Gospel Public Worship: OR, The Translation, Metaphrase, Analysis, and
Exposition of Romans 12. from v. 1. to 8. Describing, and Prescribing, the
complete Pattern of Gospel Worship.

ALSO, An Exposition of the 18th. Chapter of MATTHEW.

To which is added A Discovery of ADAM'S threefold Estate in Paradise, viz.
Moral, Legal, and Evangelical.

By THOMAS BREWER.

1 Timothy 3.15. But if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought to
behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the
pillar and ground of the truth.

See Gal. 6.1. Genesis 2.7. and v. 17. with Chap. 3.3. and v. 15. LONDON: Printed
by W. Godbid, for Henry Eversden, at the Sign of the Greyhound in Paul's
Churchyard, 1656.

Gospel Worship, by Mr. Tho. Brewer.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
IN the ensuing Treatises, are represented to thy view, a few of those many
excellent Manuscripts, penned by Mr. Thomas Brewer; who (besides many former
and some long Persecutions endured under the Prelates) suffered Imprisonment by
the Bishops in the King's Bench Prison, above the space of fourteen years: for
saying, That because the Prelates did not derive their Offices from his Majesty
as they ought, therefore he durst not partake with them, nor the Derivers of
their Offices from them in the proper works of their Offices (which in his
Petition to the Lords of the Upper-house of Parliament, 1640. he proves Legal,
Loyal, Reasonable, and Seasonable: a Copy whereof is herewith published) for
which cause they often deprived him of many of his Writings, by which means
(and through transporting and transmitting, etc.) some Papers pertaining to
this Treatise are missing; (for the Author wrote very largly of these subjects)
yet is not any thing hereby deformed, or obscured; though abbreviated; Whereby
he was prevented from publishing these, with diverse others of his Works (the
which he intended) who upon the presenting of the said Petition, was released:
but about a month after dyed, (in a good old age, and full of days.) Indeed
his sufferings (for the truth) were very great, and of long continuance; but as
his sufferings did abound, so his graces and virtues did much more abound, and
(like odours being crushed) gave a more fragrant scent; or (like silver passing
the fire) were more refined: But what need I to guild a Diamond, or what needs
he my commendation? his Piety, Learning, Experience, and Depth of Judgment, are
eminently known both in this and other Nations, and are in part discovered in
these ensuing Tracts; which are not many broken fragments of others Writings
patcht up together, but profound studied matter, extracted from the very nature
and scope of the several Texts and Subjects whereof it treats: (and wherein was
made good to the Author those Promises, Prove: 2.5, 9. in a great measure) most
of which (with many other of the like nature) were the Authors own Experiences
and Practices, (and Experimental Observations) who in the time of his liberty,
was a frequent publisher of them himself at Leyden in Holland, where he walked
in communion with Mr. Robinson, and also with Mr. Ainsworth; also after the
time of his restraint procuring liberty of his Keeper, (and sometimes in the
Prison) he taught them frequently in several Congregations in London; which is
well known to, and testified by many of his Hearers yet living: (But for my own
part, I had only the happiness to become acquainted with him the three last
years of his life, within which time, (although it was part of the time of his
close Imprisonment) I reaped much precious benefit from him, by the opportunity
of visites, etc.) and like Apollos, Act. 18.24, 25. he was a man mighty in the
Scriptures, -- and being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught diligently the
things of the Lord. The truth of the matter published, I am humbly confident is
able to defend it self against all Adversaries (though subject to be
scandalized, from which the best things are not free) First here is a more
ample foundation for, and a more stately Edifice (as it were pourtrayed out) of
Gospel Worship; (which both regulates, and improves grace) than ever yet was
published (this 1300. years) since Antichrist reigned: for as Genesis 1. and Job
38. and 39. Chapter contains the whole, and also the main particulars of the
Creation. Exodus 20. and Deuteronomy. 5. the sum of the Law. Genesis 12.2, 3. the sum
of the Promises. Dan. 2. the sum of the Prophesies. Matthew. 5, 6, 7. Chapters,
the main qualifications of Christ's Disciples. Matthew. 6.9, etc. Luke 11.2. The
Pattern of all Prayer. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. The prime Signs and special
Demonstrations of our Election, Vocation, and Salvation: So these first 8.
verses of the 12. Chapter to the Romans, (as our Author says well) contain
the whole body of Gospel Church-Worship: And as Moses, Exodus 25. to Chap. 40.
and David, 1 Chronicles. 28.11. gave exact patterns of the Tabernacle and Temple; so
here the Apostle Paul prescribes the like complete pattern for this Spiritual
Fabric of Gospel Worship; of which the former were but Types, and expressed so
to be, 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Timothy 3.15. R^v. 21. compared with Lev. 26.11. Ezekiel.
37.26, 27. This is the Central and Cardinal place of Scripture, sanctifying the
Divine Worship of the Word, about which all other of this subject, have their
proper motion and use, and whereon they depend, (as so many branches springing
from this root,) and by which they are encorporated into one Order: the want
therefore of the clear understanding hereof is the cause of the seeming
disjoyntedness of the Order of Worship, and the long and much prevailing of
Babylonisme thereby: (yea and error and darkness yet so abounds that we have
just cause to pray as the Psalmist does, Psalm. 43.3.) Secondly, in expounding
the 18. Chapter of Matthew, here is lively held forth that Meekness, Love, and
Mercy, which ought to be used for the recovery of a sin-sick-Saint, Gal. 6.1.
and on the contrary that pride, railing, and racking, prosecuted both by the
public and personal Antichrist, in such cases (as Jam. 4.1. to 11.) Thirdly,
and lastly, here is set forth that threefold, or rather fourfold Estate of
Adam in Paradise, viz. Moral, Legal, Evangelical, and Celestial: his legal
Estate, or first Covenant of Works was (says the Author, and what need be said
more?) the first grand grandsire mystery of the Word, and the Door key and
Candle to all other Theologick, Religious, Personal, public and polemike: the
Epitomal Pattern of the Mosaical Law in folio, and the Bridge garrison and
Tutor unto the Gospel, the Ladder and Key of Heaven: These four Estates were
founded in Paradise: the first, cultively: the second, epitomally: the third,
personally: the fourth, inchoately: so that this is the main hinge whereon the
whole state of all mankind depends. Now since this Work has stuck so long in
the Birth, and having this opportunity now (yet not till now) put into my
hands, and withal considering the diversities of Judgments about, and the many
diligent enquirers after these things; (which will shortly appear in their
glory and exaltation, according to Esa. 2.2, 3, 4. then shall we see
World-worship destroyed, and Word-worship alone exalted throughout the World) I
judged it my duty to be instrumental to its bringing forth into the World. My
own experience also of their great worth was no small motive to their bringing
forth; lest peradventure these precious Dawnings (or rather Radiant-beams) of
Light, should have perished in the Birth, and so have been buried in the dark
vale of Oblivion.

There is also of the same Authors a large Treatise of the Sabbath, or the
Lords Day, ready for the Press, (since the Sabbath and Worship are an
inseparable pair of Twins; being both founded on the first Table of Gods Law:
These Treatises of them had not been divided, had opportunity served: but
wanting the same, thy acceptance of this, may promote the publication of that;
Which is divided into three parts or periods, VIZ. Moral, Mosaical, and
Messiacal: In the first period is shown us divine duty, and rationality, with
seven practical Observations thereof, to second and countenance the same,
before its precepting, Exodus 20. Secondly, that it was all the Mosaic^ period
commanded, practiced, and approved, upon the same Moral Reasons, Causes, and
Motives, with the first; though covered with Judaical glosses, and Bondaging
Austerities: and in the third period that it was Gospelized, and entered
thereinto, at, and by Christ's Resurrection, with the same soul, right,
faculties, and privileges, that it had at the first Sabbath, and that in a far
higher kind, and more glorious degree; and also that it was observed and
approved by Christ, his Apostles, and the Primitive Churches: forty Arguments
stated (anatomizing the whole) for the vindication thereof; ( 12. at the least
for each period) and all the main Objections of the Adversaries answered: In
which Treatise Adam's Estate is also largly handled, in relation to his
sanctification of the first Sabbath, Genesis 2. Also diverse other small Pieces,
VIZ. A Body of Divinity epitomized; of God; of the Creation; of the ten
Precepts, (paralleled with the Sabbath) of the Lords Prayer; of Supremacy; of
Adams threefold Estate more at large; of the original working of the
Evangelical Mystery of Iniquity, and the generation of Antichrist in the
Apostles days; Wherein he not only cleereth diverse obscure passages, but also
the whole scope of the Epistles of John and Jude: This with some other of his
Writings, are likewise an excellent Introduction to the understanding of the
Prophesies: Also, he wrote A Chronology of the times of the Persian Monarchy,
and upon the Prophesies: with several others; and many fragments of precious
use: all which are well-worthy the publication: For all his Writings savor
much both of Knowledge and Piety. As for those who would have no controversal
Divinity published, let them go and learn what that means, Dan. 12.4. Many
shall run to and fro, (i. e. in discourse) and knowledge shall be increased.
Besides, our Author herein handles the main Principles of Religion very
judiciously, and in an excellent method. As for obscure Words and Phrases in
this Book; (observe what our Author says upon the like occasion) says he, you
will most disrellish the concise compoundness, and the like-soundness of some
Words; but they being intelligible to the verst in reading and hearing, the
first sort will be palliated by their saving tedious Circumloqutions, and the
second by their helping memory and delight. And in another place speaking of
the excellency of the like matter he says; My Wits must be erect, and your
ears arrect, in the fitting Words, Phrases, and Form suitable thereto; in
newness, because the radicalness is farther to be now discovered than formerly;
and the Adversaries have by their new fraud devised new Weapons and Stratagems,
which must by New Wisdom be defeated; and by their worse fury, more charged
their Canons, and fierced their rage; wherefore we must new our offensives and
defensives, and reinforce our courage and powers; or decline Gods War with
Meroz, and get its Curse: yet will I frame all so intelligibly as I can, yea
and so plausibly, as the intelligiblenes of the matter will suffer. In reading
this Book, make that use thereof, which the Author intends, who says, that the
1 Cor. 8. plentifully and plainly enough reproves all swaying the Conscience
in purpose or practice, by and for any personal respect of the Teacher, or
fore-practice, even under great censures therein expressed: Wherefore (says
he) I will fear and flee what I can from all persuading the Conscience, but by
helping it to understand the Conscience-swaying Word of God, by the rules
thereof, and our enlighted reason natural in natural things and matters of
fact, and especially spiritual, by consequences from the Positions of Faith,
and received therewith and thereby.

So assuring my self, that the sincere and serious Seekers and Lovers of Truth,
will find a large Field of Knowledge for themselves to walk in (with great
variety) in the unfolding of Adams several Estates in Paradise: Also, that
Christian temper of love, mercy, compassion, pity, forbearance, and
forgiveness, (Jam. 3.17, 18. (lively displayed) which should be exercised for
the restoring of an offending brother: with the odiousness of the contrary
proud persecuting carriage:

And likewise an excellent Discovery of the unity and peculiarity of the Gospel
Church State, with the diversity of its gifts, offices, and Administrations,
entirely and exactly compacted: Those eight verses being (as well says the
Author) A divine general Prescript, and particular Description of the Gospel
Worship of God, and Heirship of his Sons, and of their reciprocal union of
Church State, and communion in the Ordinances thereof: for proof of which (and
for thy further satisfaction in the Premises) I refer thee to the Book it self:
and rest, remaining

Truth's devoted Servant, H. P.
July 31. 1656.
TO THE Right Honorable, the LORDS of the Upper-House of PARLIAMENT. The
Humble Petition of Thomas Brewer, close Prisoner in the King's Bench,
Shows,
FIrst, that the Petitioner was Anno Dom. 1626. October the 18. imprisoned by
the Prelates, and their second Court-Day after fined one thousand pounds, and
condemned to be close imprisoned, till he at Paul's Cross should recant his
Legal, Loyal, Reasonable and Seasonable saying, That Because the Prelates did
not derive their Offices from his Majesty as they ought, therefore he durst not
partake with them, nor the Derivers of their Offices from them, in the proper
Works of their Offices.

II.
That that Fine and Imprisonment, has been extended without mitigation to all
extremity in their power, to the near ruining of his Life and Livelihood ever
since, only for the said saying, on due occasion, by their long-laboured
Project, without hope of relief but by Parliament, which is the sum of what
ensues.

III.
That that saying was Legal by the Law of God, and by many Statutes, and the
Common Law; and that their so Fining, Imprisoning, and extreme Pressures, were
Illegal, the Petitioner is ready to prove; and also that they profess that
their Illegal Derivation, in their Treatise of Consecration of Bishops, Page
10. to the 140.

IV.
That it was Legal, is manifest by King James his Approbation of that the
Petitioners saying, Anno Dom. One thousand six Hundred and Eighteen, on, or
near the like occasion; and by his Protection of Him all His Reign after; and
by His now Majesty's seconding of the same upon his own notice, and other
sufficient Testimony thereof, at the Petitioners first Imprisonment, who
therefore charged the Motioner thereof (being of His Majesty's Bedchamber) to
see the Prisoner freed, since he was for His Supremacy, and the Laws for it;
though all was frustrate by the private endeavors with HIM of the now chief
Prelate; who, and his like, and Instruments, have to their utmost persecuted
the Petitioner ever since, both by stopping all Legal courses of Judicature in
the Common Pleas, and King's Bench, and in all Appeals to His Majesty; and by
aggravating his Imprisonment, with laying the said Fine on his body, besides
the extent of his Goods and his Lands, rated by the Jury at 140 l. per annum;
and many other extreme ways, above these 14. years, especially these 5. years
by close Imprisonment, Though the former was reversed by the Common Pleas, and
though he was not of any illegal Religion nor behavior.

V.
That it was also reasonable, is apparent by the great penalties on the
breakers of those Statutes; that is of High Treason, in the Derivers of their
Ecclesiastical Offices from the Sea of Rome, and Felony in the partakers with
them, and praemunire on the not Derivers of their Offices from the King, being
confessed, and professed by themselves, in their Treatise of the Consecration
of Bishops, Lib. 1. Cap. 2. to Lib. 3. Cap. 8. p. 8. to 140. Dedicated to the
then Archbishop of Canterbury; Especially because that was proceeded in by his
Graces Fatherly direction and encouragement. Epist. Ded. in the end, and
printed by the Kings Printer, Anno Dom. 1613. not yet revoked, but much
dignified by its enlarging and publishing in Latin, Anno Dom. 1626. by Sir
Nathaniel Brent, and by the constant profession of all the Prelates in their
own Courts, and in the Star Chamber, and in all their Courses ever since.

VI.
That it was also the more reasonable and seasonable by their betraying
Instrument the said Sir Nathaniel Brent, his protesting it should be for the
Petitioners great good, to insist upon his former saying to King James, which
therefore the Petitioner did; But that has been ever since extended to the
contrary with all the extremity in their and his power, in all kind of
distresses abovesaid, and leaving 2000 li. Debts, eating on his lands ever
since; with many other exorbitant pressures, too large and troublesome for this
time and place.

VII.
That the Petitioner having endeavored by all fit and requisite ways and
means, for a Legal Hearing of his good cause, and bad case for it, has been
always delayed, or denied that course of Justice, and the legal liberty of the
Prison, and has no hope of Relief, but by this Honorable House, to whom he is
ready to aver and prove the Premises.

May it therefore please your Lordships to vouchsafe a Hearing of your
Petitioners Cause in the Premises, and to grant him his liberty to instruct his
Council, and prepare his Proofs, and to command the Register of the
Ecclesiastical Commission to bring his Books, to show the cause of the
Petitioners Commitment, and Fine of 1000 li. Or to account these long, many,
and great sufferings sufficient for this first and only fault (if any) for
which in all these 65. years of his age, he has been censured.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. Tho. Brewer.
Novem. 24. 1640.
A Star to guide the Reader: Or, a Key to the ensuing Treatise.
READER,
FOr thy Direction in, and more ready use of, the Marks (and Letters) in the
Analysis and Tables ensuing; Observe, that every first, or number 1. has its
second, or number 2. and so are like Iachin and Boaz, the two Pillars in the
Porch of the Temple (and not a third, except page 19. line 12. where this Mark
* before 3. ens should be supplied; whose second is page 16. line 3. and its
first, page 15. line 26. Or where a head is presently branched forth, as page
11. and the like) For instance, page 7. there are these Marks, [*] [] (:) * ()
whose seconds follow with the same Marks; and the last mark is still answered
first, as this mark () p. 7. l. 20. has its second mark (and head) p. 8. l.
16. this mark p. 7. l. 19. has its second p. 8. l. 22. this mark * p. 7. l.
18. its second, p. 9. l. 5. And the like, when a second head is branched into
diverse parts; and the same order is to be observed throughout.

And where the firsts have their seconds, in the same page (or in view) equal
Indentions ( viz. the standing even of the second under its first) together
with the sense, will guide thee: therefore (oft-times) in such places, marks
are omitted.

The Translation, Metaphrase, Analysis, and Exposition, of Romans the 12. the
1. to the 8. Describing, and Prescribing the complete Pattern of Gospel
Publike-Worship. Romans the 12. the 1. to the 8.
1. I Beseech you therefore brethren, by the Mercies of God, to present your
bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, even your Scripture
(Word) Worship.

2. And be ye not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed in the
Renovation of your mind, that ye may approve what that good, acceptable, and
perfect will of God is, (or wills.)

3. For I, by the (Apostolic) Grace given me, charge every one among you, that
ye arrogate (or over-mind) not beside what ye ought to mind, but mind ye unto
sobriety, or (sound-mindedness) each one as God has apportioned to him the
Portion of Faith.

4. For as we have many Members in one Body, and all Members have not one (the
same) function;

5. So we being many, are one Body in Christ, and each one another Members.

6. Having then Gifts (according to the Grace of God) distinct, whether
prophecy, according to the proportion of Faith:

7. Or Ministry, (i. e. An Office of Ministry or Service) within that Office,
whether the Teacher within teaching,

8. Or the Exhorter within exhortation; the Distributer with simplicity; the
Ruler with diligence; the Pityer (Mercy-shewer) with cheerfulness.

The Metaphrase; Or, the same in English Phrase.
1. FROM a due consideration of these many free and precious Mercies of God, in
Christ particularized to you in the eleven former Chapters; I, as your Brother
and Partner therein, infer this brotherly Exhortation to you, that ye therefore
as the sons and elect servants of that God, return your whole persons, both
bodies and souls, as a living Thank-Offering unto him, in all holiness and
acceptableness, even by addicting your selves unto that his divine instituted
Worship, which he has sanctified and blessed in and by his revealed Word,
whereto he has appropriated it, with detestation of all other pretended divine
Worship, which is not commanded by it.

2. Wherefore from all these grounds, I infer the same deho^tation from your
yiedling to conformity with any other divine Worship, whereto the worldly
worshippers will woe and force you by all means they can, but enforce ye your
selves so much the more, unto that transformedness from formality, with it
which our new-man-hood and renewedness of our mind exact of us, even to
appropriate our divine service to him only, as we have done our Sonship; in
which peculiaring our selves in estate and service unto Christ, he will bless
us with the approbation of Gods peculiar will, the original and proper cause
of those his Mercies and Graces as good to us, and of these his services as
acceptable to him, wherein is the perfect Cyclopedia of Divinity and Religion,
obebedience whereto is better then any matter of worship; and distinct
boundedness whereby, is better then the fattest Devotion to worship, 1 Samuel
15.22.

3. Wherefore as an Apostle of Christ, by his peculiar gracious authority,
given to me for this end, I charge the conscience of every one among you, to
fear and flee all arrogance, and overweeningness, both in the matter and order
of Divine Worship, least ye transgress the rule and bounds thereof, whereto ye
are bound by God in all attentness and intentness of mind, in the practice
whereof therefore manifest your sound mindedness in each of your apportioning,
your doing the works, and receiving the privileges of Faith, according to Gods
apportioning them unto you, as, and because you are his faithful ones, united
to him by faith, and communicating with him in all the fruits and benefits of
Faith, especially in these of his Word-worship, which are as good to us,
acceptable to him, and perfect in themselves, in the exactness of their matter,
and distinctness of order in their particulars, as I have preparatively
insinuated hitherto in the general.

4. For that whole and distinct Divine Worship is now instituted after the
pattern of a City, or a Body Politic, with its City-States, Members,
Officers, and their works, which are good for the Members thereof, acceptable
to the King who instituted them, and exact in themselves: For as we have many
Members in one of those, and in all natural Bodies, and every of these Members
has its peculiar function or practice.

5. So is it in the Church, and its Church-estates and works, wherein though
personally we be many several Christians, yet by an incorporating covenant to
be a Church, according to Christ's institution, we become one Body, and each
becomes others Members, of the same bone and flesh, for each others benefit,
practicing his peculiar Function.

6. Wherefore we having these enrighting and isntrumental Privileges added to
the said Mercies of God by Faith, as son-like Portions, distinct, according to
Gods peculiar grace, distributing to every one as he pleases; how should we
not observe this unity of our Church Estate, and its variety of Membrall and
Ministerial Estates, and their apportioned Functions and Rites, and bound our
selves to and within them, according to that apportionment of God, whether it
be the enrighting state, the Isntrumental, or Medial work and enabling power
of Prophecy, which ought to have a general eye to these things.

7. Or a Ministerial estate, work, and ability, within which we are
especially, and peculiarly to bound our selves; whether it be the Office of a
Teacher within the function, work, and charge of teaching, with all aptness and
ability to teach to the information of the Church.

8. Or of the Exhorter or Comforter within Exhortation, to the Conformation,
and Reformation thereof, with all serious sincerity, according to his charge,
function, and work of Exhortation. Or of the Distributer within distribution,
with simple singleness of heart, according to his Office, to the relief of the
necessities of the Church. Or the Ruler within his Ruling-office, and the
charge and work thereof, with all diligence therein: Or the Pittyer, Widow,
woman-Deacon, or Mercy-shewer, within that Office, for the health and personal
conservation of the Church, with all personal cheerfulness even within all
five Offices, as Deputies in them to Christ, as Prophet, Priest, Provider,
King, and Preserver of his Churches Ministerial, and in them more evidently
and eminently of his mystical, than without and before their constitution; and
also as good disposers of the manifold correspondent graces of that Spirit,
given to benefit the Church: and lastly, as Fellow Members thereof, employing
your distinct gifts and graces, natural and spiritual, to the benefit thereof,
according to the needs of the understandings, hearts, estates, conversations,
and healths of every Member thereof, and then you shall experimentally prove to
your own, and your brethrens consciences, that these particulars of his Divine
Word-Worship, are that Divine will of God, which I have said to be good to you,
acceptable to himself, and perfect in themselves; yea, and perfecting Divine
Communion between God and his Saints in the highest measure upon earth, and
nearest to heaven, and directlyest, and powerfullyest leading thereto.

The Analysis of these eight Verses follows, ss. First, an Analysis of the
eight Verses, then also follows a draught of the matter per modum geneseos, as
the nature of the matter falls from the generals into its particulars; the
which (to make them more portable, and for some other reasons not requisite to
be here rendered) are published as follows.

The Analysis, or right distribution of these eight first Verses of the 12. to
the Romans.
Gods instituted Worship is herein 1 Prescribed, [*] 1 In the general, [] 1
Positively, (:) 1 Impetrantly, ^ 1 Of our 1 Whole persons, () 1 Natural,
1 Material, your bodies, ver. 1. literally. 2 Formal, i. e. our souls, ibid.
by synecdoche of the part.


1 Most backward, and therefore all the rest a majori.

2 Most pertinent in this case of outward Worshipping God before men.

i. e. The Body or material part.

1 The vessel wherein the soul is to be presented to God, and to present it
self and its body, and so the whole man, as Gods peculiar service for his own
table, holy, as informed by the word; living, as inspired by the spirit;
acceptable, as required of himself, as our Father, and original Creator, and
correspondent Preserver.

2 Circle.

1 Whereby it is circumscribed,

2 Whereto it is confined, in all Gods Church-services, to the visible
manifestation of its self in them.

() 2 Spiritual.

1 Material, i. e. our created nature, v. 1. your bodies as above,

2 Formal,.i. e. our regenerate nature, and renewed minds, v. 2. but be ye
transformed in the renewing of your minds.

^ Distinct good things.

(*) 1 Personal,

() 1 Mental.

1 Intellectual, all informing and informable faculties, v. 6. whether
Prophecy, and v. 7. within teaching the Teacher.

2 Animal, of all our exhorting, and exhortable faculties, v. 6. Prophecy, v.
8. the exhorter within exhortation.

(*) 2 Corporal,

1 General, our whole conversation.

1 Active, ^ Passive, v. 8. the ruler within ruling therefore also the ruled in
their raleableness.

2 Particular, i. e. in respect of healing and being healed, v. 8. the shewer
of mercy, ss. to the sick.

(*) 2 Pertinent to our persons, or possessory, v. 8. the distributer.

* 2 By, and for the sake, or because of

*** 1 Gods spiritual

* 1 Benefits,

** 1 Of Faith.

1 Immediate, as justification,

2 Mediate.

1 Infusive, as sanctification,

2 Impartive as blessings. These three are meant v. 1. by the mercies of God
taken for matter, or things given of mercy, and v. 6. according to the grace of
God, so also taken: and partticularly, The first, v. 1. Brethren; v. 3, 6.
portion and proportion of faith: The second, v. 2. in the renovation of your
mind. The third, v. 2. good will of God, together with the free love and mercy
of God themselves, as the only cause of, and mover to them all.

** 2 With, because of, or for faith, and its three mentioned benefits, as
their terminus a quo ad quem.


That is, the means of

1 Gods gracifying us with the assurance and right use of faith, and its
threefold benefits.

2 Our gratifying God for, and with them all, namely (in both respects) these
Ordinances of divine worship following.

Ver. 3. The portion of faith. Ver. 6. according to the proportion of faith,
wherein is a double Hortatory Motive, ss. God has given you this divine
serving him as his means of

1 His increase of our faith, and all its fruit^, and benefits in us as his
Sons and Wives, and of his preserving us.

2 Our increase of his glory, by all that is in us, as his servants and
subjects, and of our serving him spiritually according to his institutions of
the second, and the promises thereof.

* 2 Free Grace, (as the cause of the matter of these many sorts of benefits
mentioned,

1 In his willing them unto us, v. 2. good will of God, and v. 6. according to
the grace of God.

2 In his merciful freeing us from their contrary evils, v. 1. ergo, by the
mercies of God, ss. mentioned before in the 11 chapters.

* 2 Paul's brotherly exhortation, v. 1. I beseech you brethren, though he might
have Apostolically charged them thereto, as v. 3. he does in the point of their
distinct observance lineal and collateral.

(:) 2 Imperantly, [] 1 Positively,:*: 1 From divine:: 1 Authority, [.] 1
Supreme, (X) 1 Dictant, or causal, v. 5. in Christ, i. e. by him, v. ^. the
perfect will of God.


1 Peremptory, as perfect, and without limit of human reason, or other bound,
before its prescripts, or exception in the matter after they are instituted,
and that both in respect of Christ as Lord of these estates, and of the holy
Ghost as inabler to, and in their functions, and of God as the effecter, and
blesser, and accepter of both.

1 Jointly, v. 2. that perfect will of God.

2 Severally.

1. In the first respect, v. 7, 8. or a ministry which are five.

2. In the second, ibid. in their five functions, or works.

3. In the third, v. 5. one another members, i. e. to the Churches goood,
which are amplified, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, etc.

2 Rational, ss. in respect of

1 God, because the whole and each part thereof is acceptable unto him, v. 2.
acceptable will of God.

2 Us, because God has sweetened his Precepts with ways and benefits of all
sorts, v. 2. good will of God, v. 3. portions of faith to be employed in Gods
service, according to that proportion of faith, v. 6. the like is to be
supposed of the grace of God, v. 6. with v. 5. each, etc.

(X) 2 Dictate, in respect of God,

1 God, i. e. his reason or word, v. 1. (...) of the Word or Scripture, which
is Gods divine Reason.

2 Us, i. e. our worship, service, or homage to God as our Lord, v. 1. due to
him from us, as his redeemed, and sanctified ( v. 1.) brethren, 3. Faith, 6.
Grace, as in the last branch; especially due as instituted in the Word for that
end: It is called (...) i. e. Divine Worship, Service, or Homage in three
respects,

1 In testimony of Gods Lordship over us, Vorscap, and in Saxon Dutch being the
same with our English Lordship, as their Vorst, and here are with our Lord.

2 As done for his end, work, and service commanded.

3 In testimony of our inferiority, and humility.

[.] 2 Deputed,

1 Dictant, proper and primary,.i. the Office of the Apostleship, both as the
free gift and deputed estate of God and Christ, and also as in gracious love to
Paul and the faithful, adorned with fit abilities, v. 3. I by the grace ( ss.
Apostleship, Romans 1. of whom we have received grace, even Apostleship for
obedience to the faith in his name, etc.) that is given me (for that end) I
charge every one among you.

2 Dictate, manifested, and as derived from that office of Apostleship, i. e.
the prescripts by word or writing, and practice of Paul, as an Apostle as here
by writing; for as (...) signifies both to say and to charge, so here are both
intended, as if he had said, I speaking or writing this as an Apostle, do
charge, and in Gods name and authority command, etc.

:: 2 Estates of

1 Sons, which God has imputed to us, v. 1. brethren, v. 3. by Faith, v. ^. be
you transformed in the renewing of your mind, ss. according to your estate
transformed you from mere natural

2 Servants or worshippers, whereto God has called us by these his instituted
Services, ver. 1. (...) worship, holy sacrifice, v. 2. Gods will, ss. which you
are bound to obey, e^pecially since he has given these Ordinances of worship,
both as privileges of sons, and means of reward; and also has enabled you to
the former by grace, v. 2.6. and the latter by gifts, v. 6, 7, 8.

:*: 2 Exacting of us hereunto all that we are, ( v. 1. present your bodies)
have, ( v. 6. since then ye have gifts) or can do for God, v. 1. a living
sacrifice, or the Saints, v. 5. as fellow members.

[] 2 Oppositely, by all those authorities and reasons forbidding whatsoever is
not by them commanded,

1 In matter, v. 2. and be ye not conformed to that worship which the world
will frame and form to God, and labor by all it can to conform you thereto,
partly as good and reasonable in the general, partly as commanded by Authority
Civil and Ecclesiastical, and especially as pretended to be the divine
instituted, sanctified by Gods Word.

2 In the Order of that matter as the particulars thereof are distinct from
each other lineally and collaterally, v. 3. that none of you overween beside
what he ought to mind, i. e. beyond the bounds of Gods portion, v. 3. and
proportion of faith, whereto he has confined each of his servants, v. 3. which
God has apportioned to each of you, which is there called wisdom and sound
mindedness, (...) as an antidote to that boundless arrogance and swelling
ambition, the root of that antichristian confusion which has long confounded
Christ's divine order, as was therefore prophetically and justly called of God
Babel and Babylon.

[*] 2 In special, and as particularly, and immediately applying all these
general precepts to the particulars of divine worship ensuing, and that by the
illative and causal particle [for] v. 4. which shows that we are to apply all
these preceding generals to the ensuing particulars: as,

1 Directing us in the connextion of each preceding particular, to each
subsequent particular, and ^ converso, and that with grounded reasons, causal
and illative.

2 Moving us (...), i. e. by internal motives of highest consequence, both
from the cause to the effect; from debt, to repayment, from Gods absolute
commands and by many other pregnant directions, and motives, wherein every one
is to help himself according to these helps, the particulars being so infinite
in number, as can hardly without tediousness be read, and yet so precious, as
will content and requite the pains.

2 Described,

1 By its name,

1 Christian, forename, v. 1. (...), word-worship of the Scripture in general,
and Gospel of Christ in particular.

2 Of its kind, surname, cognomen, v. 2. that Will of God, and so not only
properly and truly divine, but in a special manner, i. e. as the high matter
of Gods prerogative, instituting and dictating will.

2 In its nature, () 1 By a Protasis, as pattern, () 1 Immediate and proper, i.
e. of a corporation (*) 1 It self, as a totum in se, entire as


1 Existing in its self, and properly such as a covenanted body of civil men,
whether Realm, City, Town, corporate, or other proper corporation, v. 4. one
body or coporation.

2 Exerting it self

1 Dispositively into its members, as in the choice of officers.

2 Actively, by joynt-consent of its members, as in sentencing; both these as
assembled into a Congregation, as in a Parliament, Common Council, or
Burrow-month-court, wherein the body acts its concial power and supremcy, v.
4. we have many Members in one body.

(*) 2 Its members, 1 Smply, as existing, v. 4. many members. 2 In respect of
their 1 Body, v. 4. many members in one body: 2 Functions.



1 Simply, as Ordinances and Works instituted, v. 4. practice or work, (...).

2 Relatively as appropriated to their membership, all members have not the
same function or work, v. 4. These I but touch in this Protasis, they being
more proper to the Apodosis, where they shall be more particularly placed, as in
an Index or map, but their complete clearing and handling requires a larger
vindex, which yet cannot be orderly without this Analytical epitomy premised.

() 2 Remote and general, that is, of every totum and body integral or compound
by God, and Man, v. 4. body in the general, yet with all the mentioned
particulars of the properly patterning body of a corporation in particular, so
far as they agree therewith, and that so much more as they are more proper
boys in the general, though this pattern be more proper in this case.

() 2 In the Apodosis, or Patterned, as an

* 1 Vnum,

1 Subjectum,

1 Quod, which bears the adjuncts immediately, ss. the four membral and five
ministerial estates mentioned.

2 Quo, wherein subjectum quod inhereth, i. e. the Church, the original pillar
or eminencer and ground or subject of true divine worship or truth, 1 Timothy
3.15. with Romans 1.25.23.

2 Order of adjuncts, i. e. those nine adjunctive functions.

* 2 Integral integrum,

1 Totum, whole or entire body, v. 5. so we are one body, i. e. a corporation
spiritual or Christian Church.

2 Order of parts, v. 5. so we being many, are one body.

Note. The difference between these two respects is expressed in the
application of the Apodosis to the Protasis, which by a peculiar Scripturism
compleateth each other, though an inferior authority cannot force us to that
inquiry; for the preheminency of the totum, as having the parts as its own
totally, is expressed, v. 4. in one body we have many members; and the
precedence of the parts, as being the matter of which the totum was compacted,
of which compacture it does consist, expressed v. 5. we being many members are
one body, which is of great use, as shall in the Vindex be shown; but I will
here proceed in the bare Analysis.

This Order of Integralls is, () 1 Collateral, or between themselves; as, 1
Only integral,


1 Only existent, or patient, as the children of the enchurched.

2 Also active.

1 Only applying to themselves in Church-actions, and doing personal duties.

2 As working Ecclesiastically in

1 Teaching, and its consequences.

2 Matters of ruling.

1 In discussing,

2 In Sentencing; and their consequences concerning these only integral* v. 6.
whether prophecy ( i. e. ability, and so by his Churches integralship right to
speak to edification, exhortation and comfort,) by which one particular
membership the other are by synecdoche meant; but the complete proof which are
integral Church Members, is to be supplied from other places, this being but an
epitome and summary compacting the heads of Divine Worship.

2 Also isntrumental, as the Ministers. v. 7. or a Ministry, 1 Overseeing the
internal man, 1 In the root by preaching, 1 Doctrinally, v. 7. whether the
Teacher. 2 Exhortingly, v. 8. or the Exhorter,
2 In the fruit by ruling, v. 8. the Ruler.
2 Serving the outward


1 Estate, by distributing, v. 8. the distributer, by synecdoche, meaning all
other Church helps to the estates, as collecting, husbanding the Church-stock,
arbitrating debts, etc.

2 The person and health of the body by tending the sick, etc. v. 8. the pitier.

() 2 Lineal, * 1 A priore in relation to the Church. [] 1 Ascensive, or
regressive, in a 1 Giving, 1 Existence, its Churchship, or constitution unto
it, by 1 Making the Church Covenant, 2 Continuing the Church Covenant.
2 Actuation, or life to it, by 1 Assembling, 2 Acting therein their particular
works.




1 Integral, 2 Instrumental.

a 2 Receiving their membership at, and by the very act of church-covenanting,
which is to be likewise supposed of all after-entrances or admissions into the
church, they having reference thereto. V. 5. we being many are one body, i. e.
many Christians are become one church.

[] 2 Descensive or progressive in the churches giving to each christian person
his proper church-member-ship,

1 Integral by admission,

2 Isntrumental by ordination; Both which are the churches, by its making them
such, v. 4. We in one body have many members, wherefore the power of both is
in the Church, and that both of sentencing and solemnizing them, and therefore
much of laying hands on the member in his admission and ordination by the
instituted rite for both, Heb. 6.2. with 1 Timothy 5.22. lay hands suddenly on no
man, etc.

The four integral and five organical states are before mentioned and here
supposed.

* 2 A posteriore, in relation to their functions:

1 Membral, viz. of the Prophets to prophecy of the adult men to power, the
adult women to be active partakers of the Sacraments, and of Infants to be
passive injoyers of Baptism, and of each of the four to all Ordinances of
inferior nature, than that mentioned in each function, v. 6. whether
prophecy, which by relation inforceth its active relative conjugate, i. e.
prophets, (as they are called, 1 Cor. 14.28.) and by synecdoche supposes the
three other sorts of functions.

2 Ministerial, i. e. of the Teacher to teaching, of the Exhorter to
exhortation, of the distributer to distribution, the ruler to ruling, the
pitier to works of pity; in, and under which five works, all other of the same
nature and reason are by synecdoch meant, whether instituted or personal, as
the Sacraments under teaching, and provoking, they being teaching, as
significant, and provoking and confirming as sealing, and under teaching are
meant translating, metaphrasing, analyzing doctrining, proper teaching,
proving, consuting, and so of the rest.

3 Ens consisting of 1 Matter, i. e. visible Christians, 2 Form.


1 Constitutive, i. e. that pattern superinduced by, and upon that matter in
their mutual covenanting to be such a Church of God, v. 5. are one body,
whereby all the said parts and adjuncts are Ecclesiastical, and all divine
worship as of the word, v. 1.

2 Institutive, i. e. the pattern of a Corporation, revealed by the word to be
Apostolic, v. 3. and so of Christ, v. 5. and so of God, v. 3.

By this TRANSLATION, METAPHRASE, and ANALYSIS of Romans 12. from v. 1. to the 8.
there appears two main considerations of divine Worship; First, its subject
matter willed: Secondly, its respectives. The matter willed by God is real, and
rational, etc. For readiness, and memory sake, I will frame them first
Tablewise, secondly Tractwise, both so summarily as the Exposition will
competently bear.
DIvine Worship is the Body of Gods instituted Will for his Saints peculiar
public serving of him, which is here to be handled only as the object of Gods
peculiar Will, of which we will consider, 1 What is positive and true, viz.
that of the word (...) word-worship, which is twofold. 1 External, * 1 Real, []
1 Subjective, viz. in respect of a twofold subject.

X I Subjectum quod, simple, primitive, or integral, viz. the Church, which is
the permanency and eminency of Word-worship, the pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. with Romans 1.25.23. Psalm. 106.20. Exodus 32.5.


1 Stative, i. e. the Church, as incorporate, which is the essenciall original
both of the Church congregate, and all its powers and adjuncts, and that as
ens, causa, integrum and subjectum, v. 3. are

2 Active, i. e. the Church congregate, or representative, the immediate
subject of all ecclesiastica, or Church-States, Ordinances, and actions, v. 4.
have 1 Cor. 11.18, 20, 22, 5, 4. Mat. 18.17, 18, 19. this is the Church of
frequent name, understanding, and use, but the other is the proper root.

X 2 Subjectum quo (i. e. in, a, per, pro, quo) derived secondary, or membral:
[] 1 Integral, (:) 1 Active, 1 In doctrine, viz. the Prophets, v. 6. Prophecy,
1 Cor. 14.1.3. 2 In power.




1 Congregational, viz. in admission, excommunication, election, degradation,
determination of circumstances, time, place, etc.

2 Ruling, viz. in examining, advising, convincing, pro and contra, sentencing,
etc. by his membral right according to his abilities, adulti.

(:) 2 Passive, or receptive,

1 Simply, as infants, not discerning the Lords body, and blood,

2 Mixtly, viz. Women, who have no power properly act^ve, but only recipient,
1 Cor. 14.34, 35. These four integral Church-states are by synecdoche
prescribed, v. 6. whether prophecy.

[] 2 Instrumental, or ministerial, which may be two ways distributed, or
divided, viz.

1 Into 1 Internal, or mental, viz. for the minds, (for instrumenti esse est in
fine and usu,) 1 Informing which is the Teacher, v. 7. the Teacher. 2
Conforming which is the Exhorter, v. 8.
2 External, or for the outward 1 Conversation of the spiritual man, which is
the Ruler, v. 8. 2 Preservation of the natural man, viz. natural. 1 Personal,
or for conservation of the body, which is the pitier, v. 8. 2 Possessory, or
for maintenance, viz. the distributer, v. 8.




2 Into 1 Episcopal, or overseeing Elderly, or authoritive, pastoral, or
feeding, or conserving, 1 Internal, 1 Mental, or intellectual, viz. the
Teacher, v 7. 2 Voluntal, or of the will, and its affectives, viz. the Exhorter,
v. 8. or teaching Elders.
2 External, the Ruler, v. 8. who is an Overseer, over in authority, conserving
the honest behavior of the Church, and each member thereof, called also a
ruling elder, 1 Timothy 5.



2 Diaconal, or serving the Church in the whole and its members.

1 Personal, or corporal, the pitier, v. 8. the widow, 1 Timothy 5.3. to 13. or
Deaconess, Romans 16.1. vulgarly a keeper, or nurse-keeper, tending the sick, and
so an helper, 1 Cor. 12.28.

2 Possessal, or bonal, viz. the Distributer, v. 8. t^ Deacon, Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.8. to 13. by synecdoche of distributing for all kinds of serving the
Church, and each member thereof in their goods, and all things pertinent to
them, not appropriate to the rest, and so an helper, 1 Cor. 12.28. helpers,
governors.

[] 2 Adjunctive,

)( 1 Vertual qualifying, or enabling for execution, as the nine several
functions of the said nine Church estates, or membrall, subjective, real,
internal parts of Gods Worship, and the two powers of the integrall,
subjective, real, external parts thereof particularly, as particularly thus
distributed.

() 1 Potestative.

1 Original, viz. corporation, power to congregate and continue, join and so
dissolve it self, and to set the persons time, and place of the Congregation,
viz. for the first act; power delegating is but once, as married but once.

2 Derived, or representing the Original, or reciprocal to it self, viz. to
set the persons time and place of the meeting, and to act, continue to, and
dissolve it self, and to join it self to another Church.

() 2 Functional, viz. the appropriate and instituted privilege, work,
function, duty, and practice, of the Church-estates.

[Z] 1 Integral, as freemen of a City.

[*] 1 Active.

: 1 Prophetical, viz. teaching to edefication, exhortation and comfort, 1 Cor.
14.3. called prophecy, v. 6. whereby four things are meant;

1 The gift or power personal,

2 The function of the Church-prophet, proper to this place.

3 The act of prophesying, all three literally, or equivalently mentioned in
prophecy, (...)

4 The enrighting estate of the prophets to use their personal gift, as their
prophetical function actually in the Church congregate, as a member of the
Church incorporate; this is meant by the rule of Conjugates, being of the same
reason, which is to be understood in, and of the other eight functions and 2
powers, which in this Table I have and must leave to be supposed. This is the
proper function of the Prophet, not excluding the other three ensuing, which
are his by the other capacities of membral or integral.

: 2 Potestative in the particulars aforesaid, viz. examining, advising,
convincing, pro and contra, sentencing, etc. which is the proper work of the
adulti, or men grown, besides those of women and children ensuing, which they
have in common with them, yet without the proper work of the prophets, for want
of the personal abilities to prophecy.

[*] 2 Passive, or receptive,

1 Mixtly, as the duty of women, wherein the understanding, and sincerity, and
devotion of the mind is active in receiving Church-preaching, Sacraments,
Prayers censures; and secondly, wherein they act without church power, as in
testifying for and against themselves, and others in the Ordinances of Ruling
and Power, besides the pr^viledge of children under the age of discretion, and
without the work of Prophets, and men grown, and their privileges ment^oned.

2 Simply, viz. the privileges of children of the adult men and women, whereof
one or both are Church Members, viz. to be really of the Church, and to be
baptized, and generally enrighted to further Church Priviledges and duties
further correspondent, personal abilities intervening. For, they have right to
baptism which exacteth no act of the receivers, but to be mere patients and
passive receivers of Gods seal of the righteousness of Christ, wherein they are
estated by their Church Membership, received with the admission of one or both
of their Parents into the Church, by the Prerogative will and gift of God,
given them in, by, and at Isaac's receiving of Gods Covenant with Abraham, and
his promised seed, Genesis 17.7. to 14. Gal. 3.16. that is, to Isaac typically,
and to Christ antitypically, and so to Christians in the estate with Isaac, for
the gifts and graces of God are without repentance, yea enlarged under the
Gospel.

Note. The three later of the four integral membral functions or privileges,
are by synecdoch of the particular, viz. prophecy, put for the general, i. e.
membral privileges, and duties prescribed v. 6. in the word Prophecy.

[Z] 2 Instrumental, or official, as Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriff.

(y) 1 Episcopal, Presbyterial, or Pastoral, Acts 20.17.28.

[z] 1 Doctrinal.

1 Informing, i. e. Teaching, v. 7. i. e. Translating, Metaphrasing, Analyzing,
and Genesing preparatorily thereto, dogmatizing, or extracting the genuine
Doctrine of the place, and proving thereby, and its parallel places, and by
artificial proofs and illustrations ad captum recipientium, and applying them
to them, with exhortation to learn them, and comfort therein; and lastly,
confuting the opposite Doctrine with dehortation and terror of the teachers and
learners.

2 Conforming, viz. exhortation of the members to do according to the Doctrine
taught, i. e. to believe and apply the promises and comforts, and to fear and
flee the threats and terrors, to obey the Preceps and Prohibitions of God
proved.

Note. To both these Functions do the administration of Sacraments appertain,
they being teaching and significant, and also confirming and sealing rites, and
as earnests and livery of seisin of what is taught and exhorted. Observe by the
way, that the near union of these in their scope and end, does not extinguish
the distinctness of their estates or e converso; and from thence the like
affinity and distinctness of the other Offices, and also of the Trinity it
self, in its being one in its proper nature, and yet three persons, and
distinct hypostasis; and again, one with the Church, and that in union of
estate in Christ, expressed by Christ, John 17.21. The like is hence to be
supposed in all complete things of God, and in this particular, of which anon.

[z] 2 Ruling, viz. the function of Ruling, v. 8. i. e. ordering the Church
after its decrees of the time, place, and persons of the Congregation; and in
its ordering the whole Worship in its parts, time, and order of exercise,
especially in the act of Government, as proposing the case, ordering the
trial, both in the speakers, and putting the matter to sentencing, and
gathering the voices, and accordingly pronouncing the sentence, and in matters
of admission and excommunication, election and degradation, executing their
instituted solemnities, as imposing hands in admission, and ordination, (as it
is called) or rather election, whereunto it is a complementary rite or
solemnity appendant: Howsoever Antichrist has made it his Priest begetting
act, or rather the Antichristing, or whore-getting seed and act; to parallel
the creation of the Heathens Goddess whore, of the foam or shame of the Sea,
Jude 13. with that miscreation of the spiritual Gentiles ( Rev. 11.2.)
Whore-Goddess, or Mother of Whoredoms, chap. 17. v. 1.5. of, and by the fume
of the breath, and touch of the paw of that Prelatical Beast, as such, and
without other seed or act, yea or pretense of any thing or act of Gods; but the
least and last touch of his Church-Deputy in that act, who also is
counterfeited by a Church-maker, and Church-master, and Church-beer, the
monstrous monster getting of and by that beast, whereof might be framed a
Riddle unappliable, but to this monster, Rev. 13.1, 2. But for the Preachers
usurping these instituted works, I know no warrant, much less for his doing
other, and that without the Congregation or authority from it, but least of all
for his sole supremacy over it, even many of them, and that by that
Paw-begotten Prelateship, yea and to his leaving his Preachership by which he
claims them.

(y) 2 Diaconal, or serving,

1 Possessive, viz. disposing matters Possessory, v. 8 Distributer.

2 Personal, viz. tending the sick, v. 8. the shewer of mercy, [or pitier.]

Note. Both which, and the ruling function, are prescribed in their subjective
offices by this rule: The properties of each conjugate belong to all, the proof
of these, and the confirmation of other functions of the four former, are of
the larger Tract.

)( 2 Actional, or executive;

1 Active, viz. the actual execution of all the nine functions, except that of
Infants, in whose Parents yet there is an actual claiming of the active
administration of Baptism on them, and an active tendering of a fit object
thereof, which supplieth the active part of the children; but in the rest there
is a double activeness personal prescribed.

1 The one in tendering a fit object for the administration of the function of
the Church-estates.

2 The other in claiming and using the same; whether it be in doing, or
receiving, for those are active even in receiving.

2 Passive, or receptive, viz. the submissive receiving the blessed pr^v^ledg
of faith, for the increase of faith, amd its fruits, and yiedling to the holy
work of Gods Worship, charged by his Word upon us, even in the most active
functions; yea, in the right consideration of the nature of Worship, as
commanded by God, we are rather Patients than Agents in the most active work
thereof; and therefore it is said 1 Samuel 15.22. Behold, to obey, is better then
sacrifice; and to hearken, then the sat of Rams; that is the cream of works.

Note. All these adjunctive institutions are capitally included in the third
Apostolic Principle of Religion, Heb. 6.2. The Doctrine of Baptismes, and the
former subjective in the fourth foundation and next words, and of imposition of
hands; as also their commandedness is in both their relation to the two first
Principles; v. 1. of repentance from dead works and faith toward God, and
their commendedness in the two last, v. 2. and of the Resurrection from the
dead and eternal Judgment: It being the excellent course of the Holy Ghost in
notifying things capitally to set the most noted adjunct of the particular
intended, to be set synecdochecally for the general head of the thing
notifiable; it being the briefest, plainest, readiest, and certainest course,
and freest from the corruptions incident to diversity of Ages, Nations, and
Languages, and cavills of the Heretical opposites: For Baptism is the first,
necessariest, and notedest seal, and adjunctive solemnizing rite as imposition
of hands is the subjective; and rites being the most (and imposition of hands
mere) notifying; as Moses, Genesis 1.3. intending to mention Gods creating fire,
notifieth it by Light, as by its most evident and eminent quality, and most
obvious to the most; but this place abruptly.

* 2 Rational, or respective,

1 Internally to themselves, and their proper relatives, viz. the respect of
the Subjectives, as such to their adjuncts; and of the adjunctives to their
subjects, as so bounded and charged by God, v. 3. as God has apportioned to
every one the portion of faith, and v. 4. in setting a body members and works,
and particular Ordinances, within the confines whereof we are to serve God and
out selves, by observing their contents, otherwise it is desolation, perdition
abaddon.

2 Externally to their colaterals, and remote linealls, from both which we are
disbounded by the consequence of the same places especially, v. 6. according to
the proportion of faith, that is, walking servant-like in their confined stint;
and not disproportionally to their sonlike portion as transgressing the station
and circuits thereof, as the Angels did, Jude 6. for which Antichristianism is
called Babylon and Babel, i. e. confusion, as breaking the disboundings in Gods
Worship, as it is for adding to it, styled that abomination, Mat. 24.15. with
Dan. 11.31. Rev. 17.5. and Man of Sin, viz. from breaking Gods band and bounds,
2 Thessalonians. 2.3.8. (...) with 1 Ioh. 3.4. (...), for sin is a band-breaker, or
bound-breaker, and Lex and Religio are a band, and rebinding or confining and
stinting of Gods servants, especially of his instituted or statuted
Worshippers, over which to step is superstition, or supra station, Jude. 6. and
also for his destroying each of the stinted matter or order named Abaddon
Apollyon, that desolation, son of perdition, etc. This I have shown in the
Text, Metaphrase, and Analysis of v. 3. and in the distinctness and stintedness
of each state and work to be the scope of the Holy Ghost, and of the Apostolic
Emphatical charge, v. 3. so jealous is God, and ought we to be in this his
marriage, band, bound, and bed, that he uses no active word much provoking or
emphatical, in all the five last Verses of the capital matter of his Divine
Worship, but only restrictive, and many ways bounding, terms, and phrases,
for this distinctness sake.

Hitherto of the body, or external part of Gods Worship, and not only (...)
that it is, but (...) what it is, natural, proper, and simple existence.

Now of its soul, (...), scope and life thereof.

2 Internal, or Theorical: [X] 1 Lineal, (Y) 1 Previal, or respective, a
priore, [Z] 1 Positive, (:) 1 Causal, [.] 1 Internal,
1 Material:

1 Of the Church, viz. visible Saints, and faithful in each others judgment, v.
1. Brethren, v. 3. portion of faith.

2 Of its estates, of its Ministry, Saints graced and gifted for that end, v.
3. as God has apportioned to every one the portion, etc. v. 6. distinct.

3 Of their functions, moral teaching, exhorting, ruling, distributing, tending
the sick, natural bread, wine, water, and actions of breaking, pouring, giving,
dipping, and set words of consecration.

4 Of the membral states thereof, viz. hearing with understanding, and
tractableness, submission, taking, eating, going into water.

2 Formal, as,

1 True Worship, so all the institutions external as of the word, are the form
of that ens, verum, unum, ^onum, and the particulars thereof, its integra.

2 Ecclesiastica, so a corporation, its estates, and their works is its form,
v. 4, 5.6. we, v. 5. so we, etc. for the Church is the (...), basis; the
estates, (...) order, and their works (...), vigor, their administration (...)
effect perfected.

[.] 2 External, the efficient,

1 Supreme,

1 Simple, God the Father willing them, v. 1. to God, v. 2. of God, v. 3. as
God, v. 6. of God.

1 Commanding, v. 1. holy, v. 2. perfect will, v. 3. I charge.

2 Commending, v. 1. by the mercies acceptable, v. 3. good, v. 3. Portion of
faith, v. 5. every one each others members: So 1 Cor. 12.6. diversity of
operations, but the same God who works all in all things.

2 To us,

1 Ordering, estating, and enriching, Christ, v 5. in Christ, as instituter and
founder of its authority to

1 Be Gods Worship, v. 1. to God, even the Word Worship, with v. 5. in Christ,
(so in the same, 1 Cor. 12.5. ministrations but the same Lord)

2 Do as his Church-Ministry, Ministrations, Members, viz. Romans 12.7, 8 with 1
Cor. 12. v. 4, 5.

2 Acting, gifting, enabling, (the holy Ghost) v. 1. living, v. 2. be ye
transformed in the renewing, etc. v. 6. gifts distinct, according to the grace
of God, (so in that place 1 Cor. 12.4. gifts, but the same spirit.)

2 Mediate.

1 Active, viz. the Apostle, v. 3. I,

2 Declaring, viz. the word, v. 1. of the word.

(:) 2 Subjective,

b 1 Universal,

As an unum with its particulars,

As a genus with its species;

Id est,

Gods prescribing his Divine Worship in the general, and its particulars, as
the subject of our active service of him, in general Devotion to him, as
willing it by his majestic and prerogative will, v. 2. perfect will of God,
with particular and distinct discerning of special Order therein by Christ, v.
5. in Christ.

b 2 Particular, as an 1 Whole with its parts. 2 Integrum with its members.


1 Gods prescribing his existent worship, consisting of a subjective totum with
its adjunctive parts, i. e. Paradise, Noah's Ark, Abraham's Family, Moses
Tabernacle, Solomon's Temple, with their appendant things, Rites, and actions,
v. 1. sacrifice synecdochically for the whole legal or precedent worship, and
all its particulars.

2 Gods instituting the present Evangelical Church and its Adjuncts, as an
integrum with its integrall members, and their faculties proper and common, and
their actions, v. 4, 5. to the 8.

Note, These subjective respects I call internal worship, as transient from
God toward us, and we do accordingly internally worship him therein, when we
distinctly discern and observe the same in our actual worshipping him, and it
is also of special use for our discerning the difference (both in kind and
degrees of Gods wise love) between Gods former and present worship especially
for the discovery of Antichristianisme, the present opposite worship, and of
other former false worships.

[Z] 2 Opposite, in not conforming to, but separating from world-worship, v. 2.
but conform not unto the world, viz. in the matter in hand, i. e. Divine
worship.

[z] 1 Entall,

1 Internal,

1 Material, Nations professing Christianity, which as a totum are termed
Christendom, and Priests, v. 1. Brethren, v. 3. Faith, with v. 2.

2 Formal, Christendom framed into one Hierarchicall visible church of
Priests, by civil, and Ecclesiastical authority, Cons. Nice Can. 6. and Con.
Sandic. Can. 3.4.7.11.

2 External,

1 Efficient,

1 Supreme, Satan, and the Popish Princes, and Priests of christendom, as
opposite to God, v. 2. and Christ, v. 5.

2 Mediate, and proper.

1 Active, the papacy, or hierarchicall body of priests, whereof the Pope is
the head, as opposite to the Apostles v. 3. and their Gospel, v. 1.

2 Declaring, viz. his decretalls, and canons, v. 1. the word as their
opposite, v. 2. but conform not to its opposite, the world, from which to
separate, because they are opposite to, or not the true worship, is our right
souldier-like service of God, wherein properly is our suffering for God, 2 Timothy
2.3.

Final, to usurp, oppose, and vilify Christ as come in the flesh, and to set
it self as, for, and instead of his church visible, which in his visibility,
and as Gods visible anointed, he instituted, v. 1. a sacrifice to God,
(worship) Psalm. 2.12. 2 These. 2.4. (...) as for and instead of the church of
God, with 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. [z] 2 Subjective in all
the four possitive respects last mentioned, especially in the last and proper,
i. e. a church integrum, with its members; our separation from Antichrists
hierarchy and its hierarchicalls, as its opposite, is a point of Divine
worship, and of the second commandment commanded, and commended to us; but it
being rational and positive, it is in that respect internal worshipping God,
though the opposite hierarchy it self be the existent subject of the present
world-worship forbidden, v. 2. but be ye not conformed to the world, i. e. in
the particulars of Gods worship following, especially unto the image of that
integrall Beast, Rev. 13. This Antithesis of Antichrist and his worship,
againsts Christ's instituted church and church-worship in their adaequate
parrellel opposition, requires a distinct tract, which I will annex to the
tract of the Thesis, or positive worship it self.

(Y) 2 Aposteriori, or in its proceed unto its end. Thus the external worship,
as

1 True, or of the word is in obedience and love of God to observed, as a
sanctified mean of

1 Gods glorifying, and worshipping objectively, v. 1. sacrifice to God,
worship; this is the name, (...) or internally moving end, and the denominator
of a sincere and son-like worshipper, as the using of the matter sanctified by
God for his worship as such, and in obedience to his command tries our
subject-like, and servant-like obedience therein, but the doing the very
particulars themselves, is our true worshipping God.

2 Our benefit, v. 2. good will of God, in faith, v. 3. portions of says, that
is, as crowns, seals, and privileges of ^aith, and as exercisers and
increasers thereof, and of its Fruits.

1 Internal, viz. Knowledge, v. 7. The Teacher: Obedience and confidence, v.
8. The Exhorter within Exhortation: Holy conversation, ibid. the Ruler.

2 External, viz. Maintenance, v. 8. the Distributer: And preservation, ibid.
the shewer of Mercy: All which Offices, and their Functions, with answerable
gifts, and their exercise, are given by God for our good, according to their
particular effects, and our answerable need in all five respects.

2 Powerful and blessed to these ends, ( v. 2. good acceptable, and perfect
will of God) is to be in confidence and wisdom observed, as an effectual mean
to these ends.

[X] 2 Collateral, i. e. our observance of collateral respects of the five
Offices, their distinct Functions, and their correspondent gifts, and
exercising emphatically, and by express Apostolic authority charged, v. 3. as
in the Metaphrase.

All these respective Observances, are the soul and life of the subject body of
worship, and its members, and their works and workings, and so are the
internal worship of God, of which as informing that together with that body
hypostasing the same, the whole fabric of Divine worship consists, whereof
this is a summary synopsis, and Genesis as declared Romans 12.1. to the 8.
whereof the other table is a like synoptike Analysis which differ not in
matter, because Divine worship in the Radicalls thereof is the adaequate object
of that place, and it the sprig, whereby the many Grapes thereof are
epitomized, concatenated, and encorporated into a cluster of Grapes, grown, and
enwined by God for his own Cup of Communion with his Saints; only this (...)
shows the natural course of Gods creation or institution t^ereof, after the
manner of his creating Adam first in his body of the lowest solum or matter of
the earth, in the sense of Genesis 1.1. and then informing him with his own breath
of life, Genesis 2.7. And that Analysis shows the artificial course of Gods
creation and institution of his Spiritual Creatures of the highest coelum, as
Christ was first the second person in the Trinity, and after was made man by
assuming our earthly nature; so was Divine worship, or the kingdom of Christ
first instituted in the second Commandment in the general, wherein all
particulars essentially consist, as in Gods general will prescribed therein;
and after in this particular (wherein all universalls actually exist) as in
Gods particular will (or special thing willed) described in the particular
thereof, of all which this place is the head and radical compendium, most
accurately, both composing Divine worship into a joint body, and disposing it
in all its distinct parts, both lineal and colaterall, which being shown it
rests, that I proceed to the Doctrines thereof, with their proofs and
applications, and then to the like in the Antithesis of Antichristian worship;
yet obiter and sparsim laying the grounds thereof in the use of this Thesis,
wherein for order and memories sake, I will follow the trace of this geneticall
table, as best fitting our summary creation, (our best intelligible object) and
capacity natural answering thereto: and that first, gathering thence the
porismata from its general of worship, and its adjuncts, and then do the like
in its particulars of the Church, and its Churchitives; the former is charged
upon us, verse 1. (...) which compared with its after particulars yeildeth this
Doctrine; Divine worship is Gods instituted will for his peculiar service.

THE EXPOSITION OF The 12. Chapter of the Romans, from Verse. 1. to Verse. 8.
IN this Treatise of Divine Worship, for avoiding Ambiguity, I will first handle
the noture, and then the nature thereof: Worship is taken three ways, 1.
Personally, and that both instinctively, and objectively. 2. Really, or
subjectively. 3. Actively, and transiently between both. In the first it is
taken for the venerable personage or state of Superiority, as Majesty, Grace,
Highness, Lordship, and Worship, are vulgarly used for a King, Duke, Lord, and
Gentleman. In the second, for the respective things and works of their
Inferiors, imposed upon them by their Superiors, as their claimed due by their
Superiority. In the third, for the Inferiors exercising those things and works
toward their Superiors; but in that Doctrine we use it properly in the second
sense; yet for want of usual conjugates proper to each of the three and through
their affinity, if we had them, we will still allow also an obvious respect of
the third, as transient to the first, as its rightful commander, and proper a.
and o. i. e. its beginning and end; Divine also we use in the same manner,
properly for the matter instituted by Divine authority, yet also as having its
relation a priore to its instituting Deity, and Aposteriore to the same Deity,
as the sole object of that active worshipping. Again, thirdly, the will of God
has the same three fold sense in the general, but it is here appropriated to
the second, by the word instituted, and so gives the distinguishing term to
this definition, as it does the constituting by its making the church and its
ecclesiasticalls, parts of Divine worship. 4. Service, or serving God, may be
taken for the works of Gods personal service, and secondly, for his
instituted, but partly for want of fitter terms, and partly for the distinction
of the two latter senses of worship mentioned, I will constantly use it for the
third sense of worship, or exercise of worship: In the second sense for the
peculiar public serving God, and as transient from us to God, as I will also
for the same reasons use the subjective worship for the matter thereof, and
worship in the second sense, wherewith both the natural and national use of
the word well agrees; for the Etymology thereof is from the Saxon and High
Dutch words voorst, Lord, or voerst first, and Schapship, which is their, and
our usual stative abstract, both making vorstschap, (quasi (...) ship, i. e.
Headship) worship afrer our English Euphonie, all used in the said three
senses; as also the Low Dutch, Hereschap, Lordship or Worship is, except that
dieust, or, deu heren dicust, the Lords service is ordinarily used for worship,
in the second sense, as Gods service is amongst us; but the very propriety of
the word, very well serves with our frequent and only word, for the general
of Gods Ordinances, instituted for his Public Service, i. e. Worship, as when
our Divines say, there are three parts of Gods Worship, the Word, Sacraments,
and Prayer, whereto Ridley and Field add a fourth, i. e. Discipline; and when
they oppose the true worship of God against false worship, and say that the
Mass is a part of false worship, etc. yea, there is nothing between Gods
Personal Lordship, Majesty, Highness, and Worship in the first sense; and
this his real matter of Worship in the second sense, set by him for a
Testimony, Homage, Badge, or Sign thereof, to make them not literally the
same, but an easy and usual metonymie of the sign for the thing signified,
which shows them of a prime relation and nearness to Gods Majesty, head-ship,
Lordship, (all which in our case are the same) and only not Gods case
literally, for they all are in respect of God the same, though Antichrist with
his names of Blasphemy, whereof his devout and amazed followers are full, has
deposed, opposed, and disposed Gods titles, as also their subjective estates,
according to his will, Dan. 11.36. with 2 Thessalonians. 2. ^. Rev. 13.1.3. as in our
case woorschaep, as Lordship to the nobility, and our worship to the Gentry of
his time, where, and while he domineered, for at other times and places this
titularity was, and is scorned, the which he has done to all estates of his
Clergy and Laity, especially to his Prelacie; but I will not stir in his
Excrements, which he accounts Ornaments, without urgent necessity; neither do
I deny, nor want the present Historical use of them, only let our present
term, worship, be understood for Gods Headship, and its Prerogative Badges, as
peculiar thereto, i. e. is as its quarto, modo, proprium, all primacies, and
only, and always to them in the original, proper, and exact acception of
things and names, which I let serve for Explication of Peculiar, the only
remaining doubtful term of the summary definition of Divine Worship, that I
may proceed to the native Doctrines thereof; for as for the Body, Sons, and
Public, they are discernable how they are there taken by all, to whom I
intend these lines.

As for the observing, trying, and applying the Doctrines promised, the first
is, divine worship is especially to be known and observed; this is summarily
shown in the Metaphrase and Analysis of this place of Romans 12. and in the
Genesis of this matter of worship, and further to be shown, by parellelling
this place with its beams, shining in the Gospel, and in the Evangelically
transformed minds for the direction of our humane nature, to divine communion
with God, the first proof hereof in the place, is from Paul's accurate couching
and artificially compacting the same therein discernable in the geneticall
table, distinctly disclosing the same, which proves it a matter of great
moment, worthy his attentive teaching, and our attentive learning the same. The
second is from Paul's emphaticall Exhortations, the Apostolic commands Analyzed
in the former part of the former Table, proving it to oblige us upon the breach
of our son-like and servant-like Union and Communion with God to know the
Particulars, Order, and Uses thereof. A third is from Paul's urging us to a
metamorphosed renovation of our minds, for the searching, proving, and
approving the same, v. 2.

WORSHIP in the general, whether absolutely taken for his Prerogative of
worshipfulness, as God, Creator, Redeemer, Preserver, Increaser, and Perfecter
of every thing, or respectively to man, or a Christian, who have this general
notion, acknowledgement of this Prerogative, affectionateness thereunto, and
readiness therein, imprinted in their hearts, together with his image, as a
reflex of the thing sealed on the seal, and printed on the form of Letters, or
other engraven form of printing, the parts of which are distinct in kind,
which answer to the correspondent parts of Gods worship in general, or these
three parts or Offices thereof in question in particular; so that they which
confound some correspondent parts, do by clear consequence confound the like
parts in the original print, and all proper reflexes therefrom, mediate or
immediate; and Adam might much better have eaten any creature before, and
without Gods free and particular gift of them, Genesis 1 29. and 9.3. and therein
sanctifying them to him in his word, which yet had been confounding what God
had made distinct, and murder in particular; for he might have said, all things
are given me to eat, under, and in these two Particulars of Herbs and Trees,
for though God have named that only, and not flesh, and so there is a
distinction between them, yet it is only graduall, whereby I am to eat of these
more then those, but not special and in kind, so as I should be bounded unto
them, and from flesh thereby; the like may be said of Gods prerogative, in
order of being the sole Author and Orderer of States and Laws for increase, at
least in the case of Fornication, Genesis 1.28. increase and multiply, with chap.
2.22. and he brought her to the man: It might as well be said, That neither
Jews, nor the Samaritanes, 2 Kings 17. were Idolaters, because they worshipped
God more then Idols; and that neither Vzzah, no^ Vzziah broke Gods bounds,
Leviticall, or Kingly, because they dealt in their proper Functions and Offices
more then in the Priesthood; and also, that no man usurpeth and incroacheth
upon another civil Office, nor incurreth the censure of many masters, Iam.
3.1. if he be more employed in his own, and that exceeding much better, even as
much as the order of Gods House is better then that of the world; I know
nothing more perverting, absurd, and injurious, in respect of order and right
then this, nor mischievous, but utter breaking of all order and right,
Ecclesiastical and Civil, so that the body and four main branches of the
Original Root, and general of this matter, Romans 12. do strongly plead for the
exact distinctness of the particulars intended, especially if their coherence
matter, order, and particular scope, do suit and answer thereunto, which they
excellently do.

The tree it self is distinguished into the body, and its branches, under the
similitude of a man's body and its members, v. 4. answering to the particulars
in hand, viz. to the oneness, and the sameness of the Church constituted, to
which he spoke, and the diversity, distinctness, and multiplicity of its gifts,
personal and ministerial, both in their essence and existence, and so the not
oneness of their works, functions, and ministrings, v. 5. What need we more but
the particularizing of these two verses, which he does, v. 6, 7, 8. and their
clearing and illustrating as they are, 1 Cor. 12.4. to 30. the particularizing
he handles most exactly, as is possible in such a compendium, and so few
words, as speaking to men of understanding, both in express applying the
particulars unto the scope of their generals, preceding v. 6. and also in
plain innumerating and distinguishing them, v. 7, 8. their Application is
express, both in Phrase, viz. then, now, now, then, or, therefore, since, or,
seeing that, or the like Terms of inferring, assuming, or consequenting; and
also in matter, answering to three parts of the general matter in the root and
body; first, to Worship, v. 1. and the Portion, v. 3. in the root, and
members, v. 4. in the body, viz Gifts, all which express the subject and matter
distinctly to be done, possessed, and received: id est, the Powers and Offices
of the Church, as they are given parts of Worship, measured out to the members
and Officers of the Church, one place explaning another, and all perfecting the
matter: Secondly, To the bounded diversity and distinctness thereof, much
insisted on, v. 3. to many given parts of Worship in existence, and not one in
action, actuation, function, or execution, v. 4, 5. viz. different, distinct,
diverse, or several, which is expressed, v. 6. in (...) and also in (...) i. e.
according to the discreet distribution, geometrically different proportion of,
etc. all which three express the distinct boundedness, the (...) manifoldness,
or many-kindedness, and not-oneness, and also the differences and discreet
distribution of the parts of those given parts of Worship, measured out to the
several members and Officers of the Church. Thirdly, the Particulars or
Branches are expressly applied to their preceding generals, in the freeness,
graciousness and discretion of God, the giver and distributer of those given
parts of his worship so bounded, distinct in kind, and discreetly distributed
in these words; Gifts diverse, according to the Grace that is given unto us, and
according to the proportion of that faith, demonstratively and expressly
referring us in the Root to the free Fountain of all Gods good will v 2.
peculiarized in one instance of Paul's Apostleship, which he calls a grace
that is given him over them, v. 3. and very often elsewhere, as chap. 1.5.15. 1
Cor. 3.10.15.10. 2 Cor. 8.19. Gal. 2.9. Ephesians. 2.3. to 7, 8. 1 Timothy 1.14, with
11, 12, 13. and also to the same matter, and almost words, in the last clause
of v. 3. without the Particle (...) or (...) the which is applied to the body,
in v. 4, 5. by, for, have, and being, though principally it express the
diversity, and not oneness of the parts of Gods good will, and Word-worship,
bounded Portions, members, gifts, and offices of the Church, and their
Functions, and the one-ness of the Body and Church it self, and touch this
third part but slightly; yet that is to be supposed and supplied out of the
clearness thereof, both in the Root and Branches on both sides; this complete
connecting and compacting the Root, Body, and Branches in their matter, and its
distinctness of parts, ministerial and personal, and respects, original and
objective, does strongly prove that the Holy Ghost has a special intent to
set, and show the distinctness in kind of the particulars after innumerated
and ordered, and not only their difference in some degrees, which is the least
difference that can be imagined, and so is to be supposed in all things not the
same, and therefore need not be expressed, much less so solicitously,
constantly, and completely contrived, and the contrary confusion so vehemently
exaggerated, especially if the particulars following answer this excellent
foundation, general preparation, and their promised expectation, which they
fully do, both in their ennumeration and distinctness.

The Worship of God Objective, Medial, and effective, is either common,
general, and natural, or special, supernatural, or institutive.

The special worship of God, as instituted in the Word in general, commanded
in the second Word or Commandment, to be prayed for in the second Petition,
instituted at large, occasionally and sparsim by the Precept and Practice of
Christ and his Apostles in the New Testament, and summarily, purposely, and
orderly in Romans 12.1. to 8. and respected both originally as cause, and effect,
and existingly, and then properly as whole, and part, and metaphorically as
subject and adjunct, consists of an Ens and a Basis, and is parted, divided
and distinguished into its

(a) Body, Soul, Basis, Center, Subject, or Pillar.

(b) Original,

(c) Primary, or Proper, viz. Christ, as the Idea, Image, Word, Reason, Law,
Promise, or Will of God, v. 2. will of God, v. 1. (...) 1 Cor. 3.11. viz. the
Scriptures.

(c) Secondary, and in respect of Worship derived, viz. the same, manifested
to man, ordered or acted in the same words of v. 1. and 2. (...) and (...) the
word and will of God written, being the immediate Original of the Church, and
its Offices and Ordinances, though but Christ's cistern, as the breasts are to
the woman and her nipples.

Figuratively, viz. The Apostles and Prophets of the Gospel, who are called
such foundations, Ephesians. 3.20. and authors, 2 Timothy 2.16. by a Metonymie of the
adjunct for the subject, whether Christ or the word, they being but Christ's
tongue or pen to reveal the word, and so adjuncta subjecto cujus and cui,
adjuncts to the subject original, both primary, and secondary, as simply taken,
v. 3. by the grace.

(b) Existential, subjective, integral, derived and effected, viz. the Church
Ministerial, 1 Timothy 3.15. which is now, 2 Cor. 6.16. with Levit. 26.11. as the
Tabernacle, Exodus 25.35 and. 40.2.9.17, 18. Number. 7.1. and the Temple, 1 Chronicles.
28.20. 2 Chronicles. 5.1. 1 Kin. 6.38. the house with all the furniture thereof,
7.51. all the work for the house, were before Christ, viz. the hypostasis,
basis, subjectum quod, or center to all the other Parts of Gods Worship,
whether Ordinances, or Offices, lines or circles, V. 4, 5. one body.

(a) Members, furtiture, branches, cifcumferences, ad juncts and Chapiters, v.
3. to every one that is among you -- as God has measured to every one the
measure of faith, v. 4, 5. many members -- not one function being considered in
themselves, and without the particular scope of that place, i. e. to show the
distinctness of the Church its Offices, and Ordinances; these in respect of the
church their body, are

(d) Immediate,

(e) Homogeneal, private, and natural considered.

(f) Simply, as such whether inherent, and that either innate or acquisite, or
acting in the body,

(f) Relatively, and order to the church, its offices, and their works.

Membral gifts, powers and habits, synecdocally expressed, v. 6. whether
prophecy.

These are

(b) Common, viz. of knowledge, wisdom, and dexterity, in divine and natural
things, arts, tongues, utterance and actions, especially grace, which is common
to all members and abilities, and sanctifying both.

(h) Special, and as distinct, prerequisite, and peculiar to each of the three,

(i) Overseeing offices, viz. to the

Teacher, as of knowledge, and making know in those things, as the spirits, and
annimal powers, in the Arteries

Exhorter, of wisdom and wise-making therein as nutritive and vital as blood
in the veins.

Ruler, i. e. honest conditionedness, (...) Romans 13.13. 1 These. 4.12. (...) 1
Pet. 2.12.3. and 2.16. Jam. 3.13. and working others good conversation, as the
motive powers in the muscles.

(i) Serving in Provision for the

(k) Estate, as respecting simply Christians necessity, not private benefit or
glory, as flesh.

(k) Health as tender and merciful-hartedness, as the sinews and feeling power,
sympathetically moving all the parts, in the hurt of any one.

(e) Heterogeneal, public, or such as are in place, office, State or Ministry
organical, or such as are instruments of the house, as Prophet, Priest, King,
and Savior, for moral, voluntary church-common actions, or in a word,
distinct working Offices, v. 7. or an Office, v. 4. many members, v. 5. sow
being many in distinctness of place, office, state, ministry, or giftedness,
for something must be supplied, and the scope of the place touches not the
mystical and personal respect of Christians, nor the mere individual
manyness and diversity of the members of the Church, but charge us strictly
to keep distinct; the manifold and distinct respects of Gods bestowing his
diverse membral and ministerial gifts for distinct ends and works, or rather of
his distributing and disposing the distinct parts of his worship, to the
diversely fitted, and distinct members of the Church; these are in number five,
viz. the Teacher, the Exhorter, the Distributer, the Ruler, the Pittyer, or
mercyer, literally translated, v. 7, 8. Now to annex their distinctness to
their innumeration, it is,

(l) Respective and mediate, for they are to be considered as fitly answering
to the distinct, special, membrall gifts mentioned, as before, in, and after
their existence or application to Officers, which I have shown before.

(l) Expressly confined unto, denominated, and so informed, and so distinguished
by, and stirred up in those special, diverse, and distinct gifts, proper and
adaequat^ Functions, v. 6. by the inference of our diverse discharging of them,
because they are diverse in themselves, and in respect of the givers free and
voluntary distribution, and of the receivers accordingly distinct measured
portion, and v. 7. by the Particles (...) denorative, and (...) designative, as
is shown before, and also by the express or equivolent, distinct paralelling
them with their proper and adaequate Functions, viz. the teacher in the
teaching, gift, function or work (or in the Doctrine, viz. of the Scriptures,
Church, or rather of the Teacher, so appropriating the one to the other, even
convertibly and in the highest degree) the Exhorter in the Exhortation, in the
same manner, and so the other three; but because the express particularizing of
them therein, would import them too childish, and because the distinctness of
the Offices and Functions, is not all or the only thing here intended, but
only the principal; therefore the discreet, holy, and peculiar means of
discharging them, is annexed to them, referring likewise to us the supplying
the same to the two former, viz. to the Teacher, understandingly, or
perspicuously, and to the Exhorter holy, powerfully, or the like.

This incorporating, manifoldness, well orderedness, and compleatness of the
Arguments, for the distinctness in kind of the Offices of the Church, should
oversway and settle our judgments, purposes, and practices accordingly, yet as
if nothing were enough to express Gods care and jealousy herein, as being the
chief particulars of the second Commandment, nor to persuade Christians to this
strictness, sollicitousness, and jealousy, as being instituted, and so not
naturally known, and such as wherein the devil deceived Eve, and Eve Adam, and
both fell: The Holy Ghost yet adds two express particulars as the two notes
of a Patenthesis, to take all doubts from the understanding and ingenious, and
cavils from the contrary, that, that distinctness of these Offices in kind is
intended and included in this place, and properly and fully concluded, which I
have said; the former is in these words, or an office, let us accordingly be in
the discharge of that office, whether it be the Teacher, or Exhorter, or, etc.
their first Office or Ministry, is expressly named, and set as the matter
distinct, and so to be used, least the distinctness should be supposed to be
properly or principally in the work, to be done according to the diverse
abilities of the gifted: Secondly, Church Ministry is expressly divided into
five particulars, by the disjunctive and proper distinctive conjunction, (...)
the latter is in (...) which cannot be translated, she that pittyeth, because
both the article and the substantive are the Masculine Gender: Nor he that
pittyeth, because the work is receivedly proper to the Church-widow, and so it
should be false English, and therefore must they be translated, the pittyer, or
shewer of mercy, denotating a known Church-office (and not only properly or
principally a working, gifted, merciful, and pitying Officer, or Member) that
is so to do more than any other of the Church, whether Officer or Member; more,
and more plain and exact proofs of what kind you will, I think cannot be shown
in any place of Scripture, for any point of instituted worship; so that we must
admit it, or dismiss the second Commandment, with the Papists professedly, or
with other hierarchicall or profane and carnal worshippers, so much as we can
and dare.

() Mediate.

(*) Near.

Apportioning, ordering, and confining the Offices to the Powers, and the
Powers, to the Offices, i. e. the Functions of the Offices, not considered as
abilities, and that either, as existing, inherent, or acting in the Members,
prerequisites to the Church-Offices, or Actions, or causes of the benefit of
the Church, but only as the portions of faith measured out by God to every
Officer, v. 3. the bounding proportions of faith, v. 6. the distinct, and not
one work or function of the many members, v. 4. and the appropriated,
paralelled, charged, adaequated, and proper designations of, and to every
Office, v. 7, 8. for those five expressed contain in, and under them, and
intend all the passive and exequatable Ordinances of the Church, either as such
viz. the Sacraments, which as signs are teaching, and as conveyers and seals,
persuade and unite us, and the thing exhorted and sealed to: And the censures
and orderings of the Church-actions, are parts of ruling, or else as concurring
to their being, viz. the collections for the poor unto distribution, in which
respect teaching as a power or act subordnate, may be used by the Exhorter
without breach of Christ's order in the distinctness mentioned, it coming here
under the respect and nature of exhortation, it being upon right understanding
of that nature and reason intended to that end; but I know no other Functions
that can be brought under the Exhorters; for excommunication that he may
administer the Sacraments only to worthy persons, comes not unto this case:
First, because he administereth to the Church in whose power is
Excommunication, and to persons, not as such, but as Members of the Church, and
so it comes not within his Office to judge of their particular unworthiness,
much less upon that judgment to excommunicate them. Secondly, because his
personal discomfort touches not his ministerial Function, they being of
clean different natures and considerations. Thirdly, Excommunication is an
Institution, and so not to be by the Light of nature found, much less ordered
as an essential, or subordinate unto any thing without authority from the Word
expressly, or under an expressed Reason, which is equivolent; but teaching is a
Natural, subordidinate to Exhortation, and so used in our case (which also is
a fourth Argument) though v. 7. it be made also the instituted Function of the
Teacher; but that in our, and the like case, it is otherwise, is evident, both
by the Scriptures, and the Precepts and practice of Naturalists: boasting and
self-p^^ising, is a sin and folly, resting in that nature and end, and more
forbidden than teaching is the Exhorter: in the case of giving matter to the
Corinthians to rejoice of him, and answer the false Apostles, he Paul does it,
and yet denies that he does it, 2 Cor. 5.12. because he does it as a necessary
and proper subordinate to that end; and on the contrary, eating meat otherwise
lawfully, was a sin to the Heathen, being done in way of worship of Idols, and
that not only the idolatrous intent, but even the eating it self was sinful,
is evident, 1 Cor. 10.21. because it was a sin for the Corinthians to eat that
meat in their feasts, though without that intent, for that intent having made
that eating a true subordinate to their worship, it was now the same Communion
with Devils with the Corinthians.

The Precepts of Logicians are plentiful in this case, both of their Prince
Aristot. 2. Phys.

And of their soundest, accutest, and most methodicall, and judicious Pillars,
Zeb. a rel. lib. de Constit.

Scaliger de subtilitate, Exercit 307. Cap. 26. Keckerman. sustem. Log. Lib. 2
Cap.

The practice hereof is most current in all civil Courts and courses in the
world: In England trials of right to Lands and Goods are peculiar to the
common Pleas, and of personal actions to the Kings Bench; yet by way of trial
of Actions, Titles of Lands and Goods, may be, and are lawfully, and daily
tried, and so may Actions in the Common Pleas, and both in the Chancery, under
the respects peculiar to each court. The truce between the Low Countries and
Spain, was never supposed to be broken by their warring together in Cleveland,
hurts to any possession of the City of Amsterdam are to be tried and punished
by the Burgemasters, yet by way of trial of any persons right thereto, they
may be desided by the Court of Skepins: A Woman is forbidden to speak in the
Church, 1 Cor. 14. yet in the case of confession of Faith, she may teach all
the Principles of Religion in the Congregation, and as a witness speak and ask
therein, for it is the right Reason, Respects, and Order of Actions, which is
their soul and life, and not their acts that make them lawful, and on the
contrary unlawful, and so our answerable knowledge and intention of them, that
makes them so to us; but the simple acts are mere matter, and so passive, and
so neither under the state of good nor bad; for Murder, Adultery, Robbery,
etc. are not evil, because of their actions of killing a man, lying with a
woman, taking goods from a man, etc. but because they are either not Gods
subordinate means to out intended ends of revenge, pleasure, profit, etc. or
else because as such means they are not committed to us, nor permitted, as
might be cleared if present occasion required, only let me not be mistaken to
compare teaching with the act of killing, and generating in the original
estate of things, for then were they simply unlawful, but not teaching;
neither speak I here of teaching as a ministerial Function, for so it is simply
unlawful to any but the Teacher, or the end of Exposition, Analysis,
Metaphrase, and Extraction of Doctrines, but as an ability and action, duly
subordinate and necessarily prerequisite to Exhortation, without which it
cannot he, and so may by the Exhorter be used, as a Passenger may eat of the
grapes of another vineyard, yet not residently, exportingly, or beyond the
present necessity, nor in a pretended journey or occasion; these Functions as
apportioning are farther to be distinctly paralelled with their Offices on the
one side, and their abilities on the other, being qualified internally, and
externally, and also effectuated in their end; but it is best first to annex
the three last particulars:

Qualifying.

(*) Internally,

In common, and toward God, in whom they all are one, viz. the grace of
acknowledging God as the gracious giver of them, and faith, v. 6. wise holy,
and loving giver of them unto the faithful, as such, v. 3, 6. portion of
faith, v. 4, 5. we; and so by the consequences, which faith is to make upon
both; God is again to be acknowledged and depended on, as the future blesser
and so maker of them effectual, and also as the gracious accepter of his Saints
worship therein, and the glorious end of that faith, the faithful, his
instituted, and their exercised worship, and of the fruits and consequences of
them all.

(*) Externally, peculiarly, and toward Christians and their five-fold
respects, viz. of their understanding, and its knowledge, heart and its wisdom,
the honesty of their actions, (...) 2 These. 3.13. the competencie of their
estate, and of the health of their body; and also toward the managing of the
five Functions, of Teaching, Exhorting, Distributing, Ruling, and Pitying; for
their benefitting in those five respects: Now though they be expressed only as
answering to the three last respects, viz. in simplicity, in diligence, and in
cheerfulness, yet the like is to be supplied in the two first, in understanding
and wisdom, as the three latter confining Functions, were by the pattern and
course of the two first, that (...) Ephesians. 3.10. the diverse kinded, or manifold
wisdom of God, may be acknowledged in the penning of the Scripture, and of this
place in particular, yea in special, in contriving so much matter intelligibly
into so few words, as in any other place, except the Decalogue, the Lords
Prayer, and very few other; neither is the reason to be neglected which seems
to me much to be intended; why in the appropriating part of the Functions, only
the two first are expressed, and the rest are left to be supposed and supplied;
but in their animating or ensouling part, on the contrary, viz. because the
Teacher and Exhorter are to be men of great knowledge, wisdom, and dexterity in
using them, and so are to be supposed of special understanding, courage,
affections, and other personal gifts, and so are rather to be bounded then
spurred, as on the other side the other three are to be told that their Offices
are parts of Gods worship, and so have not only a body, but especially require
the gifts of freeness of Spirit, diligence of Action, and cheerfulness of
Affection, which is left to the other two, to apply to themselves in their
peculiar actuating qualities, the dividing the word aright, and being instant
therein, not excluding the common respect of all to each, nor their remembrance
that their Offices, Functions, Powers and Objects have also external parts,
for their moderating toward them all, and themselves.

(e) Remote, i. e. the effects of the whole instituted worship of God, and
every part thereof, ordered and exercised as is said; this is intimated in the
whole, as it is Gods worship, which as it principally respects Gods glory, so
secundarily man's good; yea it is his chief, yea whole and only good, Eccles.
12.13. and the wise (i. e. the religious) is wise for himself, i. e. chooses
the true happiness; and expressed v. 2. in, the good will of God: v. 3. and 6.
in, grace and faith, v. 5. in, one body in Christ: and v. 7.8. in all the five
Offices, Functions, and Powers, except we will suppose them idle or fruitless,
and so cross Gods main end in them, 1 Cor. 12.7. whereby especially the five
good effects, properly answering to them all, must be understood, viz.
Knowledge, Wisdom, Sufficiency, Honesty, or Well-esteemed walking, and Health;
these are indeed remote from the nature and body of instituted worship, and the
last respect thereof in order and time, but not the last nor least in Gods
intention for his glory and ours, and therefore not in dignity like David, in
respect of his Fathers house, the remotest, last and least, yet in Gods, and
true account, the holy and happy King, both of it, and Gods whole Kingdom of
heaven and earth.

It is yet requisite that I dispose the Heads of this matter more summarily,
thus:

Romans 12.1. to 8. and as Expounded in its v. 4, 5. and 1 Cor. 12.4. to 30.

The absolute sender, operater, and object, is God, v. 2. that will of God, it
describes the real, distinct matter, prescribes the zealous and jealous
practice of Gods special worship as existing 1. of God, viz. Christ as
Mediator: 2. To us, the Word, 3. By God, Christ as sent, v. 1. (...), i. e.
that Word worship of God, v. 5. in Christ. 4. By men, the Apostles, v. 3. for
by the grace (i. e. the Apostleship) that is given me, I charge every one that
is among you, that, etc.


1. Instituting, as orderer, intitler, and inabler, v. 3. as God has measured.

2. Instituted, as

1. One, whole, subjective, and incorporated; viz. the Congregation, v. 4, 5.
one body.

2. Diverse parts, adjuncts, and in membered, answering to the three instituting
respects of God, viz. as

Inabler, immediately or mediately, viz.

(o) 1. Powers, inabling unto, and in:

1. The being of Faith and Grace, v. 3.6. Portion of faith -- grace, personal
Functions, v. 6. whether it be prophecy.

2. The receiving of one of the Church-Offices, the doing the common
Church-works, in their matter, manner, end.

Entitler to the worthiness, or capableness, possession and execution of all
things ecclesiastical, according to the Offices measured in their

1. Intent, and Essential respect, as means of Gods being worshipped by us, v.
1. that your word worship of God -- acceptable, and v. 2. conveying of Christ
and all that is his to us, v. 2. that good will of God.

2 Extent toward each other, viz. exactly distinct in kind.

1 In words affirmatively v. 6. diverse. Negatively, v. 4. not one Function, v.
6. (...) v. 3. be not overwise.

2 In matter.

1 Root and generals, v. 1, 2, 3, 6.

2 Branches and Particulars, v. 6, 7, 8. viz. the Church-Ordinances as
apportioned unto them into five distinct portions, proper Functions (...) v. 4,
6. with Ioh. 17.4. i. e. given, or peculiar works or heads unto several
Members of the Church, qualified with fit gifts, called thereto by the Church,
and thereby making them the Church Officers or Ministers, ordered unto a manner
of exeqution, best befitting them, viz.

Prophet.

The Teacher reaching understandingly the mind by knowledge.

Priest.

The Exhorter exhorting wisely the heart by wisdom.

Provide^.

The Distributer distributing with simplicity the estate by competencie.

King.

The Ruler ruling with diligence, the conversation with honesty.

Preserver.

The Pittyer, widow or mercy worker, pitying or showing mercy with
cheerfulness to the body or natural man for health.

Ver. 7, 8. Or an Office, whether it be the Teacher, the Exhorter, the
Distributer, the Ruler, the Pittier, and v. 6. gifts that are diverse, viz.
Offices five. V. 6. gifts that are diverse, viz. Teaching, Exhorting, and so by
the same consequence, Distributing, Ruling, Pitying, or showing Mercy. V. 8.
with, or in singleness of eye, or simplicity, with diligence, with
cheerfulness; and so the same consequence of the same course, with
understanding, with wisdom; yea, and the special requisites of any other sort,
unto any Office, Function or end, v. 2. that good will of God, i. e. good to,
or for us in the worship now in hand, and v. 1.2. acceptable, for none can do
any work acceptable to God but he must give a proportionable and acceptable
good to him thereupon.

(b) Ordinances,

Existing as means of Gods Worship, v. 1, 2.

Blessing us, v. 2. as above.

Ordered into

(c) Sorts. viz. as

(d) Ministerial,

Ecclesiastical, viz. all that are to be ministered by the Distributer, Ruler,
and Mercy-worker.

Ministerial, Proper, as the Sacraments, common, as all the rest.

(d) Membrall,

Viz. Common, viz. what Christians may do out of a Church, or p^rsonall, viz.
Teaching, Exhortting, Comforting, Contributing, Visiting, etc. v. 6. whether
prophecy.

Proper actions of power, viz. judging Officers, Members, to be so, not so.

(c) Heads, viz. five, appropriated to the five Officers, as their proper
Functions, unto a fit exercising in the five sorts.

Operator, or Effector of all the former parts, viz. in all their five ends.

Accepter of his Servants services, graces, and works, v. 1, 2. acceptable will
of God.

But for cloying the Reader, and cumbering the Tables, both large, and this
less, there might have been added unto these four sorts, and their particulars,
their many divine and humane respects, both a priore, and aposteriori,
mentioned before, which do exceedingly clear, strengthen, and complete the
distinctness of these particular Offices, but I desire rather that these things
may be well digested, and the other after; at least their diverse Objects, viz.
their wit, will, acts, state and body.

There now remains only three tiles of this house to be laid, which I will very
briefly do; The first is, the illustrating v. 4, 5. by 1 Cor. 12.4. to 30. The
second is, the epitomising the tree and body at large prosequted. The third is,
an extracting, or recapitulating of the Arguments for the main point.

The scope of 1 Cor. 12. is to confute the Corinthians Opinion of Excellency,
Glory, Contentment, and Happiness in common Spiritual Gifts, which he does,
first generally, by affirming them ignorant in that Point, v. 1. by proving
that they are herein to suspect themselves and respect him, v. 2. and, by
proving that they are not properly Spiritual gifts of the Holy Ghost; and then
specially, that the three sorts of them, viz. given Powers, Ministries, and
Effects, are so distinctly set, and disposed by God, that we cannot ingross
them to our selves, nor deprive others of them, and therefore neither simple,
nor comparative happiness can be attained in them; this he does in all three
series summarily affirm; in the first, v. 4. in the second, v. 5. in the third,
v. 6. and at large prove in the first, v. 8. to 27. importing therein by the
same reason or a majori the second also: The second, v. 28, 29, 30. in what
remained or needed plainer to be expressed: The third in both the former, for if
they were so, then must their effects be accordingly, as is expressed, v. 7.

The first is peculiarly handled, v. 8, 9, 10. and the second, v. 28, 29, 30.
and both very excellently proved and amplyfied in the verses between both, in
the words, and their plain exposition of our v. 4, 5. yea it is so far
exemplyfied, that I will content myself with referring the matter to the reading
and comparing both those places by the ingenuous, though of mean capacity, what
I have said hereof, being well considered, only for v. 28, 29, 30. observe
first, that he expressly distinguishes the Offices and their Functions, so that
one cannot have more then one, v. 28. God has set some in the Church, as
first, second, third, then, after, that, and so of the rest, and v. 29, 30, are
all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all Teachers, are all, etc. to seven
particulars: Secondly, that he infers the same upon his former proofs, that
no Member has many powers, and therefore cannot have many offices, or their
given works: John 17.4. And thirdly, that he proves both by Gods practice,
viz. God gives but one power to one, and another to another, and so of
Offices, and their Functions, and therefore we are not to take more to, or upon
our selves, and therefore no happiness can be had in them, whether absolute,
because he cannot have many, much less all; or comparative, because he shall
bebeholding, yea inferior to another in another respect, gift or office; now if
God used this discreet respectiveness, in the time of profuseness of his
Spirit, Acts 2. with Joel 2. how say some that the PASTOR has all Offices
included in him, as if he were (...) or exempt from the rule of Gods practice,
and Paul's consequence of right thereupon, both in Powers and Offices, and
others that the Offices are indeed distinct, but it is only in degree, as if
all gifts were common, and given to all, and differed only in degree; or as if
the works of the Ministers were as common as those of Christians, which are
required no more of one then another, but only according to their more gifts,
means, or occasions, yea, as those of every Subject of a Kingdom, Servant of a
family, to whom no particular work nor talent is given, but only by a general
place of a Servant, or charge to do the work of the Family, and so Gods
Kingdom or House were more without Offices, or they without distinctness, then
the Kingdoms and Families of the world; but especially others, that the
Teacher, Exhorter, and Ruler are but one Office, expressing what the other
import, and professing what the other dare not, for the vehememcy of the word
and world against it: The main scope of this Chapter and the next is to prefer
happiness by grace, above that by gifts, upon this ground, that that is indeed
common, as they wrongly suppose this to be, which all those opinions cross, and
are more crossed by it.

Lastly, (for I haste,) These make way for indifferency of Offices, Functions,
Ordinances, and Orders, in Gods House, and give way to Hierarchycall, yea,
Romish usurpation, as if they had not that love of the Truth of Gods Worship
which he exacteth, at least not that first-love which he best accepts: but
this being at the utmost of my occasion, and beyond my intent when I began it,
I pass to the second Tile, referring further clearing the first, unto further
knowledge of likely doubts, and occasions to remove them.

The second requisite is, to epitomize and effigiat the Tree of this matter, so
much prosequted, that it may the better be discerned whether it be that tree of
Gods planting, of Paradise, and of Life, which it is pretended to be, i. e.
whether its roots draw sap from the River, in the midst of the Paradise of God,
and be fructified by the divine heat thereof, and the Negation of their
contraries, and be of that proportion, variety, and preciousness of fruit,
which the Tree of Gods special worship ought to do and be; only because I
fear I shall be too much straightned if I should set it and its explanation
together, (as is fit) in this page, and also confuse the matter; I will refer
it to another place, and in this place collect and set the sum of the Arguments
which this place yeildeth for the proving the distinctness of the Offices in
kind, which is the third and last, requisite to this place; they are of three
sorts, according to the three parts of the tree, viz. the Root, Body and
Branches, each yiedling five.

The first is, because they are integrall, and heterogeneal parts of Gods
worship as instituted, special, or in the strictest sense, and so are fully
under the nature of the distinctness of the immediate image, means and
representation of God, the breaking the bands and bounds, whereof is the most
proper object of Gods highest jealousy, hatred and curse, except the sins
against the first commandment, in the same, or a higher degree, and it is
annexed only to the second, as most needing the same, v. 1. worship of God.

The second, in that they are institutions, and not grounded on the general
Light of Nature, and therefore are to be observed in the strictest manner of
diversity, at least in a true and proper differentness, manyness, and not
oneness, which is expressed of them, v. 4, 5, 6. this is proved v. 1. in that
they are parts of that word-worship of God; but all moral sins are so,
without, and before the Word.

The third is, That they are severally measured out, v. 3. not one in Function,
and many parts of one body, v. 4, 5. and diverse, and proportioned, v. 6. by the
express will of God, v. 2. that will of God, that good and acceptable, and
perfect one.

The fourth, in that the contrary supposition and practice, is called
overwiseness, immodesty, and breaking the particular measure of God, v. 3.

And fifthly, conformity to the world, v. 2. These five from the general Root,
do strongly prove the point, if the Offices and their distinctness be
particulars thereof, i. e. parts of Gods worship, as instituted in the Word, as
lovingly to us, acceptably to himself, and perfectly in it self, willed by God,
and as opposed by the wit, immodesty, and unboundedness of man, and by the like
customs of the world: Now that the Offices are so, is not denied, because they
are expressly named, and by the same reason is their distinctness in kind to be
granted, since otherwise they are not diverse many, nor one, nor stinted
Officers, but the same in kind, and not many; one, and not stinted out
portions of faith; only the persons are according to their gifts to use them
diversely in measure, which is no ministerial difference, nor in state, office,
or place, but only personal, in gifts and degree, which alters not the kind.

The sixth Argument: And first, from the body of the Tree is, v. 4. as we have
many members in one body; thus; What kind of oneness is meant in the body,
that kind of manyness is meant in the members: but in the body is meant oneness
in kind: therefore the major I suppose that neither Scholar nor ingenious will
deny; the minor also none deny in our case, that I know, to have expressed
themselves: the Papists holding one Church in particular, and the hierarchians
one in kind, but of a diverse kind from ours: but of neither of these we have
now to do; and all reformed Churches, holding the same with us, that it is a
Congregation.

The seventh is from the same words, thus: Such diversity is meant between the
Offices, as is between the members of our body, that is, heterogeneal, and not
only individual and graduall, therefore this also: if this yet convict not of
it self, as me thinks it should, Paul's ground being from our members, which
have not one and the same work, and not from the branches of a Tree which have,
except of the Tree of Life, Rev. 22. Cast but the eye on the consonant reflexes
on every side, on the six former Arguments, especial the sixth, and on the more
and more clear, following especially on the next; and it will, if any thing will.

The eight is also from the same, v. 4. but all those members have not the same
work; these are the express opposite words and matter to those that oppose me
herein, for they say the Pastors office has also the same work with the rest,
especially with the overseeing offices, and they also with the rest, and with
the Pastor, only occasions, gifts, order, and arbitrary agreement may make a
difference, yea and ought; but God has not stinted and apportioned certain
works to certain offices, so as when the church constituteth a Teacher, an
Exhorter, and a Ruler, they should share out all the overseeing Ordinances into
three portions, functions, or designed works, which should adaequately
terminate their offices, and so make them distinct in kind: this place says
the flat contrary, except they will flee to extraordinary offices, or to
verbal cavills, or else to inconveniences, as if they be Ministers of Christ,
(or rather of the Church) and not his Saints, they will not suffer themselves
to be hampered, yoked, and bound with his bands and cords, but oppose them and
their courses, that endeavor it as from Christ, so as they shall find (...)
extraordinary cavilling and inconveniences, out of which my present summary
course will not suffer me to drive them, but must refer it to what is said, and
to the answer to the Arguments, for their tenent or rather practice; only the
verbal cavills against this place, I shall not there meet with, and therefore
will here touch them, The one is upon (...) all the other upon (...) not the
same, in the former they show their ignorance of the ordinary Greek phrase in
this kind, for that it is an ordinary Greek idiome, see Luke 14.33. John
3.8.15, 16. and 4.14. Acts 20.25. Gal. 2.16. 2 Ioh. 9. 1 Cor. 6.17. so that it
were better translated, and no members have the same Function, as the
generals, particulars, and coherence require it: For the second, What Greek
phrase can they better (or so well) express my Tenent by, then by it? by (...)
not many works? they might yet have had two or three, (...) diverse works? let
that then stand for good, v. 6, that it may show the diversity to be between
the members, and not between them and the body, and this prove the nature of
that diversness to be real, special, or in kind, and not only personal,
respective, or in degree; each clearing other, and both according to the words,
matter general and particular, and their coherence, with the scope, and all
with me; and indeed, this seems to be the reason why the Holy Ghost used
(...) rather then (...) which would have expressed the same more accurately,
partly to teach us, rather to look to the scope, the present place, and its
correspondence with others of the same matter or scope, then to the words; and
partly to show, that matters of institution are for Christians and Sons,
transformed into a renewed mind, v. 2. and for their benefit, ibid. and not
for the convicting the gainsaying, and affronting the stiff-necked, as the Law
and moral Duties are; yet if this be no^ enough, the whole Verse could not be
mended, though some one word singled out, might in some respect, and
particularly (...) the universal affirmative does more show the distinctness to
be Essential, Internal, and in kind, then (...) the universal Negative,
though that more consonantly to our phrase of Speech conclude the matter, de
facto, and that no two Offices have one and the same Function, common in kind
to both; and (...) having plain relation to the heterogeneal members of our
body, as is also expressed often, 1 Cor. 12. does exactly express both the
Affirmative naturalness, and the Negative strictness, which can be expected:
But I must proceed.

The ninth is, v. 5. so we being many; being, more expressing the essentialness
and specialness of the distinctness of the members, then either the
heterogenealness, or (...), or their mutual relatition, and therefore much more
then any other words or matter, because it more shows that diversness to be
in the Offices, as such, and not only that they are de facto positively and
oppositely, negatively and exclusively distinct, which is the most natural
distinctness.

The tenth yet proceeds a degree higher, (though nearer nothing can) showing,
that though no civil nor religious Office of man's making have indeed any such,
Internal Distinctnesse whereby this matter might be the better expressed; yet
those of the Church have in respect of, or by the Law and institution of
Christ, v. 5. in Christ; wherein not only the diversness and maniness of the
members, or offices, and ordinances of the church; but also the oneness,
combination, or stateness of the church it self, are proved to be jure divino,
even of Christ's own ordaining. I, but that shows that all this matter is to
be referred to Christ's mystical body, members and service, in Christ, or in
the Lord, never being elsewhere applied to the outward worship? If I should
grant the ground, the consequence would not follow, if the present matter and
scope require that sense here; nay, whether the diversness of Offices be in
kind or degree, it is granted on both sides, that it is by Christ's appointment,
and if it be not elsewhere expressed, it should the easilier be granted that it
is so here; but the words are, and are to be applied to the outward respects of
Christ, so often as to the inward, as seems by Romans 16.9, 16. 1 Cor. 4.15, 17.
2 Cor. 2.14.17. and 12.2, 19. Gal. 1.22. Coll. 1.2. 1 Cor. 15.22. 1 Thessalonians.
4.16. 1 Timothy 2.7. 1 Pet. 3.16. Well then, what will this help you? First, it
shows, that this is the matter pointed at in the VVord-worship, v. 1. and
gives us a mutual confirmation of both. Secondly, it further sends us to the
fountain of that VVord-worship whereof the Word is but the cistern, to the form
thereof, that gives its name and nature, and to the reason why it is so, and
is so called, and so to the son that is more faithful than Moses. Thirdly, It
was requisite that they should be annexed to the body of this matter, as a seal
that it is such a body, (if indeed the Analysis be true) that as Christ is the
root and body of Gods Worship, so it should be expressed in the expressest
place of the Institution, and Sanctification thereof, and of its special
respects; and again, it being here accordingly done, it is no small
confirmation, that it is for those reasons. Lastly, it not only sets the
body on the root, Christ upon Moses, and the Soul of Gods Worship into the
Body, and external part thereof, and also compleateth the body of this place,
and its four lively respects, to our present point, with the crown, name, and
nature of Christian, proving thereby the distinctness proper, and moving our
solicitousness in observing the same, and jealousy against the contrary; but
also, that nothing ought to be done in Gods outward Worship, but what is done
in Christ, 1. In the acknowledgment, that is the Ordinance of Christ: 2. That
they ought to be done in obedience to Christ, And thirdly, that none have right
to the matter or manner, but those that are in Christ, nor are to be admitted
thereto, but such as are so seeming to the Church, and as such.

Against all this it may well be objected, That though those words do prove,
and move, as is said, yet this, and the second and seventh reason are the same,
the institutions of the Word and of Christ being all one particular, and
differ only in degree, and as the commands of the Law, and Lawmakers, the one
being the immediate, and the other original commander of them: To this, and
what is more herein than in the second, is in the seventh; I say, that though
me thinks there is more in this than in the second and seventh Arguments; yet
if this whole Argument be granted to be annexed to the second and seventh, pro
rata, I will not insist upon the difference, but will here set instead thereof
the proof of the same thing from the next words, (...), i. e. but in respect of
individuality, or particularity, one another members, this shows, that he
spoke before of the respect of the members or officers, which is general, and
as they are diverse in kind, or heterogeneal, and not as individuals, existents
mutually respecting each other, or particulars of the same kind, differing only
in degree of works, gifts, operation, or dignity in such personal respects,
because he now annexeth that respect as opposite to what he had before
intended, and that expressly in terms and matter; in terms, but individually;
in matter, each others members; i. e. for each others help and benefit, in all
their peculiar differences or proper works of teaching, exhorting,
distributing, ruling and pitying, hereby making perfect the parallel, or
correspondency with 1 Cor. 12. in, not only proving the proper, special,
kindlike, or sort-like distinctness of the Offices, as before; but also now
inserting their union and communion so far as it reaches, i. e. in respect of
their individualness, and some mutual common ends of benefit; as, 1 Cor. 12.
does also discreetively and oppositely, v. 7. by (...) and v: 7.24.25, 26. by
(...), both agreeing in what I have said before, so that this distinctness of
Offices of the Church, is exceedingly well cleared in these two verses; in the
sixth Argument, that it is in kind and sort, and not only in number; In the
seventh, that it is as between the integral, yea, heterogeneal members of man's
body, and not as the great and little branches of a tree, except it be of the
tree of life, bearing twelve sorts of fruit, Rev. 22.2. in the eighth, that it
is in function, and not only in ability; in the nineth, that it is essential,
ministerial, official, and as such, and not only qualitative, quantitative,
relative, or otherways accidentary, and in the tenth, that it is not numerall,
nor in any respect whereof the individuum or particular as such, is the Basis
or Subject, which excludes the four former Negatives, or Opposites, and
includes the four Affirmatives and Positives thereby; yea, were but this last
only thoroughly considered, the main matter would be clear enough to the right
Worshippers; yet, as this second sort of Arguments being from the body of this
place of Romans 12. and of Gods Worship instituted therein, is more clearly to
our point than the first, from the soul and root of both; so is the third sort
more express than the second, even so much as the members or branches do more
manifest the manifold powers of the original basis, than they themselves, as
may out of what follows, and by further prosecuting of what it occasioneth
unto, be well discerned by the transformed in the renovation of their minds,
that have the free power of themselves, and their understandings from under
Antichristianism, custom of others, and themselves, and prejudice.

The third sort of Arguments, is from the branches, or particularizing and
explaining of what was generally and more obscurely set down in the five former
Verses, and from the use of the Divine Doctrine thereof: This last fivefold
confirmation of the point in hand, viz. that all the five Church-Offices are
distinct in kind, and properly is revealed to us, v. 6, 7, 8. the first of
which, and the eleventh of the whole number is v. 6. Since then we have gifts
that are diverse; this needs no syllogism, the words are so express, if Gifts
be granted here at all, to signify Offices given to the Church, as is v. 7, 8.
expressed, and 1 Cor. 12.28. with Ephesians. 4.6, 7, 11, 12. paralelled, and also
proved in the ten places cited before. (...) there, and (...) here being all
one, as often elsewhere, both agreeing in term, nature and use to signify a
gracious gift, such as are the Church-Offices, and that the greatest, except
Sanctifying and Inherent Grace it self; so that there is no evading from
conviction, but through the Word (...) diverse, distinct, different or several,
and surely it will be hard breaking through this strength of the scope of the
place, the consonancie, with two generals in the same, completely proving the
same, the one mediate, the other immediate; the one, as the root or soul; the
other as the body, to which these words do illatively connect the Church
Offices, as their branches and members, the expressness of the words, the
highly respectibleness of the matter requires the same in its nature, types,
and evangelicalness, and also through the Army of Associating Arguments,
orderly and powerfully fighting for the same; yet will men object what they can
against it, which are these two things.

Object. 1.
First, from the word diverse, saying, that it may signify diverse particulars,
different degrees, distinct and several respects, and so the Offices may be one
in kind, yet diverse also.

Object. 2.
The second from the matter sutening therewith, in other particulars, alleging
the extraordinary offices for instance, viz. that the Apostles might do the
works of all the rest, both extraordinary and ordinary.

Answer.
To the former, I answer: First, that that manner of Argumentation by may-bees,
proves nothing, though the ground were true; for it may be does not prove so
much as probably, which is the least proof, so that though it might be so, yet
must the matter be inferred that it is, before any thing be proved.

Secondly, That in this case and kind it may not be so expounded, it being here
adjected to an universal, an abstract, an adjunct, and a state.

1 To an universal, both in gifts, which is the general to prophecy, and an
office, i. e. to personal or membral, and to ministerial gifts; and also in an
office, which is the general to five expressed kinds of offices, as most hold,
and at least to two, as all hold; and therefore the substantive kinds, or
universal parts thereof must differ more than in number, and so much more than
in degree and respect.

2. To an abstract both in gifts and offices, and therefore if there be but
four or five men in a church gifted with prophecy, or with one language, or
made Deacons, it cannot be said that Church has diverse gifts, tongues, and
offices in it in the abstract, but only diverse gifted persons, and diverse
officers in the concrete.

3. To an adjunct to Christians, members, or Officers, viz. to the Powers or
Offices of such, and not to the particular persons themselves, and therefore
the same consequence in respect of the adjunct and subject, here follows,
which before did in respect of the abstract and concrete altering only the one
two words for the other two.

4. To a State in respect of Offices, which is our case, so that it cannot be
said, that there are diverse Ministerial States in a Church, City, or Nation,
that has but one sort of Officers, though many particulars of that sort, and
so many Officers, who may also be different, diverse, distinct, and several in
degree and manifold respects; but if they differ more then in particular,
concrete, subject, or person, as in our case they do, then must they differ
also much more then in degree, or in inabling, arbitrary, or other accidental
respects, and so they cannot be said therefore to be diverse, but for some
higher reason, yea higher then that wherein they have their being, i. e. the
existent particulars, concretes, subjects, and persons, since accidentis esse,
est in esse, i. e. the being of an accident is to be in, viz. as such; and
since existentia sola agunt, patiuntur and subijciuntur, i. e. Existents, (viz.
particulars, which only are properly and simply in act) only do, suffer, and
are subject, viz. to accidents. These four particulars yield four Arguments
against the former Objection, and fully answer it, and might plentifully be
exemplified and illustrated if further need and occasion required.

A third or sixth answer is from the predicate annexed in the same clause, to
diverse, viz. according to that grace given unto us, which also is itterated in
the same verse; in, according to that measure of that faith, both referring us
to v. 3. and so inferring the particulars following upon the preceding
generals, and both being answered, 1 Cor. 12.11. Ephesians. 4.7. with 8. to 11. and 1
Pet. 4.10, 11. wherein also are three sorts or heaps of Arguments couched,
which I must but touch: The first is in the words themselves; first, laying the
cause of that distinctness in Gods gracious and free Will, not in man's
discretion, or will, for reasons within himself, in the former Clause. And
secondly; In the proportion of faith, which is here set as the formal Reason,
or soul of our Church Estate, whether membral, proper, and immediate, faith
being the respect or cause why we have right to be Members of that State, and
why all other gifts are given unto us, Mark 16.16, 17, 18. Acts 10.44. to 48.
and 20.8.32. and so why we are capable of the Offices of the Church, according
to which measure, whether of Membership, Gifts or State, we are to actuate that
we have received distinctly, not confusedly, i. e. of each according to his own
Rules and Order, not of any of the other two, as of the State or Offices, by
the Rules thereof, not of gifts properly and immediately, though the Office was
given to us in respect of fit gifts therefore; yet now the predominant and
denominant, the constituter and distinguisher, and the proper subject of order,
is the office or state it self, and that only, though they be also both Members
and gifted, which have also their proper Rules, which we are also to observe in
their respect, as such; other ARGUMENTS there are also to be drawn from these
words, viz. from given and measured, showing us, that the Rule of our
exercising the Offices, is to be taken from the respect, as they are from God,
and not as inherent in us properly, though secondarily, both gifts and graces
are to be respected and exercised therein, as is expressed, v. 8. with
simplicity, with diligence, with cheerfulnes; and fourthly, from, to us, v. 6.
to every one, v. 3. with the reference of v. 6. thereto, showing the same, and
the specialness and singularity of the respect; but we neither need nor may
prosecute every thing to the utmost.

The second sort of Arguments is from demonstratively used four times, thereby
referring us in this point to the matters past in the generals, which yield ten
Arguments as is shown, all strongly, though more obscurely, proving the same
distinctness which is here expressed.

The third sort is from the inference of distinct executing of those distinct
gifts and Offices, upon the former proved, and present expressed distinctness
of them, connecting thereby the generals and particulars, the Root, Body and
Branches; the Soul, Body and Members, and the preceding and subsequent matter
of this place incorporatingly together, and so communicating membrally the
force of each Argument to the other; the number and weight of the following
Arguments are well to be considered and applied hereto, after I have also
answered the second Objection from the instance in the extraordinary Offices,
which now succeeds.

To that second Objection; I first answer, that as those Offices are more hard
to know in all the bounds, rules, and appurtenances, and less concern us then
the ordinary, and also yield us no present light from their practice as these
do, so are they less distinctly known then these, and cannot be perfectly
paralelled, to make the rules of these to square with those, and therefore no
good Argument a notiori can be brought from them against our point: Secondly,
that the rule of the extraordinary Offices, was principally according to the
being immediately enabled and directed by God, and not by the set State and
Office, as the proper subject of their gifts, works and end; since whosoever
was endued with Apostolical, Prophetical, and Evangelicall gifts, did
presently proceed to the execution of those Offices, without expectation of a
farther Ordination, and as being thereby called thereunto; but so is it not
with the now permanent Offices: Thirdly, those were under the respect of
Instituters, Platformers, and Law, Rule and Worship-makers, though mediate, and
not as instituted after the pattern seen in the Mount of the Word, and so are
not to be measured thereby, as our instituted Offices are. Fourthly, That Order
which is to be observed in them, is rather by reflex from the Church, to which
they most properly are given, 1 Cor. 3.22. 1 Cor. 28. 1 Timothy 3.15. viz. in
their Consultations, Acts 1.15.21, 22. and in Ordination, Acts 13.3. 1 Timothy
4.14. with 2 Timothy 1.6. and 4.5. then by any set Rule in themselves, which yet
is so sparsim and sparingly observed that it cannot be said to be the Rule of
extraordinary Offices.

Fifthly, They had diverse properly distinct functions, works and duties,
according to their inspired abilities, which were specially and singularly
distinct in several persons, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10, with v. 28, 29. especially v.
11. (...) distributing to every one privately (personally, peculiarly, or
severally) as he will; and their Offices which came therewith, and thereupon
were alike, distinct, properly and in kind.

Sixthly, For authoritative Offices, which required not only ability, but also a
sending or calling unto the Functions, immediate or mediate, about which is the
greatest question; they had also and especially their distinct Functions, Works
and Duties allotted to them, either immediately as Apostles, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.
Acts 1.26.9. with 26.14, to 18. or mediately, deputedly, and inferiorly, as
Evangelists, 1 Timothy 1.3.18. and 4.14. with 2 Timothy 1.6.4.1, 2. Tit. 1.5. to 13.
Diverse hard questions do here arise, as, whether Barnabas were properly an
Apostle or no? Whether Philip had the same authority with Timothy and Titus?
Whether Timothy and Titus had that Authority by Paul's deputation, or by their
Evangelicall gifts or office? etc. but for these I refer thee at this present
to my four first Answers, and proceed to the seventh.

Seventhly, Neither all, nor any of the extraordinary Offices, were common in
all works, nor so only diverse in kind, nor in number, as differing only in
gifts, and their exercising, which the two opposite opinions hold, that the
three overseeing ordinary offices are: but diverse also in office, both in name
and nature, and therefore the instance from them is for neither of them:
opposite I say they are, both against themselves in terms, affection and
course; and in the two former clauses of the predicate in kind, in number, and
also against the scope of this writing; and I think of Romans 12.1. to 9. the
subject thereof in matter, affection, and course; and in the two latter clauses
of the predicate, in gifts, in their exercising, though in the latter part of
that predicate they be one, and thereby destroy the unity and order of Gods
Worship, giving, yea making way, yea as Beza Annot. on Romans 12. very
Divine-like, and judiciously, and it is likely experimentally observed, causing
that great Babylonish confusion in the same, past and present, and is to be
feared, as he there says, to continue and increase, if the cause be not taken
away; so great a matter is it in the judgment of our greatest Divines,
howsoever custom and practice prevail against great and small.

Eighthly: It does not appear that any one Office did, or might do the works of
all other offices, either extraordinary or ordinary; but the contrary in the
former, Acts 21.10. to 14.20.25. with 2 Timothy 4.20. Trophimus I left at Miletum
sick, which must needs be at his coming again to the same place after his
release from his first imprisonment at Rome, mentioned in the Acts, to which
also the ancient Histories, and Fathers agree in the fact, and is so generally
received, though not in the matter of Trophimus; so that Paul himself neither
did nor could do, nor therefore might endeavor to foretell any thing
prophetically, and as of himself, or of his office or gift, neither can it be
proved that any other Apostle might, much less any other but the Prophets
themselves: and the latter, Acts 6.2. where we are to presume, that the 12.
Apostles would have prevented the murmuring, and supplied that need both, at
least so well as any other seven, if they had done the work of
Church-distributing, and therefore that they did it not; and also if it had
been within their charge and office, and that therefore it was not; for that
there was need of the work, and also of preventing the murmuring of a great
part of the Church, for the not due performance thereof, is expressed both in
terms, v. 2, 3. (...), i. e. in this need, or necessary work, and also in the
whole matter; so that it appears not that the Apostles themselves did, yea,
that they neither did, nor ought to administer the Church-alms, and so had not
all Church-Offices included in, nor annexed unto their office, much less any
other extraordinary officers, and yet much less any ordinary, but yet less the
exhorter than the ruler, in so much as he is less authoritative, as they must
hold, that put the distinctness of the offices in the degree of their
execution, and hold their denomination and proper being from that more
principal degree and emphasis of their function; nay, in that he is not at all
ruling, if any of these arguments or chief particulars of these lines be true;
yea, yet a fifth degree less has the Exhorter, commonly called the Pastor, the
Rulers office included in, but least of all subordinate under his office, as
those hold and practice, that are the occasion of my present writing, whose
Arguments (whereof one, if not the principal, is from this very place, of Act.
6.) shall anon be answered, after I have confirmed the contrary by the other
four remaining Arguments from the branches, and also by five compound Arguments
of the other fifteen; yea last, and least of all is the Ruler subordinate to
the Exhorter, by this place, since the very Deacons are not.

The twelfth is, from the express, distinct particularizing of the Offices
themselves, v. 7, 8. the Teacher, the Exhorter, the Distributer, the Ruler, the
Pittier; the former Arguments shows that the Word says that the Offices are
distinct; this, that it makes them so, and exactly particularizeth them into
five several existents in kind, and not only in number, accidentary respects or
degrees; this special distinctness in name, and nature, in state and
subsistence, and what not, that is properly and evidently to our point, is of
its self sufficient to the most solid and judicious, if ingenuous and willing
to see what they in truth do see; yet if any will be wiser then Solomon,
Eccles. 7. in walking rather in the soul, i. e. on tiptoes, or above his pace,
power, or means, as the opposition, v. 1^. shows; and in emulating
comparative accurateness, as v. 16. explaineth; yea wiser than he ought, yea
than the discreet distribution and measuredness which the Holy Ghost has in
this Romans 12. viz. v. 3. said, is set and ordained in these things by God, and
to be modestly and discreetly observed by us, He shall be set on his he^^s as a
man with the King of Babylon, Dan. 7.4. By the accurateness in three
particulars following, the former arguments not forgotten; for whereas it might
be said, that we are not presently to be swayed by the seeming litteralness of
any place, without many considerations; nor by the seeming kind like diversity
of the Church-offices in this place; without proofs of their intended
discreetiveness, and distinctness from each other of their constitutedness, and
kindlike existency, and of their functional propriety, and peculiar
definedness; all which is here convinced; All this is well gain-sayed in the
three particles, (...) and (...), annexed to each of the five offices, (...) to
the general, i. e. Offices, for its distinctness from personal gifts, and to
the two first and principal particulars, which seem most inseparable, and so
evidently to be supplied in the other three, and (...), expressly to them all.

From (...) (which is the thirteenth Argument) I thus argue: What Offices are
so essentially, properly, and expressly distinguished, (as any are from each
other) as Prophecy is from an office, and as distinctive terms can do; those
are so distinct, as I have said, or intimated; but the five Church-Offices are
so essentially, etc. therefore this adds so express, and clear proper
distinctness, as the two former, and they with this, as need to be; for that
these are so distinct as any civil offices, and as prophecy, or other
personal gifts are from Church-offices, is not to be denied, nor that any terms
are more distinctive than (...), until they be named, or rather created, mean
while I proceed.

To me yet the fourteenth Argument from the denotative article (...) is more
than all the rest; for though it pass ordinarily under the account of a slight,
or redundant particle, as the VVord-worship as such, does among all but the
truly-religious, or as above an ordinary Harould when it is emphatically used,
as the Sacrament of the Lords Supper does among the Papists, and Lutherans,
being yet by them bereaved of the soul of a Sacrament, as this is of its
specifical denotation; yet is it in its proper nature constitutive, and
denotative, of the proper specifical existence of all things, and here of the
Church-Offices: Now, so far as to constitute, is more primary in it self, and
proper to the form of every thing, than to distinguish, appropriate, actuate,
or any thing but to constitute; so far is above all other particles, where it
is used in its proper nature of denotating that constitution, as here; for
before I took it as James does works, Iam. 2. declaratively, not properly, when
I said it was constitutive, and so far as a right line does better show which
is a right line, and which a crooked, than any crooked whatsoever does either,
except that which is just alike, and then it, but as like; so far also does the
denotative article (...) exceed all other in the case of constitution, or
distinction, and much more of appropriation, actuation, passion, relation, or
any adjunct whatsoever, which either instituteth, or denotateth as instituted
the office, and not only the action of showing mercy, and so makes it a diverse
office in nature, the like follows in the rest, as before which is expressly
proved in (...), in the Masculine Gender: Yet lest any thing, especially what
is so much respected, and in this case expected, the propriety of all the
offices, and that only and always, should be wanting in this high and useful
matter; these things are added in the third particle (...), which is the
fifteenth and last argment from Romans 12. Now that it may the better be
perceived, three things are to be pointed at.

1 The simple use of (...), confining within, or unto any thing.

2 The adaequatum, or proper object, or function, in, on, and unto which each
office is confined, viz. the very actuation of that gift that makes the matter
or officer in potentia, worthy and fit to be informed with the instituted
office of Christ, answering to the name and nature of every office, viz. the
Teacher, in teaching, in exhorting, in distributing, etc.

3 The secondary qualification of the Officers, which is more remote and a
posteriori, than the former, and also more qualitative, as the other is more
quantitative, viz. the Teacher in, on, and with intelligibleness; the Exhorter
in, on and with perswasiveness, the Dristributer in, on, and with simplicity,
and so of the Rulers diligence, and Pittyers cheerfulness; all these jointly
and severally evidently prove the point; yet for the eminent clearness and
strength of these proofs, I will connect all the sorts of them, into which they
may specially be divided into one Argument: And first, of the first five oroot.

What distinctness the worship, will, and word of God, and the fleeing the
contraries, do require more peculiarly and specially in the Church-Offices,
then are in the civil, that is properly distinct in kind, and very
religiously to be yielded to God; but all these require more peculiar
distinctness in Ecclesiastical, then is in civil Offices, therefore that is
properly and in kind distinct, and very religiously to be observe

Secondly: Of the second five, or body, thus: What distinctness in the Church
Offices is revealed in the Word, to be as the distinctness of the Organicall
Members of the body, in opposition to the oneness of the body in kind, and of
the Members in mutual use, and in respect of their diverse existence,
Functions, and essence, that is most proper in kind, and mutually exclusive;
such distinctness is revealed to be in Ecclesiastical Offices: Ergo.

Thirdly: Of the third fl^e, and Branches, thus: What Offices are said
expressly, Romans 12. to be distinct and diverse from each other by the distinct
gift of God; yea, and are there so distinguished into their several sorts, and
that both disjunctively, denotatively, and apportionedly, or confinedly: those
are most properly in nature, and highly in degree, distinct in kind from each
other: but the 5 ecclesiastical offices are so said and distinguished, therefore
they are most properly in nature and highly in degree, distinct in kind from
each other: Any of these 3 connections are alone sufficient, yea the 3 last
Clauses of the 3 d, do completely conclude the point, so if any of these
nineteen Arguments be good, the Ecclesiastical Offices are distinct in kind,
properly and perfectly; yea if the consequence of none of these simple or
compound Arguments would hold, yet the combination of them all would, which
shall be the twentieth Argument, and the conclusion of the positive proofs of
the Point, from Romans 12. I will now come to the opposite part from the
Scriptures, referring the proofs from reason, both positive and opposite till
after them, and reserving the other proofs from other places of Scripture, for
the better clearing all Objections, supposing the proofs from Romans 12.
sufficient to establish the Point positively.

The first opposite Argument is from Acts 6.2, 3. thus: The Apostles had all
offices included in theirs, and did on occasion execute them, and in particular
the Deacons office, Acts 6.2, 3. therefore the Pastors now so have, and may do.
For answer whereto, first, See what is said before, both against the antecedent
and its consequence, and then I think there will be so little appearance of
likelihood, and less of certainty in the antecedent, (which is enough) and yet
less, yea none at all, of either in the consequence, that none will require
farther disproof of that, for which it is brought against me, and farther will I
not meddle therewith here, though it be for me.

The second is from 1 Timothy 3.1. to 8. thus: If ruling and teaching be jointly
requisite to the office of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.1. to 8. then are they not the
distinct functions of two several Church-offices; but ruling and teaching are
jointly requisite to ^he office of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.1. to 8. therefore they
are not the distinct functions of the Teacher and Ruler, as they have two
several Church-offices: this is the principal, and almost the only argument
from the Scripture of all 3. sorts of my Opposites, who are as much against
each other as me, and each will hold with me, rather then with each other; yet
must I not take notice of their enmity against each other, nor me, nor of their
friendship, but plainly answer them all.

Of the two grosser, the former under the name of Bishop, holding only one in
number and nature; the latter holding the three overseeing Offices, one in
kind, and diverse only in number, and the more refined acknowledging them diverse
in kind and number, yet differing only in degree and emphasis: a wonderful
refined distinction, in appearance nearer to me, and yet in truth farther from
me then the grosser in appearance; I cannot readily say how much, but I can see
and think it very much, and make some use thereof.

But first: For a joint answer to them all, I say that, that place intends,
first, no distinguishing of Offices, but a furnishing, qualifying and making
worthy of the Churches Offices, the persons, Officers, and Executors of those
Offices* Secondly, No instituting, nor denotating, as instituted, any
Church-office: nor, thirdly, any appropriating, confining, nor adaequating any
Offices and theit Functions, as the handled place of Romans 12. does in all three
points; so that neither of the two Opinions can challenge either matter or
words to be framed and expounded by the scope and course of any distinctness,
as Romans 12. does: Neither, fourthly, is there any such strong inducement from
the general body, or special, or from any particularizing in the place, as in
Romans 12. that we are to expect any of them, either expressly, or by any strong
intimation: Fifthly, and more particularly; the subject of all the adjuncts is
set in a general term, common to three Offices, and therefore no
distinguishing, constituting, nor appropriating is here intended, for a Bishop
or Overseer indifferently extends it self unto the oversight of the
understanding, heart and actions in its etymology, ordinary, yea only use and
in the correspondencies with this place; in all but the last clause there is no
doubt: By the correspondencies I intend three places, viz. 1 Timothy 3.8. to 13.
Secondly, cap. 5.1. to v. 18. Thirdly, Tit. 1.5. to 10. In the last, Bishop and
Elder being promiscuously used, as in this place; and in the two first, Deacons
being also alike extended, as a General to the Distributer and Pittyer,
promiscuously, and equivolently with helpers, 1 Cor. 12.28. Neither is that
word any where used more for the Distributer then the Pittyer, yet once on the
contrary, Romans 16.1. for though 1 Timothy 3.12. it be said that a Deacon must be
the Husband of one Wife, which in word cannot agree with the Widow, yet in the
scope and general reason, which is the soul and form of the place, it answers
so well to her, as to the Distributer, i.e. a^ it is a testimony of
Continency, which is more required in her than in him, and is so expressed, 1 Timothy 5.9.2. which is the Expositer or supplement of that place, most indeed in
the serving Offices, there being most left to be understood in them; but in one
or two special particulars also, in the Overseeing Offices, v. 17, 18. least
the distinctness so much respected, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. and also their
maintenance should seem to have been before neglected, yea least in the point of
distinctness: 1 Timothy 3. should seem to oppose those places, for it confirms
that point so much, as in so many words any man can devise, and as needs to
the making an express distinctness in terms, in, (...) and (...) and matter, in
opposing, ruling and, preaching in their Offices, and making two sorts of
Elders, and the one the more worthy.

Secondly: For answer to the two most gross and opposite Objections from this
place, I first appeal to what is said in and from Romans 12. 1 Cor. 1^. Ephesians. 4.
and especially to the twenty late Arguments: Secondly, to the five last general
answers, which principally, and most strongly confute all Arguments from this
place; for the oneness in kind. Thirdly, I deny the consequence of the major,
since the office of a Bishop, 1. Tim. 3.1. is taken generally, and indifinitely
by an usual metonimy of the particular, and definite for the general and
indefinite, Bishop being a general, indefinite, and common Name to the three
Overseeing Offices, as a Deacon is to the serving, and an Office or Ministry to
them both; and also as a Philosopher, Mathematician, Lawyer, Tradesman,
especially as an Officer of the State, Law, Courtt, Army, City, or of a Ship,
are to their proper particulars, yet is there one division of all those
Offices, necessary to make the exemplification clear and exact, for all those
Offices are either overseeing, or serving, i. e. Episcopal, or Diaconall in
the original Terms, which shows the full reason of that certain Proposition,
whosoever desires the office (or Ministry) of a Bishop, desires a worthy
work: If yet a farelier reason of the Particulars of the qualification of these
two sorts of Offices, severally, and of each of their particulars jointly, be
expected, it is to be understood, that as in God there are three persons, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, from which all existents and designments
have their life, moving and being, so there are in man natural, especially
spiritual, three subjective and overseeable faculties, as existent from and by
God, viz. his will; wit, affections, or working power; and as many mediate and
overseeing designable Powers and designing Offices, or designments (as before
often and at large) all which require both a joint and several qualifying,
according to their joyntness in the general, as overseeing, and severallness,
in special, as severally overseeing, which is also answered in the particular
qualifyings objected, and in what is hereunto to be supplied, from Tit. 1. for
their help, if their ground be good, or for the completing my project, if it
be good; since therefore Bishop is a common Name to three Offices; all the
properties of these three are common to it with any commonness thereupon,
following between any of the three Offices, or their Functions, if they be
elsewhere distinguished and peculiarized.

Fourthly: So far as it is intended and insisted on, that the Office of a
Bishop is a particular, and properly existent office; so far I deny the minor,
and require good proof thereof.

Thirdly: For a particular answer to the refined Objectors from this place: I
say, that though all the syllogism should be granted, yet they get nothing
thence for their purpose distinct from the former opinions; and so indeed these
three Opinions are all one, and so the last is nothing but a pile of witty
words, forging a distinction without a difference, and so it vanishes in the
fire, like the stone, called a Thunderbolt, looking-like Silver ore, but is
only of a sulfurious and icie mineral matter, yea though it should be
condensated with some of the Clay of Antichrists Legs, Dan. 2. even by saying
that the Bishop, Pastor, Elder, and Exhorter, are all one Office, called by
diverse names for diverse respects, viz. Bishop, as Overseer of Overseers;
Pastor, by an emphasis, as the chief feeder, and exhorter: Elder, in respect of
his years, gravity, wisdom, and personal fitness to rule, as the proper reason
wherefore he is all of the rest; and this surely is that struggling Esau not yet
come to the birth in our Church, though it be at least that reviling Goliath of
Gath, his younger brother, with whom I am neither occasioned, nor enabled to
fight; but will only prosecute my present object occasioned; anwering more
particularly,

First, That if it should be granted that the Exhorter, or Teacher, or both, by
a community of offices, through this community of actions objected, could do
all that I have appropriated to the Ruler; yet by the same community of
actions, the Ruler may do the like for them, and then though they should
shuffle down Gods ministerial bounds, they would get nothing, except the Rulers
wife be better than the others, which surely they will not say.

Secondly, if they will usurp the appropriation of the Bishopric from the
Ruler, or the Exhorter from them both (as reason and experience give us to
suspect,) yea, and of all power in the Church, which now they grant them upon
the eminent and emphatical reasons mentioned; they build such forces for
Hierarch^ans, and dig so fit Buroughs for Badgers, through magnifying their
Office, that the epitome of the Hierarchy which they form within the church,
will acknowledge kindred with its mother Iezebel, yea and by degrees with its
Grandfather Ethbaal too, and so also open the door of community between us and
them, by the same reason further prosecuted, and spirit further inflamed, as
the opinion, book and course of Mr. Johnson, and many with him, have lamentably
experimented, even unto the eminent and imminent fear of the ruin of a special
Church; if we should come to sift the differences, I doubt we should not find
them so great, as would give security of better success, outward, than has
that Church, or inward than the Hierarchy, though the goodness of the present
order and matter would delay (it may be long) this infection from raging, at
least till the iron of civil, single, double and treble crowned authority, id
est, Classical, Synodical, and National Courts and Courses made Ecclesiastical,
be added unto the former clay, and both add strength to the rotten legs of
Antichrist; but I not daring to open my mouth freely in this bad air, will
reserve my breath for better use.

Thirdly, and specially, If that course which is obtruded on this place, should
be alike observed in all places of the like reason, (as it must be,) we might
prove strange matters, yea what not? I could prove, that Samuel prayed for, and
brought out water of the Rock in the wilderness, at least that God spoke there
unto him out of the cloudie pillar, and punished his Idolatry, four hundred
years before he was born, out of Psalm. 99.7, 8. and out of 1 Timothy 5.4. that
Aunts are Parents, that all the Elders and Brethren of the Church of Jerusalem
spoke by the infallible and immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and by
absolute and immediate authority from Christ, gave Laws, Decrees, and
burdening, conscience binding, and necessited Prohibitions to the Churches of
Antiochia, Syria, and Silicia, and by consequence to all the Churches of the
Gentiles: from Acts 15. with cap. 16.4. and 21.25. and other innumerable
absurdities and falsities, out of 1 Cor. chap. 1. v. 1. concerning Sosthenes,
in 2 Cor. 1. chap. v. 1. and also Phil. and Col. chapter 1. v. 1. of Timotheus; in
1 Thessalonians. chapter 1. v. 1. and 2 Thessalonians. of Silvanus and Timotheus, and more almost
in every Epistle; should I descend to particulars, I should be intollerably,
because needlessly tedious, it being obvious to every one, that any thing might
be proved out of any thing, if that course might be allowed; besides, it would
pervert all the other places of Scriptures which begin with generals and
proceed to particularize them, which are innumerable, and indeed would destroy
all analyzing of them, which is not expressed, and then it would be needless, yea
there might then be proved out of one place thereof, consisting but of seven
verses, viz. Heb. 11.32. to 38. many sevens of falsehoods, absurdities, and
what not, that should make men cease from necessiting this Exposition of 1 Timothy
3. and Tit. 1. Heb. 11.32. to 38. a whole heap of lying wonders, viz. that
Baruch subdued Kingdoms, and did a dozen great works at least more then he
did, that Sampson did so, that Iephtha did so also, that Dnvid, Samuel, and all
the Prophets did so also, and that much more clearly and strongly then any can
out of 1 Timothy 3. that the Exhorter may excommunicate or do any proper ruling
act by the same reason, yea expressly, it that reason be good, that all adjuncts
that are annexed unto two, three, or more joint subjects, must be verified in
every one of them, and therefore I leave it for bad, holding every adjunct to be
sorted to its proper subject by the rules of Nature, and the word in other
places that intend that peculiarizing and show us the same by better means,
referring these objected unto Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 5. for their
distinctness: And again, Romans 12. and 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 5. unto 1 Timothy 3. Tit.
1. and the like, for their completing and full exemplification in matter of
practice.

Fourthly, the word (...) wherein is the whole force of this Argument, is by
all the holders of the third Opinion, applied only to that Teaching in the
ruler, which is necessary for the discharge of his Office and work of Ruling,
which nothing proves the undistinctness in question, nor more then I have often
granted in the case of the Exhorters Teaching, as necessarily subordinate to
his office, and also grant in this case with the provisoes there mentioned.

Fifthly: The question is not properly about this Teaching, simply or
subordinately considered, but as Ecclesiastical or Ministerial, and such as
carries with it, as an Appendex to the administration of the Sacraments, to
signify, seal, and convey the thing taught unto the persons, ministerially
taught, but such teaching is also confessed by them, not here to be intended,
nor within the Rulers Office.

Sixthly, (...) is apt, prone, and ready to Teach, signifying rather the
goodness and grace of the heart, then the power and gift of Teaching, to be
requisite in the Ruler, and no more can be enforced out of that word, on which
the whole strength of all the three opposite Opinions does consist; yet I will
grant a Prophetical gift of teaching to be requisite in the Ruler, partly
because it is a disparagement to his Office, and Exercise thereof, to be
inferior to the Prophets therein, who have no Office at all, partly because it
will be a discouragement unto the Prophets, to have their inferiors in gifts of
Ecclesiastical respect, to be advanced above them in Ecclesiastical Office;
and partly, because the Speakers to the Edification, Exhortation, and Comfort
of the Church, do best of all the Members deserve to be honored by the Church,
and manifest their deserts, fitness, and worthiness of the same, yea in evident
and eminent likelihood, and humane judgment; they are the most fit for any
overseeing Office, which is all that the scope of the place, or any thing
material therein does enforce, yea intimate, in any of the many other
particulars.

Seventhly, (...) v. 5. and all the other particulars, but one or two do
evidently import only qualifications, with grace in the heart, requisite in the
overseers of the Church, and not common gifts which only distinguish the
Ministries and Funnctions of the Church, which proves that this intends not
the constituting and distinguishing them, as Romans 12. does essentially,
formally, and properly, as our case requires; but only the informing the
Chusers, and Ordainers of such Officers, what qualities are requisite for their
well being and the acceptableness, and efficacy of their Office in a special
manner, above other, and making them fit above others for those Offices, such
as are aptness and fitness to entertain strangers, courtesy, and having
obedient and meek Children, etc. but to say that the want of any one of them,
exclude the every other ways fit for those Offices, would exclude the fayer
from the most; yea, almost all Ministerial Communion, and Christian
acceptableness.

These three opposite Opinions are so near each other in truth, (though in
course and affection vehemently adverse) that I cannot cut down the one, but
the other two wither also: so that all the Arguments seem alike against all,
and I acknowledge a kind of confusion in them, as in the Opposites: and ergo in
the following Arguments I will refer the sorting to the Reader, whether it be
from one, two, or all three of the Objections. The first unsorted Argument is
from 1 Timothy 3.8, 12. which prove, that the same may be said of the Deacons,
which they say of Bishops or Elders, either as one in number, or as diverse in
number; and also in gifts or emphasis: but all three acknowledge the case
otherwise in the Deacons: The first, in that the Distributer, and Pittier, or
Widow, are as diverse, as I hold the three Overseers. The second, in that there
were 7. of them, Act. 6. the 3. ergo much more than either. For, To. 16.1. does
as expressly call the Widow a Deacon, as any place calls any one, two, or all
of the other Offices, Bishops: And all the qualificat^ons, 1 Timothy 3. agree in
their reason or soul, as well to the one, as the other; yea, all but one,
literally also.

The second is, from Ver. 12. and Cap. 5.10. where the same qualifying
cond^tion is required in the Deacon in general, and in the W^dow in
particular, which is in the Bishop; whereby he challenges the power of Ruling,
and so by the same Reason, they should also rule, if the scope of these places
were to define the Offices, and design the Functions: but that they all abhor
to say.

The third is from 1 Timothy 5.17. First, because the Ruler is by express
denotation, and place of state, distinguished from the Labourer in the Word; by
the denotative Article (...) i. e. they truly that, but they that; for they are
not here demonstratively taken, neither of their subjects having been mentioned
long before; and if yet they be referred to Cap. 3. then they conclude the
matter expressly for me: nor yet much less redundantly, they being set
oppositely, relatively, or mutually respectively: Secondly, because the
Opposition is between those Offices themselves, and not only between the
well-discharging the Offices; for neither of both are worthy either double or
special honor or maintenance, except they do their duties well and
diligently. Thirdly, (...), especially adding an emphatical difference between
the two offices, and exclud^ng both Particles (...) from the same, at least
from their only emphatical use, which is the only evasion and pretending shift
from this place in that distinctnes I plead for; espec^ally from the latter of
them, which is most insisted on, if not only: Much may be said from this place
to my purpose; but I have, though the length of the matter hold me long in it.

The third opposite Argument, is from Act. 20. verse. 28. in that they are all
called Bishops, or Overseers, and Pastors, or Feeders: I may as well say, they
are all called Elders, Presbyters, or Ancients, ver. 17. and then it flatly
overthrows the first and third Opinion, that make a d^fference between the
Bishop, as the first will have it; or the Pastor, as the third will be called;
and the Presbyter or Priest, as the Hyerarchians of Rome and England term them;
or Elders, or Ruling-Elders, as some new Hierarchians call them; only the
third may say, this proves that the Pastors may rule, because they are Bishops
and Elders: it makes indeed for Mr. Smith, but neither of the rest love to
hear of that place, but in hope that men will oversee that Ruler is by it made
as good a Bishop and Pastor, as those that engross those Titles to themselves;
and I wonder, that the late named Bishop durst bring it as his chief Engine
against us, that evidently battereth down all Bishops over more Churches then
one; and also brings in more Bishops then one, into one Congregation; and
also, that Mr. Robinson will allege it, to prove, that the Pastor or Exhorter
may more do the works of the Ruler, then the Ruler his, it so plainly proving,
the flat contrary. I, but he alleges it, to prove, that the Pastor may
rule: I, but that will not serve his turn, except he turn of Mr. Sm^th's side;
but that I doubt not, but Romans 12. will keep him from, and therefore for the
present rest, acknowledging, that this place makes neither for nor against him.

The last Objection is from Reason, which seems to cross that distinctness we
stand for; partly, through the uncapableness of the matter; and partly, through
the mischiefs which ensue the same. The former part of this Objection seems
colorable, because Teaching, without Exhortation to what is taught, works no
grace in the heart, but only the Theory thereof in the head. Exhortation,
without Teaching, works no true Christian grace, but blind, superstitious,
and Antichristian Devotion; either, and both, are externally fruitless, without
Ruling; and Ruling without both is internally barren: so that the 2d. end of
Gods Worship, i. e. our Holiness, is defeated thereby. For this, we are first
to consider this case in the right and complete Establishment of Gods Worship;
and then in the growing estate thereof; in the man's and adult estate thereof,
wherein all things are grown to a ripeness, it may well be cleared; for when
all the Offices are constituted in their Purity, and exercised in sincerity, we
are to suppose the Rule of 1 Cor. 14.40. to be observed; which requires, that
all Gods Ordinances be done comelyly, and in order. Now, if in the exercise of
each Ordinance, Purity be observed, both in comelyness, as respecting it self,
not excluding the Order of combination with others: and in order with the rest,
yet preserving decorum in it self; and also Sincerity in all sanctified
peculiar and sociall respects, according to the Light of Nature, and the Word:
then ought the Laborers in the Word, so to associate their Conversation and
Studies in the Weekdays, and Ministries on the Lords day, that the Exhorter is
to know (at least) the Doctrines that the Teacher will gather out of the part
of the Word to be handled, whether by their own disposing, or public Order:
and that he therefore will build upon the Foundation* thereby laid for him, by
the Teachers Grammatical, Rhetorical, and Logical Exposition and Extraction of
Divine Doctrines, both positive and opposite with their Proofs and
Illustrations, Marks and Means; yea, all things pre-requisite to Exhortation:
Then also ought the whole Company of overseeing Officers to be acquainted with
the occasions of exercising the Ruling-Office, that the Teacher may the better
be provided with matter of Information and Confutation, and the Exhorter of
Exhortation and Dehortation* and the Ruler may the better dispose of his manner
of ordering and censuring; and each again with the sum of the others purposes,
that each may further and suit with the others courses; for in each of these
three Offices especially, there are two essential properties which have both a
peculiar and a social respect: the one extensive, quantitative, material, and
institutive, viz. the apportioning and adequating the Offices and their
Functions, as the Teacher, and his Teaching, etc. The other intensive,
qualitative, formal, and constitutive, viz. the adaptating or suiting the
Officers and their Offices, as the Teacher, and his knowledge and ability to
reach, the Exhorter, etc. as before in the Table at large, and it is Epitome: In
the former, is the purity of the Offices, and God's Worship, to be discerned:
In the latter, is the sincerity of the Officers and Worshippers to be tried.
Also, in the peculiar respects of both, the godlyness, or fixed link of Peter's
golden Chain of Election and Salvation, 2 Pet. 1.7. is required to be
exercised: and in the sociall or mutual respects, the brotherly kindness or
7th. link is called for. Now, all the services of God being observed and
exercised in their purity completely, and all his servants therein practicing
all sincerity, there is no dissonancie, much less impossibility in this
distinctness of the Church-Offices: But if there be a failing in this purity,
compleatness, and sincerity, or in either of them, then there must be much of
the matter of the Objection granted, and will be more appearing, which is the
second consideration of the former part of the Objection. To which I answer:
First, that I intend not at all to pacify the fury of Hierarchians, by
palliating this matter in any respect toward them, among whom all the Order of
God's Worship, is devised by Antichrist, and so made in appearance Christian,
but in true understanding is Antichristian, i. e. diverse from, and opposite to
Christian; for the order thereof is Babylonish, disorderly, and confused, in
respect of Gods order in his Word, though to the Spirit of the World, it
seems very, yea only uniform and orderly in Nature, and in it self; yea, and
thereby the parts of God's Worship are perverted, and subordinate to another
superior or end, and so lose their proper nature, at least, in respect of the
Consciences of the Users, which is to be esteemed according to the intention of
the principal and predominant Institutor and Author of the Work and Worship it
self; and therefore it were great folly to endeavor to consonate the Order of
Christ's Worship unto Antichrists, as it is to make good Music on an Instrument
put wholly out of Tune; and therefore I leave the Mother of Rome, and Daughter
of England, to their folly and fury in this case, wherein I cannot prevent them.

Secondly, that though I will yield much to the weakness of the exercise of the
Order of God's Worship in the present Reformed Churches, and will endeavor to
show, that this distinctness is, and may be observed in them: yet if men be not
satisfied therewith, I will not yield, that the Rule is to be framed according
to the present building, but that to the Rule of God's Word; and if excuses be
made, that all things cannot by them be established, according to the perfect
Rule, both through the hinderance of the otherwise informed Magistracy, and for
the want of fit matter or persons thereto qualified, and maintenance for them,
if they be to be had: First, let not Pleaders of extenuations, no nor of
excuses, be Judgers of that Law, from the breach whereof they excuse
themselves; for that were more then childish pettulancy, even to bite and
whine: Secondly, though indeed they be excuses from all fault, yet censures for
dissonancy are not seasonable, till things are in their complete and adult
estate; for as exactness is not to be required from, so also not by a child
under Age and Tutors until he come to his man's estate.

Thirdly, for the matter, though one or two of the Offices be wanting; yet may
the two or one remaining, conveniently agree with this distinctness; the only
seeming otherwise, is between the Laborers in the Word, especially in the
Exhorter, who, without Doctrines before laid, proved and cleared, cannot exhort
to the observation of them.

To this I have answered before, to which I refer thee; adding only, that
though in the case of necessity, and without which, Exhortation cannot be, it
be lawful, yea necessary for the Exhorter to Teach: yet without those cases,
and where there is a Teacher, that does his duty; yea, and where there is
equally necessary matter of Exhortation, received as true by the Church, it is
not lawful, much less his bounden duty, to teach the Theory of Divinity.

Secondly, for the Teacher, there is no necessity of not teaching, though there
be neither Exhortation nor Ruling, to bring it is Teaching to its more powerful
and plentiful effect; and ergo the same reason warranteth him, not to exhort or
rule in any express, plain, and known act, though he be not forbidden all
manner of acts that are hortatory or ruling so absolutely; as Murder, Adultery,
Robbery, or the like: but there is a Brotherly Fellowly, and mutual freeness,
and friendly boldness to be presumed on and allowed; yea, in some occasional
acts, even to the danger of Usurpation, if those acts should be constantly and
functionally used: As for the Ruler, none plead for his administration of the
Sacraments, which are Appendices to Teaching and Exhorting, and Signs and Seals
of the same things, to the other Senses, which they speak to the Ears, or
rather through them all, to the Understanding and Heart: but those that hold
them one Office, having diverse names, who are not the Objectors of these
Inconveniences; and therefore I need say nothing against the same.

Fourthly, though matter of convenience and inconveniency, pertains properly
to Wisdom, and not to Duty, and is but a little better then Humane Authority:
yet since it is so esteemed, and insisted on by many, I will put the
conveniences of the distinctness I stand for, into the other balance, both
for the clear confutation of this Argument, and proving the point by the
benefits thereof, if any such proof be therein, as men account; and I grant, in
respect of the Wisdom of God, if the matter be clearly shown, though as a
proper and original Argument, which is only from the Word, Romans 12.2. I dare
not obtrude it, but only in the respects mentioned, and comparatively, and as
a retorted, plausible, and probable Argument: Now the Name and Nature of
conveniences lead us to consider of the answering respects of these Offices,
which are, 6. viz. Christ, the Church, each other, eaches several work, the
Lords of the Gentiles, and Antichrist. Christ is the Monarch, Head, Lawgiver,
and Master of his Church, ergo it is fit that he alone should be Supreme and
Primitive; and that each Office of his Church should be derived out of his
Primacy, and none others; else should the derived have another Lord and Master
than Christ, for which no ordinary person is fit in any respect, though
extraordinary persons by Gifts and Functions, immediate as Apostles,
Evangelists, and Prophets, and by Offices made types of Christ by the Word,
were; and also ordinary Corporations, which are of an higher nature than any
person, but no man than any other; which is the reason, that in Commonwealths,
that are most conveniently governed, no Ruler may depute a Deputy-Ruler under
him; though, where the constitution of the Commonwealth is otherwise, it be
lawful to depute, to be deputed, and to submit to either: yet our present
point is, Whether Deputation and Superiority of Church Officers be more
convenient in respect of Christ, than equality between them. Secondly, for
confusion of the three Offices, or Functions, whether it be more convenient in
respect of Christ, than their distinctness, which the three answering, yea
primitive respects of Christ, as God, Man, and Mediator, before parallelled,
do evidently clear, viz. that equality and distinctness are more convenient.

Secondly, the Church is the Basis, End, and Owner of the Ministers, 1 Cor.
3.9, 10, 16. Chap. 12. all, especially v. 28. 1 Timothy 3.15. and therefore is it
most fit that it should have the deputing and distinguishing them, and not any
ones Authority, in the former, or discretion in the latter.

Thirdly, though a disparity should be granted, which of them should have the
Superiority? Surely the Pastor: Why? because his Office is to seed the whole
Flock, and so the other Officers. Now (...) signifies also to rule, and so he
is to feed by Ruling: There is no fear of this Argument, except the Arguer be
made cursed by Antichristian hands and breath, at his Ordination and Custom in
his Practice; and also long horned by Authority, Reputation, and Gifts: and yet
then, God is more to be seared, and his Truth more to be regarded, than our
Skin, and he to be answered: First, that that name is common to all the Three,
so well as Bishops and Elders; as is plain by Act. 20. where Paul is said to
send for the Elders of Ephesus, and charge them to feed ((...)) the Flock,
whereof the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops: Why therefore does he not claim
the name and nature of Bishop and Elder so well as of Pastor? that all the
World, and Ephesians. 4.11. do give him: What the Word, Ephesians. 4. does give him, I
will reverendly consider: but what all the World does, I regard not, lest I
should be little regarded by Christ, Jam. 2.1. Indeed, Ephesians. 4. names
Pastors: but, first, the drift thereof is, to declare, that the Spiritual
Offices were all given by Christ as a tryumphant King; but neither to
constitute, nor distinguish them.

Secondly, he first shows, that the principal Offices, viz. The feeding,
were so given by him; and then, that the principal of them, in respect of
Gifts, and extraordinary need, through its least supply from Nature (which is
the unum and particular scope of that place, viz. The Teachers, were so also,
Whether you take Teaching generally, for Laboring in the Word: as 1 Timothy 5.17.
does; or strictly, as Romans 12.7. Under which, two terms are compendiously
comprehended, the less principal Offices also, a majori; for if he gave the
chief Offices or Gifts, whether in a general, or particular regard: he both
would and could, much more give the secondary also.

Thirdly, all the Offices are not there reckoned, either generally,
synedochically, nor particularly, but as I have said; for no mention is made of
the serving offices at all otherwise, therefore there can thence no exact
particularizing of the Church-offices be concluded, but such as is supplied out
of other places. Secondly, for their Unity in kind, if it should be supposed,
yet why may the Pastor (as he is called) more excommunicate, than the Ruler
administer the Sacraments? which is the main of the Controversy. No answer
has been given me herein, though I have often and instantly demanded it; neither
know I any, and therefore I must conclude, that the Exhorter cannot attain that
Ruling-power, claimed by the right of the Word, or Reason, from that exaltation
above, or confusion with the other overseeing Offices, which is pretended; nor
by any other, but Babylonish; because his Colleagues will not, nay may no, y^eld
it him, though I should yield him that Super^ority and oneness which he
stands for; which yet in the third place I deny him, for the Reasons
beforementioned; and also, lest he oppress them, if he be of that Spirit, and
eminently gifted, or be oppressed by the inequality of his work, if he be
equally gifted, and modestly spirited, which will the better be discerned in
the prosecuting the fourth sort of Arguments, viz. which arise from peculiar
and distinct respects of each office, which now succeeds.

Fourthly, as every Officer is immediate from the Church; so is it convenient,
1. That his Functions and Actions should be assigned him from the same, and not
by the diverse personal abilities of the other officers; for else does he not
walk in the particular assignment of the Church disposed to him, according to
his gifts; but in his own, allotted him by his own discretion, or of his
Colleagues.

2. That his Authority of discharge, of h^s distinct office, should be absolute
in his place, in respect of the parts thereof, and every other Office under it,
and it is Parts, Function, and their Exercise; as that the Teacher should be
above all the other Offices in teaching them their Duties, the Exhorter in
charging the other four to do their duties; the Distributer, to distribute to
the other four; the Ruler, to order the rest circumstantially, and to execute
the determinations of the Church toward the other four; and the Widow to show
mercy to the rest; besides, their duties to themselves, and the whole Church,
in their joint Authoritative Actions, and their several sanctified
Conversations; and also toward the Prophets in their Exercise: both which
Arguments confute both their Superiority and undistinctness.

3. Another Argument against the former parts of this fourth sort, is, that
else none were fit to be an Exhorter, except he were first enabled to every
office.

And a fourth, that a man were fit to be of one of the other offices, if there
be an Exhorter established, though he be but half fit thereto, simply and
without that supposition, which four distinct personal, and peculiar respects,
prove, that the Exhorter has not all offices included in his.

Fifthly, against the latter part, viz. the undistinctness: First, else there
should be no more distinctness between the three over-seeing offices, than
between the particulars of each of them, and between the Deacons; yea, the
Prophets: I will instance in the Deacons, one of them is fitter then the rest
to hu^band the goods of the Church, in disposing their employment; another to
follow necessary suits in the Law, for defense or recovery; a third, to excite
to due contribution; a fourth, for simple and discreet distribution; a fifth,
to provide for, and tend on the help of the administration of the Sacraments,
etc. and according to this fitness, every of them is disposed, either by
themselves, the Church, or the over-seeing Officers; or else by ea^hes several
inclination: This, for the present, being supposed, shall we thereupon
conclude, that these are five, or more distinct serving offices: Surely, he were
unfit for the meanest of the five, and much more for any of the three
over-seeing offices, that should so judge, except he could find where the Word
did distinguish them; and if he could, then were it as great weakness to hold
them but one office in kind: and yet greater, so holding, to hold also that
they may promiscuously execute each others Function, whereby they are found and
held distinct; but most of all, to lay it as a general rule, that they may so
execute: and yet to exempt the Pastor only from the same, without giving a
peculiar reason therefore. The like and greater intricateness and distraction
is in our case, because it is evident in the Word, that there is such a
distinctness, in kind, to be found and held. Now, if there be but one Office in
kind, as the Deacons, then is every one charged with every over-seeing action
by God, and no mutual agreement, nor Church-assignment can excuse any one, if
any one overseeing action be wholly omitted: But on the other side, if they be
three in kind, and distinctly assigned by the Word, the one is excused, though
the other fail, either in being, or well-being: nay, he should as much fail as
Vzzah, if he should supply the failing office, through the affinitive of his
office, or personal devotion. But in the third place, (to conclude at last) to
be put to hold and practice both, is to be put into an inextricable
intricateness, and labyrinth, without light or clue, to help him out, or to
work within it; which is more then ever God charged upon man, or man could
discharge unto God; yea, if they be flat contradictories, as they seem, more
then God can discharge, for he cannot lie, and then he can charge, for he
cannot oppress: Let not us therefore give or take an higher office, nor harder
work, then God himself will either give or take to himself, or any other. The
like may be said of the Deacons and Widows, and both may be exemplified by the
legal and present joint practices, Numb 3. and 18. and very often in positive and
opposite respects.

Sixthly, and secondly, it is said, 1 Cor. 12.28, 30. that God has given some
to be Teachers, and some other Governors, and not Teachers, and so on the
contrary; the scope of the place being to show, that excellency, above others,
cannot be had in the offices of the Church, because they are severally
distributed by God, and not diverse to one person; as is before fully proved.

Hereupon, if a man should frame his practice in any o^fice, it should be
distinctly to observe the peculiar Function of his so distinct office: but if
he, according to the second opin^on, hold them both one o^fice; or according to
the third, that though they be d^stinct offices, yet they are common in their
Functions and Execution: he should look unto his gifts and discretion, or to
some assignment beside that of God, the Church and his Office, and so must
shape a clean different, if not contrary course, in the discharge of his
office: Now, therefore the destruction and entoxication will be little less
hereby than in the former Argument; so that a man, by these Opinions, must be
rent from himself, yea and the word, in the Understanding and conscionable
discharge of his office to God.

I might have added other Arguments against the first Opinion, that all Offices
are in the Pastor, out of 1 Cor. 12.7. and Romans 12.8. with 1 Timothy 5. The
former place showing the end of Christ's distribution of the Offices, to be, to
profit the Church, and not to magnify any Officer: But that his end, is to
magnify the Pastor above the rest, and so that the distinction should be as
great, or greater, then the former two: and the latter places, showing the fifth
Office to be a Woman's, and not a man's, and so unfit for the Pastor to
discharge; as because her office is night and day to attend the Sick, both men
and women: But I leave them for you to prosecute, by your own meditations,
supposing the other fully sufficient.

The fifth head, is the respect of the Lords of the Gentiles, from which the
Church Officers are expressly forbidden, Matthew. 20.26. Mar. 10.43. Luc. 22.26.
viz. in that they rule, or are superior one over another in Office, Place,
Authority, and Dignity; for, other Superiority, is either not in rerum natura,
or not intended in this place: Or, thirdly, not pertinent to our point, or else
not spiritually instituted, or peculiar to an instituted Church: but the
Hierarchical superiority of Order, whereby some Reformers palliate the
superiority of Bishops over Priests, and Archbishops over them, etc. is
neither of all these four; for the best Philosophers admit it not into the
estate of a being; and therefore we may exclude it out of the last three; for,
by best Philosophers, I intend both Ancient, Modern, Christian, Heathenish, and
Antichristian: a taste and sum of all whose Judgments, in this point, is set
down, Timpler. Metaph. lib. 3. cap. 7. and Kecker. Sustema Logicum, l^b. 1.
cap. 6. and the sum of them in this Disticon; Tempore, natura, numero, doctrina
et honor Fineque lege, loco, dic similique prius; that is,

Time, nature, number, knowledge, worth, end, state, place, likeness to these,
only yield, BEFORE.



If other order or priority seem to be in the World, it is either for want of
discerning the intent and extent of these 9. or else it is but the stamp of the
Mystery of Iniquity set upon Worldly orders, arising from the reflex of the
Antichristianing order, often mentioned by our Writers, to extenuate the evils of
the Bishops, between the Apostolical, and Apostatical times, i. e. between Anno
Dom. 100. or 200. unto 300. and after, out of which Antichrist arose; and
according to that reflex, reflecting on Civil or Monkish Estates, forged and
framed them, as a refuge for their brood into the Mothers belly in time of
danger, like the Serpent and it is brood, mentioned by Aelian.

Now the direction which Christ gives unto his Ministers, from the negative or
contrary, to find and keep his Ecclesiastical Order, being, not so as the Lords
of the Gentiles: and yet the course which I now oppose, in respect of the first
Opinion, being according to them: What distraction of mind, and disturbance in
practice (or rather what not) must this breed in and amongst the Understanding
and Conscionable? Let it here be remembered, that though the occasion of this
Argument, be but to prove an inconvenience or mischief: yet I omit not it is
absolute proof of the point of equality of Christ's Bishops; but against these
places, it may be objected with the Jesuits, and other Hierarchians, that
Christ there forbids only tyranny, pompous, and vainglorious Titles, and
Master-fulness over Inferiors; and not the superiority over other Ministers. I
answer: First, that I hope they will not more destroy the generals of Truth,
and light of natural Ingenuity, than the Jesuits themselves of Rhemes, who in
their Annotations on Luke 22, 24, say; The Apostles perceiving Christ's
departure from them, and his Kingdom, to be near, as infirm men, and not yet
endued with the Spirit of God, begin to have emulation and cogitations of
Superiority one over another; which our Master represseth in them by
Exhortation to Humility, and by his own Example, that being their Lord, yet so
lately served them. They, as Expositors of the Scriptures, minding their scope
and apparent truth, suffered themselves with the Pythonisse, Act. 16.16, 17. To
speak the truth, though it utterly destroy their and their Holy Fathers
Kingdom; and they as Antichristians, and men of scared Consciences, presently
after contradict the Truth and themselves,; adding, Not forb^dding majority or
superiority in them, but Pride, Tyranny, and Contempt of their Infer^ours. How
can these Jesuits brook their name without a metathesis of s and u, and b set
in the first place of s; then indeed, they with the Jebusites are treaders of
Mount-Sion, the most holy place of Jerusalem, under foot, Rev. 11.2. i. e.
professing possession of Mount Moriah, yet being true Intruders thereinto, and
blind and lame contradicters of themselves, and the true David and King
thereof, and contradicted and destroyed with their blind and lame gods.

THE scope of Rome, 12.1. to 8. is exactly, yet summarily, to describe, teach,
and effectually to charge the matter and manner of Gods instituted Worship; as
is expressed, v. 1. in the general, and v. 6. in the particulars: Those two
Verses are also expressly connected by causal and illative Conjunctions, which
are the absolutest Connecters of the Connection of v. 4. with 5th. and 7th.
with 6th. and 8th. with 7th. there can be no doubt. Now, the soul and sinews
being of the same body, the flesh and bones cannot but be granted, to be of the
same also: neither is the encorporatedness of these 8. Verses only literal,
but especially real, each without other being maimed, and all jointly yielding
an excellent description and charge of Gods Worship; the Root, in v. 7. and 2.
giving life to the body in v. 3, 4, 5. and to the branches, v. 6, 7, 8. the
body giving sustenance and sustentation with the Root to the Branches, and the
Branches showing the Heavenly Fruit of both. Let the words be observantly read,
and a sense worthy the Scripture be conceived; and the matter being the same
with the second Commandment, and yet being very imperfectly delivered, but in
this place, and here also in the common sense: and I cannot but think, that the
Understanding and Ingenuous will find an admirable conciseness of such a large
matter, a clearness in this dark and s ecial point of the Word, yea, a
pleasantness in what is most harsh to Nature, as being not only above it, but
mainly intended to thwart it, and to proclaim and constrain God's absolute Will
to be submitted unto, as to the Lord and Ruler of all; the Fall also of Adam,
and the most abominable sins ever since, were there-against, and all
desolations thereout, and the yet prevailing Antichristian sin, assisting in
oppositeness thereto, and usurpation thereover.

The drift therefore of the Holy Ghost being herein to preach and press
preciseness in the matter, and distinctness in the manner of God's special
Worship: The latter of this place, and the rest of this subject, must have
their spirit from hence; which also, will not only easily, but excellently
sort therewith, and better than with any other; and though the manner or order
of any thing cannot be shown, but upon supposition of the matter known, or in
the showing to be withal made known: yet when the Apostle comes, v. 6. to
assume and conclude his intent in the premises, v. 1. to 5. he seems to have
supposed, and intended only the distinctness of the Church states, by their
peculiar Functions, and the order of exercising them in the Church Assembly;
only in the handling, Paul, after the excellent Scripture-manner, interlaceth
the peculiar virtues of three of the Offices, which were hardest to be known,
leaving the other two easier to be by the like course understood, as on the
other side, he expresses his main drift of charging the distinctness of the
Offices, and their Functions, only in the two first, leaving the like to be
supposed in the other three; so that it is expressly proved, that the Offices
are distinct, v. 6. which after are expressed to be five. In the Inference
therefore of v. 6. is the drift of the Holy Ghost expressed, which is the Soul
and Life of the whole Context: upon it, therefore, we are to stand as we use to
do, on the parting of the Branches from the Body of the Tree; for the best
finding and gathering the Fruit of the Tree, whereby the Nature of the Tree,
and Intent of the Planter is best to be discerned; that therefore says, We
having then gifts (or since then we have gifts) according to the grace (measure
of Faith, v. 3. that is given, (measured v. 3.) different, (diverse or distinct)
whether it be Prophecy (the estate or ability of a Church-Prophet, or both):
according to the proportion (measure v. 3. gift v. 6.) of Faith (grace v. 6.)
2. Of the Interest in Christ's body, v. 4, 5. or Worship and Will of God, v. 1,
2.) He seems to have left the speech very imperfect; yet therein he most
excellently perfecteth the drift of the Holy Ghost affirmed; that is, to prove
a distinct observance in the offices, and not to provoke unto vehemence in the
execution, which will undoubtedly follow this distinct discerning the special
intent of Gods zealous and jealous distinguishing them. Secondly, it suiteth
with the ten times greater care that is taken throughout the Scriptures, that
Gods Worship should be observed according to his Precepts, Statutes, or
Institutions, or Laws; and Zeal that is used, in the reproof of the contrary,
than that a zealous Worship should be given him. Thirdly, he therein well
observes the order of the Commandments, in more regarding the second then the
third. And fourthly, the order of Nature, which first, and more regards the
truth of the matter then the measure. And fifthly, his own scope, intimated in
the five former verses, and often expressed, to take care for Gods Worship of his
Word, v. 1. of his Will, v. 2. of his apportioning, v. 3. of his disposing, v.
4, 5. of his diverse giving, v. 6. and of his exact distinguishing, v. 6, 7, 8.
more than for the measure thereof. Sixthly, he well prefers the maine of the
matter, before the exactness of words, yea than competency: but in this case of
endangering the proper scope of the place, which would have been the easier
wrested, to the provoking and stirring up the gifts and powers, had there been
the least word of provocation or exhortation expressed; and therein some way
should seem to have been given to the Babylonish confusion of Gods Worship,
current in the World for the true; yea, the zeal for the Worship established,
mixed with the acuteness and violentness of the interessed therein, would have
made it seem, that it had made way for the same: but the Holy Ghost would not
give them so much cloak for their sin, and deceit of the weak: neither know I
what other pretense of the scope of this place can yield to any kind of
audaciousness of Conscience herein. Seventhly, he could not have perfected that
verse, (nor v. 7. nor 8.) but he must have endangered the other, and so the
whole, in some measure; at least, if the phrase which is as the Charret-man of
the Holy Ghost, should have failed in this sore-front of the Battle, the
fearful and far-of, would first have shrunk, and then the next would have
followed for company; and so the rest must have been overcome by violence;
which was the case of Darius Codomanus, and the reputed Cause of the
translating of the Monarchy of the Persians to the Grecians: But the All-seeing
Wisdom better provided for his Charret-man in th^s great Case, though
ordinarily he rides more open, plainly, boldly, and at liberty. This,
therefore, is a second Argument, that the scope of the place, is to teach the
distinctness of the Offices, and their Functions, in that this sixth verse is
left so extremely imperfect, and no other good reason being for it, but to
prevent evasion therefrom; for though it be said, v. 6. Let us prophecy; and
v. 7. Let him wait on; and v. 8. Let him do it: yet there is not a word thereof
in the Original, but the Translators have taken liberty to insert them all,
because to them there seemed otherwise no sense; whereas they have thereby made
new Scripture of their own, yea contrary to the intent of the Holy Ghost, if
they and their Readers intend any Exhortation to the Acts of Prophecy,
Ministration, Distribution, with Simplicity, etc. or to vehemence in any of
them, or to any thing, but the precise observance of Gods allotment committed
to them.

Thirdly, as the first Argument proves the intent to charge the distinctness,
and the second to prevent all evasions therefrom: so does the exact Analysis
of all Church-States, and their Functions in the matter preceding, second both
therein.

In ver. 4, and 5. we are to observe; first the positive part, and then their
opposite; and in the former, their Fabric it self, and its use and end: their
Fabric is a body, with its members and their works: the end thereof, is the
entire good of the body, and each part thereof: the other ends thereof are
proper to the relation of these verses with the three former, and three
sollowing. The Fabric it self is twofold, Natural and Spiritual: the former
is set by the Holy Ghost here, as the Protasis and Pattern of the latter; and
the latter, as the Apodosis and reflex of the former; not as a bare simile or
allusion, but as such a necessited and complete Directory and Pattern of Divine
Evangelical Worship; as the Pattern seen by Moses in the Mount was unto him for
the Tabernacle, and all things thereof, and the Pattern left by David to
Solomon, was to him for the Temple, and all things of the Temple, and both for
the main Warrant of the Legal Worship; so is the Protasis here said to be the
Pattern, and thereby made the Warrant of Evangelical worship: a distinct and
intent view therefore is to be taken of this Divine Exemplar, that our writing
may be answerable, and so acceptable, divine, and holy; whereas otherwise, the
fairest writing in letters of gold, and with all ornaments, is odious to God,
as self-boasting, yea against him. This Pattern is not simply a natural body,
but as it is the Pattern and Protasis of a politic body; as the scope of the
place and the offices, v. 7, 8. being the instanced parts of that body show.

Diverse Doctrines gathered from Romans 12. v. 3. to 8.
Doct. 1. THE first Doctrine v. 3. is from To each one: That Gods charge and
benefit in his Worship, is to be singularly respected by each Christian, and
not only in the lump and general: for (...) is so placed, as it respects
both Paul's charge, and Gods apportioning of Faith.

The 2. is, from the Portion: Each Christian has his portion in Gods Worship,
and its blessings: And the 3. God gives his Worship as Sons portions.

The 4. is in the Faith: Faith only gives interest in God's Ordinances.

The 5. is, in that this generalness of the boundedness and distinctness of
Gods Worship is set down between the proper generals and particulars thereof,
we are taught, That boundedness and distinctness of Gods Worship is to be
observed as a part thereof in the prescription and practice thereof.

From the illustration of the matter of the three first verses, by assimiling
the body and members of our person with their Functions, Works, and
Distinctness, arises the 6th. Por^sma, that the body and the estates, or
enrighting designations of Gods instituted Worship, with their Functions,
Works, and Distinctness, are most like to the same in our persons.

The 7. is from For, v. 4. Of the same rational nature with For, v. 3. That no
exact illustration of the body, members with their employments, boundedness,
distinctness, and uses of Gods Worship, is to be om^tted in the Declaration
thereof. And the 8th. That, no justifications of the assertions thereabout are
to be neglected.

The 9. is from As, That the proper similies of the Scripture not only
exemplify, but prove so far as they are applied either in the Protasis, or
Apodosis.

The 10. is from Body; That the Church of Rome to which Paul wrote, was but as
our individual body, ^ot as a compact of all humane bodies, as now that so
called is.

The 11. is from One body; That the true Church is as the unum primum, or
Basis, wherein all things Ecclesiastical inhere, and from whence they are
derived, and whereby they actuate and fructify; but not any Church-Office,
whether Pope, King, or Pastor: nor any Society of Officers; as Assembly, or
Synod universal, or particular Classis, or Consistory.

The 12. is from In; That all Church-States enrighting to Church-works or
Benefits, are inseparable accidents, proper adjuncts, and essentiated inherents
of the Church, not of any officer.

The 13. is from Members; That the Church is a body organical in its plenary
constitution: And the 14. that no Church State is the body, but a member
thereof; and therefore the Pope, nor no supreme Officer, can be the Church.

The 15. is from Many: That there are many Church-States, and not only one,
from whence other Officers or States are derived, and so should be
Deputy-States, not Church-States: And the 16. That God is bountiful in his
Portions of Faith.

The 17. is from Have (not members have us) That Church-offices, Ministeries,
and States, are adjuncts of the Church which is first in Nature, and their Root
and Basis; but they are not its Root nor Basis, nor any way precedent, either
in Time, Nature, nor Dignity before it, as such; but as it consists of
particular members, over the well-being of each of which they are set, but not
over their being, as they be Christians, nor a Church: And also the 18. that
the Ministers are the Churches Angels, and members: but the Church is not the
Ministers Church.

The 19. is from We have: That all Churches are in relation to each other, as
equal particulars of the Church in general, as each of our persons are of man
in general. And the 20. There is no more an Universal particular Church, Head
or Body of Churches, than of particular men. And the 21. Our persons are the
original pattern of the instituted Church, imitable after the strictest manner,
of which a Spiritual Body Politic is capable; as simillimum, not idem. And the
22. the knowledge of the nature of the Church, and Church-Estates, is easy to
all reasonable men, i^ if Historically believing this one place; much more to
Christians led by the Spirit of grace in its patterning; especially if they
understand by Learning or Experience, the nature of a Civil Body Politic, the
medium simillimum to both person and Church.

The 23. is from and; That God has avoided confusion in our many personal
members, by assigning them distinct Functions.

The 24. is from all Members have not one Function by a Graecisme; or, in
English phrase, No Member has the same Function; or rather it is of the same
words. And the 25. Our Members are bounded, but not bondaged, counter-distinct,
but not opposite.

The 26. is from Has; That membral Functions, are adjuncts to the members of
the Body, and so, that the Membral-Estates denominate the Membral-actions and
administrations, but not e contra.

The 27. is from One, or in English, one and the same, or the same in kind,
That each member of the body has its counter-distinct Function, end, or use.
And the 28. That each member is not to be employed to all that it can do, but
to its distinct and proper work; as the Eye to see, the Ear to hear, the Nose
to smell, the Palate to taste; but none of them to feeling, though in some
sense they all can; nor the hands to either of the four, though in some remote
consequence, they serve to the same use, in case of defect, with unseemlyness,
and out of the due course of Nature.

The 29. is from Practice, Function, or Work; That no member ought to be idle,
but active and operative.

The 30. is from even so, v. 5. That so much expresness of Form is necessary in
this matter of Gods Worship, as is to make way for, and confirm the Logical
consequences therein; i. e. that it is an exact simile between man created
after Gods Image, and the Church of Ordinances instituted after Christ's Image:
And therefore all the Doctrines well arising out of the former verse and
protasis, in respect of the body, its members, and their function, are to be
understood as good, as expressed in the Apodosis in this verse; adding only
the Church, instead of the Body, and Ministerial for Membrall, which I for the
present leave to be done, i. e. The 31. to be deduced from the 24, the 32 from
the 25, the 33 from the 26, the 34 from the 27, supplying the particulars from
v. 7, 8. i. e. the Teacher, to teach; the Exhorter, to exhort; the Distributer,
to distribute; the Ruler, to rule; the shewer of mercy, to show mercy; and the
35 from the 28, with the same addition: and the 36. from the 29. and the 37.
from the 23. The complete parallelling of this simile is very large, and
seeming in its exact prosecution, more formal than necessary, which seems to
have been the reason why the Holy Ghost has left them to be deduced by firm
consequence, but has not exactly paralleled all particulars: wherefore I will
not be extreme herein, either in negligence of all that is intimated, nor in
exactness in what it has left unexact in particulars: yet is there some vice
versa to be applied, from the Apodosis, to the Protasis; as the 38. from, in
Christ, or by the institution of Christ, That the created order of the members
of our body, with their use and natural comelyness, is to be observed
perpetually. And the 39. That each member of the body is for the benefit of
each; these two are to be deduced from the two next clauses following.

The 40. is from in Christ: That the special form of all instituted Worship,
is Christ's institution: And the 41. from the same, in relation to the many
other causes of true worship, That subordinate causes exclude not, nor oppose
each other: so that the same worship may well be called the Worship of God, of
the Will of God, of Christ and of the Word. And the 42. in relation of this
distinctness counter-distinguished from the material parts of Gods Worship,
That Christ is more manifested in the distinctness than in the materials of
Gods Worship.

The 43. is from each one another members: That each member of the Church, is
for the benefit of each other member thereof: And 44. Much more for the whole:
and 45. Neither the Church nor its members, are for any one member, as for its
superior; but only as for its part, or their fellow-member: or as for their
singular Superior deputed by the Church, as an encorporated general over each
particular.

The 44. is from each in particular: In relation to one body, That there is an
express difference between the Church Members relation to the Church, and to
each other: so that the 45. Ministerial or organical members, have power, or
rather government of, over or objectively, for each member; but not of, over or
objectively for the Church, as an encorporated body; but only as deputedly and
Ministerially for it. And so 46. No Minister can excommunicate the Church.

The 46. is from the same words referred to Many: That the Officers diversely
respect the generality of the many Members, and the particularity of each
member. The two first respecting the generality, they being charged with the
work of publication, and pressing the general Word of God; and the three last
of the five, respecting each particular, member as a part of the Church, to
which they are concredited. This diverse respect is express in the Text; but
the apportionment is of the diverse reason of the offices insinuated.

The 47. is from the mutual relation of these three words, one, many, each,
That the Church, as one is supr^am, in respect of its particular members, is
inferior to all the offices; but as many, it is of a mixed State; as the
greater many it has the power of the o^fices, and their min^strations toward
each member, ( i. e. of the Ruler, and his Ruling; the Distributer, and his
distributing; and of the Mercy-shewer, and her showing of mercy toward the
Sick) but as the lesser many, it is subject to them all three in these three
administrations.

The 48. is from None has the same Function, compared with, but each one
another member: That all the Church-Estates are bounded as duties, and
apportioned as benefits, distinctly in their Functions, and jointly in their
end.

The 49. is from are, compared with have, That the Church-Estates, are but the
constituting parts of, and possessed by the Church, not the thing constituted
nor possessing: By Church-Estates, are meant Offices, Prophetships, and
Memberships of the Church as instituted.

The 50. is from then or therefore, ver. 6. That what follows, is inferred
from what preceded.

The 51. is from, We having, That each Member has his part in the
Church-duties and benefits.

The 52. is from gifts: The diverse parts of Gods Worship are not only duties,
but also free gifts of God to his Saints, for their good.

The 53. is from distinct: That the precedent general scope, was to show, that
the Church-Estates are distinct in their Institution, and so to be observed in
their use; and the 54. that the future scope is to particularize that
distinctness.

The 55. is from, according unto grace: That there ought to be a
proportionableness observed between the parts of Gods Worship, as instituted
and constituted, their Essence and Existence, their Precept and Practice.

The 56. is in the grace: That Christ's Institutions come from, operate by, and
tend unto Gods special grace.

The 57. is from that is given: That God always gives abilities fit for the
Church-Estates.

The 58. is from us: That abilities in the Saints only, are capable of
Church-Estates. [Note, that the Texts of the two last Doctrines, viz. that is
given, nd us, and given unto us, (as p. 76. l. 24.) do supply that which seems
to be omitted in the translation of v. 6. after the word grace, p 2. l. 13.]

The 59. is from according to the proportion: That the Execution of our
assigned Estates, ought to be proportionable to our distinct assignments; and
the breach thereof is faithless unproportionableness. And the 60. compared with
the portion of Faith, v. 3. and according to the grace given us, v. 6. So that
the general, both Doctrine and Use, v. 3. and 6. and the particularizing of
both annexed, evince and urge that a necessity of exact distinctness between
the several Church-Estates, is to be observed.

The 61. is from of Faith, with the same ver. 3. That it is the duty of Faith,
and the faithful, to observe God's proportion in the Works and Fruits of
Faith, so well as to receive the benefits and confirmations thereof.

Hitherto of the generals of true Worship in its parts, order, and ornaments:
The special particulars thereof follow; whence the rest are orderly to be
deduced.

The 62. is from Whether, Not both, as, or even; That the exactest distinctive
terms are to be used in the distinctness of the Church-Estates.

The 63. is from Prophecy: That the ability of any member to prophecy,
enstateth and enrighteth him to the Exercise of Prophecy. And the 64. referred
to or an Office, That Personal and Ministerial Estates are to be kept
distinct: And the 65. referred to Teaching, and Exhorting (part of the Function
of the Prophets) that membrall and Ministerial Estates are distinct, and so to
be kept even in the same works, i. e. in their respects, causes, and degrees.

The 66. is from the placing according to the proportion of Faith, after
whether Prophecy; though without those words there is only the form of an
inference without any thing inferred, That whatsoever is true or good in the
generals, is so also in the particulars: And the 67. from the same reason of
annexing them to all and every of the other particulars, That the exact
proportion between our Church-Offices, and their Functions, is to be kept; and
yet more particularly referred to the Teacher. The 68. that the Ministerial
Teacher ought to observe this proportionableness between his Office and
Function; the 69, 70, 71, and 72. flow thence, by the same consequence, from
the Exhorter, the Distributer, the Ruler, and the shewer of mercy. The variety
and plenty of this boundedness, distinctness, and proportionableness both, in
the general, is so abundant and express, that I doubt whether I should more
fear the neglect of the Holy Ghosts abundance in the same, or the tediousness
of my needless expressing what is by it so plentifully plain, and durst not
here omit to express them, were it not partly that I have in a good measure
expressed the same, but especially lest I should seem too vain in repetitions,
since I may not here insist on the showing their difference, from the many
former ones of the much like nature; yet does the clearness of Wit, and
weakness of Will of this Age and present occasions, force me to this solicitous
pressing this expresness and variety of the Holy Ghost herein; which I have often
in the generals observed; and ought thence to be applied to these their many
particulars, by those which doubt that the scope of the Holy Ghost in this
place, is to describe and prescribe the distinctness of the Church-estates; if
the very application of the many phrases, v. 3, 4, 5, ct 6. in the generals,
unto these express particulars, with what I have here written, be not
sufficient thereto. But this seeming so unresistable, I will annexe the manner
of this distinctness so charged in this place, from the words following,
particularizing these generals.

The 73. is from or an office; as the special particular of all the generals
preceding, and general of all the following particulars, That all the former
prescribings and describings of the distinctness, boundedness, and
proportionableness in Gods true Worship in the general, is wholly to be applied
to the Church-Offices in particular: And 74. what is said of the Church-Offices
in general, is expressly applied to every of the five Offices in particular.

A Summary Description of all the Nine Church-States, with their distinct Works.
THE special real parts of Divine worship, of the second Commandment, of the
second Petition, of the second work of Faith, 2 Pet. 1.5. i. e. Knowledge of
Gods special Will, are the Church-Estates, Ministry, or Member-ships, their
power or actuation, and success.

The Church-States are in number 9; 4 integral; and 5 organical, instrumental,
or ministerial: in all which, in common, there is to be considered their personal
existence, estate of order, their power in actions of Worship, and the proceed
of them all.

The first Church Estate is of Infants, and such as are not of Discretion,
Reason, and Knowledge, to discern the Lords body, and acts of Worship: yet are
they true members of the Church, enrighted thereby to receive the seal
thereof, and its privileges.

The second is of women, who have nor only right by their Church Estate, to
passive privileges, as the first; but also to be active in the active
privileges and seals, and to receive actual assurance thereof themselves.

The third is of Males of age and discretion, enrighted thereby both to the
nourishing and trading Church Priviledges; and also to the Church Power of
voting, whereby their voices are to be accepted.

The fourth is of Prophets, or membral or integral Teachers, enrighted to use
and exercise their personal ability of Speaking to Edification, Exhortation,
and Comfort in the exercise of Prophecy, to edify the Church.

These are the integral parts of the Church.

The first of the Organicall, is the Teacher, whose Ministerial Office is
Ministerially to teach, inform, prove, disprove, and administer the Teaching
Seals for knowledge.

The second is the Exhorter, whose instituted office is to exhort, dehort,
comfort, reprove, and terrify, by the preaching the Word, and administration
of the Sacraments, as Seals thereof, unto the Sanctification of the Church.

The third is the Ruler, whose office is to order Church-actions, and other
Church-estates and offices in their execution, and pronounce the
Church-sentences of Admission, Excommunication, Ordination, Deprivation: for
good behavior.

The fourth is the Distributer, Deacon or Helper, whose Office is to receive
and distribute the alms of the Church, to provide Meeting-places, Bread, Wine,
and Water, with their fit Vessels for the Sacraments: for provision.

The fifth is the shewer of mercy, Mercier, (...), the Widow, or Woman-Deacon,
whose office is to keep the Sick, and supply their natural wants in Food,
Physic, Warmth, and other helps for their preservation.

The first three of these Offices are called by one common name of Bishops,
Act. 20.28. because their Office is set to oversee, take care and charge of the
Church in all Spiritual means of knowledge, grace, and honest behavior, for
the benefit of the Church thereby.

Secondly, they are Feeders, Shepherds, or Pastors, Act. 20.28, for their duty
to feed, nourish, and physic the Church, by all means of information,
reformation, and preservation spiritual, for its benefit thereby.

They, thirdly, are also called Elders, Presbyters, or Ancients, Act. 20.17.
for their duty to be grave, staid, discreet, and to be examples to the younger
sort, and by their experience and habit of knowledge, virtue, and gravity, to
benefit the Church.

The other two are also jointly called Deacons and Helpers, for their office of
service to the Church, and help to the other three offices in the mentioned
particulars, that nothing be wanting to the Church and its overseeing offices.

These are the nine sorts of Church Members, Portions, Proportions, Gifts, and
Graces, Romans 12.3. to 6. enrighted there by to receive the benefits of Christ,
and do his special works allotted to his Church, for his special worship, and
their good.

The first four as children, women, men, Prophets, have by their
Church Membership an addition to their Personal Saintship, of public right to
the duty and benefits of Divine Worship, the second Commandment, and the
second Petition for their grace and exercise.

The last five, as Church Officers, have a farther privilege and duty by their
instituted offices, to purchase a good degree in the Faith, and to be promoted
to an higher work, and so to expect a greater blessing here and hereafter.

These are the particulars of the real parts of Divine Worship, etc. and their
subsequents; the immediate previal thereof, is the power of the Church
sanctified by the Word of the Apostles of the Christ of God, to enright those
estates in those works for those ends.

The immediate previal cause of the first four is the actuated Covenant of the
Saints to be a Church, whereby they are made members thereof, and therewith
enrighted to receive, and do their distinct works unto those benefits.

But of the last five, it is the Church Power electing and ordaining them into
those Offices, enrighting them to those administrations for the Churches, and
their own edification, exhortation, and comfort, and for Gods Worship.

Therein are two doubts, whether Election or Ordination be the proper and
predominant informing cause?

1. But Church-Election is the procreating act in the Spiritual Nature of
things.

2. Giving the Office and Right.

3. To administer.

4. To God and the Church.

For Ordination is only a Ministerial, and no immediate and proper
Church-action: but one Minister has no power sanctified by God to procreate
another as under the Law, but is only as the Midwife to help in the birth of
that office, etc.

Secondly, Church-election (according to the express pattern of the Church, its
Power, Offices, and their choice and working, set Romans 12.1. to 8.) creates,
gives right and charge unto the Officers elected to work for the Church; but
Ordination is only a necessited act appointed by the body to manifest and
complete its choice by some ceremonial act instituted to that end, without any
real or arbitrary Power in the Ordainer, etc.

The second doubt is, Whether the consent of the chosen be essentially
requisite; but it is only by convenience, and for the been esse; the efficient
Power being in the Church to choose its Officers, etc. but not to contract.

The superior and remote previals, and precedent Causes efficient, material,
formal, and intentionall, are many; but the chief are mentioned already.

The Uses are first in the general of all the parts to observe their
concordance in one Root, even the Church; from which they receive their Being,
Life, and Power: The four first by their admission: The five last by their
Election, to do and receive good.

Then their agreement with each other in they fraternity and portions; Children
having the same Church Membership with the other 8; women the same right with
the last 7, to the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer; Men the right to Church Power,
with the last 6; and Prophets so true a right to speak in the Church, to the
edification, exhortation, and comfort thereof, as the three sorts of Bishops,
Pastors, and Elders; though not with the like measure, charge, authority, and
blessing. Likewise, the Teacher has charge and authority over all, both
integral and ministerial members, in matters of knowledge, proof, disproof, and
motives to knowledge: The Exhorter, over all in matters of Exhortation,
Comfort, and their Opposites: The Ruler in matters of order and government.
Also, the Distributer has charge to serve all Church Members in matters of
provision, and help in Church-services; and the Widow in matters of
preservation.

Secondly, observe their special distinctness according to their diversity of
gifts, graces, and proportions, commanded Romans 12.3, 6, 7, 8. to every one of
the Church in particular.

1. The Under-aged to rest in their being estated in the Church, and their
passive privileges of Baptism, and measure of the Word, Prayer, and Order;
and not to usurp above their giftedness, with natural activeness.

2. The Women not to meddle with any kind of authority, order, or power, their
inferiority of Sex dis-inabling them therein, by a natural disproportion
thereto.

3. Adulti, and of active discretion, not enabled to speak as Prophets, must
according to that want, abstain from Prophesying, and works of Office, not
being deputed thereto by state or act.

4. The Prophets also are not to speak Ministerially with authority, charge,
threats, and vehemence; but only with strengh of arguments, brotherly
persuasions and motives, and less frequent and large then the Ministers; and
also in their distinct course, place, and time.

5. The Teacher also is not to press Exhortations, Comforts, and their
contraries, on the affection and hearts in purposes of practice, but to leave
them distinct for the Exhorter: neither is he to exercise any work of
government.

6. No, nor the Exhorter, but as actually deputed by the Church, in case of
absence of a Ruler, but in which case, neither of them are to admit,
excommunicate, ordain, degrade members nor officers, nor order the
Church-exercises.

7. Neither is the Ruler Ministerially to preach, but only on particular
occasions; in Church-dealing with the Erroneous, perverse, and ill-behavioured,
they are to inform, exhort, and do all acts of Preaching to those parties; but
they are on no occasion to administer the Sacraments.

8. The Distributer is not to use any of those three kinds of works: neither
are any of these to speak in the exercise of Prophecy, but as Prophets; laying
aside in that act, all Ministerial authority, etc. nay, they are not by their
office to do the work of the widows.

9. But they ( i. e. the widows) only are Ministerial to attend thereon, but
to use no Ministerial work in the Congregation, nor to prophecy.

This mutual distinctness, is so mainly charged on the Church, and every
Church Estate, for observation of order, and avoiding consusion, as the due
derivation of those estates, and exercise of their works, for avoiding
desolation, and the refusal of other estates derivations and works, for
avoiding of abominations, the contrary practice and titles being the proper
nature and brandmark of Antichrist, as that Babylon the great, that Apollyon,
Abaddon, destroyer and desolation, and that abomination, outlaw, that vile
one, that Tyrant ruling by his own Will, Dan. 11.21, 31, 36, 37. yea, this
distinctness is the prime and proper scope of Romans 12.1. to 8. as v. 3. in the
whole, and the boundings in every verse after, and the no affectionate
provocation in any verse, do show, as I have amply cleared before.

Thirdly, observe their variety and adequate extent to Christ's fullness, and our
emptiness, and to our abilities and Christ's employments: But this being
seasonable, after the third real part of Worship now ensuing, I will refer it
thither, both for the near relation of the third part to the two preceding, and
for the joint pertinency of that observation to both the last parts.

The third real part of Divine Worship of the second Commandment, of the
second Petition, the second Title of Christ, Esa. 9.6. viz. Orderer,
Councellor, or Judge, of the second fruit of Faith, 2 Pet. 1.5. Knowledge of
what virtues he requires, etc. consists of the Administrations of those
Ministries, and privileges of those memberships, or jointly of the works and
privileges of that Church, and those Church-estates.

The abilities requisite to the first Office, and the correspondent exercise of
them are;

1. Skill in the Original Tongues, and clearing the difficulties of the
Translation.

2. Skill in the isntrumental Arts, Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic, and
expounding, metaphrasing, and analyzing the Text, as need is.

3. Knowledge of positive Divinity, and showing the Doctrine thereof in the
Text.

4. Knowledge of the controversies raised against the same, and ability to
answer them, and confuting them.

5. Informing, conforming, comforting, and confirming in those Knowledges, and
their Uses in the general; partly, in a fraternal referting the particular
prosecution thereof to the Exhorter, as the propriety of his office; and partly
for consonancy therewith.

2. The powers and practices of the second office, are, exhortation to the said
dutys, and promises particularly, with all power and charge, as Gods
Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.18, to 21. Ephesians. 6.20. and consequent dehortation from
the contrary, and confirming in the same Faith, Holiness, and Order; and also
discouraging, reproving, and terrifying from the contrary: all four, with all
arguments of proof to the mind, motives of consent to the heart, provocations
to the affections and to practice, and with removal of the contrary: for the
differencing properties of these two offices, are not only in the mentioned
actions, but principally in their distinct scope: of the first to inform the
mind: of the second to conform the heart; that though in their prosecution of
their said scopes, they promiscue use the actions of informing and conforming:
yet those actions are, and are to be denominated according to the drifts and
predominant purpose of those distinct officers, in the discharge of their
offices: yet where there is all due ability, and loving communicating of each
others studies and purposes, there is little need of this observation to
preserve the distinctness of these two offices; the Sacraments and Prayer are
common to these two.

3. The Duties and works of the Ruler are first ordering the beginning of the
Congregation, by Prayer and a Psalm, and every distinct state and work thereof,
and their continuance; and dissolving the Congregation, with his Prayer, and a
Psalm.

2. Disposing of the place of the whole Congregation, and each distinct part
thereof.

3. Charging each distinct part to perform their office, and keep their bounds.

4. To see all the Ordinances of Worship orderly performed, and false Worship
suppressed.

5. He is not only thus the mouth of God to the Church, and its estates; but
also the mouth of the Church to the estates thereof to be admitted,
excommunicated, ordained, and degraded; for upon the Church acts of election or
rejection of a Member or Minister, he is to declare the sentence, and perform
the sentenced act of admission, or dismission of a member, and of Ordination or
Degradation of an officer, in way of complement of the act, and publishing the
Decree of the Church. Of which last, and least work of the Ruler, i. e. of his
doing, or undoing ordination, it is very remarkable, that where Christ ends
his Elders, Overseers, and Shepherds Offices, viz. in Ordination, there
Antichrist begins his: like Herod, who never saw Christ till the day of his
crucifying.

Secondly, though to conjoyn the Elderly, charging and feeding offices, I thus
place the Ruler before the Distributer; yet both in order of Execution and in
necessity; and also in all the expressions of the Word, Romans 12.8. 1 Cor.
12.29. Act. 6. the Distributer is first; and so this act of Ordination is the
work of the last of all Male-Officers of the Church, and that his last and
least work; for his works from God to the Church, and its Church-estates, are
greater than his work from the Church to its Members; and also his completing
and pronouncing about Election or Rejection of a Member, is before the same
about and Officer; for he must be first a Member integral, and so it is the
last of all actions in the Congregation; for the Widow is to do no work therein.

3. It is the last and least of all Church or Ministerial actions, it being
only complementary, ceremonial, and for solemnity and distinct orderlyness;
but the essence and substance of the Ministry is effected in (...) in the
Church-election, by hold^ng up the hands, or the like choice-declaring act,
whereto the Rulers (...), or laying on of his hand, is but ad been esse, and
for the solemnity of the Divine Office: so that their first, is Gods last;
their greatest, is Gods least; and the Prelates, essence and essentiating work,
is it self but a circumstantial and complementary Ceremony: no marvel then,
that they are such Ceremony-mongers, Makers, and Masters, I had almost said
Ceremony-Monsters.

These are extenuations of a special Nature; but suppose it a Divine
Ordinance: yet there are many great extirpations of that Divineness, and
deposers thereof, below the basest things, as they use it. For the Prelates
appropriate it to their Bishops office, which is none of Gods, as they
institute it distinct in office from (...) Presbyter, Elder, or (in their own
term) Priest; for the two words (...) and (...) are of the same extent,
convertible, and used prom^scue, and that expressly, in all the places where
(...) is used, which are but four, Act. 20. Phil. 1. 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. and
so their Ordination of a (...) by an (...), as by a distinct office, is not a
nullity divine, but even an absolute nullity, or worse, even a Devil, or Idol,
where God's holy things are given or sacrificed.

Secondly, their Ordination is administered not only out of the Church, but
without all relation as from it, yea or as by it: nay, nor for it, which is
their only pretended respect thereof to the Church; for, first they suppose no
Corporation, for, or to whom they are confined, but only the universal
Church, which is the mystical body of Christ, and no Ordinance of Worship; but
that which is worst of all, they usurp the nature, and arrogate the name of the
Church to themselves; and their natures, and practice in all things
proportionably, though in case of opposition or danger they hide it, as all
Traitors, Fellons, etc. do. But alas this brevlate will not endure the deserved
Aggravation of this Trojan horse, but must in this entrance thereon abruptly
refer the prosecution thereof to a distinct Tract, no occasion being sufficient.

4. The duties and works of the Distributer are receiving the contribution of
the Church, and distributing the same with simplicity.

Secondly, helping the Church and Elders, in providing Water, Bread, and Wine,
for the Sacraments, and fit Utensils to that end, and in other necessary
services therein, according to their names, helps, and servants, not only in
respect of the Church, but the overseeing offices thereof, in
counter-distinction from whom they are termed Deacons or Servants.

Thirdly, preservation of the Church-stock, as keeping of the purse, by
soliciting the Lawsuits, and attendance on the employments of that stock, for
the setting the Poor thereof on work, and building or repairing the place of
meeting.

5. The admin^stration of the Mercier, or shewer of mercy (...) is to attend
the Sick, especially the Poor Sick (who cannot hire helpers) in their Food,
Physic, Warmth, Comfort, and Natural necessity.

Secondly, their visiting the Sick and dejected in spirit, and comforting them
with all cheerfulness of motives, mind, and behavior, Romans 12.8. with
cheerfulness, which is more proper to the diseases of the mind, then of the
body. More especially of the th^^e first offices and their functions both
jointly and severally, as they in the general agree in any terms, and as they
are effecting the same thing, though in diverse respects: for the first they are
jointly termed and called in the Scripture (...), Surveyours, Overseers, or
Bishops, Act. 20.28. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3. 1 Tit. 1.7.

Secondly, Act. 20.1.7. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5. (...), Elders, Ancients, or
Seniors, etymologically, and Priests Popishly, and Presbyters the Mincers and
Refiners of Popish terms.

Thirdly, (...), Shepherds, Feeders, Pastors, Act. 20.28. Ephesians. 4.11. (...),
Leaders, Superiors, and Watchmen, 1 These. 5. 1 Timothy 5.17. The first 3. being
applied expressly to them as officers of one nature, well jointly mentioned by
and under those three names.

The fourth, or latter three have express relation only to their joint actions
of going before, standing over looking to the Church, which yet are to be
supposed to have respective relation to those Offices, whose properly they are
known to be by other places of Scripture, which by the scope of the Holy Ghost,
not only distinctly describe, but institutingly prescribe them to us, as
divine and holy Offices or Ministries, jointly concurring in those terms and
things sign^fied by them.

Now therefore to confuse this distinct order of God, and to dis-joyn what God
has thus conjoined, is an abomination to the Divine Author, and a desolation
to his Divine Order, and therefore well surnamed by him that Babylon, Babel, or
Confusion, Rev. 14.17, 18. both of Tongues and Terms, originally both, Genesis
11.9. and here, and also, and especially of his Divine Order of Worship
therewith, which God has charged to be kept distinct, Romans 12.3, 6, 7, 8.
especially in the distinctness of these three eminent Church-offices; so that
to desolate them, by pounding and confounding all three particular existents
into one, and that in the terms which the Scripture uses as general and common
to all three; yea, thereby, as by Divine Authority, is the high degree of
Ministerial confusion, or Babylon that great, Rev. 17.5. In the latter joint
respect, they reflect

(a) Externally on their

(b) Author,

Enrighting, i. e. Christ in his three Offices, of Prophecy, Priesthood,
Kingship.

Enabling, i. e. the Holy Ghost in its three gifts of Teaching, Exhorting,
Ruling.

(b) Objects.

Faculties or Powers, i. e. their Understanding, Heatt, Practike powers.

Habits: Moral; knowledge, virtue, or sincerity in conversation.

Spiritual, Information, Exhortation, Government.

(a) Internally on their subjects, i. e. The Ministers;

Medial, Ministerial, or Functional.

Severally and particularly of the first: it is a Church-office deputed by
Christ, as Prophet, to administer all his teaching Ordinances, for the Churches
spiritual information, Romans 12.7. Ephesians. 4.11. the genus or common matter is a
Church-Office; the efficient is, Christ deputing it as Prophet; the formal
scope, or specifical difference is, to administer all Christ's teaching
Ordinances: the final cause is, For Gods Worship, and the Churches spiritual
information: All, and only which, are requisite in this definition, which is
confirmed by the places annexed to be of a divine nature and authority for
Christ's service, and Christians benefit, in all spiritual knowledge; compared
with the rest of those Chapters, and their scope: for Romans 12.1. proves it a
particular of the Worship of the Word, (...), v. 2. to be a part of Gods
Will Worship, so called, to show the high cause and nature thereof, and in
opposition to man's Willworship, Col. 2.23. and so to be deputed by Christ; v.
3. charge its distinctness from the other divine offices in general, which v.
7. does also in particular, in the word Within; v. 4, 5, 6. show it to be a
Church-office, member, and gift, v. 7. calls it an office, which the article
confirms, especially in (...); v. 7. also shows its distinguishing form in
the words, the Teacher, and Teaching, v^z. by personal and instituted
Ordinances, which are abovementioned, with their abilities and execution in
the third part. The end is strongly imported in all the other three parts of
the definition; for though definitions of natural things require only the
matter and form: yet these institutions primarily require the efficient and end
also; and the goodness of the work on the Workers part, requires also
knowledge of these things, and sincere obedience to the commander; and also his
enrighting estate, or membership of a Church, before he is accepted as a Divine
Worshipper, and Officer of the Church.

In these Church-exercises are to be considered the works themselves toward
each other. In themselves first, Prophecy is Gods Ordinance to gifted persons;
a membral speaking by two or three in the Church to edification, exhortation,
and comfort of all the Church: all but membral is expressed 1 Cor. 14.3, 4, 5,
12, 19, 24. and that at least is to be understood, in that it is written to a
Church: and v. 34. a woman is forbidden to speak in the Church, in handling
this Exercise: Now none has power or privilege in the Church, or its
Exercises, but Church Members; and that at the least, in that Romans 12.6, with
7. it is expressly distinct from a Ministry: indeed, able gifts are necessary,
and as necessarily to be understood, in speaking to Edification, Exhortation,
and Comfort; for without them, none can so do, and so is not necessary to be
expressed.

1. From this definition arise these points: first, all members of Churches
that can speak to Edification, Exhortation, and comfort of the Church, may, and
ought to do it, in the exercise of Prophecy.

2. Only such, and such may.

3. The Officers of the Church as such, except the Ruler ih his ordering the
action, have interest in Prophecy above other members; but in priority of
order, and betterness of gifts, the former gives only firstness in the course
agreed on by the Prophets: the latter only more length of time.

4. The Church (or Rulers) as such, has no more authority to prescribe the
Doctrines and Texts to the Prophets, then to the Ministers of the Word, the
Teacher and Exhorter; but rather less in two respects: First, because the
Ministers have right and charge from the Deputation of the Church, but the
Prophets not so; but their membership they have by and with their Original
Church State, and not by any derivation therefrom, and their gifts from their
persons. Secondly, because the Ministers are to be supposed enabled to all
Texts and Doctrines, and the Church may more colourably require what Text and
Doctrine they think best for them; but the Prophets not so, but are truly such,
though enabled but in some Texts and Doctrnes; and so both in regard of their
estates and abilities.

5. The number and order of the Speakers, are to be by the agreement of the
Prophets themselves, 1 Cor. 14.29. to 33. The Ministers, as Members and
Prophets, having but the priority and moreness of speech in the agreement and
exercise, and that only by the light of nature, giving more honor to the more
honorable in estate and ability, but giving no Ecclesiastical superiority in
Prophecy: the confusion of which two estates seems to have been the first
Seed of, and step to Antichristianisme.

6. A distinct place for the Speakers in each exercise, is to be designed by
the Prophets, or by those that design other Seats, fit to speak out of, and to
be heard and seen by all, which seems to be before the Elders Pue: proofs
hereof are, 1. Act. 13.15. from the ancient Exercise of prophecy among the
Jews; for Paul and Barnabas were then and there not known to be Apostles, but
were received as gifted Jews, and so manifested of themselves, by sitting in
the Seat designed to that end; which also is to be supposed of Christ often: 2.
and from 1 Cor. 14.30. in (...), to one or any that sits, i. e. if it appear
by the Sitters in that Exercise, that much of the time will be employed by the
after-speakers, let the first contrive his matter accordingly, that each may
have his course, and the Ordinance duly discharged. 3. from the light of
Nature, the former grounds considered:

First, that there may be an aim in the first Speaker how to contrive his time.

Secondly, for the more honesting the exercise it self, by putting some
difference between the Speakers, and not Speakers, in that Exercise.

Thirdly, for the better opportunity of speaking and hearing; yea, and of being
seen: neither is there insinuation of any office thereby, if there be no
assignment of the Speakers, nor of their Text or Doctrine by the Church or
Elders; and if their original be taken from their memberships, giftedness, and
their exercise, and vicissitude be ordered amongst themselves, and kept
distinct from the officers, exercised by a distinct prayer, time, and place;
and also by a more social and less authoritative speaking then the
Teaching-Officers, even in the best enabled, especially in the Rulers, who else
by their other authority and sitting with the Ministers of the Word, and in
likelihood by their betterness of gifts, will much endanger the distinctness of
the body of Christ, so charged Romans 12.3. to 8. which is worse, then their
gracing the Exercise by their office is good.

7. A distinct measure of time, emphasis, and authority, in the utterance, is
to be observed, from the Ministers, according to their less authority, promise,
charge, and gift, lest confusion and injury grow by the Members Usurpation on
the Officers; there is rather doubt that the Prophets have no proper authority,
but a right to publish the Law of God, which has the legal authority of God in
it self: whereto is added the Ministerial authority of Christ in his offices,
Prophetical in the Teacher, Priestly in the Exhorter, and Kingly in both, as
instituted by its extraordinary Deputations of Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, and as ordered by its Ordinary, as the Church-Rulers; which also
to disobey, adds greatly to the other disobediences to the Word personally or
prophetically read, expounded, and applied; yet since every one that is truly
sent to publish the Word, has a kind of authority, the degrees are principally
to be insisted on in the greater promise of a blessing to the Ministerial than
to the membral Deputations of Christ, and of like confident expectation
thereof: in the greater charge and duty to obey; and also in the greater
measure of gifts, which are to be supposed in the Ministers, whereof an
answerable success is to be expected.

8. None has right to exercise as a Prophet out of a Church-Assembly, at least
but to Church members, much less one that is no Churchmember, whether within
or without the Church; though they may, and that successfully, to the begetting
and nourishing Faith and its fruits, exercise the same gift, because and as it
is personal, which also has a less measure of authority, charge, promise, and
gifts annexed.

9. The scope of the Prophets is to speak to the edification, exhortation, and
comfort of the Church, and not for trial, no nor exercise of gifts, though
both may also yield that use; and therefore distinct prayer in those respects
only is not good, though the goodness of prayer alone be added, because it is
here used as a Sanctifier of an action (and not as a distinct action) for the
edifying, exhorting, or comforting the Church; much less is the Churches
custom, especially if begun on a diverse reason, warrant for it, but least of
all fear of Innovation, both which are of, through, and for Babylonism, and
nourish up carcasses and traditions, yea tyranny in the Church, to the eating
the heart of Religion and purity of Worship thereout.

Secondly, therefore matters of sin, or disorder therein, are no more
censurable within that time, then the sins and disorders committed in any other
Exercise, but are to be referred to the Exercise of Ruling, at least if great
and turbulent; but if only in the length of time, and number, or other orders
agreed by the Prophets, they are to be remedied first by the reasons and
persuasion of the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32. or by them referred to the censure of
the Church, in case of obstinacy.

Thirdly, therefore each is to be referred to the knowledge of his own ability,
and to his fitting it with Text, Doctrine, and Manner; for the fruit is much
diminished by the inequality of the matter and ability.

Fourthly, though respect be to be had of strangers in many mean circumstances
and observations: the main of the course is not to be shaped, nor altered for
them.

Again briefly of the Organical and five Officers there are five distinct
objects, functions, portions, and proportions of Faith, Romans 12.7, 8. with 3,
4, 5, 6. The first is of the Teacher, who is v. 7. confined within Teaching,
which is fourfold, Lingual, Grammatical, Logical, and Ethical. The first is,
his apt expressing the Original Tongues, by the Mother Tongue of the Church.
The second is his apt expounding the meaning of the Holy Ghost in the Grammar
Phrases and Figures; either in his own person, or metaphrastically in the
person of the Writer. The third is, his analytical dividing the word of truth
aright into its proper parts, and his genetical incorporating them into one
body, enspired or ensouled by the scope of the Holy Ghost. The fourth is, his
distinct extracting the Doctrines of the Holy Ghost testimentary and
preceptive, and the genuine consequences from them, both confirming and
confuting; and his suasive pressing them to approbation.

The second is of the Exhorter, which is there called Exhortation, which is
either unto good, and from evil, or to stay in good, or flee out of evil; which
four are peculiarly called Exhortation, Dehortation, Comfort, and Terror. Now
the Sacraments, and singing Psalms, being both teachingly exhorting, and
exhortingly teaching, are the works of both these Offices, but most plenarily
and properly of the Exhorter; but prayer is equally common not only to these
two, but to the other three Offices, before and after the execution of their
offices; and that in respect of their offices, and not only of their persons.

The third is that of the Ruler, which consists in ordering of others in the
execution of their functions, and the Church in its Church-duties, as its
decreeing, admission, excommunication, ordination, degradation, etc. or in
executing his own; the former is his ordering the Church unto, and in its
Assembly, and in its Members and Officers, unto and in their Church-works late
mentioned and promised: the latter is his admitting, excommunicating members,
ordaining, degrading Officers, and dismissing the Church, and in respect of
other Churches and persons, and absent members, to receive and read in the
Church their Letters, and write and send to them; in this respect he is written
unto, under the name of the Angel of the Church, seven times, Rev. 2. and 3.
Chap. and charged with the faults of their Churches, as not using their offices
to their best redressing them, and commended for their good, on the contrary.

Fourthly, the Function of the Distributer, to provide for the relief of the
Poor of the Church, by the richer ones thereof, and to do all the services of
the Church in matter of provision, by employment of Church-stock, buying,
selling, or building, or ordering its meeting place, and following its
necessary Suits in the Law, and providing bread, wine, water, and other
necessaries, for the Elders, Bishops, or Pastors proper discharge of their
offices; in which respect he is called the Servant, Helper, and Deacon of the
Church.

The last and least is the Function of the Pittier, shewer of mercy, Widow, or
Deaconness of the Church, which is to tend upon the health of each member
thereof in cases of need, as in sickness, childbirth, and in all matters of
preservation of their persons: so that by these five offices, and their
functions, all the needs of the Church are supplied, as by the five offices of
Christ our Prophet, Priest, King, Provider, and Preserver, and the answerable
gifts of the mind infused, and acquisite, and humane innate abilities, three
whereof are the three faculties of the reasonable soul, apprehending, applying,
and expressing; and two of the sensitive, i.e. desire-of provision, and
preservation; and so all Gods promises, Christ's purchases, and the Spirits
graces for us, and all that Faith, Hope, and Love expect in this life, is in
these as in the immediate niples, spoons, and hands of the nursing Mother, the
Church encorporate, for the visible preservation of the mystical or saved
Church, wherein the one half of the special uses and ends promised, is
performed; and the other half will be shown after my present summary manner, by
observing in them all, God as our Lord, as in the former half he is shown to be
Jesus, or our Savior (which two are the sole object of Faith, 2 Pet. 1.2.) for
they are means of Gods sanctifying both for his service, and our preservation,
and that convertibly; for whatsoever is divinely to serve God, is divinely to
preserve his; and e contra; and wherein can he be more glorified by us, than by
our acknowledging of all these to be means of, and by God, for our salvation,
and of all them, and our selves also to be for Gods service and worship? for if
they be for Gods Divine Worship, and our spiritual welfare, what can be of a
greater necessity of duty, or concluder of Rebellion against God, or murder of
our own souls? especially since they are expressed to be that good,
acceptable, and perfect Will of God, Romans 12.2. That Word-worship so vehemently
pressed, v. 1. unto the approbation of both which, we must be transformed into
a renewedness of mind, and disconformed from the World-worship, (as dead,
unholy, and unacceptable unto God, v. 1.) and renounce our own Wills, as evil,
odious, and imperfect, v. 2. by which high dignity of the Commander and
Commender of these for his own peculiar Divine Worship, and his Worshippers
eternal glory, and the Divine Nature of the Worship and Worshippers, and the
heavenly end of the former, and benefit to the latter; and also by the Deity of
the Mediator, and inspirer of them thus manifested, another promised branch is
also performed, but competently indeed, in respect of what may more be said of
them; yet completely, being compared with the dignity of any other thing but
God their original Author, and ultimate End; and his Saints, for whom they and
all things but God are, and by and for whom they are exercised, and their
Institutors and Divine Declarer; and Grace, and Heaven, for which they are: But
I haste to their further dignifying, by showing the odious baseness of their
Opposites, Antichrist and his Worship, having only first marshalled them into
their comely order, lineal and collateral.

Psalm. 19. Gods natural works are highly extolled in that their line is gone
through the Earth, and their words unto the ends of the World, v. 4. and the
like is said of the Sun, v. 6. but the extension of Gods spiritual works are
far more magnified in the rest of that Psalm; and throughout that spiritual
Record, nothing is more evident and eminent both in lineal and collateral
extension, than the pillar and ground of true Worship, which is the House and
Church of the Living God, 1 Timothy 3.15. For the Word is Truth, both as the
Sanctifier of the Truth of Salvation, and also of Worship; but the Church is
not the pillar and ground of the former, but of the latter it is, as shall be
synopsed presently, which also best sorteth with the subject of that whole
Epistle, especially at that part thereof, which is an instruction of Timothy,
how to behave himself in ordering and acting Gods public worship.

The rock and root of this line is God the Father, as the absolute Willer
thereof; the Anchor or Hank end thereof is Christ as the original Revealer
thereof; his immediate Deputies therein are the Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, by their precepts and practice thereof, the Divine Record whereof
is their Writings of the new Testament, a Divine Progeny, and previal Line
indeed: but the internal Line has five parts: 1. The Church. 2. The power
thereof. 3. The Church-estates. 4. Their Functions, (...) Romans 12.4. or
Portions of Faith, v. 3. 5. Their object or matter: What these five things are,
is shown; but I only touch their lineal or successive order. The filial or
posterial Line of Gods Worship extends to all public union and communion
with God and his Saints, in all grace and glory: First, in this life, as an
Earnest, Broadseal, Livery of seisine, and Court or Temple of Sanctum
Sanctorum, and the very Heaven; an heavenly Issue, and Inheritance indeed! and
so a Royal Race, and Heavenly Line indeed!

The collateral respect of Divine Worship is either internal or external: the
former is the fraternity of its parts; which is actual in its four last parts,
and virtual in the Church, as causally respecting each branch of the four
brotherhoods; each whereof has nine particulars, according to the number of
the Church-estates, or Memberships; 4. Whereof are integral as Children, Women,
Men, and Prophets. And 5. Organical or Ministerial, as the Teacher, the
Exhorter, the Distributer, the Ruler, the pitier, whose 9. portions,
privileges, or proportions of Faith, Romans 12.3, 6. or Functions, v. 4. may by
these nine terms be understood, receptive, submissive, active, instructive,
teaching, exhorting, distributing, ruling, and pitying; but the particulars of
the matter, wherein those Functions are to be exercised, cannot so briefly be
expressed, but by reference to what is said of them, which is sufficient for
this place; over, unto, in, by and for these brotherhoods is the Church power,
authoritative over them, in giving them their being, or essentiative unto them,
preservative in them, usive by them, beneficial for them; for all gifts,
ministrations, and operations are given to the Church to profit each other
member, its Function, and its matter to be executed, 1 Cor. 12.7.

The external fraternity of our Evangelical Divine Worship is either spiritual
or natural; the spiritual is either cotypical or antitypical; the particulars
of them all are 7; five are past, one is, and the seventh is to come; so
exactly is this white Line paralleled with that black one, in time, number, and
particulars, Rev. 17. though in all substantials exactly antiparallel'd; as may
appear in the counter-parallel of this Image of Christ, with that of Antichrist.

The cotypes then are five; Paradise, Noah's Ark, Abraham's Family, Moses
Tabernacle, and Solomon's Temple, which I cannot plainly and plentifully say
and seal in few words; and yet many I may not now use.

1. Paradise, as a type of the Church.

Adam, as the Teacher or Declarer, by Moral Teaching, and the Tree of
Knowledge: As the typical preserver by the Tree of Life and Exhortation: As the
Orderer or Ruler, by casting out of Paradise.

This was also a Legal Type of Heaven and the first Covenant.

2. Noah's Ark.

Noah, the teacher of Righteousness, by the spiritual signs of the Ark: The
typical preserver of all in the Ark, by the Food of the Ark: The Ruler, by
admitting into, and rejecting out of the Ark.

This was a Legal and Evangelical Type, clearing the worship after the Fall.

3. Abraham's Family in Covenant with God.

Abraham, the Teacher of his Family, by publication of Gods Promises and
Commandments: The Sealer thereof, by Circumcision and the Sacrifices: The
Ruler, by Excommunication.

This was an Evangelical Type, clearing the second Covenant made with Adam,
Genesis 3.15.

4. The Tabernacle.

The Priests, and Levites, as Teachers by Moral and Typical preaching: As
Exhorters and Sealers, by the Passover, Sacraments, and Sacrifices: As Rulers,
by Trial, shutting out, and purifying the Lepers, the Unclean, etc.

This was properly legal, and clearing the first Covenant made with Adam: Genesis
2.17. Yet secondly, it Was Evangelical, as typing the Worship of the Gospel.

5. The Temple.

The Priests, etc. as in the Tabernacle: but thereto, as also to the Temple, as
being nearer to Christ then the other three, there was also annexed a cleerer
distinctness of the teaching, and offices of Christ, in the College of the
Prophets; and their prophesying, exhorting, and ordering the children of the
P^ophets; and in Jerusalem, as the prime place of Expounders of the Law, Luke
3. Of eating the Passover, and peace offerings, etc. and also of Judgment,
Psalm. 122. There are thrones for Judgment, etc. Yet is there this difference,
that the transitoryness of the Tabernacle showed the fading estate of the Law,
in respect of the Gospel; and of the worship of the Gospel, in respect of
Heaven; and the immovableness of the Temple, showed the respespective
permanency of the Gospel, and the perpetuity absolute of Heaven, as the proper
Kingdom of God, and of Heaven; in the respectiveness whereunto, the Gospel is
frequently called by Christ the Kingdom of Heaven: the Worship whereof, is the
next and sixth type of Heaven.

6. The Church or Spiritual Sabbath-Assembling Corporation: the Officers
overseeing it, are, the Teachers and Informers of the Understanding, by
teaching, i. e. by translating, metaphrase, analysis, doctrine. Exhorters,
conformers, or confirmers of the heart, by exhortation, dehortation, comfort,
and terror; and administration of the Sacraments, as ratifying the former, and
thereby establishing the heart: Ruler or Reformer of the Conversation, by
admission, excommunication, ordination, deprivation, and ordering all
Church-actions.

7. The third Heaven after death, where in Christ we shall see God face to
face, and know him as we are known, as in an eternal mirror, and immediate
sight of God: Be perfected with all grace and peace, by the real inspiration of
the Holy Ghost in the heart and affections: Reign in all manifest Holiness and
Happiness, as coheirs with Christ, by perfect glory, and content in God.

In these seven Divine Worships is the external instituted collateralness of
the Evangelical Worship comprehended; the moral or natural remains, which in
the general is expressed, Romans 12.4, 5. For as we have many members in one
body, and all members have not one office. So in Christ, i. e. by Christ's
institution is it in the Church, the particulars whereof are expressed in the
next 3. verses. Now in that the natural similies thereof are both personal, v.
4, 5. and public, v. 6, 7, 8. we are sent to all perfect bodies natural, to
search out the perfection of this spiritual complement of theirs; three whereof
are personal, and three public: the three former are vegetative, sensitive,
and rational hypostases. For the first, it is as the first of the former 3.
verse. Spiritual Brethren, the most dark and imperfect; yet all

1. Herbs and Trees have one stalk or body dispersed into leaves, as life or
kind-manifesting parts, by their greenness in sight: Blossoms, as internal and
inchoative kind-preserving parts, by their tenderness in feeling, promising and
beginning fruitfulness: Fruits, useful to man, (and preserving its own kind) by
their feeding, and physical and fructifying virtues and uses.

2. Creeping things, Fishes, Birds, and Beasts have their one body, and each
body its diverse organs; as, the brain for knowing, the Heart for purposing and
willing, the Motive Members for acting and moving.

These are receptive, and determining in themselves, but not agitating others
to know, will, and work as they do; only man by his discursive reason, and
actuating wit and will, collects from them knowledge and virtue, and distilleth
them into their instruments of action: but especially in himself, as the third
natural pattern, or brother of the Church.

3. Man consists of one body, having an head, and therein the five external
Senses, and their common Sense, Reason, and Memory to learn and teach: An heart
and its affections of love, hope, joy, and gratefulness, and their opposites to
will and cause others to will: Their active organs, as the tongue, hands, feet,
teeth, etc. externally to express what they internally know and will.

The public patterns are likewise three, according to the three Offices of
Christ, informing, preserving, and ruling: the first are, the Societies of
Students in the Law and other Learning; in the most eminent whereof, I will
instance, as in the Inns of Court and Chancery.

4. They have one voluntary body, associated for the study of the Law; and by
the power thereof, choose their Readers, and other Exercisers of matter of
knowledge, to inform their members in the Law: House-Officers, as Steward,
Butler, Cook, Porter, etc. to preserve their being for that end: Rulers, to
rule them in that Society and Work.

5. The preserving, are Societies of Trade, for the preservation of men in all
Commonwealths, and other Societies; such as are Regiments and Bands of
Soldiers, and the companies of London, etc. who take courses, and should set
Teachers to inform and see to others informing their novices in their trades,
for the true knowledge of their proper trade; Cooks, Butler, Porter, etc. for
their living in that Society. Colonels, Captains, Sergeants, Wardens, and their
Associats for Government, for their orderly walking therein.

6. The Ruling Societies are Nations, Cities, Towns Corporate, and other free
Common wealths, who have by their covenant power to choose Instructers, to
inform all of that body in the Laws thereof: Provokers, to excite them to
observe them: Rulers, to compel them by outward penalties to keep them.

7. The seventh is the Church, which has whatsoever these six have, whether
lineal, or collateral, and is their fellow creature, corporation, or brother of
the same Creator, King, and Father, though it have diverse peculiars more then
they; as that it is also of divine institution, nature, and use, of more
exactness of order lineal and collateral, and of a Sabbath-assembling property;
and though they are set by God, Romans 12.4, 5. as general patterns, and as the
Wise-mens Star to direct, where the Word does not institutedly prescribe: Yet
the five lineal parts thereof, and their five collaterals, are so exactly and
plentifully instituted by the divine precepts and practices in the Word, that
this is as the Sun-light to them in their substantials, as they are the
Candlelight to their darker accidentals: yet is it our special duty to attend
the to use thereof, in this our weakness, until the Sun-bright institutedness
of the Evangelical Worship in the whole, and each part and respect do appear in
our hearts; and then shall we thereby rectify and reduce them to their
original purity and use, whereas now they are perverted and hurtful.

By all which glorious comelyness of our Evangelical Worship in it self, by its
divine progeny and posterity, by its firstborn fraternity, with all excelling
bodies, spiritual, natural, and politic, required Ephesians. 4. and by its every
way compleatness, Col. 2. and distinctness, charged Romans 12.3, 6. the perfect
dignity thereof does evidently, yea eminently appear; and withal the
necessariness, yea the necessitedness both of our duty to God, to Christians,
and our selves therein, and benefit thereby is thrust upon it: and all the
vileness, rebelliousness, and perniciousness of Antichrist, the exact opposite
thereto, is to be supposed.

Antichrist destroys not only the whole Church and its power, but also all
the members thereof, both integral and instrumental, both by his setting
himself against the Church, and his sitting for, or as the Church, and thereby
extinguishing the Churchship, and all the Memberships thereof, and so is that
desolation; and as he sets himself for, and as the Church, and his 128.
sorts of his Church Members, 24. Ministerial, and 104. Monastical members, as
and for the members of the Church, he sets up that abomination.

And thirdly, as he confuseth the names, nature, and order of the
Church Members of Christ; he is that Babylon the great, or God of confusion:
For, first, he confounds the four sorts of the integral members of the
Church; as the Prophets, Men, Women, and children, both in taking from them all
distinction of Church Power and privilege, whereby as Ecclesiastical they are
distinguished from each other; for, by his Church-disorder, no Saint of gifts,
of discerning spirits, of edification, exhortation, and comfort, has more
power in government or privilege of teaching, than men without them; yea, or
women and children; for they have none at all; neither have men more enrighting
power then women or children, in telling the Church, or in putting out of the
obstinately wicked from among them, than women and children, what enabling
power soever they have more than they, for his Church-warden-promooting is a
servility absolute, of informing the Prelatical courts; but not that power to
tell the Church, if the offender will not repent at their private telling, and
not to tell if they will: Neither, thirdly, have Prophets, men, or women, more
privilege in any thing than children, by any Church right, he making them all
alike of the Laity, and not of the Church; as for his giving the bread to men
and women, but not to children, it is by a Ministerial, or rather Magisterial
munificence in the Priests; and through a natural defect in the children
simply, and not as they cannot discern the Lords body, nor eat in remembrance
of Christ: and indeed, his denying expressly the wine to all alike, shows
their Church estate and right thereby unto it, to be all alike, that is none at
all; and so he might by alike right deny them the Bread and Baptism too, but
for his own sinister ends of making his Priests munificent herein; and of
discovering the informed in the right order of God, and the avoiders of
Antichristianity, and of seeming to love Christianity.

Secondly, he so also confounds the names, nature, and order of the five
instrumental or ministerial members, in making them all but one Priesthood; for
the Teacher, Exhorter, and Ruler of a Congregation, he expressly makes but one
Priesthood; and the Deacon he makes but a diminutive servant and helper of
that priesthood, or a preparative thereto; the Widow, or Mercy-shewer he wholly
excludes, and so he is that Babylon the great, or great confounder of Gods
Offices and Ordinances.

2. He is also that abomination in setting up other Church offices than these
five, which only are made divine by the Word; and so also he sits as, or
for the Church, in usurping its authority herein; for he has set up denal,
suffragan, diocesan, provincial, patriarchal, and universal Bisho^sh^ps, and
their subordinate councels, commissaries, Officials, Archdeacons, Surrogates,
and Registers, as divinely authorized to exercise Church Authority, whom yet
Christ never authorized, which I have shown in a Tract of undivine Bishops, and
in a Confutation of their Postscri^ts, or undivine authority for them.

3. He is also that desolation, both in his sett^ng these Anachims over Christ's
Bishops and Deacons; and not only as simply ruling them by their
Church-Monarchy, as they do all called Christians; but especially, as making
them subordinate instruments of their Magisterial tyranny, both in their
servile promooting to their Courts the true, yea, and reported breakers of
their Articles, repentant and impenitent promiscuously, and especially in
executing their Sentences, though they know them unjust both in matter, and
also in the form of their proceedings: for he has hereby made them his
Vassals, Bailiffs, Goalers, and Executioners, without any inherent power of
ruling in their Offices: And this, though they had been of Gods creation by
Church-election, and under his correction: But that which is worst, they are of
Hierarchical generation, by Prelatical ordination, and are under their
censures, even unto degradation, for neglecting their traditions; so that what
they are, can do, and have in their formal estate, is of, through, and for
Antichrist; for he created them into that estate by his instituted office of
Bishopship, and its constituting ordination, thereby engaging them to use all
their powers and habits internal and external, to his ends and glory; whereby
he has not only destroyed their servantship of God, but even made them his
own servants and soldiers against Christ, as King of Israel, and Lord of his
Temple.

The next part of Antichrists antithesis against Chr^sts instituted Worship,
is, first his prescribing other ends to the works of the Church Members, both
integral and instrumental, than Christ has done, even both to their saving,
serving, souldierly, and social works; under which four heads, all Christian
duties are comprehended; and indeed, he makes of these four sorts of works,
but one, with a double end that is satisfactory to God, and in obedience to
himself; for all is works of service, suffering and love, he holds to be the
prerequisite condition of our adoption, sonship, and spouship, and so of our
union with God, as our heavenly Father; though p operly Gods imputation of
Christ and his sufferings and works unto us, be the only work preceding, or
prerequisite to our adoption, and so therein God the Father, Christ, and the
Holy Ghost, are the only Agents and Workers, and we are merely patients, as
receivers of that divine estate, nature, and inheritance, and thereby enrighted
by that estate, enabled by that nature, and moved by that inheritance, to serve
and suffer for God, and for, and with his sons, servants, and soldiers: and so
he is that Babylon, abomination, and desolation in this part also, as he makes
the soul of the works of all Church Members to be satisfactory to God, and
services to himself, whereas they are only services and homage due to God as
absolute Lord. This is not only true of that Antichrist of Rome, but of his
daughters also, in their secundary degree, and under the name of Arminianisme,
whereof the Hierarchy of England is in travail, that of Ireland pregnant, and
that of Scotland quick with child.

Secondly, in prescribing other works, rites, and observances also, than God
has sanctified, as abstinence from Marriage and Meats to some at all times,
and to all at some times, kneeling, and many fopperies in the Lords Supper,
Salt, cream, spittle, etc. in Baptism, bondaged reading prayers, the surplice,
copes, and other priestly garments, white clothing for the baptized, churched,
and penitent; praying before the crucifix, cross, and images; sackcloth, and
whipping, etc. consecrated places, breathing the Holy Ghost in ordination,
prelatical consecration, institution, induction, suspension, anathematising
with bell, book, and candle, observation of holy days, weeks, and set-times,
consecrating of Temples, and their appurtenances of many sorts, Fonts,
chalices, Bells, Holy Water, Basins, and superstitious burial of the dead,
churching women, and confirmation: some of all which, and other sorts of
superstitions all the Daughters of Rome observe in homage to their mother of
Abominations, and in love of her whoredoms of the earth.

Thirdly, in prohibiting Church-Covenants, admission, and excommunication of
members, election, and dejection of Officers by the Church Power; and in
forbidding Baptism without the cross, etc. and it and prayers without the
Surplice; and the Father to challenge his privileges of Baptism to his
Infants; and all to receive the Lords Supper every Lords day, and at the
Evening; and at all, without kneeling and the Surplice of any one, and women to
taste of the cup of blessing: and in denying ordination to Rulers,
Distributers, and Widows, and prophesying to the gifted to teach, exhort, and
comfort; and to ask his doubts in the Congregation.

Fourthly, in disordering all the Works of Divine Worship by Minister and
people, in mingling of their reading the Psalms and Prayers, one verse by the
one, and another verse by the other; and of singing with their reading and
prayers, and with the Lords Supper, even in the very time of administration
thereof; and of prayer on their knees in the very act of receiving the same.

Fifthly, in deifying the Ministerial Works far above their nature, as in
imputing to the Water in Baptism to be the real blood of Christ; and in
ascribing to Baptism, washing away the guilt of sin, ex opere operato, and
purging original sin, and actual regenerating; and to the Lords Supper real
transubstantiation both of the bread into the body, and wine into the blood of
Christ; and strange operations on the Sick, in healing all Diseases, and
dispossessing them of devils by the very act of priestly administration; yea,
they have ascribed the same unto the Cross it self, in supposition that it is a
Divine Institution; or rather because it is a Bird of his own hatching; and
many the like wonders does this Worlds-wonder work, especially in Ordination;
which of every way the least Ministerial or Church-work he has made by his
omnipotency, the Creator of the Church, Ministry, and all things
Ecclesiastical and Ministerial; and himself the Creator, Orderer and actor
thereof and of them all thereby.

Proofs of, and Motives to incite to, the knowledge and practice of the
word-Worship.
FIrst from v. 2. which expresses the word Worship to be worthy of, yea, to
exact, our best Wits, and most serious, yea emphatical extensions thereof, in
these words, But be ye transformed in the renovation of your mind.

Secondly, from the parental or proper procreating cause thereof, expressly said
v. 2. to be that Will of God: which to know we are bound by all the Bonds of
allegiance, love, wisdom, glory, and what not that is naturally or spiritually
good? Yea, this equalenting that word Worship, v. 1. with that Will of God, v.
2. (the particulars whereof are v. 4. to 8. expressed to be our present
Church-Worship, then practiced in the Churches) does more radically and deeply
dignifie it, than can without more than ordinary ability and industry; yea,
without our transforming our selves not only into that new and spiritual
Nature (according to our new and supernatural estate by Faith) but especially
into the renovation, or rouzing up of that new mind and nature, be understood;
and without a special degree of Sanctification be approved; which is expressed
i^ the intervening words. For all that is there meant by that Will of God, is
that Word-Worship v. 1. in the general, and its particulars v. 4. to 8; and
much more is all that is meant by that Word-Worship v. 1. that will of God v.
2. But there is nothing of a higher natute either divine instituted or created,
than Will absolute: neither is any thing more identically, essentially, and
reciprocally predicated of God than Will; for whatsoever is an absolute Will is
God, and God is an absolute Will; and what is God is a simple Will: And I could
never attain to a properer definition of God than this, God is a Will well
actuating it self. But you will say, that Will of God is there taken
metonym^ce, by the cause for the effect: True, yet it is therefore both a
proper and a special effect of that Will of God, by this rule: What is in the
second declared by a descendent Metonymie, is a prime propriety, or proceed of
that superior: Neither is that here taken merely denotatively of any thing as
aforesaid; but properly, demonstratively, and emphatically; for that which of
all other things is most properly willed of God, and may most truly be said,
and be thereby best taken for the will of God, without farther addition, than
of the demonstrative article (...), i. e. That This shall be farther cleared in
the next Porisma, where I show by all the instances of Scripture I can find,
where God is said to be forsaken; and that other gods are worshipped in his
stead, and the like: that those places are not meant of the person of God, but
consequently (which by that same consequence well proves our point) because
they had forsaken this his Word-worship, and used another: which using God
there, and that will of God here, for his Word-worship then, and now, ought
much to provoke us to that through-knowledge thereof, and devote us to, and in
the use and enjoyment thereof; and also justifies the approved use of Worship
(which properly signifies Lord-ship, as before) for the signs, means, marks,
and testimonies of Gods Lord-ship over us, by a Metonymie of the end or signed,
for the mean and sign; which soul of that word ought never to be separated from
the body thereof, though never so frequently used, left we understand not our
own words, or neglect them. If then we would know what of all other is most
necessited, and worthy to be known, know that will of God; and what it wills,
approve: also know God himself, and that whereby, and wherein he most
manifests his Deity, and accordingly apply it to thy soul, and thy self to
it, as therein most approving Gods Lordship over us.

Thirdly, from the 3 Divine Epithites of that Will; good, acceptable, and
perfect: good to us, therefore omit not your benefit of this high nature;
acceptable to God, therefore expose your selves in the extent of your love and
fear to please him, of, through, and for whom are all things; perfect in them
both, and it self, in kind and degree: therefore this is above all things
worthy, and necessited to be thoroughly known. Herein are three proo^s, all very
effectual; but I rather avoid tediousness, through the plenty of matter, than
heap up petty colors, or search for quantity of matter herein.

Fourthly, from the word (...) that, which taken demonstratively, must have
reference to that Word-worship, v. 1. which expresses that will, v. 2. to be
the efficient cause of that Worship, v. 1. and its particulars, v. 4. to 8. and
the joint cause thereof with the word; yea, of them both, which exceedingly
dignifieth our subject of Worship; or taken per emphasin (which the urging
thereby to disconformity with World-worship, and to transformity in grace; and
the emphatical that, v. 1. that Word-worship, necessite) it expresses worth
and necessity of this knowledge of the highest nature; yea, that double
demonstrative emphasis; imports an unexpressable dignity and necessity
thereof. Which latter sense not only excludes the former, but also imports,
yea enforces it, by the mutual emphasing, and inseparable Nature of the two
emphased matters.

Fifthly, beside the compacture of the number of particulars in the five last
verses in the latter Table shown, there is a special distinctness of those
particulars to be observed, pressed v. 3. and expressed in the metaphrase,
analysis and genesis thereof: Therefore there is not only all kind of
knowledge requisite unto this special matter; but also in the same, how to
discern the several particulars, their joint encorporating and enchaining, and
their distinct order both lineal and collateral.

Sixthly, another proof of the same kind is from the like compacture of all
manner of compleatings of this subject both lineal, a priori and posteriori,
and collatera, dextral, and sinistral, shown in the main part of the former
Table summarily, and shall be in this prosecution, thereof illustrated, that
therein the Deity, in its Unity and Trinity, as a and o, the efficient and end;
and in all its ordering means, and actuating powers, Natural and Civil,
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, personal and public, pleases to encircle and
embrace this his own instituted Son, Image, and Spouse; as thereby parallelling
his adopted and imputed mystical Church, the particular matter of this his
Ministerial Church: of both which conjoined and glorified, he intends the
completing of his perfect celestial Church: By these glimpses you may discern
in this proof, strength enough to evince the matter in hand, that the subject
of Divine Worship is very worthy of our knowledge, and best endeavors to
understand, even as any thing knowable: for Gods essence none can know, and
live a natural life: and so there is no corrival but the mystical Church, and
the like relation of the Deity to it, and of it again to the Deity, which is
the soul of our present body, as in the next proof.

Seventhly, 1. call to mind here the manifold motives, and divine commands, to
get knowledge, understanding, and wisdom; and the spiritualness and plenty of
teaching thereof in the word. and 2. the world-cloying Volumes thereof, of the
Divines of all sorts and ages; and also the unsatiable and uncessant studies
and labourings of Christians of all sorts and ages after the same: and then
consider that it is wholly reduced to the Ten Commandments, Exodus 34.27. where
it is expressed, that they are the Epitome of Gods whole Covenant with his
Church.

And 3. consider, that only the first, second, and fourth Commandment,
prescribe matters between God and Us: for the third only requires our
sincerity and seriousness in them; and the other six are immediately between man
and man: And in the first mentioned three, that the first touches only
matters personal immediately between God and Us, and the fourth only the
Sabbath: so that the second Commandment is the adequate object of Divine
Worship: Whence conclude the highness of the nature thereof, that it is of the
second sort all the matters of Religion; and also the extent thereof, that it
possesses the whole head of one of the Ten, wherein God has contrived his
Covenant, and that the largest of the Ten, and strengthened with many excellent
Reasons and Motives of all sorts expressed therein; which yet are excellently
varyed and illustrated in the three first verses of Romans 12. and the
particulars thereof completely in the kind thereof, instituted in the five
next, and their distinctness charged with Apostolic authority, v. 3. All which
show the highness of the matter, and the excellency of this place; and therein
the necessity, dignity, and pretiousness of the knowledge, both of the
prescribing and instituting place, and its instituted matter.

Eighthly, Obedience then to God, necessiteth us to know these his peculiar
commands, and the love of God constrains us thereto: the excellency also of
the matter and its order, both internal and relative, lineal and collateral,
strongly moves us thereto: which two heads show it acceptable to God, and
perfect in it self; if now it also appear specially beneficial to us, then it
wants nothing to prove it that good, acceptable, and perfect will of God; for
that therefore, mind the ends thereof, and you shall find the one half for our
good: for as they are for Gods glory and worship, which proves them to be
son-like duties of love to our Father upward: so are they for our good five
several ways, and so they are means, and so duties of wisdom for our own and
brethrens benefit; and so we thereby serve God immediately, as in Duties of the
first Table, and mediatly as in the second, therein also serving and preserving
our selves in wisdom, and our equals in love.

The first of these five is in getting knowledge of all kinds of good to be
obtained, and the Science of Science it self; and so of the means and manner of
obtaining them: which is proved, v. 6. Prophecy, which is expressed, 1 Cor.
14.3. to be for edifying, which cannot be without knowledge, and its
counter-distinction from exhortation and comfort, proves knowledge to be meant
thereby: and v. 7. the Teacher within teaching: So one whole office with its
function and exercising, is for our information.

The second is in getting grace, sincerity, and holy power and virtues of all
sorts, which both are proper and prime good things, and the Sanctifiers of all
other goods, whereby they become only good to us, yea and of all evils also,
in turning them to our good, whereby even our sins are our physic, and many
ways for our benefit in their cooperation and last end: This is also proved,
v. 6. Prophecy, with 1 Cor. 14.3. Exhortation and comfort: and v. 8. The
Exhorter within Exhortation; and so also the whole 2d. office, and its
ministration, and administering, are for our internal sanctification of Heart
and Affections.

Thirdly, the Ruling-Ministry, and its Function and Works, are for the external
nourishment of both these internals, and suppression of their contrary Heresies
and wickedness in the Church, v. 8. the Ruler.

Fourthly, God has given to the Church not only authoritative and magisterial
Laborers in the Word and Doctrine, and Rulers, 1. Tim. 5.17. with their
ministerial information, exhortation, and government, Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Cor.
12.28. but also inferior and servant-like helpers, and their works of
servant-like helps, ibid. both for our personal provision in and by the Church,
Romans 12.8. the Distributer, i. e. the Orderer and Disposer of the provision of
the Church (by a Synecdoche of one particular for the general, whereof there
are many branches, of which more at large elsewhere) and also fifthly for our
personal preservation in health and life, ibid. the Pittier or Shewer of Mercy
to the persons of the Church in need thereof; called also Deacons, Romans 16.1.
Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.8. as also the fourth sort are: These are also called
Widows, because they must be widows that be admitted to this office, and also
of 60. years old, lest they should by nature be urged to marry, and by their
husbands be hindered in their office, 1 Timothy 5.3, 9. to 16. For two
Institutions of God must not oppose, nor cross each other, as being in act; nor
the course of Nature and its Institutions be inverted nor everted: so that all
sorts of good are treasured up for us by God in his Church-worship: therefore
spare no labor to know, nor cost to buy the same, Mat. 13.11, 44, 45.

Ninthly, v. 5. it is expressed that the particular matter of this Divine
Worship, i. e. Christians are encorporated and enchained together therein for
each others benefit, and made as members of each other: so that both the
particulars of the ministerial and mystical Church, are for the good of each
Christian, as estated in Gods instituted Worship.

Tenthly, while the 5. particulars of Divine Worship for our fivefold or
omnifold good, are freshly mentioned, I will add a tenth proof and motive to
this point, conjoining the perfect good, and the good perfection of Divine
Worship in one small Table, wherein also many other motives thereto, and
matters worthy our observation will accur.

God as

(a) One

(*) in essence

(b) Existed man as an integrum of

(c) Soul

(d) Mental

Understanding willing:

(d) Practical, by that Understanding and Will to preserve his soul or rational
part by rational provision of information, conformation, and confirmation, by
his Creators means, both natural, as a Feeder; and spiritual, as a Physician.

(^) Body

Mediatly providing maintenance for, immediately preserving health of his body,
by God's means, as Creator for the present, and Redeemer perpetually; and as
sanctifying the former.

(b) Ordered

(e) Man for his own glory; as of, through, and for himself.

(e) For Man.

(f) Means of his information, conformation, confirmation, provision, and
preservation.

(f) Powers,

(g) Agent, Operative for, and effective of his informing, conforming,
confirming, providing, and preserving.

(g) Recipient of knowledge, sincerity, good conversation, provision, and
preservation.

(*) Authority, or absolute Monarch.

(:) Natural,

(h) Concreating his Law in Man, toward God and Man:

(h) 1. Instituting his Worship natural, for his natural service;

Internal toward himself,

External toward others.

In this respect, Paradise was his instituted Church-Worship, as parts of the
second Commandment, without typical relation to Heaven, Adam being the Teacher
and Ruler thereof, as the Minister of the Teach^ng, conforming and nourishing
Sacraments, and other Ordinances; and as Orderer and Dresser of Paradise: and
Eve being the Provider and Preserver, by her, being an help to him, Genesis 2.20.
and the taught, conformed, and ruled. All this, a well-ordered integral mean
between God, as unum; and Man, as integrum: by which, as by Jacob's Ladder,
there was an alternal communion between God and Man, which is the common scope
and correlation of all integral Worships ever since: but in other respects far
d^fferent, and without Works legal, restoration, or grace.

(:) Spiritual,

2. Legal, instituted

That 1. Natural Worship, with this condition; If you do this, you shall live
eternally in Heaven: Not this, you shall dye an Hellish death.

2. The Legal Worship of Adam, and of Mos^s, with the same typical condition:
If thou do this, thou shall enjoy the Land of Canaan, and its Kingship,
Priesthood, and Prophetship; and its provision and preservation: Not this, thou
shall be deprived of them all.

3. Evangelical.

(i) Imposed on Christians Evangelical worship for his service.

(i) Proposed to Christians, Evangelical worship for their benefit, with his
promise and power operating and effecting the same, upon, and in them, and
accepting it and them therein, and thereby.

(k) Typically, as the Redeemer of Man from his Fall into Hell; and the guilt,
power, and curse of sin, unto Heaven, and his imputing, infusing, and
imparting Christ unto us.

(l) Historically in

Noah's Ark, as the Church; Noah, as the Ministerial Teacher, Exhorter, and
Ruler; and his Wife as helper in matter of provision and health: The seven
persons subject to him, as the informable, conformable, rulable, to be provided
for, and preserved; and the Waters as our Baptism, showing and conveying
reconciliation, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. and so the Food, as given by Noah, answered to
the Lords Supper, and receiving into, and casting out of the Ark, answered our
admission and excommunication.

Abraham's family as the Church; Abraham as the Teacher, Exhorter, and Ruler
thereof. Sarah, as his helper in provision and health: His Children and
Bond-servants, as the matter and body of the Church: Circumcision, as our
Baptism; and the Sacrifices, the Spiritual Food of his Family; as the Lords
Supper, Personal Teaching, Persuasion, and Ruling, as ours instituted now;
(which is to be supposed in the former ideas hereof in Adam and Noah) and the
admission into or birth in the same, as ours now; and so likewise of his
casting any out of his family, as answering to Excommunication duly ordered
now, Gal. 4.24. to 30. This, and that Ark have not only primary relation to
the Mystical Church, but also to the Ministerial secundarily, through their
general likeness: yet is there not identitie, and so no perfect likeness
between them.

(l) Instituted as

(m) Transient, or typically leading to Heaven, that is, the National
Corporation of Israel in the Wilderness, Moses the Ruler, with his seventy
Deputies; Aaron and the Priests, as Reconcilers; Myriam, and other Prophets, as
Teachers; the Levites, as Deacons. Moses and his Deputies functions were to
order the Nation and Army, and matters of Justice and Protection: Aaron and the
Priests to order the Tabernacle and its Ordinances: Myriam, etc. to order the
College, Company, and course of the Prophets: the Levites to help in all
matters of service to any of them, especially of provision and preservation:
All this as in the way to the Promised Land, and its permanent worship, Deuteronomy.
1.8. to 18. and throughout that book, this kind of Worship typed this under the
Gospel, as it is the transient Kingdom of Heaven, parabled by the two Sowers,
the Mustard Seed, Leaven, Treasure, Pearls, the Draw-Net, Matthew. 13.52. and often
elsewhere mentioned, in personal respects, and without relation to this
Church-Worship, the Anttitype of them.

(m) Established the Nation of Israel with its Regal Thrones in Jerusalem, the
Temple, and its Ministries and Ministrations, the College of Prophets, and
their Offices and Works, and the Lodgings of the Levites about the Temple and
their Cities throughout Canaan; with all their teaching, uniting, (or
reconciling) ruling, providing, and preserving Ordinances, as completed by
Solomon, as the Type of Christ, as King in his constituted Church under the
Gospel, the nearest Sign, Seal, Livery of Seisin, and Earnest of the real
complete Glory of Heaven.

(k) Antitypically answering to the former Types, and really being the Kingdom
of Heaven complete, ^. e. the Evangelical Ministerial Church, its five-fold
Offices, Ordinances, Works, and Uses, derived from, and answering to Christ; as
Prophet, Priest, King, Provider, Preserver, as Instituter of his five
Church-Offices, i. e. the Teacher, Exhorter, Ruler, Distributer, Pitier; with
their five Functions of Teaching, Exhortation, Ruling, Distribution, Pitying:
enrighting us by these three sorts of Christ's five-fold respects to Teaching,
Exhorting, Ruling, Distributing, Pitying, for and unto the knowledge,
sincerity, honesty, provision, preservation, of our understanding, heart and
its affections, Christian conversation, estates and possessions, persons,
health, and life; as from, through, and for God, as an essential Mind, Will,
actus, good Being, or Essence.

(a) Respecting our five-fold needs of him, sent

(n) Christ, as to Sons, to be received by Faith; so to his Servants to be
worshipped by Works, as acknowledging Christ therein, and

(n) The Holy Ghost, to adequate Christ as our Mediator with all gifts:
Son-like to receive the benefits: and Servant-like to do the Works of
instituted Church-worship.

By this Table is Synoptice to be seen, the external relation of our present
Divine Worship to all Gods former Worships, and the internal order of the
materials thereof within themselves; and also their respects to God, Christ,
the Spirit, and Man, all exactly parallelling each other in all
particularities; and also completing all things Divine into an integral unity,
perfectly resembling the perfect uniformity of the glorified Heaven; and
proposing to Us the present enjoyment thereof in an exact Epitome, by a proper
Livery of Seisin, and imparting earnest: so that nothing is more worthy of
knowledge, in respect of the perfection and gloriousness thereof; nor more
desirable in respect of its pretiousness to us: and for their acceptableness,
it cannot but be discerned through their evident being of, through and for God;
yea, in the highest degree on earth. Alas! that this kind of Knowledge is so
unknown, and the pearl and treasure thereof as hid in the earth; though like,
yea being Wisdoms house, pillars and food proposed to, yea proclaimed for us,
with many and manifold motives by her maidens, Prove. 9.1 to 12. and though so
unlike the contrary false worship and folly of Antichrist, that foolish Whore,
and whorish folly so vilified and deterred in the rest of that Chapter, as
illustrating true worship by its contrary; the particulars of this worship are
so many and magnifyed, that I dare not move by one of them.

Eleventhly, This word-worship is the subject of the greatest part of the
Scripture, in its describing the particulars thereof, prescribing the
observance thereof, prohibiting the contrary, historying the practices of both
sorts, and the answerable blessings and judgments, and making use thereof for
future encouragements, and terrors of the proceeders; and adding farther
comforts and threatenings accordingly: but the particularizing hereof, requiring
a kind of Exposition of half the Scripture, I must refer the marking this point
in your daily readings thereof; wherein you shall find these things exceeding
useful, and worthy your knowledge.

Twelfthly, the great and many blessings of the Word are annexed to this true
divine worship, and the plenty of fierce Curses are denounced against the
false; and because this and the other are too large to prosecute to the full,
see both verified in the Decalogue-Epitome thereof in the second Commandment;
for that is so large as all the rest, except the fourth Commandment (which
instituteth Gods set time, for the celebration thereof, and so it rather
secondeth than affronteth our point) and pronounces more and higher blessings,
and denounces heavier judgments in this matter, than all the body of the
Decalogue beside.

But I more need to excuse my prolixness herein, and to break off from the many
proofs of, and motives to this point, then to proceed herein; both since the
matter is so pregnant, and the remaining points so many and special, above my
ability to accomplish, and your patience to read, except you be more then
vulgarly transformed for this purpose, which v. 2. requires; and also the
suppressedness of the matter, by the wrong exposition of this place and its
parallels, and the wronging opposition of their subject, than which none is
greater.

And therefore having made some use of the point and proofs, I will pass to
other; for if I should instance the particulars of this Worship, I should be
drowned in the multitude of their special motives to this point of the worth
and need of their knowledge.

Since then Evangelical Worship is so many and main ways worthy and necessary
to be known, why is the knowledge thereof so slighted as worthless and useless?
and that not only by the world, and its world-worshippers (for I as much
slight the slightings, and the fightings of Christ's adversaries) but by the
Lovers of the Word, and also of Gods worship in the general, and of the
particulars thereof which they hold so to be, i. e. of preaching the Word,
administering the Sacraments and Prayer: But the main and radical parts thereof,
i. e. the Church as encorporated and congregated, the diversities of its
Ministries and their Functions, their derivation from the Church, their
ministration, i. e. service in and unto that Church, their set, number and
nature, and their distinct collateral order; and more the more particular
appropriating of Divine Ruling order and acts to the proper Ruler of such a
Church, and in its Congregation: but most of all, the most particular act of
that Ruler in admission and ordination; and the knowledge whether those acts,
or the decree of the Congregation give the being to a member or Minister of a
Church.

All these, and diverse other points of great use and worth, they hold to be
Walls, Hedges, Orders, and Circumstances of Religion and Gods Worship, but not
of the substance thereof; and therefore put off the knowledge thereof, in
pretense of their love and esteem of the substance thereof.

Alas! that Professors of Religion should thus he Ushers of Antichrists Hall,
to make room for his entrance, Porters of his tryumphant chair of estate, to
bring him in, and supporters of his Hierarchy with their own shoulders, upon
such groundless pretenses; for Antichristianisme consists in the confusion of
those main points of Religion, and thereby those things which they call the
substance of Religion.

But first ad hominem, has God set them for walls of defense of his true
worship and worshippers? and will they (through ignorant negligence) relinquish
the walls to their and their Kings mortal enemy? since the winning the Walls is
the winning the City, and all therein, and the subjecting themselves to the
enemy, either to his service (direct or indirect) or destruction; yea, in God's
Matters to both, if to the first.

Secondly, has God bounded his Services with Hedges, Dikes, or other Fences
and Circumferences, to distinguish Christ's servants and services from
Antichrists? and shall we slight Antichrists encroaching on Christ's Tabernacle,
Tent, or Church, and Inheritance, or Clergy, and entitling himself with those
names of Christ's Church and Clergy, and to their answerable nature, and so to
domineer in and over both ( Domum and dominium domini, and so ut dominus domini
nostri) Mansion and Manor of our Lord; and so as Lord of our Lord, and his
Lordship, its appendant worship, homage, rent, and service!

Thirdly, suppose we the word, Sacraments and Prayer to be the materials of
Christ's and Christians Communion; shall we therefore like Swine, eat of his
meat, without observance of the order he has set for their administration by
his Ministers, according to their distinct offices and functions, and that as
parts of his family, or court of his own forming.

The Queen of Sheba shameth these Borderers on Jerusalem; for she came from the
utmost parts of the Earth to know the wisdom of Solomon, and observed the
house which he had built, and the meat of his Table, and the sitting of his
Servants, and the attendance of his Ministers, and their apparel; and his
Butlers and their apparel, and his ascent to the house of God; and she admired
them, and pronounced him and them blessed of God therein; and God blessed
thereby, 2 Chronicles. 9.1. to 8. But these eaters of the meat of the greater than
Solomon come from Heaven to them; observe, not much less admire Christ's
wisdom, Love and Will in his house formed by himself, in the offices and
set-estates thereof, and their orderly attendance and administration of them,
and the comely ornaments of them all, and the distinctness of the particular
officers and their functions and beauty; and also their relation reciprocal to
God and his house, and the mutual blessings communicated in all these: Nay,
they rather as sensual gluttons, and self-feeders, lust after and suck up his
wine and milk, without seeking after his wisdom, and perfect order therein,
loving him for his goodness therein, or obeying him in his holy and so
acceptable Will and Command in them all.

Fourthly, they learned not of David to speak so slightly of these distinct
Orders and Offices of the Church, and their necessited relation to the Ark, and
the like administrations of the Priests and Levites, as to call them
circumstances of Religion; for he says, that because they were not there in
their Orders at the bringing home of the Ark, God made that great breach in
Israel, because though Israel sought him, yet they neglected the Ministerial
Order God had prescribed for his Worship, 1 Chronicles. 15.2, to 13. with Chap. 13.
and Numb. 4.4, 15. Nor of Moses to neglect an hoof, in way of complete
readiness for Gods service; much less would he neglect the least hoof, after it
was sanctified by God for that end.

But what do they mean by circumstances distinctly?

They are vulgarly known to be three, Time, Place, and Persons; only the third
then can be the controversy: Whether it be material in the Word, Sacraments,
and Prayer public, who administreth them, whether an instituted Officer or no:
But they are so far from holding the Sacraments administrable by any out of an
instituted office, that they impose a necessity thereof in preaching and praying
in the congregation; and the formal Protestants out of the congregration also
except by reading, especially in preaching; since then they hold the ministry
of the Church and i'ts administration so necessary unto and in preaching,
Sacraments and prayer in Gods worship: why villifie they our necessiting this
Church estate to be distinctly known, purposed and practiced, as a pertinent
point of Gods worship? But now to pass from these motives ab homine unto the
greater a Deo, call to mind the constant necessity of this official Celebration
of all instituted ordinances, since God set up a set Church-ministry teaching,
exhorting, ruleing, and serving; and helping me and your self herein, read Heb.
5. to 8:8. Exodus 25. to 31.33. to Lev. 10. 1 Chronicles. 20 2 Chronicles. 2. to 7. Ezekiel.
40. to 46. All which, and many other parts of Scripture, are wholly of one of
the types of this worship summarily contrived in our present 8. verses of Romans
12. expressed so to be 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Timothy 3.15. Rev. 21. compared with Levit.
26.11. Ezekiel. 37.26, 27. Then in your reading the Histories and Prophesies of
the Old Testament, from Joshua to Malachi.

First, mark the main scope of the Holy Ghost in them, and you shall find it to
be to observe the Israelites observing and neglecting the same, and their
omission of the matter, and order thereof, and their commission of the contrary
false Worship of diverse sorts and degrees; and Gods reproofs and judgments for
the same, and his comforts and blessings of the walkers after that rule of his
truth or true worship.

Secondly, in reading the New Testament do the like in respect of his present
Rule of true Worship, both in it self, and its comparisons with that his former
instituted Rule of Worship, prescribed in his Word of Truth, and therefore
called Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Romans 1.23, 25. and comparing it with its opposites,
and you shall then find this our present subject not to be such circumstances,
ceremonies, nor the like trivial trifles, as the present worldly worshippers
account and call them.

But to be on the contrary of so high and deer esteem with God and his
servants, as they be of base and slight account, with the halters between
Christ and Antichrist, one of which must always prevail, the former in love,
to his true Lovers, in their inward and outward blessings: The latter in
contempt of his contemners, God giving them over to strong delusions to believe
lies and to wonder and wander after him. For 1260. years yet in quiet trading
and prosperity both of outward worship and jollity, while the true worshippers
were forced by him and them, into the Inner Temple and Sackcloth, Rev. 11. and
into the w^lderness, Rev. 12.6, 14. Mat. 24.15. etc. and even to death, Rev.
13.10, 15.20: 4. So that these Semi-christian doters on the 3. of the parts
only of divine worship, i. e. Preaching, Sacraments and prayer, and slighters
of the rest are worse both in worship and benefits then Antichristians who
highly esteem and devoutly practice the other parts in their intent and esteem,
and so observe the general duty of obedience to God therein, though they miss
the particular, and thereby build their Babel and Babylonish regiment and
orders instead of, and as Gods City and Church with its ministry and
ministrings, whereunto they are also furthered and occasioned by this
Semi-christian conceit and practice, not only in giving way and leave thereto,
but even in devoutly accepting their administrations of the word, Sacraments
and prayer, yea and in magnifying, maintaining and pleading for them that are
sent according to that Babylonish regiment, and profess their ministry to be
from, by, and of that Antichristian Hierarchy it self, which even themselves
hold and say is Antichrist, and that against many heavy penaltied laws of the
Land, and general practices and confessions of all their fellow opposites to
that Antichrist throughout all Christendom, and also against the ground of
Scripture and reason approved by them themselves, who most profess hatred
against (...), or the self-convicted; yet are they herein contradictory to
themselves, false to their own grounds, and condemned in avowing by their
practice, what they so disavow in their eminent profession.

But since their profession against Antichrist, concurreth with the prescript
worship of the Scripture cited, and this part thereof now in handling, and its
and their many parallels, let us lift up our eyes to behold that clear light of
those and the like Scriptures, which so gloriously magnify divine worship, and
provoke us to the knowledge thereof, even of those parts thereof which their
only opposites do in their protesting against Antichrist, so dignifie by the
rule of contraries, in their placing the essence of that Antichrist in his
counterfeiting and usurping the parts of worship, besides Preaching,
Sacraments, and Prayer: withal supposing, that their practice, in the
positive, would also follow theirs, were it not for the worldly sinister
respects of the flatterings and fooleries of the world-worship, or Prelacy;
especially of those three parts thereof, which they both in profession and
practice so highly and positively magnify; which indeed will enforce the
introduction of the rest by their own necessiting them to the Ministry, and
that to the Church.

Thirdly, the particular Churches of Ephesus and Corinth, are expressly said, 1 Timothy 3.15. 2 Cor. 6.16. to be the houses of God, and that without peculiarity,
and therefore indefinitly, and as such; and therefore of every particular
Church: for quod, est quatenus ipsum est de omni: That Church also indefinitly
taken, and so every particular Church is there said to be the pinnacle and
subject of truth, i. e. the first evidencer and evident part of divine true
worship, and the radical ground, subjective chair, and proper basis thereof:
and the then true Church of Rome is said to be the body of that word-worship in
Christ, Romans 12.5. as above is particularized; for by comparing that v. 5. with
v. 1. it is cleared to be a particular part of that word-worship; and with v.
7, 8. to be the body and subject thereof, which is so evident in that place,
that I will not farther prove it; but even by It prove, what is inferred from 1 Timothy 3.15. against the two oppositions thereof: The former is by expounding the
word Truth only of the Doctrines of Faith and Holiness; but are not the
Doctrines of Gods Word of truth, Joh. 17.17. concerning his true worship
instituted only thereby, and our answerable holy serving him therein, so well
as those concerning Faith and Holiness personal? Why are they not so proper,
yea so special truths of that word of truth?

Nay, they are more proper to the Church, since Faith and its personal fruits
are proper and immediate to the person of each Christian, and the other parts
of worship proper and immediate to the Church; yea these have no other subject,
pinnacle, pillar, chair, nor ground; neither can they subsist nor exist in act,
but as, of, and in the Church; but Faith, and therefore all its fruits are in
their perfection of parts in each true adult son, called and regenerate, before
he is admitted into a Church; for he is thereinto received, as being such, and
not as to be made such; and again upon manifestation that he is not such, he is
rejected and cast thereout, as not fit to be of the Church; and therefore is he
not to expect nor receive his Faith in, from, or by the Church; how then is it
the Fountain or Root of the Scripture-Gospel, or Doctrine of Salvation by Faith
working by love, as so working, as the Papists hold as their life on the one
side? Or as the Controverters against the same say, How is it the Post or
Pasquil pillar of Rome, whereon all public notifications use to be affixed, in
respect of its showing Faith unto the passers by? A very poor interpretation of
that place, and an embasing of the Church; which to dignifie in a special
manner, is the scope of that sentence; wherein the Popish Exposition is the far
better; only, whereas this high dignifying the Church (to provoke Timothy, and
other Officers thereof, to a reverent, diligent, and cheerful discharge of
their Ministry therein) is by the word as its Dignifier, and so it is evident
that the dignity of the causall priority, and the fundamental and fontal
originalness of the word it self, as the proper truth of God, Joh. 17.17. is
excepted, as God is excepted in this express universal assertion, 1 Cor. 15.27.
For he has put all things under his (Christ's) feet, which is in the next words
expressed: But when he says all things are put under his feet, it is evident
that he is excepted, which did put all things under him: so that that, is as
evidently false as the other, though not so unsavory and ridiculous, in making
the Church it self but a Bill-post of truth, which has but this goodness to
oppose the falsehood of the former; nor excuse, but that they know not the
proper meaning of truth in that place, nor the distinct acception thereof for
true worship in the Scripture, both in its positive and privative use thereof,
yea and both for divine worship in the general, and also more particularly for
these special particulars thereof in hand: as Romans 1.25. Who turned the truth
of God into a lie (or the true worship of God into false) and worshipped and
served the Creature rather then the Creator, i. e. in their worshipping and
serving him in, by, and under created resemblances, which God accounts for a
serving the creature (according to all Gods natural courses and appearances,
and no institution of his supposing any other) rather than their Creator,
whose Will they were to know in that their divine Worship; for of the
Idolatries in the Scripture, both of the Jews and Gentiles, there is no one
wherein by the intent of the Worshipper, there was any other original person of
the Deity adored than the same which we adore as Creator of the world. Of which
briefly as follows.

Of False, Counterfeit, or World-Worship.
FAlse, Counterfeit, or World-worship, is instituted by Man, having two Roots,
and moving Reasons, but both rotten and unreasonable: the first is, because man
has instituted in him a duty to please God in a visible instituted Worship,
which he supposes he has discharged when he has separated to him from common
use the best and most acceptable thing in his judgment, which he therefore
presumes, that God so judges and accepts also; which is expressed Esa.
41.1. to 7. and illustrated unto Chap. 44.20. as the Sum and Index of this
point, whose vindex possesses the third part of the Scripture, and all the
world but a few.

The other reason is, because the same ordinances in kind are sanctified and
blessed by GOD, especially by Christ under the Gospel, or at, or since his
coming in the flesh.

This is the Soul, Spirit, and Life of Antichristianisme, typical before
Christ, and antitypical since: as the other reason is of Heathenisme; which
consisting of instinctive devotion of Will, and this of distinctive notion of
Wit, so necessite a concord between the blind and the lame, that the God of
this World, and its World-worship, has ever compounded, or rather confounded
his World-worship of these two; though the former more predominateth in
Heathenisme; and the latter in Antichristianisme: yet do both by the former
palliate the ignorant multitude; and by the latter, the wise, learned, witty,
and practick sort: and by an associative mixture of both, bewitch and besot the
whole world, except the few whose names are written in the Book of Life, Rev.
13:3, 8.15:2. 18:4. 20:4. or through their gilded hypocrisy seem so to them
that are, as Judas did to the other Apostles, and Achitophel (his type) to
David, Simon Magus to Peter, Demas to Paul, etc. who yet like a Mer-man,
Sea-lew, Seahorse, Dog-fish, etc. will make a shift to live in the Land of
Canaan, and by twy-light to seem a course man, Lion, Horse, Dog, etc. to the
sand-blind, or semi-blind, while their tails or hind-parts are in the water,
who yet long for the Sea-banks of the Philistims, and by day may and will be
discovered to be but Dagons of Palestina, and Fishes of the Antichristian Sea,
either Mere main, and Roman, or mixed mean or Britromane, and that they were
but massingilt, not massie-gold, which Christ's Temple and Templaries ought, to
be toward, and through him, 1 King. 6.21, 22.

The particulars of this false-instituted Divine, (or rather undivine or
diviline) worshipping God, are, and have been innumerable, especially in
respect of the first root and reason, even near so many as there have been
several Nations, Kingdoms, Stocks, and Independent Families; yea, when
Nationed-Families could but slack the bridle of Superiority, Judge. 17. with v.
6. and 18. with v. 30, 31. Wherefore I aim not to enumerate them all, but only
all the special ones mentioned in the Scripture, and that in their Historical
order; and then to show that they all were intended, instituted, and
constituted, unto God the Creator, Preserver, and Governor of the world, and
of those World-worshippers: and that therefore the difference between
unchristian and Antichristian worship is not in the falsehood and difference of
the object or divine person worshipped, but only in the instituted order and
means of worshipping that most, highest, last, and properly sole divine
worshipful person, patterned to their power by his own; set by Adam, Moses,
Christ, etc.

The first False-Worship mentioned in the Word, is only in the general, that
there was one erected, and so instituted and constituted in the days of En^sh,
Genesis 4.26. which bred the distinguishing names of the sons of God, and the sons
of Man (the Worshippers being to be denominated according to their instituted
worship, which before was but one;) and also the peculiar names of a Preacher
of righteousness, and of its contrary, the matter preached being of the nature,
and so ought to be of the name of the stative worship, which yields him his
Office: wherefore, and from which time Noah is called the eight Preacher of
Righteousness, wherefore Enosh was the first in this respect; but simply, or
otherwise the third: but this being controverted, and not particularized, it is
not for this place. Nor the like of Babel, its Workmen, and their confusion of
tongues; nor the Egyptian worship, though imported in Aarons and Jeroboams
Steers: But only of those expressed in the Word.

The first is that of Aarons and Isreal's Steer, and its appurtenances.

1. The Nation of Israel congregate as fool-sacrificers, Eccles. 5.1. and
hasters to worship before God called, being parted from the old Egyptian and
new Mosaical worship; and having instituted and constituted anew their old
Egyptian worship, Josh. 24.14, 15. as the best they knew, but that of Moses,
whom they supposed to have been gone from them, and so that that his worship
was abolished, and therefore that a new one was to be erected to God, and
therefore by Aaron, Ex. 32.

2. Aaron as the Erecter and Orderer of that Worship, with its Priests and
Levites, and their works, and of the whole Congregation, and of each member
thereof, and as the Exerciser of the Highpriests Office himself, and the rest
doing theirs.

3. The golden Steer as the best sign of God, as communicater with them, in
giving it to work for, and maintain them by its life and death; and therefore
in accepting it as his own due heriot or worship, i. e. homage of his Lordship
practiced in Egypt, and confirmed by Gods erecting his set divine signs,
altars, sacrifices, eating them, etc. all which Israel and Aaron made parts of
that calvish Egyptian worship, by their subordinating them unto it, and so made
themselves forsakers of God, and of his true worship, and turners of it unto,
and into Idolatry, Exodus 32.4, 6, 8. Amos 5.25, 26. Act. 7.39. to 43. killing,
burning, eating, drinking, singing, dancing on that Holy Day, and doing or
countenancing any act or thing intended and set by them to be parts of that
Moloch-worship; even but enforced looking on Taurus, or Chiun that day, was 4.
Idolatrous communion with that false Worship, Altar, Priestood, Unholiday,
false Gods, or signs of God, and with their instituters and constituters, and
so with the Devil, the supreme Author of them all, and so became forsakers of
Jah, Jehovah, God.

The second was that of Baal, or the Sun, as the eminentest mean between God
and Man, from the second age after Joshuah unto the captivity, all the time of
the Judges more scatteredly, and after Solomon more encorporately, in both, now
with more authority and pomp, and then with less, 1 King. 16.32.

The third in the Scripture mentioned, was that of Micah, Jud. 17. which was
the same with the Baal-worship of the Land, but according to his potency,
erected in a chapel of his own, with all its appurtenances.

The fourth and next after Micha's, was Jeroboams Idolatry, subordinating all
Gods Mosaicall administrations, unto his Temples, Ministries, and Sacraments of
his institu^ing, and thereby making them parts of his Bul-worship, or
Baal-worship, though in Judah they were still Gods, 1 King. 12.26. to 33.

The fifth sort was that of the Queen of Heaven (or the Moon, or Juno) primarily
of the women of Judah, Jer. 44. though the husbands seconded them, v. 19. and
offered for them, Chap. 7.18.

The sixth was the worship of Dagon, a Mir-man, or King-fish, by the Ashdodites,
who lived by the Sea, 1 Samuel 5.

The seventh was that of Nebuchadnezzars great golden Image, Dan. 3.

The eighth was the worship of Jupiter, Act. 14.11. to 18. Chap. 17.23. to 32.

The ninth was that of Apollo, Act. 19.26. to 40. and of his Prophetess, or
Pythoniss, (...), v. 16.

The tenth was that of Diana of the Ephesians, Act. 19.

The eleventh is that of Antichrist, 1 Ioh. 2.18. that Beast, Rev. 13.1. to 10.
that desolating abomination, Dan. 11.31. and 12.11. and Matthew. 24.15. that man
of sin, etc. 2 These. 2.3, 4. Dan. 11.36. prophetically and histor^cally, or
historico-prophetically described pregnantly in the Word, as the compact
complement of all Idolatry in its Roman perfection, and Whore-mother of all
its derivative abominations, Prelatical and Presbyterial.

The Hierarchick Antichrist, or Antichristian embodied Hierarchy, or the
counterfeit Gospel Church, spiritual Body-politike, or Corporation of Priests,
Pastors, Prelates, Diocesans, Metropolitans, Primats under one universal Head,
Primate, or Pope, pretending and calling themselves Christian Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, and usurping their Gospel-offices, but in the execution extending
and racking them to an Antichristian Tyranny, Hierarchy, Church-Supremacy,
Word-absoluteness, divine infiniteness, or godness, 2 These. 2.4. with the World
worshipping it, wondering at it, and wandering after it, Rev. 13.4, 5. and its
Forts, Temples, Basilikes, or Mauzzim, Dan. 11.38. for its congregating and
maintenance, v. 39. This is the confluence of all the subjects of Idolatry, and
false Divine Worship. The stative parts, and actors, or active States
Ministries, or Offices, that Hierarchick, etc. these are the complete patterns
of all Idolatrous States, Offices, and instituted Orders, rective, teaching,
atoning, possessive, and fructive: the particulars of each of these are
innumerable, and too large for this place; the supreme State or Head is the
popeship or office of the Pope, or universal Primate: The next sort is the
National Primates: The third, the Provincial: The fourth, the Diocesan: The
fifth the Parochial: Each of these have many Nethinims and Levites. Their
Actions, Functions, or Ministrations, far more innumerable and irregular, but
more inobservable: yet the soul of their abomination is in their
God-Churchship, or God-Rome whoredom, which causes the world to partake with
the froth of her Fornication, by her pretended infallibility of Doctrine, and
absolute authority, obtruded by her emulous deposing, and envious opposing all
venerable Deities, and Dignities; so making the Gospel-preaching, Sacraments,
Prayer, etc. Antichristian: all partaking in any of those instituted actions,
etc. is spiritual communion with those stative parts, etc. and so with that
Hierarchick Antichrist, etc. and so with Devils, Rev. 20.10. of, and for whom
they were so instituted, constituted, and used.

I forget not that other false worship of the Jews after the expiration of the
seventy seveni'ts, three years and an half after Christ's Resurrection, but it
paralleleth not with these eleven, either in their humane and diabolical
institution, constitution, or communion, but only in the unholy, and unhappy
use; for there is no relative partaking, or spiritual communion, without a
relative state, spiritual union of a corporation, or authoritive erection of a
Spiritual Ministry and Office, or of a Sacramental Rite, real or actional. For
though the Mosaical Church State, Ministry, and Ministrations, continued the
same in the Jews practice; yet the Apostles, and many thousand believing Jews
were both active and receptive in all the three real, and the two relative, or
connexive parts of that Mosaical worship, either cultively, as the many
thousands, or indultively, as the Apostles and their peculiar ones, Act. 21.20.
to 26. 1 Cor. 9.19, to 23. yet without Idolatry and instituted false worship in
the Apostles and intrue understanding, because it was not of any humane
institution and constitution: only it was without the spirits direction,
assistance, or blessing in the devout thousands, yea and in the Apostles, as
worshippers of God thereby; but only as understanding Indulgers of the weak
knowledge of the sincere Believers, and as commended Judaizers with them, Act.
21.23. 1 Cor. 9.20. The reason is, because that complete worship was instituted
by God, his Angels, Act. 7.53. and his Mediator Moses, v. 37. and constituted
by the concurrence of all those, with the acceptance and free will of the
Israelites in the Wilderness, and confirmed by all the powers of Gods spirit,
as from him and in his people, then and ever after in all legal manner and
measure, yea and unto all Gospel-conversion, sanctification, and blessings,
except in the reserved degree peculiar to the Gospel, Heb. 1. to 3.6. and it
was invested in the consciences of the Saints by the word-light, and true zeal
and devotion of the spirit unto heavenly content: but none of the other eleven
ever were thus n any particular: and though it were mortal, and to cease by its
deaths wound and sentence at Christ's death, unto death and execution three
years and an half after it: yet it was not deadly and pestiferous to any of the
then converted Jews; but after, and ever since their death, it was and ever
shall be, and no more indulgeable then the other 11.

Of these, with other false Worships, the Author has written more la^gly;
whereof at present I shall only add one instance more at large, viz. that of
Aarons and Isreal's Steer, and its appurtenances; and his seconding thereof with
2 Cor. 11.13. to 16.

Aarons young Bull, or Calf of a year old, or yearling Bull, or Bull-rite,
Sacrament, or Idol.
AAron as supreme Instituter and Constituter of that Idolatry, Exodus 32. by the
general provocation, conviction, and encouragement of the people of Israel,
ver. 1, to 5. especially of his own high Priesthood thereof, and of the
sacrificing Priesthood and their Levitship with all their Functions, even the
same in kind, state, and order that they were before, but only in the new
intervening Sign, Image, Representation, Sacrament, and Memorial of the same
ultimate Object, Deity, or Person of God, whose they were before that, and whom
they then and thereby intended to worship, and that as the sole bringer of
Israel from Egypt, v. 1, 5. whereby they all became in their own account the
true instituted cultive Ministry of God in that new Function, or cultive
Ordinance so erected, and did accordingly exercise that Ministry, as of,
through, and for God, v. 4, 5. whereto all the people conformed by their acting
their parts, which were prescribed to them, v. 6. and thereby became the joint
active Worshippers of God in that false order and form; and so joint false
Worshippers with them, by their instituted respect and relation to that
instituted Bull-Sacrament, molten and graven Image of a yearling Bull or
Bull-calf, Steer, or young Ox, or Bullock, as such in age and food of eating
grass, Psalm. 106.20. but not in maimedness or gelding; instituted to be an
Image, resemblance, representation, memorial, sign, and seal of God and his
visible and discernable presence with them as his Inheritance, (or Clergy)
People (or Church) Saints, faithful and regenerate ones (or spiritualty,) v. 4.
Thy Gods, O Israel, the promised Seed and peculiar people of the God of Israel
that brought thee out of Egypt; for it is not thy God (...), but (...) thy
Gods, which signifies Gods Deputies, divine cultives, adorands, venerables, or
things to be worshipped and reverenced in Gods stead, representation and
deputation, as if he were there, therein, or the soul thereof in his own
person; which being a spirit, and they flesh, they thought that they could not
worship him, but by some external notion or image (in their own judgment) of
him. See Judge. 17.3, to 13. Now I know that the Lord, etc. as the Papists do by
their Crucifixes and Images of Christ, Mary, God the Father, the Holy Ghost,
Peter, etc. as Laymens books and Teachers, but none of them as God
objectively, the Altar, Holy Day, v. 5. the Sacrifices, burnt-offerings,
Peace Offerings, feasting with part of them, dancing, singing, and observance
of that Holyday, yea and the teaching, exhorting, and ruling ordinances of
those officers, subordinate or associate to them, became parts of that
Idol-Worship, or Bull-worship, and so of Devil-worship; and so none of Gods,
but in Gods account, a despising and rejecting of him. Therefore Aarons and the
other Priests, and the Levites accepting, killing, and sacrificing those burnt
and peace offerings for themselves, the whole Church, and for any particular;
and their eating, drinking, singing, dancing, and solemnizing that holy day in
any of those cases; and the peoples doing so with them in their allotted works
and observances of Worship so instituted, constituted, and executed; Also, the
teaching, exhorting, and ruling of those Priests and Levites, and the
Israelites hearing, learning, purposing, obeying, and coming to their set
places for those ends, and joining with them in their prayers, before and after
that their teaching and exhorting, and in their sacrificing: Yea, all the
Sacraments, Sacrifices, Services, and observances performed by Aaron and those
Priests, Levites, and People, as Worshippers of God by the said new Sacrament,
or teaching and representing Image, and in that other form of Divine Worship
instituted instead of that of Moses, v. 1. which is there expressed to be
frustrate; and that therefore a new one was to be erected, which extended to
all the particulars thereof, especially to the special one of the Priesthood;
which being thereby altered, became a new Bull-Priesthood, and therefore all
their Priestly services were changed, Heb. 7.12. Luke 10.16. Matthew. 10.40. John
13.20. and so made a new unparticipable estate which therefore made all their
Priestly works unparticipable, though their Sacraments, sacrificing, preaching,
praying, and the things sacrificed, preached, and prayed for, were otherwise
parts of the very true Divine Worship of God; yet thereby they were Idolatrous,
and the same with that Priesthood, and that with the Bull-worship whereof they
were newly made Priests; for hearing Luke 10.16. is receiving Joh. 13.20. and
honoring Luke 10.16. by the rule of opposites; and so the refusing to hear
those Sermons, receive those Sacraments and their Discipline, etc. was to
refuse and despise an Idol and false Ministry, and so to honor God.

With these things sort 2 Cor. 11.13. to 16. which calls the like Instruments
of Satan in this stratagemical counterfeiting a Ministry of Christ, and
deceitful working thereby; False Apostles, Ministers of Satan, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and Ministers of Righteousness; as
their Lord and Master, Satan himself metamorphoseth himself into an A^gel of
light. What can we conceive the scope of the Holy Ghost in these sayings, but
to incense the Saints of Corinth against these false Apostles, not simply, as
men of wickedness, but for covering their Wolvish disposition and intent, with
the sheepskin of a Christian profession, and pretense of a Ministry of
righteousness? nor against Satan simply, as an Angel of darkness; but properly
as sending his disguised Seminaries to pretend a Ministry of Christ, and to
practice and intend the mastery of Christ's Army and Church, and so of Christ in
his encorporate body, which he could not do in his person, Matthew. 4.10. Nor in
his Apostles, as I have shown in Paul, Act. 16.16. 2 Cor. 11. they seeing Satan
through all his Visards: But his Wizards and Soothsayers now are as wise as
the Pythonisse, to say and sooth the wise and true servants of Christ in their
love of the doctrine and rites of salvation, and true way unto life, as of the
bread of life simply considered, (without the order of the Word of God, which
God has set to dispose it to that end, and us to seek and serve him by in his
due order) that is, without the Church and Ministerial order of the Word, and
so they take them also in the first trial, Matthew. 4.3, 4. to the dishonor of
their Head and themselves: and in Saul's trial, by their preferring Sacrifice
before obedience, and fat of Rams, (their zeal in their worshipping) before
their listening to the utmost order of Gods Worship.

Observe what our Author says in general (for I am straightened for want of room)
of those (with other) false Worships, which are before only nominated; says
he,
THe moral Devotion of all Nations was much provoked by Gods glorious Works
for the Posterity of Abraham, Esa. 41.1. to Chap. 44. which turned to the
increase of their Idolatrous superstitiousness, as the supposed descending of
Jupiter and Mercurius, in the persons of Paul and Barnabas did, Act. 14.12, 13.
to the endeavor of the like Sacrifice to that of Baals, 1 Kin. 18.26. Be not
peremptory against my applying almost all the names of the Idols in the
Scripture unto this 2d. sort of Idolatry of Sun-worship or Bull-worship, which
was but as that of Diana unto Jupiter, and their Institution unto one and the
same God, even in Object the same with ours; at least, not till you have
scanned these proofs, viz. Judge. 2.3.6.8. and 10. Chapters, 1 Samuel 7.3. 1 King.
18.18. yea Lev. 18.21. Numb. 22.41. and 25.3, 5. 2 King. 17.25, 26. Jer. 32.35.
Act. 7.39. to 43. and have read over Macrobius Saturnals, Augustinus Egubinus
de cultu divino, Mornaeus Duplesses de veritate Christianae Religionis, so far
as concerns those two great Controversies about Divine Worship; and till you
have well considered the very Scriptures whereon you wrongly ground the
contrary to either; since they yield express and evident proofs for both.

THat which is evidently and eminently pressed all manner of ways above any
other Commandment, except the first, is, our yielding to God his zealous and
jealous Worship instituted in the Word: Not that the Order of Worship is to be
preferred before its matter simply; but only in respect of the times of
Antichrist then imminent, even in the Apostles days, and to prevail for nigh
1600. years after; partly in his encroachment, and in his establishment. And
indeed what enemy of God and godlyness did ever so much, long, and highly usurp
over, and oppose against all that is called God?

All aggravatings therefore of the holy zeal for Gods true worship, and
jealousy against the false worship, powerful and plentiful in the Scripture,
do pertain to this bounded sound-mindedness in Gods worship, so well as to the
other parts thereof, since it is so much charged as any of the other, it being
expressly and truly instituted in the word, (and is the consti^uting,
distinguishing, and actuating form of true Divine Worship) as any of them: And
therefore also the thousands of extatical exaggeratings, execratings, and
abominatings (the World yields no fit words herein against it self) of false
Worship and Worshippers, ought to have their full force against confusion and
disorder in the body, members, and functions of Divine worship, as against
other sins of omission, or commission therein, especially since the especial
propriety of Antichristianisme consists therein, as the proper and frequent
title thereof Babylon confusion, Rev. 17.11, 14, 18. understanding observation
and experience of its courses, and the nature of its type, the confusion of the
tongues of the world, and the orders of Gods worship in Babylon, do severally
and more jointly evince. But if these degrees, wherein the Scripture prefers
it before the membral matter of worship, in its manner of handling them both,
be added thereto; how can we be less zealous and jealous herein, than therein?
yea, those degrees are not dark, strained, nor small; neither are they all that
might be gathered, as the very extent of v. 3, 4, 5, 6. (above v. 1, 2.)
shows; but the introduction of the membral matter it self, of the Church, its
offices and their works, in way of apportioning and limiting each work and
office of the Church, yea of the Church it self, by its proportionableness to
those works and offices, does inestimably dignifie the observation of this
distinctness and bound-mindedness in Gods Worship, and force us to sympathize
with the Holy Ghost in our intentness thereon and therein; or if these things
will not, no means will, until the time of reformation and restitution comes:
mean while, the discerners hereof must exercise their Faith, in receiving these
privileges of Faith, their obedience in working these works of Gods worship;
their understanding, in discerning what God has thus distinctly determinated;
their temperateness, in actuating their graces, without excess or defect, in
these special trials of boundedness, and sound-mindedness; their patience in
waiting for the fruit of their sincere endeavors herein patiently, and
possessing their souls in patience: both which, these of all other will most
exercise; their godlyness, in true zeal for, and godly jealousy against, what
GOD herein proposes as their special objects; their brotherly-love, in
exercising all these six graces in this matter, for the good and benefit of
their Brethren therein, remembering that the godlyest zeal of Gods honor, which
ought to eat up us, and all that is ours, is not to eat up what is our
brothers, i. e. our dealing with them herein, as they are able to hear and
bear. And lastly, their natural love to all as naturally good, in walking
holily therein, to win unto Christ those that are without Christ, and not
giving just offense to those that are without, knowing that we once were such,
and that these Ordinances are services of God and his servants; and not knowing
who, though now without, belong unto the election of God, nor how we fall into
their danger by sin or otherwise. For if these things be in us, and abound in
this special matter, we have a special testimony of our Election, and promise
of our perseverance in the works and fruits of godlyness, and unto eternal
happyness, 2 Pet. 1.5. to 8. where also the contrary is annexed to the defect
thereof.

Now therefore of some of those glimpses, (in the close) as of the distinctness
of the four Offices to be exercised in the Church-Congregation, with their
distinct functions and fruits; and also of their roots, yet as of one
subjective ortive root, unto one objective Lordive fruit, by one ejected
project of, by, and for the one Deity, yet according to its Trinity.
GOD.
FOr, first, God as the Father willing himself to be our Father, sent Christ as
God-man, to make us his sons and servants, by the Spirits proceeding from both
their will and order to operate that complete entity, unity, community, coity,
or eternal fruit of all.

CHRIST.
Whereby, secondly, Christ as Mediator became our Prophet to teach us; our
Priest, as personally to cause, so setly to preserve, exhort; and as our
powerful King to effect, command, and commend our preservation of nature,
according to the Law, by the Gospel, unto Heaven.

CHVRCH-OFFICES.
Whereby, thirdly, he had right power to institute the Teachers office, the
Exhorters, Comforters, or Priestly office; the Rulers, Orderers, Shepherds,
Rectors, or Kingly one, and the Preservers, Distributers, Providers office,
authorized state and right.

FVNCTIONS.
Whereby, fourthly, they had right officially, ministerially to teach, to
exhort, provoke, affect our sons nature to Gods service, to rule, order,
shepherd our many stations of both, and to provide for our naturewhile we
submit to all three.

ABILITIES.
To all which, fifthly, the Spirit enableth them by light, sight, and might, to
teach, by the Spirit of grace and wisdom to exhort and provoke, and the gift
of discerning of spirits, and of ruling to rule, and the gift of instinctive
brotherly simplicity, indulgently to provide for us.

GRACES.
Sixthly, To our son-like, receiving of, and gracious serving in holy
knowledge, sincere, tender, devout, gracious heart and affections, Christian
approvable words, deeds and life, constant fosterers, provision unto our
preservation and personal content.

GLORIES.
Seventhly, all these are in their subjective, native, ortive, heavenly nature,
projective, stative, ordive, heavenly typical order, ejective, exertive,
dative, cordive power, objective, dotive, lordive end, glory, scope, upshot,
in, of, by, and for glorified heavenly illuminations, gracious motions,
infusions, sonlike sincerity, perfect, pure, unreprovable conversation with God
and Saints; complete, internal, supernal, external, eternal means and end of
intent and content, comfort, glory, divineness of wit, will, work, and weal.

FINIS.
THE EXPOSITION OF The 18. Chapter of Matthew, WHEREIN Proceedings, in cases of
Offenses, both positive and opposite, are clearly demonstrated.

Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual,
restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou
also be tempted. See 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. 2 These. 14, 15. LONDON, Printed for
Henry Eversden, at the Sign of the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

The Scripture text, or Divine Word, or Conscience-warrant, of Church Power,
Jurisdiction, or Discipline; true, and in Gods account, both in the warrant,
and warranted; in respect of Christ and his Worshippers: and false or humane,
of Antichrist, of two sorts, stative and personal, or on both sides of Christ's;
all persecuted by the World, as Christ and the two Thieves on either side of
him, by Pilate; with their Metaphrase and Exposition in brief.
1. Of that of Christ, and his instituted, peculiar, worshipping, Ministerial
or separate Church of Separates, (2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18.) in the literal warrant,
and its opening to Christians, Matthew. 18.15. to 20.
VER. 15.
1. BUT, that is, rather then he (one of these little ones, v. 14. which
refers us to v. 10. and that to v. 2.) should perish by his dejected
softness or childishness.

2. If, As a grievous, unexpected, casual, and rare matter.

3. A Brother, An enchurched Christian, or Churchmember.

4. Of thine, i. e. of the same Church with thee, in union first and properly:
secondly, and in cases and by proportion, in communion and general state and
order.

5. Sins, i. e. breaks Gods Law or Religion, whereto he has bound him and
thee.

6. Unto ((...)) the experimental and certain knowledge, conscience, and extent
of patience (lest he should perish by, and in that sin, as above in the word
BUT) of,

7. Thee, as his brother, i. e. against that Church-brotherhood, i. e. to his
forfeiture or less thereof, and of his communion with thee therein, in the
Scripture phrase, 1 King. 2.23. against thine own life, i. e. to the forfeiture
and loss thereof, Lev. 17.10. in both, being the same with (...), or in as
transitive: and so is it 2 Samuel 18.13. and so is also Lev. 19.16. and the
connexive must answer to the scope of the place, and to the transition from the
subject or efficient, unto its object or effect, both in their order and power;
all which are thus well sitted: then and in this case, and not otherwise,

8. Argue, i. e. confute by argument of that sin in the general, and convince
of the particular of the fact, and then redargue, reprove and dehort from it,
and then threaten Gods judgments against the obstinate and irrepentant: i. e.
argument and evidence by Scripture proofs in all: for it is (...) (the same
with Heb. 11.1.) argumentively convince and reprove, but not report, which is
to reproach or slander, or murder, Levit. 18.16. with Matthew. 5.21, 22. (these
four degrees must be from the first to the last of the trial.)

9. Him, personally, by conference or writing immediate; for it is not, report
to, nor tell others, which is to reproach; but argument him.

10. Between, i. e. Dialogue-wise, or by way of conference, mutual and equal;
but not chidingly nor beggingly.

11. Thee, in thy person, not by Deputies.

12. And him, in his person, not behind his back.

13. Alone, none other being present, both for thy better and quieter
proceeding in these observances without interruption: and for thy manifestation
of all tender love in that privacie, and brotherly wisdom in preventing his
being provoked to be more stout in arguing, and slow in confession; a farther
acting and exacting of all these points and phrases, and excluding all color
and excuse of whispering it, much more of blazing it to any, much less to many.
All these instituted parts of Christ's discipline, being actually done in a
decent humane manner, and with all brotherly compassion and tenderness toward
him, prayer for him, and patience of his weakness and delay, then expect the
issue good or bad.

14. If on the better part, through Gods gracious working by his Spirit with
his Gospel-Institutions, son-likely exercised by thee.

15. He or she, for the masculine gender is indefinitly here put for both; as
natural, in natural things; and spiritual, in spiritual things.

16. Hears, with his ears thy words in that personal communication, (without
which all the other particulars are irregular) and also with brotherly
attention of mind; especially with sincerity of heart, acknowledging the fact
and its sinfulness, with true repentance, and promise of amendment: for all the
requisite passages intervening between the preceding and succeeding things or
actions, are to be understood in the intervening word; and the like is in
connexives, as above in the word Unto; especially if he hear thy words, and
give a satisfactory answer, by proving that matter not to be sinful, or that he
did not sin that objected sin, must by the same reason, in the whole clause
thereof, be here supposed.

17. Thee, thou, mark how in all the passages thereof, immediate personal
dealing on both sides is exacted by Christ, and all intervening medlers on
either side are excluded.

18. Have gained, i. e. gotten good, and purchased a spiritual and heavenly
purchase, even an eternal and precious Inheritance, next in nature to that of
Christ's getting Sons that are Princes in all Lands, Psalm. 45.16. and his
redeeming straying souls, and converting of sinners, Jam. 5.19, 20. So careful
ought we to be in this case of all meek instructing the differers from us, with
gentleness, teachingness, and patience; and without provoking and hardening,
war-waging, and striving, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26.

19. A Brother, even a Weakling, or Publicane-Christian, that is the greatest
in the Kingdom of God; and yet so prone to wander, near to losing, and
perishing, that Christ has instructed the stronger by this instituted order
and brotherly Spirit, to prevent it, or regain him from that his perishing
case, v. 14. v. 2. and 10. the contrary Pharisaical forth-bearing Spirit, and
carnal Hogherds,, and boisterous Bearwards, are hereby discovered to be little
in Gods account.

20. Of thine; and therefore this gain is also our own; and so it is both
Wisdom and Religion conjoined, and of an high and heavenly nature, thus to
encorporate this Gospel-discipline, and to ensoul and enlive it with this
brotherly spirit and practice.

VER. 16.
21. But, though all these indulgences of order, spirit, and practice, be first
in nature, dignity, and time to be exercised, and discreet, distinct, and
tender compassion be frequently, and Jude 21, 22. fervently charged upon us in
this case: yet when these weak ones turn wicked ones, in cavelling;
gainsaying, and stiff-necked obstinacy: then Jude 23. is in season; and this
love and Spirit of meekness, a Rod must follow: For,

22, 23, 24. If (the worst come, that all these and you be slighted, so that)
he (a brother in state and profession, yet seeming unbrotherly in heart, right
and practice) hear not (both in humane and divine respects abovesaid, Sec. 16.)

25. Thee, Having thus holyly, lovingly, wisely, and meekly conjoined the
Gospel-Institutions, Instructions, and Spirit, for his secret and discreditless
recovery, seeking with Joseph, Matthew. 1.19. to free him from public censure.

26. Take unto, or join with thee; yet or more, as uniting to thee, and adding
to thy power and testimony, not as weakening his credit by mere relating his
sin, thy former course with him, and his obstinacy against it, and in his sin.

27. One or two, as few as may be, but one, if that may suffice, however but
two at the most; an evident barring the Spirit of envy from its licentious
reproaching of his brother; and an eminent charging us to discharge this duty,
with so small help as may be, rather than the sins of the Saints should be
spread farther than their necessited cure exacted; and an imminent judgment of
the contrary disposed, that is that of Cham and Canaan, Doeg, Shimei,
Diotrephes, etc.

2. Of the Doctrine warranted thereby, here only in the Index or sum of the
Chapter, especially of these six verses, both in their soul and body; their
Soul Gospel Spirit, or scope of the Holy Ghost, is compiled into this word,
Meek-love-mercy: their body is answerable thereto, both in the whole Chapter,
especially in these six verses; the 1. or 15. verse is of private Physicking;
the 3. or 17. is of public; and v. 16. is mixed of both, prosecuting the
former, and preparing the latter, which is ratified in the rest.
Each of these three heads have eight parts of a mere instituted Church-nature,
besides their three adjuncts, or accessories, answering to the three coverings
of the Tabernacle, which type the three orders about, but without the
Church State and Discipline, Membral, Ecclesial and Civil, all of Humane
Institution, yet relatively and objectively Ecclesiastical, though not really,
subjectively, materially, formally, nor efficiently: the membral is warranted
by 1 Cor. 6.1. to 4. and by the usefulness of association of the Rulers,
Deacons, and Prophets, for the more equal and orderly discharge of their
places, by the mutual agreement of the whole or greater number of them, in
their setting each of their turns and distinct courses.

The Ecclesial is warranted 2 Cor. 8.19, 22, 23. and by the usefulness of one
Churches advice, countenance, and help of another. And the Civil, by Esa.
49.23. and the Churches need of civil protection, permission, and help: Of
which 6. verses and heads, now somewhat more largly and particularly.

Of Matthew. 18.15, to 20. in the Epitome.
THese 6. verses are the instituted Center of the Chapter, which is v. 1.
expressed to be a main and distinct head of our Gospel-Religion, i. e. what is
the highest degree thereof, which who so has, is the greatest in the Kingdom
of Heaven; the sum whereof, contracted into one word, is, Meek-love-mercy: the
first part is commended to us, and commanded, v. 2. to 4. The second, v. 5. to
10. in the positive, v. 5. In the rest, in the opposite. The third, v. 11. to
35. morally v. 11. to 14: institutedly v. 15. to 20. exemplarily (illustrating
both and the whole Chapter) v. 21. to 35. All the three virtues are inlarded in
each of the three parts; which shall first be shown in this our middle and
instituted part of the third part, and of the whole Chapter.

Meekness is laid therein as the fountain and foundation of the whole point of
instituted Discipline, v. 15.

First, in reflexe on, v. 14. One of these little ones, and therein on the
precedent part of the Chapter; for v. 15. is connected to it, by (...); but if,
yet if, now if:

Secondly, in sociableness in the word Brother.

Thirdly, in fairness of means in (...), argument him, or convince him by
reasoning; not chide, command, warn, admonish, threaten him.

Fourthly, in privacy, in these words, between thee and him alone, to prevent
vainglory, ostentation and applause, the opposites to meekness.

Fifthly, in easiness to be satisfied in these words: If he hear thee, thou
have won thy Brother, i. e. thou have done what thou meantest.

Sixthly, in readiness to forgive in those words compared with v. 21. which was
Peter's Exposition of them.

Seventhly, in relation to the other two ensuing, Love and Mercy.

1. Love is set as the body of the building, respecting the said foundation, as
tending to save, and do good to the person toward whom we show meekness, v. 11.

2. As freeing him from evil and perdition, v. 14. Five other proofs that the
Spirit of Love must inform this body of instituted Church Discipline, are in
the five middlemost proofs, that meekness must also so do.

3. Mercy is of the same nature with Love, in seeking the good of our brother;
only love does it in the positive, and mercy in the privative; both which,
without meekness, are selfness, self-authority, self-seeking, self-shewing,
etc. but nothing of, through, nor for Christ, or his Spirit of Grace or Faith,
which works by love and mercy, and instructs others in meekness, whose good
it seeks, 2 Timothy 2.25. and whom it sees of, through, and for God, v. 26.

All these are yet more summarily contracted in this one single word Love,
supposed with its two infallible proofs that it is divine: the former, a
priori, in the face; by which the Britain Christians tried English Austin to
be an Antichristian Prelate, and no Minister of Christ, before he or they had
spoken one word together: The latter, a posteriori; for if mercy follow not our
loving endeavors, they are proved to be a Devourers pretenses, to be devoured
by God in the latter part of our Chapter, v. 21. to 35. and his repentance is
there proved false and hypocritical.

This love so qualifyed, is the soul of our six verses, and the whole Chapter;
without which, the body of Church-worship is dead, and but a carkase in Christ's
account: yet without the said body, all public divine worship, is familisme or
fantasy; yea, if both be not of the Word, it is of the World and
Antichristian.

Now therefore let us conjoyn to this Gospel soul, its Gospel body of
instituted discipline, which is an active part of Divine Worship, or
Church Order, for the government of its members.

It has also three parts answering to the three said parts of its soul; the
first is formed, v. 15. the second, v. 16. the third, v. 17. Of these three in
that order.

1. The first has eight parts: the first is a Church Members or Brothers
sinning, a sin forfeiting that his membership or brotherhood: If thy Brother
sin against thee; not against thy person, but thy brotherhood, i. e. against
Faith, a good Conscience, or Church Order.

2. Another brothers knowing thereof experimentally, not conjecturally; or by
credible testimony from without, or the not Church-estated; for a brother is
bound by this place personally to sue his said brother with all privacy, and so
he sins in telling another thereof, and that other in receiving it, more in
prosecuting it; for he usurpeth that his brothers place, intrudeth himself into
his work, and breaks Christ's instituted Church Discipline, and the second
Commandment, and so commits abomination and idolatry; and moves not that
his brother to observe the said Discipline and Commandment, but fartherth him,
and partaketh with him in his committing desolation, and deserting that Order,
Discipline, and Commandment.

3. The latters arguing and redarguing the former thereof personally, not by
Deputies; much less may he tell any other thereof, it tending to his reproach,
and that others partaking therein.

4. The secrecy of that his convincing and converting his brother, between him
and thee alone; besides the words, argument him and thy Brother.

5. Moral carriage of body, and civil behavior of actions, for the loving,
recovery, healing, and winning of that sinning brother, v. 14, and 15. to win
him, this is a general to all three; and 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done
decently, and according to order, i. e. to civil order; for Church Order is
institutable only by Christ, and it is Antichristianisme to erect any, or to
respect that Idol.

6. The success or effect of all, those in the former or sinning brother, which
is either repentance, if he hear thee, or its contrary, i. e. obstinacy; but if
he hear thee not.

7. The acceptance or effect thereof in the latter or suing brother, i. e. his
forgiving his sinning brother, v. 20. And I forgive him; which Peter spoke in
relation to this place, or impertinently.

8. The account and acceptance of all on Gods part, i. e. his approbation of
the suer and sinner, and all passages between them, thou have won thy brother
to me, whose union he had broken: to my Church, whose communion he had
forfeited; and so to thee, as a member both of my mystical and ministerial
body, and to himself, whose profession and practice discorded, and yet by thy
meek-love-merciful discharge of thy duty to me, my word, and thy brother, in
the use of my means sanctified to that end, thou have regained all, and saved a
soul from straying toward death and hell from me.

The second part is chained to the end of the first, and to the beginning of
the third, and so is a medial instituted Church-suing of an obstinate brother
by two or three of his upright brethren, for his recovery or excommunication.

1. It consists also of eight parts; the first is a Church Members obstinacy,
in a gross or excommunitive sin, discovered by the first course; if he hear
thee not.

2. Another brothers manifesting that sin and obstinacy, unto one or two of
his other Brethren.

3. His brotherly requiring that one or two to join with him in the use of
Christ's means, for the repentance and recovery of that obstinate brother by
themselves, or the Church, take unto thee yet one or two.

4. Their joint arguing with him, to convince him of that sin or obstinacy,
and their answerable dehorting him from, and reproving him for them.

5. Their instituted end and scope, i. e. the same with the former, Sec. 5. and
that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses, every thing may be ratified by the
Church.

The threefold event of all these, particularized in the first course, 6, 7, 8.
and here to be by the same grounds applied, mutatis mutandis.

The third sort, head or course of Church Discipline, is public, or
Congregational, having ten parts.

The first is a Church Members gross sin of a public nature, known by two or
three Witnesses, or by the Church.

2. His accusation thereof to the Church, by the discovering Witness, or by the
Church-Instrument, official or actual for that time.

3. The accuseds answer, either by denying, or justifying the fact, or by
confessing and forsaking that sin.

4. The trial of the two first by Witnesses and reasonings on both sides, to be
guilty, or not to repent.

5. The Church-Instruments.

6. The Church-Instruments requiring the Church sentence against the obstinate.

7. His gathering it, by the lifting up the hands of the most part of the
Congregation, tried both in the affirmative and negative distinctly.

8. His pronouncing that sentence with prayer to God to ratify it.

9. His charging them to behave themselves toward the Excommunicate, as to an
Heathen, and a Publicane, i. e. to deny him spiritual communion, public or
personal.

10. But if the accused be freed, by the not proof of the fact, or the not
excommunicativeness thereof, or by his not obstinacy therein; then the Angel is
to pronounce his absolution.

The Angels admonishing or charging the guilty in his judgment to repent.

11. The like proceedings with, and trial of the false accuser, and his
censure, of admonition to humiliation, in case of weakness or repentance, if of
malice or disorder; and of excommunication, if obstinate after two or three
admonitions.

These are the Reals of Church Discipline or Government; for all which, the
actors therein must have an instituting Warrant, either express, or equivalent;
so well as for the Church State it self, or its ministry, and other
ministrations; which answer to the Tabernacle, and its Officers, and their
works of mere Divine Institution, as its three coverings typed the three covers
or comelyers of our Gospel Ecclesiasticals, Membral, Moral, and Civil; the
membtal comelyer or adorner of the said Church Government, is, each members
reverend, orderly, and decent demeanure in the execution thereof: the second is
the like demeanure of other social Churches, voluntarily conjoined into one
moral fraternity for each others advice, countenance, encouragement, and other
moral benefit, without compulsory authority Civil, much less Ecclesiastical:
the third is civil authority.

The first was typed by the inmost covering of the Tabernacle, made of Goats
hair, Exodus 26.7. to 13.

The second was typed by the covering of that covering, made of Rams skins dyed
red, v. 14.

And the third, by the utmost covering of Badgers skins, v. 14. their terms
membral, moral, and civil, are but for ready distinct handling them for the
present, but not exactly to describe their proper natures.

1. Of the first, there are five particulars: the first is a loving, fair,
winning, and unprovoking carriage of the body in all its parts, expressing
brotherly spiritual love, without scornful fleering, or angry fierceness toward
his brother.

2. Reverend and humble behavior of voice, phrase, gesture, hat, etc. as
respecting Christ the Institutor; the Church, the Constitutor; and the sued
Brother, the Object of this Divine Ordinance.

3. Grave, sober, and modest behavior, becoming the speakers spiritual estate
of faith and order, and answerable works.

4 Equal and unpartial dealing, in giving and taking due vicissitude of speech,
and its length proportionable to the matter in handling, without repeating his
own matter, or interrupting the others.

5. Distinct and orderly handling each several part of instituted Discipline in
its proper place, without confounding his accusing, confuting, testifying,
reproving and censuring, or any two of them together, or breach of the due
successive order of any two of them, much less of more.

Compare these 24. particulars of Christ's Divine Discipline, with those of
personal Antichrists; and observe, first, that they are wholly omitted by them,
which in Scripture Phrase is a desolation of them; for so soon as the inspired
with his Ishmaels and Esaus Spirit can take, yea make an offense against the
promised Seed, Romans 16.17. he hastes to scorning, murderousness, and
dis-separation, and eagerly, and (in his conceit) devoutly prosecuteth it, and
persecuteth him, and pleases himself as in Gods service; especially if he can
effect his dis-separating and murderous project, Joh. 16.2. and as the rich
man, Luke 12.19. thereby clean (or rather foully) leaping over all the
distinctly prescribed points of Christ's holy, living, good, and acceptable
Discipline, which are 24. in number, and precious in nature of the matter,
form, efficient and end.

Secondly, what he places before and after them, are not divine, and so are
abominations, in Scripture Language, and therefore evils of the highest kind,
but sins against the first Commandment; besides they are from and for that
murderousness, and reproachingness, so fervently and frequently exaggerated in
the Word, and by the good of the World; but they pretend 2 These. 3.6, 14. for
answer, v. 16. is the sum and argument of the ten next verses; and v. 14, 15.
are the conclusion of the nine preceding ones; all ten being prescribed unto,
and to be practiced by the body of the Church to whom they were written, Chap.
1.1. not by, nor to any one, or few thereof; which also the whole ten verses
show. Secondly, the word (...), animadvertize, or censure him, or bring him to
trial, or noting with notes or marks of guiltiness, or not guiltiness, is too
barely translated note him, which each person can do alone, and may suppose in
that wrong bare sense to be his duty: but it is a legal and judiciary term of
the Roman and Grecian Judicature, when the Senate thereof tried the arraigned,
and if they found him guilty, they signed, noted, and censured him by a black
Stone, Bean, or Pease, etc.

Of that of Antichrist Stative, Hierarchical, Ecclesiastical, Universal, Papal,
Roman, Bestial, Regal, 2 These. 2.3, 4, 8. Dan. 11.21, 31, 36, to Chap. 12.11.
Rev. 13. 1 John 2.18. and 4.3. Matthew. 24.15. Mar. 13.14.
1. Whensoever, as the erection of a perpetual Inquisition-Court, and
authoritive persecution, spying, spiting, trying, frying; the four legs of the
Beast, which bear him up, and about his mischief.

2. Any man, which shows the boundless extent of the Kingdom of Antichrist
over all men, especially any religious man.

3. Is reported, i. e. proved by the Worlds word of truth, or affidavit, truly
or falsely, upon knowledge or suspicion of error or envy, etc. (they are all
alike current in the Devils, Antichrists, the Fleshes, and the Worlds Courts
and courses; especially in England, the old Ass of Antichrist and Issachar, and
yet not much reformed, but only refined, swept, and pranked.)

4. By any of my followers, Formalists or Conformitans, i. e. any truly, or
seeming worldling, Rev. 13.3, 14. on the earth.

5. To have sinned, i. e. to have broke my Canons, Decrees, and Traditions,
they being the living and authorized Scripture, and the Light, Soul, and Life
of Gods Word.

6. Let all my Apparatours, and their Praeparers, the Priests, Churchwardens,
and Sidemen of every Parish.

7. Present, and cite him to my Diocesan Courts and Judges.

8. Let them examine, article, and accuse him canonically, though rudely,
upbraidingly, and scurrilously.

9. If he compurge not, or

10. If they have any color of proof, to satisfy the world withal.

11. Admonish him thrice; by saying, I admonish you once, twice, thrice, though
it be all in one breath, without reason, motive, or respite, but only for form
of deluding and abusing, Tit. 3.10.

12. If he commute not; an impudent legal term for bribery in Hierarchical
Courts.

13 Excommunicate him, to force him thereto if he be rich; or for spite, if he
be religious, and thereby send him to hell: and then

14. Charge the Priest of the Parish, as his underling, Bailiff, or Curate.

15. To pronounce it in his Precinct, Parish Church or Chapel of Ease; and

16. To forbid all communion with him, spiritual and natural, personal and
public; and then

17. Signify it to the Magistrate, Unto imprisonment or burning.

18. But if he commute or conform, remit all, that is, free him from guilt and
pain of prison, purse, and hell it self; effectively (say the Formal^sts and
proper Hierarchians) respectively and declaringly (say the Reformists) and
mixtly say the Conformists and mixed sort (as in the Sacraments and Ordination)
who are distracted by, between, and from both; i. e. the Familistical takers of
the Character in their right hand, and yet Gods Ministrations also of his Word,
Sacraments, and Prayer; only in the Church Estate, Ministry, and Discipline,
they are mere Hierarch^sts, and Enquirers, and Presenters of their Parishioners
faults and fames; and pronouncers of the Prelates sentences; and often in the
first and last act of persecution of the Saints and promotion of Antichrist,
how hotly soever on their Mountains they profess, preach, and press Christ and
Christianity.

1. Compare this discipline with the true, and it is shorter then it by the two
first parts thereof and their 16. particulars; and in the last it only
counterfeiteth the form thereof, so far as it stands with Prelatical pride and
profit; yet neither the body, soul, nor life thereof is observed.

2. Compare it with its fellow-falshood on the other side, and this is less
opposite to, and differing from the true than that, both in the body or parts
thereof, and in scope and spirit; for the soul of that is the very spirit of
envy and spite, usurpation and opposition; or all in one word, disdisfraction,
dis-disseparatisme, Jude 19. for detraction of others own from them, and of
themselves, and their duties from others; which is so strong in them, that they
break all Christ's bonds and bounds, and run wild against the so addicted to
Scripture-rules and conscience, that they cross their absolute will which they
stole from God, though it be his peculiar prerogative, and the nearest known
Diamond of his Essence and Diadem.

Of that of Personal Antichrist, or the Spirit of Antichrist in persons
professing Christ, 1 John 2.18. and 4.2. 2 John 7.3. Joh. 9. or of
Disseparaters of themselves, or Separatists, Jude 19. Esa. 65.5. Romans 16.17.
Gal. 5.20. (...) in both, i. e. Disseparatisme, 1 Cor. 4.7.
Prove. 28.13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper: but he that
confesses, and forsakes them, shall find mercy. Therefore whosoever
discovers etc.
1. Whosoever, as a precious, enquirable, certain, and general duty, promise
and benefit.

2. Discovers, i. e. by listening, peeping, sifting, or enquiring finds;
and then by whispering, backbiting, and reproaching, divulgeth daily to
whomsoever will receive, and then to the Church that will hear, or has
communion or union with him.

3. Sins, How small soever in nature, provocation and number; yea though
seeming none to the doer, nor clear to the discoverer; nor convinced nor
convinceable by him, but only offenses to us, and that taken, but not justly
given.

4. In the Saints of a Church, To whom Gods peculiar promises of grace and
mercy are made, especially to whom God has given special Offices, states, or
abilities; as Canaan and Cham did in Noah; Doeg in David, and Abimelech; and
Shimei in David; Diotrephes in John and his friends, either true or false.

5. And forsakes those Saints, in what anger and haste of heart he can; and
manifests it by general means, as RACA; i. e. by slighting and scorning words
and gestures, etc. especially by particularizing some to work their particular
mischief, termed, standing against the blood of their Neighbor, even to a
Diotrephal Excommunication.

6. Shall be highly esteemed, for those fruits of Gal. 5.20. i. e. hatred,
strife, jealousy, wrath, contentiousness, separatingness, obstinateness,
enviousness, murderousness, and the like often elsewhere.

7. And rewarded, with his serviles applause of, who is able to war with him?
and with their wondering and wandering after him; and with Mordecais honor for
discovering Bigthana and Teresh; and with doing, that is domineering in the
meetings of his Diotrephal tyranny, or Mauzim, or God-Church, Dan. 11.39. over
some of understanding, etc. till the time be out, v. 35. and to his reigning as
a King of such Disseparatists in his own swollen conceit, 1 Cor. 4.6, 7. Thus
has malice slain the Gospel Spirit of the Diotrephists to pervert Christ's word
of truth and mercy; to erect Antichrists fraud and fierceness, with this
bragging and begging Sermon; though the plain meaning of this Scripture be
clean contrary, even to commend (as wisdom) our own confession of our own
known and Conscience-wounding sins to God, who knows them, and our own
forsaking them: but not to command under the censure of Treason against God,
our publishing others rumoured facts, and unconvinced sins unto men, who know
them not; nor our disseparating our selves, and whom else we can from their
persons and communion, spiritual and natural, personal and public; nor to make
this frowardness opposite to Christ's meek-love-mercy, to be that holy
towardness, teachableness, and tractableness toward Christ which he requires:
nor that contenting glory, joy, nor happiness, which we desire, it being a
rejoicing in iniquity, murderousness and mischief, hated by God and his Saints,
1 Cor. 13.6. Romans 1.31. much less to be irreconcilable to them, and inveterate
against them, and irregular in evil courses toward them. These errors and
erroneous mischiefs squeezed out of, or rather falsely fathered on the word of
truth and life, especially on this special portion thereof, exceedingly
aggravateth the impiety and perniciousness of this personal Antichristianisme;
especially they being made by their Extracters, to be parts of Divine
Discipline devised by man, and so abomination to Christ and Christians; and yet
pretended from the Word: and so making Christ and his Scripture seem
contradictory to himself, and his Scripture of truth to be falsehood; and its
Spirit and scope of meek-love-mercy to seem to these Deceivers and their
Receivers, to be a Patron of Usurpation and Pride; and a Pattern of Mischief
and Cruelty; which is very near, if not mere forgery of Christ's Scripture,
incurring all the plagues and curses of his true Scripture,

The Exposition of Matthew. 18. especially of ver. 15. to 20.
THE 18th. Chapter of Matthew, best brooketh its name, Chapter, or Head of
Scripture, of any that I know; First, it is equal with any other in all vulgar
use: Secondly, in its Head and Chapter of Gospel-matter, it exceeds other in
the expresness thereof, v. 1, 4. and in the answerable and connected
prosecution thereof, unto the end of the Chapter: And also Chap. 19.1. it is
said that Christ had finished all that matter before he passed to any other.
Thirdly, that matter so finished, is the handling of the truest state, and
highest degree of heavenlyness, and that in all its distinct parts of sonship,
servantship, and heirship, in our relation to God, and to our threefold
Collaterals, viz. to our fellow-sons, fellow servants, and coheirs. The first
of the three, unto v. 14. The second, unto v. 20. The third, in the rest of the
Chapter, and that both lineally and collaterally; and also in the affirmative
and negative. Fourthly, that Christ our sole Gospel-head personal and public,
is the sole decider of this head qu^stion of the chiefship in Heavenliness; all
which call us to a special respect hereof in the whole, and in each of its
distinct parts.

The summariest expression of the affirmative part of the whole is in this
word, meek-love-mercy; and of the negative in this, proud-rail-racking.

The middle part of them is the center, chair, tryer, and crown of the rest,
and for that reason placed before the first, Col. 2.5. for otherwise cultive
order, and divine Church-worship, in the course of generation, and nature, is
after Faith and Personal Union with God thereby; for that gives us right of
public communion with him, as with our husband; but Conversion by Faith
justifies us, and evidenceth our son-like Union with him, Heb. 11.1. which our
Child-meekness, v. 4, (called foolishness, weakness, baseness, despisedness,
and nothingness, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.) justifies to be true faith, (that God only
and no man may have the glory, v. 29, 30, 31.) which I desire may be specially
considered, and throughout my handling the second part remembered, lest we deal
about the hull and carkase of Religion, omitting the precious kernel, life, and
soul thereof; and mark, that this soul or spirit of Faith, Christ and the Word;
is enmity, and implacably opposite to that of Workes-Worth, Antichrist, and the
World.

This middle or second part of this Chapter, being the center, throne, tryer,
and crown of the rest; and my present endeavors being in and for a Church, and
spoken and heard by Church-right: the Church-use and exercise of this
head-grace, and soul of Religion is first to be handled; for the Church is the
center, about which this meek-love-mercy is to move and work: it is the throne
wherein it exercises its supreme authority: it is the tryer of the truth, and
power thereof, at our admission into it, and in our being in it; and therefore
its approbation is the Crown, and it the Crowner thereof; and its due
condemnation the discrowner thereof: but only upon full discovery that it is
false and counterfeit, and after all divine regular proceedings unto, and in
that trial; especially it evidently and eminently exercising in them all, the
true kind and pregnant degree of this meek-love-mercy, without which all due
conviction of obstinacy is not used; without which no Excommunication ought to
be by any Church decreed, much less executed in affections or actions; but
least of all may any or many members so discommunicate any or many members, or
the Church it self whereof they are, or any other; yea these two last God has
reserved to himself as his peculiar prerogative; and therefore our present
Church Discipline, nor any rule nor grace thereof, is to be extended to them,
without flat rebellion.

This our second or middle part, v. 15. to 20. is an authoritive or regular
exercising and trying of that head or heart-grace of meek-love-mercy, (the
subject matter of the 14. first verses) and that in three parts or degrees: The
first is between the tryer and the tried alone, v. 15. The 2d. between one or
two more, v. 16. as an help both to the first in repentance; and to the third in
due and certain trial of guiltiness: The third, between the tried and the
Church; and that before and after that trial accomplished, affirmed v. 17. and
ratified, v. 18, 19, 20. There is a connection of this matter (with the former)
expressed v. 15. in (...) but, in relation to v. 14. (that is, it ought to be
for the recovery of our sick professing brother if he be curable; but if not,
then for preservation of the Church) and with the latter in this word then, v.
21. But first of the body of this matter it self; and first, of the first part
or degree thereof, v. 15.

The sole Institutor, Lawgiver, and head of the Instituted Church, prescribes
herein the first part and Use of Divine Church Discipline, which is both a
service of God, and a preserver of Christians by Divine Institution, and
therefore precisely commanded and commended by Christ, both in the affirmative
as our portion, to use it as his sanctified means of his worship and our
benefit: and in the negative, forbidding as more than his Divine Worship, and
our Portion, all other courses, means, and manner of exercising this first part
of Divine Church Government, and means of winning our straying brother, lest he
perish by those rotting sins, which are the only matter, immediately moving us
to those means and manner for their purging away, and healing our sick brother.

There are therefore 8. main and plainly distinct parts of this verse 15.

1. The first is the state and encorporate order which enrighteth both Agent
and Patient, to the end means and manner prescribed, viz. a Church Membership,
In these words, thy brother -- against thee, with v. 17. tell the Church.

2. The second is the case wherein that end, mean, and manner, are to be
exercised, viz. in the case of the Patients corrupting sin, endangering his
brotherhood in sin against thee.

3. The third is the Agents personal knowledge of that his sin, viz. If thy
brother sin, etc. not thou hear or suspect.

4. The fourth is the end of our using the expressed Church-means and manner of
purging that sin from tha^ brother, viz. his recovery in these words, thou
have won thy brother, with v. 13, 14.

The fifth is, the means, i. e. convincing-reproof, (...), convincingly reprove
him.

6. The sixth is the instituted manner of our using that mean for that good of
that our brother, viz. all privacy and brotherly tenderness toward his
soreness, touchiness, and good name, between thee and him alone.

7. The issue and success, which is twofold; either good and pertinent to our
case and verse, viz. If he recover, repent, and return, i. e. If he hear thee:
or bad and referring us to the next verse and case, and not of p^esent
observation.

8. The eighth is the comfort and commendation of the Agent expressly, and
tacitly of the Patient, thou have won thy brother.

DOCTRINE.
The Doctrine which arises from the whole body of the first part of this. The
first degree of Christ's Church Discipline for his curing his sick Saints,
exacteth all these Ingredients.

1. A Church-brotherhood, both in the Agent and Patient. 2. Sin in the Patient
destroying that Brotherhood. 3. The Agents knowledge of, 4. And endeavor to
cure the sin. 5. By convincing-reproof 6. With all indulgent privacy. 7. And
expectation of success. 8. And comfort.
The Proofs of each of these eight requisits are expressed in the Exposition of
Christ's express, plain, and sole-instituting Precept hereof, more than which is
not in Institutions to be expected, much less exacted; what is, shall be
supplied in the uses.

USE. 1.
The first Use therefore must be for the confutation of the contrary tenent,
from whence the contrary practice grows, which is in its place to be
dehorted, reproved, threatened, and adjudged.

1. Those that hold against the first, are especially our Non-Conformitans,
called Professors and Puritans, who hold no other brotherhood hereto
requisite, but that of the mystical union with Christ by personal Faith
manifested by profession and fruits thereof: but to what Church do they fit
that party or cause? which is the prime scope of the agent; and to it are all
the said particulars to be reduced; and if the mark or aim be mistaken, all
Subordinats to it must needs be wrong: their mark is not the Church of England;
their aim, drift, scope, and endeavor is not for it, and yet other Church they
hold not, much less labor for; wherefore they erring in the very subject and
object, all their instituted Discipline and Church-dealing must needs be other
than Christ's, and so (in part and whole) Antichrists, at least the same in
nature with his, though not in act, aim, intent, or possession his, nor
accepted by him, and so they have no thanks for their labor and devotion,
either from Christ or Antichrist, and so are of all most miserable in this
matter; suffering as busie-Bishops and Reproachers, 1 Pet. 4.15.

Use 2. They that err in the 2d. particular, are the holders that every sin
in judgment, word, endeavor, or act, is the disease here meant: But what meant
Paul then to say? Him that is weak in the faith receive unto you, etc. Romans
14.1. expressing that weakness in the Faith to be in holding and practicing the
Mosaical holy days, and in abstaining from the legally forbidden meats, in
obedience and conscience to Gods command by Moses, which was then abolished,
and to prove and press that doctrine so plainly and plentifully through that
Chapter, unto Chap. 15.7. and there to conclude the same, with the same
Exhortation illustrated. This is much confirmed, Act. 21.20. to 26. and 16.3.
and 18.18.

Why is Joseph's omission of this first part commended as a point of his
justness toward God, and Christian indulgence toward Mary, as to a true, holy,
and tenderhearted Saint, though his knowledge of her supposed sin did near
over-weigh them all, and gave him a strong appearance that it was a sin
destroying Church-brotherhood, and her instituted Church State? the words,
(...), being (or as being) a just or righteous man, etc. and not being willing,
etc. prevent all evasion in this point, that every sin of a brother known to
another brother, necessiteth not this instituted or Church-dealing, which point
is very frequently and fervently pressed in the word, 1 Pet. 4.8. Prove. 10.12.
1 Cor. 13.7. (...) love roofeth all things, Gal. 6.2. Mat. 6.14, 15. Mar.
11.25, 26.

Obj. But you seem guilty and loving of some sins, in putting them out of this
case.

Answ. The truth is, I so love Gods divine Discipline, that I cleave close
thereto, though I thereby incur your suspicion: But it rather seems, that you
more affect absoluteness of Will, and licentious injuriousness, than Christ's
institutions and obedience to them, wherein a Christians summum bonum and
content consists, Eccles. 12.13. But I respect not personal upbraidings, but
real arguments in this material case; Michals scornings (2 Samuel 6.16. to 22.)
I scorn; and honor Moses his periods to all his instituted practices, i.e. As
the Lord commanded Moses.

The third ingredient unto this divine medicine, viz. the curers due and
certain knowledge of the the disease or sin of his brother, is 1. proved
necessary, Joh. 7.51. Does our Law condemn a man before it hear him, and know
what he has done? was it so evident, that the Law of Moses, though in Christ's
time much corrupted by the Scribes and Pharisees, did not upon any report or
presumption, but only by judicial hearing and testimony by two Witnesses at
the least, and testified in presence of the accused and answered by him,
condemn any man? how dare any Church of the Gospel do so, lest to his power he
make the Gospel of Christ worse then the Law of Moses? But by what spirit dare
any member of such a Church do it, yea and execute that sentence of his own, to
his using him as an Heathen, Publicane, or that wicked man? 1 Cor. 5.13.

2ly, every night-professour, yea civil man in England, or other Christian
Commonwealth or State, may with Nicodemus say the same words; for before due
proof by competent Witnesses and the Defendants full answer, may no sentence be
pronounced in any matter, whether criminal or actional: nor before that
sentence dares any Sheriff (much less any other) do any thing as to a
condemned man: and yet will any Christian person, Officer, or Church, make
Christ's Gospel discipline, worse than the civil discipline of the
Commonwealths of the world? which yet they do, when they upon a rumor, or
other backbiting receive matter of spiritual censure, both as an accusation and
testimony, yea and forthwith sentenceth, and also executes that censure in his
affections and actions, and expects, yea exacteth of others so to do, upon
his telling them thereof. This in a person or officer is personal or official
Antichristianism; and if all the members of a Church so do, it is
Church-Antichristianism, though the state be true before and after it; yea
though any, many, or all those Christian persons endeavor a trial upon that
rumorous fame and testimony: yet their course is Antichristian, and a part of
that mystery of Iniquity, whereby that state or man of Iniquity, by his Spirit
of Antichristianism, wrought himself from an embryo in Paul's time, 2 These. 2.3,
to 8. unto full complement afterward, which now is in his raging death-pangs
with Gods harping-iron in his belly; with whom also all the sparks of his
Spirit do therefore blaze as in their last light.

3ly, the very professed Hierarchical Courts, have a pretending and seeming
face of the said Mosaical and Civil Courts, and censure none for a rumors
accusation, until they hear the Accuseds answer, and use a form of trial of
the cause, more like the other than the said personal Spirits of Antichrist,
whom this Text properly concerns and charge to sue and pursue his brother
unto the Church censure, upon personal knowledge of his corrupting sin, but not
to take a third brothers right, charge, and work from him, nor to partake in
his omission thereof, nor his reproachful diverting from it, to play the
Informer to this censorious spirit of Antichrist; for why else does he
reproach, but to provoke to censure, where he finds a by-shop open thus to
receive, censure, and butcher? It Is usurpation and folly to do his work, and
sin not to charge him to do it himself.

Do all these Courts and courses hear the accused, and know what he has done?
and dares any member of a Church of Christ make himself worse then Mosaical,
than civil, than uncivil Courts? Dares he also make that Church a partaker and
guilty of that seven-headed sin? yet let not that Church dare to partake
with, not permit it, much less to practice and ratify it.

Indeed this Christian cure is properly and personally commended and commanded
to every Church-brother, that duly knows of the disease personally, and his
telling any other of the particular, is a reproach and backbite (for all
pretended consultings may and must be in the general) and so what is said
thereabout is true: yet if credible Witnesses out of a Church Estate, give to a
brother certain testimony of his brothers conscionless sin: he ought to join
his enrighting Church Estate which those Witnesses want, unto their pregnant
matter to discover and destroy that sin, that will otherwise destroy that
brotherhood or church; and if it be without exception, he ought to proceed
thereupon: First, to relate to the brother, what they offer to testify; and if
he deny it not, or by his tutchiness, dejectedness, scornfulness, or other
confirmations, make him confident that his brother is guilty: then he ought to
proceed according to Gods rule, Mat. 18.15, to 20. only by the Witnesses, v.
16. all things are to be fitted to the convenience of the Church by their
personal knowledge of all requisites, if the Witnesses from without be not fit
to be brought in person into the Church: but to do so, upon a brothers report,
or rather reproach, is, as is above said, and much worse, incurring the censure
of Jam. 4.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.15. Lev. 19.16, 17. Prove. 18.8. and 26.20, 21, 22.
Romans 16.17. Jude 19. Esa. 65.5. Matthew. 24.51. yea of 2 These. 2.4. in his
sitting or estating himself as the Church, like that Antichrist, and of 3 John
11. in his usurping over the Church and the Scripture, with Diotrephes, who
upon his own suspicion, that John meant him in his former Epistles, rayled
against him with malicious words, and cast his friends out of the Church: but
more of this in the sixth particular:

The fourth adds to the first three their Gospel-soul, meek-love-mercy,
Saint-healing and Soul-saving Spirit, v. 14. and in the end of this, v. 15. and
the fifth adds to all four their instituted means and effective power, viz.

An argumenting and convincing reproof for his said sin, (...), which is ill
rendered by tell him; for (...) is an Argument, Syllogism, or evident proof,
which applied to the said sin, imports a conviction thereof, and its
consequent reproof and charge of repentance; compared also with if he bear,
which therefore imports an answerable repentance: all which necessite and
dignifie the search of the scope of the place of Scripture in hand. This
enforces a preceding proof of his said sin, before our reproof, and of that
before our requiring his repentance; and of that before our judging him
irrepentant; and of that before our taking one or two Witnesses, much more
before our telling it to any other, upon any pretense: much more before our
telling the Church thereof, and its trial and condemnation or commendation;
much more before our barring him of Church Communion; but most of all before
our using him as an enemy, 2 These. 3.15. and barring him of natural,
matrimonial, or civil good things, which are never to follow Christ's Church
censures, but are fit only for Antichrists; who in state, courses, spirit and
curses, is flat opposite to Christ, his Church State, Discipline, Spirit, and
Censures, which all tend to the saving of souls at the day of our Lord Jesus,
which is our fourth point, by his Gospel-Institutions, which is our fifth; but
because of Antichrists oppositness in them all, God himself sirnameth him
Abaddon and Apollyon, that is, Destroyer, Rev. 9. which 5. Discipline or
mystery of iniquity, was in working in Paul's days, 2 These. 2.7. by that 4.
Spirit of Antichrist that was in John's days, 1 John 4.3. to the eminent
estating of that Antichrist in Constantines days, and his evident tyrannizing
in Constantines days and to this time; none of which four are yet ceased: not
the two first in true Christian Churches; the latter, (which is our fourth
point) is practiced in the Spirit of reproach in the Disseparatists, Jude 19.
or proper Brownists, or makers of offenses, or soul-killing sins, more then the
word has made, and makers of division or separation thereupon, even from true
Christians, yea true Churches, which the word never allowed nor instituted: the
former (which is the 5. point) is practiced in the said un-Mosaical, uncivil,
un-Messiacal, and antichristian courses, opposite to Christ's instituted
Church Order, Mat. 18.15. in all the eight points thereof, especially to this
convincing course (our fifth part) and the sixth (of which next) in both which
abominations and false Church-orders, are practiced by true Churches in their
members, telling each other of each others faults, main and mean, and thereupon
separating the reproached as vile Heathens and Publicanes, at one hour, with
the same and reproach raised, as if their so reproaching were a judicial trial,
and that an authoritive sentence, and that a soul-killing and disbrothering
execution, even all four, so soon as the first is spoken by the reproacher; yea
as if all were done in himself, so soon as it is suspected by him. Secondly, in
both these, desolations are practiced against Christ's said instituted membral
course of four degrees, i. e. 1. certain knowledge, 2. due convincing, 3.
resolvednes of his irrepentance, and 4. thereupon proceeding in an executory
course of taking Witnesses to testify it to the Church, which only has
discommunicative power, that it may duly separate the otherwise uncurable
brother; for those four are slighted, omitted, and rejected, by this rejecting
(or rejectible) course and spirit, which the word terms desolating. Thirdly,
confusions of the successive order of these four degrees is practiced in one
Church Members separating, censuring, testifying; and lastly, upbraiding
another with sin, and in his neglect of Christ's precise order prescribed him
herein: Which 3. practices of 1. abominations or false institutions 2. of
desolations of true Institutions, and 3. of confusion or Babelism, are severaly
(at least jointly) the quarto modo properties of Antichrist, either public and
stative, viz. of a false Church State: or personal and membral, viz. of the
possessed with the evil Spirit of Antichrist, 1 John 4.3. whether of
Professors at large, or of Christ's Church-worshippers in state, though
unmortified in affections and actions, especially in matters of the fifth,
sixth, and ninth Commandments, which the sixth and next point will plainly and
plentifully show.

This sixth Jngredient into this Divine Saint-healing Medicine, is brotherly
and tender privacy in all the rest, in these words, between thee and him alone.
This therefore sorteth with all the rest in their joint proper soul, and of
this whole Chapter, viz. in meek-love-mercy; and in opposing their and its
opposites, viz. proud-rail-racking: the three parts of both those words
answering to the three said distinct parts of this Chapter: the former, in the
positive respect: the latter, in the opposite. The two first parts of the
former expressly: the last part inclusively in the last part of the latter: and
the two first parts of the latter word inclusively in the two first parts of
the former: the last expressly in the last part of the Chapter from v. 20.

This sixth part of this soul-saving and sinne-purging sealed receipt, Job
33.16. sorts also with the other five in their divine and word-holy body, as
they are instituted parts of Christ's Scripture-worship; so that the omitters
and slighters hereof are Desolators of that Divine Worship; and the practisers
of any other in its stead, though in their conceit much better, are abominators
thereof; and the disorderly users thereof, are confusers thereof; and so
sorters with that Babylon, i. e. confusion, that abomination and desolation,
Dan. 11.31. and 12.11. Mat. 24.15. Mar. 13.14. called also that man of sin,
that son of perdition, 2 These. 2.3. that Usurper over and Opposer against all
called God, v. 4. Dan. 11.36. that Antichrist, that Beast, that Abaddon, etc.
and so gross breakers of the first, second, fifth, and sixth Commandments. The
gross and flat opposite to this part, both in that soul and this body, is one
Church Members reproaching and speaking evil of another; which also in a fifth
respect is the proper and prime breach of the ninth Commandment, viz. as it
tends to his discredit; for it breaks the first, as it usurpeth over and
opposes against Christ the Institutor of that order and means, and the
commander and commander of that meek-love-mercy, and against God his Father and
sender. It is a breach of the second in all the particulars of this second
respect of this sixth Ingredient, especially as it forsakes and desolateth
this part of Christ's Church Discipline, and erecteth a false one in its stead,
and so abominateth it (and sins in the like transgression with Adam, who
did, yea could sin only in matter of Divine Institution; for when by his
shame his sin was shown, God thence concludes, that he had eaten of the
forbidden Institution, Genesis 3.10, 11.) and as it usurpeth over and opposes
against Christ's Church Power, authority, and jurisdiction instituted; for as it
proudly deposes or opposes the persons enrighted thereto, and practicing
thereof it breaks the fifth, and as it arises from anger, malice, or an evil
mind, it breaks the sixth Commandment, Matthew. 5.21. to 26. If it be above just
cause and only inward, it is against the first degree of v. 22. If it extend
to external insinuations, and general reproaching, it comes under the 2.
degree of that sin and judgment: but if it proceed to the least sort of
particularizing of matter of a brothers discredit, though it be but of his
wisdom, it is expressed to be of the highest sort of sins and judgment, at
least of that Commandment: yet Jam. 4.11, 12. expresses it to be a
reproaching and censuring of the Word of God it self, and an usurpation of Gods
Law-giving Supremacy, and an opposition against God that is alone able to save
and to destroy, and thereupon thundereth against this reproacher with Who art
thou that judge another brother? which last word is expressed, v. 11. and
shows the true nature and high degree of this sin of reproaching; without
it the other two parallel places of Matthew. 5.21. and 18.15. were not its true
parallels; and without this peculiar institutedness or instituted peculiarity
of this privacy in present consideration, the other two would seem somewhat
harsh. In brief, mark the holy institutedness of this sin-hiding, or rather
sin-healing privacy, Mat. 18.15. the holy estate of a brother in all three
places, the holy nature of the Law, Jam. 4. and of Christianity, Matthew. 5. and
the oppositness of Antichristianity to all three, even in falsness of
institution against the Gospel, and in evilness of order against the moral Law,
and of nature generate and regenerate, against the first and second Adam, and
their Posterity; and you shall therein see the heavenly virtue of this privacy,
and hellish vility of its privative in dealing with our brothers sins; even
that the former is an healing, and the latter an helling of our brother and his
sins, sores, and sorrows, and that the former is that submissive and
serviceable two-hornedness of the Lamb, Rev. 13.1. and of his Lambs or Babes,
in this whole Chapter, and the peculiar Spirit of Christ, his Gospel and
Gospellers throughout his Word: and the latter that deposing and opposing two
hornedness of the Beast, ibid. of that Man of Sin, 2 These. 2.3, 4. of that
abominable or vile one, Dan. 11.21, 31, 36. and 12.11.

The 7. and 8. Ingredient having been handled before, are by our Author here
omitted.

FINIS.
A DISCOVERY OF Adams threefold Estate in Paradise; viz. Moral, Legal, and
Evangelical, (handled in three several Methods.)

To which a fourth, i. e. his Heavenly Estate, (as an inseparable relative, and
as the Complement of the former three;) is added.

Wherein also is shown, that Gods Dispensations have been under the said
fourfold relation, to his Posterity ever since.

Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh: Gal. 3.24. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring
us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith. See Romans 2.14, 15. LONDON,
Printed for Henry Eversden, at the Sign of the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard,
1656.

A Discovery of Adams threefold Estate in Paradise; viz. Moral, Legal, and
Evangelical, etc.
The first Method.
GOD created man perfect in nature, perfect in goodness, which enabled him to a
perfect obedience to the Will of God; and with him (in him) also created The
Instinctive Natural Moral Law; and did not impose any absolute command upon
him, but what in the Creation he had adopted him for, and given him ability to
perform* Else had man been made an imperfect Creature, which God (being a
perfect Entity, and infinite and absolute in perfection) could not do: and
indeed it had been against his Justice, Wisdom, and Love, to create the whole
Species of mankind to condemnation in and by the principles of Nature, and
Moral unadequateness of his instinctive and imposed Law, and innate virtue: For
the Instinctive it needed but serious consideration, it being so immediate to
Gods original creative act, in his Rationals and Legals, in whom he had
immediately created the Moral Law; and the institutive Laws were imposable by a
Natural Right, though more remote: yet they being proper adjuncts to Gods
instinctive, are parts of the moral Law, i. e. of the second Commandment, even
in the particulars. Therefore God imposed the whole Paradisal worship on man by
his creative right; [which see in the ensuing Table of Institutions] This done,
all Gods natural creation was complete in the addition of Gods natural cultives
to his instinctive Law; but immediately therewith did God also add thereto an
heavenly typicalness, as a divine Sign of Heaven, and all its particulars,
attainable by man's fulfilling them as such, by his innate virtue; which as the
case then stood was impossible.

The Natural Law was created with man, which appears by Cains knowledge of his
murder to be a sin (as is manifest by his denial of his brother) before the
Law published, Genesis 4. also Romans 1.19, 20. chiefly Chap. 2.14, 15.

Yet was not this a prohibition with a penalty nor an imposed Law or
institution, but only proposed to man to accept or refuse, and if accepted then
to be as a thing conditional for life upon performance; or death in case of
failing; (as in Genesis 2.17. appears) For in the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely dye. And in the 3. Chap. and the 3. ver. Ye shall not eat of the
fruit of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, neither shall ye touch it lest
ye dye: As if God had said, I do not impose this as a command, but only
propose it with this condition, That if thou do undertake to keep it as a
Law, and not perform it, thou shall dye: but performing it, thou shall live.
Otherwise, had God been the Author of his Fall, in giving him a Law beyond his
instinctive power of obedience: Yet it being accepted so, it became a Law of
works unto man, for his more then created life in heaven, or death in hell: And
more particularly,

The Tree of Life was planted by the Tree of Knowledge; implying, life was the
reward to the performance of this Law; and death the penalty, as before
expressly denounced for the breach. Josh. 24.19, 20, to 28. is a resemblance of
this Covenant.

Thus these were Signs and Seals Sacramental, as Livery and Seisin of a
Spiritual Estate; the one of Heaven, the other of Hell.

Proofs of the Paradise Law of Works, or first Covenant.
First, from the relation between Heaven and Earth, Genesis 1.1.

Secondly, from its relation to the Gospel, Gal. 3.21. etc.

Thirdly, from the institution of Paradise, its Ruling and Sacramenting
Ministry and Ministrations, typically relating unto Heaven by Gods Institution,
expressed in the Tree of Life, i. e. Heavenly and Eternal Life.

Fourthly, Romans 5.14.

Fifthly, 1 Cor. 15.45. etc.

Sixthly, 2 Pet. 1.4. Divine Nature.

Seventhly, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is
in you, except ye be Reprobates.

Eighthly, Romans 8.3. with Gal. 3.22, 23, 24.

Ninthly, Phil. 2.6, to 11. with Act. 4.12.

The first hereof viz. the tree of life (first in time, nature and dignity)
entered man into a heavenly state; But because it was conditional, and gave not
an answerable heavenly nature, which the Gospel Sacraments do; Adam was
mistaken in his conceited power of obedience.

For Adam not being as yet acquainted with Faith and the Gospel righteousness,
(that being not mentioned till the end of that day which was after the fall)
but only looking upon his own facile native obedience of the Moral Law, (and
not observing the dative and instinctive power cocreated to the performance
thereof) and of that only, thought he could as well by his own ability do all
that could be proposed although in stative righteousness, as he had done all
that was imposed: And therefore not doubting his power of obedience, nor
fearing the penalty, nor any prejudice that could be due to the failing part or
nonperformance thereof, and looking upon the promised prize of a hevenly life,
as clear gains, did accept of this proposition, and out of his own abilities,
(without desire of assistance of heavenly power, though in a heavenly work) did
undertake the keeping and observance of this Law; as indeed there was no reason
in nature to the contrary. The first Covenant Genesis 2. in the Tree of Life is
enlarged in Lev. 18.5.

But the Angels of mentity, of light, (thence JOB calls them Luciferians) and
order, conceiving man coming into the son-like state, and thereby in a
condition of greater excellence, and of priority, and of precedence of them,
did envy him, and that their conceited happiness of his: which ambition, pride,
and envy, spurred them to an immediate practice, for the ruin and downfall of
man: for they being servants, and not sons of heaven, and therefore in their
created nature they not knowing the far higher estate of Christ, (and his body
of Saints) Gods destinate heir of heaven, conceived Adam able to have performed
the condition, and therefore also conceived that he had been positively
established by God to have been the heir of heaven, and so their immediate Lord
and Master, which in their nature was intolerable and scornful; and in God
conceived it to be injustice, want of love, and contempt of them, and therefore
would neither serve him, nor his new adopted Son, and left their service and
their first estate, Jude 6. and wrought all mischief they could against him:
But having no power against his person, they practiced against Adam and Eve;
and being fallen from their created estate, experimentally felt and discerned
both good and evil, which al^o Adam did after his Fall: though before, neither
of them did, but good only. Now by this consequence of the Law, they perceived
the nature of the Law, and that man was thereby ruinable as well as they, and
therefore set all their wits and powers on work, to contrive their breach of
it, and ruin by it.

And accordingly, poor man, his legal, or rather Gospel weakness was such, that
(his former supporter, his created power, only enabling him to the observance
of the Moral-Law, and not reaching this, which was of a more heavenly nature)
he was no sooner attempted then overcome.

God then cursed the Serpent, Genesis 3.14, 15. and put enmity betwixt man and him;
but before he denounced the Sentence of the curse due to man for this breach of
the first Covenant; for the support of weak, frail, and dejected man, at the
declaration thereof, God first showed him a glimpse of the Gospel, in that he
gave him a promise of mercy, Genesis 3.15. (and enlarged Genesis 17.6, 7.) and full
assurance of a second victory in Christ (which by Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Daniel,
is called the second Covenant) and thus comforted ( v. 15.) then let him know
his punishment, ver. 16. to 19, 22, 23, 24.

This glimpse of Justification by Faith in Christ, and its cultive seals of
salvation, (the Sacrifices, Genesis 4.4. founded Genesis 3.15.) is the Center and
Circle of the Gospel; glancing upward to God for the good of his Saints, and
downward to hell and its hell hounds, and forwards to man two ways: The first
is properly to show God as before the Creation: The second, in: The third,
after it: And the fourth, in a mixed way of all three: Gods Gospel stating man
in personal Faith, and its Cultive Order ensighted and enrighted him in God as
Unus, binunus, trinunus, and quadrinunus; the first before time: the second at
it, and the first week: the third as at, and after the end thereof: the fourth,
as in an irregular way occasioned by man's irregularity in his breach of the
Law: In this fourth respect, we are put by effect, and a posteriori to consider
of all four, and enabled thereto by the third; enrighted by the second, and
effected by the first: We must therefore ascend from the fourth gradatium. We
had no right thereto but by the Law, nor might but by the Gospel in part; but
not in height, but by heaven; nor every way but as fallen by the Law: and in a
mixture of both, in the whole passage through the wilderness of regeneration;
wherein we are to look to Abraham showing, and shown; by the first notion of
God; to Egypt, taught by the second; to the Tabernacle resembling the third;
and to the fourth, even to seek and search for the three simples in the mixed
portion of Inheritance, and potion of health, gropingly thence to Christ, and
gripingly after, but we shall never grasp our fill but in Heaven complete.

Man had not power to fall in his natural condition by the natural Law.
GOd is a pure and perfect entity, that cannot will, nor work any thing but
like himself, for natural perfection: as the Beasts were in sensibility
perfect, till man's sin brought also on them a curse, and depravation of that
perfection: [because intentionally made for him, and by donation given into his
hands, Genesis 1.26, 28.]

The Text expressly says, Man was made after his Image.

Now God could not work, will, or incline to ill: Therefore nor man to any
thing that God had imposed, and positively forbidden him: for if man was made
after the perfect Image of God in things natural, then he could not in natural
things more offend then God; But God could not, therefore nor Man.

If Adam could in natural things offend more then God, then in natural things
Adam was not made after the perfect Image of God.

Again, God's intention was to contrive man to heaven, (else his Decree for
Election or Damnation was not eternal) and to that end proposed to him a new
Law, with the condition of Heaven, in case of observance, and Death and
Damnation upon the breach: which was proposed to him, to undertake it, or not
to undertake it: But in hopes of the prize of Heaven, and presuming of his
natural power, not knowing it was a heavenly work, did undertake it; and the
condition thereof was to do, or suffer: and then, and not before then, came the
free will of man to do good or ill: That; the Churches of England and Rome
maintain as their received opinion, (and at the Creation as pretended) but then
(as before is proved) had man no power to ill.

Now this second Law was proposed, and not imposed, for it had been injustice
in God to have imposed such a Law upon man, as was impossible for man to keep,
(which this was, being spititual, and man merely natural) except he had
likewise given him ability to have kept it, which he did not.

That it was spiritual, appears by the two Sacramental Trees of Life; of
Knowledge; that were not real life and knowledge, but only signs thereof, and
therefore Sacraments. And therefore by this it appears, that this Law was
merely proposed by God, accepted by Man, and so became federal, and a binding
Contract betwixt God and Man; and therefore is called the first Covenant.

To work any man to understand this, at the first press not upon him the
proposition, and liberty to undertake, or not to undertake the keeping of this
Law; but first let him understand the condition, to do or to suffer. Which
understood, he will reply, that doing or suffering was imposed, (the one being
necessary to man) and then it may be best made to appear, that it was the
acceptance and Covenant of man to do, or suffer, that made it a binding Law
unto him.

The general opinion is, that man had power to keep this Law, and power to
break it.

Answ. No: Adam had no power to will, or do evil, because malum is privati^um,
non ens, inessibile, incognosibile, inagibile, impossible.


Therefore malum (being non ens) to do ill, is to do nothing, power to do
nothing, is nothing in power, which rather implies a want of power to do
something.

Obj. He had power to do well, and liberty to offend.

Answ. That could not be; for doubtless God gave him not a positive command to
do one thing, and liberty to do another; i. e. to do, or not to do the same
thing; that is a contradiction, and therefore he had no liberty to offend:
neither had free will, being bound to obedience.

Obj. Not a permissive liberty, i. e. an allowance to ill, but an inclination
and aptitude to ill; yet was commanded the contrary, and had power to obey that
command.

Answ. No: Man had no aptitude, no inclination to ill; for then he had not been
made after the perfect Image of God, that could not will, work, or incline to
ill: but he (and man if made after his Image) was positively good, holy, and
perfect: therefore man was made perfect, in respect of his power of obedience,
for an imposed Law, which is the business in hand; but for the Proposition by
him accepted, he had no power of obedience.

God is Ens, Sciens, Potens, Habens,


Man depraved in will to good, is Non Ens, Non Sciens, Non Potens, Non Habens.


For indeed we have no power to do that, that is not, but as we our selves are
not, i. e. by our depravation we have no entity in good, being depraved, and in
our selves ill; and therefore by our own power can do no good. And on the
contrary, Adam being perfectly good, could not do ill, because he could not do
nothing, for all his actions tended to perfections.

The Order of Gods Supremacy, whereby he governs all his Creatures and
rational Subjects, is twofold, Instinctive and Institutive.
FOr the Institutive; that we may not derogate from God, nor arrogate to Man,
more then is meet: it is to be understood, that in acknowledgment of Gods Order
and Power of Supremacy, or Monarchship (mentioned Isaiah 45.22, 23.) there are
four particular permanent Prerogatives, Institutions, and Ordinances,
peculiarly appropriated to God therein, over Nature and Grace: which manifest
his immediate Divine Authority and absolute Power, over, and above his
Rationals, from the Creation: in procreation, preservation, gubernation, and
adoration; and therefore has God instituted a four-fould divine observable
order therein, (to wit) of Meats, Marriage,, Government, and Worship, as
follows.

The Table of Institutions.
Institutions are Prerogative Precepts of God above, and after the Creation;
which are: (a) Competent, (b) Fultive, or for man's sustenance in his (c) Kind,
that is, Marriage, Genesis 1.28. (c) Particulars, (d) Immediately by meats, Genesis
1.29. (d) Mediatly by his commanding use of all other Creatures, viz. his
government of them, Genesis 1.28.

(b) Cultive of or for Gods worship: (e) Moral, (f) Solely, i. e. Paradise and
its Paradisals. (f) Mixed, with the Worships ensuing;
(e) Super-moral, (g) Legal, (h) Paradisal: (h) Mosaical.
(g) Evangelical. (i) Familick from Adam to Moses. (i) National from thence to
Christ.



(a) Complete, or Celestial;
viz.

The Gospel and its Institutions, ( as called the Kingdom of Heaven) which are
Corporational, that is, an encorporate Church, with its Ministry and Members,
and their Functions; and all their Sabbath-meeting exercisings and observations.

The second Method.
MAN, microcosmus, micraner, micricon, at and by his Creation or Earthizing,
was first in respect of God as the

Father, an existing, respective and operative person, as earthy, ortive,
ordive, ardorive, odorive.

Son, the Form, Character, Image, and Impression of Gods Natural Order, Law,
Light, and Wisdom.

Spirit, the life, sight, might, and emphasis of the Holy Ghost, as natural
enliver and acter of all.

Trinity, or triunity of all three, the complete natural (...) of Earth, Water,
and Air, encorporate and enspired with the second-heaven fire, as its
constituting and distinguishing form.

Secondly, as Stative, he had

Right to enter into a legal Covenant of Works, meriting heaven with God, its,
and his Creator, and so King, Monarch, Supreme, etc. in all superiorities.

Light to understand that right, Covenant, merit, Heaven, God, King, etc. and
the tie, bond, duty, and Religion on both sides.

Sight to know the particular Covenant made, at and by his entering into
Paradise, with all its respects, as the minor to the major of the two former
heads, and that personally, voluntarily, freely, and in confidence of his good
thereby.

Bright print of that Covenant visibly expressed and described by the
Sacraments of Paradise, Adam as the official dresser and orderer thereof, Genesis
2.15.

And the trees and fruit thereof, especially those of Life and Knowledge,
signifying Heaven, or Gods Palace, City, and Kingdom, and God dwelling and
reigning with Adam therein, and life and all eternal, and perfect, heavenly,
and divine happiness therein unto man, if he observed and fulfilled that
Covenant; or the contrary, if he broke it; and that not naturally, but
mentally, medially, institutively, and statively, sacramentally,
instrumentally, sealingly, possessingly, enrightingly, deliveringly, and
seisingly, so signifying by Gods expression therein; which so clearly
signifying and estating Covenant, if he entered into, he knew that it bound both
parties to exact keeping thereof; whereby, and not before, nor otherwise it
became a Law consequently, not originally and simply; for though God had
instituted all that to be his worship, so far as the second Commandment
extends only: yet neither it, nor Adam had any heavenly or divine estate upon
them thereby. And though Adam and Eve supposed it a glorious and free gift of
heaven (as it had been, if he had been of a divine and heavenly nature) yet in
Gods purpose, project, intent, and end, it was an inevitable exposer of all to
Gods justice, and just condemnation, Romans 8.3. Gal. 3.21, 22. and to his glory
therein. And secondarily, God ordered this to be the first matter of Gods
greatest work of grace and mercy in man's redemption from hell, and adoption
unto heaven, v. 23, 24, 25. for Adam did, and could not but eat of the
forbidden fruit, and so became a breaker of Gods Covenant and Law, and lost his
wager, even earthly perfection and happiness, which he wagered against
heavenly, and obtained it not, but became guilty of its contrary, even of hell,
and perfect and eternal curse, malice, and misery. The preceding, worse, and
corruining fall of the Angels upon the same rock, and the proofs of both, with
their illustrations and controversies are not of this indical synopsis, but of
its succeeding vindical illustration. But to pass on toward the third quarter
of this quaternity: 1. Man by this his entry into this instituted, mental, and
supernatural Covenant, became stative from personal, and from earthly to
heavenly, and from personal to practional or federal. 2 And as it was
meritorious, and upon condition of perfect heavenly works and obedience, it
fitteth the usual Scripture terms of the Law, Law of Works, Works of the Law,
legal, etc. as opposite to the Gospel, Faith, Evangelical, faithful. And
thirdly, as it was broken on man's part, it is called enmity, our specialty
against us, the curse, condemnation, etc. by a Metonymie of the effect for the
cause, it being the cause of all man's sinfulness and misery here and hereafter.
In a fourth respect, as it is a means, order, estate, project, course,
schoolmaster to bring us to Christ and to heaven by him; and man being in that
state, it and man may be termed significantly; medial, ordal, artal, stative,
projective, entactive, relative, capital, or mental; which four respects of the
same thing yield this quaternity, federal, legal, enmial, medial, and so of
other terms of the like use. Now as this second part of this microcosmal
quaternity has a Janal aspect upon the create and recreate case of man, it
leads us to the recreate case; the create being to our purpose competently
handled.

3. This is Gods Gospel-power unto salvation, i. e. Gods Gospel power saving,
or Christ's Evangelizing effective of sonship, or the Holy Ghosts brooding,
working heavenship, heavenlyness, or sonlikeness: heavens patterning, effected
heavendome, or sondome, all grounded on Romans 1.16.

The opposite to which is Gods heaven-revealed wrath full curse, v. 18. i. e.
hell. Christ's Word revealed in efficacy not-sonning, i. e. hellship, the Holy
Ghosts convincing the Conscience unto despair or hellishness; Heavens
unpatterned, uneffected opposite, i. e. helldome, against the unregenerate,
ungospel, unconscionable desperateness, or enmity.

4. The difference between which Kingdom of heaven competent, and that
complete and third heaven, is this; the real existency and relative state
hereof prays, as in earth, so in heaven; but the reant efficacy, and the
reate effect and fruit of all pray, as in heaven, so in earth. Here; is our son
and sonship, king and kingship, wife and wifeship, heaven and heavenship; all
in being and state as absolute and perfect; as there; in Gods and true account:
and also our sonlikeness and sondome, kingliness and kingdom, wiseliness and
wisdom, heavenliness and heavendome (or lordlikeness, and lordome; in vulgar
phrase, a Manor, Manerial Dominion, or Demesne, or possessed Inheritance) are
as true in nature and livery of seisin, i. e. in divine love and its virtues,
and heavenly hope and its fruits, here as there: But the two former do not so
appear to Christians; and the two latter are not so perfect in and unto them
here as there; all shown in one verse, 1 John 3.2. we are now the sons of God,
but it does not yet appear what we shall be.

We are as true sons of God the Father now, as then; as true anointed Princes,
Prophets, Priests, and parts of Christ; as true coients, bedders, corunners,
communicants with the Holy Ghost; and as truly adopted unto, authorized in,
endowed with and seized of heaven: by 1. personal faith. 2. public
Church-worship, or instituted order. 3. divine graces operative in and by both.
4. and by autarchy, self-content, full-joy, free-pain, by and in them all three
now as then, in kind, though so far off, in degree of assurance, wisdom,
power, and plenty, as the East from the West, or Earth from Heaven; for nothing
native, stative, dative, rative is there, which is not here; nor here, which
shall not be there: yet the two first in noture, and the two last in nature,
are so different in degree of evidency and eminency, cleerness and clareness,
and of purity, power, perfection, and pomp, as the two bodies, 1 Cor. 15.40,
42, 44, 49, 53, 54. For by bodies are there meant persons, by a Metonymie of
the continent for the content; for the natural soul must there be also meant;
else it is not there declared what shall then become thereof; and by spiritual
bodies are meant the glorified natural bodies of the Saints or spiritual ones;
else it is not shown that they shall have any; but footing is left for the
Hymenean and Philetian Familists, who hold that of the degree, that I said of
the kind, confounding that oft-expressed distinction in the word and world; and
so destroy Faith and Hope on earth, Heb. 11.1. 2 Timothy 2.18. Romans 8.24. The four
reals or naturals of that spiritual body or person vulgarly confounded, need
here to be distincted; i. e. the 4. ingredients of Adam's created body: his
body was clay, red-earth, or wet-dust; i. e. of 1. earth; and 2. water; his
soul was breath; i. e. 1. air, and 2. fire; for it is air drawn into the lungs,
heated by, and so mixed with the spirit, fire, or heat of the heart, and
breathed out of the body: Thus is man's ensouling by God expressed, Genesis 2.7.
and that he thereby became a living soul; So that natural air was the immediate
vessel of the more then natural spirit of man, and communicant with the divine
spirit of God, and so different from fire mixed with air the common matter of
the sensitive souls, and from the Angels, because mixed with air; and that it
differs from the essence of the deity, needs no proof: yet is it a living
Image of God, imbreathed by himself into man's soul, whereby he is a living
soul, and so different from all other creatures of a more than te^rene nature:
yet our vivifying spirit in hand much differs from them all, they being all
real, as of God the Father; and this relative to God the Son; or rather real,
as of God the Son, whose divine nature is infused into it, according to his
Divine-man, or Man-God state imputed unto him, both which cooperate divine
virtues and glory; for as heaven is of a reality different from earth, so is
the heavenly man from the earthy, and so therefore his works and wealth: but
this spiritualness (for those terms are promiscuous) came by divine promise and
covenant of heaven (of a spiritual and supernatural nature) signed,
sacramented, sealed, conveyed by types of Gods own instituting and sanctifying
to that end; and therefore they did effect that end of making men that were
transformed by Faith in them, to be spiritual in our sense of 1 Cor. 15.44. to
say hereon that the air was the immediate vessel and basis of Gods imbreathed
Image, spiritual nature, and immortal being in man, were a parergon and
paradox; more to say that the heavenly spiritualnes, or spiritual heavenlines
of the new man, is more properly imputative, institutive, or relative than
real; (though its proper gifts, moral and moral, and blessings personal and
possessal be real) and therefore I refer the clearing to a larger and fitter
place, because I conceive them more precious and useful; than may here be fully
shown; where I will add a third, that mercy and repentance ought to have been
expected, endeavored, and prayed for by Adam before Christ was promised: And a
fourth, that the means thereof must be by the union of persons offended and
offending: A fifth is, that unitable person of the Trinity, must be the
relative, ordive, authoritive, institutive, etc. person. A sixth, that glorious
and free mercy, compassion, and pity, must be the communicative faculties of
this new procreation and birth; but I cease these for the present: But to
return to likeness and unlikeness of these two last which is only in the
degree, and that only in the two latter quarters of them; yea for ought I know
only in their bodily, earthly, external part. As for the other kind of glory
of heaven spoken of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. and 22. Ezekiel. 40. to 48. they
are only typical, (and to our present capacity, of outward glory) promising all
perfect content, joy, life, and glory of the whole man; which being
immortalized, heavenized, and perfectly spiritized, shall reign in the height
of glory.

The third Method.
NAture (as existing) is Gods Fabric of the Chaos, with its distinct forms,
powers, and fruits, of his first 6. days working: 1. its subject matter, etc.
was that Chaos, Genesis 1.2. 2. its project, form, etc. is the frame of the whole,
and its parts thence to v. 31.3. Their eject, efficacy, etc. first passive, and
receptive from God, then active and revertive toward him. 4. All their object,
end, etc. in it self, is perfect natural good and content; in God, is its
praising and thanking him in all stableness and serviceableness.

Their main and best adjuncts are Gods assertion of their being, v. 1. created,
2. was, 3. and there was light, and so often; and of their well-being in each
days work, and in the whole, v. 31.

Institution, practive of the Sabbath by his resting thereon exemplarily, Genesis
2.3. because he rested therein: whereon are founded Gods preceptive blessing it
to the holy resters thereon, and sanctifying it for divine worship, and to the
worshippers, ibid.

Preceptive in matters of preservation, i. e. what food men should eat and
order for the living terrestrials, Chap. 1. Ver. 29, 30.

Procreation, i. e. the Ordinance of Marriage, with its blessing. Chap. 2.22.

Government, i. e. the subjection of all other Chaols unto man, to be ordered
by him in all their natural dispositions and faculties, as he in his wisdom
seemed good, Genesis 1.26, 28. but the power of life or limb was not hereby
granted, v. 29. with Chap. 9.2. to 6.

Worship Divine, i. e. of what is commanded in the second Commandment, Genesis
2.8. to 17.

THe Law was Gods ladder set for man to climb to heaven by his power, i. e.
Paradise, Adam as the Workman and Ruler thereof, and the Trees of life and
knowledge with the rest; which were imposed on Adam as cultive Institutions by
virtue of the second Commandment: but proposed also to him by God (as the
Disposer of the Spiritual third Heaven, and its eternal life, joy, riches,
glory, and content) as divine Signs thereof instituted by him to that end (and
therefore as Divine Sacraments, Seals, and Seisins thereof) if he would accept
that offered Covenant, (which he did) and also perform it, which he did not.
Now Gods proposing Paradise to be a Sacrament, or significant Rite of Heaven,
and God as worker and orderer, etc of all in heaven, and the tree of life, of
heavenly life therein, i. e. of spiritual and eternal union and communion with
that God thereby, with condition of his real enjoyment of the signed, if he
observed those signs and their adjuncts, until the day of judgment then also
prefixed; and also avoided the eating the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
i. e. of the sign of its contrary evil, i. e. of eternal death, disunion, and
discommunion with God, and all his good: and Adam's accepting that conditional
Covenant, concurring; established that Law or first Covenant of salvation, or
heavenly glorification by man's own works, in an Epitome fit for man in his
perfect Naturals; and iterate in folio with the Israelites in the wilderness,
and fervently and frequently affronting the Gospel. Which Adam and Eve breaking
in their eating of the tree of knowledge; brake, and so lost Heaven wagered
for, and Earth engaged for it, and so they and their issue were cast from the
right of both, presently, and are reserved to the set time of trial thereof, and
so to hell: and in the mean time, are to be preserved thereto by natural means,
and are to expect and accept Gods mercy, compassion, and pity, in his offered
pardon; and his love, grace, and blessing, for his better means of his bringing
them to heaven and its happiness.

THe Gospel is Gods message to man of the said pardon and means by the union of
the Son, real ordive, or relative person of God, oftended, by man's breach of
his ordive and relative Institutions, with that so offending man, and by his
taking on him his said person and case, and therein dis-imputing his demerits
by his atoning death and sufferings, and imputing his own merits of his
accomplishing the Law, unto his believers on him therein, by his infused spirit
of Faith, the evidence, argument, earnest, ground, acknowledgment, and
infallible assurance of both; and of our ^^^nion, adoption, marriage, and
engraffing into Christ; but not the hand or instrument on our part to receive
them, much less as a condition prerequisite, no nor correquisite; (though it be
an active correquisite, inseparable from that our union, adoption, marriage,
etc.) much less is it the cause of our justification, union, etc. for the
immediate effecting cause is, Gods assurance of my heart, by his word and
spirit co-working, that I am elect by him through Christ to salvation: Now it
is no uniting assuring evidence, etc. except my heart be thereof consentingly,
and contentedly acknowledging the same, which therefore is included in Gods
part, gift, grace, and absolute working of our willingness: first, immediately
and properly in the order of nature, passive in us; but at the same time, act
and receiving it, it is also actively willing, assuring, acknowledging, and
testifying the same, by Gods inherent grace, infused at the same moment and
act, with the said assuring, testifying, etc. on Gods part; but our act is no
way first, 1 John 4.19. Phil. 3.9. the places and proofs are too large for this
radical Index of this Gospel root of Theology, Religion, and Salvation. The
last parenthesis cleereth me from excluding the activeness of Faith from the
act of our adoption, much less do I abate the necessity of our obedience, love,
attentiveness, and cheerful serviceableness, in all Moral and Gospel-duties, as
justifiers of our justifying Faith, to our own and others consciences, as
symptoms, fruits, testimonies, and workings of true, living, and lively Faith,
and our said union, adoption, etc. thereby: I exclude only their proper
causative necessity, from our instant act of adoption, union, justification,
etc. which the scope and soul of the Gospel also excludes; for if any proper
act on our part, and ab interno hominis naturalis be causally necessited
therein, as congruum, condignum, correquisite (much more as pre-requisite) it
is another legal or mutual Work-Covenant, and no new, 2d, nor promisal Covenant
on Gods part, and so no glad tidings of our salvation, but more sad news of a
farther testimony of our fall and damnation, even that we cannot act any one
act to our adopting act (much less before it) and so all Gods promises of grace
and peace are void, and both he and we faithless. By my terming the Gospel in
this respect another Law of Works, and by diverse other passages herein, I
clearly show the true nature of the Law of Works, as our second estate in hand,
and as opposite to the gospel; and also of the gospel; and so the true
difference between them, i. e. in Gods absolute, free, powerful, and saving
efficacy, promised and performed in the gospel, but not in the law; yet have
they both the same heavenly estate; though the Law have it only in and by
Divine Sacramental instituted Covenant, and the gospel have it by Christ's
taking it on him, and completing it, and imputing that completing to us, and
infusing its Divine, Spiritual, and incorruptible nature into us in all its
kinds, and imparting its happiness in its true nature, and true hope of all
their perfection in degree; which is the difference of the fourth and complete
heavenly estate from the two other: of all which three relative estates of
mankind, the first and natural state is the real subject and personal
hypostasis, without their abrogating the law of nature (summed in the
Decalogue) in any part, but only sanctifying it.

HEaven is Gods complete Divine Kingdom, completing our three other head
estates into an higher, diviner, and more heavenly and spiritual degree than is
proper to their own nature. It is, 1. subjective, native, moral, instinctive,
etc. Genesis 1.1. 2. Projective, stative, medial, decreative, institutive,
distinctive, etc. as in our second head. 3. Ejective, dative, medal,
recreative, modal, pertinctive, constitutive, restitutive, etc. as in our third
head, and frequently in the gospel. 4. Objective, rative, metal, perbeative,
attinctive, contentive, etc. as in this fourth head.

In a word, it is the sub-object, i. e. the main, prime, proper, sole adequate
object of the Trinity; the first-last subject of all divined or godded, the
(...), the first-last godded, or object of the godhead. For it was the first
father, or Creator of time, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created Heaven, in
the beginning of time, which is mensura rerum; heaven then being the first res
which God any way created; and a measure being an instrument, whose essence as
such, is in its use; it gave the being to time, and God to heaven; before which
there was properly no time, but only eternity. For though man, the Law,
Christ, the gospel, their spiritual gifts, graces and glories, be in time, and
since the Creation of all other things become heavenly, and so all things of
heaven, and so complete heaven was not the first Creature: yet that gain-sayeth
not my assertion, that the third heaven was the first object or creature; for
gradus non variant sed ornant specient, degrees adorn, but alter not the kind
of things. But how was it the first subject, since till after the whole other
Creation, it had no adjuncts created? the want of which destroys its
subjectship, the essence of a relative as such, being in its correlative, as he
is no husband that has no wife? etc. The Angels alone make sufficient answer;
but our Father which art in heaven, and heaven is my throne, etc. make a
fuller; and master and servant make a true and competent family, though the
masters wife and children make it complete; and the Angels are Gods household
servants, Heb. 1.7. and God begets, adopteth, and marryeth Christians; the
distinctness between God and Christ, here needs not. How the Law was an
adjunct of heaven, is more doubtful; yet is it shown that its state was
heavenly, and that its sacramentalness of heaven estated them in that heavenly
estate, for and to whom it was so instituted, by the author and order of
heaven, and its holy signs; now then all things heavenly, are adjuncts to
heaven as to their subject: but farther, it is that state whereby we are
enrighted to heaven, it being fully accomplished by Christ's death and
resurrection, imputed and published to us, and received by us, and so the law
gives us our heavenly estate; and the gospel, the answerable nature; of the
complete degree of both, glorified heaven is but the Apex, Meta, Butt, the
highest and utmost degree, yea and the first and lowest station and foundation;
whereby both the law and gospel are evident, yea eminent adjuncts to heaven;
they therefore being now made ours, who were before only natural men, yea the
first and legal Covenant was made with and by us only as natural men; our
persons are now also of the nature of that estate and Covenant, and therefore
heavenly; and therefore also our persons are now adjuncts of heaven, and of an
heavenly estate thereby, and of an heavenly nature by the gospel; all which
three are encorporate and completed in heaven: wherefore these four thus
encorporate, make up the first-last encorporate and complete godded of the
godhead; yea our natural, legal, evangelical, and celestial estates and cases,
being thus encorporate and complete, make up the glorious and adequate crown,
heart, heir, and glory of heaven, in the first-last, deep-high, largest and
compleatest state and sense, we being considered as relatively united unto
Christ the relative person of the Trinity, and therefore with the whole Trinity
it self; than which more cannot be said of true and perfect happiness in kind,
my proper and immediate aim; but it is hyperbole transcendency of glory, joy,
and precious benefit, is not to be known nor uttered in this life.

God in the first words of his Word says, In the beginning God created heaven:
which Christ minding said, In my Fathers house there are many mansions,
Palaces for his sons, Joh. 14.2. which Paul calls the third Heaven, 2 Cor.
12.2. and Paradise, v. 4. which is expressed to mean Gods eternal kingdom, of
heavenly life and glory, Rev. 2.7. and 22.14. especially Luke 23.43. which is
evidently and eminently mentioned in the Scripture, as the highest apex, and
crown of our happiness on Gods part, or desire and hope on ours. This heaven is
that house and throne of God which denominateth him to be heavenly; and in that
respect is he proposed to be prayed unto, Mat. 6.9. Luke 11.2.

But our present subject is that heaven, Genesis 1.1. which was in all things
complete at the first, but in the divine and immediate correlatives to God, as
the Father, King, Husband, and Lord thereof, which are now in framing of
natural persons, estated in an heavenly and spiritual estate by the law, and
ennatured of an heavenly and divine nature by the gospel, and to be
enheritanced, enthroned, bedded and boarded eternally therein, as in the godded
goddome of the absolute eternal God thereof. This heaven is Gods creative
house, Joh. 14.2. throne and rest, Act. 7.49. Esaiah 66.1. which he created for
that end, as considerable by Angels and Man. As it is a subject we have handled
it already, and in its causative respects; we are therefore here to respect it
only in its original and distinct existency and integrality; and then of its
divine subjectiveness, as God ordered it to be the sole universal subject of
all things, which are not really, properly, and simply God: and so as it is the
one and only subject of the Deity or Trinity: In the former respect, the
integrum is the entire local fabric of that divine house, city, bedchamber,
and dining chamber, with all its parts, furniture, and possessors; its
integrals are both real or quantitive, and personal or relative. The real are,
1. the place of Gods discernable presence, as the Father. 2. The place of
Christ's visible presence. 3. The place of the Holy Ghosts manifestive presence.
4. The several mansions of every Son and Daughter of God. 5. The several
stations of every Angel. 6. The several places of every ornament of the whole,
or any part, which what they be are not revealed, but in a module or
resemblance, fitted to the capacity of man on earth; and to the expression of
the greatest glory on earth, prophesied and promised to Israel, Rev. 21. and
22. Ezekiel. 40. to 48.

The personal are the several persons possessing all those places; who all have
also a relative respect to each other, and that both lineal and collateral.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAga the 16. Line the 14. for totally, read totallity, p. 17. l. 2. f.
Churches, r. Church, p. 35. l. 24. f. name, r. main, p. 44. l. 23, 24. r.
(...), after (...) add (...), p. 47. l. 5. r. 2 Timothy 3. p. 48. l. 1. r. in
order. l. 21. r. and 3. 2, 16. p. 54. l. 29. f. out, r. our. p. 66. l. 3. f.
nor, r. not. p. 79. l. 13. r. 1 Cor. 8.19. p. 86. l. 4. r. or root, l. 12. r.
observed, p. 92. l. 16. r. answering, p. 1^1. l. 4. r. affinity, p. 116. l. 1.
f. v. 7. r. v. 1. p. 145. l. 8. r. by the, p. 205. l. 6. f. sixth, r. third, and
p. 204. l. 24. for third, r. fourth, etc. to the tenth false worship. p. 205.
l. 13. r. Act. 16. p. 227. l. 5. r. 19. Chap. p. 268. l. 2. r. 14. Chap.

Reader, to mend these faults, if help thou lend*
Thou Wilt be thine own, mine, and the Authors friend.
These Books following are Printed for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard.
AN Exposition, with Practical Observations on the nine first Chapters of the
Proverbs in 4o. by Francis Tailor of Canterbury in Kent.

An Exposition on the whole Book of Canticles, with Practical Observations on
every verse, By John Robotham in 4o.

An Idea, or Body of Church Discipline, By John Rogers in 4o.

Lucas Redivivus, or the Gospel-Physitian, prescribing, by way of meditation,
Divine Physic to prevent Diseases, not yet entered upon the Soul, By John
Anthony in 4o.

Anabaptists Meribah, or Waters of Strife, being an Answer to Mr. Lambs Book of
Dipping, By Joh. Price, in 4o.

The Original of Dominion, or the rights of Kings, proved from Scriptures, By
Rob. Weldon, Dr. in Divinity, in 4o.

A Comment on Ruth, together with two Sermons, one teaching how to live well;
the other, minding all how to dye well, By Thomas Fuller, the Author of the
Holy State.

Horum fabulosorum hominum hoc minus ferenda est impietas, quod Prophetarum
Divinorum and Evangelistarum (...) scripta ad stabiliendas Vanitaets suas
detorquent; and ea Ezekieli, Danieli, and Apocalypseos authori afsingunt, quae
Sanctissimis Viris ne in mentum quidem venerunt unquam. Scultetus in 2 Timothy
3.1. Aureum seculum in Coelis, ferreum in terris expectandum. Idem.


