TWO LETTERS Of great Consequence, Sent from HAMBOROVGH; Which were Intercepted
going to OXFORD. The one, To the Lord Digby; The other, To Sir Thomas Row;
Exactly relating the Proceedings of the Wars BETWEEN The Swedes and the King of
Denmark. In which Letters appears the excellent Success of those Noble SWEDES
in their several Defeats against the DANES. Read in the House of Commons this
13. of February, 1643.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That these Letters be forthwith printed
and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed for Edw. Husbands. Febr. 14. 1643.

To the Right Honorable the Lord DIGBIE, Principal Secretary of State, and
one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
At Court. Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
TO clear the doubt and different reports were here spread of the Duke of
Holsteins agreement with Feildmarshall Tortenson; (whereof my last weeks made
mention) we have now certain advertisement that this Prince has accorded to
give one hundred thousand Dollers, to free his own Country and people;
Ditmarsh being exempted, and the Gentry also within his jurisdiction; for these
are to be holden unto a like contribution, and treatment, as the rest of the
Gentry of Holstein, in that part thereof, which belongs to the King of
Denmark. And, as for this Dukes two Regiments, they are disbanded; part of
them being taken on by the Swedes, and part into the King of Denmarks service,
and these last sent away for Gluckstadt. As I guessed by my last, so is it
already fallen out with Kremper Marsh, Wilster Marsh, and Ditmarsh: for all
these lower Lands near the Elve, and West Sea, this frosty weather are fallen
into the hands of the Swedes Army: 150. of the Paysans, with some Soldiers
being there slain, and 300. more taken prisoners, that made resistance; and
all these places will doubtless fare the worse, because they refused Tortenson
entrance, when he first required it both by message and writing. Yesterday, by
an express, I received a letter my self from Colonel Douglas (who as Major
General commands the left wing of the Swedes Army) in these words, Viz. The
ninth of this month we have begun our wars very fortunatly here in Juitland;
in respect we did encounter the whole Cavalerie of the Danes in these parts;
who were twelve hundred horse strong, of the best mounted manly-like-men, that
ever I did see, a mile on this side Colding; and beat them so, as that there
did not 200. come into their Leaguer, the most part of their Officers killed,
and their Principalls taken prisoners, as Lieutenant Colonel Bockwald (who
commanded them) Ritmeister Ulfild, Ritmeister Luke, and diverse other
Ritmeisters, Lieutenants and under Officers: we are now lying here in the
Dorpes about the King of Denmarks Foot, which lies in a retrenched Leaguer on
this side of the Belt, over against Middleford in Funen; they are esteemed 7 or
8 thousand strong, but more then the half part miserable poor Bawres; we are
about an exploit, which if it effectuate will make us a good war. Thus far
he. Now this day here is fresh news come, that the Swedes with their Ordnance,
were since advanced before this Leaguer; and that after they had Canoncerd upon
it a while, and that the Danes saw them ready to make a fair assault upon
them, they threw down their Arms, and cried out for Quarter; the Marshall of
Denmark Andreas Bilke (who Commanded in chief) seeing themselves too weak to
oppose the Swedes, took away their Colors, Ordnance, chief Officers, and as
many of the best common Soldiers, as so short time would give him leave; and
escaped therewith by small shipping into Funen; yet left behind them sundry
Captains and under Officers, besides all their Horses, and four thousand five
hundred Foot men, whereof one thousand old Soldiers, and therewith many of the
Bawres or Paysons also willingly ranged themselves amongst the Swedes Troops;
the rest, after the Soldiers had stripped them of their best cloths, were sent
away unto their homes: This is the effect of a Letter sent unto this Town,
which was written by Tortenson himself; who added hereunto, that by this
general defeat of the Danish Forces both Horse and Foot, he accounted the
whole Continent on this side the Belt, to be as good as in their Possession;
and this letter of his I my self have seen, bearing date at Middleford Skonce
the 14. of this month. What the King of Denmark does in Zealand, Funen, or
Schonen, we know not, more then in general, that he makes all the preparation
for the wars that he can: for all the Passages out of Denmark are stopped, so
that we can have no certain Intelligence from thence as yet. It has been
rumoured here abroad all this week that the States of Denmark, and Sweden, were
treating together upon the borders of both Kingdoms; and such advertisement
was brought also unto the Chancellor of Denmark (who is yet here) as I had it
from himself. But Lowis de Geere (a man of good account, and at this time
employed from the Crown of Sweden for Holland) arrived here yesterday,
affirming that himself came by shipping from Calmar (being not far off the
borders) the 12. of this month, and that then there was neither any such
meeting, nor yet any speech thereof; but that Fieldmarshall Gustavius Horn had
20. thousand men on Foot, and was with them to march into Denmark the 20. of
this month. The Chancellor aforesaid faith, the King of Denmark has in
Schonen already 13. or 14. thousand men to make head against the Swedes there;
and that 18 thousand more are shortly to come out of Norwegen, but these being
(for the most part) Paysans, not injured to the wars; it is to be feared that
they will not be able to withstand the fierce irruptions of the Swedes Armies;
especially seeing these last have had already such success in their
enterprises on this side the Belt. The Chancellor also let me understand that
the King his Master, has lately sent unto him, and the rest of his Colleagues
at Osnabrugge, his Letters of revocation; requiring them to come away from
thence with all expedition. So what will become of the general Treaties when
they are departed, we shall see ere long, at least whither they will go
forward or not. We have nothing this week of the Imperial Army above in High
Germany; save only that they have betaken themselves into their Winter
Quarters. And this being what this week affords, I humbly take leave, and
remain ever

Your Lordships most humble and most faithful Servant, J. Avery.
Hambrough the 19/29 Ian. Anno 1644.
To the Right Honorable, Sr. Thomas Row, Knight, Chancelour of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council, etc.
LONDON Or elsewhere. Right Honorable, etc.
I Am told this day, that Fieldmarshall Tortenson has given the Lordship of
Wandesbeck (belonging to Count Pentz, and situate within two English miles of
this town) unto one whom the Officers call here, The Swedes Agent; and that he
has already taken possession thereof, this seeming to argue what mind the
Swedes bear, when they thus begin to dispose of places in Holstein as of a
conquered Country. From Dansick the Hollands Resident writes of news to be
arrived there, out of Moravia, that the Emperors towns in Hungaria have
declared Ragotzy for an Enemy, that he has an Army on foot of above 30.
thousand men; and that the Turk will join unto them 24000. more to make war
against the Emperor; sure it is, that he has received moneys from the crown
of Sweden, and France both; and this makes many to conjecture, that the
Emperor will have work enough for his Armies above in the Country; and that
the Swedes will have no disturbance from thence unto their proceedings in these
parts: others conceive that the Crown of Sweden have a purpose to make a
particular peace with the Emperor, that they may the better intend and pursue
their new begun war against the King of Denmark; and it is written from
Leipsick, that they have a conference about this time with the Imperialists at
Fridburg in Lusatia, about a truce, a little more time will give us more light
to judge of the weight of these conjectures; but in the mean time, the
Landgravin of Hessen, has sent a principal Minister of Hers to expostulate
with Tortenson, for drawing away all his forces so far off from assisting of
Hers, and for beginning of this new war to stir up more enemies against
themselves and their Allies. This being what this week affords, I humbly kiss
your hands, and remain

Your Honors most humble and most faithful Servant, I. AVERY.
Hambrough the 12/22. Ian. Anno 1644.
FINIS.

