MILK FOR BABES; OR, A. MOTHERS CATECHISM for Her CHILDREN.

Wherein chief saving Principles of Christian Religion, through the body of it,
fit first to inform Children in; are
1 Propounded. 2 Expounded. 3 Applied.


The sum of which is set down in the following Pages; Together with the
Questions and Answers which are the grounds of the Catechism.

Whereunto also annexed, THREE SERMONS; Preached at Andrews Holborn at a
public Fast, and at Covent Garden, upon several occasions.

By ROBERT ABBOT Preacher of Gods Word at Southwick in Hantshire.

PSA. 34.11. Come ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of
the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by John Legate for Philemon Stephens, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the gilded Lion. 1646.

I Have perused this Catechism, entitled, Milk for Babes: and these three
Sermons on several Texts. And approving them as pious and profitable, I
license them to be printed and published.

JOHN DOWNAME.

The Sum of the following Catechism, may be conceived thus.
IT speaks to a threefold state of ours. Our estate
1 Of Creation: Of which you may find two points; 1 Our Creator: who is 1
Confessed: Q. 1. 2 Distinguished from the Son: Q. 2. Holy Gh. Q. 3.
3 Described: 1 By his unity in Trinity, Q. 4. 2 By his Sufficiency. Efficiency.
Q. 5.

2 His end in making us: which is 1 Propounded, Q. 6. 2 Amplified, by the 1
Manner: Q. 7. 2 Means teaching. Q. 8.

1 Commandment 1. Q. 9. 2 Commandment 2. Q. 10. 3 Commandment 3. Q. 11. 4
Commandment 4. Q. 12. 5 Commandment 5. Q. 13. 6 Commandment 6. Q. 14. 7
Commandment 7. Q. 15. 8 Commandment 8. Q. 16. 9 Commandment 9. Q. 17. 10
Commandment 10. Q. 18.
2 Of Corruption: of which it sets down our misery 1 By sin: Q. 19. 2 By
punishment: Q. 20.
3 Of Renovation: Of which it teaches us 1 The means working it [Christ Jesus]
Q. 20. Who is further described by his 1 Natures: Q. 22. 2 Work for use: Set
down two ways; 1 By the greatest manifestation of it at the latter end: where
two, 1 His Passion: Q. 13. 2 His possibility to undergo it.
2 By the efficacy of it: both in respect 1 Of the end: Q. 24. 2 Of the persons
for whom: Q. 25.


2 The means applying it [Faith] described. 1 By the nature of it: Q. 26. 2 By
the working of it: in respect of 1 The beginning of it: Q. 27. 2 The growth of
it: by means 1 Without us: which are two 1 The Word of Christ, 2 The Sacraments
of Christ: Q. 28. which are described 1 By their Nature: Q. 29. 2 By their
Number: Q. 30. 3 By their use: both of 1 Baptism: Q. 31. 2 Supper of the Lord:
about which 1 What use of it: Q. 32. 2 To whom: Q. 33.



2 Within us, and by us, Prayer: Q. 34. Which is further described, 1 By the
nature of it: Q. 35. 2 By the matter, The Lords Prayer, Q. 36. Expounded by the
1 Preface: Q. 37. 2 Petition 1. Q. 38. 3 Petition 2. Q. 39. 4 Petition 3. Q.
40. 5 Petition 4. Q. 41. 6 Petition 5. Q. 42. 7 Petition 6. Q. 43. 8
Conclusion: Q. 44.






A CATECHISM FOR Children, thorough the chief points of the Body of Divinity,
to prepare them for the Lords Supper.
1 Question.

WHo made thee?

A. God the Father.

2 Q. Who redeemed thee?

A. Jesus Christ.

3 Q. Who sanctified thee?

A. The Holy Ghost.

4 Q. How many Gods are there?

A. There are three persons, and to us Christians but one God.

5 Q. What is God?

A. He is that Almighty one, who made and governs all things.

6 Q. Wherefore did God make thee?

A. To do him service.

7 Q. How ought thou to serve him?

A. As he has commanded in his laws?

8 Q. Which are these laws?

A. Those ten words, which God wrote in two Tables of stone, and are set down
in Exodus and Deuteronomy.

9 Q. What is the first Commandment?

A. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

10 Q. What is the second?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor any likeness of
things, that are in heaven above, nor in the earth beneath, nor in the waters
under the earth; thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the
Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
children, unto the third, and fourth generation of them that hate me, and
showing mercy to thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

11 Q. What is the third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

12 Q. What is the fourth Commandment?

A. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: six days shall thou labor, and
do all thy work. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven, and earth, the sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed
the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

13 Q. What is the fifth Commandment?

A. Honor thy Father, and Mother: that thy days may be long upon the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

14 Q. What is the sixth?

A. Thou shall not kill.

15 Q. What is the seventh?

A. Thou shall not commit adultery.

16 Q. What is the eight?

A. Thou shall not steal.

17 Q. What is the ninth?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

18 Q. What is the tenth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighhours house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.

19 Q. Art thou able to keep these commandments?

A. No: let me do what I can, yet I break them every day, more then I can
express.

20 Q. What punishment is appointed for the breakers of Gods commandments?

A. Gods curse, which is the everlasting destruction of body, and soul.

21 Q. How shall thou escape this curse?

A. Only by Jesus Christ our Lord.

22 Q. What is Jesus Christ?

A. He is the eternal son of God, made man.

23 Q. What has Christ Jesus done for thee?

A. He suffered the pains of death for me.

24 Q. Seeing Christ was God, how could he dye?

A. He was God, and man: as he was God he died not, but as man he died for my
sins, and rose again for my justification.

25 Q. Are all men saved by Christ's death?

A. No, only they are saved, who have a true faith.

26 Q. What is this true faith?

A. It is the resting of the soul upon Christ for salvation.

27 Q. How must this faith be wrought in thee?

A. The Holy Ghost must work it in my heart, by the preaching of the Gospel.

28 Q. How is this faith confirmed in thee?

A. By hearing the same Gospel preached, and using the Sacraments.

29 Q. What are Sacraments?

A. They are signs, and seals, of the righteousness of faith.

30 Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two only: Baptism, and the supper of the Lord.

Q. What benefit have thou by Baptism?

A. A new estate in Christ, and so, the forgiveness of my sins, if I,
repenting, do believe according to the Covenant of Baptism.

32 Q. What benefit have thou by the Lords supper?

A. The body, and blood of Christ, verily, and indeed taken, and received by my
believing soul.

33 Q. How must thou reverently prepare for this Sacrament?

A. I must examine my self, whether I have desire, repentance, faith,
thankfulness, and charity, fit for the Lords table.

34 Q. Is not prayer an excellent means also to make thy faith grow?

A. Yes: it is a special means appointed by God.

36 Q. What is prayer?

A. A religious moving of our souls to God, to draw us into communion with him,
against sin, for grace, and all blessings.

37 Q. Where can thou more fully learn the matter of prayer?

A. In that which is commonly called the Lords prayer.

38 Q. What is the entrance into this prayer?

A. Our Father which art in heaven.

39 Q. What is the first petition?

A. Hallowed be thy Name.

40 Q. What is the second?

A. Thy Kingdom come.

41 Q. What is the third petition?

A. Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.

42 Q. What is the fourth Petition?

A. Give us this day our daily bread.

43 Q. What is the fifth petition?

A. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

44 Q. What is the sixth?

A. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

45 Q. What is the conclusion of this prayer?

A. For thine is the Kingdom, the power and the Glory, for ever. Amen.

A briefer Catechism to be opened at first.
Question.

GIve me the sum of Religion in one sentence?

A. A sinner, being justified by faith, is bound to live a godly life.

Here consider three things:
1 Thy danger: A sinner; therefore subject to the miseries of this world, and
that to come. 2 Thy deliverance: Being justified by faith; and therefore in
Christ, by the Covenant of grace for forgiveness, and all other things
promised. 3 Thy duty: Is bound to live a godly life; and therefore from Christ
bound in the Sacraments to faith working by love.
Or more fully thus:

Q. Give me the sum of Religion in four words?

A. My Generation, Degeneration, Regeneration, and Glorification.

Here thou must consider;
1 What thou art from God: A creature, brought into the world from thy parents.
2 What thou art in and from Adam: A sinner, subject unto all miseries, even to
the nether-most hell. 3 What thou art in Christ: A new creature, delivered from
the curses of the law, that thou may embrace the blessings of the Gospel. 4
What thou art from Christ: walkin a new course, till thou come unto Glory.
Or the words of Scripture, thus:

Q. Tell me: what is thy Religion?

A. 1 It is the faith of Gods Elect, and the acknowledgement of the truth which
is after godliness. Tit. 1.1. 2 It is my holding fast of the form of sound words
which I have heard in faith and love, 2 Timothy 1.13. 3 It is all things
pertaining to life, and godliness. 2 Pet. 1.6. 4 It is the knowledge and
service of God. 2 Chronicles. 28.9. 5 It is faith working hy love. Gal. 5.6.
None of these descriptions are contrary either to other, but subordinate: and
provided; you comprehend under them, what is necessarily to be believed, and to
be practiced, all is well.

TO His much Honored Patroness, the Lady HONORIA NORTON, of Southwick in
Hantshire: All happiness here and here-after.
MAdam, I must make my Apology before I say a word more. I present a Catechism
unto you who are able to instruct others: and a mothers Catechism for her
children, when you have no children of your own under your instruction now.
This may seem strange to them that know not you to be to me a great encourager
to this little work: and to them that are ignorant of your affections to a
common good: You have had experience of the power, and profit of it in your
family, and in the Congregation over which you care; and you will have me do
some little good by it (as you think) to others that may see, and use it. The
blessing of God be upon it: and their blessing fall upon you (if they receive
good by it) who have bin the main cause, under God, of my setting it forth. I
confess that I have, thus many years last past, been solicited, by many well
minded people, (who have had the benefit of my private exercises) to have let
this unpolished birth to walk into many houses; But being loath to hold out a
little candle to a quick-sighted age; or to prevent the more elaborate
endeavors of my learned brethren, I have shut it up, rather in my head, where
it stuck by judgment, and frequency; then under my pen, which is not so happy
as my tongue, in this kind. But now being overcome by your Ladyships
entreating-commands, and commanding favors; I can hold it a prisoner, no
longer. I let it loose from my head and heart, to my pen, and paper, and from
thence to every English soul, to be either embraced, or rejected according to
present fancy. If it prove un-successefull, I Will bear the blame; who, as an
old man being ready to deny my self a being in this world, have a little
learned to deny my self in this, and suffer words of diminution: But if it
prove acceptable to Christ's Church, and profitable to his meanest Members; you
(Madam) shall have the thanks, and credit, under whose wings it has found
leisure to be born. I know that you will be commending it to some of your
friends, if not out of self-worth, yet out of a conceit and expectation of some
such like thing. But, I beseech you be wary. To praise that which deserves it
not, may speak well of your affections, but discommend your judgment: and I
would not have you engage where it may be a prejudice to you in the issue.
Indeed, this little Treatise is a Catechism. And whereas preaching is a
speaking unto men to instruction, 1 Cor. 14.3 Luke 1.4. Act. 2. Mat. 22.37 Joh.
3.16.
edification, and comfort; Catechizing is a speaking to men for instruction
mainly: preaching is a dilating of one member of religion into a body;
Catechizing is the contracting of the whole into a a sum: Preaching is for all
sorts; Catechizing for the young, and ignorant: this may commend the work, if
the workman were answerable, and, as a Master Builder did lay the foundation.
But I know not how it falls out; this Treatise is much, in a little, and that
little derived from the capacity of a mother, to the capacity of a child: and
therefore can promise nothing, but poorness of judgment, and plain-nesse of
affections.

Whether it be worthy others view or no, it will be acceptable to them that
love and desire it; and so, I humbly present it to you (Madam). Though you have
no children of your own, but they that are above these instructions; yet have
you many grandchildren, whom, like Olive-branches, you rejoice to see about
your table. These, it may be, may be under them, and by the use of this book,
grace may by little and little, drop like dew upon them. Be but as you are,
like Timothy his mother and grandmother (who trained him from a child in the
Scriptures) to train them up in undoubted principles, as often as they come
about you; and they will, in after time, thank God that they had such a
grandmother. I pray to our good God, that this little Book may but help you a
little; and it has done all the work I can expect from you.

Be pleased but to take notice of of the honorable work of Catechizing, and of
the fruit of it. Catechizing is very highborn. Before the flood, Adam
catechized Abel. ^ eb. 11.4.
For it is said that Abel offered hyfaith: and faith embraces a word:
therefore, when there was none written; it must be by Adams catechizing Abel,
as he had learned of God. After the flood, Genesis 14.14 Genesis 17.1.
Abraham had his catechized servants: Genesis 18.18.
and we find his Catechism to be the sum of the law: and the sum of the
Gospel: which had such sweet fruit upon his family, Genesis 24.63
that his son went out to pray, and was willing to submit to be sacrificed: Gen
22.
and his servant prayed when he was about his work, Genesis 24.12 26.33. Genesis 14.
gives thanks when he found success, and will not eat before he has done his
Masters business: yea, all his servants, at his word, were ready to hazard their
lives in Lots rescue. In the time of the Law, God commanded to whet the Word
upon their children by catechizing: Deuteronomy. 6.7.
in which they were so punctual, that under persecuting Antiochus, and after to
Christ, the Rabbis report in Jerusalem, not fewer then 400. houses for
catechizing. This made the Jews know the Scriptures as perfectly as their own
names, whereas most amongst us know scarcely the names of the Scriptures. Luke
1.4. Act. 18.
In the time of the Gospel, as Theophilus, and Apollos were catechized: Gal.
6.6.
so God appoints a great reward for Catechizers, even to be made partakers of
all our goods. Now, for the fruit of Catechizing; certainly it brings a more
distinct knowledge of the grounds of religion; a good entrance to eat the
stronger meat of the Scriptures; and to learn us to make an Hedge of Divinity,
to enclose, all our readings, and hearings from the word, within their proper
bounds, for the settling of our judgments, and raising up our affections
insuperably. This was seen well enough of old. Therefore an Ancient has
observed, that, by virtue of Catechizing, there was never a King in the world,
but suffered alteration in his Heathenish Religion within forty years after
Christ: and the greatest enemy that ever the Christian Religion had (Julian the
Persecuter), left off inventing of torments, and put down Schools of Learning,
and Catechisings, the only ways to build up Christianity. By how much more
honorable it is, and by how much excellent use it has had, by so much the
more (Madam) love, respect, and countenance it in all yours.

I confess that this work will help but a little, very little: but better a
little, then nothing at this excellent work. We find in these distracted
times, the foundation mightily deserted, and some of them shaken: but
super-structives, yea antistructives to be pegged up to the highest strains: In
which respect it may be said of us, as of the old Philosophers, and newer
Schoolmen, that the noise of their disputations so filled the ears of God, that
he could not hear their prayers: and even so (I fear) may it be said of us. It
behooves us, therefore, to elevate the sure grounds, and to call home to absolute
necessaries, lest in finding barks; we lose trees: and maintaining twigs; we
lose the sap and comfort of the root. As I began with an Apology, so I had need
end with one for my length, but that I am very well assured of your religious
love, and patience to him, who is (Madam)

Yours in the service of the Gospel: ROBERT ABBOT.

To his much honored Friends, MARY Lady Bakere, of Sussinghurst: and UNTON
Lady Dering, of Surrendon-Dering in Kent.
Comfort after Crosses.
WOrthy Ladies, though I have dedicated my ensuing tract (as I am bound) to my
Noble Patroness; yet can I not but write a word, or two, to you both. After
dedications, custom has prevailed to draw out an Epistle to the Readers: and
because I know not who will read my Book; or, if I did, I had little to say to
them, but wish them and theirs as much good as I intend by it: Therefore,
because I am sure, that if it fall into either of your hands, you will read,
and read, and make use of it, for the benefit of your good children; I cannot
but express my intentions fully to you both. God has set you in high places
above many others: and though the Waves have gone over you, and (it may be
causelessly) have entered into your souls, by losses, crosses, and vexations in
great proximity to you both (though to one more then to the other): yet, as
when the Mountains appeared upon the slacking of the flood, the Ark rested upon
the top of them, and Noah could easily epsy them, when other hillocks, trees,
and shrubs lay covered with waters: so when the waters of your miseries lessen,
and by the favor of God and man, are dried up, you stand aloft, and the Church
can look earnestly at you, when others yet lie under a cloud of sin, and
sorrow. I humbly beseech you therefore, that, seeing men and women are like
Jaacobs sheep, which conceived by the eye, all gazers may see you so to steer
your courses, that they may behold in you both examples of fortitude to
outface the daring world; of wisdom, to bridle tongues, and affections in
evil times; and of confidence to live above the highest waves in the rock of
your salvation. God seems to smile upon us a little with the sweet beams of
peace, thorough a thick cloud, and it is to be hoped, that God has other
graces in you to be acted in such a time, for your edification, walking in the
fear of the Lord, and comfort of the holy Ghost, as the Churches of Judea did,
when they had rest round about. But whether he storm you still with the fear of
war, and bloodshed; or wrap you up in the sweet swaddling bands of peace; you
are aloft, even both of you above your neighbors, to be made a spectacle to the
world, angels, and men. Therefore let the counsel of a poor friend be
acceptable unto you so to live that ye be not swallowed up of sorrow, so to
live, as ye be not devoured by peace. As it was said of Saul and David of old,
so may it of prosperity, and adversity, that adversity has slain 1000. but
prosperity 10000. It is a glorious thing to be in prosperity, and not to be
worse. It is a glorious thing also to be in adversity and to be better. But to
be bad in both is to make both a curse: prosperity, to be made a sweet Ladder
from which to break our necks from, when we think we are climbed up to heaven:
and adversity to be a sour Ladder to let us down into hell here, and to bring
us at last to the burning Lake which torments for evermore. The only way to
help all this is, both in prosperity, and adversity, to live in Christ. If like
the Eagles you make your Nest in this rock, your faith shall be your victory.

Let prosperity come; faith in Christ will say; Cursed is he that does not
account one days fellowship with Jesus Christ above all the glistering vanities
in this world: I will not be flattered out of Christ. Let adversity come; faith
in Christ will say, Farewell money, farewell life, farewell all things for
Christ: I will not be frighted from my Christ. That you (good Ladies) may be
helped to do so; with all thanks for your loves, I humbly present unto you
both, this little Catechism expounded, There is none of you both, but have in
your families, heard me open these grounds either to your children, or
servants. Then you were pleased to approve them, and now you will be pleased to
love them more, because they lie by you for daily use. There will many faults
be found with them, as, brevity, plainness, imperfection, and the like: but
above all that, they want the living voice, and tender heart to set an edge
upon them. As to the first faults, I confess them, and, in truth, I make this
but as a forerunner to a larger Catechism, thorough the whole body of
Divinity. If God send me health, life, and leisure, you may see that, (if this,
mean while be acceptable to the Church) and it will more copiously handle all
the grounds by way of explication, observation, and cases of conscience, which
are most obvious. As to the last fault, indeed it wants my voice, but not my
heart. For when you are warming your own and your childrens hearts with it, I
will follow it with my prayers to make it successful. Could I do more, I
would do it: Could I do less, I would not: As becomes him that has been, is,
and (by Gods blessing) will be, to both of you (worthy Ladies)

Your poor, yet hearty friend, to serve you and yours in Christ Jesus: ROBERT
ABROT.

Errata.
Page. Line. for, Read. 78 15 life, lift. 79 9 blot out then. 89 25 of, in. 110
3 does, teaches. 119 3 faith, life. 122 19 of, by. 122 23 wife, house. 122 24
work in, work it in. 124 5 where they, whereby they. 125 6 connection,
conviction. 159 17 The, by the. 163 28 In obedience, In sacrifice. 186 1 must,
may. 198 21 of both, for both. Epistle. 19,20 Infants of Jews Believers. 242
6 creatures, Creator.

A Mothers Catechism for her Children.
MY good Child, Genesis 3.16.
I have brought thee forth into this world in great sorrow: I have nourished
thee either with my own breasts, or (as I thought) by those that were better
able: I now desire not only to see thee a member of the Church by profession,
but by the power of grace; and, because thou can not be thus without the
knowledge of God, Joh. 17.2 Pet. 3.18.
and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; from the tender bowels of a
compassionate Mother, I desire to inform thee in thy estate by Nature created,
by nature corrupted, and nature restored, that, in these things which concern
thy self, thou may know God, and thy self, and grow out of fellowship with
thy self, into communion with God in Christ, that thou may have life.

Tell me therefore,

1. Q. Who made thee?

A. God the Father.

It is true: Esa. 44.2.
For thus says the Lord that made thee. And to make thee is to Give thee a
being, that is, a body, and soul, and all the parts, faculties, and powers of
them. This is of great use.

1. To enquire who made thee, and

2. To resolve that it was God.

1. enquire after him that made thee; We must enquire who made us.
Both that thou may know to whom to ascribe the glory of the work: and to
whom to go to supply the defects of thy nature (for he can best repair that
first made:) as also that thou may be acquainted to whom to go to sustain
nature. Nature has taught every thing to go to that for sustenance, which
brought it forth; as the Lamb goes to the Ewe, and the Chicken to the Hens
body.

but we desire not to be acquainted with our Maker. But I hope better things of
thee, and that which accompanies salvation. Be thou provoked to enquire after
this, and not to sacrifice to thy own nets, or to run to natural means chiefly
for supplies when thou art necessitated.

2. Resolve that it was God that made thee. Galen himself, when, God made us.
as a natural Anatomist, he did consider the frame of Man, said like an
Atheist, that he sung a song in the praise of God. (...).
But thou (my child) need not to be beholding to his confession: for thou
must be made either of nature, or of thy self, or of thy Parents, or of God.
But thou art not made of nature; for it cannot give a good reason of every
thing in thee. They that have doted most upon nature could never give a
prevailing reason of the strength of the nether jaw bone, which has such weak
supporters, nor of the heat of the stomach, which consumes fit things put into
it, yet not those parts about it. Nor art thou made of thy self: For though
the Maker know the parts of the thing made, yet thou do not know thine, no,
not by anatomy; neither can thou command, or refrain, the pulse of thy
wrist, or the motion of thy heart. Nor art thou made of thy parents: for
neither thy father that begat thee, nor I thy mother that conceived thee, knew
what was begotten, nor what was conceived; and yet it is necessary that the
cause should know the effect. What then remains but that thou should
acknowledge thy self to be of the generation of God? Act. 17.28.


secret thoughts, Psalm. 139.12, 13.
and hidden lusts. A man that made a work, can easily epsy the least fault
that another makes in it: so God can see all the disorders that Satan, and thy
wicked heart has wrought in thee: and this must make thee walk in fear of
offending such a God, and with a resolution to do all things to the honor of
him that made thee. Every man that makes a thing, does desire to have the
comfort, and credit of it, much more does God, who made man for himself, Prove.
16.4.
as well as all things else. Whether thou eat, or drink, 1 Cor. 10.31.
or what ever thou do, do all to the glory of thy God. Do to his glory in
thought, word, and deed: do to his glory in disposing thy self in all the
occurrences of this life. Thou may make other comfortable reflections upon thy
soul from this point, if thou weigh the Texts in the margin: Psalm. 149.2.
Psalm. 119.73. Psalm. 100.1, 2, 3. Job 30.13.15.
but I leave them to thy own meditations, as God shall quicken thy heart with a
love to the good word of God.

Tell me next,

2. Q. Who Redeemed thee?

A. Jesus Christ.

Mark, (my good child): Christ Redeemed us. 1 Timothy 2.6.
It is Christ that gave himself a ransom for us; even the ransom of his
blood, by which he has redeemed us out of all the world. Apoc. 5.9.
To redeem, is to buy thee again when thou were lost in thy enemies hands.
Thou were lost by the sin of Adam. As thou see when a Carp is taken by a
Fishers hook, or net, and dies, thousands of spawnes in his belly are caught,
and die with him: so was it with thee, and all mankind. We were all in that one
man in his first transgression. Therefore, Blessed Paul says, Romans 5.12, 14.
By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and passed upon
all men, even over those that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression, for that all have sinned. When thou wast in this cursed
condition, with all mankind, Christ came and bought thee again, Joh. 10.11.
by laying down his life for thee.

Paul would have the Corinthians; Ye are not your own; 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
for ye are bought with a prize: therefore glorify God in your body, and in
your spirits, which are Gods. If you buy any thing you expect the comfort of
it, whether it be for the health of your body, or of your soul. Think but the
same of Christ, and you will be willing to live to him that died for you, 2
Cor. 5.15.
and rose again.

Tell me next,

3. Q. Who sanctified thee?

A. The holy Ghost.

Mark here: The holy Ghost does sanctify us.
If I should ask thee, What it is to be sanctified? it is, to be made holy.
But when I ask thee, who sanctified thee? it is, to make thee holy; and this
is the work of the holy Ghost. Therefore Paul tells the Corinthians, when
they were changed in their state, That they were sanctified by the Spirit of
our God. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Now, the holy Ghost does sanctify thee, by taking away of sin, and giving
of grace. As, if thou were to give entertainment to a great and good friend,
thou would first sweep out the dust, and brush down the cobwebs, and then lay
out thy carpets, cushions, and other ornaments: so the holy Ghost takes the
besome of destruction, the hammer, Jer. 23.29.
and fire of the word, and sweeps out thy reigning sins by Repentance, and
the spirit of Judgment; Esa. 4.4. Gal. 5.22, 23. Ephesians. 3.17. 1 Cor. 3.16.
and then brings in the graces of the Spirit, to make thee an holy Temple for
Christ to dwell in by faith. All this the holy Ghost works by the Word,
Sacraments, and Prayer. By the Word: for Christ prays; Joh. 17.17.
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth. By the Sacraments: for
Paul says, Ephesians. 5.26.
That he sanctifies and cleanses his Church with the washing of water, by the
word; and that We being many are one bread, and one body: 1 Cor. 10.17.
for we are all made partakers of one bread; Implying that in the Lords Supper
we are sealed up into the body of Christ; and we cannot be, properly, without
holiness. By Prayer: for Christ says, that if we ask the Father he will give
us his spirit.

2 Cor. 7.1.
till thou grow to, or perfect thy holiness in the fear of the Lord. If there
were but one Mart, or Market, where all necessary commodities were to be had,
thou would ply that upon all urgent occasions: so must thou deal with the
Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, if thou would have the holy Ghost shine upon
thee in the beauty of holiness.

Tell me next, because thou namest the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, even
these three,

4. Q. How many Gods are there?

A. There are three persons, and, to us Christians, but one God.

Go to Jordan, and thou shall see the heavens opened, There are three persons.
Matthew. 3.16, 17.
whence the Father sent a voice from heaven, the Son baptized, and the Holy
Ghost descending like a Dove to make up three persons. Reflect upon thy own
Baptism, and thou shall behold thy admittance into the Church, in the name of
the Father, Matthew. 28.19.
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, to make up three persons again.

Consider our witnesses, and thou shall find that we have three that bear
record in heaven, the Father, the Word, 1 John 5.7.
and the Holy Ghost, and that these three are one.

For though there are three names or persons in the Godhead, Yet is there but
one God. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6.
and though there be many that are called Gods, and Lords, yet to us Christians
there is but one God.

This heavenly mystery may be shadowed unto thee a little in a fiered coal.
There is the substance of the coal, the light of the coal, and the heat of
the coal, and yet but one fiered coal. So soon as ever the coal is fiered
there are these three, the substance of the coal, the light, and heat of it.
So in the same Divine Essence (though in a more transcendent way) is there the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Yea it may be shadowed in thy self. So soon as ever thou art borne into this
world thou art a creature to God, a child to thy Parents, and a subject to thy
King, and yet art thou but one. So, so soon as ever as God is (that is, from
all eternity) he is Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and yet but one God.

2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.19.
For all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God; and so, is a sure word, to
which thou must take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place;
because it has this threefold testimony, in one God, which cannot fail thee.
Does the Scripture give any precept, make any promise, denounce any threatening?
Rest upon it, that thou must obey it. Embrace it, and tremble under it as Gods
truth confirmed by three witnesses which shall stand, when all other witnesses
shall fail.

Would thou power out thy devoutest prayers to God? Think upon this one God,
three Persons as a fountain to supply all thy defects. Have thou any brack or
defect in the nature of thy body and soul? Pray to God the Father, as thy
faithful Creator, that, for the merits of Christ, and by the working of the
holy Ghost, he would perfect thy parts to do him service. Have thou sinned
against thy good Maker? Pray to God the Son, as thy faithful Redeemer, that
from the love of the Father, for his merits, and by the operation of the holy
Ghost, he would procure a pardon sealed to thy conscience. Have thou, for want
of believing in his name, sinned against thy good Savior? Pray to God the Holy
Ghost, as thy faithful Sanctifier, that from the love of the Father; for the
holy bloodshed of the Son, and by his blessing work of preparation, and
Insition, he would apply thee to Christ, and make thee one with him, that thou
may have all the benefits of his Passion.

Now (my child) remember what I have said.

Q. Who made thee?

A. God.

Q. What is it to make thee?

A. To give me that being which I have.

Q. Who Redeemed thee?

A. Jesus Christ.

Q. What is it to Redeem thee?

A. To buy me again when I was lost.

Q. How came thou to be lost?

A. By the sin of Adam.

Q. How did Christ buy thee again?

A. By laying down his life for me.

Q. Who sanctified thee?

A. The holy Ghost.

Q. What is it to sanctify thee?

A. To make me holy.

Q. How does he make me holy?

A. By taking away sin, and giving me grace.

Q. By what means does he this?

A. By the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. Three persons for all my necessities, and but one God to serve alone.

Think of these points seriously, and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things. It may be, thou can not so clearly conceive some of these high
mysteries, as of three in one, in a more excellent way then can be expressed:
or of Essence, which is one Nature in three: or of Persons, which are the
several manners of being in the self same God; as in respect of Creation, God
is the Father; in respect of Redemption, God is the Son; in respect of
Sanctification, God is the Holy Ghost. These things, I say, are above
reasonable capacity. But it is otherwise with thee in the understanding of
other things, and of these mysteries. In other things thou must first know, and
then believe: but in these things thou must first believe, and then know, as
Peter said, We believe, and are sure, Joh. 6.69.
that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God. And if thou add but
this, Joh. 7.17.
To will to do thy God's will, thou shall know of the doctrine whether it be
of God, and so, rest with confidence upon these most divine mysteries to
comfort thy soul.

Now let us go on: Tell me

5. Q. What is God?

A. He is that Almighty one, who made, and governs all things.

Know (my child) that we cannot know God as he is in himself; Thou can not
know God as he is.
for he dwells in a light that no man can attain unto: And therefore we may say,
as that Heathen did of old, when he was asked what God was? By how much more I
think, by so much less I understand what that is which we call God. Yet may
we know Gods back-parts, that is, those works, Exodus 34.
and names by which he is made known unto us in the Scriptures. For thus he
has manifested himself unto us for this end.

Object.

Sol.

But, Yet thou must labor to know him as he will.
because we may and must know him as he has manifested himself unto us;
therefore, surely, it is not unlawful to search into him so far. For
otherwise it might be said of us, as Christ of the Samaritanes, Joh. 4.
They worship they know not what. Yea, without this, we cannot according to our
measure, ascribe unto him such excellencies as his nature does deserve: for we
cannot say, that is gold, which we cannot affirm to be gold, or brass. Yea,
without this we cannot love and desire God. We cannot desire, and love what we
know not. The love of God must not be a groundless love, which is more in the
lover, then in the thing loved; but a well grounded love, which must proceed
from the knowledge of the amiablenesse of the thing loved. Of this alone we can
give a true reason, from the worth of God, or any person, or thing else which
we love.

I hope better things of thee, and that which does accompany thy salvation. If
the Heathens groped after him, and rather then they would not find him, Acts 17.
erected an altar to the unknown God; much more will thou, who art crowned with
more blessed favors of light, and love.

But why should I press thee to enquire after God, when thou tellest me
plainly what God is? You tell me, that God is that Almighty one, that does
make, and govern all things. Though thou know him not as he is in himself,
yet thou describest him as he has manifested himself to the Church. If I
should ask thee what the Apostle Paul was? You would answer, that he was an
able and extraordinary Minister of the New Testament. Herein you did not tell
me, what he is, or was in himself, (for so he was a living creature endued with
a reasonable soul), but you tell me what Paul was as God did employ him in,
and for the Church; so in this description thou tellest me what God is, with
reference to the whole world. Thus thou tellest me two things of God.

1. His sufficiency (He is that Almighty one).

2. His Efficiency, or how he has manifested it in part two ways: 1. By
making all things. 2. By governing all things.


First, God is the Almighty.
thou say (He is that Almighty one), and so he is: for God says to Abraham,
Genesis 17.1.
I am God Almighty, and Jeremy calls him, Jer. 32.18, 19.
The great and mighty God, great in Counsel, and mighty in strength.
Almighty, is one mighty to do all, or one that is all-sufficient for all
things in himself, and for us.

This Almightinesse, or All Sufficiency stands in his skill, in his will, and
in his power. He is Almighty in skill, to know all things: Almighty in will,
to will all things that are good: and Almighty in power, to do all things
according to his will. Were he not Almighty all these ways, he could not be
self-sufficiently blessed in himself, neither could he be almightily
sufficient for us. Were he not Almighty in skill, he could not almightily will
according to an almighty knowledge. Were he not Almighty in will, he could
not almightily do according to an almighty knowledge and will. Were he not
Almighty in power, were he never so Almighty in skill, and will, he could not
be an all-sufficient worker for his own, and our blessedness. But when these
three things meet, his knowing all things, his willing all things good, and
doing all things according to his will, nothing can lie between him and his own
blessedness, nothing can hinder us from our blessedness in him if we lie in
his rode.

humble, direct, and comfort thee. Job, in the wind, horse, earthquake, and
Leviathan; Job 42.6.
And then he abhorred himself, and repented in dust and ashes. Act. 12.
As when the men of Tyrus and Sidon heard that Herod would wage war with
them, they, knowing that they were nourished with the Kings bread, feared his
power: so, when thou hear of this Almightinesse, thou must not so much fear
them that kill the body, Matthew. 10.
as fear him that is able to cast body and soul into hell; if thou approach
not to him with due obedience.

Again, Almighty power of God in thy body and soul for thy sanctification,
and salvation. Paul prays for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.
that they may know what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward
that believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought
in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. And how is this? Surely, only by
feeling, that as God raised up Christ, so, by their fellowship in, and with
them, he does raise up them from the death of sin, to the life of grace. The
good Lord grant that it may be thus with thee: that as the power of that
Almighty one did raise up the Lord Jesus, so thou may find thy self raised
in, and from him to such a new life as may appear before God with acceptance.

Lastly, Almighty one can change thy vile body, Phil. 3.
and make it like unto his glorious body, according to the mighty power by
which he is able to subdue all things unto himself. What though, by affliction,
thy face be withered with weeping, thy body crusted like a potsheard, and burnt
to ashes, yet this Almighty one is able to raise thee up in the latter day,
Joh. 6.
and to make those eyes of thine to see thy Redeemer, Job 19.
when thou shall arise for thy self, to the glory of Gods grace, and thy
everlasting comfort.

Next here, thou tellest me how God has manifested his Almightinesse, God made
all things.
(By making and governing of all things.)

That this Almighty God made all things does appear in Genesis: Genesis 1. and
2.4, 5. Esa. 44.24.
and God says by Esaias, I am the Lord that makes all things, that does stretch
forth the heavens alone, and spreads abroad the earth by my self. To make
all things is, to give all things their being. God gives the heavens to be, the
earth to be, and all creatures in heaven, and earth, their several beings. And
do but weigh that it cannot be otherwise. For the world was neither made by
chance, nor by nature. Not by chance: For as thou may see an excellent order
in every thing (and chance is an enemy to order): so may thou discern set
purpose in every thing. All creatures have every thing provided of purpose to
perfect them. An eye has a color, an ear a sound, a palate a tastable thing,
and a smell, savours; yea, brute beasts have fodder, and man has heaven and
earth of purpose for body, and soul. Neither is it made by nature. For then as
nothing could be done above nature, the contrary whereof thou may perceive in
the very butter-flies painted wings, and the little gnats trunk, which can
pierce, and draw blood thorough a tough horses skin; so could nothing be done
against nature; but thou may observe the contrary: Josh. 10.
for the Sun stood still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Ajalon, in
the days of Joshuah; and the Sun went ten degrees backward, as was to be seen
on the dial of Ahaz: yea, thou read of an Eclipse of the Sun, at the death
of Christ, when the Moon was at the full, which was quite against nature. If
therefore the world was neither made by chance, nor by nature, thou may
justly conclude, that the Almighty God made all things.

how to use, and fear to abuse, We must use all the creatures from God.
any of Gods creatures. Thou must ask Gods leave to use any of them: we hold
all in God, and from God, and have no freedom to use them; but as we have leave
from him. Godless people account every creature, within their power, their
own: and because they have a creatures right, and a civil right, by the laws,
and compacts of men, they think they have an absolute right without dependence.
Therefore they never look to God, but say with Nabal, shall I take my meat, 1 Samuel 25.
and my bread, and my drink, which I have provided for my servants, and give
it unto strangers whom I know not from whence they come, or whither they go?
But it must be otherwise with thee.

Thou have the use of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, heaven, earth, and all their
furniture. God made them all, therefore thou must not dream of an absolute
right, but humbly pray that thou may have liberty to use them under God,
without which thou can have no sound comfort.

Besides, We must not abuse any of the creatures.
thou must fear to abuse any of them, because they are the good creatures of
God. Will thou dare to abuse the Kings stuff, or furniture of his house, or
those provisions which he has made for his servants? How then will thou dare
to abuse thy meat for gluttony, thy drink for drunkenness, thy apparel for
pride, or the Sun to give thee light to work the works of darkness, or the
house, and woods, and shades to cover wicked practices? If thou have right to
any thing, and lend it to another, thou would be loath it should be abused:
yea, God made provision under the Law, Exodus 22.
that the lender should be no loser, but that the thing lent should be made
good. Much more is it equal, that, if God lend thee the use of any of his
creatures, it should be made good to God when thou have had the comfort of it.
Be sure therefore that thou do it, and do it upon this ground, that God made
all things.

Secondly, this Almighty God does Govern all things also. Jeremie says, God
is the governor of all things Jer. 10.23.
O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, It is not in man that
walks to direct his steps; because it is God that governs him. And Solomon
says, that there is no wisdom, nor understanding, Prove. 21.30, 31.
nor counsel against the Lord: the horse is prepared against the battle, but
safety is of the Lord; because man is not the Master of his own Issues, but
God is the highest Governor above him, and above all the world. As when we
have a Journey to go, and get on horseback, with a bridle we guide him onward,
and backward; this way, and that way, till we have done our business: Psalm.
so God rides upon the heavens as upon a chariot. He has an hook in the
nosthrils, 2 Chronicles.
and a bridle in the mouths of his creatures; and, as he says to the Sea,
Here stay thy proud waves; so he says, by the active word of his providence,
to all his creatures, as that Centurion to his soldiers; Go, Luke 8.
and it goes; come, and it comes; do this, and it does it; and so he governs
all the creatures to the Issue of his will. When a man looks upon the horrible
disorders in the world, and sees Atheists, blasphemous swearers, prophaners of
the Lords Day, murderers, whoremongers, thieves, liars, to swarm in the
world, a man would think that God did not Govern all things. But thy sense
teaches thee, that if thou ride upon a lame horse, to dispatch all thy
business, though he halt, which is from himself, (by leaping over hedge and
ditch) yet thou governest him till thy business is over, which is from thee.
So though all the men in the world be lame in actions, and all the creatures of
the world do groan under the vanity of their sins, yet does God (as it
were) ride about, and govern all, and will bring the wickedest; at last,
either to repentance, and to shame and just confusion for ever.

And thou can not conceive other, but that God must needs govern all things.
For otherwise the flint and steel of contradictions would so kindle the tinder
of corruption, that the whole world would have been long ago in the flame of
ruin: yea, the Church of God would have been devoured by her enemies. The
Church of God, thou know, Luke 12.
is but a little flock, and her enemies like the army of the Aramites covering
the earth, and their hearts like those of the Edomites, who cried over
Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it, Psalm. 137.
even to the ground. What then can hold them but Gods bridle, which restraines
the Gates of Hell; Matthew. 16.
that they cannot prevail over them? Resolve then therefore that God governes
all things.

Almighty one to show himself a Governor by governing thee. Thou art not
able to govern thy thoughts, words, or actions without God. In conscience of
this, David said, Let the words of my mouth, Psalm. 19.
and the meditations of my heart, be always acceptable in thy sight; and set a
watch before my lips; and Lord, open thou my lips: even so, Psalm. 51.
and much more may thou. Therefore, by how much less able thou art to
govern thy self, by so much more must thou pray to God every day, to govern
thy mind, heart, life, will, affections, desires, conscience, and actions, that
thou may walk through the land of uprightness, Esa. 26.
into a place of happiness, where there are fullness of pleasures at the right
hand of God for evermore. Psalm. 16.


Thus (my good child) thou have told me what God is. Now tell me next,

6. Q. Wherefore did God make thee?

A. To do him service.

This is Gods truth. For, What does the Lord thy God require of thee, We are
made to serve God. Deuteronomy. 10.12. Joh. 22.5.
but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and
(to serve) the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? and thy
blessed Savior says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Matt. 4.10.
and him only shall thou serve. If thou should not be asked to what end thou
were made, thou might live to wrong ends, and might be ready to do
service where thou owe none. Therefore do I put thy soul to this question.
When thou do answer, that thou art made to serve God, thou must mean that
thou art made to Do Gods work or business. When thou servest a Master, thou
do thy Masters work, when thou servest a Mistress, thou do thy
Mistresse's business: so when thou servest God, thou do Gods work, or
business, or what he requires at thy hand. Christ says, Joh. 6.
This is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent. Paul says,
1 Thessalonians. 4.
This is the will of God, or the work which he requires you to endeavor, even
your sanctification. Therefore when thou live or do the acts of life, this
is thy work, or service of God. Thou, by nature art too apt to think that thou
art freeborn, as they that said, Our tongues are our own, Psalm. 10. Psalm.
129. Romans 1.1. Jam. 1.1. Jude 1. Pro. 16.4.
who is Lord over us? But David often professed himself to be Gods servant;
and so did Paul, James, Jude, and so must thou. For God has created all things
for himself: and he has committed unto thee a Talent to be employed for his
uses: Matthew. 25.
and has entrusted thee with a Stewardship whereof thou must give an account
as a servant. Luke 19.


Item thus much to maintain Idleness, thus much for Whoring, Drunkenness,
Pride, thus much for Profane exercises on the Lords day, do you think that
this account would be taken? No more will God accept of a wicked account from
thee who art made to serve him.

Whether you eat or drink, 1 Cor. 10.
or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God. This will keep thee from
Gluttony, Pride, Drunkenness, Covetousness, and every evil way. Without this
I shall tell thee of a fearful discomfort which will be brought upon thee at
last; when thou art run a long way, and art come to the last hour of the
day, and it may be, to the latter end of thy life, God will awake thy
conscience, which will cry out unto thee, O Friend, Friend, Friend, thou art
quite out of thy way. Thou wast made to serve God, and thou have run thus
long in the service of the world and flesh. Oh this will wound in the latter
end. Remember therefore that thou art made to serve God and do it: And next
tell me,

7. Q. How ought thou to serve him?

A. As he has commanded in his laws.

Herein thou say right also. For God says, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
Whatsoever I command thee take heed to do it: thou shall put nothing thereto,
nor pull ought therefrom. God would have us punctual in performing all our
service to him as he appoints. Therefore as David did take notice, that God had
commanded to keep his precepts diligently: so we must practice. Psalm. 119.4.


Remember therefore, first, We must seek how God must be served.
that thou must enquire how God must be served. For, naturally, thou know
not, by reason of that ignorance that is in thee. As a servant, that comes
newly to an house, is a stranger to that service which will be required; so art
thou to the service of thy good God. Yea, God has a peculiar service from all
false gods; and therefore Balaam said, Number. 23.9.
the people shall dwell by themselves, and shall not be reckoned among other
nations: they shall have a Religion; and Laws apart. Other gods will be
content with service suitable to their natures; but God will be served above the
power of nature. Yea, they that have performed Gods service for matter, have
failed in manner, Esa. 1. Psalm. 50. Esa. 5.
and have been cursed. Experience teaches that good meat may be marred in
dressing: and so may the service of God in performance.

In this faith I was borne, in this I will dye. Most take up the service of God
by tradition, and custom, without further enquiry. But do thou (my child)
stand in the ways, Jer. 6.16.
and behold, the good old way, that thou may learn to serve him as thou
should. Thy soul is like water, or other fluid substances which can never
be at rest till it be bounded; and nothing can bound it, but God, and his word,
which is thy perfect directory.

Mark next, God must be served by his law. Exodus 25.40. Heb. 8.5.
that Gods service must be of Gods commanding. Moses did every thing about Gods
worship according to the pattern, to the very pinnes, and snuffers, and
besomes, and basins. And God forbids us in his worship, Number. 15.39. Deuteronomy. 12.8.
Ezekiel. 20.18. Matt. 15.9. Esa. 29.13. Col. 2.23.
to follow after our own hearts, and eyes; or to teach his worship, and fear,
by the precepts of men; or to walk in the ordinances of our forefathers: and
condemns all voluntary Religion, though it have a show of wisdom, and
humbleness of mind. Nature teaches this equity, that God should have that
service which best pleases him. If thou serve a Master or Mistres, thou must,
in all of it, respect their pleasures. As they are best acquainted with their
own natures and dispositions, so is God: and because he is a Spirit, he will
be worshipped in spirit, and truth, Joh. 4.
which is most suitable to his nature, wherewith he only is best acquainted.

Esa. 1.
Of this God will say, Who has required this at your hands? Will thou lean
unto men's directions? They may deceive, and be deceived in what is pleasing
unto God. Wilt, thou follow good intentions? The end of an action is not
sufficient to make it good as thou may fee in Nadab, Levit. 10.1, 2. 1 Samuel
15.15. Judge. 8.27. Romans 8.7.
and Abihu, Saul, and Gedeon: Will thou lean unto thine own wisdom? It is
not only an enemy, but enmity against God. Will thou follow thy affections?
That which is done without Gods warrant is not of love: for love is the
fulfilling of the law. Gal. 5.14. Romans 12.9.
Therefore let all thy service be reasonable, that is, such as whereof thou
can give a reason from Gods word, then shall thou do it of faith, and with
good comfort.

Now, take a short sight of how far we are come: and to this end tell me

Q. What is God?

A. He is that Almighty one, who makes, and governs all things.

Q. What do thou mean by Almighty?

A. One mighty to do all.

Q. Wherein does his Almightinesse stand?

A. In skill, in will, in power.

Q. How in skill?

A. In knowing all things.

Q. How in will?

A. In willing all things that are good.

Q. How in power?

A. In doing all things according to his will.

Q. How has he showed himself to be Almighty?

A. By making, and governing all things.

Q. What is it to make all things?

A. To give all things their being.

Q. What is it to govern all things?

A. To guide all things and actions to a good end.

Q. Wherefore did God make you?

A. To do him service.

Q. What is it to serve God?

A. To do his work.

Q. How ought you to serve God?

A. As he has commanded in his laws.

Q. Why must you thus serve him?

A. Because not we, but he, knows best what will please him.

Thus (my child) we have briefly summed the three last Questions, and Answers:
now let us proceed.

Tell me therefore,

8. Q. Which are these laws of God?

A. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 15.
Those ten words which God wrote in two Tables of stone, and are set down in
Exodus, and Deuteronomie.

Mark here two things: Ten Precepts, two Tables. Deuteronomy. 4.13. Exodus 34.28.
The number of Gods laws; and the course that God took to notice them to us
unworthy creatures. As to their Number, they are ten words, or ten
Commandments, and must not be made fewer by us. As to Gods perpetuattng their
notice unto us, after the publishing of them, he wrote them in two Tables of
stone. Had we not blotted out a great part of them, and contracted hearts
harder then a stone, God would not have written them in stone. Had any stone
been sufficient to have written them in, he would not have ordered their
publishing again, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
and again, in the second and fifth books of Moses, besides all the
explications of Christ, Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles. Now seeing I enquire
after these laws, and thou do characterize, and mark them out, by their
Number ten, and by Gods perpetuating them to posterity by stones, and
writings; do but admire the wisdom of God, who can give so large a Volume in
so few words: and remember to take notice of the laws of God in general, and
of all ten particulars of them.

We must know the laws of God.
thou must take special notice of the laws of God, and therefore I ask, and
thou answerest concerning them. Hence the Jews were commanded to write them
upon the posts of their houses, Deuteronomy. 4.6.
and upon their gates: and, in truth, they are thy wisdom out of Christ, they
are thy wisdom unto Christ, and they are part of thy wisdom in Christ.

They are thy wisdom out of Christ: for Moses says, Do them, Deuteronomy. 4.6.
for they are your wisdom, and your understanding in the sight of the people.
They have an excellent political use to order thy going in, and out, for the
good of the commonwealth, and family. They are thy wisdom unto Christ: for
they are the best Schoolmaster, Gal. 3.19.24.
in thy sinful state, to bring thee unto him. They are like the storm of fire
and brimstone which drove Lot out of Sodom. For while they require perfect
personal righteousness to justificaion; and, for want of this, do reveal
sin, and uncloth thee of all worth: Romans 8. Heb. 12.20, 21.
and by reason of sin, do engender the spirit of bondage, by making thee
fear and quake; they make thee haste to Christ, without whom the curse will
swallow thee up in sorrow.

They are, besides, part of thy wisdom in Christ: for, by manifesting the
relics of sin, they will keep under thy carnal part, Mic. 6.
and, so, make thee walk humbly with thy God; and they will be such an hedge
of all moral duties, as they will make thy faith shine, in adorning thy
Christian calling with good works to all well pleasing.

under the Law, but under Grace. It is true, Romans 6.
that, when God has put thee into Christ, thou art delivered from the
exaction, malediction, and irritation of the law: but remember this similitude;
So long as an oak grows, it shadows thee from the warmth of the Sun; but,
when thou have cut it down, thou can make wedges out of it self, to rent it
in pieces, and make it serve for thy several uses: so, when the law does
overtop thee, during thy being under the power of nature, thou art deprived of
the comfort of the Sun of righteousness, but, when it is thrown down by the
power of the righteousness of faith, Romans 7.
then may thou make instruments out of it self to kill that sin (by way of
repression and mortification) which the law occasioned, and to lay open the
path of obedience, wherein (for the justification of thy faith) thou may run
the way of Gods commandments. Psalm. 119.


Secondly, We must know every commandment.
thou must not only take notice of these laws in general, but of every
particular of them: as which is the first, second, third, fourth, and so of the
rest. God has neither swelled them into to twenty, nor shrunk them into nine.
And for these ten, Deuteronomy. 4.13.
he has given none of them in vain, but has, in the least, discovered a world
of wisdom, and goodness, which is particularly to be noticed to thee, except
thou will dishonor thy good God.



To help thee therefore with the milk of Babes in this particular, we shall
pass thorough a brief sum of them all in order.

Tell me therefore

9. Q. What is the first Commandment? Exodus 20.3.


A. Thou shall have no other God before me.

Here God requires the having of the true God only to be thy God: What God
requires in the first commandment.
Thou must have a God; thou must have the true God; thou must have him only;
thou must have him to be thy God. Genesis 3.
Thou must have a God, or else thy wicked nature will be a God to thy self.
Adam was tempted to be so, and it did undo him and us: and thou will be so,
without further temptation, and be accursedly miserable. Thou must have the
true God; for all false gods are dung hill gods, and lying vanities which
cannot profit thee. Thou must have him only, for as marriage, and Monarchy,
cannot endure corrivals; so cannot God endure that any should be joined with
him. Thou must have him to be thy God: for a man is not chiefly comforted but
with that which is his own. A man's own house, land, wife, children, gold, and
silver speak best content unto him; and so will God when he is thy own. It may
be thou will wonder, how thou can have God? Thou can not have him as thou
have money in thy purse, How God may be had.
cattle in thy ground, or clothes on thy back; yet may thou have him as an
husband has a wife, or a wife an husband. A man and his wife may be a thousand
miles asunder, and may not see one another in many years, and yet the husband
has his wife, Prove. 2.
and the wife has her husband by virtue of the Covenant of God, by which they
are made one flesh. So may thou have God by Covenant when thou cleavest unto
him by knowledge, faith, fear, love, confidence, worship, and the like.



10. Q. What is the second Commandment?

A. Exodus 20.4, 5, 6.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor any likeness of
things, that are in heaven above, nor in the earth beneath, nor in the waters
under the earth; thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the
Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
children unto the third, and fourth generation of them that hate me, and
showing mercy to thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.

Here God requires the worshipping of God with his own outward worship. What
God requires in the second commandment.
God sees the vain wickednesses of Idolaters. Because they are carnal, they
must have carnal helps of their own inventions. Hence is it, because they have
not bodily communion with their gods; they, ordinarily, see them not, hear
them not, feel them not: therefore they set up their Images, likenesses, and
similitudes; they do honor and worship to them in the place of their gods:
they adorn them, they cense to them, they kneel, bow, courtesy, and pray to
them: they think that there is a religious, and divine power and presence in
them, to be a chariot of their devotions, and to convey the Influences of their
hearts, and words, to their patrons, their great gods. But God will not be
worshipped in this carnal way. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16, 17, 18.
He manifested no similitude on the day that the Lord spoke out of the midst of
the fire, lest we should corrupt our selves and make a graven Image, the
similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female. God is a consuming
fire, Deuteronomy. 4.24.
and a Jealous God, and will have none of his worship conveyed to any devises
of man, or by them, to him: but he will have his own worship, by an
acknowledgement of such divine excellencies as are in him, in the way, and by
the means that he has appointed, that is, by the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer.

out of the word the worship, to give him all manner of prayers, and praises,
to hear his word, to receive his Sacraments, and to offer up any spiritual
sacrifices, so do, that thou provoke not God to jealousy, and so to hate
thee, and to plague thine before thy face to thy confounding discomfort.

11. Q. What is the third Commandment?

A. Exodus 20.7.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Here God requires the worshipping of him in his own manner, What God requires
in the third Commandment.
so as it may not be in vain. If it be not done as he would have it, as good
never a whit, as not done as he would have it. The name of God is, God himself
any ways made known unto thee. Thou art known by thy name, and God has a
name whereby he is, or may be, made known, to all mankind, to wit, his works,
his word, his titles, his attributes, his religion, his worship; this is his
name. To take it, signifies to take it up, or to challenge it from contempt,
and blasphemy, so as God may not be dishonored by thine, or others use of it.
To take it in vain, is to use it to no end, to a fruitless end, or to a
wicked end; as when thou usest the names, titles, and attributes of God, to
toss them like Tennice balls to no use, but as fruitless imbellishments of
thy speech; when thou usest them in asseverations, and oaths, to belch out the
passions, and bitterness of thy heart to, or against others; and when thou
usest them in word, or actions, to vent the malice, or hypocrisy in thy heart.

(my child): Thou art a Christian, and would be accounted godly, and so thou
take up Gods name. Do it so, as God and his people may not be ashamed to
acknowledge thee for such. Thou sometimes take up the name of God in thy
mouth; do it with all reverence. When thou swearest, do it, when thou art
justly called unto it, Joh. 7. Heb. 6. Jer. 4.2.
to clear the innocence, or to end strife among men, in truth, in
righteousness, and in judgment. When thou prayest, hear, vowest, or
receivest the Sacraments, do them as sincerely desiring to draw thy self into
communion with God in Christ. If thou do not, though men are found to be
careful for preserving of their own names more then Gods, yet God tenderly
respects his own name, and will account thee guilty, and bind thee over to be
plagued in this world, and for ever.

12. Q. What is the fourth Commandment?

A. Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11.
Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor, and do
all thy work. But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven, and earth, the sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed
the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

Here God requires the worshipping of God by his own means upon that time
which is appointed. It is said, What God requires in the fourth Commandment.
That the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it, which thou must not
conceive to be an idle repetition of words of the same value in so short a
sum: and therefore compare other Scriptures, and the sense will be clear and
distinct unto. Esau cries out to Jacob, Genesis 27.
Bless me, even me also my father, and then Jacob gave him a prophetical
blessing, the fatness of the earth, and the dew of heaven. Judge. 1.
Achsah Caleb's daughter asked him a blessing, and what did she mean? Springs
above, and springs below, that is, a convenient situation for dwelling. So when
God blesses he gives a blessing to things, or persons. Thus the Lord blessed,
that is, gave a blessing to the Sabbath day. Before the giving of the Law, the
blessing of Patriarchs who were Priests, Prophets, and Kings of their Families
to regulate under, and from God the private, and public worship. After the
Law, the blessing of Levites, Priests, and Prophets. So in these times of
grace, he gives the blessing of Apostles, Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.
and Prophets by their writings, and Pastors, and Doctors, by their teachings
from the word, to be as blessings to the Lords day. Now, because we are so
worldly, and wicked, that we would not make use of this blessing of the means
of worship by the Ministry of the Word, if we were left unto our selves:
therefore God has hallowed the seventh part of time, and set it apart to holy
uses, and enjoined us to apply it to such uses, that we making use of this
blessing, may learn to know God, and serve him with his own worship, and in
his own manner. Mark then, that the means for the advancement of the worship
of God is the blessing of the Ministry of the word of God, which is set apart
for interpretation, and instruction of us in Gods will by the Scriptures. The
time that God has set apart for this end is the seventh part of time at the
least. For if he required of a Jew thus much, whose mercies were not so great,
much more of us Christians whose mercies are greater.

Joseph to provide for all the rest: and when thou see that all men are not
Prophets, 1 Cor. 1.10
nor all Teachers, but God has gifted, out of all now, some to be apt to
teach, by taking more special heed to themselves, to the word of God, to
reading, and to doctrine: 1 Timothy 4.23
and when thou considerest that God challenges the seventh part of time, that
thou may make use of the gifts of these men gifted for thy edification: and,
lastly, when thou weighest that that seventh part of time which was allotted to
the Jews, as a type of Christ's resting in the grave, is now vanished, and
another seventh part of time consecrated by the acts of Christ, and his
Apostles, and the practice of the Church in all Ages, which is particularly
called the Lords day (the like grounds for observing any other seventh part
being impossible for us now to have): therefore, with all care, and conscience,
do thou remember the time, and apply it unto holy uses, both in preparation,
and practice, that by the public Ministry of the Word, and private
meditation of it, and conference about it, and prayer to make it profitable to
thee, thou may make it a market day to thy soul to provide for the knowledge
and service of thy God, according to his good will both for matter, and manner.

Thus have I showed the sum of the four first Commandments, The sum of the
first Table.
as thou art able to receive it now: and that thou conceive them clearly, I Will
thus represent it unto thee. Thou art born into this world, and, when thou
come to years of discretion, then bethinkest thy self how thou may live in
after time. First, therefore, thou put thy self to a Master to bring thee
up in some good Employment. When thou have a Master, thou know that thou
must do his work. If thou do his work, thou know thou must do it in his
manner. He had rather thou should let it alone, then not do it according to
his mind: and in case he be not bodily present, but has left his Stewards to
give directions at set time, how he would have all his business dispatched
according to his will, thou must wait upon them in their seasons, that thou
may be punctual and exact in all his affairs. Just thus must it be with
thee in this business for thy souls good. Thou desire to know how it may be
well with thee in aftertime. Therefore first thou must choose God to be thy
only Lord, and Master: there is the first Commandment. Next, thou must do
his work, and worship, not according to the fancies of Idolaters, but
according to his will: there is the second Commandment. Next, thou must do it
in his manner, so as it be not in vain; Esa. 1.
for otherwise he will say, Who required this at thy hand? there is the third
Commandment. And lastly, because he is not visibly present, but has left his
Stewards and Ambassadors to direct thee in his will, at times by him
appointed, therefore must thou, especially at those times, hang upon their
lips, to be satisfied in thy Masters will, that thou may serve him with his
own service, and in his own manner.

Now proceed, and tell me:

13. Q. What is the fifth Commandment?

A. Exodus 20.12.
Honor thy father, and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Here God establishes Superiors, What God requires in the fifth Commandment.
and Ineferiours, and their several duties. When he has ordered every thing
concerning himself, and his worship; then thy good God comes to order the
world. And, because it can never be put in order by a parity, and equality, he
does establish first the throne of excellency. He would not have Hail fellow,
well met, in the world: but he would have some high, some low; some rich, some
poor; some Governors, some governed; and some Superiors, some inferiors,
for the better marshalling, and ordering the world. There shall be fathers, and
mothers; this he speaks to superiors. Ye shall honor your fathers, and
mothers; this he speaks to inferiors. Fathers, and Mothers, are all those
that are in state of excellency above thee. If they be more excellent in Age,
as old men, and women, who bear an Image of Gods eternity: or more excellent
in Grace, who are fuller of Gods Spirit, and bear an Image of Gods goodness:
Or more excellent in Nature, who have priority in time of us, and are
instruments of our derivation into the world, and so bear an Image of Gods
Paternity: Or more excellent in Place, who have power, and government over us,
and so bear an Image of Gods Sovereignty: all these are thy Fathers, and
Mothers. These are commanded to be Fathers, and Mothers, that is, so to carry
themselves in nature, in grace, in age, and in place, that they do not lay
their honors in the dust, and make their inferiors to despise them. By
honoring of father, and mother thou must understand, those respects which are
due to several excellencies. To natural excellency Reverence, obedience, and
all thankfulness under God. To gracious excellency, acknowledgement, and
submission. To ancient excellency reverent deportment: and to powerful
excellency, fear, and testification of it by obedience in the Lord, and for
the Lords sake.

and many underlings to neglect those that are in authority both to their
sin and misery. Again, as thou art an Inferior give all due honor to all
Paternitie, and motherhood. Rise up before the hoarhead, and honor the persons
of the Aged. Acknowledge all the gifts, and graces of others, and make use of
them for thy good. Be subject to the higher powers, not for fear of wrath, but
for conscience sake. Be subject unto thy parents, and when they cannot provide
for themselves, do thou thy best to provide for them; and then if thou have
not a penny, thou shall have a pound, if thou live not long in this world
(which is not good enough for thee), thou shall live for ever at Gods right
hand where there is fullness of pleasures for evermore, which God grant unto
thee.

14. Q. What is the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not kill.

When God had set the world in order in the former Commandment, What is
required in the sixth commandment.
and made some high, and some low, some superiors, and some inferiors, that
so his providence might be the more beautified in the sight of men: he comes
next to give men in charge things according to the price of them. And because
nothing is so precious as life (for the Devil sees, Job 2.
that skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life):
therefore he first gives in charge the preservation of life. This is that which
God requires in this law, the preservation of thy own, and thy neighbors
life. And because man has a double life, the life of the soul, and the life
of the body, God would have thee have a care of both lives in thy self, and
others. There is a difference betwixt killing, and murder: there may be a
lawful killing, but no lawful murdering: for murder is an unlawful hurting
of the life of self or others. But for killing, though thou must never kill
thy self, yet may there be a lawful killing of others when these four things
meet, a just Cause, a just Power, a just order and a just Mind. A just cause,
as God says, He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: Genesis
9.
a just power, as God says, Romans 13.
not the private man, but the Magistrate bears not the sword for naught a
just order, as that Jew said, John 11.
Our law judges no man before he be heard; therefore there must be conviction,
and trial before condemnation: and a just mind, which does it not out of
revenge, but out of love of justice: for though Jehu did execute Gods Justice
upon the house of Ahab, yet, because he did it with his own revengefull heart,
God says, Hos. 1.
I will visit the blood of Jezrael upon the house of Jehu. Thus thou see,
there is a difference twixt killing, and murder; yet because God would have
thee see how precious life is before him, he says, Thou shall not kill.

Thou must not kill the soul either of thy self, or others, by yielding, or
persuading to any sin, or else by giving a scandal whereby thy brother may
be moved to fall. Sin is that alone which murders souls. Thou must not kill
the body either of thy self, or others. This wicked murder does rise by Envy,
and carnal Anger; it does rancle by Hatred, and Malice; it breaks out in the
Countenance, by scornful, disdainful, and furious looks; in the Body, by
pointing of the finger, or turning the back by way of disgrace; It is executed
by wilful hurting of limbs, liberties, or life, when body and soul are
parted by an unjust hand.

stabbing them with false doctrine, or by starving them for want of teaching.
One Christian murders the soul of another by persuading, and encouraging, or
exampling to a thousand sins. And for men's bodies, what envy, hatred, malice?
what scorns, diminutions, and disrespects? what hurting of limbs, liberties,
and lives do abound, to the sadding of those whose hearts God would not have
sadded? But let not thy soul enter into their secrets. Possess thy self in
mercy, and love. Be thou able to look upon an enemy without anger, to behold
his prosperity without envy, and to bear his wrongs without desire of
revenge. Keep thy soul without sin reigning, and do what thou can to keep
others also, and what thou can not do in answer to this command, mourn for
it sadly, and seriously, and fly to Jesus Christ to heal thee that thou may
be better.

15. Q. What is the seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit adultery. Exodus 20.14. What is required in the
seventh Commandment.


The next precious thing among men is Honesty. If God would have men live,
surely, he would have them live honestly: therefore so soon as ever he had
commanded that men should live, and not be killed, presently he adds, that they
must live honestly. It is better that men were dead then that they should live
adulterers: therefore, says God, Thou shall not commit adultery.

Here God requires the preservation of thy own, and thy neighbors Chastity.
Adultery properly, is the polluting and defiling of another man's bed; when men
commit folly, and wickedness with another man's wife: but because this is
odious to God, as a seminary of corruption both to the Church, Commonwealth,
and Family: therefore he comprehends all other uncleanness under this head.
There is an inward, and outward uncleanness. The inward is a wanton nature,
lustful thoughts, violent burnings, delight in them, and serving their
tyranny. The outward uncleanness is either in Preparation, or in Practice. Men
and women are prepared for lust by Drunkenness, Gluttony, Idleness, and
Wanton apparel. Men and women practice it by wanton eyes, filthy speech,
unseemly gestures: and these bring forth fornication, ravishing, adultery,
incest, unnatural sins, which I am loath to name unto thee, much less
describe. Yet all these God comprehends under Adultery. And, that thou may
not think that thou art exempted from this law, God speaks to every
particular person in this word [Thou]: thou child, thou man, thou woman.

in eyes, as they that had their eyes full of adultery; 2 Pet. 2.
in speech, as Judah to Thamar, Genesis 38.
Let me lie with thee; in gestures, Jer. 5. 2 Samuel 13.
as they that neighed after their neighbors wives; By fornication, as Amnon;
by adultery, Joh. 8. Genesis 49.
as the woman taken in adultery; by incest, as Reuben, and that incestuous man;
1 Cor. 5. Romans 1. and 1 Cor. 6.
and by unnatural sins. How do men and women provide for it by
Drunkenness, Gluttony, Wanton apparel, and Idleness? Oh let thy heart bleed
to think of these sins committed in secret, and watch over thy nature, crush
thy thoughts, quench thy burnings with the blood of Christ rested on by faith,
that lust never come to delight or tyranny.

16. Q. What is the eighth Commandment? Exodus 20.15. What is required in the
eighth commandment.


A. Thou shall not steal.

The next precious thing among men is goods. See carefully, that first we must
live, next we must live honestly, next honest persons must live by honest
means, they must not steal. Here God requires the preservation of thy own and
thy neighbors goods. God would have every man have his own, and that we might
maintain a just possession to our selves, and others; there God says to every
man, woman, and child [Thou shall not steale].

To Steal, strictly taken here, is closely to convey away the goods of thy
neighbor without his privity: but it is to be extended to all unlawful
depriving thy self, or others, of their goods. All men condemn open theft, and
the sword of a Magistrate does reach to such theft: therefore God is pleased to
use that word which signifies close theft, and under that to comprehend all.
This theft arises from a distrust of Gods providence: it increases by love of
money, covetousness, and the crafty invention of a thousand deceits, and
couzenages to bring in: but it breaks out both against thy self, and others.
Thou may be a thief to thy self by penuriousnesse, prodigality, and
idleness. If thou refuse to take the comfort of what God has given thee; or
do prodigally lash out in a day what would serve a week; or art idle and
slothful to get what God offers in the ordinary course of his providence, thou
art a thief to thy self. Thou may be a thief to others by sins of
commission, or omission. If thou trust in wrong, or robbery, by deceiving any
man, woman, or child in bargaining either by word, or deed; or by secret, or
open deceiving them of their goods to the hurt of Church, Commonwealth, or
Family: If when thy self, or thy neighbor are wronged in their goods, thou do
not discover, and punish, and rescue when thou can, and cause restitution to
be made if thou be able, thou art a thief before God.

justly preserved, that thou, Romans 13.7. Luke 3.14. Luke 1.75.
and all men might have just maintenance by just getting, keeping, and
spending. If thou err from this course, the rack of conscience will so pursue
thee, that thou will not have peace in any thing thou do enjoy.

17. Q. What is the ninth Commandment?

A. Exodus 20.16.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

This is the fourth precious thing would have in a well ordered world. What is
required in the ninth Commandment.
First he orders the world into several ranks of Governors, and governed.
Next, he would have a care of life. Next, he would have men live honestly.
Next, he would have honest men maintained by honest means: and here, that men
may have their honor in the fifth Commandment; their life in the sixth
Commandment; their honesty in the seventh Commandment; and their goods in the
eighth Commandment; he would have truth. If falsehood may prevail, men shall
neither have their goods, nor their honesty, nor their life, nor their honor.
Therefore God requires in this Commandment, The preservation of our own, and
our neighbors truth. God is pleased to look upon that order which he has set
in the world: that some are in the throne to be honored, and some at the
footstool to honor. He saw that much disorder and sin would arise about
man's life, his honesty, his goods, and his good name: therefore he commands
that all falsehood be banished, and that Justice be carried by allegations, and
proofs, according to truth.

Witness may be given either by word, Josh. 24.22. Job 16.8.
when the tongue speaks it, or by work, when some doing, or suffering speaks
it. False witness is, when it is not agreeable to the thing spoken of, to the
mind of him that speaks it, or to the end of speaking it, that is, Justice,
and Charity. To bear false witness is, either to receive, speak, or do any
thing that may prejudice charitable truth. Against thy neighbor, is,
concerning thy neighbor, in Gods language, whether it be for him, or against
him. And this thou may happen to do in the root of false witness, and in
the fruit of it. The root and foundation of false witness may sometimes be
uncharitableness to the person thou witnessest against, or flattery, and
partiality, to the person thou witnessest for: sometimes suspicion of worse
then thy neighbor deserves: but always an inclination to hunt after that
which is thy neighbors. This will breed a digging deep to hide the truth, a
judgeing uncharitably, and an augmentation of the report, making a little to be
a great deal more. The fruit of it is, when we do not maintain the truth of
things, and persons; but fall into many sins, both against truth, and against
truth and charity. Thou may sin against truth simply by falsehood in speech,
by denying the truth, by betraying the truth, and by counterfeit and fained
actions. Thou may sin against truth and charity both publicly, and
privately. Publicly, in the person of a Judge or Arbitratour, when thou
nourishest strife among neighbors, by delaying sentence, believing the oaths
of wicked liars, or by passing rash, or unjust judgments: In the person of the
Jurie when thou find not according to the truth: In the person of the
Plaintiff, when thou accusest falsely: In the person of the Defendent, when thou
accusest thy self unnecessarily, or colourest, or deniest a bad cause: In the
person of a Lawyer, when thou pleadest known bad causes, or any cause before
thou understand it: In the person of a witness, when thou do pervert truth,
conceal truth, or testify falsehood: and in the person of a Register, when
thou do not record truth as it is found. Thou may sin against truth, and
charity privately, either against thy self or others. Against thy self, when
thou do not regard thine own credit, or think either too basely, or
boastingly of thy own person. Against others, when thou praysest them above
deserts, or praysest men's vices, or give not them their due truth, by
scorning, backbiting, slandering, or the like.

discern it as clear as thou can; honor it, by not withholding the truth
in unrighteousness; and maintain it in thy self, and others, that justice
may flourish. It is true, that, many times, truth breeds hatred among men, but
believe God, who says, that he that deals truly is Gods delight.

18. Q. What is the tenth Commandment?

A. Exodus 20.17.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is thy neighbors.

Here thou art at the very foot of the ladder: and from hence thou may rise
to the highest pitch of moral virtue, What is required in the tenth
commandment.
or of sin against it. If thou have this coveting after that which is thy
neighbors, thou will not spare falsehood to get it. If thou can once outface
truth, then have at thy neighbors goods for thy profit, thy neighbors honesty
for thy pleasure, yea thy neighbors life rather then thou will miss of
either; and next, have at thy neighbors honor, that thou may have none to
punish thee; and then have at thy God in all disobedience: for if thou sinnest
against thy neighbor whom thou see, thou will much more sin against thy
God whom thou do not see but in his word, and works. Therefore God requires
in this Commandment, such an evennesse of spirit, that nothing that is thy
neighbors do trouble thee. Has thy neighbor better house, better wife,
better servants, better cattle, better any thing then thee? thy eye may not be
evil because Gods is good. If thou have God, it is enough, it is all things:
nothing that is thy neighbors must trouble thee.

This Coveting is called Evil concupiscence, Col. 3.5.
and is an inordinate motion of thy soul soliciting to evil against thy
neighbor. This is of two sorts, original, and actual. Original (referred to
neighbors) is part of thy flesh, which, by pronenesse, poysoneth thy soul,
and moves thee to injustice. Actual, are ill motions rising from thence in
thy mind by foolish fancies, thoughts, and judgments, and in thy heart by
affections, wishes, and desires, inordinately carried after pleasures (the
lusts of the flesh), profits (the lusts of the eyes), and honor (the pride of
life). This Coveting must not be carried, in special, after things without
life, as thy neighbors house, nor after things with life, which are reckoned
according to their honor, as, thy neighbors wife, servants, ox, or ass: nor
in general, after any thing that is thy neighbors, that so thou may know
that nothing is to be excepted. These homebred broils and covetings are the
causes of all evils, when they are yielded unto: therefore God has set them at
the lower end of this Ladder.

resting in God, and all that he gives thee, be it little, or be it much, that
nothing that is thy neighbors trouble thee. If thou do not, thou will trouble
thy self, and thou will be provoked to hurt and trouble thy neighbor, and to
rise higher to a more direct sinning against thy God.

Thus have I given thee (fit for thy capacity, I hope) a short sum of these
Ten Laws of God: now look back, and let me see what thou have observed. Thou
have told me that God made thee to serve him as he has commanded in his Laws.

Q. Where are these Laws set down?

A. In Exodus, and Deuteronomy.

Q. How many of them are they?

A. They are ten, in two Tables.

Q. What does God require in the first?

A. My having the true God only to be my God.

Q. How can thou have God?

A. By cleaving unto God by Covenant.

Q. How must that be?

A. By knowledge, faith, love, hope, fear, confidence, patience, prayer, and
vows.

Q. What does he require in the second?

A. My giving of God his own worship, and service.

Q. How can thou do that?

A. By abhorring the will worship of Idolaters, and serving him according to
his own will.

Q. What does he require in the third?

A. My worshipping of God in his own manner.

Q. How must that be done?

A. By observing not only the matter of his worship, but the manner, that it
be done well.

Q. What does he require in the fourth?

A. My worshipping of God by his own means upon that time that is appointed
by him.

Q. What are his means to advance his worship now?

A. The Ministry of the word of God.

Q. What is the appointed time?

A. The seventh part of time; as the Sabbath was in the old World, so the Lords
day in the new.

Q. What does he require in the fifth Commandment?

A. Superiors, and Inferiors, with their several duties.

Q. Whom do you mean by Superiors?

A. Those that are in state of excellency above us.

Q. Whom do you mean by Inferiors?

A. Those that are in several orders under them.

Q. What is it to honor them?

A. According to their order above us, to have reverence, obedience, fear and
thankfulness.

Q. What does he require in the sixth Commandment?

A. The preservation of our own, and our neighbors lives.

Q. May none be killed?

A. Yes: upon a just cause, by a just person, in a just order, and with a just
mind.

Q. What then is murder?

A. An unlawful hurting of the life of any man, in thought, word, and deed, or
inclination.

Q. What does he require in the seventh Commandment?

A. The preservation of our own or neighbors chastity.

Q. What do you mean by adultery?

A. Properly, the abusing of another bed.

Q. What do you mean by it here?

A. All unchastity in nature, preparation, or thought, word, and deed.

Q. What does he require in the eighth Commandment?

A. The preservation of our own, and neighbors goods.

Q. What is meant here by stealing?

A. A close conveyance away of our own, or our neighbors goods.

Q. What is comprehended under it?

A. All hurting of our neighbor in his goods, either in nature, or thought,
word, or deed.

Q. What does God require in the ninth Commandment?

A. The preservation of our own, or our neighbors truth.

Q. What do you mean by false witness?

A. Any testimony, by word, or deed, which is either against truth, or against
truth and charity.

Q. What does God require in the tenth Commandment?

A. Such an evennesse of spirit, that nothing that is my neighbors trouble me.

Thus thou have heard what God is, that he made thee to serve him, that thou
must serve him according to his Laws, and what these laws are: Now tell me.

19. Q. Art thou able to keep these Commandments?

A. No: let me do what I can, yet I break them every day more then I can
express.

Here thou make a strange accusation against thy self. Indeed, Christ says,
that, out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, false witnesses, Mat. 15.19.
blasphemies. They are not sent into the heart, but sent out of it, and such an
heart, surely, breaks the Commandments: And Paul says, when he spoke
experimentally of his natural heart, I know that in me, that is, Romans 7.18, 19.
in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will is present with me, but how
to perform that which is good I know not: for the good, that I would, I do
not, but the evil which I would not, that do I: and certainly he that stands
in this state cannot keep the Commandments. Yet mark, that thou put in
an heavy indictment against thy self. I say, mark this, and mark it
seriously. Have thou a strange God to be thy God? Do thou follow Idolatrous
worship? Do thou dishonor the name of God, in thought, word, action? Do
thou neglect the Ministry of the word, and profane the Lords day? Do thou
rebel against Gods Ordinances for the orderly government of the world? Art
thou a murderer, an whore, or whore-master, and a thief? Art thou a liar,
slanderer, or backbiter? Have thou a wicked lustful heart, which boyles with
discontents because it is better with thy neighbor then with thy self? If
another body should charge thee with all these things, thou would defy him,
and be ready to spit in his face; yet thou sai'st openly, that thou do
break the Commandments every day.

I confess it to be a truth, How we do break all the Commandments every day.
yet must thou understand it according to the word of God, or else shame, and
confusion will lie upon thee more then upon other men, women, and children:
know then, that thou breakest all the Commandments every day three ways.

First, in Adam, we were all in Adam when he sinned, Romans 5.
and in his fall, sin went over all mankind, and so, over thee, as well as
any body else. If a Carp eat of a bait, and be taken, and killed, not only
she dies, but thousands of spaunes that are in her belly: so when Adam sinned
in eating the forbidden fruit, and died to God, we, that were in his loins
eat it, and died in him. He sinned against a Sacrament. By eating the
forbidden fruit, he made himself unfit, and unworthy, to eat of the Tree of
life. In sinning against this Sacrament, he sinned against the whole Covenant
of Nature. For thou know that he that tears off the labels, and seals of a
Bond, sins against the virtue of the Bond, and makes it of none effect: so
Adam sinning against that Sacrament, the seal of the Covenant, he made it
useless. He was neither bound to God now by virtue of that Covenant (because
he had made himself unable) nor God to him (because he had made himsefe
unworthy). We therefore being in Adam, and sinning in Adam, do break all the
Commandments in him, as we are in the first Adam.

Secondly, in the pronenesse of our nature to break them. A Fox is chained up
in the yard. If he do not kill all the Poultry about the house, no thanks to
him, but to his wary Master, who has tied him up. So, no thanks to thee, if
thou do not break all the Commandments, but to God, who has an hook in thy
nosthrils, and restraines thee by his providence, before he renues thee by his
Spirit: for thy nature is prone unto it. God looks upon the pronenesse of
nature, and according to that does pass censure upon men, women, and children.
Heb. 11.
Abraham is said to offer up his son Isaac by faith, though he did it not:
because from that principle of grace within him, his nature was now prone to
do it, and would have done it, Genesis 22.
if God had not held his hands. Christ says, That he that looks upon a woman
lustfully has already committed adultery with her in his heart, Matt. 5.
yet the woman is very chaste, and untouched: because Christ looks to the
pronenesse of the heart. So though thou have not broken any of the
Commandments, but art as unrebukable concerning the letter of the Law, Phil. 3.
as Paul was; yet so long as God sees the pronenesse of thy nature, that thou
have a principle of wickedness in thee, which makes thee as ready to break the
Commandments as Cain, Achitophel, Peter, yea, Judas, he will adjudge thee a
breaker of all the Commandments.

Thirdly, in breaking one of the Commandments, Jam. 2.10.
we do break them all. Holy James says, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law,
and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all: and surely thou breakest some
one of them every day, or else thou could not be a sinner; 1 John 1.
and he that says he has no sin is a liar. The whole Law is one body of
righteousness. Now, thou know, that if I sin against the least member of
thy body, I sin against the whole. Let me cut off the least joint of thy little
finger, or of thy little toe, I offend thy whole body; Thy eye weeps, thy mouth
complains, thy whole body shrinks, because touching is shot through thy whole
body. So if thou breakest the least part of Gods Commandments, all will feel,
and call for wrath upon thee, because thou sinnest against the whole body of
righteousness. There is such a linking of all the Commandments together, as
is betwixt ten sworn friends; abuse one, and all will fall upon thee. Therefore
Paul says, Cursed is he that continues not in all things that are written in
the Book of the Law to do them. Gal. 3.
Thou must have the Law, thou must know it, thou must do it, thou must do all
things in it, thou must continue in doing it. thou must continue in doing all
things that are in it, or else thou art accursed.

Yet one thing may seem strange unto thee, that thou confessest thy self a
breaker of all the Commandments every day, when one Commandment concerns the
Sabbath of old, the Lords day now, which comes but once a week: how then can
thou break this every day? I tell thee sadly, that thou may break it before
it comes, and when it is gone Before it comes, by doing that upon the week
day, which makes thee unfit to keep it when it comes. If I command a servant to
do some business for me afar off, put case he do make himself drunk by
the way, and so, be unfit to do my business, he sins against my command. So
if thou do that upon the week day, which makes thee unfit to keep the Lords
day when it comes, thou breakest that Commandment. Thou see many worldly
men; they bury themselves under the earth all the week, and they have neither
life, nor leisure to come to the Congregation of Gods people on the Lords day;
or if they do, they sit like blocks upon benches, and have more mind of the
world, then of the word, of their pence, then of their prayers. So thou see
many a wanton boy, and girl, who would nothing but play all the week, and
when the Lords day comes they mind nothing else, and so, are disgraces to the
Assemblies where they are. These sin against the Lords day before it comes,
and so may thou, and heed it not. Thou may also break it when it is gone,
by not answering the end of it. The Prophet Esaias, Esa. 2.
speaking of these days, says, That we shall encourage one another to go up
to the house of the Lord, that he may teach us his ways, and we walk in his
paths. This should be thy end, now, of keeping the Lords days. But when God
does not teach thee his ways, and then thou do not walk in his paths
notwithstanding all the teaching which shines about thee, then thou breakest
the Lords day when it is gone. And thus thou now see how thou breakest all
the Commandments every day. And never wonder at it, seeing the Law exacts
perfect obedience to justification, but is weak to give it, Romans 8.3.
because of the flesh. Indeed the Gospel gives more strength, so as by grace
thou may keep it in desires, purposes, endeavors, with all sincerity, and
willingness for thy sanctification, though not perfectly for thy
justification: but I enquire yet of thy natural state, and of that thy answer
is given and opened by me.

with the spirit of bondage so far as to bring thee over to Jesus Christ.
Romans 8.
Most men are like Saul, who, when he saw Samuel after the destruction of
Amalek, said, 1 Samuel 15.
Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have kept the commandments of God: so, they
have kept them also, they are neither whore, nor thief, they keep their
Church, and are good neighbors: and some men say as Shadrach, Dan. 3.
Meshech, and Abednego, to Nebuchadnezzar in another case, We are not careful
to answer thee in this matter, or to keep thy commandment: so they care not to
enquire into it, or know whether they keep, or break them. But as thou love
thy soul, let it not be so with thee. As I have asked thee carefully, so feel
conscionably thy answer, that thou breakest them, that thou may lie down in
shame, and confusion, in thy self, that thou may be prepared for Jesus
Christ. Think that thou were in Adam, when he brake the whole Law of nature.
Think how prone thy nature is to all sins, even the worst that ever were
committed. Think how thou sinnest daily against the whole body of Justice in
many petty sins which makes thee groan and cry daily, forgive us our
trespasses. Think, that though there be but one Market day in seven, for
provision for thy soul, yet thou sinnest against it before it comes, and when
it is gone, as well as when it is, and so barrest the blessing of it from thy
soul. And, when thou seriously think of these things between God and thy
own soul, think again what will become of thee if thou die in thy sins, and
come to answer before a just God who cannot endure to behold iniquity. It may
be, that (if God bless) thy conscience may be rowzed to hearken further
concerning thy estate, and never give over hearkening, and enquiring, till thou
have found a way into Jesus Christ. If thou will know more, tell me

20. Q. What punishment is appointed for them that break Gods commandments.

A. Gods curse, which is the everlasting destruction both of body, and soul.

Remember how far thou have gone. Of Gods curse upon sinners.
Thou were made to serve God: thou should serve him according to his laws:
thou breakest all these laws; and for this, by nature, thou do lie under
this curse of God, of which thou here speak. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Deuteronomy. 28. Levit.
26.
Moses speaks of this, Cursed is he that confirms not all the words of the
Law to do them: and, He shows the particulars of this curse upon body, soul,
and state. Gal. 3.10.
Paul expounds it more clearly, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. And Christ speaks
of the height of it; Matthew. 25.41.
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and
his angels. It is most miserable to be in such a case: yet thou art in it by
nature, Ephesians. 2.
as thou art born a child of wrath, an heir of hell.

God curses when he does inflict punishment. Men curse when they wish ill one
to another, as pox, plague, gallows, vengeance, and confusion, or hurt any way
to body, or soul. These are kinds and forms of speech, savouring of the
belched-up froth of carnal, and devilish hearts. But God curses when he
inflicteth punishments. Thou would think it a great curse to have a father,
mother, master, or mistress, who should do nothing but beat, bruise, and
wound thee day and night. In stead of feeding thee, beat thee; in stead of
clothing thee, beat thee; in stead of refreshing thee, beat thee; in stead of
giving thee rest and sleep, beat thee: so is it a far more miserable estate
to lie day and night under Gods flayles of punishments. The punishment which
God inflicts is eternal destruction of body, and soul. To be destroyed in
body, is a fearful punishment: to be destroyed in soul, is more fearful:
to be destroyed in body, and soul is more fearful yet: but to be destroyed
in body and soul everlastingly is most fearful; it cannot be expressed; it is
endless, easelesse, and remediless. What the destruction of body and soul is.
This destruction is double, the destruction of sin, and the destruction of
misery. By this thou may know that thou have the destruction of sin, when
thou art not used to that end which God made thee for. God made thee to serve
him; thou should serve him by keeping the law: thou breakest the law, and
have this part of the curse, the destruction of sin. If I had a piece of
timber squared, fawed, and framed; if I use it not to this end, but let it lie
and rot in the dirt, it is destroyed. If thou had good apparel, and should
not wear it, but let it lie in the high way for horse, and carriages to go
over, for swine to rent, it is destroyed: so it is with thee when the world,
flesh, and devil abuses thee, and thou art not used to Gods end. By this thou
may know that thou have the destruction of misery, when thou art subject to
the miseries of this life, and of the life to come. The miseries of this life
are all crosses to thy person, comfort, credit, and state, as sicknesses,
sorrows, disgraces, discomforts both within, and without. The miseries of the
world to come are thy separation from the Lord, and his Law (the two principles
of life) for ever. As when thy soul is separated from thy body, a natural
death is made up: so when thy person is separated from God, and his word of
comfort, a spiritual death is made up, which begins in this life, and is
continued for ever, and ever.

and impenitent heart, to go on in thy accursed courses. But this doctrine of
curses will teach thee that thou were in danger before thou wast borne, and
ever since. Thou might justly have been cast into hell before thou did
breath in this open world. Thou have, all thy life, been under the destruction
of sin, and this has enwrapped thee in the destruction of misery. Thou
feel many pains, and sicknesses, which are but the light flashes of hell
fire. Thou art like a man condemned to a tormenting and dying death. As if a
man had a Caldron of boiling lead hang over his head, and he stark naked under
it. First one drop falls upon his head, another upon his shoulder, another upon
his arm, another upon his hand, another upon his back, another upon his
belly, another upon his leg, upon his foot another, which makes him start and
shreeke: but at the last the whole shower comes, which makes him roar, and
tumble like a wild bull in a net. So thou, by this volley of curses, art first
nipt in one part, then in another, which makes thy joy to be interrupted, and
thy mirth, many times, turned into mourning. But at last, in death, and
Judgment comes an whole Sea of them, which makes weeping, howling, and
gnashing of teeth. Weigh it seriously before it be too late. It may be that God
will leave a blessing behind, to make thee search after a deliverance, which is
the next thing that comes to be skanned. But first let me try thy profiting.
Thou toldest me that thou breakest all Gods commandments according to which
thou should serve him.

Tell me therefore, Q. How many ways do thou break them?

A. Three ways.

Q. Which be they?

A. First, in Adam: secondly, in the pronenesse of my nature: thirdly, in
breaking one I break them all.

Q. But the seventh part of time comes but once a week, how can thou break
the commandment which concerns that, every day?

A. I break it before it comes, and when it is gone.

Q. How before it comes?

A. By doing that, upon the week day, which makes me unfit to keep it when it
comes.

Q. How when it is gone?

A. By not learning Gods ways, and not walking in his paths.

Q. Art thou in danger of Gods curse?

A. Yes, both in my body, and in my soul.

Q. How does God curse?

A. By inflicting of punishment.

Q. What punishment does he inflict?

A. A destruction of my body, and my soul.

Q. How do thou know thy self to be destroyed?

A. When I am not used to that end, that God made me for.

Q. What follows upon this?

A. A subjection to the miseries of this world, and of the world to come.



Do not forget how far thou art gone; God made thee: thou art made to do
him service: thou should serve him as he commands: thou breakest all his
commands; and therefore, thou art under the curse, and so, a more miserable
creature then a toade or any serpent, if thou be not delivered. Tell me then

21. Q. How shall thou escape this curse?

A. Only by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Thou answerest rightly: Christ is our deliverer from the curse. Act. 4.12.
for there is no name under heaven whereby thou can be saved, but only the
name of Jesus; that is, no authority, power, virtue, or merit. Gal. 3.13.
It is he that has redeemed thee from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for thee. Col. 2.14, 15.
It is he that blotted out the handwriting that was against thee, and took it
out of the way, nayling it to his cross, and having spoiled principalities,
and powers, made a show of them openly, triumphing over them, in himself, on
the cross: and therefore when Paul groveled under the burden of his sin, he
could find no rest for his soul but in the Lord Jesus Christ: Romans 7.24, 25.
and thus must it be with thee; therefore it behooves thee to know him.

If thou did owe millions of pounds, yea, and satisfaction to the law by
death; and had but one friend in all the world that would, and could
undertake to discharge thee from all, thou would know him, or else thou were
unworthy to have benefit by him. So thou must know Christ in his names,
natures, offices, and uses, by which thou have saving good by him, or else thou
art unworthy of him. And because this is signified in his names, thou must
thoroughly know the sense, and virtue of them for thee.

He is called Jesus, Matthew. 1.21.
because he saves his people from their sins. He saves thee three ways; By
Ransom, by Rescue, and by Mortification. He saves thee by Ransom, by laying
down his life for thee. Joh. 10.15.
Thou should have died the first, and second death for ever, and ever: Christ
died the first death, and overcame the second for thee. He saved thee by
Rescue, by delivering thee by strong hand. When God was satisfied, thy enemies,
the world, the flesh, and the devil, would not let thee go. Luke 1.71, 74, 75.
Therefore Christ saved thee from thy enemies, and from the hands of them that
hate thee, that thou being delivered from them, might serve him without fear
(of them) all the days of thy life, in holiness, and righteousness before
him. He saves thee by Mortification, by killing of sin of thee, least thou
be killed in sin. When thou art ransomed, and delivered, yet sin sticks
closer to thee then thy skin. Therefore, to perfect thy salvation, Christ
strengthens thee with might, by his spirit in the inner man, Ephs. 3.16; 17.
Romans 8.13.
and dwells in thy heart by faith, that thou may mortify the deeds of the
flesh by the spirit.

He is called Christ, because he is anointed. Psalm. 2.2. Col. 2.9.
This anointing is, his having the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him
bodily. He was not only made partaker of the divine nature, as we are: but he
was full God, and full man personally united; Joh. 3.34.
and so he received not the spirit by measure: but was anointed with the oil
of gladness above his fellows. Psalm. 45.7.
The reasons why he was anointed were, that he might be a fit Prophet, Heb.
7.25. Joh. 1.18. Ephesians. 1.17. 1 Cor. 1.30. Esa. 53.
Priest, and King, to perfect thy salvation. As he was a Prophet, he came out
of his Fathers bosom, to reveal his will unto thee, that so, he might be thy
wisdom to show thee the way to heaven by him. Heb. 7.
As he was a Priest, Romans 8.
he offered himself in sacrifice for thee, and still makes request for thee
at the right hand of God. As he was a King, he had all authority, and power
committed to him, to rule over thee, and overrule thy enemies. Thus nothing
lies in the way to hinder him from being the Prince of thy salvation, by
mortification, as a King, and Prophet; by ransom, as a Priest; and by rescue,
as a King.

He is called our Lord, Act. 10.36. Romans 7.25. Phil. 2.8.9, 10.11.
as one that has power to maintain that salvation which he has procured
thee: because by purchase from God for thee, and conquest over the world, the
flesh, and the devil, he does possess thee as his own, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
and therefore must give an account to him. Thus thou see him that saves
thee from the Curse.

Jesus Christ our Lord, upon Christ for salvation, and for dominion. All his
garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia. Psalm. 45.8.
That which covers thee, and comforts thee from Christ, is preservative, as
Myrrh; compurgative, as Aloes; comfortative, as sweet smelling Cassia. Christ
will not only comfort thee from guilt, but purge and preserve thee from the body
of death. Without Christ nothing can purge thee. Mich. 6.6, 7. Luke 18.11, 12.
Esa. 1.11, 12, 13, 14.
Hypocrites will run to thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil: Moralists will run to their civil carriages: Formalists will run to
the outward acts of Gods Ordinances: but nothing will do thee good without
Christ. If thou seek to Christ only, then all things succeed to this end. The
Holy Ghost purges, by way of infusion: Faith, by way of application:
Repentance, by way of disposition: Holiness, by way of repression, and
mortification: Zach. 13.1.
but Christ is the fountain whence all proceeds. Would thou have peace with
God? Romans 5.1.
It must be through our Lord Jesus Christ. Would thou have joy? Romans 5.11.
It must be through our Lord Jesus Christ. Would thou have grace reign?
Romans 5.21.
It must be by Jesus Christ our Lord. Would thou be justified? Phil. 3.8.
It must be by the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord. Would thou walk in
Christ? Col. 2.6.
As thou have received the Lord Jesus Christ, so walk in him. Would thou
have grace and peace? 1 Thessalonians. 1.1.
It must be from the Lord Jesus Christ. Would thou have any saving grace? 2
Pet. 1.8.
It must be by fruitfulness in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Still
whole Christ must be rested on, or it will do thee no good. When a wise
Physician gives a certain quantity to purge rebelling humors, thou must take
it all: so when God gives the Lord Jesus Christ, thou must apply him all.
Christ cannot be divided. Jesus cannot be Jesus except he be a Lord. He was
anointed to be a King, as well as a Priest, and a Prophet, and without the
exercise of all his Offices, he saves not one soul. There is not the vilest
sinner in the Church, but would have Jesus. He would run to his salvation,
because he is convinced that he cannot be saved without him: but they cannot
abide the Lord Jesus who must rule and reign.

the Lord Jesus Christ daily.

therefore they can neither renounce it, nor go to the fountain to cleanse
it. Some know them, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
sigh to know them, yet live in them wilfully under hope of mercy. will not be
merciful to such. Some are such sinners, as Paul was. These are in the way of
salvation by Christ. Romans 7.15. 1 Cor. 9.27.
If thou ask, what manner of sinner Paul was? I tell thee, that he was such a
sinner as hated sin, and cared not who knew what was in him: and practiced
great works of mortification: Romans 7.24.
and accounted himself a base wretch, the least of Saints, the greatest of
sinners: and one that walked humbly under the sense of finne, and one that made
diligent search after Christ to save him, and when he had found him, thanked
God for whole Christ, even for the Lord Jesus Christ. Be thou such a finner
(through Gods grace) and I shall not fear the Curse of the Law which lies upon
thee for sin. Now tell me:

22. Q. What is Jesus Christ?

A. He is the eternal Son of God made man.

This is also Gods truth: What Jesus Christ is.
for when Christ was baptized, and when he was transfigured, a voice came from
heaven, saying, This is my well beloved Son. Matt. 3.17. Matt. 17.5.
And that he is the Eternal Son of God, appears; because he was in the
beginning, Joh. 1.1.
that is, when God made Time, he was before God made that Time, to wit, in
eternity, and so, was God. This crowned Peter's faith, in the name of all the
Apostles, when he said, Thou art Christ, Matt. 16.16 Matt. 3. Luke 3.
the Son of the living God. And that he was made man, the Genealogies prove.
And tha the was the Son of God made man, appears from John's testimony, The Word
was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, Joh. 1.14.
and we beheld his glory, the glory of the only begotten of the Father: and
from the Testimony of the Angel, who says to Mary, Luke 1.35.
an holy thing shall be borne of thee, which shall be called the Son of God,
1 John 3.1.
not nuncupatively, by name only, but shall be the Son of God. As Gods
people are called the sons of God by adoption, and are so; so Christ by
nature. As borne of the Virgin, so he was made man, as the Son of God, so was
he God. The Son of God must be thy Savior; Luke 3.38.
because he might give thee what thou want. Thou wast, in Adam, the son of
God: by falling in him, Joh. 8.44.
thou becamest the son of the Devil: thy Savior comes to make thee the son
of God again, without which thou can not be the heir of glory. Now mark,
God cannot give thee what he has not. The Father is not the Son, neither is
the Holy Ghost the Son; but the Son is the Son. Therefore he becomes thy
Savior to give thee sonship. The Son of God becomes the son of man, to
make the sons of men become the sons of God. He is made man, that he might
be a fit sacrifice. Man is a more noble sacrifice then a woman: Mal. 1.14.
for cursed is he that has a male in his flock, and offers a corrupt thing.

a disease, and take heed that thou never did fall into such a disease
again? This is thy case. Thy sin is a soar, wound, and plague, that nothing
could cure but the heart-bloud of the Son of God. God out of his infinite
love did send him into the world to take thy nature upon him, that he might be
reviled for thee, spit upon for thee, scourged for thee, crowned with thorns
for thee, sweat drops of blood for thee, be crucified for thee, and shed the
blood of his hands, feet, and heart for thee, and all to cover, and cure thy
finne. Will thou not now hate thy finne, and be careful to suppress it, and
never fall into the like again? I hope thou will, or else thy latter end will
be worse then thy beginning. Go on now and tell me:

23. Q. What has Christ Jesus done for thee?

A. He suffered the pains of death for me.

Thou have seen what Christ was, What Christ has done for us
and is; now sadly consider what he has done for thee. Thou happly, may
think it little for him to be borne for thee, to live for thee, (though it
were infinite love): but because the purity of his nature, and perfection of
his obedience, have influence into the value of his sufferings; therefore thou
do mention only these pains of death. Peter mentions these pains of
death: Act. 2.24.
and Paul calls them, Romans 6.9.
the Dominion of death; Phil. 2.8.
and his humbling of himself, and becoming obedient unto death, even the death
of the cross. What pains and torments Christ endured for thee then, is
unexpressible: yet they may be valued a little, Heb. 5.7.
by his offering up prayers, and supplications, with strong crying, and tears
to his Father: and by sweating drops of blood when he grovelled upon the
ground, in so cold a season as made Peter creep to the fire in the high Priests
Hall. Surely, there was fire nigh which caused this sweat. What may the cause
then of these pains and torments be? Surely, the sight of our sins charged
upon him, Heb. 7.22.
and the sense of his Fathers wrath. He stood a Surety in our room, and was to
answer for all our sins to God, and not be discharged till he had satisfied
for them all. Look therefore, as if a man were bound for a million of thousand
pounds for other men; when he was once attached his whole charge would be put
in against him: and this sight would be fearful to him, especially if he
considered that they were his chief enemies for whom he was bound, and a nest
of unthankful creatures, who did load him with disgrace, and obloquy. Just
thus was it with thy blessed Savior. Though he had the testimony of his
enemies that never man spoke as he did: Joh. 7.46. Mar. 7.37. Act. 10.38.
and that he had done all things well; because the Lord was with him: Yet when
he was under arrests, and executions, Esa. 43.24.
he was made to serve with our sins, and was wearied with our iniquities: 2
Cor. 5.21
for he was made sin for us, who knew no sin, when all our sins were
charged upon him, and he was to make satisfaction to God his Father for them.
And whose sins were these? The sins of those that were his enemies: Romans
5.10.
the sins of his Disciples, who run away from him: the sins of Peter, who
denied him: and the sins of Jews, and Gentiles who crucified him. The Jews,
and Gentiles bare a world of enmity against him: Ephesians. 2.16.
yet he reconciled both unto God in one body by the Cross, having slain the
enmity in himself. Think seriously, whether this was not a torment, and pain
of death to have all the debts presented unto him of such sinners to be
satisfied for. Besides, when God his Father saw him thus covered with sin in
the State of a surety (though the holiness of his person was never polluted),
he withdrawes the blessed vision of the divine nature. Wheresoever it shined
abroad upon others, yet, though he was personally united unto it, it shined
not upon himself, but left him to sweat drops of blood, and his soul to be
heavy unto death, and his heart and tongue to cry out, Psalm. 22.1. Mat. 27.46.
My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Is not this an unutterable pain,
and torment of death? Was it not enough for him to die, but he must endure the
sorrows of death thus?

humble thee for sin, drive thee from sin, and comfort thee against sin.
It will humble thee for sin, to think that it should present such a cursed
visage to God, that such a fearful load must be laid upon thy Surety for it.
It will drive thee from sin, to think, that, if thou neglect so great
salvation as Christ has offered unto thee, thou shall be, for thy sins in a
worse case then he was. He was able to slay hatred, and enmity, but thou can
not by suffering millions of millions of ages: and therefore thou shall have
thy sins lie before thee for ever, and the wrath of God will press thee to
all eternity. It will comfort thee against sin, to think, that, thy Surety
having endured this for thee, it were unjust for God to impose it upon thee
again. Only be sure that thou keep the Covenant of the Gospel, that is, when
thou have been translated out of the kingdom of darkness, into the Kingdom
of his dear Son, that thou honor the Father in the Son by believing in
him with a faith working by love, and then thou will have cause to triumph, as
Paul, Romans 7.25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now let me see, what thou remembrest, and understandest of what I have said.
Tell me:

Q. Who must deliver thee from the curse of the Law?

A. Jesus Christ only.

Q. Why is he called Jesus?

A. Because he saves his people from their sins.

Q. How many ways does he save thee?

A. Three: by ransom, by rescue, by mortification.

Q. How by ransom?

A. By laying down his life for me.

Q. How by rescue?

A. By delivering me by strong hand.

Q. How by mortification?

A. By killing of sin in me.

Q. What means does he use?

A. The Word of God, Sacraments, and Prayer.

Q. Why is he called Christ?

A. Because he is anointed.

Q. What is his anointing?

A. His having the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily.

Q. Why was Christ anointed?

A. That he might be a Prophet, Priest, and King.

Q. Why was he a Prophet?

A. To reveal his Fathers will to me.

Q. Why was he a Priest?

A. To offer himself in sacrifice, and make intercession for me.

Q. Why was he a King?

A. To rule over me, and overruled my enemies.

Q. How is Christ a Lord?

A. By possessing me as his own.

Q. Why was Christ a Lord?

A. To maintain his right in me, and to call me to accounts.

Q. What is this Jesus Christ our Lord?

A. The Son of God made man?

Q. Why must the Son of God be thy Savior?

A. Because he might give me what I wanted.

Q. Why must thy Savior be a man, not a woman?

A. Because man is the more noble sacrifice.

Q. Did this God and man, son, suffer for thee?

A. Yes, he suffered the sorrows of death for me.

Q. What were these sorrows?

A. The sight of my sins, and the sense of his fathers wrath.

Remember (my child) how far thou art gone. Thou wast made to serve God: thou
should serve him as he has commanded: thou breakest all the commandments,
and so lie under the curse of the Law. Jesus Christ came into the world to
deliver thee from this curse. This Jesus Christ was the Son of God: and
though he were the Son of God, yet becoming thy surety he suffered the
sorrows of death, to satisfy God, and discharge thee. It may seem strange
that the Son of God (who is immortal) should dye: Tell me therefore,

24. Q. Seeing Christ was God, how could he dye?

A. He was God, and man. As he was God he died not: but as man he died for my
sins, and rose again for my Justification.

Here thou tellest me of the natures of thy Savior, How it could be that
Christ could die.
and of the use he made of them for thy good. As to his natures, he was God,
and man: as to his uses, he used his humane nature to dye for thee, and his
Divine nature to rise again for thy Justification. First, he was God and man.
Man he was certainly: for in his whole course, and carriage, Phil. 2.8.
he was found in fashion as a man; not in appearance only; for (as) is here
demonstrative of the truth of his humane nature. As John says, Joh. 1.14.
we saw his glory as the Glory of the only begotten Son of God, that is, his
glory was the glory of the true Son of God: so in fashion as a man, that is,
a true man. Therefore Paul says, we have one Mediator betwixt God, and man,
the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. Matthew. 1.2.
who is therefore often called, the son of man, the son of Abraham, the
son of David, yea, Heb. 2.16.
the seed of Abraham according to the flesh. He was as surely God. For when he
was given to us to be a Child, a a Son, his name is, the mighty God, Esa.
9.6. Jer. 23.6. Romans 9.5.
and Jehovah our righteousness, and over all, God blessed for ever. And John
says, that this essential word of the Father, who was with God, was God, Joh.
1.1.
even from eternity before, and when, God made the beginning of time.

Secondly, As man Christ died.
Christ made excellent uses of these natures for thee: of his Manhood he made
this use to dye for thee. For Christ suffered for thee in the flesh, 1 Pet.
4.1. 1 Pet. 2.24.
and bare thy sins in his own body on the tree. If the Sun shine upon the
body of a tree which thou have a purpose to cut down, thou can cut the tree,
but thou can not cut the shine of the Sun; that is united unto it, and
shines upon the gashes and dints thou make in the bark, heart, sap, and root.
So when Christ God and man was united for thee, the unsuffering Divine nature
could not suffer, but the body of his flesh, and blood, that suffered and dyed
for thee. Man had sinned, and man must dye. It is not equal that another
nature should suffer for man's sin. Therefore verily he took not on him the
nature of Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham, that he might taste death,
Heb. 2.9, 10.
and be made a perfect Captain of thy salvation through suffering.

Of his Godhead he made this use, As God Christ rose again. Romans 4.25. Romans
1.4.
to rise again for thy Justification. For he mightily declared himself to be
the Son of God by the resurrection from the dead. He was to deliver thee from
a world of evil, and to bring thee to a world of good things. The guilt of
sin, the wrath of God, the power of hell, the fear of death were to be
wrought from thee by him. The pardon of sin, the power from sin, the
Inheritance of heaven were to be settled upon thee by him. How could he ever
have done any, or all of these for thee, if his Divine nature had not influence
into his sufferings to bring thee the righteousness of God? Romans 3.25, 26.
Phil. 3.9.
Let him have done all this for thee, thou could never have been justified if
he had not declared himself to be the Son of God, with power, by his
resurrection from the dead. This settles the merits of his death upon thee, and
assures thee, that they are accepted by his father for thy discharge; because
death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6.
but he comes triumphantly out of the prison of the grave whither thy sins had
cast him. Christ bare a double person for thee; the person of a surety, Heb.
7.22. 1 John 2.1.
and the person of an advocate. What he does for thee for the discharging thy
debt, and for the settlement of a full satisfaction upon thee, as a surety,
that he does in thy room, and it stands in the Law of God, and man, as a
discharge of thy score: what he does as an Advocate, in appearing for thee,
pleading for thee, and satisfying all offices in thy room, that is interpreted
as thy act, and thou must stand to it, and challenge it as thy own. When thou
see, therefore, Christ dying a satisfying death for thee, and rising a
discharged resurrection for thee from further imprisonment, thou have a full
quietus est, or assurance that all thy debts are paid. If any man were bound
for thee, and cast into prison, and after enjoying the liberty of a free
subject, thou may conclude that all thy debts are paid: so may thou rest
thy soul that God is well pleased, and satisfied with what his son has done
for thee when thou see by miracles, acts, and many testimonies, that he is
risen from the dead.

Romans 8.3.
in the similitude of sinful flesh. Psalm. 24.
Is he to rise again? He is the King of Glory, the Lord mighty in battle, who
knows how to vanquish the last enemy, 1 Cor. 15.
death, as well as any that appeared before. He that is thy surety, so able,
so willing, will satisfy to the utmost farthing. He that is thy Advocate, so
faithful, so wonderful in counsel, will not leave any of thy work behind,
till he have brought thee a Certificate of thy full discharge. When thou
repentest, and art ready to be swallowed up of sorrow, let thy poor soul rest
here, and thou shall have joy by believing, and come with confidence, and
boldness to the throne of grace.

But, it may be that the extent of this benefit may something damp thy spirit:
Therefore tell me

25. Q. Whether all men are saved by Christ's death?

A. No: only they are saved which have a true faith.

Right thus does the Scripture teach. If all were saved, it were happy for the
children of darkness, and sons of Belial: Hell should soon be empty, and
heaven fuller then ever God meant it. God should be made the greatest tyrant in
the world, if he should require such repentance, faith, mortification, Godly
living of some, and yet save all by Christ's death, who never touched any of
Gods holy rules with their little finger. Therefore, certainly, this salvation
must be limited to them that believe. Thus does Christ; Joh. 3.16.18.36.
Whosoever believes in him shall not perish: and, he that believes on him is
not condemned: and, he that believes on the Son has everlasting life: and
Luke says, That at Antioch, when Paul, and Barnabas preached, as many as were
ordained to eternal life believed. This was the receipt that Philip gave to the
Eunuch, Act. 13.48. Act. 8. Act. 16.
and Paul and Silas gave to the keeper of the Prison: and it must be thine. For
faith is the eye, the foot, the hand, the mouth of thy soul, yea it is all in
all to give thee union with Christ for life, and salvation. It is the eye of
thy soul: therefore God says, by the Prophet, Look upon me and be ye saved,
Esa. 45.22.
O ye ends of the earth, that is, believe in me. It is the foot of thy soul:
therefore Christ says, Joh. 6.35.
He that comes to me shall never hunger, that is, he that believes in me. It is
the hand of thy soul: therefore John says, Joh. 1.12.
So many as received him, to them he gave a free right to be the sons of God,
that is, believed in him. It is the mouth of the soul: therefore Christ says,
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, Joh. 6.53.
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, that is, except ye believe in
him. Yea, it is all in all, for uniting thee to Christ: therefore John says, 1 John 3. Romans 1. Heb. 10. Gal. 2.20. Joh. 14.
He that has the Son has life; and Paul says, By faith we live: because it
is that excellent Instrument which unites us to Christ who is both our way,
truth, and life.

be saved by him, as well as the precisest of them all. But thou will find it
an harder work to have a true faith of Gods elect. For thou may find that
when sinners are brought into the straits of death, sometimes they can not
believe, and sometimes they dare not believe. They can not believe for their
lives, as Francis Spira, who cried out, that he could no more believe then the
Devil. If a man will ever run, he will run, when he runs for his life: and
if a man will ever believe, he will believe, when he believes for his life. But
poor sinners when the sight of their own unworthiness, and Satan's
temptations are let loose upon them, can not believe for their lives. Sometimes
they dare not believe, as wicked Christians, who see they must lose all if they
believe in Christ. They must lose father, mother, wife, children, houses,
lands, and all sublunary contentments, if they believe in Christ. As a man that
has gotten a great deal by greedy scraping, ravening, and holding, dares not
believe that Covetousness is Idolatry; for then he shall be undone: So dare
not a professor at large believe in Christ; Phil. 3.
because he knows that he must account all things loss, and dogs-meat for the
excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him crucified. He must deny all his
rotten grounds of confidence, (as, I keep my Church; I am neither whore, nor
thief; I wrong no man; I am a good neighbor; I have a good heart to Godward;
I have a good meaning; though I do not pray as others, yet God knows my heart;
though I cannot say as others, yet I know the way to heaven as well as the
best; I do as I would be done unto, and the like): he must (I say) deny all
these rotten grounds, which he dare not do: for then he sees that he shall be
a dunghill, and has nothing to please himself in. Get thou therefore true
faith, even the faith, not of the world, but of the Gospel. In this I Will help
thee as I can; and therefore tell me:

26. Q. What is this true faith of Gods elect?

A. It is the resting of the soul upon Christ for salvation.

Understand this well as thou love the life of thy soul. What true Faith is.
Some will tell thee that it is an assenting to the truth of the Gospel: It is
not assenting to the truth. Jam. 2.
and in truth, thou must agree to the truth of the Law, and Gospel also: yet
Devils and wicked men may do thus much, and yet not have saving faith. Yea,
what thou do not actually know and assent unto now, thou must have a
prepared and ready mind to know and agree to it when God shall reveal it unto
thee from the Scriptures. Others will tell thee that this faith is a full
persuasion of thy heart that what God has promised in Christ he will make it
good to thee. It is not a full persuasion.
But take heed: for this will be a rise for fearful temptations. Put case the
Devil should tempt thee, and say, If thou be a Christian indeed, thou have
true saving faith. If thou have this faith, thou art fully persuaded that thou
art one of Christ's saved ones. Tell me then, art thou fully persuaded thus? If
the ground should now open and swallow thee up quite: if thou were now to give
an account of all things that are done in thy flesh whether they are good, or
evil, art thou fully persuaded that without more faith, repentance, obedience,
thou shall go to the heaven of heavens? What say thou now? faith Satan: art
thou fully persuaded? If not, thou have no faith: if thou have no faith, thou
art no good Christian: therefore go with me to thy own place. Where art thou
now? Act. 1.
How is thy soul perplexed.

It is true, that thou must labor to be fully persuaded: for God says, 2 Pet.
1.10.
make thy calling, and election sure: and it is proper to faith to work this
full persuasion, in Gods people, at many turns: but there is a vast difference
betwixt the working of faith in it self, and the work of it in thee. Thy
handkerchief, band, cuffs, or any part of thy linen may be very white, yet put
it into an Ink-pot and it will soon be made black. So true faith works full
persuasion of it self: but put it into thy heart, where there is too much
flesh, and unbelief, and doubting, and self-policy, and the work of faith is
too much, too long, too often hindered, which makes thee cry out, Lord I
believe, help my unbeleef. Besides, nothing can work this full persuasion but
faith: for faith is an argument to conclude it. Therefore Paul says, Ephe.
1.13.
that after ye believed ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise: as if
he should say, after the spirit had wrought faith in your hearts (for faith is
a fruit of the spirit) the same spirit took faith, Gal. 5.
and thence concluded to your souls (as with a seal) that the promise of
salvation did belong unto you. Thou see then, that faith is one thing, and a
full persuasion is another: a full persuasion is nothing but a conclusion, or
consequence that issues from true faith. Therefore pitch not upon that
description of faith.

Build then upon that which thou have given, It is a resting upon Christ for
salvation.
that it is the resting of thy soul upon Christ for salvation. Thou would
fain be saved, and look through all heaven and earth to satisfy thy weary
soul with sin, thou find Christ, and see his fitness, and fullness, and
then resolvest upon him only, and restest upon him for thy salvation. This is
called confidence, affiance, trusting, but this is the plain English sense.
Esa. 10.20.
(a resting upon Christ) This is described by staying upon the Lord: 2 Cor.
3.4. Psalm. 37.5. Joh. 3.15, 16.
by trusting through Christ to Godward: by rolling our way upon the Lord: by
believing upon Christ, and in Christ: but the plain sense of all is, 1 John 3.23
Ephesians. 3.12.
thy resting upon Christ. Because Christ is Gods only ordinance to keep thee
out of hell. Who shall save thee? Christ. How shall he save thee? By his holy
death rightly applied. Whom shall he save? Those that trust in him, or rest
upon him, Joh. 5.
and so, honor the Father in the Son. If thou do thus, thou shall be guarded
by the mighty power of God through faith unto salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5.9.
Put case that the mouth of hell were opened, and thou were ready to be tumbled
into it. Thou see Christ set, by God, like the tree of life, in the way, to
stay thee from that bottomless pit; and thou rowlest thy self upon him, and
resolvest there to live and die what ever comes; this is faith. Mat. 16.18
Christ is called A Rock oftentimes in the Scripture. Put case that a man were
cast into the sea: he spies a rock, and swims to it, as fast as he can: one
wave after another beats him back, yet his face is to the rock, and he will
not give over. He strives and strives, and at last he gets hold of it. There he
prays, and cries, and looks to heaven, and resolves there to live, and there
to die. So thou art cast into a sea of grief, for thy sea of sin: Thou
espiest Christ thy rock fastened by God (for him has God the Father sealed) to
keep thee from perishing: Joh. 6.
Thou hungerest after him; thou make to him with the strength of thy heart.
Thou art beaten off again, and again, by many temptations, and art ever and
anon, ready to give over: yet, at last, by the mercy of thy God, thou do
embrace him, and grasp him. Then thou criest out as Jacob, Genesis 28.
I will not let thee go without a blessing. Thou resolvest to live and die with
him, in whose bosom thou now do lie: this is thy faith. And though
sometimes thou have not a full persuasion, yet in this resting, there is more,
or less, for thy soul. An old man can rest upon a staff, and so can a young
man, and so can a palsy man: one weakly, another strongly, another shakingly,
yet all rest upon it according to the measure of strength. So a weak faith, a
stronger faith, and the strongest faith of all can rest upon Christ, according
to the measure of their faith. There is a latitude in resting to hold up a
fainting soul. One rests weakly upon Christ, yet he rests: another strongly,
yet he does but rest.

faith, this true and living faith to be in thee: without it no salvation; with
it are all things belonging to faith and godliness. This faith makes thee one
with Christ, and Christ with thee, and so, brings thee to suck honey out of
the rock. This faith brings Christ in the mouth of it to God the Father, who
therefore can deny thee nothing. This faith makes arguments out of the word of
God to conclude convincingly for a powerful holiness. He that is in Christ
must be a new creature: but I am in Christ by faith. Romans 6.
He that is in Christ must be led with boldness to the throne of grace: Col. 3.
but I am in Christ by faith. He that is dead with Christ must not live to sin:
but I by faith, am dead with Christ. He that is risen with Christ must seek the
things that are above; above sin, grace; above the world, the church; above
earth, heaven: Romans 8.1.
but I am by faith grafted into the similitude of his resurrection. He that is
in Christ has no condemnation which shall touch him: but I am in Christ by
faith; because I live not after the flesh but after the spirit. This faith can
do wonders; pacify God with the blood of Christ shed above a thousand six
hundred years ago; purify thy heart; open the windows of heaven, and triumph
over death and hell. Rest not therefore before thou find it in thy soul: and if
thou can not find rest unto thy soul with the resting of a strong man, yet
comfort thy heart that thou do it with the resting of a child; and labor,
in the use of Gods means, and by experience of his love, to increase it more
and more. Now look back a little, and let me see what thou have profited.

Q. How many natures had Christ?

A. Two: he was God, and man.

Q. Why was he a man?

A. Because man had sinned, and man must give satisfaction.

Q. Why was he a God?

A. Because by his sufferings he might bring in the righteousness which is of
God.

Q. What use did he make of his humane nature?

A. To dye for my sins.

Q. What use did he make of his divine nature?

A. To rise again for my justification.

Q. Can the rising of Christ justify thee?

A. Yes: by certifying me that my surety has paid all my debts.

Q. But who shall have the benefit of Christ's death?

A. Those only who have a lively faith.

Q. Why so?

A. Because faith only is the eye, foot, hand, and mouth of the soul for
enjoying of Christ.

Q. What then is this faith?

A. A resting of my soul upon Christ for salvation.

Q. Why must thou rest upon Christ for salvation?

A. Because he is Gods ordinance to keep me out of hell.

Thus have I led thee along (my child) from thy creation to thy misery, and
from thy misery to thy deliverance: When thou wast made, thou sinnedst against
thy creation: when thou had sinned, thou layest under the curse: when thou
layst thus miserable, Christ came to save thee: he came to save, in the fine,
only believers: and thou have now heard what this faith is. But, now, thou
may say, Joh. 4.
the well is deep, and there is no body to draw; I cannot tell how to reach
this faith, therefore tell me,

27. Q. How must this faith be wrought in thee?

A. The Holy Ghost must work it in my heart, by the preaching of the Gospel.

In this thou say right also. Faith is one of the fruits of the spirit: Gal.
5.22.
and it was the Lord, Act. 16.14.
who opened the heart of Lydia, and made her attend to the preaching of Paul,
Joh. 6.44.
and draws us unto Christ: and that he does it by the preaching of the
Gospel, may appear to thee in what Paul says to the Romans, and to the
Galathians. Romans 10.14, 15.
To the first he says, they cannot believe in him of whom they have not heard;
and they cannot hear without a preacher, and they cannot preach (now) unless
they be sent to preach the glad tidings of good things. Gal. 3.2. Act. 11.14.
To the second he says, that they received the spirit of the hearing of faith.
Hence Peter tells that God gave him a Commission to tell Cornelius words (that
is, to preach the Gospel) whereby he and his wife should be saved. It is not
man that can work in thy heart, were he as an Angel from heaven. He may tell
thee the whole history of the Gospel, and all the promises of salvation by
Christ, and thou will be never the nearer to powerful believing. But if the
holy Ghost bring home the word of Christ to the soul, he will write it there,
Heb. 8.
and so seal it home, that he will make an impression of faith upon thy soul.
And in truth, it must be the holy Ghost, that must do it. For Faith is an
infinite comfort against an infinite horror of sin. Nothing should deeper
wound thee then sin: and thy sins (in respect of thy self) are infinite in
guilt, and number. Who can comfort against this but an infinite God who can
rebuke thy unbeleeving heart? Besides, will it not seem contrary to thy reason,
that thou should be made wise by another man's wisdom; righteous, 1 Cor. 1.30
by another man's righteousness; holy, by another man's sanctification; and
persevering by another man's full redemption? But let the holy Ghost bring the
Word to thy heart, and convince thee that Christ was thy surety, and so, one
person with thee, doing, and suffering in thy room, and for thee, then will thou believe that Christ is not another person, but one with thee, and so his
riches are thine. Agaiu, thou say, that the Holy Ghost works faith in thy
heart: Ro^. 10.10.
for with the heart man believes unto righteousness. This must put a
difference betwixt the faith in the head; and faith in the heart. Wicked men
and devils have the faith in the head, where they know and assent to the truth
of the Gospel: and they are said to tremble, Jam. 2.
because they have no share, and part in it. But good people only have faith
in the heart, whereby they savingly rest upon Christ, as a wife upon an
husband, for protection, provision, and pleading their cause even to their
perfection, in the body of Christ.

Ephesians. 3.
who only can strengthen thee in the inner man, and work Jesus Christ to dwell
in thy heart by faith. This will argue a goodness in thy soul, if, when thou
come to hear the Gospel preached, and so often as thou do it, then pray to
God, for Christ's sake, that the spirit of God may accompany the word, according
to his covenant; Esa. 59.21.
to work faith in thy heart, that Christ may be one with thee, and thou with
Christ. And, because thou may have a faith in the head, by connection; and not
a faith of the heart, by true conversion unto Jesus Christ, pray also, that by
the word, thou may not only submit to the truth of the Gospel, but receive
it into thy soul so, as thou may be changed into the image of Christ thy
husband, and be called a true Christian. I remember, I have read of one in the
primitive Church, who being examined what he was? he answered, a Christian.
What is thy name? he answered, Christian. What is thy profession? he answered,
Christian. What life leadest thou? he answered, Christian. What are thy
thoughts, words, and deeds? he still answered, Christian. He had so digested
Christ into his soul by faith, that he could speak nothing but Christian. So
let it be with thee. This can faith do, and it is wonderful in our eyes. Tell
me next,

28. Q. How is this faith confirmed and made stronger in thee?

A. By hearing the same Gospel preached, and using the sacraments.

Here thou know the means, which confirm thy faith: and truly, there is not
a readier way to do it under God. The Thessalonians heard the Gospel preached
unto them, 1 These. 3.20 2 These. 1.3. Prove. 4.18.
and though at first, there was something lacking in their faith; yet as they
heard the Gospel, their faith grew exceedingly; as just men, their path was as
the shining light which shined more, and more, unto the perfect day. And for
the sacraments, it cannot seem strange that they should confirm thy faith. For
if I make a promise unto thee that I will give thee ten, twenty, thirty, forty
pounds; if thou think me to be in earnest, and to be able, and willing to give
it unto thee, the oftener I promise it, the more thou will believe it: but if I
set my hand, and seal to it, then thou art sure of it; and may sue me for it.
Such is the case betwixt God and thy soul. He promises to give thee salvation
by Jesus Christ if thou beleevest. The oftener thy promise repeated, the more
thou beleevest. But when God has set it under his hand, and seal, in the word
of God and sacraments, now thou have cause to believe it more, and may humbly
sue him for it at the throne of Grace.

Christ. And, because this is the way, to hear the Gospel often, that the word
of grace may dwell richly in thee; Col. 3.
and to receive the sacraments; as thou love the comfort of thy soul, neglect
them not. Hear in season, and hear out of season, and as often as thou can, ply
the seals of Gods love that thy faith may be increased. If thou still doubtest
whether yet thou shall be saved or no, God loves the importunity of his
children. Go to the throne of Grace, and implead God. Blessed God, have not
thou promised, that if I believe in Christ I shall be saved? Have not thou sent
thy Ambassadors to tender this promise again? Have thou not set thy hand, and
seal to it in the word, and sacraments. Have thou not made my heart go out of
it self to rest upon thy blessed son only? Oh why do I languish in doubting
despairs? Why do I begin to sink for want of hold on my Savior? How long,
Lord, how long! Let the light of thy countenance shine upon me, and I shall
have peace.

Thus I have cleared to thee the means to beget, and increase faith: and
because the Sacraments are one; therefore tell me,

29. Q. What are Sacraments?

A. They are signs and seals of the righteousness of faith.

Here thou layest down the nature of Sacraments. The nature of the sacraments.
By the righteousness of faith, thou must understand, that righteousness
which thou have by the Covenant of the Gospel; that is, the meritorious
obedience of Christ for thee, as thy surety, rested upon by faith. And the
Sacraments, Romans 4.11.
are signs, and seals of this righteousness of faith. They are signs:
because they signify something unto thee. Thou know that a picture, or
similitude upon a post at an Inn, or Alehouse house door, is called a sign;
because it signifies, that thou may have meat, drink, and lodging there for
thy money: so is the Sacrament called a sign; because it signifies something
unto thee. When thou see the bread, and wine set apart on the Lords table for
this special service, it signifies that God the father has set apart and
sealed Jesus Christ for thy salvation. Joh. 6.
The bread signifies the body of Christ. The wine signifies the blood of
Christ. The breaking of the bread signifies the suffering of Christ upon the
cross. The pouring out of the wine signifies the shedding of Christ's blood
upon the cross. The Minister presenting these unto thee, signifies God the
Father, whose Ambassador he is, offering unto thee his son for thy
salvation: and thy receiving of it into thy hand, and mouth, signifies thy
faith by which thou make Christ and his merit thy own. Thus by these signs
thou discernest the Lords body and blood, 1 Cor. 11.
without which thou catest judgment to thy self, which is damnable, and
without repentance will in the issue prove thy damnation. So in the other
Sacrament of Baptism, water signifies the blood, merit, and spirit of Christ:
laying on of the water as well as dipping and plunging, signifies thy death and
burial with Christ: Romans 6.
washing and cleansing signifies forgiveness of sins: and wiping off the
water, as well as rising out of it, signifies our rising with Christ to a new,
holy, and cleansed estate.

Sacraments are also seals: As Abraham was said to have received the sign of
Circumsion, Romans 4.11.
as the seal of the righteousness of faith: so do thou receive our
Sacraments. Now, thou know the use of seals among men. When men make a
bargain and set their hands and seals unto it, then the bargain is concluded.
When men make a promise, and set their hands, and seals unto it, then their
promise is confirmed: we have just cause to believe it. When men convey houses,
and lands either to other, and set their hands, and seals, to an instrument
drawn to that end, then those houses and land, upon delivery, are conveyed; and
therefore it is called a conveyance. For such like reasons, the Sacraments are
called seals: because they do conclude, confirm, and convey. In the Sacrament
there is a Covenant or bargain betwixt God, Heb. 8.6.
and thee. Christ is called the Mediator of a better Covenant. Heb. 8.10.
By this Covenant God promises, that he will be to us a God, even our God, and
we shall be to him a people, Jer. 31.33.
even his people. By virtue of this, he gives the forgiveness of sins, Jer.
32.40. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12.
illumination, sanctification, experimental knowledge and perseverance in the
ways of grace. This blessing, and blessed covenant is concluded in the
Sacraments. In Baptism thou publicly enterest into this covenant: Romans 4.17.
and that God who calls things that are not as if they were, is pleased to
call thee a believer: not so much by virtue of thy parents faith, as by virtue
of his covenant to Abraham and his seed according to the flesh, Act. 2.36.
and according to the spirit, which makes parents, and their children one, and
in one covenant. In the Lords Supper thou publicly renewest thy covenant.
Conscience tells thee, that, though thou art sorry for thy sins, by which thou
have broken thy Covenant of Baptism, and purposest to do so no more; and
therefore can look back to thy Baptism with comfort: yet thou failest again
and again. And therefore thy God of mercy has pleased to give thee leave to
come and renew thy covenant again, and again, in the Supper of the Lord: and if
thou purposest to deal faithfully with God, as thou renewest thy covenant with
God, so God renews his Covenant with thee. Therefore it is called a seal to
conclude this Covenant betwixt God, and thee.

Joh. 3.16.
in the Sacrament is confirmed thy faith in the promise when thou art of years
to judge what thou have done, and do. God makes a gracious promise in the
Covenant of the Gospel, that if thou believe in Christ thou shall be saved. Oh
how hard is it for thee to grapple with thy unbeleeving heart! When thou
look to Gods love, and Christ's merits, thou art cheered; but when thou
look to thy own unworthiness, thy faith flags, and faints. Therefore thy
good God does send his Ambassador, 2 Cor. 5.20
with bread, and wine, to confirm thy faith, and assure thee, that as sure as
thou have this bread, and this wine given unto thee: so surely God will make
good thy salvation to thee, if thou beleevest in his Christ.

convey Jesus Christ, and all his benefits to thee, so, as thou may say, I am
my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. Look as houses, and lands may be conveyed
unto thee by a sealed writing; and though thou never see either house or land;
yet, in a court of Record, thou may have it made thine if it be within the
Kings dominions: So Christ by his promise, and seal is made thine: and though
thou see him not according to the flesh, yet thou have communion with the body
and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16.
by the court of Record in the Scriptures, in the kingdom of the great King of
heaven and earth. The manner of this conveyance is sacramental, that is, as a
sign and seal. For it does not convey Christ as I can convey money to thy
purse, or hand; or as clothes to thy back by natural instruments: but as
Sacraments can convey him: that is, they can signify the conveyance of Christ,
and seal it unto thee by the covenant and ordinance of God.

hand. Were thou not most miserable if thou were not in covenant with God? If
he did not take thee into special protection as thy God? If thou did not
engage thy self to be one of his people who have illumination, forgiveness,
sanctification, and perseverance? All this God does assure thee of in the seal
of the Sacrament. Would thou not account thy self in a sad condition if God
had made thee a promise of salvation by Christ, and, when thou art beaten off
by the sin of thy heart, thou had no confirmation of it from the God of
truth? yet, this is confirmed by the seal of the Sacrament. Would it not add
to thy saddest thoughts, If thou had many promises of comfort by Christ, and
yet had no performances? Behold, the seal of the Sacrament does convey
Christ unto thy soul by faith. Is it not registered in the Records of heaven,
that this bread is my body, Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11.
this wine is my blood as Christ has witnessed? Had thou but a cut finger,
thou could not have the virtue of the salve, to cure it, except thou had
the plaster of the salve it self: nor can thou have the merits of Christ,
except thou have Christ himself, though not in a carnal way. Use the Sacrament
as a sign to signify; but let it be a sign, and not the proper thing
signified. Use it as a seal; yet let it be but a seal to assure a possession of
what thou have, though thou see it not. Get possession of Christ, and it is
enough. In the mean time, turn thou this doctrine into practice, and plead with
God from the Sacrament. Good father, let these signs signify powerfully thy
love to my soul. Let these seals be a sweet conclusion of the covenant of Grace
betwixt thee and me: be a confirmation to my doubting faith: and be a
conveyance of Christ to me, that he may live in my soul by faith, and confound
sin more and more, and quicken me to all Grace to thy Glory.

Now cast thy eye backward, and tell me; seeing thou must have faith, or else
thou can not be saved by Christ,

Q. Who must work faith in thy heart?

A. The Holy Ghost.

Q. Why must he work it?

A. Because it is an infinite comfort against the infinite horror of my sin.

Q. Where must it be wrought.

A. In my heart.

Q. Why say thou so?

A. To put a difference betwixt the faith in the head, and the faith in the
heart.

Q. How must it be wrought in thee?

A. By the outward preaching of the Gospel.

Q. How many ways is faith increased?

A. Two ways.

Q. Which is the first?

A. By the preaching of the Gospel.

Q. Why is faith increased thus?

A. Because the oftener we hear the word of promise the more we will believe it.

Q. What is the second?

A. By receiving the Sacraments.

Q. Why is faith confirmed by them?

A. Because they are seals to assure Gods promises.

Q. What are Sacraments?

A. Signs, and seals of the righteousness of faith.

Q. What is the righteousness of faith?

A. The meriting obedience of Christ rested on by faith.

Q. Why are the Sacraments called signs?

A. Because they signify something unto us.

Q. What does the water in Baptism signify?

A. The blood, merit, and spirit of Christ.

Q. What does laying on of the water signify?

A. My death, and burial with Christ.

Q. What does the running, or wiping off of the water signify?

A. My rising with Christ to a new life.

Q. What does washing or cleansing signify?

A. Forgiveness of my sins.

Q. What does the bread signify?

A. The body of Christ?

Q. What does the wine signify?

A. The blood of Christ.

Q. What does the breaking of the bread signify?

A. The suffering of Christ upon the cross.

Q. What does the pouring out of the wine signify?

A. The shedding of Christ's blood upon the cross.

Q. What does the Ministers presenting them to thee signify?

A. God the Fathers offering his son to me.

Q. What does thy receiving them signify?

A. The faith of the Gospel.

Q. Why are they called seals?

A. Because they do conclude, confirm, and convey.

Q. What is concluded?

A. A Covenant betwixt God, and me.

Q. What is that Covenant?

A. That God will be my God, and I will be one of his people.

Q. What is confirmed in the Sacrament?

A. Faith in the promise.

Q. What is that promise?

A. That if I believe in Christ, I shall be saved.

Q. What is conveyed in the Sacrament?

A. Christ with all his benefits.

Q. How can the Sacrament convey CHRIST unto thee?

A. Sacramentally.

Q. How is that?

A. As a sign, and seal.

Thus have I (by Gods blessing) brought thee from thy creation to thy fall;
from thy fall, to thy curse; from thy curse, to thy deliverance by Christ; from
thy deliverance to the settlement of it upon thee by faith: and from thence to
the means working, increasing, and confirming. Now proceed, and tell me

30. Q. How many Sacraments there are?

A. Two only: Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord?

Here thou tellest me the number, The number of the Sacraments and what they
are in particular. 1 Cor. 10.2, 2, 3, 4.
and names of the Sacraments. The number; there are but two. For thou find
but two ordained by Christ: and where Paul speaks of purpose of them, he names
only two under those that went before them: yea, two are abundantly
sufficient for their end; one to sign, and seal, our engrafting into Christ,
that is Baptism; and another to sign and seal our growing in Christ, that is
the Supper of the Lord: yea lastly, the true nature and use of a Sacrament
agrees only to these two; for only these two are signs and seals of a thing
signified and sealed, having a word of commandment, and a word of promise to
all believers. Act. 10. Matthew. 28. Romans 6.
Their names are Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Baptism is a washing
with water, consecrated by the word, and prayer, by a Minister, in the name of
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, to signify, and seal our grafting into
Christ. The Lords Supper is bread, Matthew. 26.26. Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.
and wine, consecrated, and broken by a Minister, given, received, eaten, and
drunk, by the Church, to signify and seal our growing in Christ. Thus may
thou conceive these two.

a feast of fat things, Esa. 27. Luke 15.
and fined wines, even that fattest Calf, to nourish, and feed thee to eternal
life; because thou have been a wicked prodigal, sinning against the covenant of
Baptism? Do but thou condemn, and alter thy course, and renew thy covenant,
and then thou have Gods promise for it in the covenant; the settlement of it
upon thee by faith; and thy assurance of it in the Lords Supper. To make it
more plain, tell me

31. Q. What benefit have thou by baptism?

A. A new estate in Christ, and so the forgiveness of my sins, if I,
repenting, do believe according to the Covenant in baptism.

This is an excellent benefit indeed, The benefit of Baptism.
if thou rightly understand it, and do make use of it accordingly. Thou have a
new estate in Christ: Gal. 2^ 7. Romans 6.3, 4, 5.
for in baptism thou do put on Christ, and art planted into his death, and
resurrection. Thou have the forgiveness of thy sins: for Peter says, be
baptized for the remission of sins: Act. 2.38. Act. 22.16.
and Ananias said to Paul, arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins: yet
know that thy baptism does not this as the blood of Christ, by way of
expiation and atonement: not as the Holy Ghost by an infinite power: How in
baptism is the forgiveness of sins.
but only as a Sacrament; and that three ways. by signification; for as the
water does wash thy body, Heb. 10.22
so Christ's blood being sprinkled upon thy conscience by faith, does wash thee
from thy sins. the receipt of Believers. As if a Prince made a Proclamation,
that he that can bring in the head of a traitor shall have a thousand pounds;
so soon as he has this head, he sees his thousand pound, and is confident upon
the word of the Prince: so a believer, when he hears this proclamation of God,
Repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, Act. 2.38.
for the forgiveness of sins: when he sees and feels his repentance, and
has notice of his baptism, he is confident for the forgiveness of his sins
upon the word of God. by the Covenant of God. God strikes a Covenant with his
people upon this condition, that if they believe they shall have their sins
forgiven. He gives his seal for it, that certainly he will be as good as his
word. When the Christian sees his faith he builds upon this covenant; and
says, surely, God has forgiven my sins. Indeed, it is the blood of Christ
that deserves thy forgiveness, the Father that pronounces it, and the Holy
Ghost that effectually applies; but Baptism by Gods covenant does signify and
seal it unto thee.

Mat. 3.11.
Thou must make thy Baptism a baptism of repentance to amendment of life,
Mar. 1.4. Mar. 16.16
and God will make it to be a baptism for remission of sins. Thou must
believe and be baptized; and then thou shall be saved. Thou shall not be made
partaker of these benefits without observing the condition. Act. 2.
Indeed God accounts thee a federall believer when thou wast an infant, and
wast baptized, as he accounted the Jewish children, when they received the
sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness of faith. Romans 4.11.
But as it was accounted uncircumcision to them if they kept it not when they
came to years of discretion (because he is not a Jew which is one outwardly,
Romans 2.
neither is that circumcision which is litteral; but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and circumcision is not of the letter but of the spirit) so thy
baptism shall be accounted nothing, if, with a penitent heart, thou do not,
when thou come to years of discretion, believe according to the covenant. But
if thou do, out of conscience, bethink thy self of thy covenant, get into
this new estate, wherein thou may be baptized into Christ's death and
resurrection; then what a sweet comfort to thee is it, to see thy assurance of
the forgiveness of thy sins. Be sure therefore that thou have faith working by
charity to the author of faith by obedience; to the word of faith by hearing,
and the household of faith by love, and then thou may look back with joy to
thy baptism, and say, surely my good God has given me forgiveness of sins.
For it is not laying on of water that does forgive thy sins, nor doing of it in
the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: but it is God that does it for the
merits of Christ, and by the assistance of the holy Ghost, and seals it to
thee in the covenant of Baptism, if thou keep it according to the measure of
grace given.

32. Q. What benefit have thou by the Supper of the Lord?

A. The body, and blood of Christ, verily, and indeed taken and received by my
believing soul.

Mark this comfortable benefit by the Lords Supper. The benefit of the Lords
Supper.
Thy body receives the bread and wine. Thy soul receives the body, and blood of
Christ by believing. God offers him in a promise (this is my body, this is my
blood) and thou can not receive a thing in a promise but by believing it. If
I promise to give thee houses and lands, and seal a conveyance of them to thee,
thou can not receive it but by believing my words, and conveyance: so it is
with thee in this Sacrament. Christ, in respect of his bodily presence is in
heaven; for they are not to receive him, Act. 3.21.
till the time of the restitution of all things: yet in the Sacrament we have
his body and blood taken and received. As a married woman has her husband, one
flesh and heart with her, though he be a thousand miles off, Prove. 2.
by virtue of the Covenant of God which they made: so by virtue of the covenant
and promise of God in the Sacrament, though Christ be in heaven, and thou upon
the earth, thou have his body and blood. A man may be present in a place, or to
a place. In a place, as thou art here with me. To a place as Paul was absent in
body, 1 Cor. 5.
but present in spirit to the Corinthians, that is by his Apostolical spirit,
power, and authority. So is Christ's body, and blood, present to the receivers
of the Sacrament faithfully. When the Sun shines full upon our window, we say
that the Sun is come into the house; yet it is not the Sun, but the shining of
it: so we say that Christ's body and blood is in the Sacrament; yet it is not
Christ's body, and blood carnally, bloudily, but the Rays of his person and
merits to the comfort of thy soul. Every thing is received by us as it is
perceived of us. Thou receivest a color by the eye; because that perceives it.
Thou receivest a sound by the ear; because that perceives it. Thou receivest a
scent by the nose; because that perceives it. Thou receivest savourie things by
the taste; because that perceives it. Thou receivest the Revolution of the
heavens by the understanding; because that perceives it: but thou receivest
Christ in the Sacrament none of these ways. Thou see him not, feel him
not, tastest him not, hear him not, smellest him not, understandest not how
bread, and wine, both before, in, 1 Cor. 10.16. 1 Cor. 11.27, 28.
and after consecration can be the natural or glorified body, and blood, of
Jesus Christ, and yet be bread, and wine: and yet set thy faith on work upon
Gods promise, and thou can truly receive Christ, because thou perceivest him
by faith, and no otherwise. He is given to thee as he may satisfy thee that
desires him: but thou desire him to satisfy not a corporal, but a spiritual
hunger. Joh. 6.35, 36.62.64. Joh. 6.63.
He is given as he may do the good, but it is the spirit that quickens, the
flesh profits nothing. this is my body which is broken for thee: this is my
blood which is shed for thee: and I am sure that his glorified body was not
thus dealt withal. called the body, and blood of Christ. 1 Cor. 10.16.
thou shall have a real communion with Christ by promise. Next because of the
change of the bread and wine from common to holy use. Though there be not a
substantial change of them: yet is there a change in use, in name, and in
honor. In use: it is not used as common bread and wine, but as the Supper of
the Lord. In name, during the time, it is not called bread, and wine, but the
body, and blood of Christ. In honor: It is used by the faithful to give a
real communion with Christ's body, and blood.

David said, Away from me ye wicked, Psalm. 119.
I will keep the commandments of my God: so thou must say, away ye wicked, I
will have communion with the body and blood of Christ. Be of his mind that
thought, one days fellowship with Christ to be more worth then all the world.
But remember that thy soul must be a believing soul, or else thou will never
draw water out of this well, suck honey out of this Rock. There are thousands
in the Church who presume to come to the Sacrament, and think they may have
fellowship with Christ, and yet keep their old sins, and their old fellowship
also: who never look what faith they have to carry Christ home. But what ever
they do, be thou sure to follow Gods will, and my counsel about it, forsake
all and follow Christ. If thou say, that thou may come to the Sacrament long
enough before thou be assured that thou do take, and receive the body, and
blood of Christ: I Will tell thee that I have observed two ways whereby thou
may get some comfortable witness in thy soul of it. First, by the Spirit of
Christ. His body and blood were never dis-united from his divine nature. How
we may be assured that we receive Christ in the Sacrament. Ezekiel. 1.21.
Therefore where his body and blood goes, his spirit goes along with it. As the
Prophet says, the spirit of the horses were in the wheels: so the spirit of
Christ is in his body, and blood, to make them act for thy good. Do thou
then find his spirit? Mark what Paul says, where the spirit of Christ is,
there is a killing virtue to subdue the flesh; Romans 8.9, 10, 11.
and a quickening virtue, to raise you from the death of sin, to the life of
grace. If it be thus with thee, let thy soul comfort it self that thou do
take the body and blood of Christ. Next, 1 John 1.6, 7.
thou shall know it, by thy course in this world. For says John, If we walk
not in darkness, then we have fellowship with Christ, and the blood of Jesus
Christ the righteous cleanses us from all sin: Therefore if thou do not
walk in the darkness of sin, and error, but labourest to know and do
Christ's will; then thou take and receivest the body, and blood of Christ.

Thus I have showed thee the numbe^ names, and benefits of the two Sacraments.
1 Cor. 11.29.
But, now; because they that eat and drink the Lords Supper unworthily do eat,
and drink judgment to themselves: therefore tell me,

33. Q. How must thou reverently prepare thy self to receive this Sacrament?

A. I must examine my self, whether I have desire, repentance, faith,
thankfulness and charity fit for the Sacrament.

Mark here. Preparation to the Lords Supper.
God requires not any actual preparation of thine before thou come to
Baptism in thy Infancy. If thou were converted, or convinced, from
Heathenisme, Judaisme, or Turcisme unto Christianity, then must thou be
prepared at least with a profession of actual faith, as Simon Magus: Act. 8.
Act. 10. Matthew. 3. Matthew. 28. Mar. 16. Act. 2.
and thus thou must understand all those places of Scripture which set down
confession of sin, or teaching, or believing before Baptism. But now thou art
born in a Christian Church, of Christian parents (at least in outward covenant
with God) and art rightly baptized in thy Infancy; and God requires no such
preparation. He looks upon his own covenant, and promise; which concerns not
only the Jew^ and their children, Act. 2.38.39.
but all that are afar off, even so many as the Lord our God shall call, to
the profession of Christianity: and he looks to our parents professing
Christianity, as to the Jews former profession of Judaisme: but he looks not
upon thy personal preparation, further then he disposes thee himself, either
by sowing seeds of faith in thy soul, which may sprout forth afterward; or by
calling thee a believer by virtue of his covenant with thee. Matthew. 18.6 Mar.
9.42.
Yet, when thou come to the Lords Supper God does require an actual
preparation.

This preparation (thou say) must be by examination. Preparation must be by
examination. 1 Cor. 11.28.
Thou say, thou must examine thy self. This, Paul enjoined the Corinthians,
to redress the wicked abuses which had crept into the Lords Supper: and this
is as necessary for thee. Thou will find thy heart mainly apt to judge too
well of thy self: yea, there is many a traiterous sin in thy bosom which
steals thy heart from thee, and spoils thy fellowship with Christ. Besides
this, thou look for comfort when thou come to the Sacrament; and all thy
comfort depends upon thy disposition before hand. As it is with a tree; if it
be well rooted, the rain falls, and the Sun shines upon it, and the more it
grows and flourishes: but if it be plucked up by the roots, the more the rain
falls, and the Sun shines upon it, the more it rots. So is it with thy body and
soul, if thou art well stated in Grace, the more Christ, in the Sacrament
shines upon thee, the more thou flourishest: but if thou be dead at heart, and
plucked up by the roots, the more he shines upon thee, the more thou rottest,
and perishest.

This examining thy self is asking thy soul questions. What examinationis.
Thou look into the Word, and searchest for qualifications which God
requires to make Christians fit communicants. Thou do, in the presence of
God, apply them to thy soul, that thou may pass censure accordingly: and
therefore, that this work may be done thoroughly, thou set some time apart
for this work; that so thou may rise, or fall to thy self. Psalm. 4.4.
David said to Saul's Courtiers, commune with your own hearts upon your beds,
and be (...) that is, when you have set your selves apart from all the
businesses of the world, and be quiet, then talk with your souls. And David
himself, when he found turmoil in his soul, calls his soul to a reckoning, Psalm.
42, and 43.
why art thou so heavy O my soul? Why art thou so disquieted within me? So must
thou before thou come to the Lords Supper. As if thou should say, O my soul,
now thou should go to the Supper of the great King. Matthew. 22.
If thou go without thy wedding garment, thou will be convinced, made
speechless, and hear at last that fearful sentence, bind him hand and foot,
and cast him into utter darkness, where there shall be everlasting weeping,
wayling, and gnashing of teeth: tell me therefore, art thou fit to go to it?
Have thou such qualifications as Christ's requires? Try, my soul: look unto the
word: see what it says of this business: apply it impartially to thy self,
that thou may be humbled, or cheerful according to several states, etc.

But about what must thou examine thy soul? Thou tellest me that thou must do
it about Desire, Repentance, Faith, Desire.
Thankfulness, and Charity fit for the Sacrament.

desire. Luke 22.15.
As Christ said, with desire have I desired to eat the Passover with you: so
must thou desire to eat the Lords supper. Christ does invite such unto his
feast; Hoe, if any man thirst let him come. Esa. 55.1. Joh. 7.37.
Others come as unworthy guests; but these have Christ's hearty welcome. Christ's
bowels are moved over such. As he had compassion toward them that had
continued with him, Mat. 15.32.
and had nothing to eat: so has he over the thirsty. He fills the hungry with
good things. Luke 1.33.
These desires fill up the gap where other graces are wanting. For, 2 Cor. 8.12.
if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man
has, and not according to what he has not.

from an humble willingness to renew thy Covenant with God, and to have a
virtuous communion with Christ. Thy covenant was publicly struck with God in
Baptism: but thou have all along dealt falsely with God concerning it.
Therefore, now, thou must earnestly desire it. And that thou may do it
aright, thou must examine thy knowledge of God the great covenant-maker; the
knowledge of thy sin, the great covenant-breaker; the knowledge of Christ,
the great covenant-founder; and the knowledge of the nature, and use of the
Sacrament, the great covenant-confirmer. Thou will not desire any thing but
according to the knowledge thou have of the nature and use of it. Speak
therefore on this manner to thy soul.

O my soul, thou art now going to the Lords table: do thou know that God,
Nah. 1. Mal. 4.
with whom thou haste to do, who is a Lord of Anger, and a consuming oven to
approaching stubble, and a God of mercy to humble souls? Do thou know thy
sin so far as to hate it for drawing thee from thy God, and making thee a
stranger to the covenant of promise? Do thou know thy Christ who is the
Covenant of his people? Do thou know the nature, and use of the Sacraments
which binds God to thee on his part, and thee to God on thine? If thou do not
thou will never desire to come unto the Sacrament as thou ought; to renew
thy covenant with God. If thou know all this, which is the ground of thy
desires, do thou find thy desires carried aright? What do thou
principally desire when thou come to the Lords Table, do thou not desire
Christ? Say thou not, Ps. 42.1, 2.
my soul pants after thee O God, even for the living God? Do thou not
desire all Christ, a Jesus to save thee, a Christ to anoint thee, a Lord to
rule over thee? Do thou not throw away what ever may hinder the comfort of
the Sacrament? He that desires to fill his hands with gold, and silver, will
lay aside what ever baser matter he has in them. Do thou desire to cast
away thy old transgressions that thou may become a new creature in Christ?
Do thou find that thou have no contentment without Christ, no rest till
thou enjoy Christ, and that when thou have him, he is all in all unto thee?
Then comfort thy self from thy fit desires.

the fitness of thy Repentance. Repentance.
The King never offers a sealed pardon before Delinquents are sorry for their
faults, and promise amendment: neither will God seal thy pardon in the
Sacrament before thou do thus. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Exodus 12.
Thou must purge out the old leven, and then keep the feast. The Paschal Lamb
must be eaten with the sour herbs of Repentance. As the Jews did not eat the
Passover before they had separated themselves from the abominations of the
heathens: Ezr. 6.21, 22.
so nor thou must come to the Lords table before repentance has disingaged
thee from thy sins. Tit. 1.15. Hag. 2.13, 14.
Conscience defiled with any known sins corrupts the holy thing of God to
thee. Now, this Repentance stands in grief for thy sins past; hatred also, and
loathing of sins past, and present; and an holy purpose, and endeavor to
forsake them. This is that repentance which thou must examine. Speak therefore
on this manner to thy soul.

Lam. 3.39.
thou art now going to the feast of fat things and fined wines. Do thou
search and try thy ways that thou may turn unto the Lord? Do thou know
what sins of thine have made a separation betwixt God, and thee, and kept
good things from thee? Do thou see how these things gape upon thee, thy
ignorance, infidelity, security, deadness of heart, prophannesse of spirit,
and the like? Are these and other sins, as pride, hypocrisy, gluttony,
drunkenness, whoredom, envy, hatred, malice, and all thy injustice, so
noticed unto thee, as thou grievest to think that thou have offended so good a
God, Jude.
and hate the garment spotted of the flesh, and resolvest never to do the
like again? Art thou full of care to forsake thy sins, and to keep thy self
from offending thy God? Art thou full of clearing to pacify thy conscience
from wrath present, and to come. The blood of Christ rested on by faith? 2 Cor.
7.11
Art thou full of indignation against thy sins, and thy self for sin, as David,
who chides himself, so foolish was I, and ignarant, Psalm. 73.
and as a beast before thee? Art thou full of fear of offending God, lest thou
should fall into the same sin a 2d. time? Art thou full of desire, to walk with
thy God, and to do his will with all well pleasing? Art thou full of zeal to
run the way of Gods commandments, and to purify thy self from sin? Art thou
full of indignation to beat down thy body by holy acts of mortification, to
bring it into subjection to the will of God? If thou art, then thou have this
Repentance fit for the Sacrament.

Faith.
thou must examine the fitness of thy faith. The Sacrament is not appointed to
begin faith, but to increase, and confirm it, Romans 4.11.
and therefore is it called a seal. And as a man will not be such a fool, as to
set his hand, and seal to a blank; for then any man that has it may put in any
covenants, and conditions: so nor is God so unwise, as to give a seal to thy
soul, where faith has not written thy obligation, and Gods promises. Heb. 4.1.
As the word of God profits not except it be mixed with faith: so nor the
Sacrament. It is faith which is the eye, foot, hand, and mouth of thy soul, as
I have said. Besides, when thou come to the Sacrament thou drawest near to
God, and art at peace with him: and thou must draw near to God by faith: Heb.
10.22
and being justified by faith, thou art at peace with him, though not with his
enemies.

Speak then (my child) on this manner to thy soul. O my soul, now the fatted
Calf is provided for thee in the Sacrament, have thou a fit faith to feed upon
him? Do thou cast thy eye upon sin and hate it because it is against thy
word of faith? Do thou cast thy eye upon Christ, and rest with confidence
upon him for thy salvation? Have thou a license of Christ to rest upon him?
Thou know that every slovenly Clown, with his dirty hands, must not rest
upon a King: nor must every wicked sinner rest upon Christ. There is not the
wretchedst beast in the world but will say, (if he know Christ) that all the
world shall not beat him off from resting upon him. But has Christ given him a
license? If he have not, he will say, Touch me not. Depart from me, I know thee
not. Mat. 11.28.
He does give a license to some, saying, Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Do thou labor under the burden
of sin, crying out with David, my sin is an heavy burden too heavy for me
to bear? Art thou heavy laden to think that thou can not be so good as thou
would, and therefore criest out with the Apostle, Romans 7.24.
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Do thou find that thy faith works purgation, and charity? True faith does
purify the heart, Act. 15.
fundamentally in Christ, derivatively from Christ, Romans 6.1, 2
and argumentatively, by drawing such reasons from the Scriptures as may beat
down sin. Does thy faith work thus? Gal. 5.
True faith works by love: and in truth it will work thee to love the word of
Christ as the means, Christ as the meriter, (and therefore thou must set an
higher price upon Jesus Christ then all things else) and the Saints, Phil. 3.
and members of Christ, as those that are in communion with thee for salvation.
For we must not stroke the head, and strike the members: pretend to love
Christ, and hate those that are Christ's. Indeed thou must not so far dote
upon Christ's members, as therefore to suck in all errors and miscarriages in
them, who do but know in part, 1 Cor. 13.
and therefore may aim, and practice imperfectly: but so far as we see Christ
in them, so far we must love them: and is thy faith thus, then have thou this
faith fit for the Sacrament.

thankfulness. Thankfulness. Luke 22.19.
This is one of the main duties of those that partake at the Lords Table: and
it will argue thy love to it, and thy need of it, and thy desire to enjoy the
benefit of that for which thou art thankful; yea it is that rent, Ps. 116.13.
Psa. 107.1.
and tribute which the Lord requires upon the receipt of any favor. Therefore
thou must perform this both in word, and work. In word: for, before thou come
to the Sacrament, thou must praise God, who is pleased to ordain so familiar a
means to confirm thy faith, and give thee communion with Christ: when thou art
in the use of it, thou must thankfully remember the Lords death which is
signified and sealed unto thee, with the fruits of it: And when thou have
received, thou must thank God for the benefit and comfort thou have enjoyed by
it, yea, though for the present thou feel it not. Thou must be thankful in
work, by a constant obedience unto his will, 1 Samuel 15.
for obedience is better then sacrifice. In obedience thou might offer
beasts, and goods, but in obedience thou offerest thy self.



Charity. Charity.
I would have thee know that there is no service acceptable without this
charity. If thou prayest, thou must lift up pure hands without wrath. 1 Timothy
2.8.
If thou hear the word, thou must be slow to wrath; Jam. 1.19, 20.
because the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God. If
thou sacrifice, thou must leave thy gift at the Altar and go, Matthew. 5.23 24.
and be reconciled. And thus it is, by way of proportion, when thou come to
the Lords Supper. Yea, mark, that it is impossible that sound faith should be
without charity. The pulse of faith beats this way: therefore James says, Jam.
2.
show me thy faith by thy works. Yea, thy very coming to the Sacrament does
require charity. A loaf of bread is made of many grains, and we that are
partakers of one loaf, must be one bread. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
We come to have communion with Christ our head: and when members attend for
direction, and comfort from the head there must be no jars. The shoulder must
not say to the arm, nor the arm to the hand, nor the hand to the foot, I have
no need of thee, and thee. The God of peace will fill thee with all peace by
believing, and practicing this. to whom thy charity must have respect? to all
Christian brethren for Christ's sake. Thou must love God any way made known unto
thee, but especially in Christ thy Savior. (...)
He that that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be an execration, Maran
Atha. What? Not to love him that is an Advocate, a Surety, all, in all to us,
in us, for us? Too great punishment cannot be inflicted on such: too much
unworthiness to come unto the Lords Supper cannot be imputed unto them. Next,
thou must show thy charity to all Christian brethren, both by forgiving and
performing the offices of reconciled persons. In forgiving, thou must pacify
thy heart from all bitterness, To. 12.19.
and desire of revenge; Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord:
and thou must discharge them from the offense to thee, though thou can not
discharge them from the offense to God. Indeed thou art not bound to think, and
judge him good, or a friend, who by long proof has manifested himself
otherwise: neither art thou always bound to discharge a penalty, if it be
great: for then, Christianity should give a license to ungodly men, to offer
all manner of injuries to the godly: but thou must discharge so far from the
offense as it may seem to deserve the least revenge: For thou must not be
overcome of the evil of thy enemy, To. 12.21.
or of thy own malicious heart: but thou must overcome thy enemies, and thy own
evil also, with goodness. In performing the offices of Charity, thou must
labor to unite others, by making them friends, if thou can, that all our
matters may be done in love: and thou must communicate to the necessities of
the Saints. For thou receivest an inestimable favor from God, and therefore
thou must do good, Heb. 13.
and to distribute thou must not forget; for with such sacrifices God is
pleased.

(O my soul) that charity which fits thee for the Lords Supper? Have thou a
ground of all true charity to men, the love of God in Jesus Christ? Do thou
love to walk before him that he may see, and correct all thy ways? Do thou
love his familiar presence above the greatest presences of the world? Do
thou love to hear him speak unto thee in the word, and to speak unto him in
prayer? Do thou rejoice when thou see the tokens of his love in his
graces, and Sacraments come rolling upon thee? Do thou for his sake love all
that are his, his ministry, his worship, his ordinances, and his Saints? Do
thou love to have peace with all men, Romans 12.
so far as is possible, and to be friends with Christ's members, as they are
such? Do thou really discharge thy heart from all desire of revenge, and
can thou be content to be nothing for Christ? Art thou willing to perform all
offices of charity, in working reconciliation betwixt neighbor, and neighbor,
and communicating to the necessities of the Church? If it be thus with thee,
thou have that Charity which is fit for the Sacrament. Now look backward, and
let me see what thou have profited. Seeing there are but two Sacraments,
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord; Tell me

Q. What is Baptism?

A. A washing with water, consecrated by him that has authority to preach, in
the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, to signify, and seal, our
grafting into Christ.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. Bread, and wine, consecrated, broken and given, by a Minister; received,
eaten, and drunk by Gods people, to signify, and seal, our growing in Christ.

Q. What comfort do you receive by Baptism?

A. A confirmation of my new estate, above what I had by nature.

Q. What gottest thou in this new estate?

A. The forgiveness of my sins.

Q. How can Baptism forgive thy sins?

A. As a sign, and seal, Sacramentally.

Q. How is that?

A. With reference to the covenant, when I make it a baptism of Repentance to
amendment of life, God makes a baptism for forgiveness of sins.

Q. Why then should thou be baptized before thou repentest and beleevest?

A. Because I am while I am in Infancy a believer in state though not in
manifested act.

Q. How does that appear?

A. By the promise which GOD makes to believers and their seed.

Q. Was not this made only to the Jews?

A. No: but to them also that were a far off, even to so many as God shall
call.

Q. What follows hereupon?

A. That if Jews children had right to circumcision, which was a seal of the
righteousness of faith; so have the children of Christians to Baptism, which
is no more, though more clearly.

Q. What comfort do thou receive by the Lords Supper?

A. A real communion of the body, and blood of Christ.

Q. How can thou do that seeing Christ is in heaven?

A. By virtue of the covenant of God with my believing soul.

Q. How does God offer Christ unto thy soul?

A. In a promise.

Q. How does thy soul receive him?

A. By believing Gods promise.

Q. How must thou prepare thy soul to receive Christ in the Sacrament?

A. By examining my self.

Q. What is it to examine thy self?

A. To commune with my heart by asking my soul questions, how fit it is.

Q. What must thou examine thy self of?

A. Whether I have a fit desire, repentance, faith, thankfulness, and charity.

Q. Why must thou have desire?

A. Because God fills the hungry with good things.

Q. What must thy desire be grounded on?

A. Upon the knowledge of my God, my sin, my Christ, and the doctrine and use
of the Sacraments.

Q. What must thou desire?

A. To renew my Covenant with God.

Q. Why must thou have repentance?

A. Because there can be no communion betwixt light and darkness.

Q. What must be the ground of thy repentance?

A. An assurance that I have broke my covenant in Baptism.

Q. How do thou know thy repentance?

A. By sorrow for my sin, and a conscionable care to do the will of Christ
with all my strength.

Q. Why must thou have faith?

A. Because the Lords Supper is appointed to increase, and confirm faith.

Q. What must be the ground of thy faith

A. The offer of Christ's body, and blood in the Lords Supper.

Q. How know thou whether thou have faith?

A. If my heart close with Christ's promise, and I rest upon him for salvation
with confidence, and rejoicing.

Q. Have thou a license to rest upon Christ thus?

A. Yes: if I am weary and heavy laden under the burden of sin.

Q. Why must thou have thankfulness?

A. Because the end of the sacrament is a thankful remembrance of Christ's death.

Q. What must be the ground of thy thankfulness?

A. A special love to God for this high favor.

Q. How know thou whether thou art thankful?

A. If I speak of this mercy to others, praise God himself for it, and submit
unto him in all things.

Q. Why must thou have charity?

A. Because we that are partakers of one bread, are one bread, and one body.

Q. What must be the ground of thy charity?

A. The Communion of Saints, and samenesse of nature.

Q. How know thou whether thou have charity?

A. If my heart be pacified from all desire of revenge, and I be willing to
live in love with all, especially with the household of faith, and communicate
to their necessities.

Thou must remember now (my good child) how far we are gone. I have learned
thee to know God, and thy self. Thou have seen thy creation, thy fall, thy
curse, thy remedy by our Lord Jesus Christ. Thou have seen that Christ must
become thine by faith. I have discovered how faith is begotten in thee, and how
it is increased, namely, by the word of God, and Sacraments. I have showed thee
the nature, the number, and the use of the Sacraments from God. I have showed
thee how thou should use them for thy comfort; and especially, how thou must
prepare thy self for the Lords Supper; so, as thou may carry Christ home with
thee from thence. There is but one thing more wherein I desire to inform thy
childish understanding in, and that is prayer. Tell me then,

34. Q. Is not prayer an excellent means to make thy faith grow?

A. Yes: It is a special means appointed of God.

Mark this truth. Prayer is an excellent means to increase faith.
The word of God, and Sacraments are sweet means: But how these will be made
effectual, without thy prayer, thou can not tell. Christ says, Matthew. 7.7.
Ask, and ye shall have; seek, and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. All these phrases press upon thee prayer, for the enjoying of
any blessing. Act. 4.31.
When the Disciples had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled,
and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. God answered them extraordinarily
to confirm them upon their prayers. And therefore, when the Apostles found
their faith weak for the forgiving of wrongs, Luke 17.5.
they prayed, Lord, increase our faith. Gods promises go along with power.
Psalm. 145.19. Psalm. 34.15.17.
He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him. His ears are open to their
cry. Therefore David looks upon God with confidence, and says, Psalm. 4.3;
The Lord will hear when I call. And thou can not wonder that prayer should
be such a powerful means to increase thy faith. For it moves God to be
mindful of us amid a thousand vexations. When Christ was on the cross, and
vexed from heaven and earth, yet, when the good thief prayed, Christ, he
answered, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Yea, prayer does, in a
manner bind God: and therefore when Moses prayed, God said, Now, Moses, let me
alone: Exodus 32.16. Genesis 18.33.
and God went not from Abraham a foot, before he had left praying; yea,
further, and let it be spoken to the honor of our great God countenancing of
his own ordinance, prayer does (in a manner) command God. Esa. 45.11.
Ask of me (says he) and, concerning the works of my hands, command thou me;
as if he should say, if I am able to do it, I will do it, if thou pray. Yea,
in truth, prayers are so powerful, that, when God purposes not to grant, he
shuts them out. When I cry, and shout, Lam. 3.8.44.
he shuts out my prayer: he covers himself with a cloud that prayer should
not pass thorough. It is no marvel then that it should be so effectual to
increase faith.

Gods of wood, and not of gold, and silver, and other more untractable metals,
to signify the easiness of their nature to work upon. Joh. 5.6.
And Christ, at the poole of Bethesda, to show his readiness, went to the man
of infirmities, and said, without being asked, Numb. 20.
Will thou be made whole? God bade Moses, take his rod, and speak to the rock.
Moses he struck, and struck twice, and God was angry: because it might bring a
slander upon him, that he was hardly to be entreated to confirm his peoples
faith. Again, this assures thee, that he will hear thee, because prayers are
most acceptable to God. He is ready to hear at all times. Moses says, Exodus
8.9.
when shall I do it? When shall I pray for thee? As if he should say, he is a
God of all hours. He is angry when we sue to others not to him. When Ahaziah
received an hurt, 2 King. 1.2, 3, 4.
he went to Baalzebub the God of Ekron for his cure, and not to him, God was
angry, and Ahaziah must dye for it. God puts his own son to his prayers for
what he has purchased: He has a double right to all the world; a right of
inheritance, and a right of purchase: yet God says unto him, Psalm. 2.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost part of the earth for thy possession. Yea, God has so ordered the
matter, that his servants have nothing to give that is better then prayer. What
shall I give unto the Lord, Psalm. 116.
says David, for all his benefits? I will call upon the name of the Lord: As
if he should say, because he has given me many blessings, I will honor him by
asking more. All this shows that prayers are most acceptable to God, and
therefore thou have no cause to doubt, but, if thou prayest to God to increase
thy faith, that God will grant it. Let me therefore ask thee further,

36. Q. What is prayer?

A. It is a religious moving of our souls to God to draw our selves into
Communion with him against sin, and for grace, and all blessings.

Mark this seriously. The nature of Prayer.
When thou look upon thy self, thou see thousands of wants. Thou do not
know how to help thy self. Thou see an all sufficiency in God thy faithful
creator, redeemer and sanctifier. The souls moving to God.
If thou have not communion with him, thou shall have none of thy necessities
relieved. Therefore thy soul must move out of it self into communion with him,
that thou may gain his help against sin, and for grace, Phil. 3.
and all other blessings. This is prayer: and by this, thou shall be able to do
all things through Christ, that helps thee. Psa. 10.17. Romans 8.26. Lam. 3.41.
Psalm. 25.1.
Prayers are a motion toward God: and therefore they are called, our desires:
and sighs that cannot be expressed: and lifting up of our hearts with our
hands to God in heaven: of our hands to help us, of our hearts to do the work:
and our drawing near to God. Wherein thou must not exclude the motion of the
understanding; 1 Cor. 14.13.
for as thou must pray with the spirit, thou must pray with the understanding
also. Thou must mind God thou prayest unto. Thou must mind the things thou
prayest for. Thou must mind the disposition of thy own heart from which thou
prayest, and without which thou can not watch in prayer: wherein though thou
have not a constant and distinct attendance; yet thou must have a constant
desire, endeavor, and disposition. Yet principally thou must desire the motion
of thy will to honor thy God in thy prayer. First, by presenting no desires
but good and honest. Next, by stirring up such affections as are fit for the
presence of God, as such as immediately follow faith, hope, and charity: and
lastly by resting upon Christ for the obtaining of whatsoever thou desire.

Secondly, A religious moving to God.
prayer is a religious moving of the soul to God. A man may civilly move his
heart to any of his superiors, that have a civil excellency in them: as when
they pray to them to help them according to their civil, or natural power to
help them to any good, or to remove any evil in their power: but for the
religious motion of the soul, Ro^. 10.14. Exo. 14.31.
it must be only to God. For how shall thou call on him in whom thou have not
believed? And, I am sure that thou must believe only in God, and in these that
are immediately sent from God, for Gods message sake. Thus must thou move to
God in prayer to draw thy self into communion with him. For communion with him.
For as a man that is fallen into a pit, and catches hold of a bough, does not
desire to pull the bough to him (for that will drown him the sooner) but does
desire to pull himself to the bough, that he may escape danger: so he that
prays, does not desire to pull God down to him (for this would overwhelm
him), but does desire to pull himself to God that he may have the love of the
Father, 2 Cor. 13.
the grace of the Son, and the communion of the Holy Ghost to bring him to
life. Lastly, thou must desire this, Ro^. 15.30.
and strive with God in prayer, to have his assistance against sin, for
grace, and all other blessings. Against sin, and for grace. Job. 20.12.
To the ungodly, wickedness is sweet in his mouth, he hides it under his
tongue, as one loath to confess it. He cares not for any of Gods graces,
because they are enemies to his lusts, and corruptions which he loves. He
says to God, Job. 21.14. Romans 6.
depart from me, I desire not the knowledge of thy laws: I will sin, that
grace may abound: 1 Cor. 15.
let us ^ at, and drink, for to morrow we shall die. But let it not be so with
thee. Let thy soul move to God against sin by confession, and suits for
pardon; For grace by petitions, and thankesgiving; yea and for all other
blessings, that thou may acknowledge him the fountain of them, and serve God
with joyfulnes and gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things. Deu.
28.47


Job. 21.15.
what is the Almighty that we should serve him? Ephesians. 6.18.
And what profit should we have if we should pray unto him? But let thy soul
always move to God with all religion against sin, and for grace. 1 These. 5.17
If thy prayers be like the golden sockets of the holy lights, boiling with
speculations, and not like the Bowls of the Altar, full of the liquor of
heavenly religion, they will prove but like the Egyptian fleshpots reeking
out the hot vapors of the onyons, and garleek of thy own vain heart. If they
be fair words of uncharitable hearts, they are like Ezekiahs bloody pots, Ezekiel.
24.6.
that boil with the scum of rust, and lust. But if they be the interpreters of
a broken, and bleeding soul moving to God, they shall be Zacharies pots, Zach.
14.20
and the bowls of the Altar, sending up sweet incense, which shall fill the
whole heart with the savor, as the house was filled with the odor of Mary's
oynment. Joh. 12.3.
The moving of thy feet to the assemblies of Gods people, the moving of thy
body by kneeling, and beating thy breast, and lifting up of hands, and eyes to
heaven: the moving of thy tongue, and lips, will be nothing without this moving
of thy heart, and soul for fellowship with God in Christ. Oh, let thy heart
move against sin. O Lord, it has oppressed me, undertake for me. My sin in
Adam, my sin of nature, my sins of life in thought, word, and deed are before
thee: O pardon them for Christ his sake. Let thy heart move for grace. O Lord,
I want thy preventing grace, thy assisting grace, thy pardoning grace, thy
sanctifying grace, thy sealing grace, thy persevering grace. Oh give them for
Christ, from Christ, or else I die, and perish. Let thy heart move for all
blessings. O Lord, I have nothing but under thee, from thee. Thou have given me
a natural right to meat, drink, and apparel, health, peace, and liberty. Oh
give me the right of a child, of an heir, and accept my body and soul as
holy, living and acceptable sacrifices in Jesus Christ thy Son in whom thou
art well pleased. The God of heaven enlarge thy heart, and give thee by his
helping spirit, Romans 8.26, 27.
to vent thy soul with groans, and sighs that cannot be expressed. These, God
that searches the heart, and knows the mind of the spirit, will understand
to thy eternal peace.

37. Q. Where can thou more fully learn the matter of prayer?

A. In that which is commonly called the Lords prayer. The Lords prayer is the
matter of prayer.


Thy blessed Savior made many prayers, which may be called the Lords prayers:
but there is one which he has set down as a doctrinall matter of prayer,
Matthew. 6.9.
when he says, after this manner pray ye; and as a formal prayer, when he
says, Luke 11.2.
when ye pray, say, Our Father; which is more peculiarly called the Lords
prayer. This is a brief comprehension of all confessions, suits, for or
against, of all intercessions, and praises. This has the best authority in
the world; the wisdom of God, the Son of God, the only beloved of God, who
is in the bosom of the Father, and so, of Gods nearest Court, and nearest
counsel. This must give the grains of weight to all thy Petitions without
which they will be found too light.

Joh. 3.31.
Christ, that is from heaven, is above all: earthly masters will learn thee
earthly prayers, but he that is from heaven will learn thee heavenly. Joh. 1.
He is full of grace, and truth, for the perfections of thy understanding, and
of thy will. He is the way, wherein all thy prayers must walk to God. Joh.
16.23.
To ask in his name is to ask salvation; and this is to ask himself, which he
cannot deny. To ask in his name is to use his mediation; and this is the right
way to the throne of grace. God the Father bears singular love to him: Matthew.
3.17
and and the efficacy of his merits are such, as if they be presented in
prayer, they are powerful and prevailing, Revel. 8.2.
as the golden Altar before the throne, on which are offered the prayers of all
the Saints. Would thou have any grace? learn of Christ to pray. Would thou
forsake any sin? learn of Christ to pray. Prayer is a most important duty.
Dan. 6.
Daniel chose it rather then to avoid Lions: and David gave himself unto
prayer. Other duties are for certain seasons, but this must must be continually
in habit, or act. Luke 18.1.
Thou shall find thy self hardly drawn to prayer. Easy businesses we are
easily drawn unto, because they are of quick dispatch, but weighty businesses
stick, as the flaying of an Ox at the head. Thou must have many motives to
draw thee to pray; Christ's command, Christ's promise, Christ's example, and
Christ's doctrine. This shows the weight of this duty, and how necessary it is
to learn the matter of it from thy best Master. Zach. 12.10
especially considering the promise, I will power out upon them the spirit of
grace and supplication. an inward power, by which the heart moves, and goes out
of it self after God for all good. This all good Christians have from the
Spirit, which they vent, Romans 8.26.
by groans, and sighs, which cannot be expressed: an outward power, by which
they are able distinctly to express the motions of their hearts about fit
matter. This they have not all: neither have thou. Therefore must thou be
willing to learn it from this blessed sum of Christ, even all things to be
hoped for. I tell thee that it is much abused by three sorts of persons:
Ignorant persons who understand it not: Impenitent persons, who practice it
not: and careless and superstitious persons, who mind it not in sense and
power, but rest in the empty repetition of the words. Be thou none of these:
know the words and sense of it: use it as a penitent believer: and possess the
matter and contents of it so fully, that thou may with reverence, attention,
feeling and desire, go out to God for necessary materials to furnish thee in
all briefer, or larger supplications. Which that thou may do, go along with
me, and tell me,

38. Q. What is the entrance into this prayer?

A. Our Father which art in heaven.

Here thou do bespeak God with an humble salutation. As when thou have any
suit to a great man, thou do humbly salute him with his fit titles: so here,
when thou have many suits to thy God, Christ learns thee to salute him with a
title fit for prayer. For God is here described, by his goodness, and by his
greatness. He that is good, and great too, will be as well willing as able to
help thee. The title of his goodness is, Our Father. Thou can not spare
either of these words. Father is a title of immutability, and of excellent
love. A father offended is a father still: a prodigal son is a son still. A
man may be a friend to day and an enemy to morrow: but a Father to day is a
father so long as he is. What will not a father do for his child by
indulgence, compassion, and bounty. This then is a word of faith, to hold up
thy hands in prayer. Our, is a word of love to keep thee in Christian charity.
It includes thy self; charity begins at home. It includes, also, all that are,
or may be, in communion and fellowship for life; charity looks abroad to the
salvation of all Christ's body. The title of his Greatness is, which art in
Heaven. He is here, and there, and every where, yet must thou look upon him in
prayer as being in heaven. This will keep thee from sauciness. He is Our
Father, because thou should not faint: He is in heaven, because thou
should not presume. This will raise up thy affections in prayer above all
the world. Earthly fathers are mutable in affection, may fail, and want power
to their hearts: but no father like this father which is in heaven. This will
keep thy heart in tune to pitch upon chief things in prayer, Ephesians. 1.3.
spiritual blessings in heavenly things: other movables are for the sons of
Keturah, but these for Gods Isaacs. This also will prepare thee to pray with
all devotion. Which art in Heaven, are words of devotion: for it tells thee that
prayer is the work of Eagles that look against the Sun, and not the work of
Moles that dig in the earth: and therefore thou must clarify thy sight to
converse with thy father in heaven when thou prayest: and then as it was with
Christ, when he prayed, Luke 9.29.
the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment was white, and
glistering: so he will transform thee from Glory, to Glory, till thou come
unto his full image as thou art capable.

(my dear child) make the right use of this preface. Let it raise up thy
faith, because thou prayest to thy Father: kindle thy charity, because thou
go out after the good of others: and blow up thy devotion, because thou
forgettest the earth, and conversest with thy father which is in heaven. Use it
as a means to prepare thee to prayer by answering of it, by the spirit of
adoption to cry Abba, father; by the spirit of charity, to make thee lift up
pure hands to God without wrath to men; and by the spirit of devotion to seek
heavenly things, and earthly in an heavenly way.

Lastly, be sure to use it aright, by excluding no person in Trinity when thou
prayest; by excluding all creatures when thou prayest; by conceiving God aright
in prayer, as a Father in Christ, who being in heaven can shower down upon his
inheritance all fruitful blessings; and by learning never to pray to God
without due preparation.

39. Q. What is the first petition?

A. Hallowed be thy Name.

Here thou prayest for the chief end of thy creation, What is prayed for in
the first Petition.
and all blessings upon thy self, and others. By the Name of God, thou must
understand God himself any ways made known unto thee. Name is taken for
person, as Esaias has it; Esa. 26.8.
The desire of our souls is unto thy name: and when God is made known by his
nature, word, worship, or works of creation, or providence, this is his name.
By hallowing of Gods name, thou must understand, the manifesting of God to be,
as he is in himself, high, and excellent. Thou can not do it by separation,
and application, of Gods name to holy uses, as thou do the Lords day, and
the Sacraments: but thou may do it by declaration of what God is in his
work in thee, and in thy worship, and service of him to life. Now, Gods name
cannot suffer from God himself, Angels, and Saints in heaven (though they will,
and must glorify him): but from thee, and us poor sinful men, women and
children. And we hallow his name, when we challenge it from Ignorance, by
knowledge, and acknowledgement: from oblivion, by the remembrance of thee, from
contempt by confession, praise, and swearing by his name in truth, holiness,
and righteousness: And from profanation by blasphemy in tongue or life, or
any other profanation of his Justice, mercy, goodness, truth, or the like.

with God in prayer that thou may do this work. Pro. 18.10.
Gods name is a strong tower: and our help stands in the name of the Lord our
God. Thou see how little Gods name is sanctified: God passes by, and we know
him not. Thou see how the wicked profane it; and know that God will
honor them that honor him. Therefore be thou sure to aim at the hallowing of
Gods name. If the Devil should stand up in Judgment against thee, and plead;
Great God, thou have done wonderful works for this thy creature, and yet he
does dishonor thee in thought, word, and deed. I have done nothing but sought
his ruin, and burning in the pit of hell; and yet he serves me deedily: what
would thou answer for thy self? would not thou be speechless? Take heed.
If any work be wrought, if it be wrought basely, and bunglingly, he that
wrought it has no credit by it. If it be wrought curiously, every man that
passes by takes notice of it, and praises the workman. This is thy case. Thou
art the workmanship of God. If thou show thy self forth like Gods workmanship,
and live to his honor, thou do hallow Gods name, but if thou live wickedly,
as if the devil made thee, thou do not hallow Gods name. Therefore pray
that thou may know, and acknowledge him, that thou may remember him in his
ways; that thou may honor, confess, and praise him; that thou may not
profane his Name either in tongue by vain swearing, cursing, and blasphemy; or
in life, by wicked life: and thou shall hallow Gods name. Now tell me,

40. Q. What is the second Petition?

A. Thy Kingdom come.

Here thou ask the first principal means for the hallowing of Gods name.
Thou can never do it savingly, What is asked in the second Petition.
except thou be a subject of Christ's Kingdom; because without faith it is
impossible to please God to life: therefore next after, hallowed be thy name,
thou prayest, Thy Kingdom come. By Kingdom thou must principally mean the
Kingdom of Grace, and the Kingdom of Glory. The Kingdom of grace, is that
sovereignty which Christ exercises over us by grace. Of this it is said, Romans
5.21.
that grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life: Luke 17.21.
Ro^. 14.18.
and that the Kingdom of God is within us; and stands in righteousness,
peace, and joy of the Holy Ghost. The Kingdom of Glory, is that Soveraigntie
which Christ exercises over us by Glory; that is, when Christ and his members
are in full glory: Mat. 25.34.
of which Christ speaks, Come ye blessed of my father, receive the Kingdom
prepared for you. By the coming of Christ's Kingdom, thou must understand, the
Erecting of it where it is not: Psalm. 24.9.10. Act. 2.41.47. Gal. 6.1.
the Enlarging of it where it is, by adding new souls to the Church: the
repairing of it where it is decayed, when broken Members are joynted again: and
the perfecting of it fully, 1 Cor. 15.
when God is all in all. Next, mark that thou say not the Kingdom, but thy
Kingdom; Because Christ would oppose this against all other Kingdoms. Thou
know what Esaias says, Esa. 26.13. Revel. 12.4
O Lord our God, other Gods besides thee have had dominion over us. The
Kingdom of Grace is opposed by Satan, Act. 28.23.
by the world, and self-carnall hearts. The Kingdom Glory is opposed by loving
the world and the things that are in this world; 1 John 2.
by rotting in sin, and by persecution of Gods servants, which would make
Gods servants come short of glory. But thou desire here, that the Kingdom of
the world, flesh, and devil may be cast out, and that the Kingdom of grace
may be established, which may fit us for the Kingdom of glory. And that all
this may come to pass, mark what thou prayest for. That thou may have all
means for Christ's Kingdom of grace and glory. For the Kingdom of grace, that
thou may have inward, and outward means. Inward, thy subjection to the word
of God, the spirit to create new hearts, and the fruits of righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Outward means, are either in the Church,
Commonwealth, or both of them. In the Church thou prayest for Schools of good
learning, faithful Ministers, and their peace. Act, 19.9. Matthew. 9.28 2 These.
3.1.
In the Commonwealth, thou prayest for godly Magistrates, good Laws, and and
execution of them. In both, thou prayest that thou may have the Scriptures,
the Laws of the Kingdom, and the blessing of God upon all for good
government. As for the Kingdom of Glory, thou prayest that thou may have the
Kingdom promised by a glorious resurrection, and a speedy coming to
judgment: and that God, and Christ may have full glory manifested against all
our enemies.

Phil. 3.9.10 Ephe. 3.14.16, 17.
Thus did Paul for himself, that he might be found in Christ: and for others, I
bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that Christ may dwell in
your hearts, that you may be strengthened by the Spirit in the inner man, in
the holy use of all these inner, and outward means which God has ordained.
Pray heartily that the Kingdom of glory may come. The whole Creation groans
under the burden of vanity, and we our selves do groan: Romans 8.19.23. Rev.
22.17.
and the spirit, and the bride say, come. Till then God has not the full glory
of his mercy and justice. If thou do but see the largeness of the Kingdom of
sin, and Satan; 1 John 5.19.
that the whole world lies in wickedness: If thou consider the many enemies of
Christ's Kingdom, who say, depart from us, Job. 21.
we desire not the knowledge of Gods laws: who is the Almighty that we should
serve him: we will not that he rule over us; therefore let us break his bands,
and cast away his cords from us: If thou weighest how ready thou art to rebel
against the Kingdom of Christ, and to admit of the Kingdom of darkness, thou
must zealously pray, Thy Kingdom come.

41. Q. What is the third Petition?

A. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

Here thou cravest the second principal means for the hallowing of Gods name,
that is, the acts of grace. W ha is prayed for in the third Petition.
It is not enough that Gods Kingdom be within thee by grace: but thou must also
act it, by the doing of Gods will. Put case that thou be in his Kingdom, it is
not every one that says Lord, Lord, that shall be of his Kingdom, Matthew. 7.
but he that does the will of our Father. When this Kingdom is come, we are
enabled to hallow his name: but how? By doing of his will: therefore next thy
Kingdom come, is set, thy will be done.

God has but one will, yet he does not reveal all to us. Some part he keeps to
himself, till the event make it known. This is called his Counsel, Psalm.
33.11. Romans 9. Romans 11.
or thought of his heart. Of this Paul says, who has resisted his will? and
who has known his will? Some part he makes known to us, and would have us to
do for the exercising of grace. Ephesians. 5.17.
Of this Paul says, understand what the will of the Lord is. This is the
Scriptures; which are called Gods will from the common course of speech, as our
words are called our will, which are but a sign of our wills. Of both these
thou prayest here, both that God do as he please, Act. 21.14.
as Paul said, The will of the Lord be done: and that we do as God requires in
the volume of his book. Psalm. 40.
By doing his will, Revel. 2.6.
thou must understand, that God works his whole will to be our will both for
submission and obedience. And that thou may do it most acceptably, Christ
does teach thee to pray for an elevating qualification, that Gods will may be
done on earth as in heaven. By Heaven, thou must understand the heaven of
heavens, where the will of God is gloriously done. In this heaven, there are
Christ, Angels, and Saints that do it. Christ professed that he came not to do
his own will, Joh. 6.38. Psalm. 104.
but the will of him that sent him. The Angels fulfill his commandment: and
the Saints have leisure to do nothing else. Thou must not look to equality of
measure, but likeness of manner in their doing of Gods will: that as they do
the will of God first, willingly, speedily, faithfully, and zealously: so must
thou pray to do. Yea, thou must lift up thy obedience above the earth that thou
may bare the image of heavenly things. If now, thou would frame thy heart
in prayer according to this petition, have an eye to Gods secret will, and pray
that thou may submit to it when it is revealed. Thou know not; for
present, how God will deal with thee in body, soul, state, or friends: but,
when he has revealed his pleasure, pray that thou may submit. Again, have an
eye to Gods will in his word, and pray that thou may have it, know it,
believe it, and love it. Have an eye also to thy conformity to Gods will, and
pray heartily, that thou may basely esteem of thine own will, and deny it:
that thou may have power to submit, and bring it into act in all things as
they do that are in heaven.

(my dear child) learn, that it is not enough to be a subject in Gods Kingdom,
except thou live answerably. Thou may hear many say, God knows my heart, that
is good to Godward. This is but a vain plea where there is not submission to,
and doing of Gods will in life. When therefore thou see how willing thou
would live at liberty what ever the will of God is. When thou see what
enemies we are to Gods will, and how few do it. When thou think what
dishonor it is to God to have so many servants, and so few to do his will.
When thou considerest how many do it, and do it amiss by failing in
faithfulness: then stir up the grace of God in thee to pray the more
earnestly, Thy will be done. To this end know the word of God. Remember those
parts of it most which concern thine, and others salvation. Talk and confer
with Gods skilfullest workmen about thee. Practice the doing of so much of the
will of God as thou know, and avoid the course of sin: and then what thou
prayest, thou shall do about Gods will, to Gods glory, and the good of thy soul.

42. Q. What is the fourth Petition?

A. Give us this day our daily bread.

Here thou prayest for the best principal means for the hallowing of Gods
name. What is prayed for in the 4th. Petition.
Thou can not hallow Gods name without grace; therefore thou prayest, Thy
Kingdom come. The plea of grace is but poor except there be practice;
therefore thou prayest, Thy will be done. And, now, because thou art unfit to
seek Gods Kingdom, and to do his will, except thou have the supplies of this
life: therefore thou call for bread. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were
distracted in famines. Israel did want bread and murmured. Many poor Christians
shine not as they should for want of necessary provisions: and so it may be
with thee. Therefore that they, and thou may hallow Gods name, by being in
his kingdom, and doing of his will, therefore Christ learns thee next to pray
for daily bread.

By Bread, thou must understand all worldly necessaries. Luke 14.1.
Bread in the Scripture does sometimes signify a Feast, as when Christ went
into the Pharisees house to eat bread, that is, to feast with him: Matthew. 14.2
sometimes it signifies ordinary diet, as when it is said of the Pharisees,
they wash not before they eat bread, that is, take their diet: sometimes it
signifies fruit, Jer. 11.19.
as when the Prophet says, destroy the tree with the bread, that is, the fruit
of it: Prove. 31.14.
and sometimes it signifies provision of all sorts, as when it is said of the
good housewife, she fetches her bread from afar, Ezec. 4.16. Psalm. 104.15.
that is, all provision from her family. All this is asked under the name of
bread, both because bread is the staff of life, and strengthens man: and
because the very name of bread only might restrain from gluttony, and
drunkenness. Thou cravest that t u may obtain bread by gift (Give us).
Psalm. 105.15.
Thou do not say, let me enjoy what I have, or render my own bread unto me,
or let me be my own carver; but Give us. God gives it by blessing the earth
with plenty: Hos. 2.21. Psalm. 128. Psalm. 104.
by making thee to eat the labor of thy hands: by blessing the creatures to
strengthen thee: and by giving an holy use of them. He gives it to wicked men
and sends leanness withal into their souls: Matthew. 4.
but he makes his people live not by bread only, but by every word of God.
Thus thou do acknowledge God, the supreme Lord of all creatures, that thou
may be humbled under his hands for wants, and thankful to him for
enjoyments. Thou cravest not only that bread thou have use of, but what thou
have right unto, (Our bread). Though thou possessest it, Job 20.14.23.
yet it will do thee no good except God bless it. Though God bless it, it
will do thee no good except God keep it, Psalm. 127.1.
and preserve it for thee. Though God keep it for thee, it will do thee no
good except thou be enabled to make use of it: for when sickness comes, Psalm.
107.
thy soul will abhor all manner of food. Yea, though it be possessed, and
blessed, and kept for use, yet will it do thee no good if it be another
bread, and not thine. There are that eat the bread of violence, Prove. 4.17.
Prove. 20.17.
and the bread of deceit; but thou would not, and therefore thou say, Give
us our bread. Thou cravest this bread not only for thy self, but for others,
under this word, (us). Men are apt to think their throat cut with all fat
morsels that go besides themselves. But Christ learneth thee to pray for
others, and for thy self for others uses. Thou would have this bread given
thee this day, or day by day. The fool says, Luke 12.19.
Soul thou have stored up much for many years: but the wisdom of God
teaches thee to crave but for the day. Not as if thou may not provide as the
Ant, and Joseph for a raynie day; Joh. 6.
for Christ will have thee to gather up the broken meat that nothing be lost:
but because he would not have thee distrust, or be discontent, or
self-confident. Lastly, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
thou cravest this day our daily bread, that is, fit, and sufficient to support
thy essence, and being in nature, and state. Thou would have it fit to do
thee good: not a stone for bread, or a scorpion for a fish. Thou would have
it bread of necessity, not of wantonness. And thou would have it food
convenient for thy nature, and person. Prove. 30.8.
Oh the wisdom of Christ who teaches thee in so few words to ask for so
much? under bread thou prayest for meat, drink, and cloth, health, peace,
liberty, fruitful seasons, and joy of heart, that thou may be the better
able to hallow Gods name. Under the word, Give, thou prayest God to dispose to
thee an honest course of life, and his blessing upon it. Under the word, Our,
thou prayest God to sanctify thy right in things, and to apply them unto thee
by honest labor, and prayers. Under the word, (us), wherein thou includest
others, thou prayest for contentment, against repining at others, or engrossing
to thy self: and for willingness that all men may have their share. Under the
word (this day), thou prayest for painfulnesse, against idleness; for
frugalitie, against riot; and for liberality, against covetousness. Under the
word (Daily bread), thou prayest for supply in due season, and for sufficiency
both for thy nature, and person.

Therefore (my child) set thy heart aright for grounding thy prayers upon this
Petition. Pray it for thy self: for he that is wicked to himself cannot be good
to any man. Pray it for thy family, when thou have one. 1 Timothy 5.8. Prove. 31.15
28.
Thou must not pluck out feathers from thy wings, that thou can neither fly
thy self, nor shelter them. Pray it for the household of faith, that they may
not want bread that call upon the name of the Lord. Pray it for the Poor, Joh.
31.17, 18, 19, 20. Prove. 30.9. Ro^. 12.20.
that they may have bread to keep them from stealing, and so, taking Gods name
in vain. Pray it for thy enemies also. It is strange fire to offer thy prayers
to the God of peace, with any revengefull anger in them. Do but think what
dishonorable shifts men may be put unto if they want bread, as to lie and
flatter for a morsel of bread. This made David play the fool before Achis, and
to beg his bread of churlish Nabal. Think how few use the creatures aright, and
what worlds of gluttonies, drunkennesses, thefts, oppressions, covetousnesses
do fly for vengeance on all hands. Think how apt we are to be without piety,
and charity, in the use of creatures. And think how comfortable it will be to
enjoy every thing from Gods gift and blessing, both in life and death. This
will make thee zealously put up this Petition both for thy self, and others,
Give us this day our daily bread.

43. Q. What is the fifth Petition?

A. And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Here thou beginnest to beg the removing of such impediments as hinder the
hallowing of Gods name. What is prayed for in the fifth petition.
There are two sorts of Impediments: the first are our sins past. Sins do
make a separation betwixt God and thy soul, and keep good things from thee.
They keep thee both from grace, and glory, and so, thou can not honor God:
therefore here thou do pray against the guilt of them, Forgive us our
trespasses. Matthew. 6.
By trespasses thou must understand sins, that is, all errors in thy nature,
and in thy life, against the rule of Gods word. These are called Debts. Because
thou can not perform the debt of obedience to God, therefore, for sin,
thou owe the debt of satisfaction. Under this, thou must conceive thy sins,
thy daily sins, and thy sins of all sorts, and sizes whether five hundred
pence, or ten thousand talents. To forgive, 2 Cor. 5.21 Phil. 3.9.
is, freely to discharge thee for the merits of Christ accounted thine by
faith. It is as much as, let them go; have not to say to them; Psalm. 32.1. Esa.
38.17. Mich. 7.19. Jer. 50.20.
Cover them; Cast them behind thee; throw them into the depths; make them
become as no sins, like Daniels Lions, and Paul's Viper, that could not hurt, or
like a Debt book that is crossed. To this Forgiveness thy God leads thee by
these ways, the way of procuring, the way of conferring, and the way of
receiving. 1 John 1.7.
It is procured for thee by the blood, and merits of Christ. It is bestowed
upon thee, Romans 8. 2 Samuel 12. Act. 2.38. Mat. 26.28.
by God the Father pronouncing it, and tendering of it unto thee in the holy use
of the word of grace, and the two Sacraments. And for thy receiving of it,
first thou art made capable by a contrite, Psalm. 50.
and broken heart: Next, thou do receive it by faith. Romans 3. Phil. 3.
Now, mark for whom thou would have this forgiveness. Forgive (us) that is,
thy self and all that are in communion and fellowship with thee for a pardon.
Thou must include thy self. Though Christ have satisfied for thee by way of
remedy, Esa. 53.5. Mat. 18.32.
yet not by way of application of it without prayer. Thou must not exclude
others of all sorts who stand for a pardon. Psalm. 65.2.
All flesh comes to him that hears prayers: and if it come for a pardon, thou
have no authority to shut such an one out. Lastly, the argument by which thou
cravest thy pardon is (for we forgive those that trespass against us). Matthew.
6.14
This is not a cause of thy forgiveness, but an argument of thy asking it from
Gods promise. It is true, that thou can not forgive, as thou desire that
God should forgive thee, in Equality, so perfectly as God forgives; nor in
quality so purely: but yet thou may, in likeness. Though thou be a drop, and
God be an Ocean of mercy; yet a drop of water may wet as well as the whole
sea, though not as much: so may thou forgive as God forgives, but not so
perfectly. Wonderful is the wisdom of Christ in helping thee about the
forgiveness of sins in this Petition. Consider the Procurer of thy
forgiveness, thou prayest that Christ's worth, and merits may be made thine:
Consider the forgiver, thou prayest that God the father would accept thee in
Christ, and hide thy fault, and guilt. Consider the setlers of forgiveness
upon thee, thou prayest that the word may work a sight, sense, and confession
of thy sin; and that the Sacraments may be means to seal, and assure thy
pardon. Consider thy receiving of it, and thou prayest that thou may have
contrition, desire, and faith: and consider the promise of Christ, and thou
prayest that thou may have true mercy in forgiving others, without which
thou shall not be forgiven thy self.

(my child) ply God here. Neither thou, nor any body else, can hallow Gods
name under the guilt of sins; for praise is not comely in the mouth of a
fool. Therefore, what ever thou do, pray that this guilt may be taken off
both from thee and others. The odiousness of sin is such, that it is worse
then Satan, and hell. Hell could not be hell unto thee, were it not for sin;
and Satan could do thee no mischief, Act. 8.
had not thy own sins bound thee hand and foot first. Therefore we read of
an old Christian in former times, who said, that if he were set to choose
heaven, or grace, he would choose grace before heaven; because without grace,
heaven could not hold him: and if he must choose hell, or sin, he would choose
hell before sin; because hell without sin could not possess or hurt him.
Again, the danger of sin is fearful, it defaceth the image of God, wounds
conscience, hinders peace, and keeps good things from us. If thou add but
to this thought, the plenty of sin, that the whole world lies in wickedness,
and that the sins of all sorts of people cry to heaven, thou will then cry
for a pardon for thy self, and others, that for the merit of Christ's blood God
would discharge us, and by the word of God and Sacraments would assure it, that
we may comfortably walk before him all the days of our life.

44. Q. What is the sixth Petition?

A. And lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil.

Here thou prayest to remove the last impediment which hinders the hallowing of
Gods name, that is, sins to come, What is prayed for in the sixth petition.
and the issues of them. Thou art born to honor God, and thou prayest that
thou may answer Gods end. This thou can not do, as thou ought, without
grace in Gods Kingdom, exercise of grace, in the doing of Gods will, and the
ordinary supplies and additions of this life's necessaries: and therefore thou
cravest them. But because thou can not have these without a pardon of the
guilt of sin, and a power against the filth of sin: therefore as thou
did crave that in the former; so thou cravest this in this latter petition.
None owe more to God, then they whose sins are pardoned: Joh. 5.14.
therefore he that says, thy sins are forgiven thee, says also, sin no
more. None are more in danger then they whose sins are forgiven: for when the
unclean spirit is gone out he is never quiet till he return with seven Devils
worse then himself. Matthew. 12.
Hence Christ teaches thee after forgive us our sins, to pray, not to lead
us into temptation.

Thou first, prayest against temptation, not that of trial: for God will make
proof of thy wisdom, faith, hope, and charity, Genesis 22.1.
as he tempted Abraham: but that of seducement, by which thou art seduced from
the way of God, 1 These. 3. 2 Pet. 1.
and persuaded to the way of sin. This the Devil, and the corruption that is
in the world through lust, sets on upon thee, by the force of adversity, or by
the fraud of prosperity to gain thee to their party. Thou would not be led
into these temptations, that is, thou do not desire to be found trading that
way, and so, justly to be given over to the power of thy enemies, and to be
deserted by God. Romans 1.24.26.28. Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9.
Tempted thou must be so long as thou art militant; but thou would not, for
a world, that God should lead thee into them, by leaving thee to thy self,
Psalm. 119.8. 1 King. 22. 1 Chr. 21.1.
and letting Satan justly loose upon thee, and leaving thee under his power.
Secondly, thou prayest for deliverance from evil. By Evil, thou must
understand that evil one, the evil of sin, and that evil thou deservest
for being drawn. That evil one is Satan, Joh. 17.15. 1 John 2.13. and 5.8.
who is full of power, malice, methods, depths, and assistants to negotiate for
him. The evil of sin, he draws thee unto, is continuance in sin as a thing
loved, and liked, and presuming to lay hold of the promises without faith, and
of safety without holiness. The evil thou deservest for being drawn, is an
evil conscience, and the full shower of miseries whereto thou may be
subject in this life, and in the life to come. By Deliverance, thou must
understand, prevention of evils, that they set not upon thee as Philistims upon
Sampson: supply in evils, that they oppress thee not no more then Daniel in
the Lions Den: and full deliverance from evils that they destroy thee not, no
more then they did Joseph, when the irons entered into his soul.

caught in the snares of sin. That many evils attend thee, if thou sin,
both of further sin, and misery. Therefore pray, and pray, for prevention of
sin, that thou may have power against sin: that thou may not be left to
temptations: that thou may not love them, or have thy heart hardened by them.
And for deliverance from evil, pray, that Satan do not captivate thee: that
thou may not love, and like, and continue in sin: that the ill of a wicked
conscience be removed; and thou be everlastingly preserved from hell, and
condemnation. Tell me now once more,

45. Q. What is the conclusion of this Prayer?

A. For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, Amen.

Here is an allegation of reasons, The sum of the conclusion of prayer.
why thou prayest and trustest to be heard: and a confident expectation of an
answer from God. The reasons why thou trustest to be heard are five. thine is
Kingdom. Whether should subjects go, but to them that have Kingdom, to free
them from distresses? because thine is power. Whether should weaklings go but
to power? Power will help weakness. thine is Glory. If thou help me, thou will
glorify thy self. If thou help me, I shall glorify thee. The Kingdom, Psalm.
47. Psalm. 72.
The power, and The glory over all. For generality, God is King over all the
earth, and for superiority, all Kings shall fall down before him. Why should
thou not trust to be heard by such a God? for ever: for God only has
immortality: therefore why should thou not depend upon him that lives for
ever, and can help for ever? These are thy reasons.

The confident expectation of Gods answer is in this word, Amen: By this thou
sealest thy consent, and do signify thy desire, and confidence. And thou
must do it. For it is but a toy for one man to say the prayer only, and
another man to say Amen. Amen is part of thy devotion, and all, both Ministers
and people, or all others, that pray must say, Amen.

these reasons, and this Amen so, as thou may pray with success, and
confidence. O my God, am not I in thy Kingdom? Art not thou the God of power?
Will it not end in thy glory, which was also the end why thou made me? And
do not thou only live for ever, everlastingly to help me? I cannot but
depend upon thee, and confidently say Amen,

So be it.

Now in this close let me see how thou have profited by what I have opened to
thee about prayer.
Q. Why is prayer a means to increase faith?

A. Because God must do it; and he will be sought.

Q. How do thou know that thou prayest aright?

A. When my soul does religiously move out of it self to God.

Q. To what end?

A. To draw my self into fellowship with him against sin, and for grace.

Q. Where do thou learn the matter of prayer?

A. In that which Christ taught his Apostles.

Q. Tell me the entrance into it?

A. Our father which art in heaven.

Q. Why call thou him Father in prayer?

A. Because it ensureth my faith.

Q. Why say thou Our?

A. Because in love I must pray for all that are in communion with me to life.

Q. Why say thou which art in heaven?

A. Because it might raise up my heart thither.

Q. What do thou aim at in prayer?

A. The hallowing of Gods name.

Q. How can thou hallow it?

A. When I live like a creature of God, not of Satan.

Q. What do thou need to this end?

A. Grace in my heart.

Q. How shall thou get it?

Q. By Gods Kingdom coming into me by faith.

Q. Is it enough to hallow Gods name if thou have grace in thy heart?

A. No: I must act grace in my life by doing of Gods will.

Q. How must thou do it?

A. By faithful, and zealous doing of it as they that are in heaven.

Q. But to hallow Gods name do thou not need the things of this life?

A. Yes, therefore I beg daily things convenient for my nature, and person.

Q. What must be removed from thee for the hallowing of Gods name?

A. My sins past, and sins present and to come.

Q. What would thou have done against thy sins past and present?

A. I crave a discharge from them for the merits of Christ made mine by faith.

Q. What would thou have done to prevent sin to come?

A. I would not be left to my self, or to the power of the Devil, and the
world?

Q. Why would thou not be in such a state?

A. Lest I fall into the evil of sin, and the evil of punishment.

Q. What is the evil of sin?

A. Out of an evil conscience to love sin, and to like it.

Q. What is the evil of punishment?

A. To be left in the hardness of my heart to the condemnation of hell.

Thus (O my child, Prove. 31.2.
the child of my womb, and the child of my desire) I have, as I have
learned, given thee to hear the instructions of a mother. I have been an
instrument to bring thee into the world of sinners, wherein thou art too like
me and thy father, in that wherein thou art most unlike unto God; oh that I
might be a means, also, to bring thee into the world of saved ones! In the
bowels of a tender mother, let me persuade thee in time, Jer. 8.6.
to smite thy hand upon thy thigh, and say, what have I done? It is enough (yea
too, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4
too much) that thou have spent the time past, of thy life, after the lusts of
the world, walking in wantonness, and in other abominable wickednesses.
Eccles. 12.1
Now remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, and though, when thou
runnest not with others into the same excess of riot, thou be spoken of as an
evil doer, yet be not discouraged: Esa. 66.5.
God will appear to such persons shame, and thou shall be comforted. If thou
were of the world, the world would love thee: Joh. 15.19.
but if thou be taken out of the world, and keep faith, 1 Timothy 2.19 Joh. 15.10.
and a good conscience, the love of the Father shall abide in thee, and lead
thee to everlasting life. And because it cannot be thus with thee except God
open thine eyes, Act. 26.18.
and turn thee from darkness to light, to receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance, among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ: therefore I
charge thee, as thou will answer it to God in the dreadful day of judgment,
that thou suck into thy soul this milk for babes. It will plainly open unto
thee, thy Creation from God, thy corruption by sin, thy cursednesse for sin,
and thy deliverance by Jesus Christ. If thou be careful feelingly to know
these things, together with Faith, which is thy only way to make Christ thine:
and can but sensibly perceive the working, and growth of it by the Gospel,
seals of it (the Sacraments) and prayer, the work is done. I will not say thou
art a stranger to the Covenant of grace, or that thou art not far from the
Kingdom, but thou art a child of the Kingdom, and heir of life. As therefore
David said to Solomon, up, and be doing, about the house of God: so say I, be
diligent to learn, and to feel this doctrine distill as the dew upon thy soul
that thou may pass from death to life. Heb. 13.20, 21.
Now, the God of peace that brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus Christ,
that great Shepherd of the sheep, thorough the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make thee perfect in every good work to do his will, working in thee
that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
1 Secret Sins discovered. 2 Christ exalted amongst men. 3 The Soul secured.
OR, THREE SERMONS; The first preached at Andrews Holborn at a public Fast:
The two other, preached, upon several occasions, at the Covent Garden, near
Martins in the Field, in the Month of February 1645/6.

By ROBERT ABBOT Preacher of Gods Word at Southwick in Hantshire.

PROVE. 28.13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper: but who so
confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy.

GENESIS 48.19. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.

LONDON, Printed by John Legate for Philemon Stephens, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the gilded Lion. 1646.

The Texts and Sum of what is handled in the following TREATISES.
Psalm. 119.12. Who can understand his errors? Lord cleanse me from my secret
sins.

Where is considered,
1 A disease: about which 2 1 A concession (we have many errors) 2 A
confession (we cannot know them) yet we may know more then we do by means
propounded in the Sermon.
2 A remedy, flying to God by prayer: About which 2 1 The Object (secret
sins) which are 1 Demonstrated by the several eyes 1 Of God 2 Of the world 3
Of a man's own conscience.
2 Discovered by five means applied in the Sermon.
2 The act or work against them, prayer, confessing their pollution as well as
of other sins.



Matthew. 13.45, 46. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-man, seeking
goodly pearls: who when he had found a pearl of great price he went and sold
all that he had and bought it.

Whence is discovered,
1 The worth of the Gospel, which is valued, 1 By the place where it is (In
the Kingdom of Heaven) 2 By the person that trades for it (A Merchantman) 3 By
the commodities of it (Pearls, a pearl of great price) 4 By his invincible
diligence about it (he seeks till he find it)
2 What a good Christian will bid for it (He sels all that he has) which is
demonstrated; 1 Negatively, what he does not sell. 2 Positively, what he does
sell for the enjoyment of Christ this pearl.

Psalm. 31.5. Into thy hands I commit my spirit: thou have redeemed me, O Lord
God of truth.

Where is discoursed,
1 David's confession of God 1 For sovereignty to be his (Lord) 2 For the sign
of it (Thou have redeemed me) 3 For his veracity (God of truth)
2 David's profession for himself: where he presents 1 The nature of his soul
(a spirit) 2 The Castle of his soul ( into thy hands) 3 The Care for his soul
(I commit it unto thee.)

The sum of all is;
1 Secret sins discovered. 2 Christ exalted among men. 3 The Soul secured.


To his Worthy and Noble Friends 1 Mrs. ELIZABETH NORTON, wife to Colonel
NORTON Esquire. 2 Mrs. KATHERINE MAY, wife to JAMES MAY, Esquire. 3 Mrs.
HONORIA ELIOT, wife to JOHN ELIOT Esquire. 4 Mrs. MARY NORTON.

All daughters to the Noble Lady Honoria Norton of Southwick in Hantshire, my
much honored Patroness.
Robert Abbot does dedicate these three ensuing Sermons, as a testimony of my
dearest respects to that Noble Family, and does humbly pray for their souls and
bodies happinesses to Eternal Glory.
MY Noble Friends, God has joined you together by blood, and marriage, and I
durst not separate one from the other. It is all your goods I aim at, and
therefore I resolved not to make one beholding to another for a gift, but all
to be thankful to that Noble Mother, who set me on work. On my part, I can
do nothing that may deserve a public eye: but if others think otherwise, I
cannot help it. If they tell me that I have a talent; I have known that a long
time. If they tell me it may profit by way of preaching, I must put that to the
success which Gods blessing will give it. If they tell me it may profit by
writing, here only I stick. I am altogether ignorant what I can do in this
kind. I have nothing to direct me but others opinions and desires: and if they
be no sure Cards and Compasses to sail by into this censuring world, I may
suffer shipwreck. Howsoever it fall out, I must now take my Lot, and if with
Jonas I be cast into the Sea, it is because I have obeyed, and not because I
have rebelled. It is possible for a man to know when he is called to do any
work, though it be a work of hazard. He is called, surely, when he has a voice
from heaven to design him as Paul had; and when he has a particular instinct
of spirit, as many worthies in the first ages; and when he has the prophesies
go of him, as Timothy had; and when he has the approbation, and imposition of
hands of the Eldership, as ordinary servants of Christ for the benefit of the
Church, Pastors, and Teachers have; or lastly, when he has the engagement of
the hearts of Gods people attending upon his dispensing of the mysteries of
grace, and pressing the public use of what he does more privately. As I have
had long ago, and ever since, some comfortable approbation at, and since the
imposition of hands, so have I had some closing of the hearts of the godly, for
the bringing into the public, of what I have done in this service, in the
private. This I have accounted an invitation to do something by the pen, as
well as in the Pulpit. As I would not be so running out, as to make all my
diviner thoughts visible to the Sun (because there are many that can do it
better): so would I not be so bound up, as to be unwilling to profit some in
this way, though others may think it not worth the looking on. That which is as
gold to some, may be as brass to others: and that which is as silver to some,
is as lead to others: and yet variety of spirits may be helped according to
various touches, and impressions, of fancies, judgments, conceptions, and
opinions from the spirit of Christ.

I therefore being emboldened to do something in this kind, was not long to
study to whose hands to present it first, and thence to have it derived to all
English hands, and hearts, that we are willing to receive it. To you therefore
(my noble friends) is it come, only craving your acceptance, according to the
worth of the matter, not of the person that exhibits it unto you. I am a poor
old man, clogged with many infirmities, who have been tossed, and bandied up,
and down in the world; who yet, want nothing but a fuller measure of Jesus
Christ to dwell in my soul by faith. I have learned you the fountains of secret
sins, and the means how to discover them in your selves, that it may bow you
before the God of heaven, to make you fit to hold Jesus Christ. It must be an
hollow vessel which must hold water, and an hollowed heart; that must lie under
the fountain of David for sin and for uncleanness, to carry away the water of
life to the soul. I have taught you the worth of the Glorious Gospel, that you
may be willing to hunt after Christ, and, when you have found him, to part with
all that is yours for his embracements. And, because your precious souls are in
much danger in these distracted days, both by prosperity, and adversity, I
have learned you, from the best assurance office in the world, to secure your
souls; that while you enjoy them you may have faith, while you have faith, you
may have Christ, and while you have Christ, you may have the love of God for
your eternal good.

I must confess, that if ever Christian souls were in danger, they are in
danger now. We are fallen into the last, and perilous days: wherein while the
Drum, and Canon are the best music, and Commission is given to the sword to
cut off not a few, and to guild the Land with crying blood; the Enemy sowes
tares to an abundance at home, to the hinderance of Reformation, and to the
disjoynting of many a good soul. Some of the ancient exploded heresies are
revived; and such wide ruptures are made, that a devout soul can scarce tell at
which door to go in to Christ: my heart bleeds to see with what daring, and
violence private opinions are maintained. I believe that I may have some
private opinion, of my own; but I will rather bury it within my breast, then
suffer it to make a public disturbance. If others would do so too, we might
(it may be) have been wafted to our wished for haven before this day. But
(alas) all cry up the ways of Christ, the ordinances of Christ, the Kingdom of
Christ; but when it comes to be examined it is found to be nothing but self
opinions, and self practices. Some look upon the Law as a Schoolmaster unto
Christ, and, when they have learned him, they would walk in Christ, not only
by believing, but by doing, such holy and charitable duties as the Law
propounds and commands. Some would have no use of the Law among Christians, but
pin all upon faith, as if faith did not work by love. Some look upon Baptism as
unusefull in our Infantery, though the beginning of it cannot be concludently
grounded but from the Apostles, and the practice of it was never opposed till
this last age. Some are for the grafting of it into the place of Circumcision;
because it can be no other then that was, A sign and seal of the righteousness
of faith: and God, who caleth things that are not as if they were, calls, by
virtue of his Covenant, Infants of Christians Believers, much more the^ infants
of Jews. Some again are for Congregationall Churches only, as if Christ had
given any such precept, or as if there were any such practice according to
undoubted rule. Others will have Classical Churches under sweet and amiable
subordination to help the Communion of Saints, as in the days of Timothy, and
Titus. Some would have excommunication in the power of the whole Body; some in
the power of the Presbytery; some in the power of a mixed Presbytery, some of an
Eldership of Ministry, which seems to be the rightest way; and some would
have none at all, though, happly, if excommunication be not a delivering over
to Satan; yet it may, justly, be a wary casting out, and removing stones of
offense till they are humbled, and reformed. Some would have all punishments in
the power of the Magistrate; some would have none but for such faults as clash
against Public Peace of the Commonwealth: though it cannot be denied, but
that the sword of a good Magistrate, for virtue, and against vice is a back of
Steel to a good Ministry. Some are for admittance of members of the Church by
I know not what Covenant (because it is variously practiced). Others know no
covenant but that of grace, made in Baptism, and renewed in the Supper of the
Lord, except voluntary Covenants, and according to the Rules of Christian
liberty. Now (my much honored friends) when these digladiations are sharpened
amongst good men, great men, will it not be a beam in the eye of many a good
soul, even to hinder them from walking with such a steady foot, in the ways of
Christ, as were to be wished? I know no better way to help all, then to follow
Melancthons counsel to his Mother, when she was troubled with the
controversies of her time, that she stick to her old principles of saving
doctrine, and practice, and for the rest to wait the issue of Gods providence.
This is my humble, and hearty counsel to you all. Look upon the goodness of
every good man, and so far as you see Christ in them, so far honor, and
succor them: but for other opinions engage you not. It will be more unseemly
at last to cast out an error, upon further trial, then not to admit it at
first. God has his mighty work in these stirrings, for the clearing of some
truths, yet, more confusedly known. When this is brought unto an issue, it will
more sweetly content you, then a present engagement in the premises of many
stirring spirits who do too much trouble themselves and others. This is all I
aim at, and therefore present you with old quiet grounds of faith, and
practice, as well becomes me who am the servant of Jesus Christ, and under him

From my Study in Southwick, Feb. 8. 1646. Yours to serve you in the Gospel:
ROBERT ABBOT.

Secret Sins discovered. OR, A Sermon of secret Sins preached at a Public
Fast, UPON
PSALM. 19.12. Who can understand his errors? Lord cleanse me from my secret
sins?

WE are come to an humbling day: and this is an humbling Text. It points at an
infinite company of sins; but it laments and prays against secret sins. Every
Pulpit, all the Town, words it against open sins; and if we amend not, it is
not for want of light, but for want of love to piety: but if we can make some
discovery of Secret sins, it makes us suspect the more those that are known,
and, it may be, casts us upon a bed of sorrow for all, because our secret ones
are so many, and so bad.

David sues here to God for two blessings justification, and sanctification.
The motives to set him on, are the glory God has by the Creatures, and by the
word. By the creatures he is wonderfully glorified: V. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handiwork.
They glorify God by working according to the Law which God has put upon them:
and by bearing forth impresses of Gods Majesty, wisdom, and goodness. By the
word God is more glorified yet. Verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.
It is his law, his testimonies, his statutes, his commandments, and his fear.
It is perfect, it is sure, it is right, it is pure, it is clean, it is truth,
and righteous altogether. It converts, makes wise, rejoices, enlighteneth, and
is everlasting. It is desirable above the best Gold, and sweeter then honey, yea
it brings great reward along with it.

David was so in love with the glory that God had both these ways, that, no
doubt he was heartily wishing that all men would honor him too. But for
himself, he sets himself earnestly upon it: and because he cannot do it without
a Pardon of sin, and power against sin, Ver. 12.
he prays, first, for justification, Lord cleanse me: next for sanctification,
Ver. 13.
Keep back presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me: and lastly
for the fruit of both, let my words, Ver. 14.
and meditations be acceptable in thy sight. He knew that praise is not comely
for the mouth of a sinful fool. He would not therefore care how far he were
from it, even from the whole body of it, that he might glorify God as he
should.

The first suit is that which I present unto you here: and in it consider with
me seriously two points; 1 A Disease. 2 A Remedy.


The disease. The disease are Errors: Who can understand his errors? It is
propounded interrogatorily by way of question; who? and there are five kinds
of interrogations in the Scriptures. 1. Dubitans. Ps. 77.7, 8, 9
A doubting question: Will the Lord cast off for ever? Will he be favorable no
more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for evermore?
Here, in case of desertion, the Prophet is full of doubts. 2. Docens. Esa. 60.8.
A teaching question: Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as Doves to their
windows? This teaches the multitude of those that shall fly to the means of
salvation in these times of grace. 3. Discens. Mar. 10.16.
A Learning question: What shall I do that I may possess eternal life by
inheritance? This is desirous to learn the way to heaven. 4. Affirmans. 2 King.
12.19. 2 King. 14.18.
An affirming question: such often in the book of the Kings: Are they not
written in the Books of the Kings of Judah, and Israel? They are: they stand in
the public records, and in their Chronicles. 5. Negans. Lastly, there is a
denying question: and such is this here, Who can understand his errors? None
can to the depth, and bottom.
In this question there are two considerables; 1 A Concession. 2 A Confession.


He makes a grant, our life is full of errors: A Concession.
and the Scriptures say the same, Esa. 53.6. Ps. 119. ult. Math. 10.6.
while they affirm, that all we are like lost sheep: and I have gone astray
like lost sheep: and the house of Israel has lost sheep. I need not reckon up
the particulars, as the errors of our senses, understandings, consciences,
judgments, wills, affections, desires, actions, and occurrences. The whole man
in nature is like a tree nipt at root which brings forth worm-eaten fruits. The
whole man in life, is like an instrument out of tune, which jars at every
stroke. If we cannot understand them, certainly, they are very many.

David, Psalm. 8.
what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou
do so regard him? He is a thing of nothing: Nay, worse then nothing. Nothing
has never offended God; but we have done nothing but offended him in our whole
course. If we had but two, or three errors, it were the less wonder: but the
wonder is, because we have so many. We were as a piece of Tapestry curiously
wrought; Psalm. 139.15.
and now we are torn in pieces by sin, and Satan, and have errors to a
wonder, and yet are laden with benefits, and crowned with loving kindness, and
favors, on the right hand; and on the left. This must quicken your love to
God, and your thankfulness, for the enjoyment of the least blessings.

Facilitas cadendi, difficultas standi, Imbecillitas surgendi, debilitas
perseverandi. Psalm. 38.4. Romans 7.24.
and powers. We are easily drawn to fall, we are hardly able to stand, we are
weak to arise when we are down, and unable to persevere when we are up without
a covenant of mercy. If David could not bear his burden; nor Paul his
burden, what shall we do, except we fly to the stronger man then he in the
house, Christ in his way? Therefore as Benhadabs servants came to Ahabs
servants with sackcloth, and ropes; so do you come in humility to Christ, and
say, Oh seek thy servant that puts his trust in thee. If you doubt whether he
will help you, being clothed with errors as with a garment: think that the
Lord is thy Shepherd: Psalm. 23.1. Joh. 10.
and that Christ is the good Shepherd of his sheep. Therefore as they defend
their sheep, as David did from the Lion, and the Bear: as they pasture their
sheep, as Moses did in banishment: as they water their sheep, as the Patriarchs
servants, and children did: and as they seek their sheep when they wander and
go astray: so will God in Christ every way provide for thee against thy many
errors if they be not wilful, and settled by cursed custom, and resolution
to do as thou have done. But I settle not here any longer.

Confession. David has granted that man has many errors; and now he
confesses, Confession. That We cannot know our errors.
that we cannot know our errors. Put it to the question, who can know his
errors? The Answer is negative, man cannot know them: you will say then, it is
in vain to search. True, if it were impossible for us to know them, or to know
more then we do: but it is but difficult in it self, and for us. But you will
say, on the other side, why should it be so difficult, 1 Cor. 2.11
when the spirit of a man does know the things of a man. It is true he knows
the thoughts, purposes, and devises of his heart; but not every winding,
turning, nor the issue of them, and so it is difficult still.

You will enquire after two things, how comes it that we know not our errors?
and how we may be assured that we know them not? It comes to pass four ways.

How comes it that we know not our errors.
from the infinite number of them. Infinite I say, not with reference to God
(for the imperfections of the creature cannot, numerally exceed the perfections
of the creatures) but with respect to us. They are more then the hairs of our
heads, more then the sands of the Sea shore which cannot be told by us. The
little Buckets of our understandings can no more hold the drops of this Ocean,
then we can hold the Sea in our fists, or number the drops of it.

from the root of hypocrisy that is in us. This makes us not only deceive
others, Gal. 6.3.
but our selves in our imaginations: and so, we think them few, when they are
like the Army of the Aramites that covers the earth.

Plenitudinem, rectitudinem, and claritatem intellectus.
it comes to pass from the pravity and miscarriage of our understandings. We
have lost the fullness, the cleernesse, and the rectitude of our understanding
of good; and therefore we cannot understand our errors by the opposite good. If
we have lost our Grammar rules we cannot know the incongruities of our speech;
if we have lost our squire, we cannot find out the errors of our building.

the sleepiness of our consciences. If the Sentinel sleep, who so will may
come into the Garrison unespied. If the Shepherd sleep, the whole flock may be
overgrown with flye-blowes: so may thy soul with errors if conscience be
drowsy, and have the spirit of slumber. Then cry as to Dumah, Watchman, what
was in the night? It cannot be told because conscience slept. Thus it comes to
pass that we know not our errors.

by our security. How we may be assured that we know not our errors. Jud.
18.10.
If a man live carelessly as the children of Laish, it is a sign he knows not
of his enemies. If a man come without care bemired into company, it is a sign
that he knows not his foulness: so nor we know our errors when we live as if
we cared not to get to heaven, or avoid hell, or to purge away any impurity
which is presented with us into the sight of God, and man. By our pride. If a
man do highly prize his own real, or seeming excellencies, it is a certain
sign that he knows not his own wants. If a man be proud of his knowledge, he
knows not that what he knows is not the thousand part of what he is ignorant
of. If a man be proud of his graces, and begin to point at, and contemn
others, who do not so shine, certainly he knows not that his sins outweigh
his graces if they were brought to the balance of the Sanctuary. by our hard
hearts. The heart of Josiah melted when the Law showed his errors: and the
heart of Paul was wounded, and he died, when the Law came and made his errors
live before him. Triplex circa praecordia ferrum.
But we have armor of proof about our hearts. They do not melt, dye, nor are
wounded with the sight of our errors: therefore we know them not.

information, humiliation, and exhortation. First, let it teach us not to dream
of a fulfilling of the Law in this life of our selves. If a man cannot know his
errors, surely, he shall never find his full obedience. What is unknown of
his errors will have such an influence upon his conscience, that he will still
suspect his obedience to be but a polluted clout. Papists speak of a double
fulfilling of the Law: the first is the travelers fulfilling it, 1 Viatorum. 2
Comprehensorum.
which is while men are militant in this life: this they say, is, to love God
above all, and our neighbors as our selves. The second is the possessors
fulfilling of it, which is, when men are in Glory: this, they say, is to love
God with all our heart, mind, will, and strength. But indeed we have but one
rule of righteousness, which should be fulfilled with all our powers: and
when God says, Gal. 3.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
book of the Law to do them, it is not spoken of glorified persons. We speak of
a threefold fulfilling of the Law. Inchoata Imputatae Personalis

Inchoate and begun, by equal, and sincere obedience according to grace given.
Imputed, by the satisfaction of our surety made ours: for the Law is then
fulfilled when the breach of it is satisfied. And personal, and perfect, which
Paul teaches to be impossible because of the flesh. And, Rom 8.3.
in truth, it must needs be so: for personal fulfilling cannot stand with
corruption in nature, and sin in life. Besides, our love cannot be greater
then our knowledge, 2 Cor. 13.
which is imperfect: yea, and ignorance of errors cannot stand with
fulfulfilling. Therefore be not you in your eyes better then you deserve: think
not of fulfilling the Law, when you know not how many breaches you make against
it.

be humbled under the consideration of this point. A man that knows enough to
condemn him before a Judge, yet he knows not all, walks weakly before a Judge,
he has not the confidence of an innocent: So when you know enough to cast you
to the nether-most hell, yet not all, it ought to make you, as Hezekiah, to
walk in the bitterness of your soul all your life, yet with due remembrance of
the Lord Jesus to lift up your heads with confidence.

De impossibilibus non est spes.
if it were impossible for you to know more errors in your selves then you
know yet. He that knows not now, may know by search, and the rest will be
wrapped up in a general repentance, and will find a pardon of course.

There are three ways by which more may be known then now: How we may know our
errors.
the knowledge of God, the knowledge of our selves, and humility. to the
knowledge of God, you see when Job had got some sight of God more then before,
and had not only heard by the hearing of the ear, Job. 42.5, 6
but his eye had seen him, he saw so many errors in himself, that he abhorred
himself, and repented in dust, and ashes. Esa. 6.1.
And the Prophet Esaias, when he saw God upon the throne, saw such errors in
himself, that he cried out, woe is me, I am undone: Esa. 6.5.
because I am a man of unclean lips, and dwell among such a people: for my eyes
have seen the King the Lord of Hosts. Such a sight will show us such purity, as
we shall see nothing but errors in our selves. Set this light before your
souls, and then you will cry out with Paul, I was a blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13 15.
a persecuter, injurious, yea, the chief of sinners. You will see all your
errors clearly enough. Gehenna sum domine.
You will say, with that blessed Martyr, I am hell, Lord, I am hell: Oh take
away my hell, Hei mihi, quid sum? vas sterquilinii; concha putredinis; plenus
foetore Facti sumus fugitivi a cordibus nostris. Hei mihi, quam contrarius sum
egomet mihi! ego in spiritu and ego in carne.
and give me thy heaven: and with Augustine, Alas, wretched man, what am I? A
very close Stool, a shovell full of dung, full of stink. knowledge of our
selves, the more we see our selves in our right lineaments, and proportions,
the more we shall say, (when we are asked, what we see?) more abominations yet.
The truth is, that we are runagates from our own hearts. Whatsoever we pretend,
we know not our selves as we ought to do. But stand at this Bar, and we shall
be driven to word it as he of old, Alas, that I am, how contrary, am I to my
self? I in the flesh, and I in the spirit! Now errors appear, which will make
us groan, the worst that I feel is better then the best I do deserve. humility
which is the last, though not the least; means to make us to know our errors,
(...) l. 25.
the spirit does assure us, that the humble God will teach: and, if they be of
Gods teaching, surely they shall know so many errors as may make their hearts
to ache: and thus of the disease which was not my aim to be insisted upon.

David flies to God by prayer, and so must you. The Remedy.
He is the Physician, and the balm in Gilead who is only able to cure our
errors, though we know them not: therefore, (Cleanse me from my secret
sins). There are two parts here, do offer a view.

1 The object (secret sins.) 2 The act, or work about them, (cleanse me.)
the best have secret faults. The best have secret faults.
I must demonstrate this: and therefore know, that if they be secret, it must
be with respect to some eyes that see them not: and there are three sorts of
eyes; of God, of the world, and of a man's own conscience. the eye of God there
are no secret sins: yet wicked man labors to hide them two ways; Negatively
by not confessing them, and of this Solomon speaks, he that hides his sins
shall not prosper. Prove. 28.
Positively, as much as in us lies, by the impiety of our desires, that God
could not see them; and by foolish hope that he does not pierce thorough the
dark cloud: for we do easily believe that which we would earnestly have come to
pass: Facile credimus quod valde volumus.
and this makes so many flying lies of that to be done, which we would fain
have done, and of that not done, which we cannot endure to hear should be done.
the eye of the world God will have many secret sins. He knows that he can make
good use of such secret sins; and that the people of God can make good use of
them also. God can make excellent use of them, because he knows that they have
an Infective and Destructive power. Potentia, 1 Infectiva. 2 Destructiva.
If every of our secret sins were known, they would have a power to infect
others. Men are like Jacobs sheep, which conceived by the eye: Gal. 2.14.
and Peter by his dissimulation compelled some that saw him to walk with an
uneven foot. Had it not been better that his sin had been secret, and that no
eye had seen it? Again, if every of our secret sins were known, they would
have a power to destroy our selves, from doing what we ought. As Moses fled,
when he had slain the Egyptian; and did not cherish that heroical motion
which God had given him for the vindicating of the cause of his people: so if
all our secret faults were written in our foreheads, would we not be ashamed to
walk in any calling wherein the Lord had set us? Would we not run away and hide
our selves in bushes, and eat Nettle-rootes, and Juniper-roots, as Jobs sons
of Belial did, rather then to come into the sight of men? Seeing therefore that
God can make such excellent use of a secret sin, he will have many sins to
be secret from the eye of the world.

Gods people can make excellent use of secret sins also. They can make them a
seed of humility, compassion, Semen 1 Humilitatis. 2 Compassionis. 3
Gratitudinis. 4 Pietatis.
thankfulness, and piety. They are a seed of humility when others praise them.
Oh why am I praised thus? I must not be proud, for, if they knew all my secret
sins, they would not praise me so much. They are a seed of Compassion, when
others sin. Oh how can I deal extremely with poor sinners! I must be
compassionate: for if others knew my secret sins, I should deserve as severe
a censure my self. Can I be as Judah to cry out of Tamar, let her be burned,
when I remember the ring, and the staff laid to pawn to her in secret? No,
no, the Judge was wiser, of whom we read of in the Primitive Church, who when
he was seriously invited into the place of Judgment to pass sentence upon
another, withdrew himself; and at last, being earnestly pressed, came with a
Bag of sand upon his shoulder to the Judgment seat, saying, you call me to
pass judgment upon this poor sinner. How can I do it, when I my self am
gilty of more then this bag has sands if the world saw them all. Which, though
it were not well done, if he were a public Judge to pass sentence upon
public crimes (because then he should not be suspended by private guilts from
public censures and amendments), yet it shows that our bosom sins should
work compassion. They are a seed of thankfulness, when God spares them, and
does not entrap them in common miseries. Oh why am I not plagued with sword,
famine, and poverty as well as others! Were all my secret sins open to the
eye of the world, I should be as bad as they, Psalm. 103.
and yet am I spared. O my soul, praise the Lord, and all that is within me
praise his holy name. Lastly, they are a seed of Piety, to provoke them to do
good in secret. I have sinned in secret, Oh why should not I do good in secret?
I Will fast, and pray in secret, I Will give Alms in secret, I Will do what good I can
though no man look upon me: for I am sure I have too many secret sins which
the world little thinks of, or imagines. Seeing therefore that Gods people can
make such good use of a secret sin, or sins, he will have many sins to be
secret from the eye of the world.

From the third eye, that is, eye of a man's own conscience, there are many
secret sins also, and of these principally does David speak here. It may
seem strange that a man should commit sins, and yet his own conscience
should not take notice of it: yet a man's own sins may be secret to his own
soul three ways; by Nature, by Art, Secretum 1. Natura. 2. Art. 3. Iudicio.
and by the Just Judgment of God.

First, by Nature, when the natural conscience takes no notice for want of
light. Joh. 16.2.
You read of those that shall cast Gods people out of the Synagogue, and shall
kill them, and yet shall think that they do God good service, and all for
want of light, as it was with Paul when he was a persecuter. So you read of
strange things done by men and women in heathenish Rome not to be named for
want of illumination also. Romans 1. Act. 17.
Yea amongst us, are there not thousands that do things in public, and
private practice which they would not do if their consciences had light to do
better? Oh therefore shut not your eyes against that light which the Lord
offers in the word by the preaching of his faithful servants: for if
conscience be imperfectly sighted, there will lurk many a secret sin, which
will wound at the latter end.

Secondly, by Art, when the devil uses all his skill, his methods, and
depths, to make a sin secret to us. Ordinarily he uses four. Commendation
of others: thus pride is commended for cleanliness, drunkenness, for good
fellowship, duelling for gallantnesse of spirit, and then conscience sleeps,
and there lies a secret sin. Custom is a second, when men have long traded
in it, the guilt lies hid. Certe quum fuit mos, nec fuit culpa.
Thus came in the Polygamy of the Patriarchs: and thus bribery, extortion, and
common-swearing by God, or faith, or troth, come to be hid from conscience.
Yea, have not we done many things of custom about the Lords day, the Lords
worship, beside in our ordinary course, which upon better Information, we
rejoice now to be rid of. Profit is a third. When a course brings in gain,
lulls the conscience in the glorious sight of it awhile, and it falls asleep.
Then you may bring in profit enough and conscience takes no notice of it, and
thus lurks a secret sin. This makes covetousness to many, counting gain
godliness to some, and many lying, and cousening tricks in trading to be
secret sins seldom or never noticed to Conscience. Pleasure is a fourth.
When thoughts, words, or deeds have pleasure in them, conscience is soon
charmed to take no notice of them, and so grows a secret sin. Thus pride,
wantonnesses, drinkings, and a thousand dalliances are hid from the eyes of
this worlds wantons to be sins, thorough the pleasures of them; and this is
Satan's art to make many sins secret sins.

Thirdly, sins may be secret by the Just Judgment of God: When God justly
blinds the eyes of sinners, that will not come to Christ that they might be
saved, Joh. 5.
and gives them to blindness of mind, that seeing they may see, Romans 1.
and not perceive. Of this we have three fearful examples in Scriptures.
Gentiles whom God gave over to vile affections, to which they Indulged without
sense, because they basely dishonored God in their heathenish Idolatry. Jews
who because they shut their eyes against the beams of Christ's Majesty in his
preaching, and miracles were given up to call for his blood upon them, and upon
their children. This was a secret sin to them: 1 Cor. 3.
for if they had known, they would not have crucified the Lord of life.
Antichristian Christians, who because they receive not the love of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that they might be saved, God gives them over to believe lies that they might
be (without repentance) damned: and so all their foolish abominations, and
wicked Idolatries are secret sins to them. And thus have I demonstrated this
object, that the best, in some kind, or other, have secret sins.

these secret ones as well as you can. If you knew there were a thief lurking
secretly in your house, you would fear the danger, set watches, and search
every corner: much more must you do it for your souls which are in danger
every minute by your secret sins. Nature is blind; fly to the light of Gods
word. The course of the world is deceitful; walk in the path of the
righteous. Gods Judgment is grievous; provoke him not with the love of any
sin. The very thought of a secret sin, me thinks should make you watch, and
watch, again, and again.



very small, yet may they make great floods. A bird may be caught by one claw,
as well as by the whole body. A boy may creep in at a window, better then a
man, and let in the strongest thief that is to come in: so may the smallest
sin let in the greatest. Therefore I say to all, watch against secret sins.

If you will close with me now, and ask. How you may find out a secret sin? How
secret sins may be discovered. Prove. 28.
I shall give you the best light I can. First, you may find the^ out by fear.
Blessed is he that fears always: for such a man will not harden his heart.
Fear will make a man suspect every thing that has not sound warrant: and
thoroughly to examine all thoughts, words, and deeds. A man finds by the daily
loss of things, that a secret thief does hant his house. He is loath to
suspect those that are approvedly known to be honest people: but he will have a
strict eye upon every man else, and examine his business, his calling, Jon. 1.
his living, and his expenses, and so, at last he will discover him. So you
loose, every day, some strength in grace, some comfort, some peace, some good
or other. You will not suspect known inclinations, thoughts, words, or deeds
which are approved by the plain words of Scriptures. But if they be other
grounded upon ignorance, custom, profit, pleasure, honor, suspect and try
them, and out will the secret sins come which must be abandoned.

Secondly, thou may find them out, by drawing things from trade to truth. To
make a trade of any sin does at last make a sin secret. Commit it once, and
it is grievous. Commit it a second time and it is light. Commit it a third
time, and it is desirable. Commit it a fourth time, and it is delightful.
Commit it a fifth time and it is defensible. Commit it a sixth time, and it is
insensible, and so it becomes a secret sin. But now, draw it before the truth
of Gods word, and the light of it will show the foulness of it, and the
foulness of it will make it questionable: the questioning of it will open the
guilt: the guilt binds the conscience: and then, except conscience be
out-faced by impudency, it will be secret no longer.

Thirdly, thou may find them out by Repentance. Let the terrors of the
Almighty, the love of God, the blood of Jesus Christ, and the ghastly sight of
death and judgment work thy guilty soul but to repent, or to repent of one
sin, and thou will find out many secret sins. A penny is but a little
piece of silver in it self: but put it into a Payle of fair water, and it seems
as big as a shilling. So put thy least sin into a watery and penitent soul,
and it will be of a vast bigness. Thou shall see that in due proportion, and
thy eyes being exalted, and clarified, thou shall see, beside this great
Leviathan, creeping things, or sins, innumerable. For as in a train of
gunpowder; set one grain on fire, and all will be in a blaze: so let thy soul
be fired with godly sorrow for one sin, and thou shall quickly see those thou
never saw before.

Fourthly, thou may find them out, by bringing sin to a propimity, or
neernesse. As sinners put far from them the evil day: so they put as far
as they can from them the sight of sin. When they do it they are loath to see
what they do, because it is a work of darkness. It is a bastard brood betwixt
Satan, and a wicked soul; and therefore they remove it into the Country, as
far as they can; because they would not see it themselves nor suffer others
to see it. But bring it to a neernesse, and that which seemed no sin will
appear to be a sin, and what seemed a little one will be a very great. A man
upon the top of an high hill, looks as little as a child, but bring him down,
and you shall see his proportion. So bring sin to a present view, as it
wounds the conscience, defaceth Gods image, and hinders our traffic with our
God, we shall see it big enough to a miracle in it self, and all the brats, and
broods of many secret ones which are as a retinue, and hangs upon it.

Fifthly, thou may find them out, by declining such ways as bring the
judgment of God upon thy soul. If, because thou art filthy, God say, be filthy
still; and because thou will not see, God give thee over to blindness of
mind; thou will see but a few of thy sins till destruction come like an armed
man. It was a fearful speech, hear ye indeed, Esa. 6.9, 10.
but understand not: and ye see indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of
this people fat; and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see
with their eyes, hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and be
converted. Even so, it is a lamentable thing that Gods judgment should seal
thy eyes up, from seeing thy sins: for then thou may suddenly be wasted,
and made desolate, and removed far away from God. Therefore if thou would
discover thy secret sins keep off this judgment of God by sinning against
conscience. Conscience is Gods deputy: and the affront that is offered unto it,
is offered to God, who gave it authority over thee. Sin against it, and thou
sinnest against Gods officer; and God cannot but take it as an unworthy act. It
makes him angry, brings his judgment, and then where art thou? Thy eyes are
blinded, thy heart is hardened, thy sins, like Philistims, are about thee,
and thou see them not. Therefore decline this thunderbolt of judgment, and
God will be eyes to thy blind soul to see secret sins.

Lastly, thou may find out thy secret sins, by not believing the world,
and the ways of it. If thou believe the world, that will praise, and flatter
thee; and offer thee so much profit, pleasure, Excellens sensibile destruit
sensum.
and honor, that the splendor of these will dazzle thy eyes, and hinder the
sight of thy secret sins. There are none that live in strong Garrisons, and
feel not miseries abroad where sight is more clear, but are so flattered, and
fawned upon with the lust of the eye, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of
life (to patching, painting, and a thousand disguises (besides other voluptuous
sins) that their eyes are put out from seeing some open, and all secret sins.
Hence is it that they swim in the Kingdom of pleasure, and, with their eyes to
heaven, are going as fast as they can to hell in a feather-bed. But take heed:
believe not the world, and thou will have leisure to see that, and those secret
sins which will make thy heart ache.

Thus have I discovered some means by which you may know your secret sins. It
may be (now a way is broken open) better light may discover better helps. Yet,
in the mean time, take these, and use them, in Gods strength, to the glory of
God, and to the humbling of thy soul.

But, What we must do when we have found out secret sins.
it may be, you will ask me, when I have found them, what shall I do with them?
In general, you must make head against them. Let them not rest in you, as in
their proper places, but groan under their burden, complain of them to God,
cast off what you can, and use means to mortify the rest: But, more
particularly, Zach. 13.1.
look to Christ the fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness. When
Alexander the Great saw Jaddus the high Priest coming toward him, out of
Jerusalem in all his Priestly attire, he, of reverence, spared the City: and
when God sees you come toward him in the garments of your brother Christ, made
yours by faith, out of love to him, Psalm. 45.
whose garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, he will spare you. We read,
that when Antonius the Roman Orator did uncover the shoulders of Aquileus,
before the Senate, he caused the sentence of death to be reversed from him.
Much more when you show the fresh bleeding wounds, and merits of Christ rested
upon by faith, before God your judge, he will take off the sentence of death
from you, pronounced both against open, and secret sins, and give you life.
Therefore, in the bowels of Jesus Christ take a double prospect. First, cast
your eyes down into your selves, and see, what you can, all your secret sins,
whose guilts gape for vengeance, as well as open, being as contrary to Gods
nature. Next, lift up your eyes to heaven and see Christ appearing with all his
merits, as your Surety and Advocate, and making request for you, and rest upon
him with confidence, as those that are weary, and heavy laden under the
burden of sin, and are willing to honor the father in him his son, and
the work is past, neither open, nor secret sins shall appear against you to
your confusion.

David's Act about this Object, that is, Act: cleanse me.
his prayer, that God would cleanse him. Hear a word of this, Sins have a
pollution.
That even secret sins have a pollution as well as other sins, from which we
must desire cleansing.

That other sins have a pollution, is visible enough from many Texts, and
other grounds. The Text does speak, Psalm. 51.2. Ezech. 16.
Wash me from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin: and makes a fearful
description of the pollution of sin: and compares it to the vomit of a Dog,
and mire of a Sow: 2 Pet. 2.22.
yea, and makes God look with an ill eye upon his own till they be washed. Joh.
13.8.
As to other grounds, the Father of sin is an unclean spirit, Matthew. 12.
and the mother of it, an unclean soul. The property of sin is to make a blot
which is so running an infection that it makes you prone to fall into the same
sin a second time. And the effects of sin, are such stains, and pollutions,
such blots, and spots which stick to our persons, goods, and all utensils, even
to heaven it self (and therefore all creatures groan under the burden of
vanity) that they must be purged by fire. Romans 8. 2 Pet. 3.


If you say, though it be a pollution, yet it is easily washable. I would not
have you deceived: for then Christ should never have been sent, Who by himself
purged our sins; Heb. 1.3. Psalm. 51.2.
nor David would have prayed wash me thoroughly from my sins; nor would Peter
have wept so bitterly; nor would Mary Magdalen have taken such pains with her
tears, and locks at Christ's feet. If Abanah, and Pharphar, Rivers of Damascus
would have deeded it for Naamans Leprosy, he would not have been sent to
Jordan: nor should high means, and such strong pains have been used, for the
cleansing of sin, if a lesser matter would have fetched it off.

secret sins? the same nature. A man is a man, though he be hid among the
bushes, as Adam; A man is a man, though he lie secretly among the stuff, as
Saul. Yea, a child is a man in kind, though in stature he be not so. So is it
with sin: and therefore secret sins are pollutions as well as others.

David's sins: Oh cleanse me from my secret sins. The very thought of it may
make you tremble, when you find your souls under greater guilt: and the very
thought must make you careful to brush off the least rubbish. What ugly
creatures are we by sin? Job was so full of scabs, and sores, that he was
scarce known to his friends, and odious to his wife: So is every sinner in the
sight of God, who is a God of pure eyes, and cannot endure to behold iniquity.
Therefore say you as Peter to Christ; Joh. 13.
Lord, not only my feet, but my head, and hands.

But alas, you will say, my sins open, and secret, have been of so long
continuance, that they will not out. Be not deceived: it is God that must do
the work; not with soap, and niter, but with Christ's blood. Christ's blood must
do it, by way of expiation; the holy spirit, by way of immediate application;
faith, by way of isntrumental application; and holiness, and righteousness,
by way of infusion, repression, and mortification. God can make our garments
white by the blood of the Lamb. He that could create all things of nothing, can
create clean hearts, and hands, against all the world.

Only be sure that you cast your selves upon God for the purity of your souls
against all sins whatsoever, open, and secret. God will not cleanse one
except you be weary of, and are willing to cleanse all. One favored sin is
like a dead fly which corrupts the whole box of ointment. Have you souls to
cleanse? Have you a Savior to cleanse them by his blood, spirit, and word?
Engage your Savior to this work, and put the whole work to this Savior in his
way, or else you show but little care of your souls. Remember what one said
well of old: thou have two eyes, if one be out, the other will help thee to
see: two ears, if one be stopped, the other will help thee to hear: two hands, if
one be cut off, the other will help thee to work: two feet, if one be lame, the
other will help thee to walk: but thou have but one Soul, lose that, and lose
all; let that lie rotting in sin, thou let all thou have lie rotting.
Take heed: be not so desperately prodigal. Let this day be the last day of thy
presumptuous sinning: put thy soul upon God both against open, and secret
sins; and for these last, go in his way of righteousness, and holiness, and
cry out unto him; Lord, cleanse me from my secret Faults. Amen.

CHRIST EXALTED amongst men, OR, A Sermon preached in Covent Garden upon
MATTHEW. 13.45, 46. 45. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a Merchant man
seeking goodly pearls:

46. Who when he had found a pearl of great prize, he went and sold all that he
had and bought it.

THis is a Parable, and it lies in a goodly bed of many others. The whole
Scripture is like a garden: particular places are like a quarter, in which are
many choice beds for rarest flowers; and this Text is one among the rest.

This Chapter speaks, under fimilitudes, many excellent things concerning the
Gospel of Christ Jesus. The intertainment of the Gospel, in the parable of the
seed sown in four sorts of ground, whereof there is but one good. The
opposition of the Gospel, in the parable of the tares sowed among the good
corn. The power of the Gospel, in the parables of the Musterd-seed, and
leaven. And the prize of the Gospel, in the treasure hid, and this of the
Merchant man.

You therefore now (good Christians) are to attend, from hence, unto the prize
of the Gospel: about which I Will commend but two considerables.

1. The worth of the Gospel.

2. What a good man will bid for it.

The worth of the Gospel is here valued four ways,

1. By the place where it is; In the kingdom of heaven: not of the world.

2. By the person that trades for it; A Merchant man: no base beggar.

3. By the commodities of it; Pearls, of great prize: no rattles, nor babies.

4. By his Invinceable diligence about it; He seeks it, till he finds it: no
slothful sluggishnesse.

It being thus valued, the good man will bid highly for it: for he sells all he
has to buy it. Thus you have it in sum. I will not crumble out this bread of
life, and trouble you with intricate particulars, but wind up all in the two
propounded heads.

That the Gospel is of great worth: and to make good this, The Gospel is of a
great worth.
let us look to the four valuations of it: and by the place where it is, in the
kingdom of heaven. This represents unto us, the Church of Christ. The place of
the Gospel. Dan. 4.39.
God has a threefold kingdom: of Power, of which it is said, his kingdom is
from generation to generation, that is, the power, and sovereignty, which he
exercises over all: of Glory, of which it is said, Matthew. 19.33.
A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven, that is, into that
estate over which God rules by unmovable Glory: and of Grace, wherein Christ
does rule graciously by his word, and spirit, that is, his Church; and of this
he speaks here. This is the place in which this Merchant trades. And, in
truth this is called the kingdom of heaven in six respects. In respect of
Christ; because the Church is the royal seat of Christ: he is in it as in his
kingdom, Apoc. 1. Matthew. 28.
and walks in the midst of the seven candlesticks; and is with the^ always to
the end of the world. In respect of laws; because the Church has heavenly
laws, given by the King of heaven, and earth, even the everlasting laws of
Charity to God in Christ, 1 Cor. 13.
and all the Saints. In respect of the plants which are planted in it. All Gods
people in the Church are like trees planted by the rivers of waters, Psalm. 1.3.
but to be transplanted, in Gods due season, to heaven. The Church is the
nurcery depending upon the great orchard, or garden of heaven (where only no
weed grows); and therefore is it called the kingdom of heaven. of the
Inhabitants of the Church. They are, in their better parts Citizens with the
Saints, Ephesians. 3. Gal. 6. Col. 3. Ephesians. 2.
and of the household of faith, who have their conversation in heaven, and sit
in Christ in heavenly places. Jacob said of Bethel, so may we of the Church,
Genesis 28.17.
This is none other but the house of God, and the gate of heaven. As a great
house which has an hall for the family to meet in, and chambers to rest in,
for them who properly belong unto it: so is the Church and heaven. The Church
is the place of repast, Joh. 14.
and heaven of many mansions for rest. of the use that is made of it.
As heaven does help these inferior bodies three ways, by motion, and light,
and influence. Man.
like a company of pilgrims, 1 Pet. 2.
and strangers for the gathering together of the body of Christ out of all
mankind. It carried the law out of Sion, Esa. 2.
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, to bring us poor heathens to be of
the inheritance of Christ, Psalm. 2.
and to make the uttermost parts of the earth to be his possession. It is like
the heavens, and firmament, Psalm. 19.
which declares the Glory of God amongst every speech and language that Christ
may rule there. light to them that sit in darkness, Lumine. Matthew. 4.
and in the region of the shadow of death; giving the light of knowledge as
from the face of Jesus Christ, and the light of life, that others seeing their
good works, 1 Pet. 2.
may glorify God in the day of their visitation. Influences of grace from
their faith, hope, and charity, Influentia. 1 Cor. 1^.
to warm the hearts of those that belong to Christ, and to help forward their
new birth, and their growing in grace by the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Jam. 1. 2 Pet. 3.
Seeing therefore that the Church is the royal seat of Christ, has the laws of
Christ, is a nursery for heaven, is Jerusalem which is from above full of
heavenly Citizens, Gal. 4.
is the place of repast for Gods servants before their rest, and has such an
heavenly use by her motion, light, and influence; it is no wonder that it
should be called the kingdom of heaven.

Alps may see showers under them which they overlooke, but they come not at
them: and if you make use of this privilege to live in the kingdom of heaven,
ye may overlook your troubles, and not be disjoynted by them. The very
Philosopher could say, out of all well pleasance with his moral and natural
fancies, unto the tyrant that beat him in sunder piece-meale; Beat, Beat,
Tunde, tunde Anaxarchum non tundes.
thou shall not beat out Anaxarchus. He would keep his heart in the ruins of
his body. Much more may a Christian keep his life of faith when the outer man,
and all things belonging unto it does utterly perish, and come to this worlds
nothing.

to live like those that are in the kingdom of heaven. Some live in a region of
darkness: and some live as in the confines of hell. God forbid it should be
said so of you. Hear that fearful speech, the fearful, who dare not show
themselves for Christ, but fear man more then him, the unbeleeving, who, Apoc.
21.8. Apo. 22.15
notwithstanding the offers of grace, do stand out against Christ, and not
rest upon him for salvation, the abominable, who think and do abhorred
things, the murderers, who are cruel against Gods peoples bodies, and souls,
and whoremongers, who give themselves to the uncleanness of body, and soul;
and sorcerers, who give themselves to spells, enchantments, delusions,
conjurations, and witchcrafts to dishonor Christ, and Idolaters, who think to
convey Gods worship to him by Saints, and Angels, or Images, or any other
superstitious way, and therefore do fall down, or do other respects before
them with reference to God, and all liars, who forge and feign devises in
hypocrisy to bring in false ways in hypocrisy; or otherwise, are enemies to
that truth which belongs to their neighbors, shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire, and brimstone; which is the second death. Take heed:
and be none of these if you would live in the kingdom of heaven. Otherwise the
kingdom shall be taken from you, notwithstanding your strength and confidence,
and given to a nation which will bring forth amendment of life answerable to
this good kingdom of heaven.

(A Merchant man). The person that trades for the Gospel.
This does represent a true Christian in the Church, who is more honored by
the Gospel, then the Gospel can be honored by him. Yet the honor of the
Gospel upon them seems to reflect upon it self. For as the Merchants of Tyrus
are called by Ezechiel, the companions of Princes: so Christians are Christ's
fellows who trade for the Gospel, Psalm. 45.7.
which surely shows the worth of it. Mark then, Christians are Meachants.
That Christians are Merchants: and, truly, this may easily be demonstrated by
comparing what we find to be proper to Merchants, with that which answers in
a Christian state.

First, a Merchant has his sea, his ship, his Merchandise, and his losses: and
so has a Christian. His Sea, that is, the world. This tosseth him up, and
down, and he sees the wonders of God, in this deep. As John says in another
case, I saw before the throne a Sea of glass: Apoc. 4.
such is the world to the Christian, troublesome as the sea, and transitory as
glass. His ship, that is, the Church, which like Noah's Ark floats upon the
flood; and makes him cry out, as the Disciples in that storm, save Master, we
perish. His Merchandise, that is, true and heavenly wisdom, Pro. 3.14.
whose Merchandise is better then silver, and whose gain is better then gold.
His losses, that is, his houses, and lands, Mar. 10. Matthew. 16.
his father, mother, wife, children, life, yea, and his soul too if he do not
watch, and pray; and then, what will it profit him to win the whole world if
he lose his own soul?

Secondly, a Merchant lends upon adventure. He commits what he has to the
mercy of the sea; to the unsafety of a ship, which staggers up and down like a
drunken man, and is subject to many a storm, and leak, and to be endangered by
Pirates. So does a Christian. If he look for comfort he casts his burden upon
the Lord, and he knows not when he shall have it. If he look for faith, peace,
joy in the Holy Ghost, he casts himself upon the means, and confidently
adventures upon the truth of God. If he looks for better times, he casts the
Anchor of hope (because he has them not) and looks for new heavens, 2 Pet. 3.
and new earth wherein dwells righteousness. If he do but a work of mercy,
Eccles. 11.
he casts his bread upon the waters, hoping after many days he shall find it;
but he knows not when the return will come. If he find his expectation to be
fruitless, he says, as Peter to Christ, we have labored all night, and have
taken nothing, yet at thy command I Will cast down the Net; and at last finds the
success answerable.

Thirdly, a Merchant fetches in the commodities of every Country to enrich
himself, and his country: the gold of Ophir, the gummes and spices of Arabia,
and whatsoever he finds gain and glory in. So does the Christian. If any thing
be heard of, truly good, and honest, Phil. 4.
and of good report, he thinks upon these things to do them. He knows how to
distinguish betwixt base, and valuable commodities. If he meet with the
superstition of Spain, the pride of France, the lust of Italy, the drunkenness
of Germany, he hates them, even to the garment spotted of the flesh: but
whatsoever he meets withal that may be an honor to God, an ornament to the
Gospel, an edification to his neighbor, a comfort to his own soul, that he
brings home to enrich himself, and others with it.

Fourthly, a Merchant fetches all he has from far. As it is said of the good
housewife, she is like a Merchants ship, Prove. 31.
she fetches her food from a far. She fetches it from the earth to the
house, from the house to the wheel, from the wheel to lomb, from the lomb to
her household, her own, and her husbands back. Thus does she her husband good,
and not evil all the days of her life. So does the Christian. He looks to the
earth, to the Sea, under the earth, to the air, yea and to the Church, to epsy
what may be serviceable to him and his, but yet he goes further. He dares not
make use of any thing he has or can have, before he knocks at the gate of
heaven. He sees an open trade driven betwixt Christ, and his Church, and he
will not have gold, nor raiment, Apoc. 3.
nor eye salve, no nor a crust of bread before he have begged the comfortable
use of them from the great owner of heaven.

to stretch themselves upon beds of Ivory, Am. 6.4.
to drink wine in bowls, to eat the calves of the stall, to invent instruments
of Music like, and then to go to heaven in a Sedan, Coach, or Chariot as
Elias. The Kingdom of heaven must suffer violence, and the violent take it by
force. Thorough Sea, Land, and a thousand difficulties does a Merchant pass,
and so must you.

my yoke is easy? why then are we frighted with danger, and difficulty? Math.
11.
the yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden light. comparison of the yoke of
Moses, exacting perfect righteousness to justification, or else cursing. This
was insupportable, Act. 15.
neither we nor our fathers were able to bear it. These have a double yoke, in
penal statutes, and voluntary decrees and resolves. We would account our
selves most miserable if we should be galled with the easiest of them. In
comparison of Adams yoke, exacting the perfecting of the law of nature: Posse
perseverare non actum perseverandi.
for which he had a power of perseverance though not the act of it. Alas we
cannot do it; we have not this power; we cannot bear. In comparison of the
excellent helps we have to bear it. Christ puts into one hand, that we may pay
him with the other. Thus he says, they shall not depart from me. Jer. 32.40.
Therefore in these respects the yoke of Christ is easy. But in respect of the
duties of the Gospel, and our weak natures to perform them, it is very hard.
Put your souls to repent and believe: to deny your selves, to take up Christ,
and believe: not only to believe, but to suffer for Christ; to strive unto
blood, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live holily, righteously and
soberly in this present world; to beat down the body and bring it in
subjection; to mortify the deeds of the flesh, by the spirit; not to care for
the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it; and to walk in simplicity and godly
pureness, it is hard, very hard: therefore ye have cause to think of the life
of the Merchant. Yet this adds to the worth of the Gospel, that this Christian
Merchant trades in this Kingdom of heaven.

3 What does he trade for? The commodity traded for, is the Pearl Christ.
Pearls, especially for that pearl of great price, that godly pearl. This
represents Christ unto to you, who is the Diamond, heart, and soul of the
Gospel. And, in truth, Christ is this pearl in five respects. First, in respect
of rareness. Pearls are not to be found in every ground, nor Christ in every
soul. How many thousands are there where Christ dwells not? It is as impossible
not to see a lighted Candle in a clear Lanthorn, as not to see Christ thorough
the actions and motions of the body, if he dwell in the soul. But alas, in how
few is he discovered by life!

Secondly, in respect of the adorning quality. Pearls are accounted the
greatest ornament; but a pearl of great price is a greater yet: therefore do
you hang them out, on head, throat, breasts, and fingers. So nothing is such an
ornament to a Christian, Ephesians. 3.
as Christ dwelling in his heart by faith. As Albinus, for his worth, was
called Englands Library: Athanasius, the eye of his time: Melancthon, the
Phoenix of Germany: Augustine the Mallet of Heretics: so Christ is called the
Glory of Israel. Simeon could see in him nothing but salvation, when he was a
child. Talk not of other pearls; this is that only one: therefore Paul
desired to know nothing at Corinth, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

preciousnesse of Christ, pearls are accounted the most precious of things:
and a thousand worlds cannot procure Christ where he is not. All gold, and
gain cannot purchase his miraculous gifts; Act. 8.
much less himself, and his invaluable merits.

Fourthly, in respect of the breeding of pearls. If Naturalists say true (as
all Divines of all sides observe) pearls are bred in shelfish, which lie
gaping in the air. This air breeds these pearls, and by how much purer the
air is that blows then, by so much more pure, and generous are the pearls.
So, If I say as Paul, Gal. 4.
My little children, of whom I travel in birth again, till Christ be formed in
you: you will ask me two questions; What is meant by Christ's forming in you?
and, How he is formed? By forming of Christ in you, you may understand the
framing of your Judgments, affections, and actions into the Image of Christ.
You know him in his natures, uses, and offices to do you good. Esa. 53.
You know this righteous servant to Justify you, and know this Son Jesus
Christ to eternal life. Joh. 17.3.
You love him as the Savior of his Church, and Head of his Body, and put your
whole trust in him for all the work which his Father committed to him to do.
And you do (though not with equal paces) as Christ your Husband did in all
Moral Actions according to the measure of grace given. And now when men look
upon you in your state, and course, they may say, that you are as like Christ
as if you were spit out of his mouth, as we phrase it in our Proverb: Yea, and
you may say as Paul, Gal. 2.20.
I live, but not I, but Christ lives in me by faith. If you would know, how
Christ is thus formed in you? You open your mouth wide by enlarged desires
going after him, Joh. 3.
and the wind that goes where it lists, and no man knows whence it comes,
and whether it goes, that is, the spirit of the Father, and of the Son, the
holy Ghost, works it by the Gospel: and by how much more purely it blows,
without intermixture of your flesh, by so much more you are unlike to your
selves, and like to Christ this pearl of great price.

Fifthly, Christ may well be called this pearl of great price; In respect of
the Comparison betwixt the best earthly pearls, and the pearl Christ. Earthly
pearls make richer, but no better: for they that will be rich fall into
temptation, 1 Timothy 6.9.
and a snare, and into many foolish, and noisome lusts which drown men in
perdition, and destruction. Fulgent monilibus, moribus sordent.
They that shine with pearls, are too often sordid, and degenerous in manners.
But this precious pearl, Christ, makes all better who do enjoy him. Ephesians. 3.6.
If he dwell in our hearts by faith, we are graffed with him, into the
similitude of his death, Romans 6.
to dye unto sin; and into the similitude of his resurrection, to rise unto
newness of life. Earthly pearls can give no true contentment. As Solomon
says, Eccl. 5.10.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves
abundance, with increase. But if you can get Christ, Col. 3.11. Joh. 14.
he is all, and in all. As Philip said, show us the Father and it suffices: so
say much more of Christ for us. Col. 1.19. Joh. 1.16.
For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell: and of his
fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. Lastly, In earthly pearls
there is no assurance: either we are taken from them, or they from us. But this
pearl Christ shall be with us for ever; Matthew. 28. Joh. 10.
and none shall take us out of his hands.

Esau, I have enough my brother: but he that has him, may say with Jacob, I
have all things. If a man were as high as the Sun, Psalm. 19.
which comes out of his chambers, and rejoices as a Giant to run his course,
and should see the courses of men, he should see the soldier place his riches
in half a crown a day, and plunder. The Commander, in getting pay, or half pay,
which is too much for prolonging war. The Gentleman in keeping his estate, or
using it to the best advantage he can. The Tradesman, in using a thousand
shifts to bring in. The Merchant in importation, and exportation of the most
vendible commodities. The poor man, in getting by hard labor, meat, drink, and
apparel for him and his. The owner, in making the most of his own: and the
Farmer in a cunning disappointing of him, by pretense of rates, contributions,
plunders, excises, and many such pretty devices. But a few poor good Christians
only, to place their riches in their Savior Christ. Be you (I beseech you) of
this number. It will bring in all the commodities of the world that shall do
you good. Math. 6.33.
First seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all other
things shall be added unto you. For if God make you rich in his Son, Romans
8.32.
how shall he not with him also freely give you all things?

Secondly, lock Christ your pearl up in your hearts. Many will crowd him into
the narrow room of their heads: they are willing to know him. Many put him into
the narrower room of their tongues, they will talk of him, even of his great
things, and a man would wonder that there should be so much of Christ in their
upper parts, and so little any where else. But do you (good Christians) lock
him up in your hearts. Matthew. 6.
If he be your treasure your heart will be upon him: and if he be your pearl you
will lock him up there. Thence can his influences fly into all the parts of
his soul and body. Romans 10.
There is his royal seat (for man believes with the heart) and thence he
commands all your parts and powers, Romans 6.
to be weapons of righteousness unto holiness. Lock him up any where else,
and, as it fell out with the corn that was sowed in the highway, and stony
ground, Matthew. 13.
the Fowls of the air will pick him from you, or he will spring awhile, and
withdraw when he should do you most good. But if you lock him up there, out of
your belly shall flow living waters: Joh. 7.38. Joh. 4.13, 14.
for you shall have in you a well of water springing up into everlasting life,
which shall make you never to thirst after any earthly pearl, or vanity.

Thirdly, forget not where your pearl lies. There is not a Christian amongst
you, but will say, that he, and she has this pearl Christ. But, surely, if ye
have him, ye forget where he lies. If he lie in the tongue, alas, ye spit him
out at every word by your lies, oaths, blasphemies, idle, yea, and wicked
speeches. If he lie in your hands, Esa. 5^.
you throw him away by smiting with the fist of iniquity, and all
injuriousnesse. If he lie in your heads, you blow him out with imaginary
covetousness, pride, and uncleanness. If he lie in your stomachs, you vomit
him up, with gluttony, and drunkenness. Oh remember where he lies, and ye will
hug him with all reverence, and observance. He should lie in your hearts to
rule your whole man: and then you will say, 1 Cor. 6.
shall I take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an harlot?
Shall I take the head, the hand, the tongue, the mouth, the foot of Christ, and
make them the earthly members of pride, luxury, riot, whoredom, oppression,
wrong, or robbery? God forbid. You shall lose nothing by remembering where the
pearl, Christ, is in you: yea, you shall gain this, that either for love of
him, you will not; or, for fear of him, you dare not abuse any of your members
to sin.

Thus we have valued the worth of the Gospel, The invincible diligence of the
Merchant-man about it.
by the commodity which is traded for. invincible diligence of the Merchant man
about it. He seeks, and never leaves seeking till he find it. Our pearl Christ
is not found of every eye, but of the seeking and searching eye: Mark that, he
seeks, Col. 3.3.
and seeks, till he find. Paul says, that our life is hid with Christ in God;
therefore every eye cannot find him. Indeed, it is hid. Who would have looked
for life in such an outside as Christ had? In respect of state, he had no form
nor beauty; Esa. 53.2.
and when we should see him, there was no comeliness that we should desire
him. He was a poor woman's son, Mark. 6. Matthew. 11.
and a Carpenter: he was called a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and
sinners, a Samaritan, Joh. 8.
one that had a Devil, and did his great works by Beelzebub: he was accounted
one not worthy to live, and dealt with all accordingly, even to the cursed
death of the Cross. Must it not be a searching eye that must find the pearl
here? Who could find glory in his shame, life in his death, righteousness in
his condemnation, ransom in his captivity, innocence in his slanders, and
wisdom in silence, but the seeking Merchant-man? Christ is to be found in the
preaching of the Word: 1 Cor. 1.
for we preach Christ the wisdom of God, and the power of God. But look upon
it, and upon them that preach it, and tell me what you can see? In preaching
you see the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1.21 28.
to them that perish: especially when it comes not with excellency of speech, 1
Cor. 2.1.4
and wisdom; nor with the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the spirit, and of power. In them that preach, what can you
see, but at the best; a treasure in earthen Vessels laden with infirmities. 2
Cor. 4.7.
Here none can find Christ neither, but a seeking and searching eye. Such an
eye can meet with all the Arm of the Lord, Esa. 53.1. Romans 1.16. 1 These. 2.
the power of God to salvation, and the words, not of men (except when they are
such by self-fansies) but, as they are indeed the words of God: and so,
seeking, they find Christ the pearl. Christ again is to be found in the
Sacraments: when ye go thither, what do ye find? Water, Bread, and Wine. Poor
things to look upon. But a seeking and a searching eye, thorough these elements
looks to the promises, Acts 2.38.
repent, and be baptized, in the name of Christ for the remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the holy Ghosts gift: and this is my body, this is my blood:
and so, it, having Christ offered in a promise, does carry away Christ by
faith. It is plain, that had not the wise Merchant a seeking, and searching
eye, he could never find out the pearl Christ.

Therefore (Good Christians) be you persuaded seriously to trade for the
eye salve. Apoc. 3.17, 18.
Christ persuades Laodicea to trade with him for this commodity. Have ye not
this, you will be as blind as Agar, Genesis 21.
who had a well of water before her, and she could not see it. But have you
this, it is no less then the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16
or the supernatural light of faith by the Gospel, by which the soul, being
enlightened, sees things that neither eye has seen, ear has heard, nor the
heart of man is able to conceive. This gives you the light of the knowledge of
God, 2 Cor. 4.6.
in the face of Jesus Christ. are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
Col. 2.3. Esa. 25.7. 2 Cor. 3.16
He will swallow up the veil of the face; and will turn the heart to the Lord
that the veyl may be taken away. Christ only can do this. submission to the
word of Christ, that may dwell richly in you in all wisdom. Col. 3.16. 2 Timothy
3.15
If you know the Scriptures they will perfect your sight that you may find
Christ in all his ways. Therefore as the Psalmist said, of the Scriptures in
his time, open my eyes, Psa. 119.18
that I may see the wonders of thy Law: so do you say of a more full Scripture
now. Remember the Prophet Elisha's prayer for his servant, I pray thee open his
eyes that he may see: 2 King. 6.17.
so pray for thy self, Lord, that I may receive my sight; that when I seek,
according to thy will, I may find Jesus Christ and him crucified. The
happiness of a Christian stands in two things; in seeking of Christ and in
finding of him. Do you as wise Merchants seek him in his word, prayer,
sacraments: and I pray God, that as wise Merchants you may find him for Gods
glory, and your comfort: for no eye shall find him in an intelligent course,
but the seeking and searching eye.

Thus, What a good man will give for the Gospel.
now, we have valued the Gospel a little (for man cannot value it according to
full worth). The place where it is, is the Kingdom of heaven. The person that
trades for it, is Gods Merchant-man, who is no base one. The commodities of it
are pearls, and a pearl of great price, that is, Christ, and the invincible
diligence about it is seeking while it may be found, and while it is found.
Surely, it is of great value that is commended these four ways. A good
Christian sels all that he has for Christ.
let us see what the good Christian will bid for it, what this Merchant will
lay out that he may have it. Christ tells you, that he sels all that he has and
buys it. He can bid no more then what he has: and that he will part with,
rather then go without it. We must first sense it, and then settle upon it to
do likewise.

Here is a selling what he has, and a buying what he has not. Enquire first,
what he sells? It is not riches. For though we must deny all for Christ, in
the preparation, and disposition of our hearts, and in act, and deed too, when
we are called unto it: yet this is not the selling here. For Christ cannot be
bought with money: yea, many poor souls shall have him when they have nothing to
sell, before those that bestow all they have upon the poor, 1 Cor. 13.3
and give their bodies to be burned (into the bargain) and have not charity:
and besides, these are not our own, Matthew. 25.
they are but talents, and we, in them, are but usufructuaries for God. What
then must we sell? That which we have as our own. The goods of the body, Jam.
1.17.
mind, and world are from God; they are his: and we cannot justly sell what is
not our own. We have nothing that properly may be called our own but sin. And
therefore we are mightily troubled to ask, who will buy it? and how it can be
sold? Conceive it thus. The negotiation is wrapped up here in a similitude. As
in buying, and selling, there is a transaction, and passing of one thing for
another, one valued commodity for another: so in this; we must part with all
our sin to enjoy Christ the pearl. We are come to this issue, that we must
part with all sin to have communion with Christ.

We cannot drink of the cup of the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.21.
and the cup of Devils. We must part with one, to have the other. As the Jewish
Converts did part with their crucifying the Lord of life; Act. 2.
would not have his blood any longer upon them, and upon their children, but
were willing to ask, and take, better advice, and counsel, namely to Repent,
Mar. 16.16.
and be Baptized for the forgiveness of sins according to the condition of
the Gospel: 1 Timothy 1.13 Act. 9.
and as Paul though he had been a persecuter, a blasphemer, and injurious; yet
he was willing to acquit them all, and say, what will thou that I do? and as
Corinthians, though some of them had been fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10, 11, 12.
effeminate, abusers of mankind, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers
extortioners; yet were they well pleased to be washed, to be sanctified, in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God: so, in in like manner,
must all of us be willing to part with all our sins for fellowship with this
pearl Jesus Christ.

(Lord) this is impossible. 1 John 1.
He that says he has no sin deceives himself, is a liar, and there is no
truth in him. Peccata 1 Vactantia conscientias. 2 Quotidianae incurfionis.
Sins of inconsiderateness which daily make their inroads upon us. It is
impossible to be without these: and sins that wound, and lay waste the
conscience; as all sins deep died, which are scandalous and do look fearfully
upon the conscience, and flash the fire of hell upon the soul; such as I
reckoned even now, and the like. The least of all sins, if they be examined by
the Law bring the whole volley of curses. But if we part with all great sins;
and do make the least our enemies in our warfare (as well as the greatest) and
the object of mortification; and therefore we pursue them with desires,
resolves, purposes, endeavors, and groanings that we cannot be better; for
Christ's sake they have a pardon of course; and notwithstanding them, we shall
have the pearl of great price.

(dear Christians) if you would have the pearl Christ, be persuaded to sell all
you have for it, that is, part with the dominion of all sin. If you have any
care of your souls, any fear of God, any love to grace, any desire to have
fellowship with Christ, think upon this to do it. How happy was Zacheus, who
parted with all his oppression; and Peter, who parted with all his cursed
denial; and Ma y Magdalen, who parted with all her wanton whoredom for this
pearl? As therefore Jerome said of Hilarion, thou shall be the pattern whom I
will follow: so do you follow the best of Saints to sell all for Christ, till
you have cleansed your selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and
grow up to full holiness in the fear of God.

Will thou not forgo sin for a pearl? He that is filthy let him be filthy
still. Do thou think this to be a pearl, a chain of pride, whoredom,
drunkenness, gluttonny, hypocrisy, and the like? Then hearken to the issue:
thy soul shall curse thy will for consenting. Thy will shall curse thy
affections for guarding. Thy affections shall curse thy desires for pursuing:
and all these shall curse thy mind for inventing to thy eternal horror. let
us see that he is a pearl to thee. Live so to him that thou forsake the
dominion of all known sin: else he will say to thee at last, he that will not
that I rule over him, bring him forth and slay him before me.

FINIS.
THE SOUL SECVRED. OR, A Sermon preached in Covent Garden upon
PSALM. 31.5. Into thy hand I commit my spirit: thou have redeemed me, O Lord
God of truth.

BOth upon humbling days, and upon joyful days, it is ever good to Secure
our souls. In humbling times if we do it not, we will be swallowed up of
sorrow. If we do it not in joyful times, we will be swallowed up of sin.
Therefore we living in both these times, times of sorrow under the burden of
public calamities, and times of joy, when God flings in variety of particular
mercies to be as the first fruits of a larger harvest: it is our duty to engage
our souls to seek their own security without which we perish.

And that we may do it, it is a comfortable thing to know where our strength
lies. Sampson knew the hair of his Nazariteship, Hares know the thickets, and
Conies the stony rocks, so we must know some place of safety, or else we are
in ill case.

Look therefore upon David. He was in fearful troubles, and he knew that his
life was kept by committing it to God. Hence he beats upon it again, and again
in prayer (in this Psalm), as if he were never weary of asking the same
protection from his good God.

This David does not out of Poverty of spirit, Matthew. 6.7.
which brings forth these idle repetitions condemned by Christ: Matthew. 26.42.
but out of abundance of spirit, as Christ did in time of the hour of
darkness, to show the excellent use of repetitions (in this case), and to
clear fervency of spirit when a man would settle, and assure any good to the
soul.

Amongst other things commended to God, David's soul has a chief place in this
verse read. In which be pleased to consider,

1 David's confession of God.

2 David's profession for himself.

His confession is his foundation, and his profession is his building upon it.
We cannot build upon God except we know him. David (through the mercy of God)
knew him: and thence makes use of it in confessing him, 1 For sovereignty to be
his (Lord). Redemptoris jus 2. 1 Propinquitatis. 2 Proprietatis.
2 For the sign of it (thou have redeemed me); for he had the right of
propriety to him. Masters might redeem their servants, and Lords their vassals.
3 For his veracity (O Lord God of truth) thou have promised to deliver me: and
thou have been as good as thy word.


Hence I might discourse unto you of Gods Lordship over his people: and
therefore that they must walk before him with fear, and trembling, as those
that must give an account unto him of all their doings. I might discover more
fully the use that God makes of his Lordship: not to tyrannize, but to deliver
poor captives; which is an excellent president for those in high places. I
might press the condition that Gods people are subject unto, to be in bondage
to miseries: and the footing we have in God for our rescue, that he is a God of
truth, and will be as good as his word without exception.

But I pass these things; and only pitch upon David's profession for himself
(into thy hands I commit my spirit). From whence I present three particulars; 1
The Nature of the soul. 2 The Castle of the soul. 3 The Care of the soul.


that the soul is a spirit. The nature of the soul: It is a spirit.
If you refer the word (Spirit) unto a man, it signifies six things in the
Scripture. 1. The hid man of the heart: as when it is said, Joh. 3.6.
that which is born of the spirit is spirit, that is, is the new creature, the
spiritual part of man. 2. It signifies Conviction, as when it is said of
reprobates, that sin unto death, that they are made partakers of the Spirit,
Heb. 6.4.
that is, they are convinced of the truth of the Gospel. 3. It signifies
Sanctification, as when David prays, Psa. 51.11.
renew a right spirit within me, that is, give me a sanctified soul that I may
go right in thy way. 4. It signifies Extrordinary graces, as when it is said of
Stephen that he was filled with the Spirit, that is, Act. 6.5.
he had extraordinary gifts, and graces. 5. It signifies the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.6.
as when we are said to be Preachers of the Spirit, that is, of the Gospel,
which brings life to the soul. 6. It signifies authority, as when Paul says,
when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, 1 Cor. 5.3.
that is, by virtue of my authority. But among the rest it signifies the
soul, as when Christ says, Father, Luke 23.46.
into thy hands I commend my spirit: and Peter says, that Christ, by Noah, 1
Pet. 3.19.
that Preacher of righteousness, preached unto the spirits that are now in the
prison of hell: Heb. 12.9.
and the Apostle to the Hebrews calls God, the Father of spirits. In all which
places the word spirit signifies the soul.

God is a spirit. Joh. 4.
God is: because in it, it resembles God in his Immortality for time to come:
A part post. Genesis 2.3.
whereof there are three arguments in the creation of it: That it was, as it
were, breathed by God into man, and therefore more heavenly; and that it was
breathed for the breath of lives, Lives is spoken dually.
to signify the life of it hereafter as well as here. Therefore Christ's
convincing argument makes for it, Mat. 22.32.
that God is not the God of the dead but of the living: therefore though
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob be dead in body, yet they live in spirit: Domus viventium.
in which respect the grave is called the house of the living.

Hence give me leave to make a threefold exhortation unto you. If the soul be
a spirit, provide spiritually for it: Join it to him that is spirit: and
think of a better place for it then here. First, provide spiritually for it.
If a child ask a father bread, Matthew. 7.9, 10.
will he give him a stone? If he ask him a fish, will he give him a serpent?
will he not provide for him according to his nature? Deal you no worse with
your souls, and it will be the better for you. I read of an usurer, who loved
his bags so well, that, when he died, he chewed, and swallowed, and being asked
the reason; he said, that he was eating up his money: and when he saw that he
must dye, he offered all to his poor soul, to stay with him. This was a poor
provision. Be you wiser; and seeing your souls are spirits, let them have
spiritual provisions out of Gods Word.

Secondly, seeing the soul is a spirit, join the soul to him that is a spirit.
Simile nutritur simili.
Every thing is nourished with that which is proportionable unto it. The Lamb,
so soon as it is yeaned, runs to the sides and dugs of the Ewe: and the
Chicken, newly hatched, covets the warm body and feathers of the Hen, without
which it thrives not so well: so let your souls run to God that is a spirit. He
is the father of spirits, who will provide for all of his image and
superscription. The Apostle has an excellent expression, He that is joined (or
glewed as Joyners do boards) to the Lord, is one spirit. 1 Cor. 6.17
It would be a glorious privilege to be one spirit with God, that we may be
made partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
in the efficacy of it for our salvation. This is the way, join your souls to
the Lord. They are joined to the world, and so they rot in a thousand vanities.
They are joined to the flesh, and so they perish in sin. Oh let them be joined
to the Lord by faith in Christ, working by love, and then, with the whole
Church, 1 Cor. 12.12
they shall be called Christ, and, according to their measure, they shall fare
no worse then Christ did, Romans 8.17. Luke 24.26.
first to suffer, and then to enter into Glory.

Thirdly, seeing the soul is a spirit, think of a better place for it then
here. You are apt to say with Peter, Matthew. 17.
Master, it is good for us to be here: let us build Tabernacles. Eccles. 12.
But Solomon tells you, that the spirit returns to him that gave it. Let it
learn the way now by having an heavenly conversation: for it was not made for
low places. Fire is the driest, and lightest element, and it desires to be
above; and therefore it will burn up all combustible matter which lies in the
way: So, your souls are the divinest parts; where should they desire to be,
Phil. 1.
but to be dissolved, and to be with Christ? therefore secure that place for
them. Be acquainted with Gods infinite love, and mercy in Christ. Rest with
confidence upon those merits, and that intercession which are presented to God
the Father in your room. Love the Lord and the appearance of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Walk before God, 2 These. 3. Genesis 17.
and be upright: That, when you dye, you may be received into an everlasting
habitation, a place suitable for an highborn spirit. Consider the order of
creation, and disturb it not God has set the heaven above, and the earth
beneath, and has so framed us, that our heads, and our hearts are above, to
think upon heaven, and to love, and move to it; and our feet, and heels on the
earth, to teach us to set earthly commodities at our heels, as the newborn
Christians laid their money at the Apostles feet. Act. 5.
It is fearful to see how ungodly men do disorder this course. They set heaven
at their heels, and all earthly glory at their head, and heart, by thought,
loves, and a thousand imbracings, as if heaven were below, and earth above. But
take you heed. This is not the way to secure your souls; they are spirits, and
should have better places then you lodge them in. If you will be so earthy, and
neglect your own salvation; there is a worse place, even that where Judas is,
Act. 1.
since he went unto his own place, where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing
of teeth.

Thus you have the nature of the soul: Castle of the soul, The Castle of the
soul is Gods hands.
Gods hands (into thy hands). Mark then, that the safety of a soul lies in Gods
hands. Properly, the hand is an outward bodily instrument for actions and
executions. But when it is referred to God, he has three sorts of hands,
Correcting, Revenging, and Protecting hands. His correcting hand is spoken of
in these words; Psalm. 38.2.
Thy hand presses me sore, that is, thy correction. His revenging hand is
spoken of in these words, Jud. 2.15.
The hand of the Lord was against them for evil: that is, his corrections, and
judgments were out against them for their sins. But his protecting hand is of
two sorts, Eternal, and Actual. The eternal protecting hand of God is the
counsel of his will. Of this it is said, that the Jews did to Christ
whatsoever Gods hand, and his counsel determined before to be done, and no
more. This is a safe hand, without, and above, exception: for as many as were
(...) this hand, and so, ordained to eternal (...) believed. It will preserve
them to his everlasting Kingdom. The actual protecting hand of God is either
Extraordinary, or ordinary. The extraordinary protecting hand is that which he
holds over some, and but at some times: as when it is said, Ezekiel. 1.3.
the hand of the Lord was upon Ezekiel, that is, the spirit of prophecy to
guide, and protect him in his prophetical way. The ordinary protecting hand of
God is threefold: either General provision, Psalm. 104.28
whereof the Psalmist speaks, thou fillest with thy hand every living thing,
that is, thou providest for them: or special favor, whereof Luke speaks,
Luke 1.66.
and the hand of the Lord was with him; that is, Gods special favor was with
John Baptist from his infancy: or the spirit of strength, as when it is said of
Elias, 1 King. 18.46.
the hand of the Lord was on him; that is, he strengthened him with boldness,
and protected him against Ahab and Jezabel. The issue is this: when God does
provide for, favor, and protect the soul, therein lies the safety of it. And
it is no wonder when you do consider what manner of hands Gods are. What manner
of hands God has.


Holy hands. They touch nothing in love, but they are the better for them. As
when God sent an Angel with a coal from the Altar, to touch the lips of the
Prophet Esaias, Esa. 6.
he was the better for it, and was very willing to go on his prophetical
errand: so, much more, when God touches our souls, shall they be filled with
all grace, and goodness, of which they are capable. loving hands: Cant. 2.
therefore the Church cries out to Christ, put thy hand under: As when Ananias
put his hands upon the blind eyes of Paul, Act. 9.
they cured him, and scales fell from his eyes, and he saw plainly: so when God
touches our souls, acts of grace, love, and bounty follow. For love strives
for such acts, and all safety. powerful hands. The little finger of the Lord
is above all: Romans 8.
therefore, if God be on our side, who can be against us? His hands will guard
us by a mighty power in all good. blessing hands. As Christ, when he was to
ascend, lift up his hands and blessed his disciples: Luke 24.50.
so Gods hands are blessing hands. If he touch the Mountains, they shall smoke,
as the Psalmist has it: so if God do but touch our souls, the send forth the
fumes of Gods grace and glory. Therefore seeing Gods hands are holy hands,
loving hands, powerful hands, and blessing hands; it is no marvel that the
safety of the soul does lie in Gods hands.

reason. They are like the ancient Quaeristae, who would go in Religion no
further then reason guided them. Others put their souls into the hands of the
world. If that can dandle them happily upon the lap of it, they look for no
more: though at that time that the world leaves them, Animula vagula blandula,
quae nunc abibis in loca?
they cry out as that Emperor did, Alas, my poor silly, wandering soul, whither
now away? what will become of thee? Nay, others put their souls into the hands
of the Devil, and do not know it. They walk in their own counsels, and follow
their own lusts blown up by Satan. All these are but slippery places. Therefore
(Good Christians) take heed that ye put not your souls into any of these hands.

Secondly, be you exhorted to be such, as may hope for such hands. You will not
put foul things into fair fingers: nor foul souls into the hands of that God,
whose eyes cannot endure to behold iniquity, much less his hands to touch it.
We had an holy man, Mr. Bolton of Northhamptonshire.
who lived amongst us. When he had all his children about him upon his
deathbed, he charged them, that they should be careful not to appear before
God, with him, without regenerated ^^^^ s. He knew, and saw, that there was no
presenting of them into Gods hand without purity. If we come unclean to him, it
will be woeful in the latter end. If God shall say, I will not touch you, this
will kill in the day of death, and judgment.

Oh, think upon this, ye that forget God! You that live in Associated
Counties, or in the strongest Garrisons, can do something to send out Troops,
after Troops (with a little pay, or pay now and then) who do with free quarter
and contribution, eat up all places where they come. In the mean time, you
(altogether insensible of the miseries of your brother Joseph) can live in all
luxury, letchery, and pride, (I mean too many of you). Take heed. I wonder,
what kind of souls you will commend to God when you dye; if they be in that
state, and posture wherein you live! I pray God be merciful unto you, Act.
8.22.
if it be possible your sins should be forgiven you. For Gods clean hands
will not receive unclean souls.

We have thus viewed the Nature of the soul, and the Castle of the soul. The
nature of it, is, to be a spirit: the Castle of it is, to be in the hands of
God: but now we are come to the care for the soul. David gives a President of
the best care of it in type, and Christ makes it good in truth: both of them
commit it to God. Paul says, 2 Timothy 1.12
I know whom I have trusted, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him against that day. It will be well for all of
us, if we can take the same care for our souls as these have had. Lay it to
heart, that we must have a care of, and for the safety of our souls. The care
of, and for our souls. Deuteronomy. 4.9.


Keep thy soul diligently: and it has been practiced by Gods people. Jaacob,
when he was wonderful busy before his death, in his prophetical will, looks
unto his soul, Genesis 49.6.
and says, my soul, come not thou into their secret. He would be loath his soul
should be in traffic, and trade with such ungodly, cruel men, as Simeon and
Levi; though they were near, and dear unto him. And David was at it again, Psa.
25.20.
and again. He pleades with God, O keep my soul: and, when he saw it out of
order, Psa. 42.5.
he chid it, why art thou so heavy, O my soul, why art thou so disquieted
within me? And when he saw it backward to do its duty to God, he calls out unto
it; Ps. 103.1, 2.
My soul praise the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name. My
soul praise the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. This shows what care he
had for his soul, and so must you (Christians).

You will put me to a double question; when we must have such care? and why we
must have this care for our souls? You must have this care always. Satan is a
great Merchant for souls. What ever he pretends, he means the soul. He will
offer the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, but
he means the soul. He takes unmatchable pains for souls. He compasses Sea
and land to make a proselite: he compasses the earth to and fro, to catch at
advantages. He adventures all he usurps for souls. As he said to Christ, All
this will I give thee, Matthew. 4.
if you will fall down and worship me: so he will offer you any thing, let who
so will perform it. He makes his riches lie in souls. If thousands fall into
sin before him, and ten thousand at his right hand, then his riches come home;
Therefore it behooves all good Christians to have a care of their souls.

As you must have a care at all times of your souls; so especially when
prosperity, adversity, and death comes. Prosperity comes with a cup of deadly
wine to poison you: As at that time when the persecution of the Primitive
Church did cease, and days of ease came in, there was a voice from heaven
heard, saying, Hodie effusum est venenum in Ecclesiam.
this day poison is powered out into the Church; so when prosperity comes, look
to thy look to thy soul that it be not bit with a Cockatrice. Adversity comes
with a ghastly countenance to affright us from God: and therefore, as Job cast
his eyes from his troubles to God, and said, though thou kill me, yet will I
trust in thee: so must you for the good of your souls. Death comes and brings a
Catalogue of sins reaching from one end of heaven to another. Lose the soul
now, and lose it ever. He is not the best Archer that draws the strongest
Bow, and shoots the longest length, but he that gives the best lose: so he is
the best Christian who has so lived that he does dye well. Therefore be sure
to have care of your souls in prosperity, adversity, and when death comes.

If you will ask me, Reasons.
why you must have such a care of your souls? 2 Cor. 5.19 A participle of the
present time, signifies a continual term of time without intermission.
Let us make man, and his resolution and fiat, let it be done, and it was so:
but now, God was in Christ, Reconciling the world unto himself. He was about
it, and is doing of it still, and will never end till the world ends. By how
much harder it is to make a soul good, by so much more you must care for your
souls. Secondly, Matthew. 16.
nothing can make up the loss of a soul. Christ says, What will it profit, if
a man gain the whole world and lose his own soul? All that cannot make it up to
us. By how much greater the loss of a soul is, by so much greater care must
you have of your souls. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Thirdly, the soul is not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver, and
gold, but with the precious blood of Christ. By how much more precious the soul
is, by so much more must you care for it. Fourthly, there is no proportion
betwixt the whole world, and the soul: Satan will give all ^^ r that, Matthew. 4.
and think himself to have a ^^ od bargain, as you see in his offer to ^ rist.
That which is more worth then ^^ e world you must have a special care ^^ f:
and such are your souls. Lastly, if you ^ ose your souls, the loss must be
made ^ p not only to you, Mic. 6.6, 7.
but to God whose ^ hey are: and I pray tell me, wherewith ^ ill you come
before God, and bow your ^^ lves to the most high God? Will you come ^ efore
him with burnt offerings, with Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil? Will you give your
first born for your transgression, and the fruit of your body for the sin of
your soul? All will be found too little to make up the loss of your soul to
God: and surely, that which is not in the power of man to make up, if he lose
it, must be kept with all care.

Hos. 4.15.
Though Israel play the Harlot (says Hosea) yet let not Judah sin; and
though all the world be careless, yet be you careful of your souls. Josh.
24.15
When Joshuah saw the wickedness of Israel, he said, Choose you this day whom
you will serve; but as for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord: so say
you, let others suffer their souls, like Lambs-grease, to melt away in sin;
yet I will have a care, yea, I will have care to keep my soul by Gods hands.

whole care of men, what could he find? One cares for the back, another for
the belly, a third for worse: but who cares for the soul? That lies rotting in
a thousand lusts, though thou know not how soon thou shall say to
corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art my brother and
sister. Indeed you come to the Congregations, pray devoutly, hear reverently,
note diligently. But will ye be all ear? All for carrying in, nothing for
carrying out from the strength of prayer, and preaching? To eat much, and have
no evacuation will soon stifle, and suffocate nature: so the poor soul will be
choked, if, from the strength of what it feeds upon, it do not work for the
Grace of Christ, and against the sins of nature and life. Therefore try, as
you love your souls, try your care.

Secondly, be provoked to be more careful for your souls, and, as Solomon
says, Prove. 4.
Guard thy heart with all diligence; so say I of thy soul, which is all one.
Say as one when he was tempted to do fearful things against himself, Had it
not been for this soul, I had not been here now. Charles the fifth, when he was
solicited by a great Counselor, Antonius de Lena, to cut off all the petty
Princes of Germany, and then he should rule alone, Anima, anima.
cried out, My soul, my soul. Nay says that Tiger, if your Majesty have a
soul, give over your Empire. The Emperor had a care of his soul: this
bloud-sucker had none. God keep our King, and all Christian Princes from such
Counselors in these distracted days, and ever. Let men prize souls at never
so low a value; have you a care of yours.

The soul is for Christ to live in by faith. The soul is the Master-wheel of
all our acts. The soul is the chief seat of the image of God. The soul is the
maker of all our actions good, if it be good it self. So much good soul as is
in every act, so much goodness is in it. Therefore care for your souls.

Remember that Christ died for souls. He emptied himself of glory for souls. He
swet drops of blood for souls. He cried out, I thirst, for souls. What? He that
endured so much, could not he endure a little thirst at the last? Yes; yes. He
thirsted that all the prophesies might be fulfilled for the good of souls. Esa.
53. How we must care for cur souls.
He made his soul, a sacrifice for sin for souls. Shall he do so much, to show
so great care, and will not you care a little for your souls?

how shall I care for my soul? the old man, and put on the new, yea, be changed
in the spirit of your minds. Let Christ dwell in your souls by faith for this
work. This has a preserving power, to keep thy soul from rotting, Joh. 3.16.
he that believes shall not rot and perish. Keep thy soul from the lusts of
sin. Put it to a daily task by meditation, and prayer: for an idle soul will
be a sinning soul. 2 Samuel 11.
Let thy soul work all her works before God: think that he stands by with a Pen
of Iron, Jer. 9.
and point of a Diamond, to engrave all thy sins, and virtues for memory.
Acquaint thy soul with death. Job. 18.14.
This is the King of terrors, which will rouse thee from the dead sleep of
security. And lastly, 2 Cor. 8.5.
Give thy soul to God in Christ. O Lord, when thou committedst my soul to me in
Adam, I lost it. Oh trust me no more. As thou will not trust me with my life
(for thou have hid my life in Christ) so trust me not with my soul. Thou have
bought it with a price: 1 Cor. 6.
therefore I humbly, and heartily, and trustingly, commit it it into thy hands:
oh keep the soul of thy servant.

Now the God of Peace trample Satan under your feet shortly, for the good of
your souls: and he sanctify you in body, soul, and spirit, that ye way be
found blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

Glory be to God on high, and in earth Peace, and good will toward men.

FINIS.

