AN ALARM To the City of LONDON, By the Scotch Army: Discovering most of the
damnable, detestable, and execrable Plots of the siding, overruling, and
prevalent Party in both Houses of Parliament, the Army of Independents and
Sectaries, etc.

1. To abolish the established Protestant Religion. 2. To subvert the
fundamental and known Laws of the Land. 3. To imprison and murder their
King. 4. To burn and plunder the City of London. 5. To destroy Monarchy, and
settle all power upon themselves. 6. To enslave all people that are of a
contrary judgment to themselves.
With their Resolutions for the King and Kingdonmes, and the settlement of the
known Laws, and bringing all Offenders to exact trial.

Aug ye 29 Printed in the Year, 1648.

An Alarm to London etc.
WERE you not by divine justice blinded, and hoodwinkt with more then ordinary
stupidity, and carnal security, you would at last see the manifold mischieves
and miseries that are coming on you, and your City; and in time provide for
your safety, and be no more gulled with flim flams, and rest satisfied with
delusive expressions, soft oily answers to your Petitions, smooth silken words
like Sirens songs to entice you to destruction: -- As Gentlemen, if you
consider what Declarations, Protestations, Oaths, and Covenants, those
Libertinismes have taken before God, and have broken, and altered their
Principles, according to their success, it will plainly appear before God and
man what Jugglers they are to both; therefore hear what they say, [ Declar.
Parl. May 26. 164^.] They doubt not that it shall in the end appear to all the
world, that their endeavoures have been most hearty and sincere for the
maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the Kings just Prerogatives, the
Laws and liberties of the Land, and the Privileges of Parliament; in which
endeavors (by the grace of God) they would still persist, though they should
perish in the work.

Does it not appear to all the world how they have fulfilled this promise
concerning Religion; have they not suppressed the government by Bishops (as
ancient as Christianity it self) the Book of Common Prayer, settled by five
acts of Parliament, compiled by holy men, Reformers, and Martyrs, and practiced
in the time of four Princes, though the Law formerly put one Penry to death
[in Qu. Elizabeth's time] for writing two scandalous Books against Church
Government, who was indicted, araigned, attainted of treason, and executed at
Tyborne.

Does it not appear to all the World that this is true, and does it not
appear to all the World that they have against this profession, not only
altered the true Protestant established Religion, confounding all Government
and Orders, but introduced and tolerated all manner of Heresies, Sects,
Schisms, Anarchy, Libertinisme, and profaneness, and the sam^ Law as well
deserves the same end as their Brother Penry did.

2. Does it not appear to all the world, how they have mai^ayned the Kings
just Prerogative or power, when against the oath of Allegiance, the oath of
Supremacy, and their own oaths and Covenants; they have divided His politic
capacity from his natural person, and his power from his person, have wrested
the sword out of his hands, with which he was invested withal at his
Coronation, the Militia (that is the power of making peace and war) and is
trusted only in the hands of the King; not only by the Laws of the Land, but by
God himself, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: as one observes
excellently, saying, The sword of the Lord and Gideon is but one two handed
sword, and when wrested out of the hands of the King by Rebels, then God takes
it into his own hands, and with it will wound the hairy scalpes of his
enemies. It appears that they have (against their professions) wrested this
sword out of his Majesty's hands, and seized not only of his Majesty's Revenue
and Shipping, but of his Forts, Ports, and Magazines of War, which is no other
but high Treason by the Law; that they have counterfeited his Seal, signed
Writs, and granted Patents and Commissions, and made Officers, Justices of
Peace, and of Assize, without his consent, divesting the King and the Crown of
the chief power and government, and established it upon themselves; voting no
more addresses to be made unto his Majesty, nor Messages to be received from
him; intending with the Army (as appears plainly by their last Declaration) to
settle a government without the King, and against him, and against all that
take part with him. This makes all your Petitions for a personal Treaty, and
for his Majesty's return, to be so unwelcome to them. This appears to all the
world, and a little more, if the God of this world has not blinded us, That to
involve the people in this most execrable, damnable, and detestable Apostasy
from their faith and allegiance to God and the King, and more subtly to carry on
their plots and designs to ruin Monarchy, they have framed a desperate
engagement, That no manner of person whatsoever, shall adhere to any other
authority, but the two houses of Parliament; and to renounce the King his
protection and government, and to submit to the usurpation of the Rebels at
Westminster, or else to be adjudged as Traitors and Rebels to the State. And
this desperate engagement is by their Proselites carried into all the Counties
of the Kingdom, and pressed upon the people in all Corporations. This is
enough, and too much for the Kings Just Prerogative, which by the grace of God
these zealous hypocrites would endeavor and persist in, though they should
perish in the work. Here let the World behold their equivocations with God and
man, and whether their own words be not a thousand witnesses against them, and
their base disloyalty, and manifest perjury, be not laid open to all the world,
and whether this would not move all manner of persons to oppose and fight
against them, both for the defense and maintenance of the King and Crown, and
the established Government in the Kingdom.

3. How they have maintained the Laws and Liberties of the Land: in the end it
appears what Laws they have kept or broken: or whether they have not
abrogated all the good and wholesome Laws of the Land, and in^roduced in their
places, a new brood of pernicious and banefull Ordinances, that have not the
least reference to any of the ten Commandments? have they not put diverse to
death against Law? have they not against Law, the better to foment this ungodly
war, and to enrich themselves, raised Excize, Contributions, Sequestrations,
Fifth parts, Twentieth parts, Meal-money, Sa^e of plundered goods, Loanes,
Benevolences, Collections upon their hypocritical Fast-dayes, Impositions upon
Merchandises, Guards maintained at the charge of private men, fifty Subsidies
at once, Compositions, sale of Bishops lands; and as if all this were too
little, Coals four shillings the chaldron, Grindstones and Salt, and a
thousand more tricks to impoverish and enslave free subjects? what guide have
the subjects of this Land to direct them but the known Laws? What means
could they use to discern what to follow, or what to avoid, but the known
Laws? which requires all persons to assist their King? never before this age
were any people or Nation criminally punished for what the letter of the Law
commanded them?

Now fellow subjects, does it not appear to the world, what their endeavors
have been for the maintenance of the Protestant Religion, and the Kings just
Prerogatives, and the Laws and Liberties of the Land; and consider how the
case stands between his Majesty and you? Is not his case your own? have ye
not been both alike abused, gulled and oppressed? Is not he deprived of his
Crown, and are not you deprived of your liberties and estates? Is it not
plain that his Prerogative and your freedom must fall together? and is not a
speedy settlement, the only means to preserve them? and is there any
probability of settling till his Majesty be settled in his Throne? is there any
way to effect this, but by accommodation with his Majesty? And though all the
loyal hearts of the Kingdom have given them to understand by way of Petition,
that they are very sensible of their own and his Majesty's distressed
condition; yet how loath the Houses are to come to a personal Treaty, and how
the people have been put off with delays, appears to all the world, and if a
Treaty voted, yet upon their own conditions, that his Majesty shall have a
restraint upon him, and remain still in the hands and power of the Army; and
therefore judge with what honor or freedom i^ can be to His Majesty; Now at
this present not allowing Him so much as a Secretary or Clerk to write for Him
though they have such superfluity themselves.

4 For the Privilege of Parliament, at the beginning of every Parliament all
arms are or ought to be forbidden to be born in London, Westminster or the
Suburbs, no guard or force to be upon them, or compel them to any thing, yet
the King is suffered to be driven away by Tumults, so the Parliament is no
Parliament, when the King with whom they should parley was driven away, nor can
it be a Parliment so long as His Majesty is restrained as a prisoner, for the
Houses severed from the King have no more power then the body has being
severed from the head, there is such an incorporation between them, ( viz.
King, Lords and Commons) that they cannot be dissolved without the destruction
of all likewise between the King, the Laws and Kingdom.

Again, How have they maintained the just Privileges of Parliament when they
have chosen Members that were not resident in the County or Buroughs for which
they were elected? besides they have ejected Members lawfully chosen, that have
sitten and elected new ones of their own faction in their places, against all
Law or reason; for they cannot remove a man out of the House unduly returned,
much less a man returned duly. Whether this be the just Privilege of
Parliament, to eject whom they think good and elect others, besides keeping
strong guards of their army about them to hinder the people from prosecuting
their just aggrievances, killing and murdering them, will appear to all the
world, (whether by the Grace of God) (as they profanely take his name in vain)
they have not persisted and endeavored what they promised for the Protestant
Religion, the Kings just prerogatives, the Laws and liberties of the Land, and
the Privileges of Parliament: Now let them consider, whether for acting
contrary to their first Principles they deserve not to perish, and make good
their own words concerning their former expressions, when they still persist in
these execrable Designs.

That they intended to poison, pistol or murder the King, appears to all the
world; considering but these few particulars; 1 By seizing upon His Majesty's
Person at Holdenby without the consent of Parliament.

2 When they made the engagement of the people (entitled, Peoples freedoms,
Soldiers Rights) at the Rendezvous near Ware, where they had plotted the
dividing of the Army; and had hired one to kill the King, being then at Hampton
Court.

3 When this plot faild that Cromwell and Ireton (as appears to all the world
by Major Huntingtons Narrative) in person juggled so with His Majesty (the
scene lying too near London to murder him at Hampton) into the Isle of Wight
on purpose to murder him there, which appears to all the world if we consider,
that he was sent to Hammond an Independent, and one whose hands formerly had
been imbrued in innocent blood.

4 It appears to all the world by the examination of Mr. Osburn, Mr. Dowcet,
and another witness against that inhumane Regicide Major Rolf, who by Cromwell
and his confederates in the Army and Houses was set on to pistol, poison, or
otherwise do (as the Independents say) that acceptable work, and remove the
wicked from his Throne: Before this Martin, Challenor, Corbet, Mildmay, and two
or three more of the unclean spirits of the House forged a Declaration, taxing
the King with murdering His natural and dear Father, and other shamfull and
wicked slanders and obloquies to make His people hate him.

5 That they voted no more addresses to be made unto Him nor messages to be
received from Him; which was nothing else but to un-King His Majesty to murder
Him, and then to settle all power upon themselves, after they had seized on all
His Revenues, His Forts and shipping, what can any fool think they could take
more from Him but His precious life? This appears to all the world.

That they intended, nay do yet intend, to plunder, destroy and burn the City
of London as appears by these few Observations. 1 By their cowardly taking
Southwark, and afterward the City of London. 2 By imprisoning the Aldermen, and
chief merchants. 3 By diverse Testimonies in Letters and witnesses from Windsor
to the Common Council of the City, that they intended to plunder and burn the
City. 4 Which may appear the more evidently by Skippons privately listing
Independents every night, with all the privacy possibly can be imagined, having
whole Troops of Horses in all readiness placed in holes and corners of the
City and Arms in Independents Houses. 5 By Fairfax lying still before
Colchester, till Skippou has listed his number, and then to join with him for
the Design. 6 By Wollaston, Atkins, Ven, Pennington (that enjoy great offices
from the Parliament) and others sending continually away their goods and money
into the country for security.


Therefore we make no doubt but the City of London will join with us for the
restitution of his Majesty, and their City from apparent danger, the Laws and
freedoms of the people, the establishment of true Religion, the bringing of
all offenders to exact trial of the Laws, the obtaining of a personal
Treaty, an act of oblivion, and the Soldiers their arreares, and every man his
own, with respect to be had to tender Consciences; also for procurement of the
final dissolution of war and discord, the joyful acclamations of a happy and
welcome Peace: these are our only aims, which we will prosecute with our lives
and fortunes, as God shall help us.

And we doubt not of the cheerful concurrence of all good people whatsoever
in his Majestyes 3 Kingdoms, England, Scotland and Ireland, for the finishing
this blessed work, that it may appear to all the world that we aim not at any
private or particular Interest, but a general good.

FINIS.

