DEVOVT RHAPSODIES: IN WHICH, Is Treated, of the Excellency of Divine
SCRIPTVRES. ALSO, Of
GOD, His Attributes. Plurality of Persons. Absolute Monarchy.
ANGELS, Good, Bad, Their Power.
How the Bad Fell. Tempt Man.
MAN, His Fall. Beatitude.



By J: A: RIVERS.

Haec omnia Liber Vitae (Contine=t) and Testamentum Altissimi, and agnitio
Veritatis. ECCLES. 44. LONDON* Printed by Thomas Harper, for Daniel Friar, and
are to be sold at his Shop, at the Red Bull in Little Britain.

To the Reader.
WHy according to the custom of the present, and former ages, I have not
dedicated this Poem to some particular person, my motive was, because I am
engaged to many, and therefore would pay ^bligations to many: To others though
not much known yet to their worth, and virtue, I would give a testimony, and
express affection, and perform all these more then with a ceremonious letter
which, though in the choicest words, are like, at least no more then Trajans
Wall-flowers, as our Constantine in derision of that Emperors too frequent
inscriptions on City walls, gates and bridges, adagis'd: For whereas the former
are but Innes of memory, fame, and affection; written volumes, especially in
Greek and Latin (if good) are Mausoleums, Pyramids, constant h^bitations and
dwelling Palaces for fame love, and gratitude. In adressing the Sermons to
particular personages, I did not think much election was necessary,
distribution of Poems being like sitting at a round table, where the placing of
the salt makes not the upper end of the Board; and great Augustus by his own
Minions Vngil and Horace, was often saluted after mean Gentlemen of Rome.

Being for many years detained in a miserable and chargable Prison, to divert
my mind from too serious thoughts of public and private calamities, made me
undertake this employment. The public griefs were the condition of these
lament^ble times wherein our Nation has imitated that man of whom Gerson the
Chancellor of Paris makes mention, that seeing a f^ie on his friends forehead,
with an axe (intending to k^ll the poor fl^e) dashed out his unfortunate
friends bra^nes; such have been the cures in Civil and Ecclesiastical
affairs; both the Church and Commonwealth being more rent, and distracted by
these irreligious, and uncivil combustions, both made more diseased and
Epidemically sick, by these unnatural, and desperate remedies.

Private griefs were, that being with diverse noble Gentlemen for six years
prisoner in a comfortless, and chargable Goal, our means of livelihood taken
away, our friends impoverished, or altogether undone, by plunderings,
sequestrations, compositions, and imprisonments: Notwithstanding, contrary to
the Laws of God, which forbid, Exodus 23. to boil the Kid in the milk of the
Damme; contrary to the laws of this Realm, which though severe enough, yet
provide, that any may freely relieve, and support any person of our profession
being in prison: Contrary to the honor of this Nation, to the dignity of this
City, the authority of the Sheriffs, to whose care and charge, this prison is
by his Majesty concredited: Contrary to all our hopes, and expectations of the
subjects rights, and liberties, the vindication and assertion whereof have by
so many Vows, Covenants, and Declarations, been promised, sworn, and avowed:
Finally contrary to all these Laws and Titles, which have, and should make
Bidentals reverend, and bestow immunity on them; the efficacy and equity of
which Laws Mr. Pym (reputed a great patriot) with such Eulogiums extols, that
the sacred Majesty of great Britain, (who Though now in clouds, yet he shall
shine more bright,
Then petty Comets, that eclipse his light)
with approbation has vouchsafed twice to mention them: I say notwithstanding
all these Laws, titles, hopes, and expectations, we even in prison have been
diverse times plundered, our books, though bought publicly, and allowed to
be sold by authority, as English Bibles, English Chronicles, Grammers,
Virgils, and the like, most injuriously (may not I say felloniously?) taken
from us, and for moneys redeemed, again with the same violence and injustice
retaken by those Harpies of the Common wealth, and for more moneys redelivered,
though some to this day most injustly detained Our slender housholdstuffe
pilfered, our chambers rifled, considerable sums of money (which should have
protracted the miserable life of above forty captivated persons) seized on; for
want of which, many Gentlemen of birth, and heretofore of quality, have been
thrust into the Common Goal, where they, and diverse others in the other
several wards, have dyed in much want and misery. We have made our addresses,
if not for justice, yet for compassion, but our mediators and presenters of our
petitions (though recti in Curia) were examined, if they were not of our
profession; and being threatened as Malignants, have been deterred from further
prosecution in our behalf, and so all supplications, and expectations have
been rendered fruitless.

It Is one of Senecas Gnomicall, and commended distributions, that Magna pars
vitae elabitur male agentibus, maxima nihil agentibus, tota aliud agentibus: By
which division (if right) my writing this Poem may be censured: Howsoever, I
may profess some part of my study and care, in the prosecution of it, has
been as to offend no Religion, so no Person: and therefore my hopes are that no
particular will proclaim himself so much faulty, as being not accused, he
will take exceptions.

Some faults escaped in the printing, may be so amended.
Page 1. for sealed, read sealed. p. ^. for history, r. histories. p. 7. for
silly profane, r. since prophaner. p. 10. for living. r. lining. p. 12. for
weapon. r. weapons* p. 24. for know, r. knew. p. 28. for alterations, r.
altercations. p. 36. for God, r. good p. 57. for before, r. ^ore. p. 6. for
precious stones, r. pibble stones.

To his honored Friend, Mr. Rivers, Upon his Holy Rhapsodies.
Who's this? who like the rosy-fingred Morn,
Is thus from Mountain unto Mountain borne:
Whose mystic locks charged with the drops of nights,
On us below hurl beams inrich't with lights?
Is it that soul, which having Jordan past,
Pure Jordan, made such an ambitious have
To pass like Israel through the bloody maine,
In hope another Baptism to obtain?
It is the same, whose Rhapsodies unfold,
Sweet Raptures, Raptures which in cups of gold,
To us Caelestiall Constellations hold.
Would all thus Poetize, who would refuse,
To celebrate the strains of such a Muse?
George Fortescue.

To his honored Friend, Mr. Rivers, upon his excellent Poemes, the Devout
Rhapsodies.
MYsterious Rivers, whose each sacred ^yne,
Shows that thy ^use is absolute Divine;
And cannot with impurity be stained,
Or with obsc^a^e conceptions be prophain'd.
But in Meanders, holy turns, and winds,
Delightful to thine own, and Readers minds.
He that will give thee a deserved praise,
Must crown thy head with groves, not boughs of bays.
James Yate.

To my much honored and Candid Friend, Mr. Abbot. alias Rivers, upon his
Devout Rhapsodies.
Was thy Quill made oth' towering Eagles wing,
Who soaring in the bosom of his King,
Saw what was done in Heaven? straight thence descends,
And sings our Churches lot, and state of Fiends.
Thy Poem speaks all these, which I read ore,
With wonder and delight, but which was more,
I know not of these two, and dare proclaim,
Who understand it, will commend the same.
Nor do I envy it, because it is thine,
Yet were vows potent; I could wish it mine.
Ad eundem Decasticon.
QUale tuum pectus, quae Musa humana superna,
Dum pariter lustrans, Tartareasque domus?
Caelicolas cantat cives, ipsumque sedentem,
In solio Dominum; Terrigenasque Deos.
(Hinc amor invitat justos ad pnemia terret,
(Dum legitur) sceleri debita, paena malos.)
Sed been cum cantas haec omnia; sperne quid ausint,
In Librum Rabies invida, tempus redax.
Scilicet haec Thamesis, resonabunt carmina Ripae,
Dum placido Thamesis, mur^ure Lympha fluit.
George Cox.

To my worthy, and learned Friend, Mr. Rivers, after the reading of his
Religious Rhapsodies.
THat thou in noblest strains of Poesy,
Do teach the myst'ries of Theology:
And raisest humane souls from sordid earth,
Up to that blessed place, whence they take their breath.
I leave to them whose learned spirits know,
How best their knowledge, and thy praise to show.
And only saying, I the Work admire,
Wish that all those who Christian bays desire,
With just attention, and clear sight would look,
Each hour, or day, on thy sweet, mystic book:
So they, reformed by virtue of thy Muse,
No more shall Wit, and Poesy abuse.
John Chapperline.

To my dear Friend, Mr. Rivers, upon his Rhapsodies.
HOw often write I Verses? often tear
My Verses? still imagining they were,
Unworthy thy brave Muse? begin again:
And search in every corner of my brain?
Barraine; I bite my P^^; my servants rate,
When the fault lies (...) in them, but my Pate.
Shall I who have so many Verses writ,
In every Theme impl^yd my active wit;
And having promised Verses, not perform
What I have promised? here again I storm,
Yet reassume my Quill: write: All men know;
That to my noble Friend I Verses owe:
Protest against my self, so great's the sum,
Of thy due praise, my Muse is banquer out, Dumb.
H. W.

DEVOVT RHAPSODIES.
To the Right Honorable, Philip Herbert, Earl of Pembroke and Montgomerie;
And to the Lord Philip Herbert his Son.
Liber Primus.
Sermo Primus.
The Argument.
As branches do the Root, Rivers obey
The Ocean, smaller lines their tribute pay,
And homage to the Center, as the Sreames
Shot from the Sun confess themselves his Beams;
So must all Authors, all prescriptions fall
Unto the scripture as Original.
Wrangling Philosophers may boast,
The Scriptures only speak the Holy Ghost.
Their Schools decay, what is grounded on our Texts
Shall flourish, maugre Gentilisme, and Sects.
OUr sacred Volumes are the sealed springs, Cant. 4.

Where choicest Nymphs, as they of heavenly things
Sing ditties, b^th themselves: from the white Mount
Of Liban issues this perennall Fount,
Which prooves an Ocean where the silly sheep
May wade securely, St. Aug.
yet the same's so deep,
The Elephant may swim, and if he range
Too f^r be swallowed in the Gulf: so strange
And perilous are these streams. Was not a Wave,
Nestorius venturde on Nestorius grave?
And did not Arrius perish in these seas,
Whilst he durst sail midst the profundities.
And wanted a sure Pilot: What Saint Paul
Has preached and writ to instruct and save us all,
Turns to the ruin of illiterate men, 2 Pet. 3.

As they pervert the meaning of his pen.
Who pry too nearly into Majesty,
Struck purblinde by the rays of glory die. Prove. 25.

It Is true: Pharphar and Abana are streams
Of Syria; 4 Reg. 5.
but if leprous Naaman dreams,
They Will cleanse his spots he erres, and must obey
The Prophet, and to Jordan take his way:
There glide the waters which he washing in,
Shall cure his leprousie, and cleanse his skin.
Poems must from this Crystal Torrent spring,
Else they will, as did those bitter waters bring
Diseases to the Drinker. Exodus 15.
Wanton books,
Hurt souls, as did the body Maras brooks,
Like dangerous Basiliskes a passage find
To dart their poison at the inveigled mind.
What? Are our Rils drunk up? Our fountains dry?
That we must to such durty puddles fly,
First shall no Tapers grace the spangled heaven,
The rough Alps lie as the smooth Valleys even:
Ere who are conversant in sacred writ,
Shall fail of Themes to exercise their wit.
Are not the Fire, the Air, the Earth, the Seas,
The Spheres, the Saints, the Angels above all these.
A still supplying Subject? then to wade
In the Divine Idaeas whence God made
Of nothing every thing, and with one word,
Could existence to all he made afford. Genesis 1.

The Birth, Psalm. 14^.
the Infancy of this Vast Frame,
Increase, decrease, restoring of the same.
All Sciences of things above, below,
(More then Philosophy did ever know)
Are objects of Gods Book, and easily yield
To all invention a most spacious field.
We grant prophaner Authors have given Rules
Of living well, kept open natures schools:
But this book Gentilisme exceedes as far
As the bright Sun at Noone some lesser Star.
Why do we study? Wherefore are we joined
So fiercely in dispute? To adorn the mind
With Truths, and as the flint and steel conspire
In issuing forth the Element of fire:
By joint collision, so from much bickerings
In disputation Aletheia springs.
Volve and revolve your Sages Volumes, you
Shall not be certain one opinion's true
Amongst one hundred. What their History?
Patcht up with idle fables and with lies. St. Austin. lib. de Doct. Christiana.

What Is noxious there our Scripture reprehends,
What Is crooked rectifies, what is faulty mends:
What Is good makes better, and you need not fear
Any report or false position there.
Millions of Lines about this Circle are,
And though they mutually may seem to square,
And contrary as East to West, the South
To North; yet all meet in the Center Truth.
What can be thought or writ by any quill,
Is in our Bible specified, and still
New matter draws the curious Reader on,
And makes the Learned to reflect upon
The sense of deeper Mysteries, as he sees
Here wondrous actions done: and out of these
Draws moral applications, and can fly
To Allegory, and Anagog^e.
From the same words and deeds quadripartite,
Senses are fetched, and every one is right.
Who but the Mother of us all Gods mind
Could in few words such strong allusions find?
And then what he has in Aenigma's put,
Make curious wits enueleat the Nut?
GOD is a copious Magazin; men are
The dispensatours of his precious ware,
And heeres such plenty that from every clause,
New mysteries the ingenious Reader draws.
Go juggling Mountebanks, cry up your toys
Amongst the Rustiks, Idiots, Girls, and Boys.
Ye winding Sophisters expose your tra^h,
Wrangling Philosophers together clash.
Frame-Sophismes, Syllogismes, describe, devide,
Bring in essentials to define, decide
By Demonstrations Problemes. What Is all this
To what we are made for, everlasting bliss?
Study four years the ten Predicaments,
Mean while forget the ten Commandments;
What profits Stoicisme? What Plato's wit
To your salvation? What the Stagyrit?
That Cynik Sage expresses, though heel hide
In's Tub, and currish manners far more pride
Then Plato in his Pomp. He who gave rules
To Courtiers, had a Caesar in his Schools
For a Disciple, Seneca.
found another way
How Princes Gnomically should write and say,
With some Atheistik Documents spoils all,
Commending such who on their own swords fall,
And with a violent Fate themselves deliver, St. August. Laudantur ubi non sunt
cruciantur ubi sunt.

From pain or shame, for such shall live for ever
In pain, and shame. These wisemen are commended
Where they are not: but their pains shall nere be ended
Where they are. Lets ask where are their followers now?
Who to defend their marcid Axioms vow?
Who now adore strict Zeno's Apathie?
Who for smooth Epicure will Champions be?
Where are Diogenes scholars that can scrub,
Sleep, wake, eat, drink, live, die; All in one Tub?
Contented with a scrip, a dish, a staff,
More mad themselves at others madness laugh?
Surely such men have been; and made a show
Of Learning, had Disciples, and did know
Something indeed, although not much; but what?
Is it Times fault? All almost are forgot.
No: Sap. 4.
time is blameless, for a Bastard sproute,
Though watered much seld fixes a deep root.
Our Scripture is a more Celestial seed,
Not Philosophik Darnell, or that weed
That grows in one day, in the following fades;
But planted by Gods hand, Mat. 13.
shootes forth, the blades
Increases so, that in the branches rest
Your towering Eagles, and make them their Nest.
(Our glorious Doctors over whose head a Dove
Hovers, and dictates Lines of Wit and love)
Wit in expounding Mysteries of our Faith,
Love, urging to perform what Scripture says.)
From bough to bough these soaring Eagles spring,
Chanting the Trophies of their slaughtred King
Who (by his passion worthy made) revealed
This Sacramental Volume seven times sealed. Apoc. 5.

For our Lamb butchered, straight the Vale was rent,
Which 'twixt the Temple, and the HOLIEST went.
The Tables, Mat. 27.
Aarons Rod, Luc. 23.
and Manna there
Reserved, by immolated JESUS were
To be brought forth, Heb. 9.
the Law more plainly taught,
Grace freelier give^, Number. 17.
deeds more prodigious wrought.
These Tables, and what appertains to them
Were preached, were taught, received in every Realm.
These are the silly grains of Mustard Seed,
That tasted once such operations breed. Mat. 23.

Converted Nations, builded Churches, and
Planted soule-saving faith in every Land.
How is it possible poor Fishermen
Should convert Nations, erect Temples, then
Leave their Disciples, who when they were dead,
This saving Doctrine every where should spread?
Be Trumpets and the Pipes of heavenly grace,
And in all Regions JESUS Banners place:
Be daily Actors of stupendous things,
Maugre all Sects, and persecuting KINGS?
First does the Synagogue recalcitrate
Against this Progress with intestine hate.
But Truth prevailing, the Apostles shall
Interre her in a glorious Funeral,
And jointly every Ceremonious Rite
Takes sweetrepose in darkness, but delight.
Then Pagan Kesars dreading the overthrow
Of their false Gods, against the true GOD show
Their indignation, and with fire and sword
Pursue, destroy Professors of his Word
Revealed, Exodus 7.
and writ: But as did Aarons Rod
Turned to a Serpent by the hand of God,
Devour the Sorcerers Wands by Magic spells,
Also made Serpents, yet not tumid swells,
So this divinelie-vigorous Mustard Seed
Shall eat up, and has swallowed every weed,
That through the world by Gentilisme was sown,
(Their Doctrines, Phanes, and Idols overthrown.)
No honors now to Moloch, Camos given,
None to Astarthe, 2 C^^on 3^.
and the Hoasts of Heaven.
Their maimed Dagon falls before the Arc,
Does Hamon bleate now? Jer 19.
Does Anubis bark?
Paphus and Cyprus no more Venus follow, S^pn.

No doubtful answers uttred by Apollo.
These have, all Sects successively must perish,
Our heavenly seed eternally shall flourish.
To the Right Honorable, William, Lord Powis, and Sir Percie Herbert his Son.
Sermo Secundus.
The Argument.
We mean to treat of GOD, what shall we take
For Essence, and a Definition make?
Can he who no ways will be circumscrib'de,
By any terms of Learning be describ'de?
Can he be specifide by words of Art?
When thought cannot imagine the least part
Of his perfections. Yet we will something write
From Gods own Lucid Lantern borrowing light, Ps. 119.

For silly profane Authors Buzzards were,
By this directed, we our course must steer.
SO sacred are our Records, no profane
Hand must attempt to touch em under pain
Of severe chastisement. Exodus 18.
So Sinais Mount,
Nor man nor beast approach when Moses on it
Receives the Law; and the same Prophet must
Pull off his shoes in reverence of that Dust,
Where God shall show himself. Ib. 3.
He answers well,
Who being commanded by his King to tell
What God was, and desiring still more days
The Question to resolve, yet still delays:
Truly confessing that the Thesis grew
Harder, and harder, and the less he knew.
The more he studied. Theodectes a Tragike Poet.
Who writ Tragedies,
For his presumption forfeited his eyes.
And Theopompus lost his health, because
One in his Stories, Aristaeas one of the ^2 Translators.
the other Moses Laws
Durst bring upon the Stage, both are restored
To sight, and health; their fault by both deplored.
Yet who are humble with a prosperous gaile
In Cephas ship shall through the Ocean sail,
And in the depths behold Gods Attributes,
How this perfection, that negation suits,
To express some thing of a Diety,
(More then created understandings high)
And character as follows. GOD'S a Being,
That ever was, and shall be; a mind seeing,
All in the Mirror of himself, A description of God.
where all
Future things, and possible (though these shall
Never have existence) boast Eternity,
And in the Godhead all whole sharers be,
GOD every where is present, no where seen,
He fills the whole world, and had there been
Myriads of worlds, GODS Immensity.
he would them all have rounded,
Himself not compast, bounded all not bounded.
Fancy some vast imaginary space,
The Center, and circumference of that place
Is GOD. Imagine thousand vaster, there
GOD must be'e involved the surrounding Sphere*
All intimate to all things, yet all without
All things; though nothing can be, if God be out.
GOD is an Entitie most simple, yet
Millions of discrepant perfections meet,
As Lines Concentrike in this SIMPLE ONE,
And without all these we will acknowledge none:
For GOD: where all are with a bended knee
Offer our Vows to that sole Majesty.
Admire his immutability, Immutability.
the same
Still in himself, yet changing still the frame
O'th world with various Motions: Can love, hate,
Be pleased, displeased, yet still keeps the same state.
(Exteriors only altered.) Stanil amazed
When man's and Angels thoughts to the height are raised
By The light of Glory, yet inferior far
To penetrate what Mines of Treasures are
Hid in that supreme Nature, Omnipotency.
Power, and Skill
To make ten thousand worlds, when ere he will,
More beautiful then this, increase the store
Of Angels numberless, and make 'em more
Glorious beyond esteem. Can any Law
Limit his Arm? When this world's but a straw
Compared to what he can: turn when he please
To their first Chaos, the Air, the Land, the Seas.
Dissolve the Heavens, reduce to the old Abyss,
Of nothing, whence they came, those Bands of his
Own Court, the Angels, and when this is done,
Be full as happy in himself alone.
For GOD did not those glorious spirits create
With purpose to increase hi^ blessed State:
Who was so copious, as he was before,
Nor do their Legions multiply his store.
Repute Earth, Angels, Heavens, but a mere story
To speak a Deities more extensive glory:
And when he made this ample fabrike, He
For our good would declared Majesty
Ineffable; in all express a will
Of doing good, a power to do it, a skill
To do it in the best manner, as much Art
In the production of each several part,
As of the whole, (an Artists skill being waigh'd,
Not after what, but how the work is made.)
A Child may be begot, brought forth, and cry,
But without more solicitude must dye.
Gods Providence his Creatures must attend
Else were they made to little, Divine Providence.
or no end.
Soon would this world to the first nothing fall,
If wisdom should not nurse, and govern all.
The Machine a disordred Ataxie,
General confusions, and combustions be.
What Is Provideence? A fair exterior Robe
Encompassing, and covering the whole Globe,
And all things comprehended in it: Beside
It is the living of the worlds inside;
Ordaines, rules, acts, for ends peculiar; yet
This Queen does not her Majesty forget;
But makes the secondarie causes know
They are her Agents, and obedience owe
To what she lists. Could the intensive heat
O'th flaming Furnace make the children sweat, Dan. 5.

This Providence a while suspending fire
From action maugre the fierce Tyrants ire? Jo^.

Did not she make at Josuahs vows the teeme
O'th posting Sun a while shoot every beam
From the same Zenith, and in lieu of night,
Mortals stand gazing at a Noonedayes light?
This prescribes Rules, ordains Ends, gives Laws
Constant to the universe, makes every cause.
Help it is associate: Nothing does in vain,
But first disposing sweetly without pain
Brings forth what nature would: Yet most appears
Where liberty of action domineeres.
And with so deep a wisdom enterweaves
Humane affairs, that though she freedom leaves
To several purposes and different ends,
Yet happily effects what she pretends, S^p. 8.

Attends to all, yet so to every one,
As if save that, she notice took of none.
To dictate, write, read, hear, all in one hour,
Made Caesar wondered at, Origin much more.
This world of creatures Gods eye looks upon,
Governes, provides for; yet for all as one.
Observes as well what is in the Cottage acted.
As what votes are in the Senate House transacted.
Searches intentions, searches hear^s and reins,
What Is done for public, Ps. l. 7.
what for private gains,
Has admirable fetches. Jer. 11.
Did not Gods
Providence make B^nadad and John Rods
Of Achab, though that an Idolater
Jehu a Jew, Reg. 19. 10.
yet a false worshipper:
These scourges were of Gods revenging ire,
And vengeance acted, cast, into the fire.
This lets bad men bear swaie some Months, or Years,
And then excited by the cries and tears
Of the oppressed, with a potent hand
Frees a distressed and captivated Land.
So Tribes return to Palestine again,
And Portugal shakes off the yoke of Spain. Nehem.

How this was done the following lines shall speak, Esdras.

And how man's Arts to Providence are weak.
No end of Taxes, of Excises none,
How to get money still is thought upon;
Water excis'd, and Spanish Lordans are
So greedy, they would tax even the free Air.
True Patriots are suppressed, and only they
Advanced for Officers, who have the way
To grind the Land, and out the poor man's throat
Get for Corbona an extorted g^oat,
Harpies oth' the Commonwealth, who procure hate
To an easy King, and cosen King, and State.
All tattred the other day, Banc^^apts, poor John's,
Now prance it on their foote-clothes, are great Dons:
These are dispersed through the whole Kingdom, and
Their Arbitrary power for Law must stand,
They are seconded at Court, if any take
Exceptions, are so potent, they can make
Him a dangerous Malignant, have him sent
For up, plagued in purse or imprisonment.
Thus groans poor Portugal, knows not to whom
She should address her self, no help from home.
St. Julians Fort is in the Spaniards hands,
All Castles kept by Military Bands.
No Lovers of their Country weapon bear,
But sent to Italy, or Flanders, there
A Gods name let 'em fight the ^^ore are slain,
The more firm is the Monarchy of Spain.
Now steps in Providence, no more quoth she
Of bondage; I will set this Nation free,
And make D' Almeida with the Mello's plot,
And never cease till they have freedom got.
And take that crown from the third Philips Son, Philip 2.

Which D' ALVAS Arms for Prudent Philip won.
Could humane wit or strength? But sole GODS hand,
And PROVIDENCE (that can events command)
So soon, Eccles. 10.
so easily with no loss of blood
Redeem a Kingdom from long servitude?
But we must know the Kings, and Peoples sin
Translates the Natives, Reg. 4.
and brings strangers in.
So Roderigo'es fault brought Moors to Spain, Edward. 3.

Our Britain by the Saxon, Henry. 5.
Norman, Dane,
Subdued; Henry 6.
the French-mens sins for us have fought,
And what but our own sins fetched in the Scot?
So when the Conquerours crimes weigh down the scale,
They make their Vassailes over them prevail.
When wise, and just men fall, Fools, Tyrants rise
On the heavenly disposition with squint eyes
We look, Ecclesiastes. 10.
and cry an ERROVR of the Prince,
When rightly it is a supreme Providence.
Lets higher go. Jud. 8.
Abimelech combined
With Sichem, and with Mello, all are joined
To ruin Gedeons house. The Olive Tree,
The Vine, the Fig Tree put off Majesty:
Tell the Trees plainly; we will not lose our ease,
And for your sakes so much our selves displease.
We shoot, we spring, we flourish, bring forth fruit
Which with the Spring, the Summer, Autumn suite
Please God, and man: what are great Monarks shares?
But as their Realms, so multiply their cares.
Only a Whin, a Bramble will be great,
Takes complacence enthroned in Royal Seat;
But what is the sequel? Sichemites shall rue
That with their Tyrant Gedeons Race they slew,
And by such murders chose Abimelek Prince,
Gloried in him: Now steps in Providence.
Which Joathan fortold 'em. God shall send
From the dark shades of hell some subtle Fiend,
That shall the Subjects, and the King divide,
Make them hate his Tyranny, him their pride:
They upbraid him with his Brethrens murder, though
They were associates in the murder: (So
Eager on mischeife, we first rashly do,
At leisure see how foul the fact's, then rue)
He who was raised by them, rases their Walls,
Destroys their Town, and by a woman falls.
(Heavens not permitting such League should last long,
Which for Foundation murder had and wrong.)
Mark Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and private States,
And you will observe not Fortune nor the Fates,
But GODS transcendent Providence bear sway,
And always sin with shame, or sorrow pay.
As Providence and Power, so his science is
His Bounty, Mercy, Justice, an Abyss
Of infinite Perfections. We Will conceive,
Millions of worlds in the Divine Essence, leave
Nothing which may add beauty, give delight
To the understanding, hearing, and the sight,
Angels surmounting sands oth' Ocean shore,
Of populous Nations a far ampler store,
Then should of Atoms be, The Beatificall Vision.
had this vast Frame*
Nothing but distinct Atoms in the same.
Now, what a pleasant Vision were? If you
Saw all these objects in one simple view.
Millions of Angels, Men, Beasts, Plants, rich Stones
All Minerals, heard all Symphonies at once.
Beheld all Colors, Fields, Woods, Trees, Flowers, Fountains,
Oceans, Springs, Rivers, Valleys, Plains, Rocks, Mountains,
Numberless Cities, Hamlets, Castles, Courts,
All recreations, all delightful sports.
Is there delight in War? the Seige of Troy,
And sacking often? How barbarous Kings destroy
Rome, and Jerusalem: The Punik slights
Of Hannibal, Grecian, and Roman fights:
The battles by our third stout Edward fought
Against the French, and Flower-de Luces got
To adorn our Scutcheons, the renowned story
O'th Field of Agincourt fifth Harries glory,
And what with BLOOD not ink should be set down
Our CIVIL fights, since that at Keinton Town,
Which so much blood, and many lives have cost,
That whosoever was gainer, England lost:
Had they been well employed, those Legions might
Have subdued France, regained the Electorall Right.
The Roman Triumphs, and Olympian Games,
And whatsoever Magnificent in Fames
Book stands registered, is, shall be, has been,
Are in Gods Essence as a Mirror seen:
And all these known a thousand Myria^s more
Of objects may be seen, and yet the store
Never exhausted: GOD alone must be
The Comprehender, of his Infinity.
Eternally there was duration, though
Nor Years, GODS Eternity.
nor Months, six thousand years ago,
Nor Days, nor Hours, nor minutes did divide
Ages, and Times, and all these specified
By the perpetual motions of the SUN,
As he shall through his annual mansions run,
And by the carrying his eternal Light
Make Winter, Summer, Autumn, spring, day, night.
So when the world shall fade, and all these ^^ase,
The tired Earth enjoy a constant peace.
No Plough rip up her Bowels: The Gl^be-land
Still unmannured, and untilled stand.
No aurigations of the heavenly ca^res,
No incertaine motions of the wandering Stars.
Shall not there be DVRATION? Sure there shall,
But such an one as comprehends all
Ages, and Times, the present, future, past,
And all these vanished evermore shall last,
And is the same with God. This never had
Beginning, never shall have end. This made
When it pleased him the universe: We know
How long it is since he made it: If we go
FVRTHER that FVRTHER is Eternity,
And will not measured, but admired be.
For who conceives some thousand Centuries
Of ages past, and again multiplies
The same millions, and millions more of time,
Yet cannot this grand Calculator climb,
Although perpetually he multiply
Unto the Top of GODS eternity.
Who only can his own DVRATION tell,
Above created thoughts ineffable.
These glorious Attributes, and Idioms show
A mighty GOD, come we to things below.
As he converses with the sons of men,
Bestows his gifts, bears with their manners, then
Greater amazement will arise to see
His Bounty, Mercy, Longanimity;
But we will defer to insist upon this Text.
And with Devotion prosecute the next.
To the Honorable, my most honored Friends, the Lady Francis Nevil: And
Mistrisse Margaret Brook her Daughter.
Sermo Tertius.
The Argument.
We sing the Notions of the Father, Son,
And Holy Ghost, issuing from both; yet ONE
With BOTH: One individed Essence: Three
Persons by relative Plurality:
Man is Gods Image, and does represent
This Ternall One, Genesis 1.
and the unconfinde extent
Of the whole Macrocosme; yet never shall
Be happy till he gain this ONE, this ALL.
SHall he from whose redundant Plenitude
We all receive, Being, Grace, Beatitude.
Who fills the Ocean with innumerous spawnes,
Replenishes the Deserts, and the Lawnes
With stock of Cattle, daily does repair
With young ones the inhabitants of the Air.
Can such a God be barren? Esaias. 66.
No, a sire
Issuing a Son shall with that Son conspire
To breath the Holy Ghost, and all these three
Equal in glory and in Majesty.
Ethinks acknowledged, though with much ado
One God, but knew not what belonged to
ATRIAD what is Divine GENERATION,
What is PROCESSION what active SPIRATION.
The FATHER needs must ^et a SON, and then,
That FATHER and that SON give Origin
To the Holy Ghost; the first Two cannot be,
Unless they make their Number Ternary:
For Love which gives all Creatures birth and growth,
Before all Creatures had his birth from Both:
(Father on Son the Son on Him reflecting,
And with a mutual Complacence affecting)
The Synagogue of this had shaddows; but
Their Lantern was under a Bushel put: Matthew. 5.

And the Hebrew Rites, Luke 11.
and Books Enigma's are,
They' explain not Truths, but point at from a far;
The Law in measure, S. Ambrose.
above measure Grace,
When that once past, this other comes in place.
That Lamb, that Lamp of the Caelestiall Town,
Shall leave his royal Throne, and coming down,
Enucleat Mysteries, preach a Godhead, three
In Notions, yet a pure Identitie.
Who comprehends himself, could only tell,
GODS immanent Acts, that are ineffable.
O thou Eternal Son, and Word, who far,
(In The rays of Saints) before the morning Star
Were got, Psalm. 109.
and spoke; let us through all Ages break,
And search, when GOD did thee beget, and speak;
For both are One, GOD did no more afford,
To give thee birth, then uttering of a Word.
Lets search a hundredth thousand Ages more,
Yet shall we not thy Birth, and utterance know.
If we thy Father question, heel reply,
My Son is both so old, and young as I.
When he was got, as no time can design,
So when he was not got, no time define.
Yet of his Origin, you truly may,
Affirm he is begetting every day:
And through Eternity all Ages past,
Shall this continued Generation last.
A SON of's FATHER independent, Heat
As th'e ORIGIN, whence it is derived so great.
True GENERATIONS yet devoid o^ Motions,
Real relations, yet no more then Notions.
As the Vast Ocean that surrounds the Earth,
Though it give RIVERS springs and Brooks their Birth,
Euphrates, Volga, Quahu, Nile, our Them,
Yet never wants but runs still the same.
As th^nkfullie all these Return again
And ^isembog^e themselves into the Maine.
The FATHER never wants, although the SON
(...) has: nor are these TWO undone,
Nor the least jot of all their Treasure lost
Though all is be f^owde upon the holy Ghost.
For though they mutuallie give all their store
Yet give they so, that they can still give more.
Imagine some Eternal Spring, or Mine
Whence Purest Gold is ^igd, flows richest wine,
And yo'ule conceive some glimsies that come nigh
^o shadow this still Bounteous Trintie.
Not Trimegistus or the Stagy^it,
Not any Stoik, S. Th. 1. p q. 32.
or Platonik wit,
Though Monas Monadem begat, can tell
How this Fecunditie, yet no wombes swell,
Arises, how one can give all his store
Yet never be exhausted, never poor.
Such science is a more peculiar grace,
Granted to none o'th Philosophike race,
And who will have this TRIAD for his book
Must with FAITHS candle on the volume look,
Though none can understand each page aright
Who has not for his Flame-bew Glories light.
Merchants, who travel to the rising SUN,
And view his setting when the day is done
In neither of the Worlds can fulness find,
For though they fill their purses, yet their mind
Is empty still, and still they covet more,
And are amidst their heaps of Riches pore.
The Macedonian youth contented not
Himself with the whole World his sword had got.
The Reason: all things here confined are
Within their Model, insufficient far
To satisfy man's APPETATE ordained,
Not to be satisfied till GOD begaind.
The Spherik Figure no way can suffice,
To equal what is made TRIANGLE wise.
Lay one upon another, you shall see
All ways some corners will unfurnished be.
When the Worlds maker made man's Soul, the same
Triangular did the best Worke-man frame
To represent his matchles self and be
The Image of one GOD in Persons three;
Ordaining him to love, to honor, serve
His GOD, who for such service does reserve
A Crown, and place in Heaven; where he shall see
The TRIADS order, and how all things be
Derived from thence. Nor can there ought be found
In this low O^be, that is Sphericall, and round,
May satisfy our Souls; nor can we ^est
In Creatures, who are ordered to be blessed
By his fruition, who to Creatures gave
That existence, and essence which they have.
Sol'e GODS proportioned to our Souls, and till
GOD be injoid, we nere shall have our fill,
Unles we feed on this Celestial meat,
We still shall hunger, still desire to ear.
Creatures observe that order, keep that state,
Which GOD appoints: Sole MAN'S retrogradate.
Behold the wandering Planets, and fixed stars
Are Constant in the motion of their Cars,
And as they approach, or go from several seats
Cause winters nipping frosts, and Summer heates.
Make buds and blossoms sprout forth in the Spring,
And in the Au^^mne to perfection bring.
See how the Simple Elements Combine
And in the making of mixed Bodies join.
The Fire, the Air, the Water, that surrounds
The Earth* how all observe their proper bounds,
And very bounteously themselves bestow,
On all things that have sense, or move, or grow.
Suppose (what will not be) some glorious light,
(The Sun or Moon) should fall from Heaven, or quite
Extinguished be: suppose Gods arm should take
This World, and often the Pristine Chaos make;
Involving in the same calamity,
The old, the middle aged, and the Fry.
Here death gives rest to Beasts, to Fish, to Foul,
All pain expiring with the fleeting Soul:
And though here is some inversion of that end,
Which Nature in Creation did pretend:
Yet it is no more then if some Clown should grub,
Or cut a plant up, but as yet a shrub;
Or a young Partridge caught in the Fowlers net,
Or by the Hawke devoured Pin-fether'd yet.
But different far is Man's accursed state,
If by transgression he prevaricate:
For if in prosecution he shall err,
Sulphurean Flames that first prepared were
For the Infernal Fiends must be his hire,
And with condemned Ghosts, eternal fire.
Better he had nere been borne, Matthew. (...).
then be borne so,
As dying, he must live in endless woe:
For not as souls of Birds and Beasts, Man's mind,
Shall with the body dissolution find;
But when chance, age, or sickness break the tie,
Twixt Body and the Soul, this last shall fly
(Supported by the wings of heavenly love)
To those magnifie^e Palaces above,
Where Saints and Angels with much blithenesse sing, Apoc. 4.

The Trophies of the slaughtered Lamb, and bring
Their Anadems of Glory, (as it is meet)
Offering them, and themselves at JESUS feet.
Who with the treasure of his precious blood,
Purchased his Courtiers such Beatitude.
Or else the Soul poysde with transacted faults,
Shall straight descend to subterranean Vaults;
Where horror with pale desperation dwell,
And damned Ghosts eternally shall yell.
'Twould be some ease if thousand myriads past,
Of years, Hels torments should have end at last,
But they will endure so long as GOD shall be,
And one way equalize eternity.
O thou all-potent Trinity, whose hand,
First made, then polisht Fire, Air, Water, Land:
Prescribdst to all their duty, and their end,
Which they without reluctancie attend,
And gain; Illuminate our souls to know,
Wherefore thou made us, whether we should go;
To heaven our journey is, direct our ways,
To that blessed Land; there crown us with thy rays
Of glory; who made by, and after thee,
Without thy self shall never contented be.
To the Honorable, William Savile, Baronet, my Godson. Edward Atsloe, John
Church, Esquires.
Sermo Quartus.
The Argument.
We sing what power bad Angels have, and how
All causes, and their consequents they know,
Are incorporeall, and with w^nged speed
Act what they will, but not their bounds exceed.
We sing unhappie man's corrupted state,
How more then Beasts he does degenerate.
THe World being finished God amazed stood, Genesis 1.

And with much complacence pronounced all is good:
If all be good, how come ill Angels then
(So noxious, yet so conversant with men?)
If they are ill, why are they lef't to roame
Abroad, why are they not confined to home
In Hell? why did they not when they lost grace,
Forfeite as well their Energye as place?
In Heaven? they can do wonders, have a power
As great as Sions courtier's, some have more.
What from the rising of the Radiant sune,
Till in the Occident his race be run
Is acted, 2. Reg. 5. 14.
they see clearly, can without
Passing through Medium's scu'd the World about
In The twinkling of an eye; at distance can
Mountains oreturne, destroy, or tempt a man.
Local Dimensions limit not their Sphere
Of action, where they operate they are there.
And though these Devils can the Sun as soon
Shut in a lantern, as deduce the Moon
Down from it is Mansion; yet they are petty Kings
In the airie Region, Ephesians. 6.
and ore earthly things
Can dominere, although not reach so far
As is the Mansion of the lowest Star,
All Theorie, and Practike arts they know,
Natures abstruser secrets, no plants grow,
But they their Virtues ken, and can apply
Actives on Passives to bring misery
And witchcrafts upon man, and as if we
Framde of Ambition, envy, enmity,
Were not sufficient Devils to our selves,
We must have aid from these Infernal Elves
In our malicious plots, and for the hire
Damn our own souls to their eternal fire,
And as we share in their Iniquity,
So in their punishment associates be.
And such must of necessity be ill,
Who once depraved can never change their will,
Never retract an Error, nor repent
What once (apprehended good) they durst attempt.
Speak more Celestial Muses, what is the cause
Of so much pervicacie against the Laws
Of humane sense, how fell the Angels down
Why did they forfeit that Perennall Crown
Due to integrity and (Virgins) know
The knowledge of such Cronicles you owe
To Sacred Historyes? how Ba^thasar,
And Nemroths Babylon surprised are,
And the Assyrian Monarchy cast down
The Medes and Persians share the Imperial Crown,
How Tomyris the warlicke S^ythian Queen
Amidst her thickest Troops in Armor seen,
Acts dire Revenge, and having first made drunk
The Persian Brigades, drenches the cold trunck
Of slaughtered Cyrus in a tub of gore,
Bidding him quaffe his fill, who evermore
Had thirsted blood; how like the flashing fire,
Of angry Heaven, when Heaven and Earth conspire
To raise a tempest, Alexander flies,
And shows the World his glorious Victories;
How by death conquered, he who conquered all,
Must in the midst of all his Trophies fall;
Many great Homers (Alexanders Vow)
Enrich you with such Histories, and how,
Caesar amidst and by perfidious friends,
In The Capital his life, not glory ends.
The sad disasters of these Monarchies,
With the addition of ten thousand lies,
Of the Assyrian, Greek, Odrysian Lords,
Innumerous Stories, numberless Records
Speak amply: many Birds first reassume,
Only their proper Feathers, then unplume,
The Roman Eagle, till great Mahomet,
As he did Constantines Bizantium get,
Wrung off one neck, and in that Empire placed
The beauty of our Towering Bird defaced.
But of the real grounds, why these States fall,
Why the other rise, no mention's made at all;
Nor once remembered what condition they
Be of, who are chief Actors in this Play
Of blood, and death, where a Muse buskind fings
With tears the Fates of Commonwealths, and Kings.
The Gentile Sages by experience see,
But know not whence proceeds our Misery:
They never know with what industrious Arts,
The Devils in our Drames act chiefest parts.
Why Man does with the Spiders Cobwebs spin,
And one net wrought, unsatisfied begin
A fresher web, why with the Ante take pains,
With such solicitude for sordid gains.
Why thrust the Badger with the Foxes slight
Out his own Hole, why with the Lions might
Invade the weaker; why made Lord of all
The Universe, does he degenerate fall
So low beneath himself, and far inferior
In sense to many Beasts, to all superior
In brutish qualities, exceeds the Hog
In drunkenness, more sawning then the Dog,
When profit shall accrue, in rage outgoes
The Hircanian Tygres, when assayl'd by foes,
She saves her young ones, and with teeth and nails
Against a world of combatants prevails;
Prouder then the Horse, when in his bravery,
He shall attract every beholde^ eye*
To mark him only, as with stately grace,
Through the streets richly hanged he shall pace.
As here the Gentiles all are silent, we
Should sit amazed, and with them silent be;
Wholly transformed, knowing our God all good,
Dispute, how with such bounty it has stood,
To suffer his chief creature, Man to fall,
In such disorders, and permit in all
So general a confusion, when behold,
Only our writs the Origin unsold
Of all these mischeifes, taught by them we will speak
The causes: and through many ages break
Boldly our passage open, beginning long
Before the Universe began a Song.
To the right Honorable, John Paulet, Marquess of Winchester, the Lady
Honoria, The best Example of her Sex, His Marchiones; and the Honorable, Walter
Mountague.
Sermo Quintus.
The Argument.
What round Angels? a transcendent pride?
Or envy? Because Man was Deifide.
Proud Lucifer turned Traitor animates
His fellow Angels to be associates
In the Rebellion: Michael with the bands,
Of Loyal Subjects for GODS title stands:
The Traitors lose the day, Grace, glories Crown,
(They might have (...)) toth' depth^ of Hell cast down.
THe Devil nere was glutton; never soild,
With amorous embraces; never foild
with drink: Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 14. cap. 3.
no purser by the high way side,
Never for Murder at the Sessions tried.
(Nor could ^e fail so, such concupiscence
Following corporeal faculties and sense.)
Yet has he perpetrated all these crimes,
By proxy, above a hundred thousand times)
How fell the Devil then? how lost his place,
And share 'oth Deity, Celestial grace.
How did the searcher of all intrailes find,
Iniquity in so sublime a mind?
What horrid act has his eversion wrought? Psalm. 3.

Ruin on him? Job 4.
on Us destruction brought,
(For he having limp^ himself, made Adam halt,
Whence issued our hereditary fault.) Genesis 3.

Was Lucifer a Peacock? when he spide
His specious plumes, with a selfe-pleasing pride,
Took he fond complacence in gifts bestowde,
And with those gifts rebeld against his God,
Who gave 'em? did he glorying in his state,
Aspire to be with God coequall Mate?
With soaring wings why would he northward fly,
And independent be as the most high? 1 Samuel 14.

Or did not envy reign? that God should slight,
The Angelike Essence, and himself unite
To our weak substance, by a wondrous tie,
Including in one Man the Deity,
And humane Nature: this makes Traitors rise
In arms against their Creator; envies eyes
Are so malignant, that another good,
Like daggers strikes toth' heart, and fetches blood.
What quoth the aspiring Angel, shall this slime
Oath earth, this worm in plenitude of time,
Graced with the union Hypostaticall,
Be Deified? have Empire overall.
Must Angels so accomplished with grace,
In Entity so perfect give him place?
Be slaves, and as obsequious Vassals stand,
To know, then execute what heel command?
If God cannot his bounties better share,
We Will learn him Order, teach him who we are:
If needs he will his gifts, and self diffuse
In Donatives, let him election use:
Wherefore you (Legions) aid me, and we will make,
This partial God recall his purpose, take
Ou^ Nature, where you all shall sharers ^e,
And fellows with me in the Deity.
As in a Leguer, where distracted minds,
Revolt against their General, Treason finds,
New accomplices to act a d^irie plot;
So now seditious Lucifer has got
Whole multitudes to second what he says,
As Impious Angels violate their faith,
Turn to a Creature their chief leader, and
Amazed at his eminencies stand:
For Lucifer had such similitude
With God, that he, next him was the first good.
No Cedar in Mount Libanus so tall,
No Beech as he: Ezech. 31.
he far surmounted all;
Great his indowments, Job 40.
specious were his rays,
And he stild justly, First of all Gods ways,
Allured with such parts, the inferior stars
Forsake their stations, denounce open Wars
Against their Maker, Apoc. 12.
Now the signal's given,
Of a great battle to be fought in Heaven.
For Michael and his friends oppose themselves,
In Squadrons rangde against the haughty Elves:
The loyalty of Subjects now is tryde,
As they take part on Michaels and Gods side; In what manner the good and bad
Angels fought in heaven.

Who stands impartial a spectator by,
To see these Combatants for maistery try.
No party brought to the field, or swords or bills,
But serious alterations of their Wills:
Neither did they with a Stenthrean voice,
On any part plead rights; but without noice
Joined the Batalia's: No loud ^lamots there,
Let the left Wing advance, How the Angels express themselves one to another.
bring up the Rere:
But what they would have either friend or foe,
Should understand, their Wills did make) 'em know:
Yet Drums and Trumpets were the harmonious Spheres,
Still ecchoing terror in the Rebels ears:
When they reflect how those, though senseless stand,
In order, when these spurn at Gods command.
That fight was famous in Pharsalia field,
Where the Patritians, and their Pompey yield
To Caesar's conquering Legions, and one day,
Makes Rome, and the whole world the Victors pray:
So was that Naumachie by the Actian shore,
Where Anthony pursues his flying Whore;
And great Octavian all the Empire gets,
Where the Sun first appears, and where he sets.
The whole Worlds Sovereignty, being set at stake,
Did these encounters so conspicuous make.
But in this Battle fought on Sions plain,
Where the false Angels lose, the loyal gain
The day: what ever is above the skies,
Even Gods command must be the Victors prize.
The Armies ordered, and in mutual view,
The grand Commander of the Traytruos crew
Himself advances, and at every strain,
Presents Goliath, or fierce Ta^^erlaine.
Blasphemes and curses Gods selected band,
But as (if such comparisons may stand)
A thick neck'd Bull made Captain of the Herd,
And for his strength, of all the Forest feared;
Meeting some stately Lion at a spring,
Disdaines to pay due homage to his King:
But ventilating often his horns in the air,
He and his Flock themselves to fight prepare;
When the stout Lion backed by his friends,
The conflict presently begins and ends:
As furiously upon the Bull he goes:
And, maugre his great strength, casts in the close.
Then on the prostrate neck, setting his foot,
With a disdainful paw pulls out his throat:
The rest, as they behold their Leader dye,
With the disaster all appalled fly.
In the same manner Michael putting on
His trusty Armor: Vindication
Of Gods supremacy, a two edged Sword,
Strongly composed of Gods revealed Word: ^ Ephesians. 6.

Justice his breast plate, and of Faith the shield:
A belt of Verity: his helmet steeled
With safety. 1 Reg. 17.
Armed thus against his foe,
He marches, and as David with one blow
Defeats the Elfe: then trampling on his head,
This ovant speech in following manner said:
Who like to God? who from the abyss of naught,
First made thee, then to this perfection brought?
Ungrateful wretch to thy Creators grace,
Unworthy such endowments, and chief place.
Was thy eye evil because God was good? Matthew. 20.

Or did thou surfeit with much plenitude?
What is, is his; and must he come so low
Beneath himself, that when he will bestow
His favors, he must ask his creatures what
He shall bestow? whether on this or that
Person, or nature? he can best dispense,
Who knows what is given is but benevolence
Great were thy eminencies: did we repine
At dignities conferd on thee, and thine?
We knew, and so should thou, that he who gave
Such gifts, knew well what every one should have,
And in what measure, neither thou, nor I,
Can limit or enlarge his liberality.
False Impe, who would have Empire over all,
To the lowest pit thou shall dejected fall:
Can nothing please thee but thy Makers Crown?
To Hell with thy associates tumble down.
As when the heavens, the air, the winds conspire
With horrid thunder, and with flashing fire,
To terrify the world, and make us think,
Our sins had filled Gods cup even to the brinke,
And the Universe must cod* Midst all these tones
Of angry Heaven, innumerable stones,
Of hail fall down, and with their fragour make,
The Machin of the frighted World to shake.
Such was the Angels precipice from Heaven,
When glorious Michael had his sentence given.
For Lucifer, who made the Angels fail,
As he fell head^g, Apoc. 12.
dragd down with his tail,
The stars third part (when men of high estate
Decline, the ruin ends not in their Fate.)
But as some potent Lording, who has wrought
Treason against his Sovereign Prince, and sought
To murder or depose him, for which ends,
Conspiring with his Vassals, and his Friends;
He traitorously takes arms, but in the field,
Is vanquishd by his King, compeld to yield.
Brought to a trial, all receive their doom,
But differently; some from their native home,
Banishd; some forfeit life, some goods and land,
So did the case with the damned Angels stand,
Some are confinde 'ith spacious air to dwell,
Others on the earth, and seas; yet all in Hell.
For they still bear about the load of sin*
Fire in the apprehension, tortured minds within.
And we might see, had we spiritual eyes,
How innumerous Devils, Perei in D^n.
Atome-like and Flies
In a hot summers day, Haee omnium Doctorum opinio est, quod Aeer iste, qui
Cae^um, and terram medius dividens, inane Vocatur, plenus sit contrari^^
fertitudinibus.
hop up and down,
Ith'ayre over every City, Village, Town.
Soaring like Hawks, with Vultures mawes and eyes,
And when it is sprung, source down upon their prize.
Then let us know that as they tower so high,
They easily, viewing, with advantage slye,
And seize upon their pray. (What Is poor man's state,
Continually exposed to their hate?)
But that grand Traitor, S. Hierom in Cap. 6. Ep. ad Ephesians.
Lucifer, what is done
With him? do not the conquerors sit upon
The manner of his chastisement? who lead
The dance in this Rebellion, was the head
Plotter, and actor in the treason, shall
Be more severely punished then all
The minor Devils; and one clause they add
Toth' rest of's torments, that makes him stark mad:
Namely, that he who would so high have flowne,
With wings of pride, even to ^ehova^s throne,
In a deep dungeon, shut eternally,
Shall a confined slave and prisoner lie.
A hole his goal furthest from Heaven to show,
That as transgressions so must penance go.
The other Fiends have the vast Air and Seas,
And land to range in whensoere they please:
But their great Monarck must in fetters tide,
In lowest Hell perpetully abide.
And this was the first prison made for sin,
A pattern to torment Delinquents in:
Yet no confinements, Fetters, Bolts, and Gives,
Can make the damned wretches mend their lives.
Sure the strange quallities of Alpheus streams,
Are idle Poets or Historians dreams.
How he though difimboguing in the Maine,
Yet midst the brine his sweetness can retain;
Debt, and transgression are conducent gins,
To Prisons, Prisons Colleges of sins.
The noble Sciences professed, and chief
Arts taught, are of the Drunkard, Whore and Thief,
Who were in knavery Freshmen, coming here,
Shall proceed learned Graduats in one year.
Behold the Galleys, and a Prison view,
And they shall fully represent to you
What Is done in Hell; blaspheming every where,
Continual torments, yet they curse and swear
Amidst those torments: Boat-swaines, Goalers are,
The Furies that torment 'em and their fare,
Biscuit, Tobacco; trickling t^ares must serve
To make their meat go down: else let 'em st^rve,
What then? too many care no more when half
Are starved then Butchers when they kill a Calfe.
A Prison's like the cruel Martichore,
Or Hell it self, still seeking to devour,
It Is always taking, the least favor must
Be dearly bought, nor can you go on trust.
Sweat, labor (...) sour Go^lers, a good turn,
Is never thought of in the following morn.
Best curtesi's done to them are but their due,
And what is their Office must be sold to you*
French imposts, Spanish taxes are not hard,
If to the exactions of a Goal compared.
Yet heavens forbid all Keepers should be such,
I know some gently bred, who will not grutch
To do a favor gratis, know the same
Fortune that oretakes others, is not lame,
But may oretake themselves, and they may be,
Their fellow prisoners in Captivity: Exodus 23.

Know what a sin it is, to boil the lamb,
In The milk and sight of the afflicted damme,
And therefore scorn to add fresh woes to woe,
(Only ignoble, Bears and Wolves do so.)
They understand al gains these Vultures take
From undone men cannot them wealthy make,
No more then did that silver Judas good,
Which he had purchased with his Masters blood.
The poor are Christ himself, and what is got,
Over the Devils shoulders needs must rot
Under the belly of his Damme (as tears,
And Prisoners clamours penetrate Gods ears.)
These keep not Goales as Charon kept his Boat,
To crave for every passenger a groat,
Nor (gentle souls) will they, or curse, or rail,
If any in their bounty sometimes fail. Exodus 23.

May such (and prisoners votes are potent) be
Fellows with Peter in Eternity. Exodus 2.

(Turn-keys best pattern) who with little state, Jud. 2.

But much humanity will open Heavens gate
Toth' poorest soul, Psa. 79.
that cleansed from his sin,
Or knocks, or rings, craving admission in.
No mischief on such Keepers ever fall,
But let 'em have his lot who kept Saint Paul:
No prisoners scaping from 'em run away,
Much courtesy with much injustice pay. Act. ^p. 16.

Free from the Bondmans heaven-ascending curse,
May they dye rich in credit, rich in purse.
As the Egyptian Midwifes, let their race,
And they thrive here, Exodus 1.
and have in Heaven a place.
Yet thrice blessed Rome, who in the seven Kings times,
And Tribunes rule, were so devoyd of crimes,
That one pore Goal sufficed, to detain,
All Malefactors, but as Scipio's gain,
Asia, and Africa, Emilius Greece,
And all return rich Iasons with the fleece
Of gold, then as thy sins and Town increase
New Goales are made, and Justices of Peace.
How art thou spotted, with what tincture di'de,
Of sins proud London? which so loud have cried
To Heaven for vengeance, that in every street,
New prisons must be made; the Gatehouse, Fleet,
Newgate, and Ludgate, and a hundredth more,
Not large enough for murderer, thief, and whore;
But so increases the Malignant trade,
That Courts and Palaces are prisons made.
O inauspitious Stars to live and die
In torments worse then those of Gregory.
There miseries end with our exhaled breaths,
Continued prisons are continued deaths:
A prison's like Vestas deflowred Nun,
Ram'd in the grave before his thread be spun.
Yet heavens are gentle, and permit this curse,
To fall on some, to keep 'em from a worse.
To the right Honorable, Henry Parker, Lord Morlie, and Mount-Eagle, William
Habington Esquire, and Mistress Lucie Habington.
Sermo Sextus.
The Argument.
What undiscovered paths the Serpent treades,
With what slye Engines, and dark ways he leads
Mankind to error? with what subtlety,
Invites he us to our own misery.
The Fowler and the Fisherman may gain,
Arts of deceit from his more subtle brain.
Eve poisons Adam, and by his sad fall,
Conveyes pernicious venom to us all.
The folish Woman, and her female seed,
Taxed worthily for this accursed deed.
WHy does the Spouse in a Cygnean song,
Descant so dolefully of the great wrong
Her Brethren do her, Cant. 1. Pugnavtrunt Contra me Filij ma^ris m^^.
and of battles fought,
And stratagems wherein her life is sought;
Who are these barbarous Brethren so unkind?
Legions of evil Angels in Gods mind,
Our general Mother, who, Idea'de there,
Were formed, then fell, and after suffered were
To range abroad; these tempt, solicit Man,
And do him all the injuries they can,
(Thinking erroneously it is some relief,
To have companions in their endless grief,)
As Meagre envy made 'em first to fall,
So the same fury domineeres in all
Their actions: Psalm. 109.
knowing man must wear that Crown,
And fill those thrones from which they tumbled down: Apoc. 12. (...). 21.

Knowing how no coinquinated thing,
Shall see the face of Sions glorious King.
At every step, and place they set their gins,
To entrap the passengers in snares of sins.
All creatures of the world are traps and nets,
Which to catch fools the cunning Devil sets
And Satan having long converst with man,
Is in his Volume deeply read, and can
Co^ply with all his appetites; invert
The order of his intellect; divert
Affections rightly placed; persuade him choose
Evil clothed in the shape of God, refuse
Virtue look;d on, not in her proper guize,
But formed by Fancy, or our carnal eyes:
For the grand workman of this earthly mole,
When in our body be infusde the soul,
He made the Inteilect, Will, memory,
A true resemblance of the Trinity.
As they have power to issue several,
Most distinct operations; yet they all
Are one, and the same soul; and though we name
Them diversely, yet they are all the same.
The soul as some great Queen of many lands,
All the corporeal faculties commands;
And though she seem to rule by Deputy,
Yet in all acts it is she, and only she,
Who records only understands, wills only, hoords
Only in her vast Magazin records,
The species of things present, past, to come,
And when she will remember, to that room,
Makes her recourse. These species Satan can
Stir up, when he intends to tempt a man,
Objects of riches, Ioh. Ep.
pleasure, and the height
Of honor; and propose with such delight,
That the Intellect obscured by the Will,
Shows in false glasses good, that which is ill:
Then sense, will, understanding headlong run.
Into transgression, and are all undone.
The Serpent such a color set on pride,
With a rich gloss of being Deifide, Genesis 3.

And knowing much, that Eve liked it so well,
As having tasted Heaven, she would venture Hell.
To know what is ill. The Fiends not long a wooing,
But tells her if she will know, she must be doing.
Behold that goodly Apple, take and eat,
The choice of Paradise, delicious meat;
This will bestow an immortality,
And make you sharers in the Deity.
God knows this well, ther'fore least you should be,
Partners with him, he has forbid this Tree.
The liquorish Woman eyes, and eyes again
The Apple; sees it lovely and would feign
Pluck it, but fears: at last demurreth so;
If not for use, why did this apple grow?
What Aromatic smell? how smooth the skin,
And gay? Can any poison lurk within?
No sure: God in forbidding has some end,
That Is envious, I Will believe my speckled friend;
Who gives the world to roame in, and excludes
But the least corner, all his gifts deludes,
And pens you in a prison. All the trees
Of Eden are but toys; forbidding these
Choice fruits, what gave God when he gave command,
Ore fishes, fowls of the air, beasts of the land?
And then forsooth to say, dare not once touch
This Apple; bounty is not valued much,
Hedged in with lymits: I had rather have,
What he exempts, then all the rest he gave,
Had it not been forbid, it might have past,
Not cared for, now I must needs, and will taste.
Be it what it will, I Will by experience try,
If it bring death, or immortality.
With this, maugre Jehovahs frowns and threats,
The bold Virago the Apple plucks and eats.
She scarce had gorgd it when the subtle Snake,
Tickling with laughter in such manner spoke.
Are not your eyes now open? sure you know,
What Is Good and Bad: but be not envious, go
Present your husband with an Apple, and
Both good and ill alike shall understand.
Lets to the Devil give what is his due,
Though he equivocate, yet he speaks true.
But why did he assume the Serpents shape?
Are not there other beasts, the Fox, the Ape,
The Dog, the Elephant so wise as is
The Serpent? but he takes this vermins hiss,
To cheat our Grandame: Satan will declare,
How near allied he and the Serpent are.
All other creatures only will defend
Themselves, Genesis 49
not unprovoked man offend:
This venom still in ambush lies like Dan, Psalm. 69. 109.

To bite our heels, and not touched poisons man.
What harm did we the Devil? that he should,
Envy our happiness, prevent our good?
Then in the turns and windings that he makes,
How does he represent the circling snakes?
Observe this plot, and by one wile guess all,
As he made Eve, so he makes others fall.
Knowing the woman of the two more frail,
He will the weaker vessel first assail.
Knowing the man of sounder judgment, he
Sends his Ambassadors to Adam, she
Must play the Orator; command the meat,
Turn Crocodile, 3 Reg. 11.
peule, weep, unless he eat.
(By such seducers Solomon al-wise, Iud. 16

Forsook his God, Sampson lost strength and eyes.)
If we dare trust the Jews, their stories tell,
How Nathan saw before King David fell
His ardent love to Bershabe, and thought
To stay the Prince from his adulterous fault. Epiph. in vitis Prop^^tar.

He trudges to the Court, but in the way,
The subtle Fiend as a dead carcass lay:
The Prophet stops his course to interre the dead,
Mean while the King defiles Vriahs bed.
Shall we conceive Adam was so unwise,
To think an apple could make clear his eyes?
Indude with grace, and a strong Intellect,
He could not but on Gods command reflect,
Wherefore we must believe his chiefest end,
In the transgression was not to offend
His cogging wife. (A precedent of those,
Who to please others their own souls dare lose.)
So Solomon his Queens so much affects,
That for 'em to false Gods he Phanes erects: 3 Reg. 11.

But did the mischief end in Adams sin?
No sure I our misery must here begin.
A business of such consequence, that all,
Involved in him with him must jointly fall.
Had he been single, there had staid the doom,
But he was Father of the World to come:
And in his sentence we were censured, who
Nere understood what appertained to
Transgression. Ist' not strange one single crime,
Should last, and blast all progresses of time?
Let Epictetus, let the Stagirit,
With Divine Plato, who have amply writ
Of virtues, and of vices, speak the cause,
Why man so easily transgresses Laws.
When all are dumb, our sacred Volumes can
Tell wherefore all these mischiefs lite on man.
Adam had all our wills in his, and we
Eat jointly with him the forbidden Tree.
His only act, that one pestiferous bit,
Had many thousand Aconites in it.
It scarce is swallowed when infernal gates,
With violence slye open, Iron grates
Of Hell are burst; anxieties, cares, fears,,
Sorrow with all her dropping children, tears,
Suspicion, Jesus. praef. lib. 1.
jealousy, lawless desire,
Unbridled lust, pretensions to aspire.
Fond joys, sad discontent at present state,
Aversion from good: anger, envy, hate,
Avarice still greedy, griping penury,
Dogging at the heels of Prodigality,
Darkness of mind, perversity of will,
And what in both can be suspected ill.
Beguiling error, pervicatious schism,
C^ab-creeping heresy, impious atheism:
Idolatry always inventing where
New Gods may be adorde for love or fear.
Egypt to Ibis, Rome will sacrifice
To the fire, and Cloaca a Goddess is.
These monsters with their pale commander death,
(Kept hitherto close prisoners beneath,
Nor should they ever have beheld the Sun)
Hearing what man against his God had done,
Scorn longer to obey prescribed Laws,
But they will forth and vindicate Gods cause.
By the effects judge Adam of thy fault,
These mischiefs are the purchase thou have bought,
Corruption is the house; the land sad woes,
In which though with tears watered no good grows.
Making at hour of death thy latest will,
Thou did bequeath this Legacy of ill,
And for Ex^cutors, the Devil trust,
Who though a Bankrupt, yet in this is just,
And takes such care th^^ jointly with our breath,
We do rec^ive thy testament of death.
Hence issu^, if we well ^^volve our Fate,
Those woes which follow man's accu^sed state:
Hence those afflictions which attend our ways,
Those sad catastroph's of our wretched days:
Hence that unequal share of joy and pain,
A drop of pleasure, but of woe a maine;
O, had thou loved God more, Eve not so well,
Thou would have left us heirs of Heaven, not Hell.
Who can describe what is sin? Nothing at all,
And must the mass of man for nothing fall?
All things in the world God made, Genesis 1.
and God was glad,
That by his making hand they being had,
Only thou misbegotten Monster, sin,
As Bastards use stolest at the Window in,
Ashamed of thy birth: God never put
Least finger to thy Essence: Hell was shut.
Thou wert' the Key to open it; day light
Changde by thy birth into eternal night.
Cursed be thy birth day; Job 3.
let it not appear,
Nor once be named with the other days o'th year.
Be long expected, and as thou shall fail,
Be cursed of those, who watch to chase the Whale:
On that black day let the Universe be sad,
And Furies only at thy birth be glad,
For thou have on us all these mischiefs ^urld,
And made a Pristine Chaos of the World.
And we will be angry with thee, Grandam Eve,
The Mother of this Child: thou did conceive
The odious Monster: Satan was his Sire,
But you adulterous Paramou^^ conspire,
And with such slights juggle the business, that
Adam must father the mis-gotten brat.
God formed thee of the man's selected bone,
To help him, Genesis 2.
that he should not be alone:
This was your task: Have you not helped him well,
And all his progeny to go to Hell?
Eve must bring children forth in pangs and throes, Genesis 3.

And make a joyful father by her woes,
Which she performs, with a delight in pain,
(One teeming past, another hasts again.)
Eve must be subject to her Husband, and
A Vassaile always be at his command.
Grounded on this, some Commonweals ordain,
A Salique Law, the Distaffe shall not reign;
Esteeming those God censured to obey,
Unfit for Government, and Regal sway.
And this first fault all mankind so has vexed,
That men take all the Nation for a text
Of their invectives, dip in gaul their quill,
And with Satyrick lines whole Volumes fill
Against Eves sex, who in much ignorance bred,
Unable are their proper cause to plead.
But had they pens, as good as are their tongues,
They amply would retaliate such great wrongs:
And we should read, as well as loudly hear,
With how much patience they these scandals bear.
To my Honorable Friends, Master EDWARD, and Mistress RVTH PETRE.
Sermo Septimus.
The Argument.
We sing those Courtiers, who attend the Throne,
And act commands of that most absolute One,
Who gives all, takes from none, but what before,
Issued from his never exhausted store:
We likewise treat, with what despotike sway,
This Monarck governs, Citizens obey.
PLATO framed a Republike, and it cost
Tullie much labor to write, what is lost,
A Commonwealth: so Aristotle writ,
His book of Politics, prooving in it
How the best form of Government is, where
One absolute Monarck shall the Scepter bear.
Be it so, Herodo^.
or not, let slain Cambyses Peers
Dispute the Question: jealousies and fears,
Arise on every side: a Monarck may
Turn tyrant, Nero, or Dionysius play.
Violently take your goods, A Tyrant.
command your Wives,
And what more precious is then both your lives:
Bring in an arbitrary Government,
or fear, or scorn to call a Parliament?
Forget himself, and how one single clause
Of his life more commands then all his Laws.
He acts on a conspicuous stage, and is
Subject to all his subjects clap or hiss.
Thus Monarcks may decline, and may not such,
Who to a state turn Kingdoms do as much?
Suppose your Noblemen should bear the sway,
Even these may err as well as tyrants may:
Consult, Aristocracie.
combine, to keep the people low,
And from the public pressures potent grow.
A crafty party circumvent the rest,
Some few prevail, the bad oretop the best.
From reasons rule, and square of Justice err,
Before the general, private ends prefer.
Athens a slave by thirty tyrants made;
And Rome by the Decemviri betrayed.
These promised cures o'th body politic,
But made the same a hundredth times more sick.
Weary of Kings, Rome ordains Consuls, those
Suppressed, she ten chief Magistrates will choose.
Rods only scourged her in the days of Kings,
And Consuls, these few men with Scorpions stings
Slash the poor Commons, as none can be sure
Of his own goods, nor in's own house secure;
The people grumble: let 'em, this base Yoke,
They brought upon themselves, and till the' have broake
Their Asses back in the carriage must endure
The burden; armed Cohorts shall secure
The tyrants lives, and military bands,
Force speedy execution of commands.
For the fond multitude, they never knew
Their proper good, Democracie.
nor what belonged to
Or worth, or manners; Peers and Monarcks know,
When they do injuries, that they do so.
But the base Vulgars unrestrained will,
Is model of their actions good, or il.
A many headed monster, yet not one
Sconce stuffed with Reason, or Religion;
Fiery in prosecution of what is new,
Which had, they presently their wishes rue:
And you as easily may, and even as soon,
Shape out and make a garment for the Moon,
Now crescent, now in the full, now in the waine,
As satisfy the Vulgars fickle brain.
The Rabble doated on this Parliament,
With clubs and staves for their protection went
To Westminster: gloryed to hear^ themselves
Called Roundheads, others Cavaliers (new Guelphs
And Gibelines) what blood shed they? what sights?
Adventured for the Parliamentall rights?
How bountifully did they give their store,
Of gold at Guildhall? yea, contribute more
Then was required. City and Country cry,
To Have reverend Laud and active Strafford dye,
As enemies to the Realm, and Parliament;
And till their heads are off never be content.
But now the case is altered, they rail on
Both Houses, cry down for oppression
Excises, are so impudent, they would thrust
Them from their Voting, whom themselves did trust,
With all their rights; whisper, express their spite
In prose and verse, most dangerous pamphlets write:
Yea some ('it is strange) so rash they dare proclaim
Themselves the authors, and subscribe a name:
Boldness and mercy, these would spend their blood
Most willingly, our Senators are good,
And will not spil't, knowing a Magistrate.
Should the Emperor Nero (yet young) imitate.
Who wept when he should sign to the deaths of men,
Condemned, and wished he could not use a pen.
But howsoever they hold a wolf by the ear,
Who court the multitude, and still must fear,
Heel byte 'em; Psalm
all their bones are broke in twain,
Who seek the fickle Vulgars love to gain.
So weak our providence, so full of fear,
No state that is perfect can be stablish'd here;
None formed yet a body politic,
That sundry noxious humors made not sick.
Eutopia fancied by our learned More,
Had faults, and Platoes Commonwealth had more.
Let Genoa, Jena, Venice, Amsterdam,
And my dear London a republike frame,
As they have framed, some Constitutions are,
That err from reason, and with justice square.
Yet when Philolophers with all their wit,
(Though some were Statesmen) fail, our sacred Writ
Shall speak a Commonweal, so sound, so sure,
That for eternity it shall endure.
For lift your eyes up, and contemplate them,
Who fill the Senate of Jerusalem;
There you shall see an ordered policy
Established, a sure grounded Monarchy:
That on the Burgers has more blessings brought,
Then Commonweals have dreamed of, or have sought.
A glorious City, that surpasses far,
Ninus vast Ninive, or the grand Caire:
Though that could vaunt of threescore miles in length,
Walls of unmeasured magnitude, and strength,
Almost two thousand towers as Babel high,
Threatening as Memphis Pyramids, the sky.
Yet if with Sion you both these compare,
Both silie cottages, both Sheep-coats are.
The pavement, Apoc. 21.
walls, and roof of gold are made,
With diamonds and precious stones inlaide. Tob. 13.

That with their luster give a constant light,
Although such need not, for the sable night
Is ever banished thence; (the fulgent rays,
Oth' slaughtered Lamb, causing perpetual days.)
No watch, no warding at the several ports,
No military stations at the Forts.
Only at every Gate an Angel stands,
And brandishes a Fauchion in his hands,
To keep Malignants ou^, Genesis 3.
as heretofore
The Angel kept watch and ward at Edens door.
And when that shame of nature went about,
To break Lots house, Ibid. 19.
the angels kept 'em out:
Besides the Citizens al soldiers are,
Knights of St. Vincent for their fea^s of War.
They made their passage through a crimson flood,
(As did the Israelites) of Jesus blood. Exodus 14.

And Satan mindful he was vanqush'd here,
Scarce lifts his eyes to Heaven, much less comes there.
The form of Government is such; one King,
To whom all homage owe, and tribute bring;
His Court most glorious: Myriads of those Peers,
Whose charge it is to volve the circling Spheres,
Assist his throne: Cherubs who pierce, and see,
The secret Orders of the Deity.
And those Seraphike Lords, with fiery love
Inflamed, The Hierarchy of Angels.
in and about the center move
Oth' divine Essence. Sedentary be,
The thrones, and with a sweet tranquillity,
Contemplate God. Ore sublunary things,
The dominations sway, and act their Kings
Commands; who uses to employ the powers
When he will curb those enemies of ours,
The Acrian Potentates: as Satan would,
Bring Moses body forth, Epist. Iud.
that the Hebrews should
It idolize, he was made hold his peace
By Michael, and from the enterprise surcease.
Who take the charge of Kings and kingdoms, these
Are sti^'d magnifique Principalities.
When God prodigious operations takes
In hand, he then the active Virtues makes
His instruments. Angels, archangels, are
His Nuntio's, when he pleases to declare
His mind to Mortals: the angel Gabriel went,
In Embassy to crave a Maids consent,
And as some Paranymph prepare a room, Luc. 1.

Where God himself should to our nature come,
And wooing in's own person make a tie
Betwixt our flesh, and his Divinity;
The hypostatick Union was the Ring,
Did make the match, and to perfection bring:
And made our lump of despicable clay,
Ore the Empyrian Dominations sway.
What time the Spouse, Ephesians. 5.
both Jews and Gentiles takes,
And with them both a mystique marriage makes.
The fervent Seraphin, and Cherubs be
Lords of Gods privy Council, although he
Nor sits, nor needs much to deliberate,
What Is to be done in businesses of State.
Yet some blessed Angels know more of his mind,
And in the Book of Life (read deeply,) find,
The fixed decrees of his eternal will,
How he elects the good, rejects the ill.
Some leaders of Gods Army, whom he sends,
Or to subdue his foes, or aid his friends;
So Michael, Generalissimo, commands
The sacred Brigades, and Caelestiall Bands;
Guess at their strength, by what but one has done,
Killing in Egypt every first borne for. Exodus ^1.

All this one night performed: Did not almost
Two hundredth thousand of the Syrian Host,
Oth' ground lie gasping, by one Angel killed,
And all the rest with Panik terrourfilde,
Trudge with their King away? 4. Reg. Chapter 19.
some Angel must
In The latest day collect all humane dust:
When souls shall reassume their flesh, and give,
Account of all their actions done alive.
All these great Princes hourly wait upon
Their glorious King, encompassing his throane,
To do him service, and in the very name,
Each one Enucleates his Creators fame.
For every single appellation suites,
To be the Banner of Gods attributes.
The Seraphim proclaim that ardent fire,
Wherewith the Persons mutually conspire,
To give existence, and communicate,
To what is existent an accomplished state.
The Cherubs witness an abyss of skill,
In the production, and a provident will,
In government oth' world: both in the height
Of wisdom, number, and of weight.
How fitly do the quiet thrones express,
Gods never to be altered quietness?
Who in himself immov'd, always the same,
With various motions alters the Worlds frame.
Mutations in the fire, air, water, land,
And in all these God has a special hand.
But as some Rock fixed firmly midst the waves,
Stirs not a jot, although the ocean raves,
And boisterous winds conspiring with the tide,
Cause noise, and fear alike on every side:
So in the world, though daily motions be,
Changes of elements, and Kingdoms; he
Who changes all, sits quiet in his throne,
Ever the same unalterable, One.
Powers, virtues, principalities, display
With dominations a despotick sway.
The Angels fancied young with Cherubs wings,
The cheerful expedition in their Kings
Commands: Matthew. 18.
these ninety nine have never er'd,
But always loyal to their God adhered:
When Lucifer that Ca^^lin lost his place,
These purchased glory, keeping their first grace.
A mighty Prince prepared Assuerus feasts,
And sent his Vassals to invite the guests, Esther. 1.

And bid 'em forthwith to the banquet come,
They only wanted to adorn his room.
They all excuse; one answers, he has bought,
A Farm, Luc. 14.
and goes to see if it be worth ought;
Another has bought Oxen, and must know
By trial, whether they be good or no.
The third's a married man, and for his life,
He cannot obtain license of his wife.
What Is to be done? must all the Kates be spoyld?
This noble Prince, and all his court'sie foyld?
No sure his servants go to every street,
And take up all the passengers they meet.
Yet there is place: he sends for the Rif-raf,
They come sit at his table, drink, eat, laugh.
Such is God bounty, he prepared feasts,
Adorned heavens Hall, and only wanted guests
To fill the rooms of those rebellious Fiends,
Wherefore to Jews and Gentiles out he sends.
Many excuse themselves: Ioh.
some pride of life
Retard, some hope of gain, others a Wife.
But who can cross Gods efficacious will?
Guests are compelled, Romans 9.
whether they will or nil,
By congruous grace to come, and fill the seats
O'th traiterous Elves, and feed on dainty meats.
The lame, the feeble, and the poor in spirit,
By grace of Christ advanced, not their own merit,
To Gods own table, eat Caelestiall Kates,
Where Angels minister, Luc. 11.
and Jesus waits.
Of these in Heaven a countlesse multitude,
Inhabit, Apoc. 7.
not as the base vulgar rude;
But deeply learned, having for their book,
Even God himself, on whom they daily look:
And as they more or less relations see
I the sacred triad, so they learned be;
And happy more or less, and what them all,
Most firmly comforts, they shall never fall
From this beatitude: some ages past,
This state of things shall end; theirs ever last.
No sickness, no diseases can come near
That happy Town, nor is there any fear,
That all consuming time, or pensive cares,
Shall issue furrowing wrinckles, Apoc. 21.
or gray hayres:
Never sedition troubled this blessed town,
Since Lucifer that Boutifew fell down.
And care is had that none shall enter in
The gates, Ibid.
de^il'd with leprousie of sin.
It Is true, there is difference twixt the light of stars,
Yet cannot inequality breed jars: ^ Cor. 15.

No Saint repining at another share,
Though some more glorious then some others are.
All rest contented with their proper store
Of grace, and glory, and require no more.
And 'twere a madness any should repine,
The cheerful Sun should on his fellow shine;
Or dropping Clouds with a fructiferous shower,
Upon his neighbors fields a blessing pour.
The self same mirror bounteously reflects.
Upon a thousand several men's aspects.
The aerie species, nor is less your view,
Because a thousand sharers are with you.
God is this glorious planet, this clear glass,
That cheers all, shows all objects as they pass.
Though he cheer all, though he be seen of many,
All this is done sans detriment of any.
And had there been millions of such worlds more,
Of saints, and angels, an innumerous store,
All had had heat, all had as clearly seen,
Yet the object never penetrated been.
As easily God giving life and form,
To al as he does to the silliest worm:
And though to some his bounties ampler be,
Yet even in this we shall Deco^um see.
As a^chitects, who rear a house or wall,
When pondrous stones are fit, apply not small:
When small proportion will not massy place,
For so the work would want both art and grace.
Such is Gods City made of lively stones,
Spiritual Chrysolithes, and Unions.
The Sardonix, Apoc. 21,
and sparkling Chrysoprase,
Beryllus, Jasper, Christaline like glass.
All these rich Jems proportionably cut,
Are in that form, and decent manner put,
And of such quantity, and valor be,
As with the Universe shall best agree.
For if the workman showed such curious art,
In making this low Orb, and every part
Contained in it, how must his skill abound,
When he a palace for himself will found?
We have viewed Gods City, know the subjects, now
Let Us contemplate the policy and how
This mighty Monarck governs, by what law
So steers, his subjects love, yet stand in aw.
Kings are compelled to employ their subjects hands,
As use^ull instruments of their commands:
They cannot live without 'em, nor are Kings,
Unless the subject necessary things;
Supply for life, and state, whence come their treasures,
But from the subjects purse? even to their pleasures
The subject must contribute, nor the field,
Nor River without* Subjects pleasure yield,
Unless the Falconer trave^sing the mounds,
Shall lu^e the Hawke, the hun^s-men rate the Hounds.
In masks, and shows, and plays, which Princes see,
Subjects must revellers, and actors be.
If he rule wisely the best Monarck hears,
More with his subjects, then with his own ears:
He must have ledgers, and his spies maintain,
To inform what is done in Rome, France, Flanders, Spain.
Ist' the least misery of Kings to stand^*
In fear of their own subjects, least they band
Against them, or plot treason; Monarcks are,
Jealous when subjects grow too popular,
Too potent, or too rich; on purpose send
Them out Ambassadors, to make 'em spend
Their formidable treasures: Or in show
Of honor, let 'em for their Viceroyes go
To the remoter Indies. Who can tell,
How many Monarks by their Vassals fell?
We need not travail Greece, Rome, Beme, France, Spain;
In our sole Britain fifty Monarks slain:
That Aventinus boldly dares report, Aventinus de Bello Turcico. George Abbot
Archbish Ca^. in his description of the World.

The Roman-German Emperor kept a court,
Where Kings were subject: none but Asses were
Vassailes to the French King, because they bear
Such heavy burdens; the Hesperian Kings,
Were Kings of men, because the Spaniard clings
So closely to his Prince. A King of Devils,
Our English King, by reason of the evils
Against their Kings done by the subjects hands,
Rebellions, depositions, murders, bands.
Yet we must understand there is mighty ods,
Betwixt the Commons, and terrestrial Gods.
Angels guard us, Matthew. 18.
archangels wait on them,
Secure their persons, Dan. 10.
and protect the Realm
For Monarks sakes: Ps. 81.
let the world know that Kings,
Are gods on earth, and consecrated things.
Precious 'ith sight of God, in state most high,
Who touch 'em, Zach. 2.
touch the apple of Gods eye.
Semei may bark, Reg. 2. cap. 16. ib. 17.
Achitophel counsel give,
But how long after did these traitors live?
The politician, farewell gently takes
Of all his friends, and with decorum makes
(If hanging have a decency) an end
Of's loathed life. Ibid. 19.
Semei is made a friend,
To the restored King; but with this law
(Which whilst he lives shall keep him still in awe)
He must not leave his house: some few years pass,
His servants run away; mounting his Ass
He brings 'em back again. Reg. 3. cap. 2.
It Is told the Prince,
And Semei dies for's first, and last offense.
(Gods scourge oretaking (though it is sometimes long)
Still subjects, who dare do their Monarks wrong.)
But though high powers guard Kings, yet we may see,
How to their subjects spleens they subject be.
No such dependant Monarchy in Heaven,
Where nothing by the subject can be given,
That was not Gods before: their very being
Glorious endowments, beatifique seeing.
For pleasure, not for want of power or skill,
He makes the Angels actors of their will.
Nor fears he mutinies; lov's the only law,
Of their obedience, and a filyall awe.
Should any rise (which cannot be) one frown,
Would easily cast to Hell the Rebels down.
Who acts al things, above, beneath the Sun,
Needs no informers to know what is done.
The greatest Monark governs, as well clounes,
As Kings: in Heaven all are Kings, all wear crowns.
Nor can we reckon the innumerous list,
Of Gods apparent heyrs, Apoc. 7.
coheyrs with Christ.
Commanders of his Military Bands, Galat. 4.

Who for their brave exploits by Gods own hands,
Have Diadems set on every Victors front,
Of precious stones, and every stone has on it
The trophies they have reared by Victories got,
As with the Devil, World, and Flesh they fought.
Thus is our Sions government in all
Points most complete, truly Monarchical.
To the right Honorable, Thomas Lord Brudenol, Master Robert Brudenol his Son,
and my learned Friend, Master James Yate.
Sermo Octavus.
The Argument.
All good here scanted, if a Man have wealth,
He wants or wit to use it, or wants health.
This witty as Achitophel, but his case,
As poor as Jobs, or worse: for he wants grace.
Only in Heaven these Three are friendly joined,
Health, Wealth, and choice endowments of the Mind:
Then the fourth Good on these Three former waits,
Angels, Archangels, Patriarcks are your mates:
With Prophets, Martyrs, Doctors to their King,
Melodious Allelujas you shall sing.
THe end of Commonweals is to procure,
A temporal happiness, and put in ure,
All means conducent to that purpose, this
Obtained they rest contented with such bliss.
Was ever Rome, Spar^^, or Athens blessed,
With such a happiness? Lots view the rest,
Of Commonwealths; they often changed their forms
Of government, to be secured from storms.
Now Kings, now Peers, now Commons, now commixt,
All three; no policy long standing fixed.
Which shows that all your Commonwealths are lame,
Gain not their ends, but only at them aim.
Are private men more happy? Let us see
What Is requisite to our felicity. Aristot. Ethic.

A plenteous fortune, Dowries of the mind,
To which the bodies health must be adjoined.
(Does not such bliss stand on a ticklish point,
The Gout, or headache can put out of joint?)
Then choice associates must accumulate,
The full fruition of a blessed state:
And it is extension of a private good,
When friends partake in our Beatitude.
Such have blind Fortunes various changes been,
That never yet a Commonwealth was seen,
Or single man, in whom these blessings joined,
Friends, health, the goods of fortune, and the Mind.
In wrongs was Alexander fortunate,
H^s friends unfaithful, mind intemperate.
What was his fury? what his drunkenness?
When he slew Clitus, and Callisthenes.
Virtues in others can this Prince offend,
Which were they his, heed^ in himself commend.
What can content this brainsick young man's mind?
When what his foes cannot, himself will find
A want in his own greatness: Philips son,
Though Asia he subdued has nothing done,
Because Perdiccas has a warlike breast,
Lysimachus amongst his Chieftaines best,
Can lead an Army. Attalus brave gate,
A shadow casts on Alexanders state.
Seleucus is magnanimous, and where,
Dangers and death are most apparent, there
He will be foremost, Ptolomy does rest
In Fortunes lap, all his attempts are blessed.
Thus envy has, as Argus many eyes,
Above, beneath, on every ^ide she spies.
We hate Superiors, because they are so,
We fear least our Inferiors equal grow.
We look a squint on such we fellows see,
And have a jealousy they will better be.
The best of Romans, and most worthy man,
Was Scipio Major, surnamed African.
Was he accomplished? no, though wherein weak,
His noble Wife can, Valerius Maximus.
but disdains to speak.
Omitting these, we will come to Solomon,
A type of the Messiah, David's son:
This Monarck by his subjects even adored
For wisdom, with all rich endowments stored:
Well kend all plants, and could describe the tall
Caedar as well, 1 Reg. 10. 11.
as the Hysop of the wall:
He knew all secrets, and could make his texts,
The causes influences on their effects:
He well was verst in what few mortals know,
Whence it proceeds, why these, and those winds blow.
And what learned Aristotle put beside,
His wits, he knew the ebbing of the Tide,
And the refluxe: whether the Moon be cause
The Ocean in both observes such constant laws.
Taught by omniscious God, he knew the motions
Of all the Orbs, and how their revolutions
Sway sublunary things, and whether those
Have a predominance in joys and woes.
Whether our Lilie or his Booker ^rre,
Or we must Wharton before them both prefer:
Had he writ Almanacks, (and sure he had
Such knowledge, half whereof would have made mad
All our Astrologers) by this we had seen,
What the end of all our troubles would have been.
Since these by Prophets only are foretold,
For we are masters of our arts and hold
Our Fortunes in our hands: stars may incline,
But not necessitate thy will or mine.
Had he turned Alchymist (as many say
He did) he would have taken the right way,
To make projection come, and not with brags
Of Peru's mines, have gone himself inrags,
As our impostures do, who rich men cheat,
Only to sneak in ^atters and to eat.
The Rabbis tell; so powerful was hit skill,
That the aerie potentates obeyed his will;
And that in pity knowing how much hurt,
Is done to mankind by this glistering dirt,
Called Gold, the sinews of unnatural war,
Lust, and ambition; and how Lawyers are
Frunish'd by this to feed eternal strife,
'Twixt friend and dearest friend, man and his wife;
And if men get the Philosophic stone,
All would be rich, proud, and luxurious, none
Go the right way; he therefore the Angels bound,
By a strong oath, that whensoe'r they found,
Projection, near to come, they should like thunder,
Fall on the Alembiks, and break all asunder,
And ever since projection has been spun,
Even to the latest day: then all is undone.
Though Empyricks whine and swear some grievous fault
Has crush their stils, and made their science halt.
Our Soloman had a full theorie
Of all the moral arts: Oeconomie,
How we should rule our house, how rule a state,
How our unruly passions subjugate. Prove.

How we should children rule, Eccles.
and if we can,
Make every wife obeisant to her man.
What all surmounts by gift of prophecy,
He could the mysteries of our Church foresee;
And to one God a sumptuous Temple rear,
Pre^igurating that which Jesus here
Founded: 3 Reg.
although to this inferior far,
As to prototypons all shadows are.
Then wrapped with heavenly fires chaste hymns enroule,
Wherewith the Spouse shall count the Church, the soul,
(His compheres) and as this musician sings,
The amorous emoraces of his Kings,
In strong allusions, and harmonious airs,
What are his own (...) he declares.
His comely body was a curious house,
For a composed soul. His Memphian spouse
In The following song thus shall her consort greet.
The fragrant roses and while lyllies meet, Cant.

In my loves face, his form surpasses far,
The sons of men! Psalm. 44.
the attractive graces are,
Dancing about his lips, when heel decide
Some doubtful case, or else his wit is tryde
In parables, what Combs of honey flow,
What heavenly elocution does he show? 3 Reg.

Kings and Domestics, all astonished gaze
Upon him, and the happy fortunes praise,
Of the worst Meniall of his house, who stands,
And hears as well his wisdom, as commands.
If these enjoy such bliss, how great is hers,
Whom to his bed, and bosom he prefers,
His loyal consort, Empress, turtle Dove,
His friend, completely fair, his only Love?;
Will you behold the royal majesty,
Of Spanish Kings? travel to Sicily,
Or else a^ Naples, view the Viceroyes port,
And all the glorious circumstance of Court.
But if you will see Magnificence indeed,
To Salems new adorned city speed.
There you will behold a mighty Prince command,
From the Sea shore to swift Euphrates strand,
Potent in horse and foot: innumerous sums,
Of coin, of Sercan silks, Arabian Gums,
Odours of Saba: every neighbor King,
Courts him with presents, or does Tribute bring.
His Heet (in a firm league of friendship joined,
With Tyrian Hyram) shall mount Ophir find,
And marking when the Lions go to pray,
S^aze on the precious Ore, R. 3. c. 9.
and bring '^ away
(For Ophir Lions dig, and watch those Mines,
Of purer dust which covetous man refines, Lyra ib.

And spreads about the world to maintain what,
Ambition, lust, wrath, envy, level at.)
Now view this glorious Monarck sit alone,
(Like some terrestrial God on's Ivory throne)
Or the resplendent Sun at noon days pride,
His Memphian Empress sitting by his side, Psalm. 44.

In a rich pearl-imbroidered Cyclad dight,
(Resembling the fair mistress of the night.)
Two massy Lions made of beaten gold,
On either side the high-set-throne uphold: 3 Reg. 10.

Six steps the ascent: a dozen Lions are,
Of the same metal guarding every staire.
A world of Grandees wait upon their Prince,
Admiring his full answers, and deep sense:
Either as he Ambassadors shall grace,
Or else enucleate some ambiguous case:
For pleasures now what were his house and court?
A City this, that Eden full of sport.
Ordered so well that every meniall knows
His proper duties, and discharges those
Without disturbance to the rest, 3 Reg.
all move
In their own centrike lines as does behove,
Vassailes of Solomon: Eccles. 3.
the plains, the woods,
Yield profit and delight: the springs, the floods,
To fish ponds turned, and made inhabitants,
About his house to water trees, flowers, plants.
When he feeds every element combines
To grace his board: the earth her richest wines.
Sea, earth, and air, present fish, foul, and beasts,
And every day he makes Apician feasts.
At all his banquets, massy plate behold,
Cups, Tankards, Flagons, all of purest gold,
Embost with Jems: For gold, pearls, diamonds,
Abounded there, as rife as precious stones,
What stately Masks, where wit with bravery strives,
Presented are before him, and his wives,
And concubines? (a thousand) every one,
So gracious, might be a Prototypon,
And single give ingenious Zeuxis laws,
When for rich Croton he a Goddess draws,
At every strain such music charms their ears,
May parallel with the Harmonious spheres.
Such was the life of Solomon, and sure,
If you will character an Epicure,
Envelop'd in all pleasures, Eccles. 2.
do but look,
And seriously, upon this Monarcks book,
And you must grant an happiness, if this
Low Orb, and all things in it can yield a bliss.
But Moors, and Plato's Common-weals have been
Fancied ingeniously, though never seen.
And Xenophon with a neat pen could draw
A curious Cyrus, whom the world nere saw.
So Aristotle formed a happy man,
In his own brain, which no age could or can,
Or shall behold: Riches, and outward things,
Are temporary* Pleasure brings
No constant bliss: are wives, and women ware,
More precious? let our Ancestors declare
The worth of these. What is for silver sold,
Less valued is then Silver, Osea. 5.
less then gold:
A Wife by Gods command the Prophet buys,
And with her having paid his Sicles lies:
A Kings first daughter chaffer'd for the skins,
And slippits of preputiate Philistines. Reg. 1. 18.

We go beyond their wisdom; now it is common,
Without a Dowry few will take a woman.
Five thousand, twenty, forty thousand crowns,
Laid down upon the nail; wardrobes of gowns,
And rich attire, jewels prepared before
She enters her dread Lord, and husbands door.
Yet notwithstanding all this stir and cost,
The hapless husbands have by the bargain lost.
For some such shrews, or rather Furies are,
Their husband's better be without 'em far.
What are your Empires? what your large commands*
So many several cares, as several lands.
What are your stately masks? ingenious plays?
Wit uttered, shows performed by Popinjaies.
Besides this transitory life's so short,
That passing we can only look at sport,
Not sit by it; that thread, the life of man
Spins out, fitly resembled to a span.
What Is Solomon on his Imperial Throne,
His Grandees all attending, every one
Praising his wisdom? Despicable clay,
Accou^red well, set forth in rich array:
Yet thus set forth a Lilly withering straight, Matthew 6.

Shall quite eclipse this gaudy Monarcks state.
If wisdom, learning, erudition bring
Felicity; we must confess this King
A happy man: but he himself shall grant,
Where Is much affliction, likewise there is much want
Of happiness: though sciences delight,
Yet what a toil is studying day and night, Eccles. 1.

To purchase arts; and when all is done none know,
What animates a dog, a cat, a crow.
We see when any such poor creature dies,
The senseless carcass without motion lies.
Death some thing must destroy, some thing divide,
That soul and body has together tide.
The union's lost, where is, and what is that?
Did constitute a crow, a dog, a cat.
We cannot tell, more then in general,
How we these actuating souls should call.
We have surveigh'd the world and nothing find,
Which can beatifie m^ns restless mind:
Created to be happy: must this end,
Be frustrate? must we toil, and labor spend
In vain? No! we will fly with wings of love
To heaven; and find beatitude above.
The state of joy and pleasure, is the will,
The object either real good or ill
Yet such as clothes it self in the antique tire
Of good: the senses when what they desire,
They have, transmit to the soul (their Queen) delight,
Which issues from the heating, cast, smell, sight.
That pleasure is the scules, we are easily taught,
Because the will, or else some pensive thought
Can curb all pleasure in exteriours t^ne.
Yea more, convert all pleasure into pain.
Fair Aletkeia the search, and object is
Oth' understanding, and its proper bliss
Is formal verity: How are we glad,
When certain demonstrations can be had,
In any science? through what labors run,
To find how, where, by whom, such deeds were done?
Pleasures belong to the will, and to know much
Gives the understanding great contentment: such
Knowledge have Sions Citizens; they know
All things; as torrents, so their pleasures flow.
A torrent, Torrente vo^uptatis tuae potasti (...).
blessing the overwhelmed meads,
Derives his Origin from several heads:
Heaven-threatning mountains in abundance send, Psalm. 35.

Their fleecy snowes; the neighboring rivers lend
Friendly their streams, heavens cataracts fly open,
The earth to all her ^lood-gates gives full scope:
So shall there be a confluence of all good,
To make complete the Saints beatitude.
Will understanding, memory, every Sense,
Shall freely give a large benevolence.
A body so exact in every part,
That skillful nature cannot mend, nor art
Make better, Ephesians. 4.
after the age of Christ; for he,
As author, so the exemplar cause must be
Of the Saints bliss; full of agility,
Can when it will through the (...) Kingdoms fly.
Drakes Ship as a rare monument was kept, The dowries of a glorified body.

At Debtfort, 'cause she had the Ocean swept,
Encompassing the world, and (...) the Sun
Had thrice his course through the oblique Zodiac run,
Circled the coasts of parched Africa,
Of Asia, Europe, and America,
What is this world compared to heaven? a span, Agility.

To fifty leagues. Yet the Saints bodies can,
As soon as the swift sun all regions see,
And at the journyes end not wearied be.
Then how pellucid bodies made divine
By glory are? Claritie.
how radiantly they shine.
Here they were Tabernacles (though of clay,)
In which souls dear to God, a while made stay,
Organs oth' divine glory; so Paul's tongue,
Through the Universe, Gods praise, and Gospel sung,
Orethrew Idolatry, Act.
orethrew false Gods,
His body for the true God scourged with rods. 2 Cor. 11.

Orewhelm'd with stones; in perils on the Maine.
His head by the sword from off his shoulders taken.
These several members for the several wounds,
Shall be adorned with several Diamonds.
Anadems of glory circle that blessed front,
Gyrlands of richest Jewels set upon it.
The Proto-Martyrs body black and blew, Act. 7.

With stones shall shine in a most fulgent hue.
Such glorious dowries, Subtilitie.
the Saints bodies grace,
That rocks and hardest marble must give place.
To make them way, nor can they suffer harm,
By any sword managed by the strongest arm. Impassibility

Subject to woes, to blows, to torments here,
Senseless of woes, of blows, of torments there.
Parched Afriks glory (borne in's mothers eyes)
(An happyer issue of her holy cries,
Then of her womb) would magnify three sights
Above all other temporal delights. S. Aug.


In which he was to the false Jews betrayed,
By Gentiles crucified, rose from the grave,
And by his death did Jews and Gentiles save.
Paul,
Either in the Athenian judgment Hall,
From the unknown statue fit occasion take, Act. 17.

And to his auditors a Sermon make:
Or in the Synagogues, instruct the Jews,
How he whom they so barbarously did use,
Naild to the Cross should with much glory come, Act. 13 14. etc. 23.

To give all Mortals an impartial doom.
Or else before the Roman Presidents, Act. 24.

Thundering Gods judgments, and what punishments
Attend transgressors, with his Rhetoric make
Affrighted Faelix and Drusilla quake.
Then what a glorious sight will it be to see,
Great Rome in all her former Majesty?
Or in Augustus, or Vespasians time,
Proud with the Trophies of the Easter clime?
The spoils of Nations Caesar's bringing forth
In Ovant pomp, what in the South and North
Was rich, and glorious: Soldiers crowned with Bays,
Ecohoing in Paeans their Commanders praise.
Rome at the greatest was but thirty miles
About; had for its household stuff the spoils
Of the whole World: the riches of all Realms,
Arabian Gums, and gold, Egyptian Gems.
What Is thirty miles to Sions amplitude?
What Is the worlds treasure to Beatitude?
We speak a City, where large Kingdoms are
The graceful streets: Rome, Babylon, Grand Caire,
But simple Cottages compared with ours,
Their Palaces, their high-Heaven-threatning Towers,
But sties for swine: though we fond mortals cry
'Em up, not knowing true Felicity.
Heavenly Jerusalem with jems is built, Apoc. 21.

The Walls, Tob. 13.
the Battlements, the Turrets guilt,
The streets are paved with Sapphire, Ophir stones,
Berill, rich Carbuncles, and Uniones,
In such a City, (when the blessed souls must,
Be reunited to their wonted dust,
Completed by that Union) the Saints shall
Have lordly domination over all
The World, Sap. 3.
and seated in Majestic chaires,
Judge Nations, Romans 8.
heirs of God, with Christ coheires.
Be conversant with him, humbly adore,
And kiss those wounds by which he trumph'd ore
The grave, and Hell; acknowledge his sole blood.
The only price of their Beatitude.
Therefore with the Elders every Saint casts down
Prostrate at Jesus feet his royal Crown. Apoc.

Not only in the mirror of Gods mind,
You shall the Apostles, Paul, John, Peter find,
But all the Patriarcks, Martyrs, Doctors see,
Converse, and with 'em most familiar be.
Hear every passage of their lives and deaths,
How the stout Martyrs purchased their wreathes.
Hear Paul relate through what Seas he did wade,
What dangers escaped, where, what Orations made,
And before whom; what good his Sermons wrought,
And who by them into the Church were brought.
And as he speaks, so act at every strain,
That you would think you heard him preach again.
Your understanding shall be lightened so,
That you the several Hierarchies shall know,
See perfectly what now, we but in trust,
Take up; if every Individuum must
Bee' a several Species by it self, and God
Must needs of the same Form create an od;
Suppose, if two of the same form heel make,
He must our Mother, the first Hyle take.
But these are Nicities: Your principal
Happiness is God, whose Vision includes all
May satisfy. What Is done in Heaven, the Son,
By his Father got: active Spiration.
How these embracing mutually conspire,
From both their heats, to give eternal fire
Its Origin: which sent by them shall move,
In such a circle, that with ardent love
The World shall burn, acknowledging a Law,
That shall both Jews and Gentiles keep in awe.
A Law not of stern threats and fetters made,
To compel man; but gently shall persuade,
Attracte with ties of love, Zach.
no more command,
Then what may easily with prastice stand.
Let Us well observe what things are requisite
To draw from Scientifique arts delight,
So shall we know what they, and how much pleasure
Enjoy, who purchased have this hidden treasure.
A power, a faculty, apt to conceive,
And from proportioned objects forms receive;
And knowledge, and delight, compleater be,
According to the objects dignity.
This power cognoscitive must be combinde,
With the object, and the closer it is joynde,
The more it knows, receives the more content,
And both increase when the object's excellent.
Can any object be like God? of good,
The fountain, in himself Beatitude.
Of bounty, mercy, justice, a vast Ocean,
Whose every virtue, every single notion
Speaks an abyss of worth; where sily sheep
May wade, Elephants may swim* not reach the deep.
With this sea of perfections, sea of good,
The soul's so joined, it is swallowed in the flood.
Immerg'd so deeply in that vast abyss,
That with it one, 1 Cor. 6.
and the same spirit it is.
Knows all his immanent acts, sees all respects,
Which his All-potent hand has to eff^cts.
Is entered to all Gods joys, and injoyes
Made one with God, all treasures, pleasures, joys.
Gods all in all things, 1 Cor. 15.
and whom he unites
So nearly to him, with him all delights
Pertakes; nor need the blessed journeys take,
To seek Beatitude; God alone will make
Them happy, having in himself all store
Of bounty, mercy, justice, wisdom, power.
And such an object how must it distill,
Torrents of pleasures on the ravished will?
How shall our memory, th^^^ M^g^zin,
Of all Idaeas showing what has been,
Is extant, shall exist before us lay
All acts from the Worlds cradle to this day?
Present all passages through our life run,
The many favors God for us has done:
The many dangers we have escaped, the fights,
We had against the world, the flesh, the slights
Of Satan, how God aided with his grace,
And brought us Conquerours to this happy place,
Where (our brows circled with triumphant bays)
Eternally we shall his mercies praise. Psalm.

Then we surveigh the worlds Chronology,
And entering in Gods Cabinet council see,
Why he so often has suffered just men here
To be oppressed, the wicked domineere.
Plainly perceive these miserable times,
To issue from the deluge of our crimes.
Our bloody sins have made so loud a cry,
Nothing can cure us but Phlebotomie.
We did abhor the very name of Peace,
The clamor of the Drum shall never cease.
We chase Religion out the Land, not any
One can content us, now we have too many.
Did too much plenty cause a surquedrie?
Famine shall cure it, and much penury.
The stock of cattle spent, a barren year
Shall Victuals make, and Corn excessive dear.
Excises shall, set up on every score,
Add to the famine, and undo the poor.
Necessity caused taxes, the same Law,
Must keep 'em up to keep the rout in awe.
Why did the ambitious Horse endure the bit,
To chase the heart, then would be free from it?
But cannot; who thrust themselves into a yoke,
Deserve to bear until their backs be broake.
The Saints shall see why God permits all this,
And not a jot be troubled in their bliss.
For those blessed Citizens of Sion be,
As well from trouble, as from sickness free.
Nor can their Kin, or dearest friends annoy,
Though known, diminish their eternal joy.
For mercies toward themselves, to God they owe,
And praise his justice in Delinquents woe.
To the right Honorable, Edward, Earl of Dorset, Richard, Lord Buckhurst his
Son, and my truly honored Friend, Doctor Samuel Turner.
Sermo Nonus.
The Argument.
Man laboring like the Spider, when all is done,
It Is but a simple Cobweb he has spun.
The Epirot will with his Armies rome
Abroad, to gain what he injoyes at home.
Well may we learn of the industrious Ant,
To gather treasures against the time of want.
Such is that dreadful day when all souls shall
In public audience, give account of all
Their life* The good mounting in heaven shall dwell,
The bad descend down to the Abyss of Hell.
HOw does the Spider toil, and when all is done
It Is but a silly cobweb she has spun:
Worth nothing, of no durance, every blast
Can break it, with a dish of water cast,
It falls; or Joane when she makes clean the room
Sweeps down the Cobweb, and with her long broom,
The Spider kills: from heavens embroydered hall,
The Angels see (who with one act view all
That done on earth, (so do the Devils too,
And crave such acts as to their nature due.)
Fond men with the laborious Spider toil
By day and night are troubled, keep a coile,
To purchase Lands, and Titles, and all done,
It Is but a silly Cobweb they have spun.
Your goods, your lands, your glorious titles be,
Exposed to Fortunes mutability.
The Senates anger, or a Kings displeasure,
Commands your liberty, life, honors, treasure.
How many Princes, mounted even to the top
Of Fortunes wheel, have fallen? and without hope
Ever to rise; who but the other day,
Ore many Nations had Monarchicke sway?
How many wealthy men, even in our times,
Either for real or supposed Crimes,
Have been dispoil'd of all? and know no more
Of their vast treasures, but that heretofore,
They had abundance: And it is no relief,
To have been happy, but a greater grief.
So rich men only dream of goods and lands, Psalm. 76.

And waking graspe just nothing in their hands.
A sickness soiles the choicest beauties grace,
Time leaves his furrows in the smoothest face.
Wast not a frenzy in the Epyrot
To boast when his Victorious sword had got,
Great Rome and Italy; Plutarch in vita Pyrrhi.
he would waft ore,
And land his forces on the Lybick shore.
Africa subdued, he would conquer ^^ince and Spain,
Then Asia, and the Eastern R^gions game.
The sage Philosopher demanding leave,
Thus does the haughty Pyrrhus undeceive.
What title have you to invade these lands?
It Is not the number of acquirde commands
Makes Monarcks potent? rather such are weak,
Who in their Conquests laws of justice break.
Pyrrhus. Do not I lyneally claim^ my descent,
From great Achilles, who to ^lium went?
And Neoptolemus his warlike son,
Who sacked the City of Laomedon.
I tell thee Cineas thy friend Pyrrhus springs
From Alexander, and Molossian Kings.
Who like Joves thunder through the world did fly.
Imp'd with the plumes of nimble Victory.
And of the East a speedy conquest made;
And had there been more worlds, my Kinsmans blade
Had all subdued. From great Aeacides,
My mother, from renowned Hercules
My father draws his stem; from both my blood,
And both excite me to be great and good.
Fear argues baseness, Demigods and Kings,
Are borne t'attempt, and act Heroic things.
Have I degenerated? did not these hands
Defeat Demetrius, and his bay-crownd bands?
When I was young, whose valor but mine own
Worth could restore me to my Fathers throne?
Here Cyneas smiles, and pitying much his Prince,
(Pardon first begged, thus speaks without offense.
Is It not a folly (Sir) to vaunt of blood?
When such are only Noble, who are good.
And it is a sign of small inherent worth,
When kin and clothes are urged to set us forth.
True worth and virtue not by deed of gift
Or birth descend, but we must make a shift
To purchase 'em. Such are more noble, who
(First) raise a house, then they who (last) undo.
As valiant deeds, so kindred then are best,
When others, not our selves the same shall test.
Gaurus cures any sickness, if not named,
Speak Gaurus, and his Energie is maimed.
It Is brave to do exployts worthy the Pen
Of Homer, and Herodotus, but then
Beware to be the trumpe of your own praise,
Let Courts and Cottages your trophies blaze.
For noble virtue like some stream that is deep,
A constant, but a silent course will keep.
When shallow Riv'lets, which on Pibles glide,
Make louder noice then Seas at a full tide.
Alive we build no Monuments of Fame,
To our own memory, but leave the same
To progeny: The father tells his son,
The worthy acts his Ancestors have done:
So we acquire addition to our glory,
When we being silent others speak our story.
But tell me (Prince) when what yo^ intend is done,
And we have conquered all, where the humble Sun
Declines, and where he gloriously appears:
How shall we spend the remnant of our years?
Pyrrhus to this replies, Then coming back
To our native Land, we will free from cares drink Sack,
Fare jovially, consume the days and nights,
In banquets, revellings, and fresh delights.
Wearied with sports, our choicest Captive Dames,
Shall set our bloods on fire, then quench our flames.
The air, the land, the Ocean shall conspire,
To furnish us with what we two desire.
Why all this stir? Cineas.
why must we go so far,
Expose our selves to the hazard of a war?
Suffer the heat of days, the cold of nights?
Such Victories obtained enter new sights?
Suppose we conquer Rome, Africa, Spain, France,
In Asia our victorious ^lags advance,
What have we got? lets cast up our account,
To how much-does the total sum amount?
That Pyrrhus and his Cineas coming back,
T^our native Land* may free from cares drink Sack,
Fare jovially, consume the days and nights,
In banquets, revellings, and fresh delights.
But cannot Pyrrhus and his Cineas do
All this in Epire? why should we run through
So many dangers; wherefore fight and rome?
When we may have this happiness at home.
O foolish mortals, senseless cares of men,
To leave what we enjoyed at home, and then
To seek't abroad, with loss of limbs, and lives,
Our daughters rapes, deflouring of our Wives.
Had we not peace? what have we got by wars?
But undone families, but death, but fears,
(The tests of civil fights) with English gore
We are forced to purchase what we had before,
And might have still enjoyed, had we not been
Selfe-authors of our mischiefs, and brought in,
All the destructive plagues that wait upon
A Commonweal rent by dissension.
A state before indifferently good,
Turned shambles, an Acheld^^^ of blood.
And slaughterd corpse; it is true, before w'had many
Religions with us, now we scarce have any.
And what must be deplored with gushing tears,
Weak hopes of better, but of worse strong fears.
Yet now (with Pyrrhus) we have conqur'd all,
Lets bury strife in a just funeral.
As Christians ought, know the best and of blows
Is clemency, and to forgive our foes.
Such moderation Cajus C^^sar made
More loved and famed then his victorius blade.
That conquered Caesare foes; but mercy takes
Caesar, and of himself a conqueror makes.
They Are Wolves and Bea^^^, who on dead ^^lies pray,
The Lion scorns a prostrate foe to s^^y.
Is It not Gods chiefest atribute to show
Much mercy to transgressors? such who know
To pardon injuries resemble God,
Who more delights in favors then the Rod.
And in the midst of's fury does a^^wage, Habac. 3.

With clemency the (...).
So when his doom strikes our first parents dead, Genesis 3.

The Woman's seed shall (...) Serpents head.
And when the world is swallowed up in waves,
Just Noah and his Family God ^alves,
To be a future Nursery of men,
And to make populous the world again.
Shall sins against our selves be thought almost,
As great as sins against the Holy Ghost,
Never to be pardoned? shall our children rue,
And childrens children (what they never knew)
Their Grandsires errors? If It eironeous be,
To serve, to obey, to fight for Majesty.
Dare we presume we have a Deity,
In us to cast on faults infinity*
Are we not mortal men? and shall we bear
Immortal enmities? Will we not fear,
Like retributions at Gods hands? Can we
For sins against that supreme Majesty. Psalm.

Done by us vermin, who to God compared
Are nothing, hope by the same God to be heard,
When we forgiveness ask for Talents ought,
Our selves forgiving not a petty fault? Matthew. 18.

Will nothing satisfy? but deaths, but bands,
But sequestrations of men's goods and lands, The Armies remonstrance concerning
the impeachment, and suspending of the eleven Members.

Will we not fear? will we not stand in awe,
Of the like recompense? or Talions Law?
How did we handle Strafford? how grave Laud?
We made a rod for them; now the same rod,
Scourges our selves, as our own Soldiers plead,
They trace our steps, who first this dance dare lead.
How do the Angels smile to see poor Ants,
More wise then the worlds chief inhabitants;
They toil, they labor, gather here and there,
To hoard up grain against the following year:
When they are sure by winters frosts and raines,
To be besieged, therefore take all this pains,
To fortify their hold; but man that knows,
Not whether in the Sabbath, of the snowes
Of winter, Matthew. 24.
he shall take his flight; (both times,
Unfit to travel into distant climes)
Provides not for his journie, scarce demands,
What come goes current in remoter Lands.
Sound faith, firm hope love, hospitality,
Patience in trouble, meekness, piety.
These when our soul does the frail body leave,
Shall in eternal mansions it receive.
And when we all by the Angels summond must
Be reunited to our wonted dust,
And Christ appear in his majestic state
Of glory, in the vale of Josaphat;
Myriads of Angels waiting on their prince,
(All of the Judges verdict in suspense.)
These shall conduct you up to Christ's right hand,
Where without dread securely you shall stand,
And see the Book of Consciences liad open,
And all our actions done under the Cope
Of heaven made known, then hear the Judges votes,
Remunerating Sheep, condemning Goats.
Ungrateful wretches why have you misused,
Those treasures I have given you, why abusde?
Your stewardship, not knowing, or not caring,
How I to thousand others have been sparing,
To you most bountiful? your labors blessed,
Your sheep, your oxen, and your stock^ increast;
Your ears of corn yielding a hundredth fold,
Your Ships returned loaded with spice and gold.
And why all this? that your superfluous store,
Should find out, pity, and relieve the poor.
Amongst the needy distribute your pelf,
Whom I esteemed my Brethren: more, my self.
But your boards furnished with choice Kates and Wines,
Distressed Lazarus at your threshold pines.
You strut in silks and purple, Lazarus begs
Your crumbs to satisfy his hunger, rags*
To cloth his nakedness, bind up his wounds,
But finds more merciful then you, your Hounds.
You cruel men, what pleasure did you take?
When you could several Goales and Prisons ma^^;
To torture poor offenders; as if God,
Had not for you as well a scourging rod,
As them: did ever your superfluous sto^e,
Comfort a prisoner, or relieve the poor?
How many starved in prisons thither sent,
Even for no crimes, at your commandment?
And being petitioned for poor men in clogs,
You cryde out, let 'em famish, hang 'em dogs.
Thus you your Christian brethren did abuse,
As if or they, or rather you were Jews;
Put in authority, you so did bear,
With cruelty your state, as if you were,
Not as are other men, but Wolves or Fiends,
Still sacking blood for private splens, eand ends.
Deaf to laments of others, with false lies,
Detractions, slanders, fears, and jealousies,
Cozoning the world; making the multitude,
Your instruments in shedding guiltless blood.
So at the Priests command, the rabble cride
When I was judged, Let him be Crucified.
When helped you widows, and the fatherless?
When gave you lodging to the harbourlesse?
Wretches pack hence to ^ubtenanean vaults,
Prepared for the Devils and their faults.
This sentence given; with flashes, and with thunder.
The yauning earth shall forthwith rive a sunder,
And swallowing in her jaws, conveigh to Hell
The damned, who there eternally shall yell.
And wail in flames their most accursed state,
With Devils whom they here did imitate.
Christ gently turning toward's the elect his face,
Speaks mildly, but with a Majestic grace.
You blessed of my Father, come, partake
That kingdom, and those joys which for your sake.
When the foundation of the world was laid,
By God predestined were and made;
For when my members begged from door to door,
You gently did support them with your store:
When hungry, fed 'em, thirsty, gave 'em drink,
Nor were you frighted with the loath^ome stink
Of cutthroat Goales, but when they lay in gives
Your supreme charity, preserved their lives;
When they were sick you ministered unto 'em,
When they were wounded, and the Priest not knew 'em,
Nor Levite, you like the true Samarite,
Taking compassion from your Horse did lite,
Bound up their wounds, and brought 'em to an Inn,
Which you had made an ample Magazin
Of Chirurgerie for the sick, and with much pity,
Erected Hospitals in every City.
And you who for profession of my word,
And Church, and faith, dreaded nor fire, nor sword;
Courageously shedding your noble blood,
Have swum with Israel through a crimson flood.
You sowed my Gospels seed the whole world ore,
And rained on it your own fructiferous gore,
To make it grow; Acts 5.
and deemed it your chief fame,
To suffer ignominy for my Name.
You wept when you went forth to sow this seed, Psalm. 125.

But now with joy you shall receive your meed:
Bringing along with you those souls to Heaven,
To whom you faith have and salvation given.
You learned Doctors dect with virdant bays,
Shall issue forth as the fresh more your rays. Dan. ^2.

You guided others in the way of right,
And now shall shine as stars the gloomy night.
This speech being ended with triumphant cries,
The judge, the Angels, the Saints ascend the skies.
All Roman triumphs were but silly toys,
Or rather gaudy feastings of Schoole-boyes,
Compared to this, where Christ the King of Kings,
With him his captives, yet all conquerors brings,
Into the eternal City. (All had bin,
Made slaves to death, and Hell, and both by sin;)
(They were enfranchiz'd by his precious blood,
On Golgoth shed, from this base servitude.
And fighting battles of the God of hosts,
Subdued the world, the flesh, infernal Ghosts.)
For though the blessed Saints shall always play,
(Their life being one continued Holie-day.)
Yet shall their first ascent more glorious be,
And solemnized with more festivitie.
The Hierarchies of Angels will attend,
And entertain obsequiously their friend,
And fellow-sharer Man, leading the way,
And as they mount, sing hymns, and sweetly play.
What a magnifique spectacle shal't be?
To behold every distinct Hierarchy,
March in array, as if they went to win
A battle, or some Citadel take in.
These Squadrons marching: of hiacinthine clouds,
A stately Chariot made great Jesus shrowdes,
And such his grandeure is, his beauty such,
Angels of viewing him have nere too much.
For now the glory of his soul, (which he
Enjoyed even in this veil of misery)
Reflecting on his comely face a light, 1 Pet. 1.

Shall make it then the Sun (at Noone) more bright.
The Angels gone before, the Saints shall follow,
And Epinician acclamations hollow.
Apostles, Martyrs, (their fronts crowned with bays,
Shall blithly chaunt their grand Commanders praise.
The Patriarcks, Prophets, Doctors, Maids conspire,
With choicest voices to make up the Quire.
Roses at every passage, as they go,
And Violets on Jesus head they throw:
As if the welkin now turned April Spring,
Would pay the latest tribute to its King.
The Airie Regions echo in the cares,
Of our Musicians, what the harmonious Spheres
Sweetly deliver; melody of Lutes,
Viols, The condition of this World after the day of judgment.
Theorbos, Clarions, Triumpets, Flutes.
This glorious sight so wondrously shall scare,
The Sun, the Moon, and every lesser Star,
That all the glittering Tapers, which cause day
And night, amazed perpetually shall stay
In the same Zenith; no more shoot their beams,
By winding motions of their Orbed Temes. Ap^r. 1^.

Hoping (although such hopes will be in vain,)
They shall be^ld the self same show again.
FINIS.
To the truly Noble, and Virtuous Lady, Honoria, Marchioness of Winchester.
In Sermonem Quintum.
WHy did God labor when he made the Court
Of Heaven so glorious? wherefore in such sort
Did he adorn it? wherefore take a mold,
Better then this terrestrial we behold,
For the Material? furnish it with light,
Of all the scattered Tapers of the night,
And that eternal Torch the Sun? let us break
Into Gods Cabinet council, and then speak
Freely our sense. He meant a house to make,
For the Angels and blessed Saints, and for their sake,
Mansions prepare with all magnificence,
To please the eye, and pleasure every sense.
And may we not imagine that God aimed
At the same end? when with such Art he framed,
Your beauteous self, proportioned limbs, a face
Most amiable, and a peculiar grace,
In all your actions. Did God idely take
Such pains in the composure? No; he would make
A curious Palace for a spirit divine,
Which seriously should emulate the Nine
Orders of Angels, and as they do move,
In the same Orb of a Seraphick Love.
A sumptuous Court to entertain a Soul,
That mounting to its Center, should control,
Terrene affections: As you firmly stand,
When Apostatick Scenes through the whole Land,
Are daily acted; and in the gloomie night,
Of more then D^cian Tempests shine more bright.
(Though Noah's streams to the multitude proved graves,
Yet like his Arc, You're raisde to Heaven by waves.)
And we dare say, not idolizing You,
Nor flattering, but with confidence what is true,
GOD framed your specious Outside, and ordained,
A fa^^er Soul should in it be entertained.
Which guiding for a while, that ordered Sphere,
Should afterward ascendto Heaven, and there,
Fixed a bright Constellation with your ^ayes,
Direct our Ladies in their nobler ways.
J: A: R.


