THE Male of the Flock, OR A SERMON Preached at St. PAVLS, before the Right
Honorable, the LORD MAYOR, And the Right Worshipful, the Aldermen of the
City of LONDON, September: the 9th: 1655.

By BENJAMIN AGAS, Minister of Cheneye^ in BUCKS.

LONDON: Printed by A: N. for HENRY EVERSDEN, at the Greyhound in Paul's
Churchyard. 1655.

COURTEOUS READER:
THe Author being absent, many material faults have escaped the Press, the
chief of which you are desired to mend with your Pen before you read, else the
sense will be very imperfect.

IN the Epist: for incutiver: incentive] for full r: full p: 2. l. 22] for
policy r: polity, p: 6, l: 21] for (...) r: (...), p: 7. l. 8. (...) r:
(...), p: 7: l. 19.] (...) r. (...) p: 8. l. 1.] easiness of hand knowledge, r:
eafie of hand knowledge, p: 9: l. 7:] your r. you p: 9: l. 19.] Kennel r.
channel p. 10. l. 15. wit r. will 11: l: 36] the old men r: old were p: 7: l.
9] impetious hadstrongness r. impetuons headstrongness p: 12. l: 27] (...) r:
(...) p. 13. l 10] (...) r. (...) p: 14, l. 6] their their r. your your p. 16,
l. 31] house r: houses p. 18: l. 4.] adtient r. ancient p. 21. l. 25] tie r.
denial p 23. l. 10] that r. the p. 23. l. 29] blot out the first more p: 24^ l:
18] I can r^ can I? p. 26. l. 18] ambitiou near r. ambitious nearer p: 27: l:
4:] blot out well and what p. 27: l: 36] sternize r. eternize p: 27. l. 37] Job
r. God, and write in the Margin the 8 Motive, p. 28. l. 25] sacrifices r.
sanctifies p. 29. l: 17] for aims r. acmee^ p. 30. l. 22.

TO THE Worthy, and Right Honorable Sir CHRISTOPHER PACK, Lord Mayor of the
City of LONDON.
May it please your Honor:
I Am no man to withstand the stream, especially if the spring be from Heaven;
such I thought the strange providence in calling me from my private Cell, to
that public place: such likewise I think, (if vanity deceive me not) the
vehement importunity of my friends, besides the desire of several unknown
faces, (when the Assembly was broken up) to make this Discourse, how
unworthy-soever the Pulpit, to presume the Press. But for this equal, if not
greater presumption in the Dedication, Custom, as I am told, will bear me out,
that great Tyrant of manners. Though here I shall no more cry out of violence,
then Moses his Mother, when she was enjoined to nurse her own Child: b^t
profess my self the more free, by how much the more forced; so prone are mine
own inward desires toward the same thing; because of the great worth, and
wisdom I saw in, and the great Civility, and respect I a mere stranger
received from your Honorable Lordship. And to tell the whole truth, a singular
good Friend of mine, Abraham Chambers Esquire;
and the chief means, with your Lordships favor, of my appearing so public
laid this charge upon me; whom, I have reason to satisfy in a thing more
difficult. What I know by experience in his House, and Family, I question not
in your Lordships, viz: a Form of Godliness; let not the word sound ill, for I
speak it laudatively. The form, and the substance may well consist together, as
I hope either of your Families may witness: but where the form is not, I never
there yet saw the substance. Nevertheless, a form of Godliness may be alone,
yea, it is usual, and common. A man without his picture is an unseen Chimera, but
the picture without the man is a frequent spectacle. This ensuing treatise
despises not the picture, but more vehemently expect the man, even the hidden
man of the heart, which is the Male of our Flock, and the best Christian
sacrifice to offer unto God: Calcar addere currenei quid velat?
if what has been spoken may may be incutive, or directive in so good a work
to your Lordship, my worthy Friend, or any of Gods people, I am fulfilled, and
bound to flow over with praise, and thanksgiving. But my Friends importunity
was not in the lest to importune your Lordship with prolixity, wherefore I
shall no further make trouble to your Lordships weighty affairs; but lifting up
my hands for Gods blessing upon your Honorable person, and that great City now
under your Lordships Government, I cease, only I crave lisence to assume unto
my self the much desired Title of

Your Lordships most humble Servant in Christ Jesus, BEN: AGGUS.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Earl of BEDFORD, my most Noble LORD, and
PATRON.
Right Honorable:
DId I not know the candor of your Lordships most noble mind in general, and
trust (such is my presumption) to a gracious indulgency in particular; I should
not adventure so small a Present to so great a person, unto whose goodness also
I am so much indebted. But when on the one side, to do a kindness, and not to
get a benefit is the Law of Friendliness, there on the other side, Habere, and
not refer gratias is the rule of thankfulness. The latter I attempt not:
indeed I can no more remunerate God, and my Patron, than God and my Parents:
the former I have vowed, and must fulfill it, though but with emptiness.
Pardon, most Noble Lord, your servant his unequal way of speaking thanks; for
under this pretext I run still deeper on the score, by gracing my little Piece
with so great a Name. 'Twas uttered in a public place, and yet becomes more
public by Friends importunity. Your Lordship has vouchsafed me the hearing
several times, and now I humbly request your Honor to find a vacant hour,
and vouchsafe me the reading also. I challenge the Male of the flock for the
Altar of God; but curse the blind, and the lame. It Is not the Verb, but the
Adverb, which may abide the scales of the Sanctuary: not that we hear, and
read, and pray, etc. but that we do these things worthily, viz: in the best
manner we can; this, this is only current coin in Heaven. Grace here must tread
in the footsteps of Nature, which always puts forth her strongest abilities. I
have endeavored to show our failings, and to amend them. God give his
blessing, and then weak means may do much. The seed is the same, though sown
out of a course, and Country hand, and I have seen such seed proving fruitful
as if the hand were tender, and delicate. Should God honor his most unworthy
labourer with such a return, I have my wish, and reward. But I am too bold, and
tedious; wherefore with my most sincere acknowledgments of, and my most humble
thankfulness for the many many favors received from your Honorable Lordship;
and with my strongest desires for all spiritual, and temporal mercies upon your
own most noble Person; your Lordships most Honorable Countess, and much
admired Consort; and that Noble, and hopeful Offspring, wherewith God has
been graciously pleased to multiply, to bless both the most Honorable Parents;
I cease, for-ever remaining

Most Honored, and Gracious Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant. BEN:
AGGUS.

MALACH: Chap: 1. Ver: 14. Cursed be the deceiver, who has in his flock a
Male, and voweth, and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing.
THis sweet Angel Malachi, as his Name imports, was in order, so in time, the
last of all the ancient Prophets: after him not another, until that glorious
One appeared in the Orb of his flesh, who was the Prince of all those Prophets,
and the truth of all their Prophesies. The interval was very spacious, even for
several Ages; a large Tract of Heaven was left without a light, that so the
brighter Star of Jacob might appear by himself alone in greater glory. But in
particular, he Prophesied after the Babylonish captivity, and the building of
the second Temple. In this Chapter he treats of Gods extraordinary love
toward them; and then taxes their poor and common respect toward Him.

He treats of Gods extraordinary love toward them, ver: 1 Mo.
2. and 3. Was not Esau Jacobs Brother, says the Lord? yet I have loved Jacob,
and hated Esau; and laid his mountains, and his heritage waste for the Dragons
of the Wilderness; that is, I have made him an utter desolation, whereas I
have restored you again to your own possession. This latter clause is not
expressed, but supposed. Many such places we have in scripture, where things
are spoken (...) without reddition, espetially if there be indignation.

He taxes their unworthy carriage toward so good a God, 2 do:
and here he contesteth partly with the Priests, and partly with the people:
with the Priests from the 6 ver: unto the 13. or 14th. and with the people,
from thence to the end of the Chapter.

With the Priests, Mo: 1.
Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar, ver: 7. Panem illegitimum, bread not
lawful to be set upon the Table, or seen in the Temple; say, course, moldy, or
half baked. Then of the flock, ver: 8. Ye offer the blind, and the lame, and
the sick; that is, ye offer and sacrifice ye care not what, and this is your
plea and pretext, that the Table of the Lord is contemptible, ver: 7. that is,
despicable, and not worthy to be regarded as in ancient times. Because this
second Temple, together with its appurtenances, Ezta. 3.12.
was not so splendid, and glorious as the former house, Therefore these
profane Priests did despise the day of small things, and thought it now
needless to be curious and exact in administering before the Lord. Wherefore God
contends with them, and give a clear demonstration of the justness of his
quarrel three ways.

1. By a comparison of his most transcendent Majesty with some small petty
Governor in Judea, and himself a Vassal to the King of Babylon; who yet would
scorn such a present as they brought into the Temple, ver: 8. Offer it now unto
thy Gevernor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord
of Hoasts? May not I your Creator sadly complain, being less regarded then man
your fellow creature?

2. By a declaration of his sul rewarding them for all their service, and
attendance, ver: 10. Which of you does shut the doors of mine house for
naught? neither do ye kindle a fire on mine Altar for naught? that is, I have
given you a just salarie for all your service; and ought not therefore to be so
scorned, and neglected.

3 By a prediction of greater respect from the poor Gentiles, whom they looked
upon little better than bruit Beasts, who yet would have more understanding,
and bring unto God a better Offering, ver: 11. From the rising of the Sun unto
the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in
every place incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure Offering. May not
this be grievous unto me says the Lord, that strangers should honor me, but
mine own children contemn me; that my name should be great among the Heathens,
and yet I little in your eyes?

With the people he contesteth likewise, ver: 13. 2 do:
Ye said also, behold what a wearines is it, and ye have snuffed at it; and
ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought
an Offering, should I accept this at your hands says the Lord of Hoasts? that
is, ye do me but little service, and that after a most unworthy manner, yet
ye grudg and complain, as if the burden imposed would necessarily break your
backs. Should I accept this at your hands? can I take any pleasure in you, or
your services, while your hearts are no more toward me, and my ways? if ye
think so, Toto erratis coelo, ye are much mitaken, Imo maledictus, etc. Cursed
is the Deceiver who has in his flock a Male, etc.

In which words there are these two parts considerable. viz: A fearful
Anathema. The person anathematized.


1. The anathema is in the first word of my Text, Cursed; what that means we
shall tell afterward.

The person Anathematized is described unto us in General. Particular.


In general, by the name deceiver, Cursed is the Deceiver, Qui cum Deo dolose
agit. He deals deceitful with God, and is not plain and upright in his
proceedings: but casts about in his mind, not only to go beyond man, but even
God also. One that is hallow-harted in Gods service. He may be called a
Deceiver, because he would deceive God, and others, and does deceive himself;
Tam a consequenti, quam a precedenti; he is bold and subtle to face it out in
Religion, when indeed irreligious; and he is blockish, and foolish to expect a
blessing, viz. the love and favor of God, but behold a Curse.

In particular, and so this deceiver is set forth three ways. By his 1.
Possession. 2. Seeming piety. 3. Real impurity.


In all which his deceit and baseness is made the more manifest.

1. By his possession. He has in his flock a Male. He is one having flocks,
and Herds, and among them goodly, and choice Cattle, for he has a Male, by
which I understand one of the prime, and the best of his flock, a lovely Lamb
without spot or blemish, fair, and fat, and every way fit for sacrifice; indeed
so good, that this deceiver thinks it too good for God, and to be cast away at
the Altar, a worse shall serve the turn. That this word (Male) must here thus
be taken, besides the consent of several expositors, I lay down these grounds.

Because first, It stands not in opposition to a Female; for the Law in some
cases permitted Females, even as Males, Levitt: chap: 3. ver: 1.

2ly. It is here opposed to a corrupt thing in the end of my Text; now I shall
presently show, that by a corrupt thing is understood one of the worst of the
flock, and consequently, by a Male, one of the best of the flock, otheewise the
opposition would be neither full, nor just.

3ly. The very corrupt thing here offered in all probability was a Male; for
this Deceiver as he had stronger, so he had feebler Cattle, sick, and lame,
etc. and questionless among these he had many Males, one of which in all
likelihood he offered unto God; which Offering of his, though a Male, was
nevertheless a corrupt thing. All which being put together, do fully satisfy
me, that it it is an ecliptic expression, a Male for the best Male in the
Flock; even as in Isa: 1.18. Wool, for the whitest wool.

2. By his seeming piety, and that in two things, A Votary. Sacrificer.


1. A Votary, He voweth, either voluntarily, by an act arising from the freedom
of his own will, or else occasionally moved thereunto, either to obtain some
good, as Jeptah to subdue the Amonites, Judge: 11.30. And Jacob to return home
in peace. Gen: 28.20: Or to remove some evil, as Jonah in the belly of the
Whale, to be delivered from that living grave, Jonah 2.9.

2ly. A sacrificer (and sacrifices) not immediately by himself, but by the
hands of the Priest. But what? this makes way for the third part of the
description, where we shall find this deceiver set forth.

3ly. By his real impurity; for after all this ado he sacrifices unto the Lord
a corrupt thing. We may see all along the Chapter what the Prophet means by
this corrupt thing, even ^ vile and a base oblation, some of his worser and
rascal Cattle, blind, or lame, or sick or diseased. A corrupt thing, possibly
corrupted with worms, putrified with sores, ready to rot as it went on the
ground; with such a carren Carcass instead of a lovely Lamb would this
deceiver put off God. Wherefore what is his Reward? my Text tells you he is
accursed; that is, He incurs Gods bitter Odium, and renders himself most
hateful, and abominable; God casts upon him an evil eye, and will ere long
plague him unto the very pit of Hell, except he repent. For cursed is the
deceiver who has in his Flock a Male, etc.

The words being thus briefly resolved, and explained, me thinks I see a
spations plain of matter lying before me, and in it various and several paths
for the Passenger to travel in, but I am afraid to loose my self, as to tire
your patience; wherefore I have determined to keep only the great Road, and to
insist upon the main truth of the words. Take it in this following conclusion.

It is a thing most detestable in the eyes of God, not to sacrifice unto him
the very choice, and best of the Flock.

That we may carry on the Doctrine more smoothly, a scruple or two is to be
removed out of the way. As --

Why do I so tacitly pass over this deceivers vow? 1. Because I have work
enough besides, 2. Because I see no great inconvenience, if we look upon this
deceivers vow by way of parenthesis. For 1. The sense is undisturbed, though
that sentence be removed; as thus: Cursed be the deceiver who has in his flock
a Male, and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. 2ly. Not the lest of any
such thing is hinted at as vowing in the preceding part of the Chapter, upon
which I conceive my Text has a great dependency. 3ly. Whether they vowed or
not, they were bound to sacrifice, and without a vow, that person would be
accursed who offered not the Male of his flock; though this deceiver much more,
because of a double obligation, not from the Law only, but from his own vow
also; this in answer to the first.


2. At quid nostra interest? What have we to do with sacrifice and Offerings?
were they not everlastingly abolished by the coming of Him, who was the body
and substance of all these shadows, and resemblances?

In some sense I confess it: cum bono Deo, and vestra patitientia, with the
help of God, and your good patience, who beforehand I humbly bespeak, I hope
to make it manifest, that this Doctrine equally concerns the piety of
Christians in our days, as the policy of the Jews in ancient times.

To this purpose I must entreat you to go a little more out of the Flesh into
the Spirit; and then ye shall see, that even by the coming of Christ. We are
made an holy, and a Royal Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifice,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet: 2.5. And we read of several
sacrifices thus to be offered, as of praise and thanksgiving. By him therefore
let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of
our lips giving thanks to his name. Heb: 13.15. Again of Alms, deeds, and good
works. To do good, and communicate, forget not for with such sacrifices God is
well-pleased, ver: 16. But I may not delay in particulars, but come to one
general sacrifice, comprehensive of the rest, with all the spiritual seed of
Aaron, even all appertaining to Christ, are everlastingly to offer unto God,
and this we find called, and christened by Paul (...) your reasonable service,
Rom: 12.1. The whole Verse runs thus, I beseech you therefore by the mercies of
God that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God,
which is your reasonable service. In which words Paul gives the Romans a
compendious, and yet a most complete use of the foregoing Epistle. As if he
had said, since ye have heard of the great privileges of the Gospel, how
God has given you Christ, and all things: Gratitudinis ergo, give up your
selves again unto God, and be devoted unto his fear, and this by way of
sacrifice.

I beseech you to present (...) to set before, as the sacrifices of the old men
exhibited in the Temple, presented, or set before the Lord at the Altar.

Your bodies (...) an usual grecisme for the whole man, or person; the Hebrews
expressed it by souls, Act: 7.14. There went down into Egypt threescore and
fifteen souls, that is persons, but the Greeks many times by bodies, as we in
our mother tongue are wont to say, such an one is a very good body, that is, a
very good Man o^ Woman; thus Bodies must be taken, viz: by a synecdoche for the
whole man; yea I am bold to say, chiefly for the soul, with all its nobler
faculties, and powers, otherwise how could they be called (...) a living
sacrifice? for the body without the spirit is dead. Yet I conceive he rather
makes use of the word body, for the greater concinnity of the (...) because he
bespeaks a sacrifice; now it is evident, that the bodies only of the beasts
could be sacrificed, and not their souls, which did then immediately Tenues
vanescere in auras, vanish away into nothing.

So that the sum of Paul's exhortation is this. Offer up your whole selves,
(bodies and souls) unto God in the way of sacrifice. But now lest they should
question what he meant, he comes in with reasonable service; that is, serve God
in your bodies, and souls, and so sacrifice your selves unto him.

Reasonable] some questioning about this epithete; some: say spiritual service,
opposing this sacrifice of Christians, to that of the Jews, which was merely
flesh. Others say reasonable, that is, rational as opposing it to their (...)
bruit beasts offered in sacrifice. However it is (...), which on all hands it
is agreed to be servitus religionis, viz: worship, homage, service, and those
several duties we daily perform unto God.

So that at length to make an (...), and to infer our worship, homage,
devotions, in a word, all Christian duties which daily we perform unto God, is
our Christian sacrifice. And this is that sacrifice which must be the choice,
and prime of our Flock, unless we would be accursed.

As under those carnal rites, and administrations, it was a thing hateful unto
the Lord, to bring a Sacrifice unto him of the refuse, and worser Cattle, and
not of the fairest, and best of the Flock: so in the days of the Ghospel (when
more spiritual sacrifices are required,) it is equally abominable; if these
Sacrifices of our services be not performed in the best way, which is within
the compass of our power, and utmost abilities.

Our next work will be therefore to show, what it is to bring the Male of our
Flock, and why it must needs be abominable if we do it not. The first will be
explication, the next confirmation, and so way will be made for Application.

What is it to bring the Male of our Flock?

Vt supra, to serve God in the best manner, with our whole hearts, Prove: 23.26.
My son give me thine heart, the rest is little worth, and without that nothing
worth. But here I take heart for all the nobler powers, and faculties of the
inner man, which are constantly to be brought forth, and faithfully to be made
use of in all our religious services, and performances.

But more particularly, to serve God in the best manner, is to serve him with
our best understanding, with our best will, and our best affections; for if our
homage be not served up with one and all of these, it will be no better than a
corrupt thing. If not with our best understanding, then the Lamb for Sacrifice
will be blind, if not with our best will, the Lamb will grow wild, and run away;
if not with our best affections, it will be faint and sick; heartless, and
wortheless. But

1. With our best understanding, we must beat our brains, and muster up our
wits to find out God, and to have a clear apprehension in heavenly things;
especially those heights and depths those bredths, and lengths of Gods free
grace, and Christ's rich love to Mankind, and with a reference to perform all
duties. Be not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is, Ephesians:
5.27. In malice be ye Children, but in understanding be ye men, ^ Cor: 14.19.
This is that which makes the man, and discriminates him from bruit Creatures.

But oh, what cloudy muddy brainslo^ with what an easiness of handknowledg do
most men content themselves! People generally are of the Colliars faith,
believing as the Church beleives, and the Church believes as they believe; but
what themselves or the Church believes, they know not. Whereas it is our
bounden duty to be able to render a reason of our faith from point to point;
and to know the ground we go upon, tam in agendis, quam credendis, both in
things we believe, and in things we practice, 1 Pet: 3.15. I know the common
answer, and evasion, viz: It Is for you Scholars who are book-learned, and have
nothing else to do; but alas, we are so taken up with other occasions, that it
cannot be expected from us.

But I answer, this sive will not hold water, and therefore deceive not your
selves, it is not only for Scholars, but for your Citizens, and were I in my own
Auditory, I wo^ld say it is for you Countrymen; and wherever I were, I would
indifferently press it upon all, who desire to serve God acceptably here, and
see God comfortably hereafter. God takes no pleasure in fools, Eccles. 5.8.
And Christ will come with flaming vengeance to those who do not know God, as to
those who do not obey him to the ignorant, as to the rebellious, and
disobedient, 1 These: 1.8. Think not your Callings can plead you guiltless, for
no Calling which is of God can in sound reason be thought to put a man upon a
necessity of sinning, and serving the Devil, but if they unavoidably keep you
in perpetual ignorance, then are ye brought under such an hellish necessity.

Our Savior says Mark 9.49. Every Sacrifice must be salted with salt; salt we
know is a word of wisdom, as in the verse have salt in your selves, that is,
be knowing, and intelligent. The sacrifices of all our services must be
seasoned with divine sapience, and knowledge; else the whole lump of our
devotions will be a corrupt thing, as a tainted piece of flesh unsalted, and full
of worms. Wherefore Paul was resolved to sing with the spirit, and sing with
his understanding also, to pray with the spirit, and to pray with the
understanding also, 1 Cor: 14.15. and well he might, for it is the
understanding which makes the praying words of a Penitent to differ from the
prating words of a Parrat. Here I might complain, for never more darkness, then
in these days of light, but I entreat, hear, read, and pray, make diligent
search, excogitate, and often in your minds revolve, the things of Heaven,
until ye attain the best understanding.

2. With our best will, I deem that the best will which is violently bent to
the will of God, and resolutely set to do that work. When we come into the
Command, as a ship under full sail to the Harbor. Could we suppose a chain of
iron, or steel lying cross the kennel, twould tear it in pieces as a twine
thread, and yet rush violently forward in her intended course. The Apostle
possibly hints at such a thing, 2 Cor: 8.12. (...), etc. If there be in you a
willing mind, it is accepted. (...), est, omni studio aliquid conari, to do a
thing with a willing mind, is to do it with all earnestnes of desire, and
endeavor.

The will with its first and second power (which for lack of better terms I shall
make bold to call vellability, and volition,) is very subtle and misterious: I
had almost said inscrutable; hence all those endless, endless controversies
between the Arminians, and their nervus, and stout opponents. Oh happy is that
high understanding, and deep Judgment, who can touch the tops, and sound the
bottoms of this hard and knotty truth. Sciat talis, se esse theologum, and Deo
gratias agat; May not an ordinary capacity even here tu^^ sceptique, and
seeker; and say, Hoc scio, quod nil scio; this one thing I know, that I know
nothing.

But to our purpose, It Is manifest there is in man a carnal, and a spiritual
will. I see a law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind, Rom: 7.23.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, Gal:
5.17. It Is equally manifest, that this carnal will is a most unruly beast, as an
untamed Heifer unaccustomed to the yoke, flying off, and not enduring to do
homage unto God, especially in any strict and pinching Command Now therefore
unless the spirital will be the more prevalent, (and unless it has this
potency, I call it not the best will) either he do^ not service at all, else at
the best he hangs in equilibrio (as things weighed in an equal balance)
sometimes bending toward God, sometimes again bending toward his lusts; or at
the worst, having begun in the spirit, he ends in the flesh; for example sake,
suppose one covetous, and yet who would be godly too: (many such the dregge of
our times have brought forth, who have drawn a contract, and would needs
solemnize a Marriage between gain and godliness; but can these deadly enemies
ever be brought kindly to embrace and kiss each other? Tunc Ararim Parthus
bibet. -- But we come unto the example, the man of our times. God in his
service calls him to part with some unlawful way of gain, of which he has found
the sweet; say, in trading, of Merchandising; now according to the potency
either of his carnal or spiritual will, he answers this spiritual voice. His
spiritual will complies, and says instantly I will do it, but his carnal will
holds off and abhors, and says, I will not do it; wherefore if the spiritual be
the stronger, he casts off the world, and cleaves unto God; but if his carnal
will be the more potent, he forsakes God, and sticks unto his gain. I might
mention the same in ambition, or voluptuousnes; this therefore is the best
will, which brings up all carnal thoughts, and reasonings to a determinate
issue, and wholly overpowreth them; to comply with the Command, be it for us,
or against us. And now let me tell you, that this is a work of the greatest
pains, and difficu ty. Sometimes by arguments, and reasons; and sometimes by
plain force we shall only be ab^e to subdue our carnal wills and desires. That
three leaved Book of diverse colors, the red, the white, and the black is the
best medium for argumentation; this we must ho d close to the eye of our
Consciences. The first is red with the blood of the Lamb; oh! a serious
apprehen^^on of the sufferings of Christ is able alone to calm the frowardnes
of our wit, and provoak a willing obedience to all Gospel injunction. The
second is black with the horrors of Hell, and the darkness of the infernal pit
dwells upon it, we must deal roundly with our souls. Do this, or dye; God who
gave the command will revenge the neglect, and grind thee to powder in the day
of his wrath, what think of that devouring fire, of those everlasting
burnings? this will be thy portion if thou humble not thy self before God, and
submit unto his will. The third is white with the joys of Heaven, yea brighter
than the Sun with the everlasting light, Oh, blisfull Paradise! oh blessed
mansion of God, how sweet art thou in contemplation, how ten thousand times
more in a real fruition! and what shall I loose all to have my will? is there any
carnal lust as good as Heaven? why do thou then stand up to retard my motion?
I am resolved to go to God; follow me, or i will dragg thee after. And this is
that, which sometimes we must do, when argument and reasons will not prevail, to
compel our wills by force and violence. As they, I conceive, of old with an
untoward Lamb, or an untamed Heifer which would not be caught for sacrifice;
they use many words, and calls but in vain; wherefore in fine, they even tire,
and hunt it down. Well, caught it is, and brought unto the Temple: but now that
it sees the fire, and the Altar, and the sacrificing knife, it bellows and
struggles, and were it possible, twould get away; wherefore the Priests lay
violent hands upon it, and by plain force fasten, and tie it to the Altar. This
sure is the next sense of that place Psalm 118, 27. Bind the sacrisice with
chords, even to the horns of the Altar; what other use the horns of the Altar
did serve unto, for the present I do not remember. Just such is the impetious
hadstrongnesse of our carnal wills, notwithstanding all moral and divine
swasions; wherefore, with the same kind of violence we must force them to their
good abearing. And now let me tell thee for thy comfort, thou have shot the
gulf, thou have triumphed glorious sly, I see how thou draggest base lusts at
thy Chariot wheels: yea, and thou shall conquer more and more, and tread down
Satan under thy feet. The will of man is all in all, sind me will, and I Will find
all the rest; as in civils, so in divine actions; as the Sun among the Orbs
domineereth in his Light, and gloriously illustrates the superior, and inferior
Planets: so the will in the mi^dle between the understanding, and the affections
has a wonderful influence both upon the one and the other, to set them in good
earnest about the service of God.

3ly: With our best affections, as with fear and reverence. God is exceedingly
to be reverenced in the Assembly of Saints, and to be had in honor of all
those who are round about him, Psa. 89.7. So likewise with love, joy, defire,
delight, and in a word, with zeal as hot as fire. We must be passionate Lovers
of God, and of his service; Be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Rom: 12.11.
(...) Gal: 4.18. It is good to be zealous in a good work. This is a good work,
and we must be zealous in the transacting it. Zeal is the intention of any
affection, as strong desires is zeal, vehement love is zeal; which should be a
perpetual concomitant to all our devotions; if we have not this fire upon the
Altar, our sacrifice will not burn. It Is not enough we take up our Bow, and our
Quiver, but we must strain the string up to the arrows head by a strong nisus,
and laboring of the spirit. He that sets out for Heaven, must betake himself
to the swifter Chariots of Aminadab, Cant: 6.12,
and not drive on so heavily and sluggishly with the world.

We must not only be content to come to Church, and hear a Sermon, and spend an
hour etc: but long for the Courts of Gods house with the same eager appetite,
as a Longing-Woman her much desired Morsel. Again, we should find as much
sweetness in the Word, and divine revelation, as an elegant Palate in marrow
and fatnes, How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea sweeter then honey to my
mouth. Ps: 119.103. So likewise in private and secret; to read, pray, and pour
forth our souls to peform all Christian duties of meditation, and
selfexamination etc: all these are to be done with strength of desires, and
fullness of delectation. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that
delights himself greatly in Gods Commandments; he does what is his duty, and
delights, yea greatly delights in what he does, so that in comparison he Loves
and delights in nothing ease. As for Wife and Children, and the enjoyments of
this world, he Loves them as if he loved them not; ye know where I have the
phrase, 1 Cor: 7.30. The rule is; to rejoice as if we rejoiced not, to buy as
if we possessed not; to use the world as if we used it not. Now this holy man
of God observes this rule, having the maine stream of his affectious flowing
forth to God, and only some little out-lots to the things of this world. God
has his heart, and then he loves in good earnest; as it is said of Elias, he
prayed earnestly, (...), he prayed in praying: so they delight in delighting,
and love in loving: and this love of God is like the rod of Aaron among the
rods of the Magicians, consuming and devouring whatsoever stands in
competition. What we have spoken here more largely in the Explication, we may
find as shortly in the words of our Savior, John 4.24. They who worship God,
must worship him in spirit, and in truth. Let this suffice for the first part
of the Doctrine; we now come unto the second, viz: why it must needs be
detestable unto God if we do not sacrifice unto him the Male of our flock.

The first reason may be this. Because it is so contrary to the way and method
of God;

Let us see the Platform of Gods Ecclesiastes, or Church Discipline chalked out
to Israel in the Wilderness, and because we are to sacrifice we will bring you
to the Tabernacle: where ye can see nothing base or common; nothing refuse, or
vile, but choice, costly, and precious, as could be had these days upon the
earth. Read over at your leisure the 25, 26, 27, 28 Chapters of Exodus. Let
them bring gold, and silver, and brass, and blue and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen, and Goats-hair, and Ramskins died red, and badgers-skins, and
Shittim-wood etc. and let them make a sanctuary that I may dwell amongst them.
Every thing in this Sanctuary was very rich and costly; either massy-^old, or
at lest select wood ov^r-layed with gold. As the Ark, and the ta^le of
S^^w-bread were shittim-wood, yet over-layed with gold; but the Cherubims and
Mercy-seat were pure gold, v: ^7, 18. c: 25. So likewise the dishes, spoons,
and covers, ver: 29. the candlestick, tongs, and snuffdishes, ver: 3^, and 38.
The oil for the Lamp was to be pure olive, chap: 27, 20. Now for Aron and his
Sons the Priests who were to administer before the Lord, Moses was commanded to
array them most gorgeously; Thou shall make holy garments for Aaron thy
Brother, for glory, and for beauty, and thou shall speak unto all who are wise
hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they make Aarons
garments to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the Priests Office,
and these are the garments which they shall make, a breast plate, and an Ephod,
and a Robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle, etc: and they shall
take gold, and blue, and purple, and fine linen, etc. chap: 28.2, 3, 4 and 5
verses. These for the Offering, God required the first ripe fruits, which we
all know are still the choice, and the fairest; the top ears of corn, and the
principal wheat. If they brought an Offering of the increase of their flock, it
was to be a lovely Lamb without blemish, Levit: 1.3. if of the fruit of the
field, It was to be the finest of the flour, and the kidneys of the wheat. In
one word ye may see what God says unto Aaron, I have given thee the best of
the Oil and the best of the Wine; and of the Wheat, and the first fruits, which
they shall offer unto the Lord, Numb. 18.12. Afterward in the days of Solomon
when this Tabernacle grew into a Temple, it lost nothing of its pompeous
ceremoniousness, but rather increased in glory, and became much more
magnificent, for David that great Warrior, and most victorious Captain
consecrated the spoils of many Crowns and Kingdoms to the House of God; and
much more super-added by Solomon his Son. Certainly it was the goodliest pile,
and most stately structure that ere the sun beheld, and all other things were
in a just equippage. The Priests, the Levites, the Sacrifices, the Offerings,
the Altars, Tables, Vessels, Vtensils, and all the appurtenances: all rich and
costly, and nothing common and forbid among them. Now God in all these things
did show clearly as in an emblem that his service, and worship was a thing most
sacred and solemn; that he did expect the best of man in all their approachings
unto his Majesty, and that nothing less should ever be accepted at his hands.
This likewise is his Law in the Third Commandment. Thou shall not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless
that takes his Name in vain. The first Commandment shows who is to be
worshipped, viz. the only true God, the Second, after what rule viz: divine
revelation, and not hnmane imagination; the Third after what manner, Thou shall
not take his Name in vain; that is, thou shall not presume to intermeddle with
God, or his Worship after a slight and empty way; but holily, reverently, and
most devoutly, as is beseeming his sacred Majesty, for the Lord will not hold
them guiltless, that is (according to my Doctrine) he will curse them. The
fourth shows the time of public Worship, and I rather mention it, because of
that appendent to it, making clear to our purpose Levit: 19.30. Ye shall keep
my Sabbath; but that is not all, it follows, and reverence my Sanctuary. I will
be sanctified in them that come near me, and before all the people will I be
glorified says the Lord, Levit: 10.3. Let them make their addresses to me
after such a worthy manner, that glory, and not dishonor may redound unto my
Majesty by their service and homage, and this makes way for the second ground
of the point, viz.

The blind, and the lame are a reproach unto God, and do much derogate from the
greatness of his Majesty; of this God seems to convince them in the words
immediately following my Text, for I am a great King; but ye make of me by your
unworthy service, and Offering, as if I were some poor, mean, and slender
Deity; it follows, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen, that is, I have
gotten to my self a great Name in a l the earth, so that the very head of the
Heathen has made a decree that men fear, Dan, 6.28. unto which I suppose these
words do relate
and tremble before the God of Daniel, the God of Israel. I am known to be a
God of Gods, and a Lord of Lords, and ye are known to be my people. It Is known
my dwelling place is in S^on, and my Temple in Jerusalem; hither the Tribes
come up, and all the Kindreds of the earth to bring oblations upon mine Altar.
But now that they come and see; what can they guess by the meaness of their
service, and the baseness of their Offering, but that I am not the same mighty
God, and dreadful Majesty as I am reported; else sure I should obtain more
reverence and respect among mine own people, and in the house which is called
by my Name; Thus instead of upholding my brightness, ye obscure my glory, and
lay mine honor in the dust. Even such, and greater is the indignity in the
days of the Gospel, if our services be mean and and low, and not performed
with the greatest curiosity, and exactnes. A little present speaks a man a
little Prince to whom it is sent; even so jejune and empty devotions insinuate
no less than a thin and empty Godhead, to whom they are performed. But if this
be not Blasphemy, I know not what it is to blaspheme; needs therefore must such
a one be accursed. Quod erat probandum. This being cleared, now we shall descend
to Application.

The use of this point affords something unto us by way Of Reprehension.
Exhortation.


1. It reprehends those men who say, at lest think, They have in their Flock a
Male; that is, they have Life, Spirit, and much activity in things concerning
their own pleasure, profit, or preferment; but as to God, and his service, they
are sleepy, and careless, negligent, and supine: in these they are as dull as
Lead; in those more sharp and keen then a Razer. God shall be put off with what
comes next to hand; let it please, or displease, take it how he will. Religion
with the most men has the Curse of Cham upon it, it is made a servant of
servants: a slave, and an underling; and every thing is preferred before it,
and obtains greater respect in the World. But I will unloose my whip into three
several Lashes for three sorts of Men; Atheists, Papists, and Formalists; and
yet something will be left for our selve^.

1. Atheists, Truly there is Gods plenty ( At quid dixi? muto factum, I mean
the Devils plenty) of such in our Land; even a profane generation of Men, who
are so far from Offering the Male of their Flock, that they Offer Male, nor
Female; sound, nor sick; best, nor worst; flesh, nor fleece; neither a holy,
nor a corrupt thing. They have Gallio his eyes, and look upon Religion as a
mere matter of words, and names; an ayery empty nothing; wherefore God is not
in all their thoughts, so as to do homage unto him, neither have they
conscience in any such matter. Give them for back, and for belly; for their
lusts and carnal appetites. and you have the very outside of their desires;
what care they for preaching or praying, whither ever Sermon more, or Sabbath
more in the World? go to their House (for they are scarce seen in the Holy
Assembly) and you shall find there, nor Altar, nor fire; incense nor sacrifice;
nor any tending toward Worship. They neither read, nor pray, or perform any
good Family-duty from one end of the year to the other; in a word, they are
mere Swine, and bruites in the shape of men. But I dare not long abide with
them under the same Roof, (no more then John with Cerinchus in the same Bath)
lest it should fall upon my head, valiant; fare them well; only I will write upon
their doors. Anathema maranatha Deus Judex and vindex, God will come and Judge
them.

2. Papists. Now I must send my Doctrine on an Embassy, and let it fly with a
swift wing to the Towers of spiritual Babylon, (for we have no Papists among
our selves, O utinam, would to God it were so;) but yet let it go; and now that
it is arrived, it may perhaps Prima front commend and applaud; instead of
censuring, and reprehending. Behold here are Temples, and Altars; Sacrifices,
and Priests; and all in their Pontificalibus. Magnus equidem apparatus. A great
appearance, and yet when all is done, a mere Outside; but our Doctrine
requires Truth in the hidden man. Here is aureum vellus, the lovely fleece of
the Male of the flock; but the fat, and the flesh, and the inwards are not to
be found. Truly their service, and pompous cerimoniousness is like a Sacrifice
of paint; as when I see Abraham and Isaac pourtrayed upon the wall; and the
Altar built, the wood laid in order, and the Father bowing down upon the Son to
make him a Sacrifice; my phanticy is moved, though all is but a fantasy; or
if you will, this their outward glory is like Esaus goodly raiment, for all
underneath is Jacobs hollowness, and deceit. Si parvis componere magna licebit.

Let us see their sin-Offering, (so it is indeed) the sacrifice of atonement
making, which they call Penance. A Papist sins, and confesses to the Priest;
so many Rosaries of Ave Mary's, and Pater nosters are to be mumbled, and rolled
over; say them they will (except they mistake their Beads) but see the vanity
whilst they are walking in the streets, busy about Merchandi; zing, playing at
Cards, between first and second course, interlard them with Oaths, and
execrations, and yet on again til the task be fulfilled; and the man is
devout, and perhaps dies a Saint. But if this be not to offer unto God a
corrupt thing, judge ye. And our ignorant

3. Formalists are Ejusdem farinae, like to like; Mr: Rogers of Dedham.
as he in his plain but solid way to his Parishioners. Ye will say your prayers
indeed, but how? while unbuttoning your doublets, pulling off your shoes and
stockings when you are in your Beds, and the latter end of your Pater noster
falls asleep in your mouths. Oh, worthy service, and as worthily performed! And
truly

4. The best of us all comes under censure; how often do we offer the blind,
and the lame? how poor! how thin! how cold! how sleepy! how dead! how
superficial! how formal! how lazy! how sluggish! how low are we generally in
all our holy, and religious Offices! how faintly! how feebly! how weakly! how
sickly! how slovenly! how lazily! and how every way unmanly are they managed,
and transacted! Let no man say what need so many words? for I need them, and
ten times more, and all too little to set forth the wretchedness, and unwor
thines of our daily Sacrifice; of our common, and customary devotions; Oh how
little good is to be found in the best of our services! Bonum est, quod sui
plenum est, Good is that, which is full of it self, as gold, that nobler mettle
is full of it self, and therefore the heaviest of all mettles. But alas, how
unempty are our devotions of themselves, viz: pious, and holy affections, and
desires! even like a puff in ones hand, you may squeeze them to nothing: or
like the Lamb, in the verse preeding my Text; so light, and macilent, that the
blast of ones mouth would have blown it off the Altar. God says, My Son give
me thine heart; and we give him the lip, and the knee, the eye, and the ear,
but our hearts are far from him. Matthew: 15.8. That which should be the work of
the spirit, is commonly no more than (...) a mere bodily labor.

Let us look upon two o^ three particulars, wherein the great stream of our
Religion flows, viz: reading praying, and hearing.

How often is reading the labor of the eyes: Ye have set your selves a task
to read good Books, and so many Chapters in the Bible every day (by the way, no
good Books should take us off from reading the Scripture in the pure, and
simple Text; yea, I would hate the loveliness of that Book (though lovely only
for the piety of the matter, and sublimity of the style) which should in my
affections stand corrival with the Word, and bewitch my mind more with love and
admiration, than those sacred Oracles in their own phrase, and expression.

But for our reading the visive Organ is only altered, and affected, and this
is the greatest part of that service. The words in the Book (say Jesus, Faith,
Repentance, and the like just while we look upon them) imprint their image upon
our eyes, but make little or no impression upon the understanding, and the lest
alteration upon the will or affections; so that after we have read over the
Bible again and again, our understanding is as unfruitful, our affections as
carnal as if we had never read a word in our lives.

So for our prayers, we say our prayers, but not pray our prayers. Our tongues
are vocal, but our hearts are silent: They fulfill their task, and run their
round as an horse in a Mill, by a continual custom they will go from petition
to petition, until the words be said, and the prayers be done. But in the
interim the soul lay dorment, and fast asleep, and in all these words uttered
not a voice, nor put up any request at the throne of Grace. If God know what we
have prayed for, it is many times more then we know our selves, so little of our
mind and spirit went along with the duty.

Then for hearing, the sound of the Ministers voice strikes upon the ear, and
finds a passage into the head, but as we say proverbeally, in at one ear, and
out at another; because our spirits do not way-lay these heavenly truths, and
surprise them in their passage. The rich Traveller would pass on, nay stand
says the Thief, I must have your Treasure, so those rich Treasures of all
Heavenly wisdom will suddenly glide away, unless greedy desires like a Thief,
presently lay hold, and carry them into the secrets of the heart, there to
rifle and rausake them: but here we are men too too honest for our own good;
Truth often passes by, and yet we never come to finger the lest of her
Treasure. Generally this is the best account of a Sermon, there was a great
Audience, he was a rare man, he had a strong, and a clear voice, was very
zealous, and pressed things home. But what? here they are utterly to seek. Even
as Ahimaaz, 2 Samuel: 18.29. that came from the Battle of Absalon parting, and
puffing: what is the News says David? I saw a great tumult, but I know not
what it was, so, as you would think they are much taken, and heard great
matters, but what? They know not what; only they have heard, they have read,
and they have prayed, they satisfy themselves that the work is done, though
never so unworthily. But my Brethren these things ought not so to be. Therefore

For the future let us be more careful in this matter, I have prepared for the
house of my God with all my might says David, 1 Cron: 29.2. It was for God and
his House, therefore he did with all his might so, whatever we intend for God,
should be to the utmost of our powers. A true Isralite in antieut times was
able to witness at the Altar, I have brought the best Lamb in my flock, and a
better I could not find. So good Christians should do service to God in that
manner, as that they may justify themselves, and say, I could not have done it
better. Grace should imitate nature, which still puts forth her strongest
abilities. A stone falls downward as fast as it can, and faster it cannot fall;
fire flies up as fast as it can, and faster it cannot fly. So we in all our
services to God should be pious, and devout as we can.

This rule with some proportion is heedfully to be observed not only in our
services immediately holy, (such as were even now mentioned, reading, praying,
etc.) but also in those which are holy by a mediem, remotely holy, and one
removal from God: such are the services of our secular employments in our
ordinary vocations, and Callings. Here commonly the next thing is man, but it
is ultimately resolved into God. As for examples sake, an Apprentice, or
servant serves in the next place his Master, but in serving his Master he does
finally service unto God, who gave the Command. Again, a Magistrate (who is the
greatest Minister of the people) his service in the next place is unto them in
protecting them from evil, and consulting for their good, and welfare; but yet
in the last, and chief place it is unto God, who requires as much at his hands.
In such services as these which are remotely holy, we must yet be careful to
offer the Male of our Flock, See for servants Col. 3.23. Servants obey your
Masters not with eye service, but in singleness of heart; and whatsoever ye
do, do it heartily as unto the Lord, and not unto men; for ye serve the Lord
Christ. How so? I serve Peter, and Paul, I but in serving them you obey a
command, and so serve a greater Master.

See for Magistrates Rom: 12.8. Let him that rules do it with diligence; not
only rule, but do it faithfully, and with the greatest care. In the one
concerning servants, I might fall as low as a Skul in a Kitchen, and tell him
that even among his dust, and dirt, there is a Male to be offered unto God;
yea, and such as God will accept with a good will in Christ Jesus. On the other
concerning Magistrates, I might fly as high as the Head of the Nation, but I
aspire no higher than to the Head of this Auditory, and Honorable Society; and
I shall only make bold to say over again the words of Paul, Let him that rules
do it with diligence, for the Sacrifice in my Text calls me chiefly to speak of
services immediately, and properly holy, viz: of Worship, and adoration. And to
stir up your pure minds to perform these after the best manner; give me leave
to enforce the Exhortation by a few considerations. As

1. viz: to ingratiate our selves with God: now such an one becomes not the
more gracious, but the more odious by all his services, my Text says he is
cursed: and the more he does in such a way, the more accursed. It is a most sad
thing to loose our aim, and expectation in a matter of such great concernment,
thou have taken to thy self a form of godliness, thou walk the rounds of
Religion, and art pretty severe in thy way; hereupon thou blessest thine own
soul, and thy heart is full of hope; and yet, miserable wtetch, when all is
done; God will nor more accept thy person, or look favorably toward thee, than
if thou had never performed any good duty in thy life. Ye have brought me
the sick, and the lame; should I accept it at your hands, says the Lord of
Hosts in the Verse foregoing my Text. The question is a most vehement tie, as
if he had said, I detest, and abominate your Offering, accept it? I will no more
accept it than a doggs-head the price of an Whore, or if you offered unto me
swines-flesh; ye may go on in this way, and heap up services unto Heaven; and
yet at the last He throw you down to Hell. Oh this is a sad thing, and seriously
to be considered. Thou have been filling and filling all thy days: but now
what will be thy reward? in the end God kicks down the Vessel in a scorn, oh how
will this sink thy soul in horror! how will thou cry out in bitterness, and
anguish of heart, Operam and ^leam predidi, I have lost all my work, and I am
lost.

God is infinitely above, and knows it, I am a great King, and know my self to
be worthy of the Male of the Flock, and less I will not accept. Even our
Grandees on earth look for great respect, and endure not in the lest to be
slighted, or under-valued. Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory being presented
with a curious piece of Needle Work, stood beholding, and praising the Woman,
and her skill; but quoth this vain-gorious fool, and I can make a better if it
please your Majesty; and can thou make a better? said the Queen, and do not I
deserve that best? and with that threw it down in a scorn, and withdrew. Even
as Augustus Caesar (if my memory fail me not) being invited by a Pratrician of
Rome, but finding his provision not very extraordinary, after supper whispered
the Noble man's ear, and instead of Thanks, gave him a more regal check, for his
less civil entertainment. Non putassem me tibi tam familiarem, I thought you
had not looked upon me as such an ordinary Fellow. This is the great spirit of
our mortal, and dying Gods; much more of him that ever lives. He knows his
own peerless excellency, and goodness; and accordingly bears the grea test
reverance, and respect to his own sacred person; and expects that others should
do it too; but takes it very il if man his Creature dos derogate from his
greatness, by the littlenes of his reverence, and respect in what he presents
unto him, God is infinitely above, and knows it, so man is infinitely beneath,
and should know it also; wherefore let us consider

2 Our own vileness and baseness, how unworthy we are at the best to do service
unto God; ye know what the great Patriarch Abraham said, while he stood near
unto God, I am but dust and ashes, fitter to be trodden on, then treated with.
It Is our great privilege, that we may come near, and be Officious unto so
glorious and blessed a God; if wise therefore, we would set off our selves in
the best dress, that we may find grace in his sight. Joseph, though called in
have out of the Dungeon to appear before Pharaoh, first shaved; and washed, and
changed his garments; this he did more prudentially, the more to commend his
person to the King; even so let us prize our privilege of standing before the
God of the whole earth, and with the greatest care, and complement commend our
service unto God.

3. How can we say we love God, unless we offer the Male of our flock? True
Love is most noble, and generous, near of kin unto Heaven; for God is love;
This high born offspring scorns to be base, even there, where it might be
bold, (...) 1 Cor: 13.5. Love does no unworthly, or unseemly thing; but if the
blind and the lame be not unseemly for the highest Majesty, judge ye; wherefore
Love will not endure it, but brings forth her fatted Calfe, and furnishes her
Table with her choicest store. Elkanah gave unto Peninnah, and her Children
portions; but unto Hannah a worthy portion, for he Loved her, 1 Samuel: 1.5. her
virtue filled his heart with Love, and his Love filled her hands with bounty. Love
(if any such thing) will force us to bring unto God a worthy Offering. Love
loves to abound, and will make us bountiful, his Altars shall overflow with the
fat of Rams, and of Lambs, and with Alexander the Great, we will scorn a few
drams, but throw on handfuls of incense upon those holy fires.

4. If we serve not God after the best manner, in time we shall be weary of God,
and of his service. Ye bring the sick, and the lame, and ye say what a
weariness is it! the less they did for God, and the more unworthily; and the
more tedious, and cumbersome it was unto themselves. Nothing more emasculates
the spirit, nothing more deadens the heart unto duty, than a dull and lazy
performance of duty; whether public, or private, or secret. As one speaks of
secret prayer, if it be done only in a formal way without life, and spirit, it
will strangely take a man off from praying; so that in time he will fly his
closet, and even loath his own Oratory.

The Ravens seeing their young Ones, (now newly excluded) callow, and naked
forsake, and leave them to the dew of Heaven: so we beholding the fruit of our
souls naked, and unlovely, will be as little pleased with our own devotions. But
duty done with life, and love, will make a man in love with duty, Isa: 13.14. If
thou will make my Sabbath a delight, etc. that is, if you cheer fully, and
lively will wait upon me, and mine Ordinances; then thou shall delight thy self
in the Lord, and I will cause to ride upon the high places of the earth; that
is, I will free thee from the earthly and lumpish disposition, wherewith thou
were wont to be cumbered and retarded, I will carry thee out with an high hand,
and thou shall mount with a strong Eagles wing into Heaven. A weak, and an
heavy performance of spiritual exercise is like swimming in a low water, where
our bellies are apt to grate upon the gravel, and our feet hit against the
stones; we meet with many offensive rubs; besides the shallowness of the
stream makes it a most laborious toilsome work: go into the deep, the waters
will bear thee, and the swifter stream most pleasantly drive thee forward.
Jejune, and scanty services are as these shollow Fords, here we meet with
stones and sticks, and many remoras: here we scrabble, and tire our selves yet
scarce get forward; but there is a spirit of might dwelling in the deep to help
our infirmities, and to carry us on more pleasantly in the ways of Heaven.

I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me, Phil: 4.13. and (what
follows by a just rule of contraryes) without Christ and the assistance of his
Grace I can do nothing: now Christ will never own such base unworthy services,
neither will he ever assist such persons; but leaves them to a mere, and a pure
work: no wonder therefore if their hands wax weak, and their knees grow feeble;
if they are sick and weary of duty, and in fine give over. The work of a
Christian is too great for man, were it not for the incessant concurrency, and
help of God, the wheels would quickly stand still, were not the spirit of Grace
both as Oil, and an hand too upon them to keep all in motion.

5. For thy better service thou shall have a better reward both here, and
hereafter. Thou have already Premium ante premium, a present delectable
sweetness upon the performance of every good duty; a joy in spirit, which a
stranger knows not neither can he know, for it is only to be known by
tasting, and not by telling. I may tell you honey is sweet; but I can make it as
sweet unto your ears, as it was unto my palate? no taste it your selves, and
then you will know how sweet it is. I tell you therefore that God is wont to give in
wonderful incomes of Joy, and even ravish the souls of his Saints with
celestial comforts, when they have been exact and full in his service. Christ
now will smile, and be very delectable. He will kiss them with the kisses of
his mouth, and his love shall be better then wine, they shall find lillies and
roses about their pillows, and Christ will lie all night betwixt their breasts;
he will satisfy them there with marrow, and fatnes; and even in dreams, and
night visions acquaint them with celestial glory. This upon the way.

But then in their Journies end, these are the persons, which in all
probability shall have a fuller enjoyment of God; for Quales in via, talis in
patria, every man's time is set against his eternity, by our duties we may
guess at our dignities; by our present performances at our future privileges.
As in general, they who have done well shall go into life everlasting, so in
special, the most zealously affected shall be the more abundantly possessed of
the heavenly glory. Some will be door-keepers in the house of God, and at a
greater distance; and some near unto the Throne. The worst place in Heaven (if
I may say so) is very good, Oh happy is that man who is the doorkeeper, yet if
not ambitiou^ to come near the throne, he may perhaps be thought unworthy of
the threshold.

6. This is the only thing wherein we answer for all the loving kindnesses of
the Lord: as I may say our little All, for his great All. Deuteronomy: 10.12. Moses in
the nine foregoing Chapters makes a narrative of the great and singular
mercies, which God had bestowed upon that people: but then closes with these
words; And now Israel what does the Lord require of thee, but that thou love
him, and fear him, and serve him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? so
might I say, God has arrayed you in scarlet, and clothed you in purple; ye
fare delitiously every day ye eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet: and thus
has God done unto you, and this populous City; and now, O Senators, O people;
what does the Lord require at your hands, but to serve him with all your heart,
etc. ought ye not therefore to do it in the best manner ye can? should a
Prince or a Potentate give unto his servant several Lordships, and Manors, but
withal, require now and then a nosegay in token of homage, would be refuse him,
and when he did present his gift; should it be of weeds, or common highway
flowers? were not this ingratitude to be punished with a Lacedemonian Law? God
has given us far greater things then I have mentioned; our being, life,
reason, understanding, protection, provision, etc. and as if these things were
too little, he has spoken concerning afterward; that he will give us glory, and
bliss, and immortality; we have much in hand, and present possession, but much
more in hope and future reversion; now for all these unspeakable mercies, we
are only to present a Nosegay to our great Benefactor, that is, our service, if
we be wise therefore, and ingenious, we will make it up of the chosest, rarest
flowers, for this is our All. Again, it is that we were made for, Children will
tell you as much, and it is that, wherein only it can be well well known, that
what ever we were made. Absalom had neither Son, nor Daughter, but he sets up a
pillar to sternize his memory; we may well think therefore it was not mud, or
common dirt, but curious and costly as hands and art could make it. This is our
Absaloms pillar, without which our Name, and our memory will rot, especially in
Heaven, we have neither Son nor Daughter to keep us alive; Riches, and honor,
greatness will not do it; (these oftentimes like Absoloms Children dye before
their Father, only our zeal, our service, our Love will everlastingly recorded:
Let us therefore make the pillar of our memorial as rich, and as costly as we
can.

7. Wicked men offer the Male of their flock unto their God, and shall not we
much more the Male of our Flock unto our God? they sacrifice their Sons and
their Daughters unto Devils; they do evil with both hands earnestly. Mich: 7.3.
They do, there is their hoc agere; with both hands, there is their dexterity,
for they are ambo dexteri in wickedness; earnestly, there is their sedulity,
indeed every word shows their diligence, and unweariablenes in evil ways. They
have appetitum caninum, and swallow down Hell at a bit, as if they were afraid
others should get the lest share of it besides themselves; As I have seen an
hungry Dog swallow a bone without chowing, for fear his fellow should come to
touch it; Oh how mad, and how violent are wicked men in the prosecution of
their Lusts? shall not their excessive wickedness provoak us to exceed in
goodness? do we not serve a better Master! are we not about a better work? do
we not expect a better reward? when Job provided a sacrifice for the World
'twas the Male of his flock, and when we provide a sacrifice for our God, shall
it not be the Male of our flock?

God put us not off with Saints or Angels, though he had store and choice; but
one better then all, the only lovely Lamb in the Fold for brightness, and
perfection; even his own dear Son. He spared not his Son, but delivered him up
for us all, Rom: 8.32; what therefore shall we render unto the Lord, gratitude
will answer I have nothing good enough, but the best which I have, sha^ forever
be at his service. Which that we may do, let us observe these following rules.

Let all our services be ordered according to the rule of the Word, Means.
we may not presume to know above what is revealed. To the Law and to the
testimonies, we may expound (...) Romans 12.1. by 1 Pet: 2.2. where we have the
same epethite (...) which is there translated the milk of the Word, and not
reasonable Milk, and then our sacrifice will be the service of the Word, viz:
according to the word of God. Here we must stick, otherwise we shall strangely
vanish away in our own foolish imaginations, and set up graven images, which we
all know is abominable in the eyes of God, that service is peformed in the best
manner which God says is the best, for God is sole Judge in this matter, and
not our foolish and fond opinions; we may see groves, and Idols, a world of
vanity, and will worship in the world, among all Sects, and persuasions. But
while they take freedom to abound in their own sense, doing what is right in
their own eyes; let us only do what is right in the eyes of God.

2 Let all our sacrifices be offered upon the golden Altar Jesus Christ, It is
the Altar that sacrifices the gift, Mat: 23.19: yea, and inricheth it too; and
only makes it of worth, and value. Christ is Gods beloved Son, in whom he is
well pleased, and for his sake will not quarrel with us, or our Offering, though
we do not attain unto the perfection of the Sanctuary, yea, the spots of our
sacrifices are easily covered by his spotless righteousness: so that God
himself will say here is an Offering according to my mind. Where ever Christ is,
there God is fully satisfied; for his eye is so taken with this lovely object,
that he cannot look off to see elsewhere what is done amiss.

3. Time also, and its opportunity is much to be observed for helping on this
work; especially there let us put our selves upon service when the good fit is
upon us, I intend soberly, and seriosly when the spirit of grace moves more
sensibly upon the face of our souls, warming, and melting our affections; and
unkindling gracious desires in us, (and there are such golden seasons) now
strike while the iron is hot; now to reading, praying, thanksgiving, etc: for
now thy hands will drop with myrh, and thy fingers with sweet smelling myrh. O
how holy are such breathings! how seraphical such expressions! how will thy soul
mount upward! how near will it come unto God! and thou, whether in the body thou
can not tell, or out of the body thou can not tell.

4. Keep a sacred reserve of the strength of thy Spirit, and the best of thy
affections for God, and for his service: and let them not consume and blaze out
among the lying vanities of this world, if we do not use the world as if we
need it not, we shall serve God as if we served him not. There was a time when
Solomon gave unto the Lord the Male of his Flock; but when afterward he
suffered his heart to be taken with si ver, and gold; with Wine, and Women;
with Men-fingers; and Women-fingers, with Orchards, and gardens, and Vineards,
with Apes, and Peacocks, and all other the vainer delights of the Sons of men;
Solomon was another Man; and now presently instead of a Male he offered unto
the Lord a Corrupt thing.

The Lord said unto Moses, Exodus: 30 34.
take unto thee sweet spices, and thou shall make it a perfume, a confection
after the Art of the Apothecary tempered together, pure, and holy; and as for
the perfume which thou shall make, you shall not make unto your selves,
according to the composition thereof. -- Whosoever shall make like unto that, to
smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people. This was a sweet only to
be smelled in the Sanctuary, and not elsewhere, upon pain of death: so I
conceive there are several aims, and high breathings in our affections, which
are only for God; but to spend them upon our selves, would be the greatest
sacriledg; and moreover, puts us upon an in possibility of performing the duty.
I have always observed people high, and hot in their pastimes, and pleasure;
as low and as cold in their prayers, and performances. They who suffer
themselves to admire Romances, and Play-books; and seldom seen to affect
Sermons, and Gods-Book; but they hear, and read with a certain kind of loathing
and fastidiousness. The reason is this; the purer strength of their spirit is
spent upon vanity; and therefore feeble and weak in the things of solidity. A
tree running out in foolish excrescences, the fruit is rare and little, and
that too of the basest sort. In your common Limbecks, the purer spirits being
drawn out and gone nothing is left behind but a Caput mortuum, fleam, and
dreggs. Therefore we must be careful to keep in our spirits, to moderate our
Joys, and to check our desires, and not to suffer our selves to love any thing
beneath God with an excessive love, midling affections are enough for these
things, as for those high breathings of soul, let them wholly be sacrificed
unto the Lord. Stop up the floud-gates, that the pools may be full when ye go
unto God; and now open all, and let them flow as fast as they can; the faster
the better. I love such a thing with all my heart a common saying, but once a
grave Christian replied not less piously, than truly; why for shame, all thy
heart for this trifle, and that? and for every vanity? all thy heart must be
for God, else thou will have for God no heart at all. To conclude; Thou have in
thy flock a Male; but if that be meat for thine own palate, if that be consumed
at thine own Table; then, when thou come to offer, thou will most certainly
sacrifice unto the Lord a corrupt thing.

Gloria in exelsis AMEN.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Have under two or three Heads put in a little more filling, which for fear
of tediousness, I thought good silently to pass over in the Pulpit.

B: A.

