THE Abdicated Prince; OR, THE ADVENTURES of FOUR YEARS. A Tragi-Comedy, As it
was lately Acted at the COURT at ALBA REGALIS, By several Persons of Great
Quality.

-- Nec Lex est justior ulla
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for John Carterson, 1690.

THE Actors Names.
The MEN.
Cullydada, King of Hungaria Nova. Philanax, his true Friend and Counselor,
but out of Favor. Philodemus, Duke of Monumora, the Darling of the People.
Pietro, a sly malicious Villain; a Renegado Christian, and turned a Mohammedan
Priest, chief Favorite of the Kings, and a Mortal Enemy to the Hungarians.
Count Dadamore, a special Favorite of the Queens, an Italian by Birth, and
sent on a Secret Message by the Mufti to the Hungarian Court. Barbarossa,
Chancellor of Hungaria, a bloody-minded Villain, and Enemy to the Christians.
Warranto Two Creatures of the Chancellors, raised on purpose to ruin the Laws
and Liberties of the Hungarians. Dispenso Two Creatures of the Chancellors,
raised on purpose to ruin the Laws and Liberties of the Hungarians. Remarquo,
an Honest Hungarian; a deep Observer of the Court Intrigues, who by a Witty
sort of Buffoonry picks out and discovers all their Plots and Contrivances.
Sentinels, Rabble, Messengers, Country People, Officers.
The WOMEN.
Hautefelia, Queen of Hungary, a proud imperious bloody minded Woman, sworn
Enemy to the Christians of Hungary, in Love with Count Dadamore. Mazeto,
Marchioness of Bulgaria, chief Confident of Hautefelia. Sycophante, Countess of
Shambrogue, and Favorite of Hautefelia. Celia, Midwife to the Queen. Secretta,
Nurse to the Queen.

THE Abdicated Prince; OR, THE ADVENTURES OF FOUR YEARS
ACT I.
SCENE I. The Curtain being drawn, the King and Queen are discovered within the
Scenes, rising as it were from a private Banquet, and advancing forward on the
Stage. The Queen begins.
Queen. NOW the great Business of my Life is over;
That Clog to all my Cullidada's hopes,
That still kept down and awed my aspiring heart,
Is now removed with silence and with safety:
And now my active Freeborn Soul's at liberty.
Yes, Cullidada, he is gone indeed;
But you must needs confess with gratitude
My active prompting Tongue did first inflame
Thy shrinking Soul with courage and with reason.
Time and Intemperance, thou would often say,
Will soon perform (and that without our Crime)
The utmost of our Wishes and Desires:
But still thou would forget the falling snow
That then in flakes lay thick upon thy head,
Which the faint warmth, alas! of thy chilled spirits
Will never, I fear, be able yet to thaw;
And would thou not my Cullidada grieve?
Nay, if (as our most holy Prophet tells us)
There Is sense of pain and pleasure after death,
Would it not make thy Paradise a Hell,
To see thy vast ambitious Soul shrink back,
And skulk and herd with the ignoble crowd
Of uncrown'd Heads?
I grant indeed that Nature does encroach,
And sometimes would confine our Appetites;
Honor, Religion, Friendship too sometimes
(Those bugbears of the crafty Priest's creatio
Will needs intrude to regulate our Fancies;
But these, alas, were at the first designed
To influence the crowd, and to amuse
The giddy Rabble, while the King goes free,
And acts according to his inclination.
Tell me, did e're the Mufti (our High Priest,)
When any powerful Monarch did demand
Even what the most licentious would forbear,
Provided always it did not detract
From his own Glory, Interest and Power;
Tell me, I say, did ever he refuse,
Or with a tardy niggard hand send back
His Bulls, Indulgences, and Dispensations?
From this it follows, what the Monarch Wills,
Is Law and Equity of course.

King. Well Hautefelia, I must praise thy care
To make my Crown sit easy on my head;
But I confess it something puzzles me,
(And yet I want not Heart or Resolution)
To think in what a world of difficulties
We stand engaged.
It Is true, the glorious luster of a Crown,
Which by the easy temper of my Brother
I grew acquainted and familiar with,
Did so awaken my ambitious thoughts,
And raised such murmuring contests in my breast,
As made me at the last become his Rival:
Then as two Friends, who when they have agreed
To share the pleasures of a beauteous Mistress,
Do yet with jealous eyes attend and watch,
Each fearing and suspecting partial Favors;
So I began to blame my unjust Fortune
That by a trick of Eldership had given
What my bold Genius told me I deserved,
Nay, and deserved alone.
Then still as my dislike grew on, the faults
And weakness of my Rival, (as I thought)
Increased and multiplied.

Qu. It Is well, you say
You saw these faults, and yet could tamely stand
And wait the formal stroke of tedious time,
E're boldly grasp at what you thought your due.

Enter Pietro, Barbarossa, at one door, Remarquo at another. K. Yet,
Hautefelia, I in time grew wise
And nicked the happy Minute --
With thy bold Counsels, and my own Ambition
Prompted, I made a quick advance,
Did I not Barbarossa?

Barb. Why truly Sir, by the neatness of the Contrivance, and quickness in the
Execution, a body would think your Majesty was no Learner in the Trade of
packing off Elder Brothers.


K. You know the manner, so I Will hold my Tongue.


Remarquo, [aside.] Oh had restraining Providence so held your hand! May it
please your Majesty to hear your honest old Servant speak a word or two?


K. Speak on.


Rem. I have a scurvy Brother, who in a small dispute about Priority, even in
my Mothers Belly, gave me a swinging box on the Ear, before I was aware, and by
the advantage of that blow slipped into the World before me, and enjoys three
thousand a Year in my prejudice; nay, though he has had the Ptysick, and
labored under a Consumption these fourteen Years, has neither Chick nor Child,
and cannot spend the Tithe of his Rents, yet he will not give me a farthing to
maintain me, and would as soon invite a Captain and his Troop to Free-quarters
in his House, as me to take share of a Bottle of his Wine, or a
Christmass-dinner: Now Sir, here are your Chancellor and Confessor, two
Persons of Notorious Conscience and Piety, they understand my Case, and I beg
your Majesty's favorable determination.


[ Here Barb. and Pietro shuffle up in have to Remarq. and both whisper him.
Barb. Sir, I know your Case very well, and if you would bring it before me, I
should bring your Brother to reason; three thousand a Year, say you, and so
inhumane to his only Brother? But I will be your Friend, not that I expect to
be much a gainer, though I confess it will be a troublesome point: Three
thousand a Year, said he, [aside this] A Man might pick up a handsome Portion
for his Daughter out of it, and egad we must provide for those of our Household,
as they say.


Pietro to Rem. [aside.] Sir, your Case appears hard and difficult, but I could
put you into present enjoyment of two thirds of it, if I could be sure of the
other.


K. Well Gentlemen, you must be kind to our old Servant, I know him honest.


[ Exit King, Queen, with Barb. Pietro, manet Remarquo. Remarq. Now have I
brought my self into a fine Praemunire, I have given them a hint of three
thousand a Year, and I shall have them as troublesome to me as a hungry Kite to
a brood of young Chickens: Oh! how they caught at the word, before it was well
out of my mouth; and of my Conscience will quarrel about the Dividend, though I
have no more an Estate to lay claim to, than they have a stock of Conscience or
Honesty: I spoke to fathom his dealing with his Brother, who is more than
suspected to have had foul Play shown him; and though Men of least Conscience
are commonly most quick of apprehension, yet for ought I could perceive they
stumbled at my Parable, which I am glad of: Discretion must be the Badge of my
Office, and Dissimulation the Dark Lanthorn to guide me.

And sure it is an excusable deceit,
Dissembling to do good does sanctify the Cheat.

SCENE II.
Enter Queen and Mazato talking. Qu. Thou always bring'st me some good News or
other,
I feared that Cloud that for some Years ago
Hung on the haughty proud Hungarian's brow
Would ended in a Storm, but now I see
The Sunshine of our better Fortune has
Dispelled those noisome Vapors that did threaten us.
But tell me, dear Mazato,
Does not the fresh remembrance of a Prince
That sometime was the darling of their Hearts
Loosen their Tongues, and raise their poisoned Venom?
How do they take this loss?

Maz. Then to be plain, if he had died seven Years ago, half the Women in the
Town had run mad for him, but of late years these plaguey Politicians have kept
such a pother about Sham-Plots, private Leagues, and a deal of such stuff, and
going home to their Wives have told such lamentable Stories of him as quite
turned their Hearts against him; and your Majesty knows poor silly Women are
apt to believe any thing, God help them.


Qu. But dear Mazato, tell me how they like
This taste of Government from Cullidada?
Methoughts their shouts went up unanimous,
Their Joys excessive, and their Welcoms hearty,
(As if the Memory of all past quarrels
Had been no more)
When we ascended the Imperial Throne
All Innocent, and all Divine they cried,
As if that saying were Prophetical,
That Crowns wipe off all stains.

M. Yes, yes,
Like Spaniels, while at distance they behold
The awful frown of their incensed Master,
They Will cringe and creep to their acknowledged Duty:
Yes, yes, the Hungarians are all Obedience.

Qu. It Is well, and much agrees with our designs,
And yet my boading Soul foretells
There Is something wanting to complete my bliss.

Here the Queen sits down in a Chair musing. M. Now have I a months mind to be
guessing what this can be: Stay, I shall judge by my own wants: Well, [she
muses and shrugs. the first Happiness a body would wish for, is a guilt Coach
and six, to whisk thorough the City on a State-day, and make the Ladies teeth
water in the Balconies; but hang it, she has that already, and so have I, so
that cannot be it: Well then, [she muses again. let me see, Money I have enough,
and fine Clothes, and so has she, though to speak the plain truth, I believe
her Majesty's Name, as well as mine is upon many an honest poor Citizens Tally.
Now sorrow take me if I can hit it, unless it be -- [she pauses a while] Oh!
what a Jade was I to miss the [running up to main point! Give me leave Madam, I
have found (the Queen. out your Majesty's want; Oh that I should forget my dear
Tommy! well, he was a sweet Lad, Madam, so good Company, and Efack a Man of
business, ay, ay, Tommy, Efack I would have Tommy of all things in the World; I
knew I could give a guess at your Majesty's meaning.


Qu. Why how now Mazato, thou do surely rave.


M. Nay, but I humbly beg your Majesty's Pardon, I have been your Majesty's
faithful Subject and Servant a long time, and I would not tell your Majesty a
Lie for the World; when ever I think of my dear Tommy, it is a sort of Hell to
want him; to be tied (...) Old Man that spends the best part of his Life in
supping of ^^^^dles, and sweating in Flannel, that has a good Dish of Meat
before him, and has hardly the strength to say Grace to it; to go to Bed before
Starlight, and lie 'till high Noon, and all the while lie as still as if you
had drank Opium; and if the fit took you, and you resolved to be merry, the
greatest Comfort you could have, would be to dance to the Music of his Nose:
This is intolerable.


Qu. Oh! prithee stop Mazato, thou have touched me to the quick; sure nothing
but experience could so well delineate the Torments of uneasy Wedlock and yet
thou have only touched my smallest sore: Oh! my Mazato --

Let thy more active Fancy paint
What my unapter Tongue can never express,
Suppose the sorrow of some sleeping Miser,
Who when his airy Fancy in a Dream
Has shown him mighty heaps of wished for Treasure,
With greedy have pursues the pleasing Object,
And with a murmuring fearful Joy approaching,
Has stretched his longing Arms thinking to grasp it;
When lo his waking faculty returns,
(The Sun that dissipates his golden mist)
And all his Joys, like some enchanted Castle vanish;
Such is, my Dear, thy Hautefelia's Case,
So transitory are the hopes I build on,
The pleasing Vision which did so rejoice,
Which showed me Mountains of delight and ease,
Mountains, Mazato, that like little Worlds
Seemed solid and immovable, --
Is past, Mazato, she muses a little. -- is it not? --

Ma. Now let me be far enough, Madam, but you must give me leave to tell you,
your Majesty raves, as you call it: Past, say you? in the Name of Mahomet, what
is past? I Will fetch it again if it be above ground, I Will warrant you. But by
[aside the by, now I think on it, I wish my Commendation of honest. Tommy has
not got me a Rival; come, come, let me tell you, Queens are Flesh and Blood as
well as other Women, and as high as her Majesty looks, I caught her gnawing the
Sheets the other day, and that is a shrewd sign, let me tell you.


Queen musing. Qu. Do mock me Mazato?


Sycophante and Count Dadamore appear at the door. Syc. to Da. My Lord, I Will
ask your Lordships Pardon, 'till I acquaint her Majesty with your attendance.


Da. I wait with Impatience.


Enter Sycophante. Syc. Ha! Musing? Well, I shall quickly put her out of her
Dumps; this Count Dadamore is the Spark she has so [aside. often told me of,
now he is come with abundance of business, and I Will warrant it private enough;
or to speak it in other words, he has writ her a Billet Deux, and for the
better security has brought it himself: Well, I Will e'ne do as I would be done
by; bring 'em well together, make my honors, and shut the door after me, and
when her Majesty cries out, I Will come in and see fair play. May it please
[making up to the Queen. your Majesty, Count Dadamore waits at the door, and
begs the Honor of kissing your Majesty's hand.


Qu. Conduct him in with speed.


Ex. Syc. Qu. Now Honor, Virtue, Modesty defend me;
For this is he, Mazato, this is he
That by some strange mysterious art
Has taken all my Senses Captive.
Retire in pity, dear Mazato, do,
And covet not to see thy Sex's weakness:
No, stay, and see that lovely charming Man,
And praise the judgment of my well laid choice.

Enter Count Dadamore and Sycophante. Da. It were a Crime to think, illustrious
Queen,
The small addition of a trifling Crown
Can make a change in Hautefelia's Breast,
Who stood before in Natures Roll of Worthies,
The first and chief.
It Is in this Faith the happy Dadamore
Amongst the Crowd of your admiring Slaves
Begs leave to kneel, and pay his adoration.

Ex. Syc. Qu. Rise noble Count, and think the Hungarian Crown Shall never make
us forget our Friends or you.


Ma. [aside.] A good sturdy Fellow Efack, he has shoulders so like my Tommy,
I Will warrant him no flincher: See what a Nose he has, true Roman Efack, I Will be
hanged but he brought that Nose with him, on purpose to delude the poor Women
here; an arch Wag, he knew what would please our Hungarian Ladies: No, no, that
Nose never fails.


Da. aside Oh! my Prophetic Fears; how coldly she spoke.
to the Queen. I cannot suppose Impossiblities,
The brave and generous by nature act
With decent courtesy to all alike;
And common Gratitude obliges all
To think with separate kindness of their Friends;
But yet (forgive me if my just Despair
Prompts me too freely to express my grief)
Those Favors which your early Bounty gave,
And which you often promised should continue,
Ma^^^^. (alas! mistaken Wretch!) believe
That something more than barely not forget
Might be allowed to Dadamore --

Qu. Taxing my Gratitude you seem to own
Your merit gained, those Favors which you boast,
But I shall --

Ma. Oh, the weak Policy of Woman! that for [aside a trifling form of Modesty
can thus endure to wrack themselves and others; as if Men did not see through
our Cobweb Arts of Scorn and Cruelty: Now will I be hanged, for all her
mincing, but her Teeth water to be at him: And for his part, he knows her mind
so well, I Will warrant him for hanging or drowning.


Qu. to Maz. You may retire, Mazato, while he imparts his business to us.


Ma. I am all Obedience. Did not I tell you what [aside all these hard Words
would come to? I knew it by my self, for I serve my Tommy so now and then: We
Women of Honor don't tread the honest beaten paths of Love, but by little
tricks, and turnings and windings, we decoy our Gallants into the Snare, and by
the like Tricks, when either our Fancies are palled, or their Courages cooled,
we let them loose, and turn 'em out again, for it is not the fashion to be
constant.


Exit Mazato. Da. Might I presume to lay aside the Queen,
And with my wonted Liberty approach
My generous Hautefelia; I would ask,
From what neglect of Duty or of Love
This Cruelty and Coldness can proceed?

Qu. If noble Dadamore were still the same,
As when his Hautefelia gave her heart,
The Conscience of his Merit had allayed
All Scruples that a jealous Love could raise,
And fixed in that belief, could never suppose
She Would covet change, who by that change would lose.

Da. Oh! cease, alas! that word has punished more
Than your mistaken Cruelty before;
I see with Horror, and confess my Crime,
And own your Goodness, like your Bounty, infinite.

Qu. My Lord, no more, I can believe you love me, nor should I blush to own
that you are not indifferent to me; time presses me, and I can say no more at
present than this, that some important business will make me exact your
Attendance very speedily, in the mean time go and be discreet.


Exit Dadamore. Queen, sola. Who waits there?


Enter Mazato, Sycophante. Qu. What is it a Clock Sycophante?


Syc. By my Eyes I should guess it is almost Bedtime, but your Majesty looks
like a Rose just washed in the Morningdew, so blithe, and fresh, and lively, I
guess the Count has rejoiced your Majesty with some good News.


Qu. Quite otherwise, Sycophante; I know not whether my Face belie my Heart,
but I was never more Melancholy than now. Prithee sing me that Song you learnt
last, I like the Humor on it.


Syc. O my Conscience so do I, for I put it in practice [aside. but last Night.

Syc. sings. WHy should Beauty stand contesting
SONG.With the amorous pressing Lover,
When the granting of the blessing
To her self new Joys discovers?
Let the Old and Ugly plead
Their Fears and vain Excuses,
Beauty stands in no such need,
And is above Abuses.
Yield Phyllis then while time invites,
And all your hopes are easy,
Delay in business or delights
Should never never please you.

Qu. Delay in Business or Delights
Should never never please you.
Seasonable advice, Sycophante, is it not?

Syc. Yes, Madam, If a Body had the Will to follow it.


Qu. Ah Sycophante, never tax my Will,
But blame that cruel overruling Fate,
That with an envious Industry opposes,
And bars the Progress of my Undertakings.

Syc. The Wise do always govern their own Fate,
And Fortune with officious Zeal attends
To crown their Enterprises with Success;
But since our Holy Prophet has been pleased
(Wisely foreseeing how your pious Care
Would serve to re-instate and to improve
The falling Interest of his just Disciples)
To fix your Majesty in this high Sphere,
The better to enable and enlarge
Those Holy Resolutions you had taken:
It would be now a sort of Blasphemy
Once to suspect or doubt his just assistance.
No, No, great Princess, let but your endeavors
Go on with equal Zeal and Industry,
And I Will engage Perfection to your Wishes.

Enter Remarquo at a distance. Rem. Hum! Who have we got here now? On my life
[aside. her pious Majesty, with her brace of Counselors; I Will warrant you they
have no less business before them than building of Churches: Well, I must
hearken, for by their whispering and caballing they must have some grand design
on foot.


Qu. It Is true, I have it settled in my Heart,
From whence the torturing Rack should never tear it,
During the time our holy Prophet grants
To us to share and fill the Hungarian Throne,
No means, endeavors, industry shall fail,
To extirpate the Christian Interest hence,
And raise the Pagans to their former Glory.

Rem. Why look ye there, what an even guess have I! I was sure Religion was the
main point in Debate: These Women are never without a scruple of Conscience,
though they always take care to have the satisfaction of committing the Sin,
before ever they will put themselves to the trouble of disputing the Unlawfulness
of it.


Maz. Since then your Majesty stands so resolved,
(As it is high reason that you should be so)
What can these doubts or needless scruples mean?
(Forgive me if my hearty Zeal provoke
Words which my conscious Duty should forbear)
Have you not now within your power to act
As even your Will shall prompt you?

Qu. No, Mazato,
The obstinate Hungarians often plead
Peculiar Laws and ancient Liberties,
Which with a daring resolution they
With Lives and Fortunes threaten to defend.

Maz. Prerogative and Kingly Power runs low,
When it is disputed by unthinking crowds,
Or which is worse, by haughty Sanhedrims.

Rem. Now shall we have these two Ladies new [aside mould that Covernment in a
moment, which has been settled by the wisest Heads in the Kingdom for these
hundred and fifty years.


Maz. But, Madam, grant this wild unruly Rabble
Should in a puling Fit repine or murmur,
Are we so destitute of sound advice,
Of wilely Stratagems and Policies,
As we should doubt to take this stalking Bugbear,
Even in their own weak Snares?
Your Cullidada's Predecessor knew
So well to manage even the most refined
Of all the Christian Herd, that singly he
Would with his Eloquence alone defeat
The united Counsels of whole Sanhedrims.
It Is known, the Mufti, our most Holy Father,
Has in his secret Conclave often declared,
(According to our Prophets great Instructions,
As he is pleased to Interpret)
That for to propagate the Faith and Power,
Or to enlarge the sacred Territories
Of his most pious Mussulmen -- No means,
Whether by breach of Oath, (which silly Christians
Account so sacred) or by the rougher Art
Of Cutting Throats, of Poison, Halter, Dagger,
Or any other yet unthought of way:
No means, I say, though seeming barbarous,
But what by strict Anathema's declared
To be both good and meritorious.
And how can Royal Cullidada then,
Who by established great Prerogative
Has, like another Deity, the Power
Of Life and Death invested in himself;
(For, whom the King's resolved to ruin, who shall save?)
How can he want, let him but have the Will,
Means to complete your utmost Resolution?

Rem. [aside.] Now I should never have wondered to have heard so learnd an
Harangue from Barbarossa or Pietro, the two pious Directors of our gracious
King's Conscience; but from Madam Mazato this, whose whole Discourse I thought
should have been of nothing but Billet Deux, and bawdy assignations; indeed
it is something strange! but I see Love-intrigues improve a body in
State-politicks, as Soulders learn the Art of War by moving and removing the
Men on a Chessboard. Well, good People of Hungaria, if ever you desire to be
informed, or are willing to be persuaded to turn Mahometans, pray repair to
Madam Mazato, and her Highness the Queen, they have forcible Arguments to
induce you, and if you can prevail with your weak Stomachs to digest Haltar and
Faggot, they have a flaming Zeal to convert you.

[aside.
Qu. Alas! Mazato, Cullidada's Will,
After such signal proofs can never be doubted;
His early Care and watchful Industry,
To re-induce our holy Alchoran,
Has even to danger of his Crown and Life,
Made him obnoxious to the Hungarian Laws:
Nor has the Accession to the Imperial Crown
Allayed or cooled his first determinations:
But when by indefatigable Care,
By private Promises and public Threats,
By condescending Smiles and Closettings,
By Judges picked, and pension Sanhedrims;
By private Murders, public Executions;
(For Obstacles must be removed of course)
By breach of Words, and often Perjuries;
When by these means and others, dear Mazato,
We have shak'd the sure Foundations of those Laws,
Which the Hungarians so much boast and value;
The momentary pleasures we shall reap,
Will prove no more substantial than the Dreams
Of Thirsty Drunkards --
Alas, Mazato, one bold stroke of Time
Or Death, can in one moment disannul
All that our tedious Industry has gained,
And then how soon that fatal stroke may happen
From Cullidada's growing Weaknesses
(Which like the silent steps of Midnight Thieves
Creep hourly on him) we have much more cause
To fear, than hopes to hinder:
Mazato starts Well may thou start to hear these frightful Truths.
But what must I, Mazato, who must stand
And bear the test of all; unless kind Fate
And our wise Mufti could inculcate to us
Some more effectual Method to secure
Our Infant Projects to Posterity?

Mazato shakes her head, and muses. Syc. Now if a body might speak plain truth
to her Majesty, what a hopeful way could I put her in, and cure her of all
fears and scruples?


Qu. What truth thou can speak in this matter, Sycophante, relates to the
good of the Public, and therefore cannot displease.


Syc. Then, Madam, with submission, I Would have you do as several of your wise
Predecessors have done before. I have read of some notable Queens of Hungaria,
as well as of other neighboring Countries, who when their Husbands have been
troubled with the Pip, like old Cocks that have lost their spurs, or their
thoughts so taken up with abstract notions of Divinity, that they have had no
leisure to mind even the necessary carnal Affairs of the World; why then, mark
me, these Queens fearing to lose the opportunity of having their Pictures
drawn, (for that is the way that Queens transmit their memory to posterity) they
have sat several times to several Limners, and so continued 'till the business
has been done to the Life. Now, Madam, though I confess Cullidada has been a
reputed good Painter in his time, yet now he is grown old, and his Hand shakes,
his Pencil is worn, and his Eyes are bad, his Fancy palled, and his Colors
corrupt, so that you may better sit to a Sign-post dawber than to him;
therefore Madam I advise you to send quickly for some of the most expert in the
Trade; be assiduous and diligent; for hang me, I never grudged my pains so I
could gain my ends; and in a very short time you will find a happy alteration in
your Affairs.


Qu. Why thou art a rare discusser of hard Questions Sycophante; thou arguest
like a Philosopher.


Syc. I pretend to be part of a Natural one.


Qu. But the greatest difficulty is, to find some of these Artists; I know but
few, and a body would not trust to strangers: They are often careless or
ignorant; and I would not have my Business slubber'd over.


Maz. Well, now I hope to come in with a piece of Advice: If your Majesty would
have your Business done exactly, and to the very life, Take my Tommy; well he
has a bold stroke with him; he draws all in Flesh and Blood: Tommy, Madam,
Tommy should be the Man, I say: Though by the way, I had rather she would let him
alone; for my Tommy has as much business with me as he can lay his hand to.
aside.


Qu. No Mazato, I should not like thy Tommy: He has been a long time about
thee, and yet has made but a bare piece of work on it. Now Vengeance take them,
if they don't guess better, and save me the trouble of naming one my self. Oh!
Dear Dadamore, have thou never a Friend here?


Aside. Syc. I Will name your Majesty several, and so take their choice. What
think you of Pietro? Let me tell you he has a gentile way with him, to my
knowledge.


Aside. Qu. It Is true, I could fancy Pietro well enough for an after Game;

[aside] and indeed, for fear of the worst, a body would have two strings to
ones Bow: But my Count, my Count; in Drawing, Fancy is a vast matter: Oh, if I
were to be drawn in Flesh and Blood, (as Mazato says) my Count would be the Man.

[Aside.] No Sycophante, Pietro's a devout Man, and concerned in the Church; he
might mistake my Minutes, and fall a Preaching up Abstinence when I have a mind
to Feast. No Sycophante, I would be upon sure grounds; you know I have been
baulkt enough already: Oh! My dear Dadamore.


Aside. Syc. I find her drift:

[Aside] It Is certain our Hungarians are not so lively and brisk in their
Fancies, as your Gallo Graecians and Italians.


Qu. Oh! Your Italians are brave Fellows; why they are Men of an universal
fancy; there is not Man, Woman, Beast or Fowl, scapes them: Nay, I have heard
them say, the great Noah was an Italian, and that most of the Creatures in the
Ark were of his own drawing.


Syc. Why then I have thought of an Italian that will fit your Majesty to an
Hairs breadth.


Qu. Who prithee Sycophante? Who? Prithee name him my Dear: Who? Who? [she
makes up eagerly] Oh! if she should mistake me now.


[Aside. Syc. I hope I need go no farther than the Noble Count Dadamore.


[Remarquo listens, and retires to a corner. Qu. Oh! Sycophante thou have
touched the string that makes Harmonious Music in my Soul.


Syc. Now this comes of Modesty: If you had spoke but half a word of this
before, your business had been done by this, but since it is as it is, better
late than never.


Qu. Since all our Interests are so interwoven,
Why should I doubt to tell you my resolves?
Pietro, Dadamore, and you my Friends,
Do all agree that nothing but an Heir
Can fully raise and fix our just desires:
Nay, even Cullidada does agree
In this, and differs only in the Manner.
The Mufti will assist in this just Cause,
Our Neighbor Monarch presses it with Zeal:
Time, Circumstance, and Sacred Duty urge us,
And shall we now be backward to our selves?
It Is true, since necessity does urge,
My Dadamore of all Men else I Would choose;
And my Prophetic Soul foretold success,
Even from the lucky minute of his Landing.
For then alone our Hopes do fairest stand,
When Love goes with Religion hand in hand.

[Exeunt Omnes.] The End of the first ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Remarquo solus. Rem. SO so! we are like to have warm work on it e'faith;
this late Scene of Mirth and Joy for our new King and Queen may probably prove
like the last blaze of a Candle spent in the socket: Young Philodemus they say
is Landed in the West with a trusty Troop of Myrmidons, and sets up for the
Christian Religion: Ha, ha, this Religion is the most quarrelsome thing in the
World. There has not been a War in Europe this many Ages, but Religion still
came in for a share; and Heaven knows, they that make most pother about it have
commonly least to do with it: Well, what the event may be I cannot divine; but
it is certain, this young Prince carries a great stroke in the Peoples Hearts,
though in reality, he is but Natural Son to the late King; and has no more
right to the Crown of Hungary, than I have to be King of Poland; however this
good may come of his Enterprise, that if he escapes, though he be vanquished,
he will serve for a bridle to the exorbitant humor of our haughty ill-designing
Queen, and to correct the weakness of an obstinate bigoted King. I have heard
part of her designs; and how to advance the Pagan Religion in Hungary, she
would not scruple to expose her Husbands Honor, her own Chastity, or the
Kingdoms Welfare and Peace; but let her drive on, I have a reserve in store for
her, that will make her Minions scratch, her self chafe, and Cullidada tremble;
that will make him turn his tune of Obedience without Reserve, and be glad if
his People will then take their own again and be quiet: But stay, here he comes
with his Pious Chancellor and Confessor; he has Fire in his Eyes, and sullen
Rage in his Face; he has heard of Monumora's Landing: I Will hush, up in a
corner, and hear their Conference.


Enter King, Barbarossa, Pietro, Philanax, with Guards and Attendance. K. Well,
it is no more than what he has threatened, and I expected; but what numbers has
he with him?


Pie. It Is certain he brought not an hundred with him, but in two days he is
increased to three thousand, you may see now the Faith and Loyalty of
Christians.


Ph. Pietro, abuse not the principle of Christianity, for the evil practices of
a few misguided Creatures.


K. You speak very tenderly of them Philanax, thou seem unwilling to call
them what they are, Rebels.


Bar. Well, from this time forward farewell Christianity; they shall lose a
Pillar of me.


Phil. [Aside] O my Conscience, a Caterpillar both in Church and State.


Bar. Well I shall have the handling of some of them, I Will put a Collar mark on
them.


K. Have you given Orders for raising the Militia? What Troops are gone down?
Detach half of my own Guards, and make what haste you can to meet them: I hear
they talk big, I Will soon try whether Rebels Hearts are as good as their Tongues.


Pie. Do you hear Philanax, the King says you must give no quarter: Sir, [he
whispers the King,] you may lop them off now with Conscience and Honor, (as
they have it in their Language) all that are in Arms shall fall of course, and
Barbarossa, by a fetch of Law, will bring in the rest for Abettors.


Bar. Nay, nay, I reckon I shall come in for the gleanings: Well my Teeth water
to be amongst them.


Enter Messenger. M. God Save our Sovereign Lord the King.


K. Prithee tell me of saving when the Enemy's beat. What News from the Rebels?


M. Why an't please your Majesty, they are all there together.


K. Prithee where together, how many are they, what do they do, and where is my
Army? Speak to all this.


M. Why then an't please your Majesty, they are like a swarm of Bees; I Will
warrant you they are at least a Thousand: No, no, I mistake, they are more a
huge deal; for I saw them, and they reached from one end of our great Lane to
the other, and they all swore, they would fight up to the Ears in Blood for the
Christan Religion.


[ Exit Messenger. Pie. This is the Christian Passive Obedience, Sir.


Bar. Yes, yes, when they want an opportunity to get into Active Rebellion, why
then they are all for Passive Obedience: But let but some fawning Nobleman,
that can pull off his Hat to the Rabble, and shake hands with the Country
Gentry at a Horse Race; let him I say but repair to the Market-Cross of some
disaffected Town, and make an harangue of Liberty and Propery, and the
Christian Religion, and e'faith they will change their Tune in a moment, and like
negligent Schoolboys when they have got into a new Lesson, they presently
forget the old one.


K. Well Pietro, when this brush is over, I Will read 'em a Lecture of Pagan
instruction:


Bar. And I Will see them put it in practice.


Phil. Sir, let not ill insinuating Tongues,
So far prevail upon your Royal Heart,
To make you think your Christians can be false.
I saw your Troops when marching against your Foe;
And saw on every Face the stamps of Loyalty.
Such vigorous briskness in their Eyes was seen,
As when the Bridegroom hastens to his Joys:
And as they marched and turned through every street,
In loud and often repeated Acclamations,
They cried, (which by the joyful People was returned)
Let our great Cullidada Live and Reign,
And let his Rebels perish.

K. Well Philanax, I know thou speakst thy Love; but late experience, to my
cost, has shown your Christians love and sentiments of me.


Pie. Yes Sir, they showed their Zealous Loyalty, when with unheard of
Impudence they stood disputing your Succession to the Throne.


Bar. Yes, yes Sir, do but trust them as your Father did, and they will make you
a Glorious Prince: Sir Philanax, you do ill I must tell, to plead thus for a
company of Rebels; let me tell you Sir, I have had many a one Whipped and Fined
unmercifully for less words than these: Come Sir let us have no pleading for
Rebels.


Phi. Sir, when I plead it is for the innocent, and let the guilty suffer.


Bar. Sir, guilty or innocent, it is all one for that; if the King has a mind to
punish them, it is ill Manners to argue against it.


Phi. Sir I am silent. O! Poor Hungaria, thou art like to thrive under such a
dispenser of Justice.

[Aside.]
Ex. Phil. Enter second Messenger. M. Great Sir, the Enemy in a vast Body are
on their march, and design, without delay, for Alba Regalis.


K. How far's our Army from them?


M. Seven Leagues.


K. Pietro then make haste, send to our General;
Bid him, with all the speed he can, advance
And give them Battle: We must stop their progress,
Or they will gather like a rolling Snow-ball.

[ Ex. Pie. Mess. K. Barbarossa you must also speed,
And prepare a Proclamation of Pardon
To all that shall return to their Duty
Within five days.
I must for show put on the meek Lambs skin,
But soon they will feell I Am Lion all within.

[ Ex K. Bar. Manet Remarquo solus. Rem. Certainly never Man took such pains to
win a Kingdom, as this unhappy Prince does to lose one: He has taken upon him
to be the Father of his People; yet has sworn in his Heart to ruin and destroy
them: He has Apostatized from his Faith, and made a sale of his Honor; and as
it was said of him before his coming to the Crown That he never broke his word:
So since his accession we may say, to our sorrow, That he never kept it. His
people set him up, though excluded by Law, and chose rather to be guided by
their love to his Family, than by the reasonable Rules of even necessary
Politics; they generously fixed all their thoughts on the King, and never
disputed the Errors of the Pagan; and how well they are likely to be paid for
their kindness, the Queen and Pietro have too lately declared. Well, they may
be as extravagant as they please, but 'e fack the Reckoning must be paid one
day.

Sure-footed Vengeance, though he moves not fast,
Will catch the unwary Criminal at last.

[ Ex Remarq. SCENE II. The Duke of Monumora's Out-Guards.
Enter Countryman. First Sentinel. Who comes there, stand, what are you?


Countryman. A poor Countryman that has left his Wife and seven Children, to
come and fight with his Highnesses Grace for the Chursten Religion, God bless
him.


Cent. Prithee speak, are you for the Christian Duke of Monumora, or the Pagan
King of Hungaria?


Countr. Udsbud he would fight for never a Pagan King in Churstendom, so he
would'nt, as long as he could heave a Bill to his Shoulders: No, no, he would
have no saying Prayers to the Twelve Apostles, and twenty more beside. No, no,
the good Wife would never let'n live in quiet, if I dud'nt fight for Prince
Philodemy and the Chursten Religion.


Cent. Thou art one of us I see, come on; what Arms have thou brought with thee?


Coun. Slid h' has both Arms and Ammunition; Law ye, here is a good tough brown
Bill, and the best white Loaf Joan ever made in all her Life.


Cent. That Is one sort of Ammunition indeed: Come honest Brother, pass; you are
in the direct way to the Main-Guard, and so good morrow.


Enter second Countryman. Cent. Who comes there? stand, stand or I Will fire,
stand I say.


Coun. What a Fool he was to make a Maun stand tull the Pagan Rogues come and
knockn of the head: Udsbud ler'n go to the Chursten Camp, and help young
Philodemy to thrash those Pagan Dogs: A murrain on 'em hoo cannot abide 'um.


Cent. Advance, advance Brother; what Arms have you brought with you?


Count. By my faith Maun as good a Scith as ever moved Hay; udsbud hoo wull so
maule their shanks, hoo wull warrant the Pagan Rogues for coming into the West
Country these twonty Years again.


Cent. Well Brother you know the way, I wish you a good Joruney.


Enter a Country Maid crying and running. Ma. Alack, alack, my poor Jonny;
alack, alack, why wud he go to be killed by the ugly Pagans.


Cent. Hey day what have we hear, a young Dove that has lost her Mate, and now
she is a cooing after him. Well what want you, whether are you traveling so
early.


M. Alack, did hoo see my poor Jonny away here?


Cent. What a like man was he?


M. Ah hoo's Jonny was aruddy like Maun, and hoo told me, hoo loved me dearly.


Cent. Come give me a good kiss, and I Will --


[ While the Sentinel offers to kiss the Maid, Trumpets sound, and Drums beat;
at which he starts Cent. Troop off. troop off, my little Doxy, Mars cannot be
in Conjunction with Venus, this time.


Drums and Trumpets again. Enter Philodemus, Officers and Soldiers on one
side, the Rabble on the other. First of the Rabble. Look, look, does hoo see?
Which is Prince Philodemy?


Second. Why you tall Maun with the Nose: Oh! Hoo's so like his Father.


Third. Why did hoo's know his Father?


Second. No, known what then, hoo's sure he must be like his Father he is so
handsome.


Sold. Gentlemen, keep silence while the Prince speaks.


[The Prince beckens with his Hand, and pulls of his Hat Philod. Gentlemen,


First Rab. Did ever hoo hear such a civil, well bred Prince; why hoo called us
all Gentlemen at the very first word: Well, hoo shall have my Vote to be King.


Philod. I am come here to fight for the Christian Religion; and I hope you will
all stick by me.


Omnes. Yes, yes, we'll all fight for the Chursten Religion, and Prince
Philodemy.


Philod. Do ye love your Wives?


Rab. Yes, yes, we love our Wives as long as we can stand.


First Rab. No, no, I don't love my Wife; for I caught her a mowing with Jacob
in the Barn, so I don't love my Wife, but I love the Chursten Religion and
young Philodemy.


Philod And you would not have them taken away and ravished by the cruel Pagans.


Omnes. Udsbud, No, hoo's have many a broken head first.


Second Rab. Udsfish an they ravish my Wife, hoo would sub poena 'm into the
Bishops Court, and let'n take what follows.


Philod. And you would not have your Children murdered before your Faces?


Omnes. Ah lack, no no.


[here they fall a wouling. Fourth. Rab. Alack, I would not have my Tommy
killed for the best Cow in my Landlords stall; ah Neighbor, you know his God
mother would almost cry her Eyes out for him.


Philod. Well Gentlemen, if you have a value for your Wives, your Children and
Estates; if you wish well to the Christian Religion, as Established by Law; if
you would keep your Churches undefiled with the Heathenish Idolatry of the
Pagans, and your Daughters with their Beastly Lusts; why then Gentlemen stick
close by me, and I shall endeavor to preserve you in your Religion, your Laws,
your Liberties, and over and above reward every one of you for your kindness
and love to me: Therefore Gentlemen, if you do resolve to espouse this Cause
with me, let us be resolute and valiant, and oppose our Enemies to the utmost
drop of our Blood: We shall not have many of these opportunities to do our
selves good, therefore we must strike now or never; and indeed if we gain this,
we need fear no more, our Enemies will never stand again, no they will run like
Hares before us.


First Rabble, Run away says he? Will they so? Udsbud then I Will be after them
full drive; I always loved an Enemy that would run away without any more ado:
Oh! I fight like a Lion always when they run away.


Philod. Pray Gentlemen bring what Fire Arms you can with you, and I Will take
care to have you Regimented and well disciplined; and so I bid you heartily
farewell.


Second Rab. But hark you me, I pray your [the D. is going. Worship one word
with you before you go.


Philod. Speak Friend.


Rab. Mun we be all Officers?


Offic. Oh! yes, yes, all Officers.


[Ex. D. cum suis. Third Rab. Why then hark you me neighbor, I Will be a
Colonel; and look ye me, because you are my friend, you shall be, [he
scratches] what do'n you call that is the next Maun after me,


Fourth Rob. Pugh, pugh, I Will be the place of a Justice, law ye now.


Fifth Rab. Why hoo's a Fool, we mu'n be all Colonels or Captains; why there
never is any Justice in the Kings Army:


Sixth Rab. Come, come, lets us make our selves ready for these Pagan Rogues,
and so let us pray, [ownes] God bless the Chursten Religion and Prince
Philodemy.


[Exeum Rabble. SCENE III. The Scene changes to Alba Regalis.
Enter Barbarossa, Pietro Bar. No News from the Camp yet Pietro.


Pie, The King has not a word but that the Rebels increase daily: He has sent
other strict orders to the General to fight them without delay.


Enter Remarquo. Bar. 'Twas a desperate attempt of the Duke of Monumora's to
invade a Kingdom at time of peace with so small a handful of Men.

He had certainly great hopes of Friends in the Country, and I begin to fear
the worst.


B. Well, you and I must follow the same fate; we must stick close together.


Rem. I hope to see you close hang together. [aside.]

My Lord your Servant.


Bar. Honest Remarquo how goes it: Well I have considred your affair, and
design you a kindness as soon as this Plaugy business of the West is over.


R. My good Lord, your Servant thanks you; perhaps his own business may be over
by that time.


[Aside. Pie. Well Remarquo what News from the Rebels; I have not been at Court
to day.


Rem. Now will I heat 'um: [aside] Why Sir, matters appear to be much more
dangerous than we thought at first: The Country comes in strangely to them;
they all cry up for the Chursten Religion, and Prince Philodemus, whom they now
call King.


[Barbarossa startles. B Good lack Remarquo; but is it so?


Rem. He has put out a Proclamation of Pardon to all that will submit, with
some few exceptions only; and I think he has had the Confidence to put in your
Lordship and this Gentleman more for two.


[Bar. fumes and muses. Bar. Udslife this is very hard, to fall thus from the
very prick of preferment; this must not be.

[Aside.] [ He muses and looks hard at Pietro.] And is the Reverend Pietro.
excepted too, it is unjust: Let me see, I must contrive some way or other to
save my bacon; [aside] what if I should betray Pietro into the Dukes hands:
[aside] Nay, King Queen, all should go if I could save but Barbarossa, the
great Barbarossa: I Would as soon hang as go to my old trade of Petryfogging again.
[Aside.


Enter Messenger. M. My Lord the King commands both your attendance.


[ Ex Barb. Piet. Rem. Oh! The tortures of a guilty Conscience.
See how he fumed and trembled at my News:
The sound of a Post-boys horn's as troblesom
To him as that of a Passing Bell:
And there is not a Messenger comes from the Camp,
But he fancies he has a present of a Halter to make him.
Well, he has been the boldest Sinner that ever Hungary knew:
For whereas most Vices covet to lurk under the disguise of Virtues, he has
made it his sole business to expose his bare faced; as if it was not sufficient
for the World to know, without they saw him commit them.

Yes Barbarossa I will do this right,
What ever thou art, thou art no Hypocrite.

[ Ex Remarque Scene the Camps. Enter the Duke of Monumora, leading his Army
over the Stage. Duke Halt; give the Word softly.


Sold. Halt, halt.


Duke. Gentlemen we must march with all the silence imaginable; the Night
favors us, and we may take them knapping. When we come upon them, we must fall
on without any good morrows; one hours good work and the day is our own:
Billmen succeed the Shot, and fall on pell mell; 'twill be time enough to give
Quarter at Sunrise, when we can know who and who is together. Now march.


Sold. March, march


[Exeunt. Noise of Drums, Trumpets, shouts, cries of Dying Men, clashing of
Swords, etc Enter Officer with Soldiers re-treating. Offi. Stand, stand, and
charge the Rogues; some Villian betrayed us; they were prepared for us: Come,
come, charge; flying wont save us.


[They beat the Enemy back Enter Duke of Monumora. D. Here Colonel, take your
Regiment of Firelocks; line those Hedges; I Will stand the Body. Where Is the
Horse? Here speed to the Horse, bid them charge their Flanks: Charge them home
brave boys. They fly, they fly.


[They beat the Enemy off again. Enter Soldier. Sir provide for your self:
Retreat as soon as you can; you are betrayed: The General of the Horse is
marched off without striking a stroke: The Enemy are pouring in upon us, and
'twill be impossible to stand.

[The Duke stands amazed. Offic. Dear Sir make off, you will be surrounded in a
moment.


D. We have time enough to damn that Villian first,
Let him by Woman, Man, and God be cursed.

Ex Duke Drums, Trumpets, Shouts Acclamations of Victory Enter a few Soulders
of the Dukes, crying Quarter, Quarter, Pursued by Officer and Soldiers Offi.
Down with them, down with the Rebels.


D. Sol. Quarter, Quarter, Noble Colonel, spare our Lives.


Offi. Down with your Arms then, [They through them down] though you had as
good be knocked of the head as hanged. Here takes the Rogues, tie them together,
and drive'um before you.


[Souldier, Tie um. Sol. Come march you Rebelly Dogs.


Enter the Kings Army with Drums Beating, Colors flying, Trumpets sounding,
leading their Prisners with them: The General meets them. Genesis Gentlemen you
have behaved your selves bravely; the King has ordered his Thanks to you, and
will take care to reward you.


Soldiers shout, Long Live Culledada King of Hungary.


Genesis Here you Colonel, detach a Regiment of Horse, and two of foot, and scowr
about the adjacent Countries for Monumora; he cannot be got far; the King gives
Five Hundred Pound to them that take him.


[Exeunt Omnes. Enter Duke of Monumora solus in disguise. And art thou then
that Glorious Monumora? [looking on himself.
Whose Praise filled every Tongue, touched every Heart:
Whose beck commanded the obsequious crowd;
Whose Name, (like that of Hannibal to Rome)
Did make the proud Hungarian Monarch tremble:
Sure thou mistak'st thy self, and by some trick
Of wild Enchantment, thou art here deluded.
Who waits there? No Attendance? Call my Guards,
How fares the Army? come lets charge the Flanck.
Bring up the Horse: So ho! bring up the Horse!
Now by the Gods the Villain flies: Oh! See the Villian
Now Monumora thou have time to see
[He groans. The slippery, weak Foundation of thy Greatness:
That Airy Phantome of a Diadem,
Which thou with so much eager fondness strove.
To grasp, which cost thee some whole toilsome Years,
That robbed thee of thy Pleasure all the day,
Thy Nights of Sleep and necessary Rest:
Thou have seen it now in one poor minute vanish.
One Sun has seen thee rise a hopeful Monarch.
And showed thee Mountains of solid Gold:
The next has with an envious hand withdrawn,
(As new sueceeding Kings are wont to do)
All that his Predecessors gave before
Not yet five hours, and thou were great and good:
The Christians Hope, the Pagans Four and Torror,
Hungaria's great Defender, King, and Darling:
Now, poor forsaken Caitiff, Villain Rebel.
Such Fortune is thy vast unlimited Power,
That can as 'twere unite even Contradictions.
In thee alone it is placed, to Carse or Bless,
Nor Cause, nor Man, is good without success.

The End of the Second ACT.
ACT. III.
SCENE I. Alba Regalis.
Enter King, Barbarossa, Pietro, Philanax. King. WEll now Sir Philanax, I hope
you will grant,
Your Christians can be Rebels, sturdy Rebels:
Yes, yes, I am informed, though much o'r power'd,
By the number of my Forces, yet they stood
And sought it briskly. Sure they were inspired
By their young Dagon.

Pie. When they first came on
In ecchoing Shouts, they thus expressed themselves,
Long Live Hungaria 's King, Great MONUMORA.
But your great General, who even from their Camp
Had early Notice of their dark Design,
Stood well prepared, and ready to receive
Their fierce Assault, and within two Hours space
Quashed and unravelled all their long-laid Treason.
What yet remains, lies at your Royal Pleasure;
That is, the Prisoners.

Bar. If your Majesty pleases to depute me for that Business, I have a
Compendious way to deal with them.


K. Yours be the care of that, Barbarossa.


Bar. Now if I should have a queasie fit come upon me, and be Merciful, it
would vex me heartily.


Ph. Yes, thou will take as much pity of their Cries,
As a hungry Wolf does of the bleating Lambs.
(Aside.) Dread Sovereign,
May all your Enemies and Rebels perish
As these have done, your Faithful Servant prays:
But, Royal Sir, forgive me if I wish
Your Majesty were something more acquainted
With the firm Loyalty and Principles
Of all your Christians in general;
As they in number far exceed your Pagans,
So it is in Wealth the Sinews of all Power.

K. It Is that which troubles me, but I shall Level
And crop that monstrous growth they so rely on:
Let them now flatter their rebellious hopes,
And find some other Monumora to set up,
For This they may give over:
I Will try how far my high Prerogative
Dare be disputed by a crop-sick Crowd;
I Will break the Curb of haughty Sanhedrim's,
Who with audacious Arrogance would plead
And argue my just Favor to my Friends:
No, Philanax, it shall be so no more;
I Will set oppressed Virtue free.
And raise the Clouded Glory of my Pagans.
Their Loyalty to me is well assured:
Nay, I have tried it in the worst of times,
And I might well be called Ungenerous,
If for some dull Formalities of Law,
I should expose to want or to disgrace
My Faithful'st Subjects, and my chiefest Friends.

Enter Messenger. Mess. Great Sir, your Noble General sends to tell,
And to Congratulate your Majesty,
For Monumora's taken.

Bar. Is he taken?


[in Amaz. M. Taken, and lurking in a poor Disguise.


K. I wish he had rather fallen in the Field.
But since it is so, Justice must have its course.

Bar. Nay, if I had a stock of Pity now, I don't know but I might spare him a
little; but hang it, he had better die, than Cullidada, and the Kingdom should
lose a good Chancellor.


( Ex. Mess. Pie. Great Sir, from this long Series of Success,
We find our Holy Prophet favor us.
From hence I humbly move, he will exact
All the most suitable Returns of Zeal.
He has through dark and untrod ways of Danger
Conveyed you safely to the Imperial Throne,
Now by a great Deliverance from your Rebels,
Who like a swelling Torrent had broke loose:
And but for this restraining Providence,
Had over-flown and ruined your whole Kingdom.
Your proud insulting Enemy he has curbed;
An Enemy indeed, who dared to despise
Even our most Holy Faith and You.
Now, Royal Sir, it is left to you to improve
These mighty Benefits he has bestowed:
It Is now he justly will exact performance
Of your long Promised Mord, to extirpate
The Christian Interest out of Hungary.

Bar. Nay, now is the Time, your Army's staunch and strong,
And your Pretenses good to keep them up.
And since you have Power and Will, what can you doubt?

Pie. But above all, remember Monumora,
He must be lop'd.

Phil. Great Sir, if Mercy can,
Without a hazard to the State or You,
Be shown,
'Twill be a God-like second Conquest over him,
To let him by your Royal Bounty Live.

Pie. Rivals in Empires never can be spared
Without the general hazard of the Nation.

Bar. Oh! Sir, it is most convenient he should die.
'Slife I would not undergo such another Fright as he
Put me in for a Million of Monumora's.

(Aside. K. We shall debate these weighty Matters further,
But it is our Royal Pleasure to depute
Our Trusty Barbarossa to go down,
And fix the Country in its due Obedience.
Examples may be made as you think fit.

Bar. Oh! my Discretion knows to limit those.


(Exeunt Omnes. SCENE. II.
The Queen 's Bedchamber. The Scene draws, and discovers the Queen and
Dadamore, rising from the Bed. Qu. Come, prithee leave this dull Formality;
I am Hautefelia still to Dadamore;
Can thou yet doubt or wish for greater Proofs?
Come tell me, how do like my last Contrivance?

Dad. Fortune has been a Niggard to thy Merit,
And made but poor returns to thy Endeavors.
Transcendant Wit! and depth of Policy!
Why pour Hungarian Politicians will be forced to borrow of you;
Thou art Invention in the Abstract!

Qu. Let your Grave Philosophers keep a pother about their Entities and
Quidities, one flight of a VVomans Fancy would ruin the nicest of their
Distinctions.


Dad. And what is no mean Ornament to your Atchievments, to have Success like a
Lacquey, still keeping pace with you; so that you no sooner grow big with a
Project, but she like a Mid-wise, stands ready to deliver you.


Qu. Let their Christian Sanhedrims now pore upon their Fear and Jealousies, I
think I have sitted them with a Bill of Exclusion. O! how my hopes do antedate
the tedious Months. Well, this is a Revenge worthy my self, to satisfy my
Love, my Ambition, and my Interest at once: Why, it will make the Musti, and
whole Conclave blush to see themselves so much outdone: And then my Lovely
Dadamore, 'twill be no mean or trifling Pleasure to thee, to have, perhaps, a
long Successive Race of Pagan Kings, sprung from thy very Loins; beside, the
expectance of a vast Reward from our most Holy Prophet, for thy care thus to
improve his People's Interest.


Dad. But, Madam, grant (for we'll suppose the worst) that this should fail,


Qu. It is impossible, did not our Holy Virgin, the Great Loretto, promise me
Success; hear the Words of the Oracle:

By thy Industrious Zeal and Prayers I Am won,
To grant and promise thou shall have a Son;
Italian Strength, or Gallick Policy,
Shall help to enlarge thy great Posterity.
It Is ordered he must share a double Fate;
A Peasant Born, a Prince Regenerate.

Dad. Why, it is a sort of Riddle.


Qu. Oh! your Oracles always speak in that manner, but the Key to explain it
was sent with this: I have the sense of it at my Fingers ends. In short, my
Dear Dadamore, the Secret is this, that if the Envious Stars Conspire to render
our Embraces fruitless, we must have recourse to the other extreme: Time
presses hard, and we may be sure to have the Curse of our Prophet, if for want
of an Heir, we should let the Inheritance of Mother Church fall to Strangers.


Queen is going. Ded. This is an admirable Fetch: Well,
For Wit, Religion, Honesty, let no Man
Hereafter vainiy think to vie with Woman.

Aside. Exeunt Qu. Dad. SCENE III. Alba Regalis.
Enter Remarquo, Pietro. Pie. Well, Remarquo, who is the Christians King now?


Rem. Pietro.


Pie. Ha, ha, how do you make that out Remarquo?


Rem. Why the Queen Governs the King, and Pietro Rules the Queen, so in effect
Pietro is King.


Pie. I don't like your Jest.


Rem. I don't like your Earnest.


Pie. Thou talkest as big as if thou had another Monumora at thy back.


Rem. If I have, you will not stay to look him in the Face: I have one in store
yet, for your Confessor-ship. He may raise the Price of Hemp as much as
Barbarossa,


Aside. Pie. Come, prithee be Civil Remarquo, and lets talk of the News. You
were at Monumora's Execution; how did he behave himself?


Rem. As an Honest Man would do amongst a Company of Knaves; what he thought
fit to say, he knew would not be suffered; and what they would have him, he
scorned; and there is and End of his Speech: Your Worship will make a longer
perhaps, when your turn comes.


Aside. Pie. Well, Remarquo, I pity him; but the Cause, Remarquo, the Cause
must go forward.


( Exit Pie.) Rem. If the Cause (as he calls it) and his Worship had been
Hanged Twenty Years ago, I would have been at the trouble of Pitying him too:
Pity quoth he? Poor Hungary will never be happy till he is so Pitied.


Exit Rem. SCENE IV. Aceldama in the West.
[ The Scene opens, and discovers Barbarossa sitting in Judgment; on each side
stands Officers with Axes, Halters, burning Irons, Racks, Whips, etc. One side
of the Stage is Crowded up with Prisoners, which by a Guard are surrounded: The
Crier makes Proclamation of Silence, and then the Court proceeds to the Trials:
Dispenso, Warranto, all the while are shuffling up and down to get Bribes of
the Prisoners, and proffering the Sale of Pardons. After the Indictments
against several Read, the Clerk bids the Crier call the King's Evidence,
Timoroso, Trecheronto, Gripe, who appearing, Barbarossa begins.] Bar. Here you
Mr. Timorosa, you look like an Honest Man: Come, do you know these Men at the
Bar? Look on them.


Tim. Yes, my Lord, I should know them, but my Memory is bad, I have forgot
them.


Bar. Speak out Man, thou art afraid, Did not thou see those Fellows here
Armed, and Engaging like Sturdy Rebels in the Duke of Monumora's Army, against
our Sovereign Lord Cullida?


Tim. O Lord, Sir, I was never in an Engagement my Self, but I saw those Men
all; and some of them with brown Bills, Scythes, and Hatchets.


Bar. You saw them among the Rebels?


Tim. My Lord, I don't know Rebels from other Folk.


Bar. Ha!


He frowns and storms at him. Tim. But the Truth on it is, they have the very
Looks of Rebels


(in a fearful tone.) Bar. Thou have the Look of a Hobbyhorse. Set up the next
there.


First Prisoner. My Lord, perhaps he might see me with a Bill on my Shoulder; I
was going to the Field about my business.


Bar. You were going to the Field to Plow with your Bill: Yes, you went to Sow
Rebellion, and you will Reap Halters: This is your Christian Religion, as you
call it! Well, you will not scruple to Die Martyrs for it. Come you Mr.
Treacheronto, what can you tell us of these Men?


Tree. My Lord, I saw them every one hacking and hewing as if Old- Nick was in
'em.


Second Pris. Where was you when you saw us?


Tree. Where was I? why, where I saw you, I warrant you: Nay, if you are for
asking hard Questions, I Will fit you: My Lord, I saw that Man as fierce as a
Dragon, I Will warrant he killed Fourteen or Fifteen himself.


Here Dispen. and War. come close aside the Prisoners, and whisper them. Bar.
What Murder and Rebellion! Come Sir, for your part you have said enough.


Enter Remarquo. Dis. What Estate has this Gentleman, Sir?


to one of the Pris. Pris. Near Four Hundred per Annum.


War. A fair Estate, it is pity it should be all lost to himself and Family.


Dis. Sir, the Judge is my very good Friend, and I pity your Condition, I shall
do my endeavors for you.


War. Nay, Sir, he carries a great stroke with him, and you know Life is sweet,
a Body would give ANY THING for ones Life.


Remarquo makes up and listens. Pris. Woe is me, Sir, you shall Command all I
have, so you will but save my Life.


Dis. Alack Sir, I don't value five hundred pounds, it is pure Charity that I
stir in it.


Rem. Who in the Name of Goodness have we here?

(Aside.) O my Conscience, the Musti's Bloodhounds, and Barbarossa's
Purse-Bearers, the two Law-Butchers that comes every Sessions and Assize, and
grope the Prisoners, as Graziers do their Cattle, to see if they be Fat, and
well to pass; then if there is hopes of a handsome Greasing, they presently give
their Master the hint, who extends his Mercy, as Rooking Gamesters at first
lose their Money, only to draw you in for a deeper stake: But hold, I Will mark
the Proceeding.


Disp. But, Sir, the Truth on it is (speaking to the Prisoner) my Lord's
Servants will expect something considerably.


Pris. Sir, the Five Hundred Pounds shall be ready in two Hours.


Bar. Well, you see Gentlemen, the Evidence is plain against you, what have you
more to say? What do they say Dispenso?


Rem. So there is the watch Word.


Aside. Disp. My Lord, there is Mr. Wealthy and his Kins-man, wholly throw
themselves upon the King's Mercy, I believe they have been deluded.


Rem. Ay, in my Conscience, if the Devil had been in their places, and you too
to have dealt with him, he had been at a plaguey nonplus, if not outdone, in
his own Masterpiece of Cheating, Lying, Forgery, etc.


Bar. Well then, Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard the full Evidence
against the Prisoners, for the two black Crimes of Murder and Rebellion; the
time will not admit of any long Discourse, we have other Business of the same
Nature; only this I must tell you, they are plainly Guilty by the Law, and you
cannot but bring them in so.


Fifth Pris. My Lord, I have not spoke one Word for my self.


Bar. Oh! Sir, you need not say much, you have done more than you will be able to
answer while you live. What say you, Gentlemen of the King's Evidence, was not
that Fellow amongst them?


Gripe. Nay, my Lord, I must needs say, I know his Face very well. Yes, yes, he
was one, a mere Rebel he. Now, I think on it he is a Creditor of mine.


Aside. Pris. My Lord, I desire Justice, that Fellow owes me a hundred Pound,
and thinks to come out of my Debt by falsely Accusing me. Oh! Villain.


Gripe. Do you hear, my Lord, would any but a Rebel Abuse the King's Evidence
thus?


Bar. Come, Gentlemen of the Jury; I find they have nothing material to offer,
so go out.


Ex. Jury. Rem. Was there ever seen such a Monstrous Dispenser of Justice, that
would rather throw away the Lives of so many poor Christians without a hearing,
than stay half an hour for his Dinner? Why, the Villain was certainly suckled
with Blood; he does even thirst after it: With what Ridicule and Buffoonry he
used the poor Wretches! Not the half of 'em were suffered to speak a word for
their Lives.


Enter Jury. Crier. Make way for the Jury there.


After the usual Questions the Clark says. Cl. How say you, is John Littlehope,
etc. Guilty of the Murder and Treason for which they stand Indicted, or not
Guilty?


Jury. Guilty.


Cl. Jailer, look to your Prisoners.


Bar. Well, Gentlemen, you that are Prisoners there, and by the Law stand
Convicted; as your Crimes have been of the blackest nature, so that you cannot
in reason expect much Favor; so I shall proceed to give Sentence of Death
according to Law.


After which the Court breaks up, and Exeunt Omnes. The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
After a Procession of Mohammedan Priests and Choristers, followed by the Queen
and Ladies, by way of Thansgiving for the Queens supposed being with Child;
Enter Philanax, Remarquo, Cellia the Queens Midwife. Phil. WIth Child, Man?
It Is a Miracle!


Rem. How! a Miracle! what, for a brisk Lady not yet thirty to be with Child?
Why, prithee, there is not one in Fifty of the Sex but has a Colt's tooth in her
Head at Threescore; though by the by (considering all things) I should as soon
have suspected my Grandmother as her Majesty upon that score.


(Aside.) Cel. Oh dear, Sir Philanax, the Queen is full of Children, and what
is more, I dare affirm, she is going with a Prince, or I am very much mistaken
in the Stars.


Rem. Why, there is the thing? These Pagans are the shrewdest Astrologers, they
Calculate every thing to an hairs breadth; they have an Almanac fitted for
every Meridian, and seldom fail in a Tittle of their Predictions.

(Aside) But, pray Madam, how long is she gone?


Cel. I am not acquainted with Particulars, but it is a blessing obtained from
the Holy Virgin of Loretto.


Rem. I should have thought an Address from her Majesty, to some Holy
broad-back'd Brother would have better befitted her Desires and Circumstances.

(Aside) But what Applications did the Virgin prescribe?


Cel. Oh! she sent her a Smock of a Generative Faculty, I Will warrant ye we
shall never want a Prince now.


Ph. Nay, nay, now I remember, Madam, the Receipt was sound out near an hundred
years agone.


Rem. Yes, yes, it has lain dormant among the Pagan Relics ever since
Hantefelia the First, and now for the good of the Kingdom, and Advantage of
Holy Mother Church, it is brushed up anew; but this will not do.

(Aside) Well, Madam, Increase of the Royal Issue is a great Blessing.


Cel. Oh! we shall see glorious Times in Hungary, Remarquo, These puling
Christians make such a strange pother about Liberty and Property, and I know
not what, that they spoil all the good Intentions of the King and Queen. Those
Patients can never expect to be well Cured, that will not follow the Advice of
their Physicians.


Ph. Nay, Madam, I must needs confess we are in a lamentable Condition; but by
the way, we should be as little beholding to her for her way of Cure, as I
should be to be knocked of the head by the way of putting me out of pain, when
yet there was pregnant hopes of my Recovery.


Aside. Cel. Well, Sir Philanax, the Queens Delivery will put an end to, and
satisfy all our Fears and Jealousies.


Exit Cel. Ph. Spoke like an Oracle efaith!


Rem. Yes, yes, the Queens Midwife, you must know, speaks with abundance of
foreknowledge. Satisfy their Fears and Jealousies, said she? Yes, her
Majesty's Delivery (as they call it) will satisfy all Parties; the Pagans,
because they hope to bring their old Plot of a Sham Prince to perfection; and
the Christians, no doubt, will be satisfied of the Cheat. Well, I shall live, I
hope, to see her Majesty and this Kingdom fitted with a Delivery. I believe,
indeed, her Majesty has made as curious a search, and taken as much bodily
Pains for an Heir, as ever Chemist did for the Philosopher's Stone: But, alas!
a Body might as soon extract Gold out of a Flint, as hope for a Child from such
known depraved and sickly Constitutions; I hear by Mazato, indeed, that the
Count and her Majesty have made many Experiments about it, but cannot nick it;
so now they have resolved to trump up the old Game, and play the Tune of her
Majesty's Name sake of Pious Memory, Well, I Will stick as close to her as the
Shadow to the Substance, he shall never make use of a Pot, but I, like a
Physician, will be casting her Water; I Will trace her to her very Bed, and
observe every part of her; not the Promises of the King, nor the Threats of her
self, shall be able to delude or frighten me. No, I love my King as my Father,
but would not make him my Idol, and Adore him; I honor him as my King, but
will not with base Flattery blow him up to a Tyrant; I will obey him as a
Dispenser of, but not with Justice, and above all, I Will prefer the safety and
honor of my Country in general, before the private Lusts, and unlawful wicked
Designs of any Prince in Christendom. And this, Sir Philanax, is or ought to be
the firm Resolution of every honest Hungarian.


Ph. And may the Plague of Pagan Tyranny light on him that wants it.


Ex. Phil. Rem. SCENE. II. The Palace of St. Jacques. The Queens Bedchamber.
Enter Queen, Mazato, Sycophante, Midwife, Nurse, etc. at one door: Remarquo
privately slips in at another, and hushes himself up at a corner of the
Hangings. Mid. Your Majesty will consider, I presume, that this being a
Business of vast moment, it is to be managed with all the nicity imaginable,
the least slip here, like the taking out the pin of a Watch, sets the whole
Work out of Order; and, what is amiss here, is not like to be ever recovered.


Q. I know all this, Cellia, and my own strong Inclination, as well as former
real Experince, should, I fancy, put me out of all fear of failing.


Maz. Madam, you cannot be too perfect, you will have abundance of Eyes and Ears
about you; therefore my humble Advice is, That your Majesty would not think it
a trouble to practite it well before it comes to the Test.


Q. Let Us see then Cellia, what must we do?


Here the Midwife opens a Bag and pulls out her Implements necessary for the
better Delivery of Women of Quality. Remarquo Peeps. Rem. So, so, the Play is
composed and distributed, and now they are come to rehearse their Parts.


Aside. Syc. Oh dear Cellia, we shall have no use of them, 'twill be too
public for us, it must be all done in Bed.


Rem. Yes, I Will warrant you, with the Curtains close drawn, and none but your
Worships to fumble about her Queenship, and then if we sail of a Sturdy Boy,
let Old-Nick fail you.


Aside. Qu. That Is the up shot of all, but there are praeliminaries to be
considered.


Cell. Yes, in the first place Your Majesty will remember every Morning you are
to be taken with a small fit of Hawking and Reaching, and now and then a
Long-spit or two.


Syc. Oh Madam, I remember a Qualm on the Stomach now and then is a very
deluding thing (with the Men especially) and passes for a certain sign of a
growing Belly.


Mid. I remember how I bubbled a young Spark so once, who was fond of the
conceit of having got me with Child, and when I had hooked in some Presents of
considerable value, I feigned a Miscarriage, which cost him a few Tears, and me
a sound Laughing, and there was an End of my Qualms; yes, yes, Qualms will go a
great way.


Rem. Now if her Majesty wanted a stock of Hypocrisy, etc. She is got into
good Company, and might be easily furnished: Oh the unsearchable Impudence of
some Women!


Aside. Mid. In the next place, when your Majesty would admit of much Company,
you must yield to a Minutes Torture of being very strait Laced, which will be
apt for the present to make you ready to Faint, which will add much to the
Credit of your being with Child,


Maz. That Is a piece of Skill I was unacquainted with till now, Madam Cellia.


Mid. From the quickening of the Child, proceeds Motion in the Womb, which
disturbing some Fibers that go up to the Heart, causes Palpitations, etc. and
thence proceed Swooning, Faintings, Short-breathings, etc.


Ren. On my Conscience, I shall have a sweet Lecture of Natural Philosophy,
she will run over Aristotle's Problems presently.


Q. If Swoonings and Faintings be a Rule you prescirbe, I can easily perform
it; but Mazato, and all of you, remember to loosen me presently, or I may be
sick indeed.


* Note, That this was the constant Remedy for all the late Queen of Hungary 's
Swooning Fits, during her pretened Bigness. Mid. Binding in the back, like one
that is overburthen'd, is so natural a consequence of a Great Belly, that Your
Majesty will not, I believe, need Instructions concerning it.


Rem. Well, now from a Mothodical Digestion of these weighty Instructions, a
body might make a shift to pick up a Moderate Maintenance; why, I shall be a
perfect Midwife; there is many a Man has set up his Trade, that has not Learned
half so much on it, as I have of this.


(Aside.) Mid. Now Madam, we must be bold with your Majesty's Belly, for that
is, as it were, the Primum Mobile of our Intrigue, and must be ordered with
abundance of Nicety.


(The Midwife and Ladies come up close to the Queen, and feel and grope about
the Queens Belly, and then lift up her Petticoats. Rem. Udsbud, what are they
going to do now? (Remarquo peeps, he shrugs and scratches. Oh lau! Treason,
Treason! 'Dsflesh, if I should be caught here now, I should be hanged as round
as a hoop, for committing Treason against her Majesty's Belly; well, I don't
care, I Will carry a good Conscience with me, I will not see. (Aside.)


(He holds his hands before his Face, and peeps through his fingers. Mid. Your
Majesty must have it heightened by degrees, it must carry a Simimilitude of a
Natural Swelling.


Rem. This is an odd way of getting a Son, an Heir, though: (Here they place a
small Cushion under her Clothes. What, a few Rags pinned together, must
personate the Prince, and we shall have some neighboring Monarchs, sent to,
and Solicited to stand Godfathers to a Piss-burnt Cushion: Well, they may get
what Infant they please to complete the Comedy; but I Will engage he shall stand
to his Pedigree, and never be any thing in Hungary, but King of his Mothers
Clowts. (Aside.


Qu. All these are but trifles, Sycophant, my own Ingenuity will undertake
these; but the very Critical Minute, Celia, that is the grand Question, these
Plaguey Christians are so mistrustful, they will not take ones word for any thing.


Rem. It Is very hard, considering her Majesty deals so Justly by them.


(Aside. Mid. Madam, young Pupils must of necessity submit to the Experince and
Doctrine of their Elders; this is not the first business of this nature that I
have managed, and with your Majesty's Patience, I Will draw you a Scheme of all
we are to do, in a moment.


Qu. Prithee Celia, I have Inclination and knowledge, but my Modesty will be at
a stand.


Rem. O Lau! O Lau! Modesty, said she? She has been at the Court of Hungary
these ten years, where Whoring, Lying, etc. have been improved at the rate of
Fifty per Cent, and now she pretends to boggle at a little. Dissembling: Yes,
yes, I have heard Count Dadamore and her Queenship, Con over Lectures of
Modesty, till they sweat again.

(Aside.) Oh! She Is a very Zealot in Modesty, when she lights of an industrious
Tutor.


(Aside. Qu. However, Cellia considering the necessity, I Will overrun all
difficulties.


Rem. Her Highness is very positive; She and her Jehusites have made it their
business to wrangle us out of our Senses, if they could; and the King has not
left us the disposal even of one Thought, for he tells us we are to give an
implicit Obedience without Reserve, so that if all other means fail, for ought
we know, we may have the Daughter of an Elephant trump't up with a Declaration
of Hic est filius meus, and who dare dispute or gain say it?


(Aside. Cel. Well then, Madam, in the first place, suppose your self
handsomely laid in Bed, between nine and ten in the Morning, and no Company but
your own Trusty Friends, the Christians safe at their Devotion (the Prelates
especially must be absent.)


Qu. Oh! Foh, if I had a mind to save Charges, I Would take no other Physic than
the sight of a Christian Prelate. Oh! what a strange working it has caused in
my Stomach, the very name of them is a Vomit.


(She spits. Cel. Nor indeed must any other of them come within sight of you,
they will make such a noise with impertinent Questions, as may spoil your Milk,
as you know Thunder does Ale.


Rem. There Is some hopes of this, Lady Midwife; her Memory I see is short, and
she may be out in her Lesson, she is afraid of spoiling her Milk, when they had
agreed before, she could have none; but it is the nature of some people to tell
a lie so often, that at last they persuade themselves it is true.


(Aside. Qu. Alack! You may be sure Cullidada will take care to keep them at
the farther part of the Room, where you know out of common complaisance, they
must harangue him upon his Unexpected Happiness.


Rem. Of having a Child beyond all possibility. (Aside.


(...) You are in the right on it, Madam; then for two or three faint Cries
(such as I gave when I made my Husband believe he was tearing my Maidenhead to
pieces, and a little bustling about the Clothes, and out comes the Young
Perkin, as like the Father as if he were spit out of his Mouth.


Qu. But as to the cleanly conveying him in; we forgot that, Celia.


Cel. That I Will show you in a moment.

(She goes to one corner of the Stage, and brings a large warming Pan lined
with Velvet. Now Madam, just before the critical minute, you call of course to
have the bed warmed, then in comes me, Madam Midwife, with this Warming-pan,
mark you me, with young Perkin as sung in it as a drowned Toast in the bottom
of a Tankard; then while you are undressing and ready to pop in, whip, I strait
disembogue and leave your Majesty the hopeful Mother of a lusty Son and Heir.


Rem. So, so, this is an excellent way to hinder collateral descents: Why, who
would be so foolish to pine for an Heir, when every Midwife in Town can so
easily supply them?


[aside. Qu. Why, this Cellia is an Artist, Ladies: Well, thou have satisfied
me to a miracle: I long for the good hour. Oh, I have it now at my fingers ends.

Pagans rejoice, our Mufti does agree,
This Year should be to us a Jubilee,
[Exit Qu. cum suis,
manet Rem. Rem. Pagans beware, for we shall take occasion,
To tax your works of Supererogation.
We scorn your Presidents, and never can own
Such spurious Sons, as fill our Neighboring Throne;
Spite of your frauds we shall be shortly free
From Tyrant Kings, and Pagan Slavery.

[Exit Rem. Finis Act. 4ti.
ACT. V.
Scene I.
The Scene opens and discovers Cullidada alone, leaning pensively on a Table,
and endeavoring to raise himself; he is in a moment environed with a great
Company of Ghosts, which rise out of the Ground, and point severally at him,
shaking their Heads at one another. The first is that of the Sieur Godferus,
sometime one of the Tribunes of the People of Hungary, his Head seems to dangle
from one side to the other, as if his Neck were broken, and has his own Sword
sticking through him as he nods to the opposite Ghost, which is that of
Columona, who holds; out to the King the end of a Rope, which is fastened about
his Neck. The next is Monsieur Stephano de la College, with a Halter about his
Neck. The next is the Count de Esseycke, who points to his Throat, which is cut
so deep, that his Head seems ready to fall off. The next are the Lord
Rossellio, and the Sieur le Sydeny, who have two Golden Rings about their
Necks, by which their Heads seem to be fastened to their Bodies. The next is
the Ghost of the Sieur del Aramstrough, with an Halter about his Neck, and an
Ax in his hand. The next is the Burgomaster Coronise, with an Halter in his
hand. In the midst of all is the Ghost of the Prince Philodemy, Duke of
Monumora, who has also a Golden Ring round his Neck, and a Crown seems to hang
over him some small distance from his Head. After two or three horrid Flashes
of Lightning and Claps of Thunder, the Ghost of Godferus speaks: Ghost of Godf.
SEE, Cruel Prince, thy Trade of Cruelty,
Which was first practiced and begun on me:
The Ghost points round to the rest. Love to my Country, and the Kingdoms Peace,
(Which sure deserves reward, at least should please,)
Made me, Oh! Strange Ingratitude! incur
Thy Cruel Rage --
It Is true, with zealous Industry I ran
And traced the bloody Steps of thy Mysterious Babylon:
There was my Crime; And here my Punishment:
Nor is thine far behind. Repent, Repent;
[Pointing to his Neck. Thy Fate's determined, and the Time draws on:
Thy Crown (by Fratricide obtained) is gone;
Thy Life's inglorious, troublesome and short,
To Friends a Burden, to thy Foes a Sport.

Ghost of Col. Ah! my ungrateful Master, are you here?
Your cheated Secretary does appear,
Partly to chide your black Ingratitude,
That could so easily betray my Blood;
But chiefly to inform you, you mistake,
If for a Saint you Columena take.
Believe me, Sir, (and Spirits seldom lie)
You are your self as much a Saint as I.
Ah, much more likely it is, you may be one,
Since Providence permits your Glass to run,
And gives you time to think, and mend your Errors;
(For after Death you cannot plead Demurrers.)
Ah! Think in time then, and repent your Evil,
Or else by Mahomet, you will be a Devil.
Oh! Roguey Priests! How often they repeatrd;
If I Would conceal, how well I should be treated?
If you will believe them, you will like me be cheated.

Ghost of Step. Col. By perjured Tongues, suborned and bribed by thee,
I fell the Victim of thy Cruelty,
No Age, nor Sex, nor Quality was free
From the base Insults of thy Tyranny.
Through all Degrees of Wickedness thou'st gone,
Through all the murdering Arts of cursed Babylon:
Nor Prince, nor Peasant, Lords nor Commons stood
Free from thy cruel Thirst of shedding Blood.
Thy Friends scarce pity thee, thy Foes despise;
And Heaven, who sees the Justice of our Cries,
Has cursed thee --
Thy Fate's determined in the Eternal Roll,
Thou shall with Speed and Ignominy fall:
All that thy cruel Subtilty has done,
Shall in the compass of one short lived Sun,
Be lost, unravelled, spurned and trod upon.

Ghost of Ess. Unhappy Prince! by what blind Fury led,
Do thou delight these Paths of Blood to tread?
Does thy insatiate Moloch still require
More of thy Sons to pass the fatal Fire?
Does thy strange Principles and Zeal overthrow
All ties of Blood, of Virtue, and of Law?
Will not the Father, King, nor Friend control
The wild Excesses of thy boundless Soul?
Ah! Prince look back, see what a Multitude
[The King looks back affrighted. Of pale-faced threatening Ghosts about thee
crowd,
All earnest Suppliants at the Heavenly Throne
For Vengeance on thy Guilty Head alone;
And they have obtained; thy Fate is written there,
And soon thou wilt find it executed here.

Ghost of Rossel. Pity, a Stranger to thy Savage Soul,
Does yet my just Resentments so control,
That at the Throne of Grace I am become
A Suppliant to reverse thy fearful Doom.
But oh! thy unrelenting Soul denies
Even Pity to thy self, nay, and defies,
Like hardened Rebels, all just Terms of Peace;
Thou would not bid one Tear for thy Eternal Ease.
Hear therefore what the Fates have now ordained,
Thy Crown is lost, thy Fame for ever stained:
A Prince for God-like Qualities renowned
Shall raise the Grovelling Kingdom from the Ground
And stop the Torrent of its bleeding Wounds,
In base Disguise thou shall obscurely fly
Be made the sport of every common Eye,
And dwindle a short tedious Life in Misery.

As soon as the Ghost of Lord Rosselio has done speaking, all the rest of the
Ghosts clap their hands aloud, and pointing and laughing at Cullydada, they
dance round him: Only the Ghost of Monumora seems pensive, and shakes his head
in a lamenting manner, which the King takes much notice of; and in a trembling
manner ventures to come a little toward him, and speaks: King. By that Divine
and Glorious Form, I guess
If Ghosts may carry Names, thou art Monumora,
The Valiant Son of my most Royal Brother.
[The Ghost nods in token of assent. Thou seem to carry on that solid Brow
More of calm Sorrow than of just Revenge:
Good Heavens! He seems to weep! his shaking Head
Seems to lament the Misery that waits me.
Speak, Holy Shade, can thou forgive the Wrongs
Which cruel Policy of State, and sordid Fear,
Prompted by bloody Importunites,
Of an imperious Wife, and Crafty Priest,
Made me commit?

Ghost. Repent, and I forgive.


K. [Sighs and groans heavily] This is the first time my hardened Heart
E're melted with Remorse: Oh! the sharp Sting
Of a Relenting Guilty Conscience!
Dear Shade, accept my just unfeigned Sorrow
(The only Recompense I now can make)
Thy undeserved goodness has overcome me,
And I am now all over Penitence:
Oh! that I could reverse the Book of Fate,
And re-instate thee on the Earth again;
Methinks 'twould ease me of a Load of Sin,
If to my troubled Conscience I could plead
Not Guilty of the Death of Monumora

Ghost. Repent, and I forgive.


[He is going.] K. Stay, Sacred Shade, and since thy Goodness can
With so much ease forgive; let me prevail
From thy Divine Intelligence, to learn
The utmost of that Fate that threatens me.

The Ghost is just going to speak, and the Cock Crows, at which they start, and
shaking their Heads at Cullydada, they Vanish. Enter Messenger. Mess. Sir, I
was hither from the Low-Lands sent
With Letters to your Sacred Majesty.

[He gives the Letters, and the K. Reads, he starts and stamps. K. Five Hundred
Sail! and Forty Thousand Men!
And ready just to Sail: Did you see any?

Mess. It Is too true, my Liege, 'twas whispered there,
They Would Sail the Morning Tide.

K. And is it certain
That they design to Invade our Kingdom here?

Mess. At first the Rumors were so various,
We could not fix on any Certainty;
But it is no longer now a Secret made,
That they design their Course for Hungary.

[Exit Mess. K. [muses] This unexpected Storm does more confound me,
Than all the threatening Dangers of my Life.
Five Hundred Sail of Ships! it is wonderful,
Manned, Victual'd, Fixed, and ready to Hoise Sail,
And all with such profound strange Privacy!
It seems to carry fatal Omens with it,
Since Providence already seems to fide with them:
Sure my Prophetic Ghosts could never mean
To spur my eager Fate so quickly on:
And I designed, if time had been allowed,
TO have taken all effectual humane means
To baffle their pretended Fate --
If Shoals of Gallick Friends and bold Hiberians
Could have performed what I so long designed,
They should have swarmed in all their Christian Hives,
And turned their murmuring Hosts a grazing:
But still I Will not despair.
Industrious Wisdom often does prevent
What lazy Folly thinks inevitable:
Big swelling Clouds are by the Winds blown over,
And threatening storms may dwindle into Showers.

[ Exit King. ACT. V. Scene II. The Mosque at the Palace of St. Jacques.
The Scene draws and discovers Barbarossa, Pietro, and several Pagan Priests
and Jebusites in Consultation. Enter Remarquo. Rem. This News has struck 'em
all dumb; you can see nothing at Court but a Company of moving Statues; the
Christians whisper indeed, but the Pagans shake their Heads, as Physicians do
when they give a Man over; and the King runs to and fro as if he were pursued
by a Spirit or Goblin. I wonder where the good natured Pietro, and the Generons
Barbarossa are, I have not seen them at Alba Regalis all this Evening; I Will
warrant you, one is consulting the good of the Christians Souls, as the other
did of their Bodies in the West, and are as calm in their Consciences as the
meek suffering Martyrs; and as little disturbed at the News, as a Hare at the
first opening of the Kennel. Well, I Will go in and visit some of their Active
Brethren, who at this time now are wonderful busy in forging false Reports, to
scatter amongst the People. Had who have we yonder? Oh there is

[He is going forward.] the Jebusites private Cabal; now they are preparing
business to be offered in Council; a Company of true State-Tinkers, who under
the pretense of mending one Fault, make twenty. Well, I must be incognito; I Will
stand up here and listen, I may edify upon it perhaps.


Pie. We have no time, Gentlemen, to make long Speeches: let us each offer our
Sentiments, and from thence we'll pick out matter for the fittest Proposals to
be made to Cullydada.


1 Jeb. What are the Heads of the Prince Lysander's Declaration?


Bar. I am afraid the Reverend Pietro's and mine are two of them.


Rem. Ay, And I hope he will have better hold of them, that in his Declaration.
[aside.


2 Jeb. Does our Danger proceed from the Person of the Prince?


Pie. Oh! He Is the Primum Mobile of the Faction.


2 Jeb. Why then can we want a Zealous Brother, that will venture to give him a
gentle touch under the Fifth Rib? It Is the way of the Pagans, and according to
the Instructions of Mother Church.


Pie. I confess it is lawful, but not at this time seasonable; we must use
Lenitives yet a while; we may have a time yet.


Rem. Yes, yes; I may see them all take their turns in good time. [aside.


Bar. The Plaguey Christian Nobles advise the King forthwith to call the
Sanhedrim.


[They all start at the Word. Rem. Oh! how they wince at the very name of it?
[aside.


Omnes. Vdsbud, a Sanhedrim! Why, the very thought of one's as dreadful as the
sight of a Death's Head, and there is a Memento mori to us included in the very
Words.


Pie. Alack, my Breath smells of Hemp ever since you mentioned it: Why, prithee
what was our business here for these many long years, but to stave off
Sanhedrims, unless now and then to let them come together for matter of Form,
and to fill the Kings Coffers, which we always made sure to employ against
themselves.


Bar. Nay, I had as lief take a Lion by the Paw, as look a House of Commons in
the Face, they have such a plaguey way of making a Man dancing the Somerset
before 'em, and turning him inside outward: I should not be my self again while
I lived.


Rem. Nay, of my Conscience, there must be a great dearth of Halters, here, if
you lived long after. aside


Jeb. But how do the People behave themselves?


Rem. Ay, there is the sting. aside


Pie. Why to be plain, As Malefactors at the Gallows, when they. see a Reprieve
come, an unusual blithness in the face of the better sortst and an insulting
boldness in the Rabble: I walked the Streets last Night in Disguise, on purpose
to hear their Sentiments, where you should see at every other Door private
Caballers and public Mutineers: At one place they stopped me, and made me Drink
Confusion to Pietro, and his Holy Colleague the Chancellor: at another I saw a
company of Boys were busy in twisting of Wattles I asked what they were for?
They presently returned, to hang the Iebusites together, and make a present of
them to the Prince Lisander: Now this is our Distemper, Brother Barbarossa,
what do you prescribe?


Bar. Why, I am at a stand; I have a plaguey Crick in my Neck of a sudden, and
that is very ominous. Oh, that I had but two or three State Days in the West
again! Oh, 'twould be an infallible remedy.


R. Nay, your Worship need not doubt of making one Holy Day before you dye yet.
aside.


Enter Messenger. Mess. My Lord the King sends for you both with all speed.


Bar. What Is the News prithee?


Mess. The Prince Lysander is landed in the West with a formidable Army, and
the Country pour in like Hail to him; some of the King's Troops have already
entirely joined him, and all the people declare unanimously for him.


B. Oh poor Chancellor!


P. Ah-poor Pietro!


They run off, clapping and wringing their Hands. Scene III. Alba Regalis.
Enter Queen tearing her Hair, and wringing her Hands, with Dadamore the Nurse
with the pretended Prince; and Mazato, Sycophante, and Remarquo at a distance.
Qu. Oh Villains! Rebels! Traitors! thus to betray their King and me. Are these
their Christian Principles? Foh!


she spits. Rem. Why, there is the business: these ill-natured Christians. Out
upon 'em, that two or three Millions of Souls should so unanimously conspire to
save their ancient dear bought Laws from being subverted, their Religion from
being violated, and their Throats from being Cut, when her Majesty had such a
longing desire for it. Indeed it was ill manners.


Qu. Oh, if Barbarossa and the General had followed Pietro's advice and mine,
they should not have left either Hive or Be in that cursed West.


Rem. Ay, but the Soldiers are wiser now; for to save shedding of Blood, they
are all gone over to one side. aside.


Dad. Dear Hautefelia, do not so immoderately grieve, but think thy loving
Dadamore shall still supply all that envious Fortune can take from thee.


Qu. Dear Dadamore, I must confess thou art the prop and stay of all my hopes;
but --


Enter Messenger. Speak; What Is the News? make no preamble, be plain and short.

Mess. The King sends word his Army is revolted; his very Friends, Relations,
all are gone, and he is returning with all speed for fear of being surprised by
the Enemy.


Qu. Oh! Tortures, Plagues and Curses seize them: Come, come my Friends, for
you must share my Fate.


Mess. Alack, if I should lose my Tommy now in this hurly burly!


aside: she howles. Manet Remarq. Solus. Exit Qu. cum suis Rem. Oh the hard
Hearts of People grown in Sin!
She Is sensible of the Plague that follows her,
But thinks not of the cause: her Coward Soul
(Essential to the wicked) now can pine and howl
At the apprehension of due punishment;
But with unimitable boldness she
Could run through all the dreadful Catalogue
Of heinous Sins, without a doubt or scruple.
Nay she does yet even refuse to own,
Or to repent her Crimes against the Nation.
Her Crown, her State, her Grandeur, are the things
That cause her Tears and Curses; but better far
Some watery drops from her should singly go,
Than Streams of Blood should from the Nations flow.

Exit Rem. Enter King, Pietro, Barbarossa, Philanax, Messenger. King. Does he
design so suddenly to come?


Mess. Some of his Troops will quarter here to night.


King pawses a while. I Will answer all by a Messenger of mine.


Exit Mess. King. Well my Friends, you see how Fate and Time press me? I have
told you my designs, and this Night resolve to put them in execution: the Queen
and Child are safe gone off; and Pietro she has left her Casket of Jewels to
your care and charge.


Pie. I Will be her faithful Carrier: humh! the Jewels to my charge! Nay, there is
a little comfort then; I find I shall not go empty handed. Yes, yes, I shall
take care of them. aside


King. It begins to grow late, we must separate: Well my good Friends, farewell;
we may meet again.


Ex. K. Bar. Pie. Enter Rabble; with Links and Staves, shouting and hollowing.
1 Rab. Come, come, away Boys, away; the King has slipped away, but we'll claw
his Pagans off.


2 Rab. Ay, ay, let us pull down their Houses; they have abundance of Crosses
and Beads in them: Oh I hate Crosses; there is none but Heathens love Crosses.


3 Rab. Ay let us pull down Count -- what de call'ems house; Oh he is a devilish
Pagan, there is abundance of Gold and Money there.


4 Rab. Nay, then it deserves to be pulled down: I Will warrant you they worship
it there.


5 Rab. Ay, and there is Goodman Fangum, he is a Plaguey Fellow; Iowe him for two
Suits of Clothes indeed, but he rayl'd so sadly against Prince Lysander, that I
have no mind to pay him.


6 Rab. Come, come, we will lay down our Lives for the Christian Religion, and
so it is unreasonable these Pagans should have such a deal of Money; come, away
Boys, away.


Enter Pietro disguised, like a Tinker with a Budget at his Back. 1 Rab. So
honest Brother, come along with us, Efack you shall have Brass enough to mend.


Pie Ay, Ay, come away, God bless the Christian Religion, and hang the Pagans:
Omnes, Amen, Amen.


2 Rab. Come along Old Bay, we'll make thee for ever.


Pie. OF my Conscience they will make me out of my Wits, if they keep me much
longer. aside.


3 Rab. Come old Boy, throw away that Budget; thou shall have a purse full of
Brass and Iron.


Pie No, hang it, I Will keep it because 'twas my Fathers: Uds-be as black as the
Case appears, there is a heavenly luster within. O my Heart aches for my Jewels.


7 Rab. Oh! I love this gutting of Houses dearly, my Father was brought up to
the Trade.


8 Rab. I had a Brother lived and died in it.


9 Rab. Ay Tom, I remember him very well, I saw him cut down.


10 Rab. Away, away Boys; holloo, holloo.


They shout, and go off with Pie. Enter Guard, with Barbarossa in a Tarpawlins
Disguise, followed by the Rabble. Bar. For Heavens sake Sir's, keep me from the
Mob; and do else what you please with me.


1 Rab. Do you hear, the Villain abuses us, he calls us plain Mob, without an
M. to it.


2 Rab. Ay, ay, a Rogue, he hanged my Brother in the W^^ without ever a Letter
in the whole Criss Cross Row; He would not let him speak one word or tittle for
himself.


3 Rab. Hey day! why is this the Chancellor? Why he look as if he had been at
Sea.


4 Rab. No, he looks as if he would have been at Sea; but hang him, he was
never born to be drowned.


5 Rab. Why here is a strange alteration; here is the Judge turned Executioner;
he is like the Hangman in the West.


6 Rab. O the Villain, he hanged my Father for giving a handful of Hay to one
of the Lord of Monumora's Horsemen: Oh his tear him to pieces: Guard stand off
there.


Exeunt omnes Scene IV. The Palace of St. Jacques.
Enter Prince Lyfander, attended with the Nobility and Gentry of Hungary, and
Guards in a magnificent manner, with Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Colors
flying, the People shouting and the Guns round the great Tower firing; at which
the Stars clear up, the Sun shines, and all the enchanted Pagan Mosques
Priests, Jebusites, Crosses, Beads, Quo Warranto's, Dispensators, Ecclesiastic
Commissioners, etc. vanish in a moment. FINIS.

