The Advantages of the Kingdom of ENGLAND, both abroad and at home, by
Manageing and Issuing the Drapery, and Woollen Manufactures of this Kingdom,
under the Ancient Government of the Fellowship of MERCHANT'S ADVENTURERS of
ENGLAND.
GOVERNMENT is granted necessary, as over the persons of men, s of those things
which are convenient and fit for the maintenance of humane Society.

Arts and Merchandise are the natural effects and employment of this Society:
And as without Government, men could not be reduced into order, no more could
Arts and Merchandise be improved, to the benefit of the society of mankind, if
the same were not by the Magistrate regulated.

There was never any Nation, but as soon as it became civilliz'd, it sought to
employ it self, to make advantage of the growth and product of the Land upon
which God placed the same.

God has not blessed any Nation with that universal product of its own
Country, as that it should not stand in need of something, whereof another may
furnish it; and has either given a superfluity to every Nation, by
commutation, to supply one another reciprocally, or else the quickness and
industry of spirit, invention and labor, to furnish their several wants and
necessities otherwise.

The superfluity of England was Bestiall, and the product of its Mines: The
Sheep rendered an overplus of Wools, and Wool fells, the other Cattle, Leather,
and the entrails of the earth, Lead.

Our Forefathers did a long time content themselves to be discharged thereof,
even as nature, with a little art and workmanship, gave the same unto them.

The Neighbour-Nation of Flanders, not abounding in any thing of this kind,
did buy this wool, and Endraped the same, and grew more opulent by their
Manufacture thereof, than this Nation, by the material it self.

The Grower of wool rested in the profit he made of his wools, at his own door,
or his Countrey-market; and thence did arise a sort of men who bought the same
up of them, and begot a Traffic between the Wool-grower and the foreign
Endraper, which were from their establishing their Market for the stranger in
some certain City, lying commodious for intercourse, called Staplers.

Yet still all along the Supreme Magistrate made Laws, both as to the sorting,
combing; and packing of wools, as also for the said Staplers more regular
issuing of the same out of the Land, granting them many Franchizes, Immunities,
Privileges, and Exemptions not communicable to every person, but to such only
as were bred up in the mystery of their Trade.

So here is a Corporation established for the regulation of the first
ingredient of Clothing; for their encouragement they have Franchizes, and for
their regular issuing out their commodities they have Mart-Towns abroad, and at
home: And all this found necessary by the wisdom of several Parliament.

Franchizes and privileges import distinction and separation between and from
other persons, and without these no great affair can either be compassed or
maintained.

In King Edward the first's time, there did spring up out of the Guild of
Mercers London, a sort of English Merchants, who first began to attempt the
bringing in the making of Cloth into this Land, and about the latter end of his
Reign, viz. Anno 1296. they obtained privileges of John the Second, Duke of
Brabant, and stapled themselves in Antwerp, joining in society with them all
other English Merchants resorting to those parts.

After few years, King Edward the third, taking notice of their hopeful growth,
did, to encourage this Manufacture, by many privileges, invite over the
Strangers, both Cloth-makers and Cloth-dressers, authorizing all by Parliament:
insomuch, as at the latter end of his Reign, he and his Parliaments did
adventure to prohibit the importation of foreign Cloth.

King Henry the fourth, finding how that the Government of this Trade (which
hitherto had no other countenance, but by the under a foreign Prince) might be
advanced by the concurrence of his Authority, did first, Anno 1406. grant these
Merchants a Charter to govern this Trade, both abroad and at home; and he
grounded the same upon the defect of good Government.

Now then, the conveniences of this Government will appear, from the benefits
which arise thereby. First, to the public, and then to the private
Undertakers; and lastly, to the several Artificers and Workmen depending on
Clothing, and the general influence the same has upon the whole Nation.

The public Interest is.
That nothing is more evident, than that the upholding this Government has
obtained, and gained this great Manufacture from the Stranger.

That it has, all along, cherished amity and intercourse between this Nation,
and its neighbors.

That it has seasonably prevented all Innovations, wrongs, encroachments, and
exactions abroad and at home, whilst the Supreme Magistrate continued its
protection.

That it has, in all times, advanced the vent of Clothing abroad.

That it has augmented and secured the public Revenue.

That it has maintained and increased the Navigation.

That when either the honor of the Nation abroad, or the necessities thereof
at home, have required the same, this Fellowship, because of their Government,
was always to be found, were still ready and at hand, and by their forward and
dutiful services, have averted many imminent dangers on the Nation from abroad,
and supplied many great occasions at home, as can be manifested by many
particulars in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

That by its Courts and Staples, and their good Government abroad, the Princes
and Republiques of Germany, and the seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands,
have outvied one the other, in offering them privileges and immunities above
all other Nations.

That hereby these Privileges and Immunities are become the Rights of this
Fellowship, not ex gratia, which has in all Treaties been insisted upon.

And hence to the public also, as well as to this Fellowship, have accrued
these benefits and advantages.

That throughout so many Ages this Kingdom has trained up, and been still
supplied with knowing and experienced Merchants, as well in the true and good
making of the Cloth, and other Woollen Manufactures of this Land, as also in
the improving of the vent and profit thereof beyond the Seas.

That the Fellowship may take and plant their Staple of Residence in any City
of those parts, as they shall agree; and that the Supreme Magistrate shall
provide, that they shall be therein privileged, as they have been in any other
Countries, or places; that nothing shall be imposed on their Persons or Goods,
but by their foreknowledge.

That still, in all accidents of difference, or war, between this Nation and
the Supreme Magistrates of the Low Countries, they are provided, by Letters of
safe conduct, to retreat in due time with their Persons and Estates, and clear
themselves of the Country, which was religiously observed, during the late
breach with the States General.

That their Goods, by mistake of entry, are not subject to confiscation.

That they pay, neither to the Supreme, nor to the Inferior Magistrate any
Duties upon Clothes, Kerseys, or Bays.

That in case of wrack at Sea, their Goods which can be recovered are restored
upon reasonable Salvage.

That if by tempest, or other misfortune, any Ship of the Fellowship, designed
for their Mart or Residence, enter any other Port, or Haven, that the same
shall not be obliged to pay any Duty or Toles, except they break bulk.

That the said Fellowship may make their contracts with such conditions, as
shall be to their most benefit, containing themselves within the general limits
of the Laws of those Lands.

That the Members thereof may make their Wills, and dispose of their moveable
Goods; and that they shall be of the same validity, as if made in England.

That the Fellowship shall have civil jurisdiction for the administration of
Law and Justice over and amongst themselves, and their supposts, being
Englishmen, according to their own Laws and Customs, and the privileges by
them, in those Lands, and elsewhere obtained and used.

That in no Contracts made with the Fellowship, the Debtor shall have any
Letters of Respit, or the like, for prolongation of time, or protection against
the Law.

That in criminal Cases, if any person accuse any of the Fellowship, the
accuser shall be kept in Ward with the accused, till the delict be made appear;
and for the default therein, the accused shall be forthwith discharged without
costs or damage.

That none of the Fellowship shall suffer confiscation, or other damage in his
Goods for crime committed by his servant without his knowledge.

Yet all this, upon condition that the Fellowship shall hold and keep their
Court of Residence in those Lands.

The privileges and benefits of the Fellowships Residences abroad are.
That in all cases, either of slaughter, wounding, or abusing the persons of
any of the Fellowship, or dammaging of their Ships or tackle in the Harbor, or
of stealing any of their Goods, speedy and exemplary Justice shall be done, and
restitution or reparation be made.

That they shall enjoy Churches peculiar to themselves, which are kept in
reparation by the Towns.

That they are provided of fair public houses to keep their Assemblies in, and
entertain their Factors and Agents daily, besides, houses for their Governor,
Minister, Concierges, and free Hosts, Secretaries, Clerks, and all
Underofficers, according to the quality of every of them, all free of Rent,
and repaired at the charge of the Towns.

That they enjoy, in these public houses, freedom of all manner of Excizes,
as to all sorts of Beer, Wine, Fuel, and all other provisions for
housekeeping, and for all commerce, and the like, in all their private houses,
so they keep no public Table for Strangers.

That they, in these houses, are free of all Watchings, Wardings, or Quartering
of Soldiers, and all contribution in that behalf, real or personal.

That no English or Scotch Garrison shall be lodged in their Residence, without
the approbation and consent of the Fellowship.

That no Englishman shall be admitted Burger, without the consent of the
Fellowship.

That the Fellowship may make Arrest of the person and Goods of any English, by
their own Officers, of their own authority.

That the Stranger may sue in the Court of the Fellowship any English man, and
shall be obliged to abide and perform the Sentence thereof, and shall not
withdraw his Cause, or Appeal.

That the Causes of all English, in the Courts of the Town, shall be preferred
in dispatch.

That no Arrest or Attachment of any person or Goods, made by the
Town-Officers, by Suit of any of the Fellowship, shall be dismissed, or
discharged without their consent.

That no man of the Fellowship, either in his person or Goods, shall, in any
civil Action. be Arrested, without the foreknowledge and consent of the
Governor, or his Deputy.

That in all cases of Capital Crime, or even of High Trcason, committed by any
of the Fellowship, his Estate shall, nevertheless, not be confiscated, but come
to his heirs; neither the Goods of his Principals or Friends, in his, or any
other men's hands, be touched or forfeited in those Cities.

That none of their Burgers shall color English men's goods.

That the Tare or allowance, upon defaults of English Cloth, shall be moderated.

That the Fellowship may choose their own Measurers and Packers, Brokers, and
other Officers.

That the Fellowship shall be provided, of all fitting Dwelling-houses,
Lodgings, and Pack-houses at a reasonable rent.

The Conveniences and Benefits of the Fellowships Government in ENGLAND, are:
To breed up Youth, for succession, to take care they be instructed by their
Masters in their trade; to see they be decently maintained, to provide they be,
in due time, sent over by their Masters, to be acquainted, as well with the
Foreign, as Home-trading; and that they be there so overseen, and regulated,
that they may be restrained from vice, and those inconveniences which Youth
are inclined, and liable unto.

To employ no person to be a Factor abroad, but English only, and such, so
bred up, as aforesaid.

To prevent, that the Kingdom lose not a Subject by foreign Marriage, and that
thereby the Mystery of their Trade be not communicated to Strangers.

To take care, that all Clothes and Woollen Manufactures of this Land be
Shipped to no other part of their privileges beyond the Seas, but only to the
Mart, or Staple-Towns, both to maintain the Treaties in this behalf and to
increase as well the Manufacture at home, as the vent thereof abroad, and there
to uphold the esteem and price thereof, which can only be done in a Mart-Town.

To appoint Shipping in the due Seasons of the year, and according as the
Market abroad requires, or incourageth them; and that no man have the
advantage of going to Market before another.

To take order that the merchant, full grown, and full of stock, do not carry
away, or ingross the Commodity, but that there may be room and encouragement
for Plants, and men of lower Estates, to employ their stocks and endeavors.

To inspect into the true making of Cloth, and all other Woollen Manufactures.

To prevent the exportation of Wools and Fullers-earth, in which two points the
Fellowship has taken more pains, and been at greater expenses, than all the
Corporations, and Merchants in England.

To give an account, from time to time, of all encroachments and attempts upon
their Trade, and Privileges beyond the Seas, and of the reasons of all decay
or obstruction of trade, both at home, and abroad; and to advise, in the
Station, remedy and redress thereof.

To correspond weekly, and as there shall be occasion, with their Courts and
Members, as well resi^ing beyond the Seas, as planted throughout the Ports of
England.

To carry through all which affairs incumbent upon them, they employ persons of
known worth, and integrity; in the first place, of Government, entertain
Ministers of zeal, good knowledge, literature, and example of good life, for
Gods due worship and Service in his Ordinances, breed up several men able to
serve their Country, if need be, and to inform the same, of the state of
foreign Nations, and their attempts and competition upon, and for this great
Staple of Clothing; and that the Fellowship do relieve daily many distressed
persons of this Nation abroad.


