AESOP AT TUNBRIDGE OR, A few Select FABLES IN VERSE

BY No Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for, and are to be Sold by the Author. School.

To the READER.
RIding, of late, to take a little Air, and crossing by some chance the
Tunbridg Road, it was my fortune to find ^ ^arcel of Papers, which were
doubtless (...) by some unwary Passenger, who had made more Haste than good
Speed; and taking them up, I found they were the following Fables: which, I
imagine, some Young Gentleman of Wit and Leisure, had diverted himself in
composing, whilst he was obliged to drink the Waters. The Entertainment they
gave me and my Friends, made me think of making them Public; and considering
the Nature of them, and that they were very fairly written, it is not at all
unlikely that the Author had designed them for the Press himself. There are but
two little Reasons to the contrary, which may be also soon answered; First,
That they are too small to make a Book: the Second, That some of the Fables are
too bold, and might expose the Author to some Danger or Displeasure. As to the
first Objection, Whoever would be sure of Pleasing must not be tedious; it
happens but to a few great Books to be read through; and many good Authors have
defeated their own purpose of instructing the World, by frightning the Reader
with three or four hundred Pages: but besides, the Nature of such a Work as
this, requ^res that the Reader be never cloyed, but always kept in good Humor
and good Appetite, which a long Work could hardly do; and ten or 12 Morals are
enough to amuse the Mind, and keep it exercised a good while. But, after all, it
may be there were many Fa^^^ ^ore intended to follow these; and the^ I have
nothing to say, but that these were all I found, and thought they were too many
to be lost to the Public.

To the there Objection, the Author having ^^thing to fear, has nothing to
answer; for ^^^y are published, if not without his Will, (...) without his
Knowledge. But should it be ^^an^ed that one or two Fables are a little too
^^^d and angry, yet since there is some Foun^^tion for such sort of Mutterings
and Com^^a^nts from whence can our Rulers learn these Truths more
inoffensively, than from such little Stories? they will not, perhaps, attend so
easily to wise and good Men as they will to Foxes and Asses; and wise and good
Men will not, it may be, dare to tell those Truths these Beas^s deliver, which
yet our Governors should know.

I will not altogether excuse the Exaggeration of Matters in the Twelfth Fable;
for though our Bargain be dear enough; yet I cannot tell what we should have done
without it; and Things, I hope, will mend upon our hands, in good time.

AESOP AT TUNBRIDGE.
FAB. I. Fair Warning.
IN Aesop's, new-made World of Wit,
Where Beasts could talk, and read, and write,
And say and do as he saw fit.
A certain Fellow thought himself abused,
And represented by an Ass;
And Aesop to the Judge accused
That he defamed was.
Friend, quoth the Judge, how do you know
Wherer you are defamed or no?
How can you prove that he must mean
You, rather than another Man?
Sir, quoth the Man, it needs must be,
All Circumstances so agree,
And all the Neighbors say it is Me.
That Is somewhat, quoth the Judge, indeed,
But let this Matter pass;
Since 'twas not Aesop, it is agreed,
But Application made the Ass.
FAB. II. The Cock and Pearl.
A Dunghill Co^k was raking in the Ground,
And flirted up a Pearl;
I would, quoth he, thou had been ^ound
By some great Lord or Earl.
My self a single B^^ly-corn
Would, surely, rather find:
We Creatures that are dull, Earth-born,
Things only useful mind.
Whilst they who are divinely Wise,
And do from Jove proceed,
Thy lovely orient Luster prize,
And for thy Beauty trade.
FAB. III Of the Horse and Ass.
A Horse and Ass were journying on their way,
The Horse was only harnessed, light, and gay;
The Ass was heavy laden, and lagg'd behind,
And thus, at length, bespake his Friend.
Companion, take some pity on my State,
And ease me but of half my Weight;
Half will to you no burden be,
And yet a mighty help to me.
The Horse laughed loud, and shook his Head,
And wantonly curvetting said;
Seignior, we Horses never choose
The Burdens that we can refuse;
And should such Jest upon me pass,
Methinks I should be but an Ass.
The Ass quite spent, and vexed to be denied,
Sunk down beneath his Weight, and died.
The Master coming up, took off the Sack,
And threw it on the Horse's Back:
And having flaid his Ass, he threw
The filthy Hide upon him too.
At which the Horse, thus sadly humbled, cried.
(Letting some Tears for Grief and Anger fall)
Whether 'twere Cruelty, or Pride,
That I so fair Request denied.
I am justly served, and made to carry all.
The Asses of the South and East
Desire the Horses of the North and West,
That, as to Parliament they trot,
This Fahle may not be forgot.
FAB. IV. Of the Judgment of the Ape.
A Wolf complained that he had lost a Lamb,
And strait impleads a Fox of no good Fame,
(Who had a Lamb) that he had stolen the same,
An Ape was to decide the Cause,
Having some Knowledge in the Laws.
No Council was by either feed,
Each would his Cause, in Person, plead;
And so they did, with mighty heat;
The Judge himself did almost sweat,
To hear the force of their Debate.
How they accuse, and how defend,
How they replied, joined and rejoined.
At length in pity to the Court,
The Judge was fain to cut them short;
And thus determined -- Sirs, in troth,
The Lamb belongs to neither of you both.
You, Mr. Wolf, have, doubtless, lost no Lamb;
And, Renard, you as surely stole that same;
But not from him, If Justice might prevail,
You should be both condemned to Fine and Jail.
So two great Lords for an Estate may fight,
Which does to neither appertain, by Right.
FAB. V. Of the Horse and Man.
A Fierce will Boar, of monstrous size and force,
Did once, in early days, affront a Horse:
Who meditating Vengeance, found his Will
To hurt, much greater than his Power and Skill;
And therefore, chafed and resolute, he ran
To the next House, and thus applied to M^n.
I come, Superior Power, whom Jove has made
His Substitute on Earth, to seek thy Aid,
Against a sordid Brute, who injures me,
And likewise speaks contemptibly of Thee.
Jove whom thou nam'st (said Man) was to thee kind,
And sent thee where thou shall Assistance find.
But this injurious Boar will never meet
Our Arms upon the Plain, but trusts his Feet.
But shall his Feet then his Protection be,
Since Swiftness is the Gift of Jove to thee?
(Mark it, my Friend, this Insolence
Deprives us of our common Sense.)
This doubtless he forgot; so will not we.
You, for Convenience, will a while submit
To be directed with a Bridle and Bit;
And take me on your Back, till we shall see
This your outrageous Enemy.
Up, said the Horse then, let us never rest,
Till we have found this cursed Beast.
Away then to the Woods they flew,
The Horse his Haunts and Coverts knew,
And there his Foe, the dextrous Warrior slew.
This done, they jocund homewards make,
And thus the Horse the Man bespake.
Now, Sir, accept my Thanks for what is past,
I to my wonted Fields, and Friends must haste.
Hold, quoth the Man, we part not quite so soon:
Your Business is, but Mine is not yet done.
Some Service there remains, due to the Aid
I lent you, which must be repaid.
This said, he light, and tied him to a Rack;
Where the poor Creature, thus with Sorrow spoke.
Slight was the Injury of the Boar,
And might, perhaps, have been no more:
But now I Am utterly undone,
My Ease and Liberty are gone.
Sweet is Revenge, just in the Taste,
But surely Bitterness at last.
Let other Creatures warning take,
What Bargains they in Passion make.
Let Nations also take good care,
That they with many Hardships bear,
Rather than seek Redress abroad;
Which is but adding to their Load.
FAB. VI. The Bargain.
TWO Welchmen Partners in a Cow,
Resolved to sell her dear;
And laid their Heads together, how
To do it at Ludlow Fair.
It was a sultry Summers Day,
When out they drove the Beast;
And having got about half way,
They sat them down to rest.
The Cow, a Creature of no Breeding,
(The place with Grass being stored)
Fed by; and whilst she was a feeding,
Let fall a mighty T --,
Roger, quoth Hugh, I tell thee what,
Two Words and I have done;
If thou will fairly eat up that,
The Cow is all thy own,
It Is done, quoth Roger, it is agree*
And to it he went a pace;
He seemed so eager set, it is said,
That he forgot his Grace.
He labored with his wooden Spoon,
And up he slopt the Stuff;
Till, by the time that half was done,
He felt he had enough.
He f^l^: but scorning to go back,
Would look as if he wanted more;
And seemed to make a fresh Attack,
With as much Vigor as before.
But ^^o^ping short a while, he cried,
How fa^es it, Neighbor Hugh?
I hope by this, you 're satisfied,
Who^^ M^ster of the Cow.
Ay, ay, qu^th Hugh (the Devil choke thee,
For nothing else can do it,)
I Am s^tisfi'd that thou have broke me,
U less thou will give out.
Give out? quoth Roger, that were fine;
Why, what have I been doing?
But yet I tell thee, Friend of mine,
I shall not seek thy Ruin.
My Heart now turns against such Gains;
I know the art piteous poor.
Eat thou the half that still remains,
And it is as 'twas before.
God's Blessing on thy Heart, quoth Hugh?
That Proffer none can gainsay;
With that, he readily fell to,
And eat his share of the Tansie.
Well now, quoth Hodge, w' are even, no doubt,
And neither side much Winner.
So had we been, quoth Hugh, without
This damned confounded Dinner.
Let this, both to our Wars and Peace
Be honestly applied;
France and the Allies have done no less,
That what these Welch-men did.
FAB. VII. The Frogs Concern.
TWO fierce young Bulls within the Marshes strove.
For the Reward of Empire and of Love;
Which should the fairest Heifer gain,
And which should govern all the Plain.
This, when a Frog hard by perceived,
He sighed, and sob'd, and sorely grieved,
He hung his Head, and made great moan,
As though he had lost his Wife or Son.
At which a neighbor Frog admired,
And kindly of the Cause inquired;
Which when he knew, he said in hast^,
And Gossip, is this all at last?
If this and that great Loggerheaded Bull
Will try the Thickness of each others Scull,
Even let them do, as fit they see:
But what is that to You and Me?
If that, replied the other, were all indeed,
We should about this Matter be agreed.
I should not care a single Groat,
To see 'em tear each others Throat;
But, Friend, the Creatures of such Might,
Can never meet in Field to fight,
But in the Fury of their full Carreer,
Both you and I endangered are;
And all our kindred Tribes below,
In hazard of their Lives must go.
When Bulls rush on, or when retreat for Breath,
They Will tread a hundred of us little Folks to death.
If Kings would fight themselves alone,
Their People still secure,
No mortal Man would part 'em sure,
But let them even fight on.
But when the Subjects Blood is spilt,
And their Estates are drained,
To justify a Princes Guilt,
Or have his Vanity maintained;
When they must pay for all at last,
That Lust, Ambition, or Revenge lay waste;
The poorest Man alive may fear,
And pray against the Miseries of War.
FAB. VIII. Of a Man and his Ass.
A Wretched Churl was trav'l^ing with his Ass,
Beneath two Panniers Load oppressed;
And hearing Noise behind, cried to the Beast,
Fly, my Friend Roger, fly apace;
Else I Am undone, and all my Market's naught;
And thou thy self will by the Rogues be caught.
Caught? quoth the Beast, what if I be?
What will it signify to me?
My Panniers are so full, they will hold no more;
I carry two and cannot carry four.
'Twixt Rogues and You, I can no difference make,
They are all Rogues to me, who break my back.
Fly, fly from France, our Statesmen cry.
And Slavery's cursed Yoke;
Whilst with our Ancient Liberty,
Our very Backs are broke.
France is a Thief; but France can do no more,
Than keep the Panniers on we had before.
FAB. IX. Of a Wolf.
A Wolf retiring from Whitehall,
Where he had Statesman been,
Built for himself a Box so small,
That few could be received within.
The Country all admired at this,
And could not at the Reason guess,
Why one so Wealthy and so Great,
Should cage himself at such a rate.
Till at the last a Fox came by,
A Courtier also, sleek and fly,
And thus in earnest and in jest,
His Reason gave amongst the rest,
Perhaps my Lord Commissioner intends,
Here to receive only his honest Friends,
FAB. X. The Plaintiff and Defendant.
TWO Travelers an Oyster found,
Dropped from some Pannier down;
Each stoopt, and took it from the Ground,
And claimed it as his own.
Since both cannot have it all, said one,
Even let it parted be.
No, says the other, all or none,
But all belongs to me.
One Sergeant Law, by chance came by,
And he must end the Strife:
Which thing he did immediately,
With his deciding Knife.
He took the Fish, and cut it up.
(This Cause he opened well)
And fairly did the Oyster sup,
And gave to each a Shell.
And if hereafter Causes rise,
Where People cannot agree,
I know, quoth he, you will be so wise
To refer them still to me.
My Name is Law, my Chambers are
At some of the Inns of Court,
Or Serjeant's, or Westminster,
Where all for Help resort.
Sir, quo' the Men, trust us for that,
We shall not fail to tell,
'Twas Law that did the Oyster eat,
And left to Us the Shell.
FAB. XI. Of the Pigeons.
THE Hawks were once at mortal Jars,
Which came at length to Civil Wars,
The Pigeons they stood looking on,
And, full of Pity, made great moan;
To see how bloodily they fought,
And never would these Creatures cease,
Till they had mediated a Peace.
The Hawks did easily consent,
So Peace was made, and home they went,
Where when they came and wanted Prey,
And how to pass their time away;
They fairly made one general Swoop,
And eat their Mediator up.
Two lucky Pigeons were not there,
And so escaped the Massacre.
Of which the One to The Other said,
How came our Kindred all so mad?
Parting of Hawks! Hawks ever should
Be gorged with one another Blood.
The Wicked have a natural Rage,
(A thirst of Violence to assuage.)
Which if not on the Wicked spent,
Will fall upon the Innocent.
So the poor Hugonots of France.
And Vaudois full as poor.
Prayed loudly, in their Innocence.
That God would Peace restore.
Peace was restored; but Peace to them
No Safely did restore;
Their Hawks employed their Power and Time
Much worse than ever before.
And thou, O Church of England Dove,
Done not upon thy Peace;
That may, than War, more fatal prove,
Both to thy Wealth and Ease.
FAB. XII. The Farmer and the Hare.
A Hare did on^^ into a Garden get
Belonging to a Farm;
Where she began to throw up Earth, and eat,
And do some little Harm.
The Farmer cours'd her round and round.
But got her not away;
Puss took a liking to the Ground,
And there resolved to stay.
Well, quoth the Fellow, in a Fret,
Since you are grown so bold,
I shall some more Assistance get,
And drive you from your Hold.
And strait he, sends to a young Squire,
That he, by break of day
Would with his Pack of Hounds repair,
And sport himself that way.
The Squire, as asked, attended came,
With Folks, and Horse, and Hounds;
And in pursuance of the Game,
Rode over all the Grounds.
They leapt the Ditches, broke the Hedges down,
They trampled all the Garden round,
And killed poor Puss at last.
At this the Farmer tore his Hair,
And swore most bloodily,
Zounds! What confounded work is here?
And what a Fool am I?
Not fifty Hares, in fifty Days,
Had so much Mischief done,
As this good Squire (whom I must praise
And thank) has wrought in One.
If our Deliverance from the Frights
Of standing Army near,
And silly superstitious Rites,
Worth Forty Millions were;
Then have we wisely broke our Mounds,
That our Defenses were,
Wisely called in our Neighbors Hounds,
And killed the desperate Hare.
But if, with all this vast Expense,
Besides a Sea of Blood
Spilt in the Church and States Defense,
Our Matter* stand much as they stood.
Then have we done a World of ill,
With endless Cost and Pains,
A little hurtful Hare to kill;
And well deserve the Brains.
FAB. XIII. Poetry its Cure.
A Youth of pregnant Parts and Wit,
And thirsty after Fame,
Was musing long which way to get
An everlasting Name.
And having heard of Poetry,
And its Immortal Praise;
He thought the way to Fame must lie
By courting of the Bays.
He heard how many a noble Town
Laid Claim to Homer's* Birth,
To purchase from it a Renown,
Above the rest of the Earth.
This kindled in his generous Mind
A strong and noble Fire,
He seemed for nothing else designed,
Could nothing else desire.
The Father finding this intent
Ill with his state agreed,
That, living, wanted Six per Cent.
Much more than Fame, when dead:
Resolved to try to cure his Mind,
And change his vain Designs,
And could no fitter Method find,
Than sending him these Lines:
Seven wealthy Towns contend for HOMER Dead,
Through which the Living HOMER begged his Bread.
FINIS.

