THE LOST SHEEP IS FOUND, UNDER A NEW DISGUISEMENT OF A Yong-raw-scull'd Wit,
etc.

A Bold adventure, a new way declared in a further imitation of more domestique
Boarders and Scholars of the feminine gender, in vindication of a pious
intention, and Christian relief of a disconsolate Husband, and three innocent
young Children, for the loss of an imperious revolted wife, and an ungrateful
Manservant, lately departed together, or asunder, into the streights of
Magellanica, or the West Indies, or some where else unknown, to trade by their
own self wits or wills, in Chaundry wares, or Cotton-Wooll, in flat
opposition and dislike of so laudable and generous a design, etc.

London, Printed. 1642.

THE LOST SHEEP IS FOUND, UNDER A NEW DISGUISEment of a young-raw-scull'd Wit,
etc.
PAUL may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God alone which renders the
increase. The sandy foundation of my building hitherto must be razed, and a
firmer timely prepared to erect a new edifice upon. But seeing my particular
ruin (with too many in the like Catastrophe) cannot, nay, must not (with times
variation) be repaired by the ancient and ordinary rules of Law and Justice,
which evidently presages an eminent (or imminent) dissolution. And therefore
beyond the care of these outward Tabernacles, the eternal mansion of our
souls should be thought upon, by a sure laying another manner, and more firm
foundation; building and erecting securely on that blessed, and most immovable
Rock, Christ Jesus; by a daily fabric and edification of a Theological
archietecture of Faith, Hope, and Charity; which virtues are not singly
attained by humane endeavor alone, but through cooperation of Gods holy
Spirit (preventing Grace from divine illustration perpetually assisting) yet
for certain we may (by industry) enlighten and conduct morality to some
special degree or apprehension of some hopeful perfection (beginning at youth
especially) in the future in one, or all, the chief whereof is Christian
charity; always intending the morrall good and benefit of others, with (and
sometimes before) our selves. Now although my former intendment has prepared
ready for the press, two tracts of another consequence, and more concerning
the public; a taste whereof I have lately set forth in Print, by way of a
Remonstrance, entitled Clericus Mercati; of another also likewise ready, for
the timely expression of Mortification and Repentance. Forasmuch as my unhappy
and perfidious yoke-fellowes, and copartners, both male and female, have
conjoyntly made me (some other way not to be mentioned) more public then my
self would have it, or desired; and thereafter framed and suited their
intentions and purposes (though not with my consent, as they pretend) quite
opposite to these immaculate times (as some too precisely deem) which need no
Repentance now, as well as no Clericus Mercati; both damned in judgment, as
useless or fruitless for Church or Commonwealth; I have therefore laid aside
and suspended awhile, both. Tracts and rural office together, as impertinent,
until the present times mend or end with me and mine, and so patiently refer
my cause and needless calling, to the Laws supreme, at the last and general
Resurrection. In the mean season (not grow desperate) but assume a steadfast
resolution (through public and private distemper) to wade through all
temporal disasters; but first, submit and return to God Almighty, beginning
like a young and hopeful Grammar-Scholar, with Proximus sum, etc. true charity
begins at home, etc. Maugre that instance of wisdom and experience, which
infallibly denotes Cor humile faciemque moestam, and plagam cordis efficit
mulier improba; manus remissas and genua soluta, quae non consolatur virum suum
in angustia, etc. Ecclesiasticus 25. ver. 23.

For as much as time and too late experience has made me sensible of every
syllable of this sacred Text, and sent home to my habitation (even to the very
doors and posts of my house) a doleful commentary thereof, yet in pious
consideration, that Sampson (though treacherously betrayed by Dalilah) had
strength enough continued in him afterward, to ruin his enemies by the same
means they ensnared him; and surely the promise (through divine ordinance and
providence) is not by the bondwoman, but the free, as our Apostle also
infers, etc. Gal. 4.24. Let me not therefore (Christian Reader) be deemed
too confident or arrogant (amid a conjugall contestation) to undertake (though
not by my self alone, being the unfortunate husband of an impious and revolted
wife) yet by the obsequious help of others, pious, virtuous, and expert
assistants that way of my procurement) to breed up and religiously educate,
three dozen at least of pure Virgins, and yet turn and return them all safe
and secure to their several indulgent Parents, after four or five years
exercise of their young and tender inclinations, as chaste and pure, and surely
more perfect and clear, then they came or were delivered into my charge,
maugre all those imputations of my frozen imbecilitie that way, cast upon me by
my lustful wife, who (after almost twenty years experience) declares me
scarce so able for her satisfaction as an Evenuch, or for education (as well as
procreation) of youth male or female, more impotent then a dunce or a disguised
Schoolmaster, lost utterly for want of wit, or defect of such another rural
office, having almost consumed his whole substance upon his wives wit, and her
two leaved book, whereon he has poared himself so dull and blind, that half
his revenue left can hardly procure right Crystal spectacles, to contrive a
close, way to pay his debts to her minion, or avoid the acknowledgement of a
disguised or discontented Cuckold, unless the revolted wife would have timely
become a convert to return on her bare knees to ask pardon of her husbands
jealousy, and not her own impudency, and therefore politikely he turned his
Clerk out of doors after his rural office, being first in his debt 500.
pound by his wives procurement, that she might (in pious affection of justice)
follow after him, well knowing before hand, that her self alone, neither could
nor would perform the duties of a loyal wife, unless the man were sometimes
ready provided to take off what the master had laid on; but mistake me not, I
mean in dry beating, which she could no longer endure from her husband at no
time, but rathera threefold bum-basting from the abler man, her husbands
Clerk, at all times at home or abroad, more willing always to steer her
floating vessel by her man's Rudder then her husbands Mainesaile or Tackling
either, which made her at last cut Cables and ride away by stealth in Church
time, for fear of too speedy pursuit by an old, lame, and lasie husband. But
to avoid prolixity in this ambiguous and incurable malady, and to congratulate
with their conjoynt and more feasible designs, whatsoever, or wheresoever
pretended, or farther intended between themselves, or asunder, as they
cunningly seem to be for a time of future advantage: I dedicate as well to
them, as these wavering times, this my rustique muse. Viz.

Though wives comply not with their husbands strain,
To castigate young girls, must age restrain?
No suer, for education (man's) evermore the best;
To instruct and point them home to heavenly rest.
Although the younglings think the old ones fools,
Yet th'oldest know more young ones whipped in schools.
All youth is ranging, till find themselves more wise,
Old ones experience, for them's in stead of eyes. Numb. 10.31. Eccles. 25.6.

Notwithstanding all the insultant premises of an ungracious wife; I have had
by two wives, six children; though now (through lazy negligence or other
accidental impediment) I have so seldom, and timerously frequented the
two-leav'd fore-dore of my stately habitation; that my present wife (with some
other of that fleeting sex) has been unwillingly constrained to run through the
back-yard of Concupiscence behind her husbands great house, to persuade her
lusty man to perform his Masters office at home and abroad, that she may the
better enjoy her own husbands company, who has been hitherto detained from
her, and bated of her own and due benevolence, three quarters, at least, of
every whole year, for almost twenty years together. Besides, to aggravate the
long tyranny she has endured in that kind or nature, she has to sundry
persons desperately sworn and vowed to return no more (like a loyal and
obedient wife) without her man to wait on his old Maher for redemption of his
former neglects and escapes, within his first covenant, without a livery of two
Laces behind and before, as the Clerk of the Markets man, proudly and
reproachfully taunted some of the Justices of the peace in Cornwall, as also
(not long since) nearer hand at London. But wot you the reason (courteous
reader) of so sudden and strange alteration of late betwixt me and my wife;
my associat in office and fellow Clerk, it is (may it please you) as well
double as doubtful, the one, if her husbands rural office with its rustique
authority, should rise in judgment against her and her minion, for their
conjoynt, corrupt, or indirect making the slave away at an under value, without
her husbands privitie, being his sole and only substance; then albeit the
office never return more in statu quo, etc. she is sure of a more loving
husband in posse, then ever the present, or preterimperfect tense, of her Verb
could yet decline, or indeed ever means hereafter, in her husbands well
appointed new female schoolehouse, in the Latin (or lackwits) tongue
especially. A second reason may be inferred (ex congruo) for apt and seeming
complaint with her husbands purpose and laudable design in present agitation,
to teach the young Damsells and Gentlewomen (bourding scholars in her husbands
house) to write true English or French, in a bastard Komane hand, her self
having so long time approved his character to be very legible, and so
contiguous to discipline and good nurture of Pupils (or rather puppets) that in
very deed, she can hardly (though her lame husband may still if he list) be
well or ill understood without him. Nevertheless, dread not you, my tender,
innocent, and feminine scholars, let not the thought of these disasterous
times, or trivial suggestions affright you, nor your indulgent or timorous
parents; for I have undertaken next under the Almighty) the sole tuition and
safe protection of every one of you, and am steadfastly purposed to trust
neither of them (him or her, nor any other of their party or confederates) with
any your writing tackles, much less any other instruments of your discipline,
mine own pen (I praise God, how ever depraved by them and their accomplices
only) has yet incke and virtue enough to supply some particular defects of my
hired teachers (beside superintendency) to guide your right hands to the
untainted paper of chaste integrity and sincerity of life and example; while
both your interiall and exteriall faculties are severally exercising their
several functions and operations by turn and course, assiduously pursuing
those ends and exigents, for which you came, and particularly your parents
acquire, and your selves hope and aspire unto; whereof I purpose (for the
public good, as for my own and childrens better subsistence) according to a
more succinct subscription and description, God assisting by my self and
others, to be a vigilant and sedulous professor; and therefore by this
succeeding brief, or intimation, I refer the well desposed, to try if they
lust, And then confer trust,
Who (hence with all) must
Return to his dust,
Thence rise with the just -- One to live with
Him for evermore, Amen.


THere is lately erected, within a private, healthful, and pleasant house,
situate in Kingstone upon Thames, in the County of Surrey, a private School or
Nursery, for the general education of female youth only, at, or from the age
of eight years, or thereabouts, with all convenient and delightful
appurtenances thereunto belonging, and therewithal provided of men and women,
expert, as well for the teaching of Latin, French, and writing by Letters and
Ciphers, as also for other Morrall, Civil, and Religious discipline, with the
teaching of sundry sorts of Needle Work, Tent-worke, or the like, Musical
instruments, and Dancing. If any person of what estate or degree soever, be
thereunto disposed, may have their daughters placed, boarded, and taught, at,
and for answerable rates or rents, per annum; and shall be also therewithal
daily supplied (with much safety and security) by other needful and fruitful
accommodations.

Per me, Ben: Agar.

An humble Remonstrance to the Honorable house of Commons assembled in
Parliament, for the furtherance and establishment of a necessary and laudable
design in hand for the public good, but hitherto much hindered, molested,
and impeached, by an ungracious Obstacle of an adulterate and shameless wife,
etc.
IN which disasterous and untimely accident, the husband of the foresaid wife
retiring himself within his house, since the beginning of October last; at
which time this Authors wife wilfully departed from her husband and children to
follow her man, they both yet conspiring against the husband; nevertheless to
avoid discontent, or fatal despair (the issues of her desire) the husband
has spent his time since, in the composure of these several Tracts, ready
prepared for the Press; the several arguments and contents whereof hereafter
more amply ensues: viz. Wherein some persons may conceive and find,
The various explications of perplexed mind. viz.


The sundry and several arguments particularized in Prose and Meeter. viz.
1. A Swarm of Bees fitted and provided for the Hive of Prophesies and
Predictions, The ^logicall and Morrall, concerning sundry events to be expected
in the last Ages of the world; with other smaller Tracts, and Discourses, both
in Prose and Verse, profitable and delightful to be known; together with
sundry Apothegmes collected from King James his Table-talke in his life time,
both in England and Scotland, since his happy access to the Crown of England,
etc.

Item.

For other things belonging to this life. viz.
For Wit, or Wisdom, or such sublimer things,
Which cumber life below, which hang on supreme strings.

Reciprocal invectives, as well for good as bad; viz.
First, whorish women, and their exultations,
To quit them quaintly, select evacuations;
For Meer-maids sly, and subtle attemptations,
Their privy tisements, and dangerous insinuations.
Their Crocodiles tears, and Sirens adulations.

Some for the better sort, some others for the worse.
For Prophesies, and their nice explanations;

By various Ways, doubtless interpretations.

Some pithy consort, devout, short ejaoulations,
Some sacred vows, and pious meditations
For Churches foes, some Christian imprecations:
The like for friends, with doleful invocations,
Some Psalms inverted, meet for consolations,

Predictions calculate, for Churches holy ways.

A plot for enterludes, deserving Laurel bays.

TO instruct the wits, perambulate more wise.

For young and old to know, to redeem the time.

And such composed from exigents in Wees,

Inverted proes into satyrique verse.
For these and like, as the author shall be able,
(To make for good men) wives more comfortable
Again (for bad wives) men more suspectable,
Least both in the end decline most despicable,
Diseases festered, prove not incurable.
Hence therefore dream (for each) things profitable.
Assizes due amongst all, all must appear,
Howso'ere disguised, or now baffled here,
For which performance all should be charitable,
With prayers to God, and gestures answerable.

To men within, to beast without in stable.
That such at least (when all have courst the round)
For upright dealings may in Christ be found;
So found in him, when God himself shall come,
Each mortal may receive deserved doom.
All blessings flow from God alone,
Thrice blessed three in one.
Amen.
To set forth all these tracts at once, to public view,
Cannot be brought to pass;
But when for truths (they all) shall prove as true,
As clear perspective glass.
Then render choice and change to all, quaint strains of wit
M' obtain a public praise,
As cause appears abroad, give all some taste of it,
May doleful spirits raise.
Per me Ben. Agar.

FINIS.

