THE AGREEMENT AND RESOLVTION OF SEVERAL ASSOCIATED MINISTERS IN THE COUNTY OF
CORK FOR THE ORDAINING OF MINISTERS.

MAT: 9.37, 38. Then says he unto his Disciples, The harvest truly is
plenteous, but the Laborers are few. Pray the Lord of the harvest, that he
will send forth Laborers into his harvest.

2 TIMOTHY: 2.2. And the things that thou have heard of me, among many witnesses,
the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.

CORK.

Printed by WILLIAM SMITH for Richard Plummer, and are to be sold at his house
in Cork.

THE WORK OF THE MINISTRY PERPETUALLY NECESSARY TO THE CHVRCH-MILITANT.
. 1.
THe work of the Ministry is, as well of perpetual necessity, as of spiritual
advantage to the Church-Militant; To restrain, 2 Cron: 24.2. To call, 2. These:
2.14. To convert, Act: 26.16, 17, 18. To expound the Divine will, Act: 8.31. To
make known the manifold wisdom of GOD, Ephesians: 3.7, ad verse 10, and heart secrets
of men, Heb: 4.12. To minister the Spirit, 2. Cor: 3.8. Gal: 3.2, 5; which is
not promised to teach any thing but what CHRIST has spoken before, John.
14.26; and John makes it to be the infallible examen, or trial of the Spirits,
whether they be of GOD, or not, That they consent that CHRIST is come in the
flesh, 1 John. 4.1, 2, 3, and hear, that is, obey his word by his appointed
Ministry, which he professedly determines to be of GOD, verse 6. To work
Faith, Rom: 10, 14. 1 Cor: 3.5. Ioh: 17.20. To sanctify, Ioh: 17.17. To
establish, Ephesians: 4.14. To seal, Ephesians: 1.13. To come with; and convey much
assurance, with evidence of Divine Election, 1 These: 1.4, 5, and joy in the
Holy GHOST, v: 6. To convince Gainsayers, and stop the Mouths of Deceivers,
Tit: 1.9, 11, whereunto the Church Militant is in all Ages obnoxious, 2 Pet:
2.1. 1 Timothy: 4.2. Elect Ones shall (if is were possible) be deceived ( Math:
24.24) by the uncertain sound of Schisms brazen Trumpets, 1 Cor: 14.8: Zions
Silver ones are needful to call her Assemblies, Numb, 10.7, and alarm her
Sons to battle, v, 9. Every Heretic, and deceiver, will in these last, and
perilous times be pointing at CHRIST, with a Lo here, Lo there is CHRIST, is
if he were there in sober sadness, Math: 24.23, 24: There is a necessity of the
continuance of these Philips to lead doubting Nathaniels unto JESUS, Ioh: 1.46:
ignorant Eunuchs to a right understanding of the word, Act: 8.30. to v. 35, and
to a due participation of the Sacraments, v: 36, 37, 38. The world lies in
wickedness, 1 Ioh: 5.19, in thick, gross, Egyptian darkness, Ioh: 1.5.3.19:
these Lights must flame on the hill, Math: 5.14: in the Candlestick v. 15: to
dispell, and break it, v: 16. False Apostles, will fill their hands, or
consecrate them selves, 1 Kings 13.33: these Ephesine Angels must try them,
Rev: 2, 2. Jezabel will make hereselfe a Prophetess to teach, and to seduce:
these Thyatirian Angels must prohibit her, Rev: 2.20. Diotrephes's, men loving
pre-eminence, will exercise arbitrary power in the Churches; Others shall not
be Ministers; They will be Masters: there must be a succession of authorized
John's to remember their deeds, and silence their pratings. 3 Ioh: v: 9, 10.
Consusio^s will multiply in the Church of Corinth, till there be neither
measure, nor end of them, unless some Paul's be in being and careful to set
things in order when they come, 1. Cor: 11.34. Many Children will want their
food; and allowance, if at any time there be none in Office, Stewards of the
Mysteries, and manifold wisdom of GOD, 1 Cor: 4.1. 1 Pet: 4.10. CHRIST'S
coming can not be as it was in the days of Noah, Math: 24.37, unless some
Preacher of righteousness be then living, 2 Pet: 2.5, to warn the sinful
world of their wickedness, and danger. The purest grain has its chafe, 1.
Ioh: 1.8, 10. Pro: 20.9: the best need this Fan to cleanse them, Math: 3.12.
Sheep are apt to wander, Psalm: 119.176. Esa: 53.6: the best need a Nathan to
reduce them, 2 Samuel: 12.7. All flesh is liable to Fly-blows, Eccl: 7.20: the
best need this salt to preserve them, Math: 5.13. Where grace is not, the
work of the Ministry is necessary to beget it, 1 Cor: 4.15. Jam: 1.18: where
grace is, the work of the Ministry is necessary to continue it, 1 These: 5.19,
20. to increase it, Act: 20 28. 1 Pet. 2.2. As long as there is one Sinner to
be converted, one Saint to be perfected, one member in the body of CHRIST to be
edified, one Christian militant to be made triumphant, the work of the
Ministry is necessary, Math: 28.19, 20. Ephesians: 4.11, 12. Act: 20.32.

Office-power perpetually necessary to the work of the Ministry.
. 2.
AS much as the Ability, or Gift is in order to the Office, or Administration:
So much is the Office in order to the Work, or Operation, 1 Cor: 12.4.5.6. 1
The work of laboring in the word, and Doctrine, is the distinctive character
of Pastors. 1 Timothy: 5.17. Ephesians: 4.12. 2 Those only are gifted for the work of
the Ministry, for whom CHRIST received, to whom CHRIST gave Gifts; and these in
the Holy GHOSTS Register, are only gifted Church Officers, Ephesians: 4.11, 12, 13.
Psalm: 68.18. 3 Office-power is so essential, that if the Office-worke may be
done by others then instituted Officers, 1 Positive acts of Religion need not
an affirmative warrant. 2 The institution of Officers had been superfluous. 3
GODS Judgments against Intruders, had been unjust; (absie) Nor was that, which
the Scripture makes to be the extreme of Jeroboams Apostasy, any so great
matter, 1. Kings 12.31. cap: 13.33. Nor that sad threatening of the Church of
Jsrael by the Prophet Hosea any thing at all, Hos: 4.9. Read also and consider
Jer: 23.21. 1 Samuel: 13.13. 2 Samuel: 6.7.

The distinction of the Ministeriall-Office.
. 3.
TO run without Office-power, argues presumption; to stand still with it,
laziness: The former, because the Ministry is a distinct Office: The latter,
because it impowers for distinct Works, 1 Timothy: 3.1. 1 The Persons empowered
distinct; some, Ephesians: 4.11: not all, 1 Cor: 11.29; and in relation to their
Office, distinguished from other Saints. Heb: 13.24. 2 The Office, and
Office-titles distinct; 1 Timothy: 3.1. Ier: 3.15. Math: 9.36, 37, 38. 1 Cor:
3.9.4.1.2.15. 2 Cor: 3.6.5.20. Act: 20.28. Rev: 1.16, 20. 3 distinct promises
are made to Church Officers, Mat: 10.19.16.19.18.18.28.20. 1 Timothy: 4.16. 1 Pet:
5.4. Dan. 12.3. 4 distinct gifts, and qualifications required in them, 1 Timothy:
3.2. Tit: 1.7, 8, 9. 5 distinct duties imposed on them concerning others, 1
Pet: 5.2, 3. 1 Timothy: 4.13, 14, 15. 2 Timothy: 4.2. Heb: 13.17: the neglect whereof
procures Woe peculiarly to them, 1 Cor: 9.16; is reproved peculiarly in them,
and for the observance, they peculiarly approved, Rev: 2. cap: 3. 6 distinct
Duties imposed on others concerning them, 1 Cor: 16.10, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18. 2
Cor: 8.23, 24. 1 Cor: 9. Gal: 6.6. 1 These: 5.12, 13. 1 Timothy: 5.17. Heb: 13.7.
Phil: 2.29: the observance whereof in the lowest measure is kindly accepted by
CHRIST, Math: 10.40. Ioh: 13.20: the neglect condemned as the worst of Sins, 2
Cron: 36.15, 16. Lu: 10.16. Hos: 4.4: Resisters of them are said to resist the
Holy GHOST: Act: 7.51, 52: dispisers of them are said to be despisers of GOD, 1
These: 4.8: to judge themselves unworthy of eternal life. Act: 13.46: to reject
the counsel of GOD against themselves, Lu: 7.30: punnished with the worst of
judgments, 2 Cron: 36.16, 17. 1 These: 2.16. 2 Kings. 2.24. Amos. 2.12, to v.
16. The Apostle Jude, v. 11. taxes the primitive Heretics with three horrid
crimes against Christianity, 1 Cruelty against their Brethren, as Cain. 2
Vassalling Religion under covetousness, as Balaam. 3 Opposition to the
ministerial Function, as Core: and adjoines perishing as the necessary product
of that contradiction. To this Sin, temporal punnishments are often
consequent, 2 Cron: 36.17. Amos. 2.12, to v. 16. 2 Kings. 2.24; Spiritual
always. That dreadful judgment threatened Isai: 6.9, 10, and so often repeated
in the new Testament, Mat: 13. Mar: 4.12. Lu: 8.10. Ioh: 12.40. Act: 28.26.
Romans 11.8.
(where Gods dispensations, both in mercies, and judgments, are especially
spiritual) in each of the Evangelists, in the Acts, and in the Epistles, is
the special fruit of this impiety. When those who are antiministeriall, reele
so fast to Atheisine, and a sottish insensibility, let none imagine that GOD
leaves them unpunished.

The distinct ministeriall-werke, and Office proved by Reason.
. 4.
THough grace does unbeast us: yet it does not unman us. The will of GOD
therefore discovered by right reason, binds our observance: and right reason
gives in its suffrage to the distinct work, and Office of the Ministry, as 1
From the nature of Religious Ordinances, which are 1 High, and difficult; such
as require the whole time, 1 Timothy: 4.15: yea more than the whole man, 2 Cor:
2.16. 2 Mysterious, and excellent: mysterious, because religious (of inward
grace as well as outward rites) excellent because mysterious; And the
difficulty, Act: 6.2, excellency, Heb: 5.4, and mysteriousness, 1 Cor: 4.1. 1 Timothy 3.16, as of every Employment: so especially of that which is sacred,
distinguishes Persons to attend it. 2 From the manner of religious duties; A
work done in religion is not done, if the manner of doing confutes the matter
of the thing done, 1 Cor: 11.17, 20. Hos: 7.14: But such as are regardless, Who
performs religious cuties, are commonly regardless whether, always regardless
how, they are performed. 1 Kings. 12.31, 32. 3 From the end of Religion, the
deligne whereof is GODS glory; i.e. the manifestation of divine excellency. 1
GODS Being is manifested, when as in the darker glass of the world: so in the
clearer glass of the Church (representing more lively GODS Image, 2 Cor: 3.18)
by this dependence. of one on another, we are led to him the original of all.
2 GODS Power is manifested, when by such neake distinct Instruments of divine
appointment, 1 Nations propossessed with enmity, and prejudice, are subdued to
own the way of Religion, 1 Cor: 1.27, 28. 2 The heart (which is GODS
privy-chamber) is reached: Paul a prisoner at the bar, makes Felix, a Judge
on the bench to tremble, Act: 24.25. Agrippa becemes almost a Christian at one
of the same prisoner-preachers Sermons, Act: 26.28. 3. Supernatural treatures
are conveyed by earthen vessels; the power therefore is of GOD, 2 Cor: 4.7:
upon which account the Apostle puts Faith, wrought by Gospell-preaching in the
first rank of the admirable things of the great day, 2 These: 1.10. 3 GODS
universal Sovereignty is manifested by our united services, (as sociable
creatures), which are required of us, Heb: 10.25: and can not be performed by
us, without distinct Ordinances, nor those orderly administered, without
distinct Officers; And as GOD is the GOD of order in the whole Universe: so
especially in the Churches of the Saints. 4 GODS goodness is manifested by
employing 1 such distinct Iustruments, as are symbolicall, and therefore most
probable to be effectual, Ex: 20.19. 2 Such as may in their lives exemplify,
what in their doctrines they teach, Phil: 3.17 1 Timothy: 4.12. 1 Pet: 5.3. 3 such
as have their adventurers in the same vessel, 2 Cor: 1.6, 8: So that they can
not deceive others, but they must deceive themselves, Math 15.14. 5 GODS
wisdom is manifested, in the institution of this distinct double witness Ioh:
15.26, 27; double means; 1 Cor: 3.9; inward, and outward. GOD is a Spirit, his
conveyances of himself must be spiritual: we are Bodies, our present
receptio^s must be corporeal; so the infinite wisdom of our GOD, that suits
his institutes to both; to the former by the Spirit of his grace; to the latter
by the Ministry of Man.

That it is, GOD, who calls to the Officeworke, and power ministerial.
. 5.
BUt all means ought to be proportioned to their proper ends. The Stream can
not rise higher then the springhead; As therefore the ends so likewise the
institution of the Ministry is supernaturalls Not to speak of the Poiest-hood,
before, and under Mosaicall Paedagogie; GOD promises, Esa: 66.21, to single,
or take out from the rest of believers under the Gospel; some for Priests,)
and Levites, ^^es New Testament Officers, set forth in old Testament
characters: And according to this promise, GOD sets such in the Church, 1 Cor.
12.28, 29, 2 Cor: 5, 18.19. Christ (...) gives them to the Church, Ephe 4.11 1 Timothy 1.11 12 The Holy GHOST seperates them for the Church, Act: 13.2.20.28.

Ordinary Ministers.
. 6.
THis truth reaches, not only Apostles, Prop hets and Evangelists
(extraordinary): but Past ours and Teachers also (ordinary) Church Officers:
Thus Apollo, 1 Cor: 3.5. Epaphras, Col: 1.7. Archippus, Col: 4.17. Silvanus, 1
These: 1.10, with cap: 2.4. Tychicus, Col: 4.7. Ephesians: 6.21, ordinary Ministers,
received their Ministry from the LORD.

And mediately by Ministers.
. 7.
ANd as it is perpetually necessary, that those, who minister in the things of
GOD, should be thereto separated by GOD: so is it perpetually necessary, that
by some external act, it might appear, who are thus separated. This Express
under the Gospel, Christ at first determined, either by personal, or
miraculous signation. Personal, during his humiliatio^, as the 12 Apostles,
Math: 10: Miraculous, after his ascension, as Matthias by Lot Act: 1.26. Paul
and Barnabas by vision, Act: 13.2. Timothy by prophesy, 1 Timothy: 4.14. But though
Miracles cease, yet the Gospell-ministration, and Ministry must continue (2
Cor: 3.11,) in regard that the Churches need of it, (as Sect: 1.), and GODs
care to supply it, is the same to the end, Math: 16.18. and 24.14. Esa: 30.20.
Therefore does CHRIST send Gospell-Ministers, as the FATHER sent him, Ioh:
20.21: and authorizeth them (acting under him, and in his stead, 2 Cor: 5.20.)
to authorize others, 2 Timothy: 2.2. And as their work and office shall continue
to the end of the world: so he promises his presence with them always, even
to the end of the world, Mith: 28.18, 19, 20.

By the way of Ordination.
. 8.
THe Ministers of the Gospel thus separated and authorized to separate and
authorize others; are herein directed to Gospel Ordination; as GODS institution
for this end and purpose. Thus Paul; though immediately chosen by GOD, even to
an Apostolate, must be ordained, Act: 13.1.2: and the Seven, though ^mediately
chosen by the multitude of disciples, but even a Deaconship, must be ordained,
Act: 6.3, 6. Paul and Barnabas go from place to place, to ordain Presbyters
in every City. Act: 14.23. Titus is left at Crete to ordain Presbyters, Tit:
1.5: all which had been nedless, if qualifications, or popular election
(without ordination) had been authoritative mission. Timothy received his
commission by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy: 4.14: and
though in the negative, he be forbad to lay hands sudenly on any man: yet
thereby in the affirmative, he is commanded to lay on hands, i. e. ordain
Ministers, 1 Timothy: 5.22.

Gospell-Ministers (in the County of Cork) excited to ordain Ministers.
1 By Sense of Duty.
. 9.
WE do not, we dare not apologize for all, or any the infirmities, errors,
offenses, scandalls etc, of any in the Ministry. It is (the LORD knows) a cause
of sadness, and heart-searching to us, as often as we think of them; and the
rather, considering how prodigiously provoking, and of what dangerous,
destructive consequence, the excesses and obliquities of the Sons of Levi are,
which the LORD has been wont to prosecute with flaming expressions of an hot
displeasure, Mal: 2.8, 9: Yet since the unbeleife and miscarriages of men can
not make the faith of GOD of none effect in any thing that he has promised to
his Church, Rom: 3.3. 2 Timothy: 2.13: and since, even in the deepest defection of
the Aaronicall Priesthood, which was to give place in time to the
Evangelicall, GOD took care, ere he threw out one, to provide for the
substitution of another (as if he would thereby acquaint us, that it is some
part of the mystery of his ways, to be angry with men in Office, and well
pleased with the institution and Office it self at one and the same time as we
may see in that famous portion of Scripture, 1 Samuel: 2.27 ad fin: Yea,
especially, since we are encompassed with such a cloud of Scripture-testimonies
already expressed, That GOD will not leave his Church at any time, after the
manifestation and resurrection of his Son, destitute of Pastors, according to
his own heart, which shall to the end of the world teach, and make Disciples
out of all Nations; unto whom our LORD JESUS has annexed a Lo of his being
present with them always, or every day, Math: 28.20; which word and phrase, in
our judgment imports a promise of a clear, and daily manifestation of what a
CHRIST present can discover, and hand forth unto them: We have therefore
resolved through GODS assistance (being confidently and comfortably persuaded
of the promised presence of our MASTER with us) to put forth that power,
wherewith the LORD has (in this instance) entrusted us; That in this part of
CHRIST'S Church, 1 A Gospell-Ministry may be regularly continued. 2 Intruders
prevented. 3 CHRIST'S Flock preserved, as well from dispersion, as infection.

2 By experience of diverse sad consequents of non-ordination.
. 10.
COntraries are best illustrated by their Contraries. We shall therefore
particularize some of the sad co^sequents, which by experience we have observed
to arise from entrance into the Ministry by other ways than GODS way of
Ordinatio^. 1 The most of those, who take upon them the Ministry, without
ordination, are far from having such gifts, as are necessarily required in
those that are instructours to others. 2 Those Congregations, who give this
liberty to persons unordained, are incompetent Judges of their gifts. 3
Conversion-worke went on more lively, when Ministeriall-worke was wholly in the
hands of ordained men, and Church-Guides. 4 Such confident Intruders are
seldom without their considerable errors, not only in discipline, but
doctrine. 5 Popery, and Apostasy have little prevailed, but where and when,
either such as pretended to be Ministers, labored not in the word and doctrine;
or such as pretended to labor in the word and doctrine, were not Ministers. 6
Enthusiasmes in such we see often pretended to, and no wonder, when Learning,
which in an ordinary way, should furnish with abilities, is wanting. 7 Though
this Gangrene begins at the foot; yet it suddenly cates to the heart: we
seldom see any who are against Ordinances, Sabbaths of Scriptures, CHRIST, but
such as were first against ordained Ministers. Some of them who without
ordination pretended to be prime Preachers of CHRIST, do now themselves
protend to be CHRIST. 8 In such unordained men is easily discernable, not only
the bublings up, but the flowings over of a Spirit of pride, and
selfe-confidence. 9 They who exclaim against Ministers, as preaching for
Tithes, have given shrewd cause of suspicion, that themselves preached for
places and employments, 10 Such unordained persons commonly divide and break
insunder such Congregations, in which they have liberty to exercise. 11 They
ordinarily obtrude themselves on such Congregations, as are conscientiously
scrupled, and professedly unsatisfied with them. 12 Many or them neglect the
duties of their particular and general Calling; and whilst they pretend to
teach whole Congregations, they omit to instruct their Children and Servants.
13 Because of such wild and: irregular practices, the Ordinances of the Gospel
come to be contemned, and the offering of the LORD to be abhorred. 14 Men of
learning and ability, whose labors might have been of singular and signal
advantage, have by this means been slighted, excluded. 15 Even by natural
conscience the profane are convinced that duties of Religion ought to be
performed, and distinct Persons attend them when therefore they see such as
pretend to the power of Religion, to despise the form (which is the utmost
their Capacities can reach) they are easily induced by the old Serpent to over
value the form, and despise the power; and when they see other profane ones,
prize what they prize, and those that pretend to the power, despise the same
(by making it common, and of ordinary address) they are rootedly hardened in
their profaneness 16 The Irish and Papists are alienated from the Protestant
Religion.

1 Ignorance is the mother of Popish devotion; they therefore respect more the
persons of teachers than the things taughts and where these are contemned, they
are apt to repute Religion denied:

2 Order and Unity are essential properties (in the Papists opinion) of the
true Church; but disorder and Schism are the natural consequents of
unordained Intruders; and where these are, the Papists do readily conclude
that Religion is not.

3 Many Papists, though so ignorant in the choice principles of Christianity,
that their faith is implicate; yet in many things (especially Popish
controversied) they clearly discover a greater ignorance and weakness in these
Intruders; the discovery whereof, together with the admiration of their own
dark Sophisters, confirms them in their persuasions against the Protestant
Religion; whereof they judge rather by the weakness and pretenses of such
Intruders, than by the true grounds of Protestant Religion.

4 These various unordained Intruders are often contradictory, not only to each
other, but to themselves; the observance whereof confirms the Papists, that as
there is out one truth, so these contrary ways can not be that truth.

5 Scripture being wrested by these unstable intruders to patronize their own
conceptions, the Papists are confirmed, that Scripture is a Judge insufficient,
and unlawful for common use, as being liable to abuse, and if
Scripture-adjudication be once rejected, carnal reason will invite to set the
highest value on Popish polity.

6 These unordained Intruders do usually revile Gospell-Ministers, and the
owners of the Gospell-Ministry as Antichristian: Now when that guilt is
charged by these on the Protestants, which the Protestants charge on the
Papists, the Papists are thereby confirmed, as if they were as innocent as
their professed Opposites and Reprovers.

7 Vice may be nourished with the milk of virtue. The Gospell-Ministers are
constrained by the distracting disturbances of these Intruders to lay out so
much of their time and sweat in the prevention of the evil consequences before
instanced, that the Papists (who are opposite in the other extreme) gain
ground by this diversion, and are easily persuaded to think the better of
themselves, even on this occasion.

8 Many doctrines delivered by these Intruders are expressly Popish; which
some of them deliver because of their ignorance and inability to distinguish
betwixt what is Popish, and what not; others out of design to introduce Popery
without noise or discovery.

Many of these consequences (we believe) arise from the nature of unscripturall
intrusion into the work of the Ministry without ordination; though possibly
others of them arise from the frequent distemper and irregularity of them, who
dare be such Intruders; by instance whereof we intend not to justify the
distorted illations made by Papists, and profane persons; but to discover the
advantage, which by this occasion is ministered to the slye and subtle
insinuations of the crooked Serpent, and the Church-shattering,
Soule-indangering improvement he makes of that advantage; which jointly with
the sense of our special duty, inforceth us to the discharge thereof, in
ordaining Ministers.

More, than others.
. 11.
THat we herein begin, will be no temptation (we hope) of prejudice to any
Brethren; for 1. Some must begin. 2. England affords many precedents. 3 of all,
in this County, we apprehend the opportunity to associate is most, because the
Ministers are most and nearest: the necessity most, because the Congregations
are most and greatest; and many members of them rationally judge, that those
intend to climb over the Wall, who refuse to enter in by the Door.

More, than formerly.
. 12.
THat we rather engage in this duty at present, than formerly, has these
inducements. 1. The Protestant Inhabitants were necessitated formerly to live
in, or nigh Garrisons; and so might be supplied by such ordained Ministers, as
GOD had there set: but at present, they disperse themselves into the Country;
wherefore to attend them, the increase of the number of Ministers, becomes
necessary; and to that end (by GODS institution) ordination is necessary. More
Gospell-Ministers settled in Ireland, since the LORD HENRY-CROMVVELL arrived
here, and owned the public Ordinances of Christ, than in 15 years precedent.
Think upon him O God for good, according to all be has done for thy People.
2 Through the LORDS goodness, and the benign aspect of our Magistrates,
Gospell-Ministers are encouraged, and we find, that both the harvest is great,
and the Laborers not so few as formerly; who (in GODS way) must either seek
ordination from our Brethren, the Scots in Vlster; the inconveniences whereof
(the present State of affairs considered) are too obvious to need our
instances: or from our Brethren in England; But 1 They may probably want means
of support for such a journey. 2 Certificates from persons at this distance, may
possibly be counterfeited, or if true; discredited, because the Subscribers
unknown: by the former, unfit persons may be ordained; by the latter, fit
persons discouraged, if not rejected: by both, the Church of CHRIST prejudiced,
and the work of the Gospel obstructed.

More, than to other acts of discipline.
. 15.
NEither do we think the procedure proposterous, to engage in the duty of
Ordination, before other acts of Ecclesiastical discipline; for 1 Herein we
walk in the same method, as the reverend Assembly late at Westminster, in
their advice propounded. 2. Ordination of Ministers, properly and peculiarly
belongs to Ministers. 3 Several particulars (urged by many, under this Head of
discipline) are to us very dark: but ordination of Ministers by Ministers, is
to all of us a clear duty: those therefore are fittest for further debate; this
for present observance. 4 Many acts of discipline are only necessary to the
well-being of the Church visible: but ordination of Ministers to its very
being. (At least considered as orgainz'd, or as continuing.) 5 We have mutually
engaged our selves to the LORD, and to each other, to improve the advantage of
our frequent meetings, in wrestling with the LORD by prayer; and considering
and admonishing each other; both in relation to our particular walking, and in
relation to the Flock of CHRIST, over which the HOLY GHOST has made us
Overseers.

WE conclude with a few words of advice to the Readers of this Account of our
Principles, and intended Practice; and especially to our People, and the
several Congregations committed to our charge; whose spiritual improvement,
flourishing growth, and eternal welfare in the Heavens, our very Souls do
pantingly breath after.

1 Let that which was the Bereans commendation, ( Act: 17.11.) be yours, Search
the Scriptures daily. Many places and passages in sacred Writ you will sinde
quoted by us, which we entreat you to turn to, and examine: A passing over
them in have, and with a transient glance, may not gain a steady consent, but
leave you hesitant and dubious; at least in some of the instanted particulars.
It Is a narrow search, and curious inquisition that tends to; and terminates in
a clear conviction and full satisfaction. It Is of grand concernment, that you
be well grounded in this main Head of Divinity. The Gospell-Ministry (which is
indeed the Devils smarting eyesore, being the great Engine designed by CHRIST
to Batter down the Wails of the Kingdom of darkness) is on all hands
beleaguered, assaulted, struck at; though from some quarters, and regions, the
storm be more violent and impetuous than from others. An huge dust is raised
by Objectors, and men by great heaps loose themselves in a mist of dangerous
mistakes; and all for want of pondering and weighing things in the Balance of
the Sanctuary: However, this we may depend on, and comfort our selves with,
That it shall contmue till the second coming of our LORD, maugre all combined
and boisterous opposition in order to its subversion and abolition. When
Ordinances shall cease, then Ministers shall be no more, and not till then.
Particular Ministers (like boughs) may be, and have been lopt off by the hand
of violence; but Ministry (like a mighty Tree (whose fruit the LORD has
appointed for the healing of the Nations) is too deeply and firmly rooted, to
be blown cowne. In vain is that Port assaulted, that has a promise of
CHRIST'S presence and powerful assistance, Math: 28.20. This is an Age
abounding with suggestions and insinuations of several shapes; which, if
obtruded under the notion of a clearer light, and an higher way of Communion,
have a potent and captivating influence on persons, whose Hearts are better
than their Heads, and who have warm Affections, and but feeble Intellectualls.
It will be your wisdom (abhorring all easy; yielding, corrupt compliances upon
the wretched, unworthy account of promoting or securing an interest in the
World) to have recourse to the Law and to the Testimony, confidently
concluding, that if they speak not according to this word, it is because there
is no light in them, what ever sparkling and beamy brightness may be pretended
to, Esa: 8.20.

2 And since it is a duty incumbent on the people to pray for their Pastors, 2
These: 3.1: And since there is a great door and effectual opened, but not with
out the waspish activity, and retarding obstructions of maligning adversarias,
1 Cor: 16.9: And since we are but men, subject to the same passions and
infirmities with your selves; and knowing only in part, 1 Cor: 13.9; and our
Strength no way proportionable to the weightiness of that work that lies upon
us, 1 Cor: 2.16: we shall earnestly entreat, that in your addresses to the
Throne of Grace, you would frequently and affectionately make mention of us,
and importuaately pray unto the Father of Lights, that he would inlighten us
with his truth, and show us the way that he would have us to walk in, and
teach us how we ought to behave our selves at such a time as this is; That he
would encourage our hearts, and strengthen our hands in his own way and work;
That he would bless the sincere, though feeble endeavors of his Servants for
the propagating of the Gospel, and promoting of the interest of his SON; and
that out of tender regard unto his Churches welfare, he would blow upon and
blast all anti-ministeriall designs. The Harvest is great, the Laborers few:
O pray unto the LORD of the Harvest, that he would send forth painful
Laborers into his Harvest, Math: 9.37; 38; and make them suceessfull for the
bringing of many sheaves into CHRIST'S barn. Our motions are slow, because not
furthered and assisted by your prayers, which should serve as oil unto our
Chariot wheels, to make them run the more smoothly and swiftly. The time that
many spend in whispering, complaining, backbiting, quarrelling, contending,
exclaiming, censuring, do you spend in praying. The LORD forbid that we should
sin, in ceasing to pray for you, whom we expect to be our glory, and crown of
rejoicing in the presence of our LORD JESUS CHRIST at his coming: And the LORD
forbid that you should sin, in ceasing to pray for us, who watch for your
Souls, as those that must give an account; and are willing to spend, and to be
spent for the Churches good.

FINIS.

