Th. Fables of Aesop Paraphrased in Verse and adornd with Sculpture by John
Ogilby.


THE FABLES OF AESOP Paraphrased in Verse, and adorned with Sculpture,

By JOHN OGILBY

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Warren for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENEAGE FINCH Earl of Winchilsea and Viscount
Maidston. AND THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY SEYMOUR Lord BEAUCHAMP.
My Lords,
AFter the Felicity, my first labor, the translation of Virgil, received, in
the protection of so Learned, and so Honorable a Patron as your noble Father,
my very good Lord, I could not, nor did resist, being charged home with
Gratitude, Duty, and the Harmony of Order, to entitle my Second Piece to the
same renowned Family by this humble Dedication to your Lordships.

Nor is it, (may it please your Honors) without something of design, by which
this my last work, what ere it be, may in such a Grove of Honor, with your
Names inscribed, and influenced by your Virtues, last, until the truest Test
of Books shall sign its Commission for milder ages, and perhaps more clear from
Prejudice, Barbarity, and the most cruel of all enemies, Ignorance.

If any, my good Lords, shall accuse my Judgment, and Choice, who had the
Honor of Conversation with Virgil, that I have descended to Aesop, whose
Apologs this day are read and familiar with Children in their first Schools;
and in these latter times dishonored by unworthie Translators; though the
Dictates of my own reason deny I should make Answer to such men, It shall not
be impertinent to say, this Ancient Mythologist has through all and the most
learned Times, been highly esteemed by the wisest, and studied to the great
Advantage of Humane Life. Macrobius, of most eminent Judgment, allowd his Book
a place in the Temple of Wisdom; and Socrates, who was judged by the Oracle
the wisest man then living, followed him in all his ways of persuasive
Oratory, not disdaining to translate him into Verse.

But I fear I have troubled your Lordships with this Vindication, and now be
pleased to receive your own, the old Philosopher in a modern and Poetical
dress; if he find entertainment from you, it shall be an honor to him, and
the greatest engagement upon,

My Lords, Your most humble and obedient Servant, JOHN OGILBY.

To my Friend Mr. Ogilby.
IN Empire's Childhood, and the dawn of Arts,
When God in Temples dwelt not, but in Hearts,
When Men might Teachers by their Deeds believe,
When Power robbed none, nor Science did deceive;
Nor soaring Thought wildly to Heaven did fly
Searching Records, which in Gods Closet ly,
To know (since none like God eternal were)
How his Dominion could at first appear;
Presuming he, nor Honor had, nor Sway,
Before some were, to Worship and Obey.
Vain Thought! could Man doubt God was ere alone,
Whose several beings to himself were known,
Who if he Power could want, it must but be
Because he could not make fit Company
To tend his own perfections; which were more
Than now best souls can perfectly adore:
Or could he, if alone, feel want of sway,
Who worlds could make, and make those worlds obey
For what he since created Argues more
His Love of doing good, than Love of power.
Nor so could God mistake, as to believe
That to be honor which his Creatures give;
Nor could he then, since honor is respect,
Want honor till himself he did neglect;
For if it might be said, he was alone,
Yet to himself his Excellence was known;
Which was so great, that if himself could raise
His honor higher with his own just praise,
He was himself his own abundant Theme,
And only could himself enough esteem.
But these vexed Thoughts, which Schools unquiet make,
And like to madness keep their souls awake,
Took rest, and slept, in the Infancy of Time,
And with seeld eyes did never upward climb.
To study God, God's Student, Man, was made;
To read him as in Natures Text convaid;
Not as in Heaven, but as he did descend
To Earth, his easier Book; where, to suspend
And save his Miracles, each little Flower,
And lesser Fly, shows his familiar power.
Then usefully the studious world was wise,
Not learned as now in useless subtilties.
Truth naked then, not armed with Eloquence,
Walked safe, because all rose in her defense.
But now the gravest Schools, through Pride, contend;
And Truth awhile, at last themselves defend.
So vexed is now the world with mysteries,
Since prouder minds dressed Truth in Arts disguise;
And so Serene and Calm was Empire then,
Whilst Statesmen studied Beasts to Govern Men.
Accursed be Aegypt's Priests, who first through Pride
And Avarice this common light did hide:
To Temples did this moral Text confine,
And made it hard, to make it seem Divine:
In Creatures forms a fancied Deity
They drew, and raised the mystery so high,
As all to reach it did require their aid;
For which they were, as hyr'd Expounders, paid.
This clouded Text, which but to few was known,
In time grew darker, and was read by none;
So weak of Wing is soaring Mystery;
And Learning's Light goes out, when held too high:
But blessed be Aesop, whom the wise adore,
Who this dark Science did to light restore;
Which though obscured, when raised and made Divine,
Yet soon did in his humble Morals shine.
For that which was by Art for profit hid,
And to the Laity, as to Spies, forbid,
He, as the hirelesse Priest of Nature, brought
From Temples, and her Doctrine freely taught;
Whilst even to Beasts Men, blushing, seemed ashamed
That Men by Beasts he counseled and reclam'd.
Blessed be our Poet too! whose fire has made
Grave Aesop warm in Death's detested shade;
Though Verses are but Fetters deemed by those
Who endless journys make in wandering Prose;
Yet in thy Verse, me thinks, I Aesop see
Less bound than when his Master made him free:
So well thou fit'st the measure of his mind,
Which, though the Slave, his body, were confind,
Seemed, as thy wit, still unconstraind and young,
And like thy numbers easy and as strong.
Or as thy Muse in her Satyrick strain
Does spare the Person, whilst the Vice is slain,
So his rebukes, though sharp, were kind and grave,
Like Judges chiding those whom they would save.
Thus since your equal souls so well agree,
I needs must paint his mind in drawing thee.
Be both renowned! and whilst you Nature preach,
May Art never raise your Text above our reach.
Your Morals will (they are so subt'ly plain)
Convince the Subtle, and the Simple gain;
So pleasant too, that we more pleasure take
(Though only Pleasure does our Vices make)
To hear our sins rebuked with so much wit,
Than ever we took when those we did commit.
Laws do in vain with force our wills invade;
Since you can Conquer when you but Persuade.
W: D' AVENANT
From the Tower Sep. 30. 1651.
To my Worthy Friend Mr. JOHN OGILBY.
IN what part of our Hemisphear, could spread
A cloud, so long, to obscure thy radiant Head?
Shine forth Prodigious Star, and make us know
What to thy welcome Beams our Age must owe.
As thou appear'st, how does each trembling light
Retreat? whilst thou emergent from the night,
Like Days new Sovereign, have discovered more,
Than all their revolutions showed before.
At this a Marble heaves! Methinks I see
The Learned shade of Virgil rise to thee,
Taught our own Language, with that soul, and sense,
As has not shamed his Roman Eloquence;
And kissing his fresh shroud, smile, that he must
Confess himself thy debtor, in his dust:
Whilst we admire both thy bold Hand and Fate,
Who have performed, the next thing to Create.
Yet here thou leave us not, as if thy Fame
Were narrow, and too stooping for thy Name;
Aesop the Great Mythologist, thy Pen
Has raised, and more than made alive again.
(When Rimers vexed his Ghost, and Men, to see it,
Staining fair paper with their Cloven feet)
Thou have new made him, for (as if by thee,
Shuffled into his Antique dust) we see
Him rise, but visible in some Earthy part,
His Soul is the new Creature of thy Art.
This could thy great Converse with Virgil do,
To make old Aesop rise a Poet too.
What in thy method must our wits amaze
Next thy Translation, and This Paraphrase:
Awake that Poem, born from thy own flame,
And at least Second in Heroic name;
This, only this remains, Then, thou may try,
And thy Muse tell thee, it is too late, to die.
JAMES SHIRLEY.

Imprimatur.

Na: Brent.
July, 1. 1651.
1
THE FABLES OF AESOP.
THE FIRST FABLE. Of the Cock and Precious Stone.
STout Chanticleere four times aloud proclames
Day's signal victory ore nights vanquished flames:
As often the mighty Lions are affrighted
With his shrill notes, while others are delighted.
In a short coat of feathers warm as furs,
In boots drawn up, and gilded spurs,
(Of old the valiant Cock the Eagle Knighted,)
He from proud roosts high as the thatch descends,
His wives, his concubines, and fair race attends.
Scaling a sordid Mountain, straight he found
A star in dust, a Sparkling Diamond.
Then spoke the Cock: Stone of the blackest water,
Whom time, nor fire can waste, nor anvile batter;
If thee some skillfull Jeweller had sold,
Adorned thus with purest Gold
To a fond lover: he, his love to flatter
Would swear his Ladies eyes outshine thy rays
(Brightest of gems) although she look nine ways.
Thou Emblem of vain learning may adorn
The wisest, but give me a barley corn.
Let meager Scholars waste their brains and tapers
In quest of thee, while they turn anxious papers
Let me have pleasure and my belly full;
Far better is an Empty scull
Than a head stuffed with melancholy vapors.
Lie still obscure; I Will be to nature kind;
My body I Will not starve to feed my mind.
MORAL.
Voluptuous men Philosophy despise;
Down with all learning the armed Soldier cries:
On gleab, and Cattle, greedy Farmers look;
And Merchants only prize their counting book.
2
THE SECOND FABLE. Of the Dog and Shadow.
THIS Dog away with a whole Shoulder ran,
Let thanks be to the careless Larder-man
Which made the Proverb true: both large and good
The mutton was, no way but take the flood;
His fellow Spaniells waiting in the Hall,
Nay Hounds, and Curres, in for a share would fall;
Those beggars, that like Plague and Famine sit
Guarding the gate, would eat both him and it;
Shrewd were his doubts lest Servingmen might put
In for their part, and strive for the first cut:
A thousand real dangers thus persuade,
As many more his nimble fancy made:
Faces about, straight at a postern-gate
He takes the stream, and leaves the rest to Fate.
'Twas in the Dog-daies too; the skies were clear;
Not one black patch did in Heavens face appear:
The conquering Sun left two and thirty winds
Breathles, and happy calmes the Halcyon finds.
When a refracted Ray, a golden beam
In the gross Medium of the darker stream
Pencil'd an other shoulder like to that
The Dog had purchac'd, but more large, and fat.
To him, who often had fed from beggars caps,
Shared in the Dole, and quarreled for fallen scraps,
With twenty more for a gnawn bone would fight,
A greedy Worm, a dogged Appetite
Gave sad advice, to seize one shoulder more.
Some Mortals till they are rich are never poor
Too rash he bites: down to the deepest stream
The shadow and the substance, like a Dream
Vanished together; thrice he dives in vain;
For the swift current bore it to the Main
To furnish Triton's Banquet, who that day
Married the famous Mermaid Galate.
The Virgin smiled, but yet the easy Nymph
Returned not, for the Present, one poor Shrimp.
Thrice round he looks, raising his woeful head,
To see which way the featherd joint was fled;
But finding none, he is resolved to dye,
And with his love dear lady Mutton lie.
Yet hating a wet death, he swam to shore,
Then set a throat up made the Welkin rore;
To hang himself in his own collar he
Is next resolved, could he but find a tree.
Full of despair, in a most desperate qualm
Then thus he howld his recantation Psalm.
Here I the Emblem of fond mortals sit,
That lose the substance for an empty bit:
Whom fair pretenses, and a hollow shade
Of future happiness, unhappy made.
Nay States, and mighty Realms, with plenty proud,
Thus for rich Juno often embrace a Cloud.
He is too blessed that his own happiness knows,
And Mortals to themselves are greatest Foes.
MORAL
Foul Avarice is of pregnant Money bred;
He that loves Gold, starves more, the more he is fed:
Doubling of thousands Usurers to their cost
Know, when both Use and Principal is lost.
3
THE THIRD FABLE. Of the Lion and other Beasts.
WHen troops of beams led by the grey-eyd dawn
From Eastern ports rushed with recruited light,
And beat up all the quarters of the night;
When Cynthia fled, with broken silence drawn,
Her Glory plunderd, pale at the affright;
When Acherons jaws for routed Spirits yawn,
Dreams and fantastic visions put to flight;
When Stars disorderd hid in Sea Nymphs beds,
Or back to Heaven did shrink their golden heads:
Then was the Lion up, and all his court,
Prepared to hunt, from woods and deserts came
Various wild beasts, from fields and Cities tame.
About his palace throng a huge resort,
Because the Royal Edict did proclaim
There would be profit, feasts, as well as sport:
Thus expectation heightend was by Fame,
The strong, swift, cunning, all laid nose to grownd,
Should share alike with him of what they found.
With The Woolfe
Isgrim, The Bear.
Bruine came, and all his Bears,
Attending in the presence yet being dark;
Ram Belin safe was there as in the Ark,
The Fox.
Reynard was buisy with his ginns and snares,
Well know'ng all walks and outlets of the park,
The Cat.
Tybert attends with troops of mountaineers,
And Iefery the Ape, well horsed, a gallant spark
All sorts of dogs, among whom the Spaniell waits,
For shadows hoping now substantial cates.
The Sun scarce drank his draught of morning dew,
Nor did his bowl of disolv'd pearl exhaust,
When mixed troops take the field, no time is lost.
At last a royal Heart they ran in view,
Whom, having at a bay, the Lion drew
About him round his various languag'd Host:
Many their limbs, and some their lives it cost;
At last ore-powr'd by number, down he falls,
While Heaven and Earth ring at his funerals.
Th'unlace, then strip, and next divide the Deer.
Thus the offended King did then complain:
These shares not equal are, divide again.
One portion of the Quarrey will appear
My Perquisit, as I Am your Sovereign;
The next is Ours, as being strongest here;
The third you must acknowledge for my pain;
The last shall be your bounty, not Our clame:
But who denies, look to it, his Foe I am.
No Subject against this Prince durst try his suit;
Not Reynard though most learned in the Law.
Vain are all pleas against the Lions paw,
It Is only force must violence confute,
Just title present power does overawe.
None of the beasts their grievances dispute,
All home return, sad with a hungry maw.
But as they went, one said, Though equals must,
Yet when they please Superiors may be just.
MORAL
When mighty power with Avarice is joined,
Will is obeyed, and Justice cast behind:
So Tyrants to engage the people grant,
And at their pleasure break the Covenant.
4
THE FOURTH FABLE Of the Eagle and the Daw.
THe royal Eagle, when the Ocean's dark
Waves had retired to their low water mark,
Weary with grosser food, and bloody meat,
Forsakes his Cedar court and mountain seat
To seek fresh banquets; nothing that the Ark
Contained could please, Kid, Pidgeon, Lamb, nor Lark.
Nor humane slaughter moist with putrid gore
His gorge with surfeit weakened could put ore.
Shellfish being salt
Might cure the fault,
That only must his former health restore.
When his quick eye piercing the air a mile,
Upon the sea-wash'd margents of an Isle
A Scollop found: which was in shell so locked
That if the devil and his dam had knocked,
They might have staid for entrance a while.
Without success long did the Eagle toil,
His beak grows blunt, his griping tallons ache,
No storm, nor stratagem the fort will take:
When the sly Daw
The leagure saw,
And to his king and royal master spoke.
Prince of the plumed Citizens, to whom
We come for Justice and receive our doom,
Your Highness has been pleased to take advice
From silly Birds, from prattling Dawes and Pies,
And often great Kings will hear the meanest Groom.
Not far from hence (Sir) stands an ancient Toomb
Hard as the Adamantine gates of Hell,
Mount with that Fish enchanted by a spell,
Lessen to a Lark
Then take your mark,
And on hard marble break th'obdurate shell.
This counsel pleased the featherd King: who straight
'Bove Clouds and winged Tempests made a flight:
So high he soard, till Earth's magnetic force
Would not have hindered to the Stars his course;
Then lets the Scollop fall, where its own weight
Made a wide passage to the lushious Freight.
Soon as the hungry Daw perceived the prize,
He stood not to consult, but in he flies;
And straight did eat
The Delicate,
Then to the sheltring wood for safety hies.
When The Eagle this from Heavens bright arches saw,
With a deep sigh he said; Ah treacherous Daw!
By fair pretense, and counsel seeming good,
Thou have deprived me of my dainty food.
Thus cunning Foxes use the Lions Paw;
And by these Arts Subjects from Princes draw
Sovereignty to themselves: the Monarchs wing
Must be strech'd out to his own ruining,
No other power
So high can tower,
It Is the King only must destroy the King.
MORAL
Let Princes of the best advice beware,
Nor trust the greedy, they still treacherous are:
Subjects to Kings Exchecquers have no way,
Unles themselves deliver up the Key.
5
THE FIFTH FABLE. Of the Crow and the Fox.
WAS it the Crow that by a cunning Plot
A piece of Cheese had got?
Or sherking Rook, or Chough, or Pie?
Some bold affirm, as boldly some deny.
But sure I am it was that Daw, or Crow:
And I can prove it to be so,
That robbed the King his master of his meat,
And now to make his Cozenage more complete,
On Man, his Kings King, puts the second cheat.
This Crow, surpised with his own happy wit,
Could neither stand nor sit;
Proud of the spoil, he makes a search
Through all the Grove to find a dancing Perch:
From bough to bough th'insulter hops;
Too low are now tall Cedars tops.
At last he fixed, whom sly sir Reynard sees,
And soon projecting how to get the Cheese,
Thus he accosts him, placed among lofty Trees.
O thou most weather-wise, who best can tell
When Heaven as dark as Hell
Juno incensed shall make, and when
Jove condensed air will rarifie again.
But what sings lying Fame? she says
Thou blacker art than those foul days:
But yet to thine, Swans silver down seems tanned,
With such Plumes Phaenix funeral fire has fand,
And Mexicans in fight like Angels stand.
As thou in Plumes, did thou excel in voice,
'Twould Heaven and Earth rejoice:
Would thou but chant one pleasing lay
Then be thou King of birds, and Lord of May.
Fair Crow entreated, not refuse
As crottcheting Musicians use;
Sing, and let mounting Larks forsake the sky,
And let the emulating Lynnet dye,
And Swans no more tune their own Obsequie.
Success wide doors to open Flattery gives;
All this the Crow beleives:
Trying to reach no common Noat,
Down drops the Dainty in sly Reynards throat;
Who chops it up; then fleering said:
You have sung well, and I have played
My part not ill: All learned Doctors hold
Cheese for the voice far worser is than cold,
Since once it turned a Siren to a Scold.
When the Crow said: I that robbed Man, whose Plot
Spoils from the Eagle got;
A Beast has cozened of no less
A dainty now than my whole second mess.
What cannot glozing Flatterers do,
When our own selves we flatter too?
Go scornd of all, and take thy woeful flight
To dismal Groves, there mix with Birds of night:
Did thy own eyes believe the Crow is white?
MORAL.
Great is the power of Charms, but what enchants
More than bewitching tongues of Sychophants?
Love, and the wealth of Kings, are in their power,
And Gold not sooner takes the maiden Tower.
6
THE SIXTH FABLE. The Battle of the Frog and Mouse.
FRog-land to save, and Micean Realms to spare
From War and Ruin, two bold Kings prepare
The Empire of the Marshes to decide
In single fight. From all parts far and wide
Both Nations flock to see the great event,
And load with Vows and Prayers the Firmament:
Opposed Petitions grant Heaven's Court no rest,
While Hope and Fear thus strugle in their breast.
Up to the fatal Lists and measured Banks
Both Armies drew; bold yellow coats in Ranks
And black furred Monscovites the circle man,
Which the six-finger'd Giant could not span.
The rising Hills each where the Vulgar crowned:
Nor long expect they, when the warlike sound,
Of spirit-stirring Hornets, Gnats and Bees,
(Such Trumpeters would blood turned Ice unfreeze)
Told the approach of two no petty Kings,
While the long Vale with big-voyc'd Croakers rings.
First King Frogpadock with the freckled face
Enters the List (for they by Lot took place)
Riding a Crafish, armed from head to heel
In shell, dame Natures gift instead of steel.
Although the many-footed could not run
With the great Crab, which yearly feasts the Sun;
Nor with the golden Scorpion could set forth
And measure daily the tun-belli'd Earth;
Yet such his speed, he nere was overtook
By any shell-backd monster of the brook.
The arms he wore, once wear a water snakes,
Which in the battle when the springs and lakes
Decided were, a Conqueror he brought
From the deep floods, with gold and purple wrought.
Ore these a water-Rats black fur he cast
Dreadful with teeth and claws. Thus, as he past
The Vulgar showt to see their six inch'd King
Like great Alcides in his Lions skin.
A whole house armed his head, had been a snails:
Though Estridge Plumes it wants, and Peacocks tails,
Yet every color the great Rainbow dies,
Shone on his crest, the wings of butter-flies,
Sent him of old a present from Queen Mab.
His Targe the shell of a deserted Crab,
Where in the Phrogian tongue this verse was writ;
The Manlike swimming King, unvanquish'd yet.
Six sprightly Toadpoles his rush Javelins bore;
His sword, a sharp-long-two-edg'd-Flag he wore
Girt to his thigh, a wandering snaile the hilt
With a bright varnish in Meanders gilt.
Appointed thus about the lists he rid,
While all admire the Champions arms and steed.
Soon as the pleased spectators settled were,
Glad acclamations melting into air,
Voices were heard through ecchoing valleys ring,
The approach foretelling, of the Micean King.
A subdued mouse-trap, his Sedan in peace,
His Chariot now; from man's high palaces
Moustapha brought: Nere through the scorching plain
Did sweating Kings draw such a Tamberlaine:
Six Princes, captive ferrets, through deep tracts
Fearing the lash, often fired his thundering axe:
And though a heavy mortal was their load,
King Oberon they ore hill and dale out-rode.
Entered the list, he lights, then mounted on
A dapled Weesell; the bold Micedon
Appeared (may we great things compare with small,)
Like the worlds Conqueror, though not so tall.
His arms were not of steel, nor gold, nor brass;
Nor sweating Cyclops turned the yielding mass
With griping tongues, nor Bull-skin bellows rore
To purge Electrum from the froathie ore;
But the black coat of a Westphalia swine,
Long hung in smoke, which now like jet did shine.
Fame says, (and she tells truth as often as lies,)
The seasond Gammon, Miceans did surprise,
Spoyld the red flesh before 'twas once served up
After full boards, to relish a fresh cup:
This their Kings right, his Captains did present
To him for safety, and an ornament;
Such was black Moustapha's habergeon.
The ancient Hero's had but steel upon
The heads of cruel spears; but this did weeld
A lance, whose body was all over steeld;
It was a knitting needle, strong, and bright;
His helm a thimble daz'd the enemies sight,
Ore which a thick fald plume, wagd with each gale,
Of Tiffanie, gnawn from a Ladies veil;
In it a Sprig which made his own afeard,
The stiff Mustachios of a dead Catts beard.
His solid Shield which he so much did trust
Was Biscuit, though some write it was Manchet crust.
Historians often as Poets do mistake;
But I affirm 'twas Biscuit, for the Cake
They all agree by Navigation,
Four times was seasoned in the Torrid Zone.
The Story thus is told, the Rattish Prince
A great Diviner, had Intelligence
From occult causes, that the dangerous Seas
Must be forsook, and floating Palaces:
His ship next voyage would by Storms be lost:
Therefore his black bands swom to the next coast
On Biscuit safe; But Tybert by the way
(The Prince of Catts) made him and it a prey,
Slew on the shore and feasted on his head.
He with blood sated, leaves neglected bread,
Of which black Moustapha after made his Targe,
Like Ajax sevenfold shield, but not so large.
His Motto was his Title and his name
Transposed into no costive Anagram,
Which from the Micean tongue we thus translate:
The Parmazan affecter, strong, and great.
Both Champions searched, found free from fraud or Charms,
They take their stands, and peise their mighty Arms.
At once loud Hornets sound, at once they start;
At once couched Spears, with equal Force and Art
Closed bevers met, struck fire; at once they both
Did backward kiss their mother Earth, though loath.
But first his nimble foot the Micean found:
When King Frogpadock as loathed Irish ground
His limbs had touched, lay on his back upright:
Yet soon recovering, never Frogian Knight
Made such a Charge; for with strange fury led
At the first blow, he leapes quite ore his head,
Bearing his pondrous Arms, his Sword and Targe.
Nor was black Moustapha wanting in the Charge
To show his wondrous courage, strength, and skill:
For, by the advantage of a rising Hill
A Mole had wrought, he strikes; and though the stroke
Would not have feld an Ox, or cleft an Oak;
Yet such it was, that had it took, in blood
His Soul had wandered through the Stygian flood;
But missing, the soft air receives the wound,
And ore and ore he tumbles to the ground.
Nor at the advantage was Frogpadock slack,
But at one jump bestrides the Miceans back;
Then grasping him twixt his cold knees, he said:
Robber of man, who now shall give thee aid?
Foul Toad, so Oberon please, I fear not thee,
Stout Moustapha replied: then actively
He backward caught the short armed King by th'rists,
And bore him on his shoulders round the Lists;
Loud croaks scale Heaven, then mauger all his strength
Regaines his Sword, and threw him thrice his length.
On equal terms again they battle joynd:
Heroic Souls in narrow breasts confind!
For these in Trojan wars, once Champions fierce
With gallant Acts adorned great Homers verse:
After became Testie Philosophers,
And fought in hot disputes, and learned jarrs;
Then Lions, Bears, Cocks, Bulls and brisly Hogs;
Last transmigrated Schismatics, or Dogs:
Where ere they meet the war is still renewd,
With lasting hatred and immortal feud.
The King, whose Grandsire when it thunderd loud,
Among fire and hail, dropped from a broken Cloud,
And with an Host of Toadpoles from the sky
In those vast Fennes a Frogian Colony
At first did plant: though icy was his skin
With Rage and Shame an Aetna felt within;
Raised his broad Flag to make a mighty blow,
Thinking at once in two to cleave the Foe;
Who nimbly traversing with skill his ground
On the Ceralian Shield, received the wound:
Yet from the orbed biscuit fell a slice,
Which near the List, was eaten in a trice.
Here the Crum-picking King puts in a stuck
With a bright needle, his stiff Spanish Tuck;
Which pierced Frogpadocks skin, through's Dragons mail;
Rage doubles, then the Flag becomes a Flail;
And on his Thimble Cask struck such a heat,
That Moustapha was forced to retreat:
Not struck with fear, but from his hole to fling
Assured vengeance on the Diving King.
Seven times he sallies forth, as often retired;
But now both Champions with like fury fired
Lay off all cunning, scorning to defend,
Strength, Rage, and Fortune must the battle end:
There was no interim; so the Cyclops beat
When Mars his arms require a second heat,
Though louder the Aetnaean Cavern rores;
Blows had for death now made a thousand doors,
As many more for life to issue out.
But here among our Authors springs a doubt.
Some in this mighty combat, dare aver
Both Champions fainting, Symtomes showed of fear;
In a cold sweat Frogpadock almost choakd
With heat and dust gaspd thrice; and three times croakd.
And Moustapha bestewd in blood and sweat
As often cried peep; and made no slow retreat.
To these detractors, since I am provoked,
I say it is false; this peepd not, nor that croakd.
Historians feign, but truth the Poet sings;
Some writers still asperse the best of Kings.
While thus the battle stood, the Kytish Prince
Had from loud croaks and cries intelligence
Of this great fight, then to himself did say,
What mighty matters in the Marsh to day!
Then mounted high on laboring wings he glides,
And the vast Region of the air divides.
The woeful Fairy Mab did this foresee;
Whom grief transformed now to an Humble-Bee:
She flies about them, buzzing in their ear:
For both the Champions she esteemed dear.
The black-Prince did with Captive Frogians come,
And at her Altars paid a Hecatombe
That day: and King Frogpadock in her house
With reard up hands offered a highborn Mouse;
And when the immortal mortal Cates did wish,
The fattest sacrifice was made her dish.
Therefore she humns; desist; no more; be friends;
Behold the common enemy attends;
In vain against him are your united powers:
O stay your rage, see, ore your heads he towrs.
But they engaged in cruel fight, not heard
The Queens admonishments, nor did regard
Approaching fates: but suddenly they bind
In graple fierce, their Targets cast behind.
When the plumed Prince down like swift lightning stoops,
And seized both Champions mauger all their troops:
Their arms drop down, upon them both he feasts,
And reconciles their doubtful interests.
Amazed spectators fly, Hunt-crums, and Vaulters,
Run to their holes, and leap into the waters.
MORAL.
Thus Petie Princes strive with mortal hate,
Till both are swallowed by a neighboring state:
Thus factions with a civil War imbrued
By some unseen Aspirer are subdued.
7
THE SEVENTH FABLE. Of the Court Mouse, and Country Mouse.
A Courtly dame of Moustapha's great line,
When length of time digested had long sorrow,
Will with her sister in the Country dine:
The Rustic Mouse dwelt near a little Borough,
About her round verminious troops inhabit;
The Weesell, Fox,
Bagers and Brocks,
And Ferrets, which so persecute the Rabit.
Hither Court Mouse.
Crevisa coming, soon was brought
Down by Country Mouse
Pickgrana to a homely table,
Supplied with Cates, nor far fetched, nor dear bought;
Which to behold the Court Mouse was not able:
Cheese that would break a saw, and blunt a hatchet,
She could not taste,
Nor mouldie paste,
Though twelve stout rustic Mice that night did fetch it.
Yet had she fruit, and store of pulse and grain,
Ants Eggs, the Bees sweet bag, a stars fallen jellie,
Snails dressed in the shells, with Cuckoo foam, and rain,
Frog legs, a Lizards foot, a Neuts pi'd belly,
The Cob, and hard roe of a pickle Herring
Got from a Dog,
As they did prog,
And a rush candle purchac'd by pickeering.
When dame Crevisa thus at length begun:
Dear sister rise, and leave this homely banquet;
Who with Westphalia hamnes and Parmazan
Are daily feasted ( Oberon be thanked)
Such meats abhor; come, go with me toth' City,
Here is cold air,
Famine, and care;
Your miserable life, in truth I pity.
We Lords and Ladies see, dance, laugh, and sing;
Where is that dish they keep from us is dainty?
Proud Cats not oftener look upon the King,
And we with Princes share prodigeous plenty.
Invited thus, they went through many a Crany,
When it was wide,
On, side by side,
To the Court larder undescri'd of any.
There heaps appeared of baked, roast, stewd, and sod;
The vast earths plenty, and the Oceans riches;
Able to satisfy a belly God:
The roof was hung with toungs, and bacon flitches,
Beef Mountains had Rosemary Forests growing
On their high back,
Nor was their lack
Of Vinegar in Peper Channels flowing.
Little they said, but suddenly they charge
Huge Venison walls; then towers of paste they batter;
Breaches are made in trembling Custard large,
Here a Potrido the bold sisters shatter;
This takes a Sturgeon, that a pickled Samon;
Then tooth and nail
They both assail
Red Dear immured, or seized an armed Gamon.
While boldly thus they mighty havoc made,
They hear keys gingle, and a groaning Wicket;
From place to place Pickgrana as betrayed
Seeks in strange corners out some Hole or Thicket.
To these Alarms Crevisa being no stranger
Needs not to think
Where was the Chink
That should from Man protect her, and all danger.
The coast being clear, the Court-mouse straight did call
The Country-dame to pillage the whole larder;
And Sister said, To second Course lets fall:
But she amazed, still seeking out some Harbor,
Trembling and pale, dear Lady said; Pray tell us
Are these fears often?
Crevisa laughed,
And thus replies; it is common what befell us,
No danger this; it adds to our delight;
Nor are we with a careless servant frighted;
Motion and time revives dull appetite,
And we to Banquets are afresh invited.
Then said Pickgrane; Is this the Royal Palace?
Better are Farms
Without Alarmes,
Where we enjoy less plenty, but more solace.
MORAL
What relish has the sated appetite,
When false Alarms tumultuous Cities fright?
But in the noysless Country, free from care,
Swaynes are more blessed, though harder be their Fare.
8
THE EIGHTH FABLE. Of the Mountain in labor.
HArk, how the Mountain groans, what wondrous birth
Comitting Incest with his mother Earth
Did huge Typhaeon get! his sister Fame
Heightning the expectation, did proclaim
'Twas with Rebellion big; the hopeful Heir
Should pull proud Jove from his usurped Chair;
The Starry Towers by Mortals should be stormed,
And the Gods sculk in several shapes transformed.
Poets and Painters, nay Historians too
As near as they in modesty could do,
Draw to behold the issue, and to see
A Monster might beyond all fiction be.
Come you long-sided Widows, six or seven,
Whose husbands fell in the late war against Heaven,
And help the laboring Mountain; quickly come
And mollify her Adamantine Woomb.
While thus it labors, Fame divulged abroad,
The Hill was eased of her prodigious load.
Fear tells she saw, and th'Infant's shape describes;
Not all the Covenanting Brethren's Tribes
That Heaven assaulted, could such Forces boast:
This bigger was than that Gigantick Host.
This could more ponderous than his Mother peise
A Hill on every finger: Hercules
In Cradle strangled Serpents, but this can
Crack twixt his nail, Ironside Leviathan.
So much it grew in every hour, that soon
The Gold and Silver of the Sun and Moon
Would all be his; and some not stick to say
Joves arms, and thunder would be seized next day.
At last the Mountain a huge groan did fetch,
Which made her bellies marble portals stretch;
And was delivered straight; from this great house
That threatened so much danger leaps a Mouse.
A showt scales heaven, all cry a Mouse is born;
And what so much they feared, is now a scorn.
Silence our Pipes, and Muses now be dumb,
Great expectations often to nothing come.
MORAL.
Thus haughty Nations with Rebellion big
Land forces raise, and huge Armado's rig
Against the State, fame trebling their great power,
Which happier Stars have scattered in an hour.
9
THE NINTH FABLE. Of the Lion and the Mouse.
What Is this that troubles us we cannot sleep?
Something is in our fur, we feel it creep
Betwixt our neck and shoulders, 'twill invade
Our throat anon, the weary Lion said,
New come from hunting, stretched in a cool shade.
Peace, and we will catch a Mouse; his word is kept,
His great paw seized the stragler as he crept.
Who trembling thus begun. King of the grove,
Whom when thou thunderst beasts more fear than Jove,
Let no small crime thy high displeasure move.
Hither I straid by chance; think not great Sir
I came to pick a hole in Royal Fur,
Nor with the Woolf and Fox did I contrive
Against you, nor questioned your Prerogative:
If so, then justly me of life deprive.
Should I relate for what great act my name
Through Micean Realms resounded is by fame,
It would too much my modesty invade;
But when at stake life is and fortune laid,
To speak bold truths, why should I be afraid?
Pirrhus who now is through the world renownd,
The Roman Soldier no Barbarian found.
In complete Steel he saw their armies shine;
Full squadrons stand exacter than a line,
Beyond the Aelian tacticks discipline.
Mountains of flesh, he mighty land Whales brought,
That towers supported with armed Soldiers fraught:
Supposing by the Castle-carriers might,
To break the brazen ranks, and to affright
Ausonian squadrons with the unusual fight.
But the great warrior faild in this design;
The subtle Roman Herds of filthy swine
On the Elephants drove: straight at their dismal cry
Cittadels clash, ranged Castles rowted fly,
And towers unsadled in their ruin lie.
Yet one maintained the field against all ods;
For which his King him with new honor loads:
And to paternall Scutcheons charged before
With sable Castles, in a field of ore
Cantond in gules, he ads an argent Boar.
This mighty Elephant I in dead of night,
With these small arms, though sharp, challenged to fight,
And said; Your Castle, and your guard are gone,
On equal terms encounter me alone.
True valor best is without witness shown.
Strange! from a Mouse this Mountain trembling ran,
And prayers in vain to the high Moon began:
But when in Clouds she hid her silver wain,
I through his trunck, like lightning pierced his brain,
And till the dawn tryumphed ore the slain.
But now my fortune's changed; I captive lie
Imploring quarter from your Majesty
Make me your friend; to sentence not proceed;
If fickle chance should frown, (which Jove forbid)
The Lion of my aid may stand in need.
This said, the King admiring that a Mouse
Should such a monsters mighty soul unhouse,
Seizing the Pericranium of his brain,
And there with death, and sullen darkness reign:
Signs his dismiss, then seeks repose again.
Soon as to the East tall shades began to creep,
The Lion rose, and shakes off drowsy sleep:
Feasts for his pregnant Queen must now be sought
In fields remote; far fetched, as dear was bought,
The roaring King in a strong net is caught,
Laid by a subtle Sunburned African;
While he his great strength used, and strove in vain,
Twisted grates gnawing of his Hempen Cage,
The Micean heard the indulgent Lion rage,
And grateful straight to free him did engage.
First Hunts out busily to find the cord
Which closed the snare, which found, as with a sword,
His teeth (before well on an old cheese set)
Cleers all the meshes of the tangling net:
When thus the Lion spoke at freedom set.
Kings be to subjects mild; and when you move
In highest spheres, with mercy purchase love.
From private grudges often great Princes have
Midst triumphs met with an untimely grave:
And swains have power sometimes their Lords to save.
MORAL.
Mercy makes Princes Gods; but mildest thrones
Are often shook with huge rebellions:
Small help may bring great aid, and better far
Is Policy than Strength in Peace or War.
10
THE TENTH FABLE. Of the same Lion and Mouse.
THen to the Mouse he spoke, though Kings requite
Their Saviors often, with steel, or Aconite;
Yet I magnanimous Micean since i am free
And had this great deliverance from thee,
Shall (if our kingdoms have it) grateful be.
I know the Frogians, now a popular State,
By various chance of war, and long debate,
Have driven your race to fensed towns, and towers,
Where cruel The Cat.
Tybert in nights dismal hours,
Many a harmeless Mouscovite devoures.
But noble Catus boasts his stock from us,
For of our species is majestic Pusse.
I Will use my power firm peace from him to gain,
And by the Eagles means from Jove obtain
A Stork, that shall ore Croking Frogians reign.
But more than this, by that Celestial sign
(Which gilds the Corn, purples the plumper Vine)
The Lion called, by wise Astronomers,
What Is mine is thine; ask then; in peace and wars
Be also one of our prime Counselors.
The ambitious Mouse; who chooses still the best,
For where his phang tooth has a seal impressed,
If purest bread, rich cheese, or mellow fruit,
That the whole table eats without dispute;
To great Kings taster is this little brute,
Encouraged by the Lion, thus replied;
Then let the royal Virgin be my bride.
Nor wonder at my suit; though I am small,
My mother was a mountain, full as tall
As high Olympus, Joves huge Counsel hall.
Great was the expectation at my birth;
My sister Fame divulged our mother Earth
Swelld with a son, should give heaven fresh alarms.
What ere my limbs, me, no less soul informs,
Than bold Briareus with the hundred arms.
The troubled King then to the Micean said;
Son, dare thou venture on the horrid maid.
See where she comes: attended from our court,
Pards, Leopards, Panthers, round about resort,
Near, her delight, to wanton Jackcals sport.
The Lion then aside his daughter took,
And to prepare sweet love, thus kindly spoke;
From whom I life and freedom have, behold:
Amongst our Kings his name shall be enrowld,
One wise in Counsel, and in Battle bold.
Then take this Jewel, honor him as Lord,
And in thy bosom warmest seats afford.
She then advancing with majestic gate,
Looking too high to view so low a mate,
Trod on him unawares, and slew him straight.
Then said the Lion weeping ore his friend;
Great are the woes unequal beds attend.
Therefore I judge thou art more happy dead
Than those lie tortured in a scornful bed,
Where Vulturs on their bleeding hearts are fed.
MORAL
Who dare a combat with the devil try,
Are often vanquished by a Ladies eye:
Those that from Schools and hot disputings come,
Are at a Woman's presence stricken dumb.
11
THE ELEVENTH FABLE. Of the Boar and the Ass.
THe Ass preferred from toil, and tedious roads,
Labors no more now under packs and loads:
That Goddess blind
To Asses kind,
Gave him trapings, and a golden sadle;
With the Horse he prances, with the Ape he modes,
And spends his time in fidle fadle.
His once short maine is powdered, curld, and dried;
He wears heart breakers too with ribands tide;
No more he brays,
But lowdly neighs
Love verses, madrigals and fancies
To some she Ass, his mistress; by her side
No hobby horse more proudly dances.
The warlike Boar who never knew to yield,
Who often with blood, and foame, had di'd the field;
He round be set
And in the net
Would break through Hounds, like tamer Cattle,
Charge horse, and man, spear, sword, and shield,
This beast, the Ass challenges to battle.
Sir, I have heard a Soldiers horse well shod,
His Arms, his Sword, and Pistol, are his God:
And you I know
Have seen the foe,
By your buff-jerken, and your bristles:
It Is like the paths of honor you have trod,
Where Roses do not grow, but Thistles.
Fortune has courted me, and I court Fame;
And though the arms we use are not the same,
The golden Ass
Will try a pass
With your Boarship in a duel;
It Is true I nere was tried by wild or tame,
Yet honor I esteem a jewel.
The warlike Boar viewing the Ass so brave,
Perceiving yet in him more fool than knave;
Though sudain rage
Bids him engage,
Yet with an Ass he scorns to meddle,
As Merchants trafficking through the azure wave
To deal with those bear packs and pedle.
But to the high-fed beast the Boar thus spoke;
Thou art not worth my anger, nor a stroke;
Yet i will not stick
To give you a kick,
But for a combat choose a brother;
And there with equal arms your selves provoke;
One Ass must always beat another.
MORAL.
Let valiant men themselves from Cowards bless,
Lest Fortune favoring fools grant them success:
Who deal with such, often conscious shame disarms,
While hope of honor, the faint-hearted warms.
12
THE TWELFTH FABLE. Of the Frogs desiring a King.
SInce good Frogpadock Jove thou did translate,
How have we suffered turned into a State?
In several interests we divided are;
Small hope is left well grounded peace to obtain,
Unless again
Thou hear our prayer
Great King of Kings, and we for Kings declare,
That Supreme power may on the people be
Settled, it is true; but who that day shall see?
Men, beasts, and birds; nay Bees their King obey.
When wealthy Regions factious Counsels steer,
Destruction's near.
Thus night and day,
Grant us a King, a King, the Frogs did pray.
Jove hears, and smiles at their vain suit; but when
The great affairs he saw of Gods and men
Vexed with their clamoring, down a block he threw;
With a huge fragor circkling billows roll
From pole to pole:
The people flew,
And far from such a thundering Prince withdrew.
At last all calm and silent, in great State
On silver billows he enthroned sat,
Admired and reverenced by every Frog:
His brow like fate without or frown or smile
Struck fear a while;
Then all the bog
Proclaim their King, and cry Jove save King Log.
But when they saw he floated up and down,
Unactive to establish his new Crown;
Some of the greatest of them without dread
Draw nearer to him; now both old and young
About him throng,
On's Crown they tread,
And last, they play at leap-Frog ore his head.
Straight they proclaim a fast, and all repair
To vex Heavens King again with tedious prayer;
This stock, this wooden Idol to remove;
Send them an active Prince, a Monarch stout,
To lead them out,
One that did love
New realms to conquer, and his old improve.
Jove grants their suit, ore them the Stork he puts,
Straight through the fens the dreadful Long-shanks struts
Devowring Subjects with a greedy maw.
Again the Frogians with a doleful croak
Heavens King invoke,
He would withdraw
This cruel Prince that made his Will a Law.
Then, the angry God in thunder answered these;
To change your government great Jove did please,
And you I gave a peaceful Sovereign:
Since he disliked you, by the Stygian lake
A vow I make,
The Stork shall reign,
And you for evermore repent in vain.
MORAL
No government can the unsettled vulgar please,
Whom change delight's think quiet a disease,
Now Anarchie and Armies they maintain,
And wearied, are for King and Lords again.
13
THE THIRTEENTH FABLE. Of the Frog and the Ox.
FRom the Hydropick kingdoms of the bog,
Up to a verdant mead,
With green Plush Carpets spread,
Comes a proud Frog;
Who once did tread
Upon the head
Of his own gracious Sovereign mild King Log.
Whom fat with mighty spoil
Of the rich wooden Isle
The Stork persu'd, the new Malignant flys,
And now in shadie Grass in safety lys.
Amongst the bellowing Herds, and bleating flocks,
This Frog by chance espies
Of a prodigious size
A stall-fed Ox,
Such chines and thighs
Good stomachs prize,
And bones with marrow big as hollow Oaks;
Wide was his spreading horn
As Evening from the Morn:
When thus the Frog in length not half a span
Stuffed up with envy, and self-love began.
I who once greatest of our Nation seemed;
Now standing by this clown,
Whose flesh might feast a town,
Am unesteem'd,
And up and down
Hop 'thout renown;
Though no such bull-calf my dear mother teemed;
With wind my sides and back
I Will swell until they crack;
Fancy shall help, a revelation now
Bids me be great, as the offspring of the Cow.
Thus having said, on his design he falls;
And both with wind and pride
He swells his back and side;
To his son then calls:
And said, My hide
Now grows as wide
As that in thongs once measured Carthage walls.
Nor on a larger Chine
Did valiant Ajax dine,
When him the Grecian General did invite
Unfoyld by Hector in a single fight.
Then spoke his son: Father you strive in vain,
To me you not appear
So big as his crop'd ear;
Ah do not strain,
The wind I fear
Your sides will tear;
And though your soul may a new body gain,
A father I shall lack;
Should you bear on your back
A Castle, and inspire an Elephant,
The Mouse your deadly foe you shall not want.
Thus the wise son to his fond father spoke,
While he did strive in vain
Four winds to entertain
In one small nook:
Regions where rain
And hail remain
Must in his bosom be, as prisoners took;
At last he grew as full
As Toads live in a scull,
When at a mighty rupture enters death,
And air confind, now flys with vital breath.
Then spoke the son, over his gasping sire,
Had thou contented been
With this thy little Inn,
Not aiming higher,
Here thou had seen
Good days again,
But thou like Icarus did too much aspire,
On thy Kings neck have trod,
Now the Ox the Egyptian God
Strov'st to be like: so the proud Angels fell,
And though in Heaven, not knew when they were well.
MORAL
To strive what seems impossible to get,
A Supererogation is of wit,
Not folly now, when every day we see
What men thought once impossible to be.
14 15
THE FOURTEENTH FABLE. Of the Woolf and the Lamb.
IT fortuned the fierce Woolf and tender Lamb,
Vexed with high noon, and Phoebus scorching flame,
To quench their thirst to one cool river came.
To whom the Woolf betwixt his draughts, with slow
Yet rancourous speech, thus spoke: How dare thou blow
My drink, and with thy feet up gravel throw?
Son of a rotten Sire; how durst thou (slave
To cruel man, who with thy fleece does save
Himself from cold) fowl this clear silver wave?
The Lamb astonished, struck with sudden fear,
To see his glowing eyes, and brizly hair,
Said, Sir be patient, and your anger spare.
I humbly crave your pardon, that so near,
And at one time with you I water here;
Yet under favor still your stream is clear.
I am beneath, Sir, if you please to note,
And from your mouth to mine the waters float;
It passes yours before it touch my throat.
The fell Woolf grind, his eyes like firebrands glow;
Oh cursed race, he said, to mine a foe,
Still plotting harmless Wolves to overthrow;
Thy father, mother, sacrilegious Lamb,
And all thy bleating kindred, from the damn
Style themselves guiltless, but I guilty am;
And none dare say you in Wolves habit come,
And tear dead bodies from the new built tomb,
And poor Woolves then for your offenses doom.
Dogs once our brethren, cursed Curs, you lead,
Against our race, who now will hear us plead?
When you are the cause of all the blood is shed.
Now by our King Lycaons crown I swear,
So wronged by that rebellious Jupiter,
Affronted thus, no longer i will forbear.
Thus having said, at the poor Lamb he flys,
His cruel teeth a purple river dies,
While warm blood spurtles in his face and eyes.
MORAL.
They that have power to do, may when they will
Pick quarrels, and pretending justice, kill.
Who hunt for blood, and spoil, need not invent
New crimes, but lay their own on the innocent.
16
THE FIFTEENTH FABLE. Of the Woolf and the Crane.
BUt while the Woolf devoured the innocent Lamb,
Raising her voice and eyes to heaven, the damn
Implored revenge: Pan from the shepherds coat
To Menalus heard, and fixd a bone in's throat.
He wonders what obstructs, who warder stood;
Stopping so old a thorough-fare of blood.
What shall he do? or where now find a cure?
Great was the danger, nor could he endure
The pain, while he ore hill and dale did pass
To native realms, where his own Surgeon was.
When on a rising banck hard by, he spied
Beline the Ram: he could but be denied;
And though his teeth blushd with the purple gore
Of his dear son, slain near his mothers door,
Yet he would try; in some mischances, foes
Will with our friends, commiserate our woes.
Upon this score he went, and thus bespoak
The King, and horned father of the flock.
Sir, may your wives be numerous, and bear
Twins always, and be pregnant twice a year.
And may your beauteous son, who on youn banck
Conferred with me, where we together drank,
Be golden fleeced, and when his horns grow large,
To thousand Yews, a husbands love discharge.
It Is true, our nations long at ods have been;
Yet why should public jars raise private spleen?
Let there my Lord no personal difference be;
Or strive we, let us strive in Courtesy.
Favors may purchase love, love peace may win,
Quarrels may end, since once they did begin.
Suspecting plots, his Bell, wise Beline rung,
When troops of Rams to guard his person throng.
Then said; Your business Sir? be brief; and know,
It must be lawful, that I grant a foe.
When with dejected look thus Isgrim spoke;
A bone sticks cross my throat, some pity take,
And draw it forth; and when the silver Moon
Makes low-browd night faintly resemble noon,
The Goddess i will beseech, you never may
Want Grass in Summer, nor in Winter Hay,
No floods in Autumn, no destructive cold
Send scabs, nor rots depopulate your fold.
And She will hearken to our pious race.
Often when She swounds, and notes of tinckling brass
Cannot recall, nor color her pale lips,
Our cries have rescued from a dark Eclipse.
Then Beline said; Impudent Woolf be gone,
Who knows, but late thou have some murder done,
And this a judgment due to thy desert.
On pain of death our quarters leave, depart.
Thus to the shaggie Goat, he did complain,
To the swift Dear, and the dull Ox in vain;
They all refuse, and say, no punishment,
On ravening Wolves, can be unjustly sent.
When stalking through the Marsh he meets the Crane,
(Low Country people know no God but gain)
To whom the Woolf thrice Congeeing began;
May your plumed Phalanx pass the Ocean,
To Northern Regions safe, and landing there,
May all the Pigmie kingdoms shake with fear.
And may you Conqueror ore the dwarfish ranks,
Triumph on Strymon, or Caysters bancks.
But to your friend be kind, and draw a bone
Sticks in his throat, ungrateful i am to none;
Then i will a Trout present thee sweet and good,
Cleans'd in a silver stream, and free from mud.
If that not satisfy, most noble Crane,
To please thy Pallat this whole Fen i will drain.
He undertakes the cure, nor plucked he often
With his long bill, but Isgrim's well, and cough'd.
The Bird demands his pay; the Woolf at that
With a sour smile replied: Sir Crane for what,
For plucking out a bone are thy demands?
Thou might have stretched, fool, on these yellow sands,
Vent'ring thy long bill in my throat, thy head
I freely gave, thank me thou art not dead.
Or come and draw another out, though loath
I shall reward thee nobly then for both.
When to himself, the grieved Crane mourning said;
Great favors thus, are by the ungrateful paid.
MORAL.
So Merchants having escaped a dangerous Sea,
Mocks to their Saints for promised offerings pay:
But some more impious having touched dry land,
Think they perform, to let their Statues stand.
THE SIXTEENTH FABLE. Of the Husbandman and the Serpent.
WHen a cold storm confirmed the trembling bogs,
And drove to warmer springs the naked Frogs,
With His prong on's back a simple farmer
Boldly goes
Through frost and snows,
Ice on's beard, fire in's nose,
A freeze jerkin all his armor;
To feed Sheep, and Cattle fodder.
Where by chance he found
Frozen to the ground
Stretched at length a dying Adder.
The cruel Serpent under deaths arrest,
Strange, but the Fable has sufficient test,
He takes, and in his bosom lodges,
Where at night
His delight
His dear wife heel invite,
And home again in haste he trudges.
The viper as a precious jewel
Straight he laid in moss,
Putting sticks acrosse
Busling out to fetch more fuel.
Fresh warmth gave resurrection to the fiend,
And from the dead the devil did ascend,
His vital spirits returning;
He now grown hot,
Fresh poison got,
Contriving straight a damned plot,
With rage and malice burning.
He uncoyls his speckled cable,
And prepares by arms
To seize all the farms,
Of him that was so hospitable.
And with injustice thus he taxed the Gods;
Gives Jove to silly swains such warm aboads,
When subtle Serpents must lie sterving?
Who else will dain,
But this dull swain,
To take us up and ease our pain,
What ever our deserving?
But leaves us gasping in a furrow;
Or with a staff,
When we are half
Dead, kill, and so conclude our sorrow.
I Will scourse my windy lodging for this grange;
Nor is it robery to make a change,
A cool house for a warmer;
Him i will assign
What ere is mine,
In open field to sup and dine,
And here i will play the Farmer.
I Will take the charge of Sheep and Cattle,
And when there is need
On them i will feed.
This said, he straight prepares for battle.
His Nervy back, and his voluminous train,
Are both drawn up to charge one single swain,
His eyes like Aetna flaming,
His sting he whets,
His scales he sets,
Now up and down the room he jets,
With hisses war proclaming:
He, stools and tables forms embraces,
Wreathing about
Now in, now out,
And takes possession of all places.
Mean while the Rustic had with sounding strokes
Whole Elms disrobed, and naked left tall Oaks,
To bring the Snake home store of fuel:
Little the good
Man understood
Whom he saved would seek his blood,
And with the devil to have a duel.
But when he came into the entry,
It made him quake
To see the Snake
Stand, like an uglie Soldier centrie.
Not staying to plead the goodness of his cause,
Armed with a stake up the bold Shepherd draws
To save his house and dwelling;
Well he knows,
He must oppose;
Though fire and poison arm your foes,
At first charge them rebelling.
A horse and arms the Knight could brag on.
This with a stake
Assaults the Snake
Swollen with fury to a Dragon.
Long time the fight was equally maintained;
The Shepherd now, and now, the Serpent gaind;
Chance gave the swain the better:
When with a stroke
Three ribs he broke,
And words with blows thus mixing spoke,
Sir, still I am your debtor;
I tender thus my house and cattle.
The Serpent flies
And quarter cries,
And once more dying quits the battle.
Spawn of the old Dragon, worm, ungrateful wretch,
(Then lights a blow which made his long sides stretch,)
What, do you cry peccavie?
Unworthy soul
Think thou a hole
Will shelter like a worm or mole
And from my fury save thee?
I Will sign your lease first on your shoulder;
Next take this sowse,
And then my house;
Now go, and be a good freeholder.
With what he meant for fire, a knottie stake,
He warms the Serpents sides until they ache,
Then on his breast he tramples:
His purple head
Waxt pale as lead
His golden scales with blood were red;
Live now he said among examples,
While this tough cudgel lasts i will bang thee;
I to my grief
Have saved a thief
That would have been the first to hang me.
MORAL
Ungrateful men are marshald in three rancks,
This not returns, the second gives no thanks,
Evil the last for good repays, and this
Of all hels monsters the most horrid is.
17
THE SEVENTEENTH FABLE. Of the sick Kite and his mother.
THe Kite first steeredge taught to Mariners,
By which strange lands they found, and unknown stars,
And took from Seas imaginary bars.
They saw when heaven was clear
His plumie rudder steer,
Starboord and Larboord, plying here, now there.
These Sailers having a good voyage made,
Near Kitish seats rich vessels did unlade,
And to that Prince a royal banquet made:
Him, with fat offerings fed,
With Oil, Wine, moist and red;
Which Surfeit a Malignant Fever bred.
And now, who long by rapine and by stealth
Had heaped up riches, lost his former health,
More worth to mortals than all worldly wealth:
In his well-feather'd nest,
The sick bird takes no rest,
When to his mother he himself confessed.
Mother you know, and I now to my grief,
That I have lived a most notorious thief,
Robbing for pleasure, oftener than relief.
I, once from the Altar, stole,
With flesh a kindled cole,
Which burnt my nest high as the lofty Pole.
Such are my sins, no God I dare implore,
Lest they should know I live, and punish more:
You for your son may pray as heretofore.
Let heaven but grant me health,
I Will give the Church my wealth,
And orders take, repenting former stealth.
Then to her son the mother made reply:
Ah my dear bird, could thou but once-more fly,
And cut with fanning wings the ample sky,
Were hungry once again,
Thou Wilt rob the Lions den,
Spoil the Eagles nest, and pillage Gods and men.
MORAL
A golden robe in Winter is too cold,
Too hot in Summer is a beard of gold:
Church robbers thus cram impious coffers still,
And greedy men count sacrilege Gods will.
18
THE EIGHTEENTH FABLE. Of the Old Hownd and his Master.
OLd Dog it is thou must do it, come away,
Within a thicket near
Is lodged a gallant Dear,
We must not, friend, neglect so brave a prey.
Killed, thou and I will feast,
To morrow and to day,
Upon the slaughterd beast,
Then come I say.
Remember once a Conqueror thou were,
And seizing did pull down a mighty Heart,
When the Kings swiftest dogs thou did outstrip;
This said, the Huntsman let his old Hownd slip.
The roused Dear flys for life, the Dog to kill,
Through Lawns, ore hills and dales,
So swift the Nymble gales
Seem in their faces, turn which way they will.
Ready to pinch, Kilbuck
With air his mouth did fill,
At last the Dear he took
Yet was deluded still:
His phangs grown old, now fail, and what vexed more,
He crossed a proverb, says, old Dogs bite sore.
Then stripes resound upon his panting side,
Who while his Master beat him, loud thus cried.
Ungrateful Lord, once I did save thy life,
When thou by thy own Hownds
Were chased through neighboring grounds,
Transformed like to Actaeon by thy wife.
You a hornd monster, Sir,
I knew, and vent'ring life
Beat off the leading cur;
But these rewards are rise:
Thus Masters former-services forget;
This no new way to pay old servants debt.
Ah me poor wretch, and must the proverb hold?
A serving creature is a Beggar old.
MORAL.
Servants beware, often is but little space
Betwixt preferment, and the loss of place.
Ladies are fickle, and fantastic Lords
Would see new faces waiting at their boards.
19
THE NINTEENTH FABLE. Of the Hares and Frogs.
WHile a huge tempest through the wood resounds,
The frighted Hares
Prick up their ears,
Supposing loud mouthed gusts, shril horns and Hownds,
And leave their native seats, and ancient bounds;
Winged with vain fear, the outstrip the thundering
Not one durst make a halt, or look behind.
A stream the encounter, swollen up to the brim,
Which a full cloud
Had made so loud
As ranting Auster; this they dare not swim,
Viewing the hollow wave it looked so grim.
Nor durst the valiant Hares once backward look;
The Devil's behind, the Devil is in the brook.
One of the gravest, here did courage take,
When he did spy
The Frogians fly
At their approach, and did their camps forsake
To shelter in the bosom of the lake.
Then bids them stand, and make the front the rear;
Vain is the Frog's, as vain may be our fear.
All do as he commanded, not one stirs;
When soon they find
Threats empty wind,
Which did not hurt, but discompose their furs:
Then thus he said; There is from barking Curs
No danger; we are swift, and strong, all parts
We have, that makes good Soldiers up, but hearts.
Fortune assists the bold, and he that dares,
Though but a swain,
May Scepters gain;
But whom cold blood beleaguers with base fears,
That start at every sound like timorous Hares,
At Court not thrives, nor in the Martial lists,
Nor Venus in loves Conduct them assists.
MORAL.
Strange are effects of fear; danger to shun
On grim death's sternest visages we run:
Fear in a night will blast the Conquerours bays,
And from sterv'd Cities mighty armies raise.
20
THE TWENTIETH FABLE. Of the Doves and Hawks.
LOng had the Doves a happy peace enjoyed,
Broaching no quarrel with their neighbor nations,
Nor stird up civil strife, with plenty cloyd;
Than love the Pigeons had no other passions,
They have no Gall,
Nor know at all
Dissension, nor stern Mars his angry mood,
Nor pleasure taken in rapine nor in blood.
But they Diana slighted, nor prepare
For Pallas offerings, nor great Juno's Deity,
To Venus and her Son is all their prayer;
These powers offended highly with the impiety,
Did Mars entreat,
Now in a heat,
Since more Adonis, Venus did delight,
To raise against gentle Doves, the cruel Kite.
Moved by the Gods, the Kitish Prince proclames
War against the Turtles, and their wealthy regions;
Far more than honor, booty him inflames,
And from the North he musters feathered legions;
The War grows hot,
The Turtles not,
Inured to battles, Camps, and fierce alarms,
Many strong houses lose by force of arms.
They call a Counsel, and consult of aid;
They know the Hawk more valiant is and stronger,
Would he take pay, they need not be dismayed,
His pownces sharper be, his wing is longer,
The Hawks desire
But Soldiers hire,
Their purs shall only for the Pigeons fight,
And they are certain to defeat the Kite.
The Hawks are mustered, and the War renews,
Soon they regain their Houses, Forts, and Castles,
As soon the Pidgeon their assistance rues;
For those they hired, and were the Turtles vassals,
Seized them for pay,
And day by day,
Their bowels rend, and tender bodies plume,
And more than Kites, the Dovish race consume.
MORAL.
Effeminate Nations, to long peace inured;
Are by Auxiliaries ill secured:
Who ere prove victors, they shall be the prize;
But best your friend knows where the money lys.
21
THE ONE AND TWENTIENH FABLE. Of the Dog and Thief.
BOugh wough, who is there? Bough wough who is that dare break
Into my masters house? first stand, then speak,
Or else i will have you by the throat; nere start
You Sir, I Will know your business ere we part.
Thus in the Cynick language, loud and brief,
A true Dog barked, discovering a Thief.
When softly thus nights pilfering minion said,
This sacred silence, and the holy shade
Of night, dear friend, disturb not, I am sent
(Because thy master keeps a stricter Lent
Than wiser mortals) with a sop to thee
From Cerberus, at such fond piety
From triple jaws exclaiming, he bids eat.
Wise Sects who Nature serve forsake no meat.
Then take this morsel and lie down to rest,
Let not fleas thee, nor others thou molest.
When thus the faithful Dog replied again:
Have thou thy habitation among men,
And know not me? have thou not heard how I
Six Winter days, and stormy nights did lie
Watching my murdered Lord? his bleeding head
Three Spring tides washed on a cold Osier bed:
At last with extreme hunger overcame,
I to this house, through the broad River swam;
Where well recruited, with warm Viands, then
From hospitable boards, and living men,
I crossed rough mountains with a silver head,
To wait in open Mansions of the dead.
At last they following me with swifter Oars,
Where by the smell were found polluted shores
They made a search, and ere I took my place,
Kissed his pale lips, or licked his woeful face,
My person they secured; then him interred,
And I for faithfulness was thus preferred.
Nay more than that: 'twas I the Murderer found,
And with my forces first beleagur'd round;
Loud vollies spent with foame, with tooth and nail
Fell on his quarters, all parts did assail,
No man durst rate me off, no not the frown
Of my dread Lord, until I plucked him down;
And he cried out 'twas I thy master slew;
Then fiercer Dogs upon him, Sergeants, flew:
And think thou i will be treacherous for a crust?
Dogs are than men more faithful to their trust.
Not our Penates keep a stricter watch
Over these seats, than I, such rogues to catch.
Err, err, bough wough, thieves thieves, with speed awake.
He frighted flys, the trusty Dog then spoke;
But what he said, is dangerous now to tell:
What tortures Cerberus told him were in hell
For servants that are false; but they that sold
Their Country, or their native King for gold;
To them Judge Minos deepest seats allots,
Where moulten gold they quaffe in Iron pots,
And when their blood with burning liquor fries,
They get on Snakes the worm which never dies.
MORAL.
Servants that Sentinels to Princes are,
When close Conspirers plotting civil War
Do send them gold, if they prove faithful, then,
They are the best, if false the worst of men.
22
THE TWO AND TWENTIETH. Of the Woolf and Carved Head.
Was it Alecto in that impious age
Stird up the peoples rage?
When dedicated temples they did spoil,
And what no Prophet did presage,
With Hero's broken Statues strewed the I Will,
And horrid rudeness did Religion style.
This trod
Upon the Image of his God,
And that bold Soldier storms
Heavens Queen, and breaks the marble in her arms,
Then man
Began,
Seeing vengeance slow fall from unwilling sky,
To question truth, and sacred writ deny:
Not fearing hell, nor hoped for heaven when they die.
Amongst legs, and arms, and bulks of men and Gods,
Which lay in mighty loads,
The sacrilegious Woolf, who preys by night,
In sacred and profane aboads,
Came, and with eyes casting malignant light,
Through gloomie shades espied this joyful sight;
And thought
Some battle had been fought,
Or fatal vespers had with blown-out lights,
Mixed bloody butcheries with sacred rites.
Where best
To feast
And be with blood and humane slaughter fed,
He mused a while, then with much purple red,
Painted to life, he saw a decollated head,
The bloody neck inviting; straight he seized
What little pleased;
And in obdurate Oak his teeth engaged;
Which not his hunger well appeased,
Nor thirsty jaws with crimson draughts asswag'd.
Who while his broken fang extremely raged,
Thus said,
Beauty has wit betrayed,
All is not gold that glisters, and a fowl
Cabinet often, includes the fairest soul,
They Are wise
Whose eyes
With deep inspection on the inside look,
Regarding not the gilding of the book;
But they are fools with Idol stocks, and stones are took.
MORAL.
A comely carriage, youth, and beauteous form,
Take proudest hearts, and enter without storm:
But when they find their list of virtues short,
As suddenly they are expelled the Fort.
23
THE FABLES OF AESOP. The Second BOOK.
THE THREE AND TWENTIETH FABLE. Of the Lion grown old.
COme all, come all, take your revenges full,
My Cosen Horse, the Boar, the Bear and Bull;
Come all you free born-beasts, and now no more
Tremble to hear the cruel Lion rore;
The Forest now is ours; that Tyrant which
So long proud Scepters swaid, in yonder ditch
Lies bedrid, brays the Ass; then come each one
And give him ample Retribution,
And I Will redeem my reputation lost:
The Lion now shall know unto his cost,
The Ass is no such dastard, nor so dull;
Then come, come all, and take revenges full.
This said, the vulgar rush, both wild and tame,
Where the old Lion lay, weak, sick, and lame:
His Crown they sieze, upon his Scepter tread,
And pull his Royal Ermine ore his head.
When round his eyes the dying Monarch cast,
And as he viewed them, groaning, spoke his last,
I did not well, when I had strength and power,
So many loving Subjects to devour,
Whose friends take just revenge; but where are they
Who drank with me their blood, and shared the prey,
To guard my person, from their cruel rage?
Some my dim sight presents, who now engage
With greater malice: ah for which good deed
Friends do you tear my side? You make me bleed?
'Twas no well grounded policy of S^^te
By Arbitrary power to purchase hate;
But I did worse, in choosing such false friends,
That join with foes, having obtained their ends.
MORAL
When Kings are weak, then active Subjects strive
To raise their power above Prerogative:
Both friends and foes conspire with time and fates,
Often to reduce proud Kingdoms into States.
24
THE FOUR AND TWENTIETH FABLE. Of the Dog and the Ass.
WHy how now rogue, why rascal, have thou got
Thy breakfast yet, speak sirrah, have thou not?
Your whining and colloguing will not serve,
Thy fat sides, villain, say, thou do not sterve,
The master said to's Dog; then strokes his head;
And claps his back, and neck: the Curwell bred
With fawning postures first plays with his knee,
Then leaps up to his breast, next who but he,
His masters lap's his cushion, where at ease
He lies, and torments the tormenting fleas.
This put the sullen Ass in woeful dumps,
Who his deep judgment for a reason pumps
Why he should toil, and eat the bread of care,
And the idle Dog like his rich master fare.
Then with a sigh he said;
Have I with patience, and packsadles, broke
My heart and sides, my back so many a stroke
Endured, to make my greedy master rich?
When his proud Steed lay fainting in a ditch,
And cried no more he would be a Pack horse made:
I took the burden from the pamperd jade,
And bore it stoutly through a tedious rode.
And yet this Whelp, this cringing A-la-mode
With Bells, and Collar, hair in the Island guise,
Feeds with his Lord, and on soft Couches lies.
And why? because he will sport, and fawn, and cog,
He knows no other duty of a Dog.
This, keeps no Sheep, nor takes foul Swine by the ear,
Nere barks at Thieves, nor plays at Bull or Bear,
But a mere foysting-Hownd; well, now I see,
Not always strength, nor wit, nor industry
Gain's fortunes smile; too often in Princes Courts
Great favorites rise by jests, and idle sports;
And Complements: if so, there is none surpasses
For complement, your Complementall Asses.
I am resolved their Dog-ships, Ape-ships all
This day to imitate, fall, what may fall.
This said, the Ass pricks his notorious ear,
And like a Hobie-horse, or dancing Bear,
Begins to move, now like a Spaniell plays,
But still his own voice frights him when he brays.
Then to his Master boldly he drew near:
And at last charged him with a full Careere,
Then rising up takes with a rough embrace,
About the neck, offers to lick his face,
And with foul hoofs wanders all ore his breast.
With wonder then and sudden fear oppressed,
The affrighted Master calls aloud for aid,
Then Assinego for his folly paid;
Who while his bones, Swains made with beating sore,
He thus his chance did patiently deplore;
My Genius, and my person I mistake,
Not every block a Mercury will make;
Foul ways, and heavy burdens better suit
With Rustic Asses, than the Ivory Lute.
All things befit not all, and imitation
Is for the Ape, more than the Ass in fashion.
MORAL.
Often airy jesters, and fantastic Drowls,
Take more than wise, learnd, or industrious souls:
A handsome Mien, a varnished outside can,
More than the golden linings of a man.
25
THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH FABLE. Of the Husbandman and Snake.
THere dwelt a learned Serpent near a grove,
Whom fortune did not love.
She gave him want, whom Nature had made wise,
And Industry had taught all Sciences.
He knew each walk in Heavens great board of Chesse,
Where games not end in many thousand years,
Could golden Hierogliphicks all express
Which fill the volumes of nine mighty spheres,
He could the musters of heavens army tell,
And when Stars ruling seasons, rose, and fell.
There was a Shepherd who by his advice
Grew wealthy in a trice.
His thousands wandering on Sicillian hills,
Twice every day a milkie River fills,
His snowy pailes: his numbers not decrease,
When from the sky some dire contagion falls,
When Herds and flocks scarce make up Death one mess,
Thisipon raging in full coats and stalls.
This Swain invites the Snake his house to grace,
And live with him, the Genius of the place.
He that the wisest charmer would not hear
Gave to this rustic ear,
Resolved to leave sad hunger, cold, and care,
For roofs, where warmth and plenty were.
Nor long he sojourned, when the will natured Swain,
Vexed that he could not fell a stubborn Oak,
With the same hatchet would his guest have slain,
And raging charged him with a mighty stroke;
Hardly with life the wounded Serpent fled
To his own seats, and frighted hides his head.
Those whom we wrong, we hate: what arts the stern
Rustic before did learn
From the wise Serpent, now seemed poor, and cheap:
Who Winds and Stars observe, not Sow, nor Reap.
Him Industry, and Fortune happy made;
But not long after Udders full, wax dry,
A chaffie ear shoots from a withered blade;
His Corn is blasted, Sheep and Cattle die.
Suppliant he stands then at the Serpents door,
And thus desires his company once more.
Wise as thy self, than Doves more innocent,
The injury I repent;
And though it is Justice, since thy head did feel
My cruel axe, that thou should bruise my heel;
Yet pardon me, and once more I entreat,
That thou would bless my little house again:
Then spoke the Serpent from his low-roof'd seat,
Though the wound's whole, the memory I retain;
Yet I Will forgive the wrong, but never more
While thou a hatchet have come in thy door.
MORAL.
What pleasure has full boards, when, ore our head,
A ponderous sword hangs on a twisted thread?
Fly dangerous company, when Choler burns,
Often Princely cheer, to bloody banquets turns.
26
THE SIX AND TWENTIETH FABLE. Of the Fox and the Crane.
NOble Sir Crane, I tarried at my gate,
You, and your victory to congratulate.
I heard the battle was both sharp and long,
The Pigmies are a nation fierce and strong.
Be pleased good Sir to light,
And take a bait with me; it is long to night;
Thus did the Fox the mounted Crane invite.
The Crane not doubted but the Fox could gibe,
As well as any of his subtle tribe.
But the sharp air amongst Riphaean rocks,
Where nothing was but hunger, cold, and knocks,
Provoked his appetite;
Besides, a savoury steam did him invite,
And his long Nose now stood in his own light.
At last Fox-Hall they enter, where they found
A table in a broathie deluge drowned:
Broth must not cool; This piddles with his bill,
While young Sir Reynard did whole Rivers swill,
Licks up the Mediterrane,
Drinks misty Bays, then guzzels up the Main,
Till the boards weinscot face appears again.
When to himself the vexed Crane said; did I
That Giant Pigmie kill twelve inches high,
When breaking of our eggs a Sea he made?
Him, spitted on this bill with wings displaid
I carried ore the rocks:
And shall this long-taild Cur, this Fox-furd Fox
Abuse me? must my shoulders bear his mocks?
It must not be; this said, he wipes his bill,
As if that he had banqueted his fill,
And Reynard then invites with many thanks,
To taste a dish brought from Ca^sters banks.
The Fox consents, nor did
Believe the Crane to any thing would bid
His Worship to, unless Veale, Lamb, or Kid.
The appointed hour is kep't, and as he wished
Choice Cates he found, but in glass Viols dish'd.
This diving with his beak sweet morsels picks,
With watery Jaws dry glass Sir Reynard licks;
Then said; I have deserved
With Tantalizing bankets to be sterv'd,
And am with tricks for tricks most justly served.
MORAL.
The most ingenious scoffs, and bitter'st taunts
Are best revenged with the like affronts:
But many times from them such rancour breeds,
That he that laughed at first, soon after bleeds.
27
THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH FABLE. Of the File and the Viper.
VVAst ill-advising Hunger did persuade,
Or Anger, that fond Viper to invade
A horrid File, which had an iron husk,
Scorned the Sharkstooth, defied the wild Boars tusk;
It had a skin so hard, and rough,
As that infernal coat of Buff
The Luciferian General had on
In the first grand Rebellion:
Which no Celestial arm
Could harm,
Or pierce,
But his, who guides the Stars, and rules the Universe.
But Anger gave the cause he so mistook;
He knew the sweating Artist was no Cook.
Who with this File that day had polished
The Snakes which Periwig the Gorgons head,
And had filled down the speckled mail,
Which shining armed the old Dragons tail;
He thought those Snakes alive had been,
And strange tortures he had seen.
Since on the man he could not lite.
To bite,
He glides
Raging with venomed tooth, to pierce strong Iron sides.
The secure File, whilst he did gnaw and bite,
Smiling lay still; at length it laughd out right;
Finding his foe no Estridge weapons had,
To murder Horse-shoos, and devour a Gad.
Then thus began, Desist for shame,
Thou hurtst not me, I Am still the same:
When thou beginst a War, not only know
Thy own, but forces of the foe:
Thou see I lie upon my back,
And crack
Thy Gums:
He is not wise with his own strength himself orecomes.
MORAL.
Fools that with spleen and fury are possessed,
Not mind their own, nor public interest*
Some, vexed abroad, on their domestics fall;
Or bruise their knuckles on a senseless wall.
28
THE EIGHT AND TWENTIETH FABLE. Of the Heart.
THe Heart beholding in a fountain clear
His stately crest,
With Antlers dressed,
Admiring said, I am a gallant Dear.
How many in the Park like me appear?
Where is the beast that can,
Or the Cornuted man,
Show such a horney Forest on his head?
Nor could that mighty Stag,
Arms like these weapons brag,
Which with the famous Clubman combated,
Nor were Actaeons branches fairer spread.
But his supporters did stir up his Gall:
Amongst all the rancks
Of spindle shanks,
None were so little, none had legs so small.
Both God and Nature he unjust did call,
To mount him like the Crane,
On four limbs less then twain.
Such spiny shins nere went in any road;
Those Usher dames boast half,
His legs had nere a calf;
He wonders that on Stilts he durst abroad,
And why four sticks bore such a gallant load.
Thus while he descanted on every part,
The wood resounds
With horns and hownds;
Like to a Scytbian shaft, or Indian dart,
Or clouds with tempest driven, flys the Heart:
Those Legs he so much scorns
Did save him, but his Horns
Entangled amongst thick boughs made him a prey*
Who spoke with weeping eyes,
Poor friends I did despise,
Who me from Dogs and Hunters did convey,
But Pride, vain Pride, did the proud Heart betray.
MORAL.
Too much we value Beauty, Wit, and Arts,
Since often great men are ruined by their parts
Some with small learning, and a slender list
Of virtues, frowns of fickle Chance resist.
29
THE NINE AND TWENTIETH FABLE. Of Birds and Beasts.
A Difference 'twixt Birds and Beasts arose,
But how no story shows;
Traditions tell, that Beasts
In trees would build their nests;
Others, that Birds did Forest lands enclose;
But hot debate at last did come to blows.
Both Feathered, and Four-footed not delay,
To muster and array;
And as the nations use,
Their Generals they choose:
The Eagle must the winged Legions sway,
The Lion, in great bodies Beasts, obey.
Poets and Painters added to their force,
The feathered Griphon and the winged Horse;
Than those no other dare
Tempt Castles in the air,
Nor through untracted sky to bend their course,
Among steep rocks the Eagles nest to force.
The Bat observing that the bestiall power
Increased every hour,
How Lions, Wolves, Bears and Boars,
Dogs and Horses filld the shores,
Enough ten flying armies to devour,
Straight he revolts, and yields his airy tower.
Both sides engage, there was a mighty fight,
From morning until night;
Beasts well maintain their place,
Birds charge them in the face:
The Eagle by advantages of height,
Both salvage and domestic put to flight.
The treacherous Bat was in the battle took:
All hate the traitors look,
He never must display,
Again his wings by day,
But hated live in some foul dustie nook,
Cause he his Country in distress forsook.
MORAL.
Wisemen are valiant, and of honest minds;
Treacherous subtle, and explore all winds:
Or King or State their ruin they will endure,
May they from Sequestration be secure.
30
THE THIRTIETH FABLE. Of the Jay and Peacocks.
WHo has not heard of that most cruel fight,
When by the Eagle beasts were put to flight?
When, from supplies fell in at setting sun
Of Harpies, Furies, and sad Birds of night,
Tigers like Steers, like Sheep bold Lions run:
Then first on Birds and Beasts men to the height
Did feasts themselves, and they who often preyd,
On slaughtered armies, now a prey are made.
Amongst other chances of that dreadful day,
A wing of Peacocks was discomfited:
Their valiant leader amongst the foremost lay,
His Angel-plumes died with his own blood red.
This had a Page, a proud and foolish Jay,
Whom, from an Egg, he in his nest had bred:
This, strips his Lord, and boldly then assumes
His train of Argos eyes, and gaudie plumes.
When to the Eagles Court the proud Jay got,
And like a Turkie-Cock struts up and down,
Suing to draw in Juno's Chariot,
As if those gaudie feathers were his own:
With love fair Pea-hens, here he follows hot,
Keeps company with noble birds, or none;
Among the Wits, and Braveries did sit,
And would be (strange) a bravery and a wit.
His tongue condemned to everlasting prate,
Boasting his Beauty, Wealth, and better notes,
Brought on him first Suspicion, after Hate:
( Peacocks, though Angels plumes, have Devils throats)
At last they strip him, as he chattering sat,
Of his fairy feathers, and his guadie coats;
Naked, and banished from the court of birds,
He to a doleful note, composed these words.
I stand the true example of vain pride,
Since I the Jayish nation did despise,
Not only noble Birds will me deride,
But I shall be a scorn to Jacks and Pies:
Not Tyrian robes can birth and breeding hide,
Let their own fortune still content the wise.
And let all those that climb above their place,
Stripped like me, and suffer such disgrace.
MORAL.
Whether Ambition, Virtue be, or Vice;
Has raised great disputations among the nice:
Who by unseen gradations reach a crown
Heroes are styled, but Traitors tumbling down.
31
THE ONE AND THIRTIETH FABLE. Of the Woolves and Sheep.
THe Wolves and Sheep, great Nations both, and strong,
Had long
A mighty War maintained:
Great slaughter often there was of old and young,
With various chance, yet none the better gained.
Finding their strength decayed, their treasure drained,
With one consent Commissioners are chose,
That might so great a difference compose,
And join in lasting leagues such ancient foes.
Long they not sat, when they conclude a peace:
On these
Few articles they straight agreed;
The Wolves should give their Whelps up hostages,
The Sheep their Dogs, their stout Molossian breed,
And then they might in fields at pleasure feed;
The Woolvish bands should sally forth no more
From Wood nor Hill; no Woolf come near the door:
To this hornd The Ram.
Beline, and fierce The Wolf
Isgrim swore.
And now on pleasant plains themselves the Sheep
Do keep;
No Dog of War to guard the Coat;
All seem secure; they eat, and drink, and sleep:
When the young Woolves extend a hungry throat,
Wanting their dams, and raise a dismal note.
Woolves cry the peace is broke, and like a shower
Fell in their quarters, and whole Flocks devour.
Neither to friend nor foe give up your power.
MORAL.
Not Hostages, though Sons, the foe can bind,
If they an evident advantage find:
Let Mothers weep, dye Children, suffer Friends,
The Ambitious vallews nothing but his ends.
32
THE TWO AND THIRTIETH FABLE. Of the Woolf and the Fox.
THat night what slaughter did the fields imbrew,
When from the Woods, and Hills, the Woolvish crew,
Pretending rescue of their cursed brood,
Howling the peace was broke,
Fell on the guiltless flock,
And satisfied their ravening jaws with blood!
They who a solemn League and Covenant swore,
But one short day before,
Then slew Ram Beline at the Shepherd's door,
And with him slaughterd many thousands more.
Among these was one whom Woolves themselves did call,
For rapine, Plunder-Master-Generall;
This having stuffed, in that great Massacer,
His den with fattest Sheep,
Resolves a feast to keep,
And sit in State alone like Kings to fare,
When with self-kindnesse struck, he thus began;
I fear nor Dog nor Man;
I scorn the Swain, and Sheep-Protector Pan;
Soul take thy rest; do they the worst they can.
A crafty Fox, who strickt account did keep,
Of those well-fed, and golden-fleeced Sheep
He, by the horns, that night to's den had drawn,
Two days and long nights waits,
Expecting open gates;
When with the greedy worm his bowels gnawn,
Aloud he calls; Ho! Colonel, how do you fare?
Be pleased to take the air;
And since the Woolvish army Conquerors are,
Keep not within, nor spirits waste with care.
The Woolf perceived the Fox desired to feast,
And in his absence make himself a guest;
When with a heavy groan, he thus returns;
Ah dearest Cosen, I
Am sick, am like to die;
In a hot Feavour all my body burns.
In that nights service, I provoked with zeal,
To serve the Commonweal,
After much toil, would needs stand Centinell,
Where I took cold, which did my blood congeale.
In my stopd veins rules adventitious heat;
Swift does my pulse like an alarm beat;
My throat so dry, that Seas of Sheepish blood,
Which still did use to cure
The Woolvish Calenture,
Commix'd with humane gore, will do no good.
Desire not to come in; Cosen, I fear,
It Is dangerous; spots appear:
My short breath tells me my departure's near;
Ah! that I had some zealous Pastor here.
Thin hunger now gives place to swelling rage;
Thirst of revenge spurs Reynard to engage
With mortal foes; who, straight thus calls a Swain;
Ho! Shepherd, come away;
Make this a holy day,
The Woolf, by whom such loss you did sustain,
I Will bring you to, be pleased to Fancy then
Me, with his goods and den,
And clear my score of Lamb, Kid, Goose, and Hen.
The Shepherd grants, and calls his Dogs and men.
Mean while the Woolf did sit at joyful feasts;
When at his gates he heard no welcome guests.
Repeated surfeits often make courage fail.
Up starts his briefly hair,
His fiery eyes now stare,
And Cowring 'twixt his legs he claps his tail.
But out he must, and venture to the field;
No quarter Shepherds yield:
His pampered belly made him leaden heeld,
That ere he ran six score, the Woolf was killed.
This done, the man sets on his Dogs again,
And Reynard seized; who dying did complain;
I the sad Emblem am of rancourous spite.
The foolish Fox repind,
Because the Woolf had dind
So well alone, and would not him envite.
Thieves falling out, thus true men get their own.
His head must go to town:
My skin must face some wealthy Burgers gown.
Thus Avarice has the Woolf and Fox orethrown.
MORAL.
When Conquerors, rich with spoil, scorn Men and Gods,
Chance unexepected shakes revenging rods.
Are common Foes destroyed? the unequal share
From Accomplices will raise a second War.
33
THE THREE AND THIRTIETH FABLE. Of the Fly and the Ant.
WHen the hot Dog Star, joined with Phoebus beams,
Drank broad-backd floods, to narrow-shoulderd streams,
From the Kings Palace comes the silken Fly,
And cuts with sarcenet wing the sultrie sky;
From whence he saw black bands of laboring Ants,
(Mindful of Winter, and approaching wants)
March through straight paths, on many shoulders born,
Viewed a great Convoy guard one grain of corn.
Then to himself he said; it is wondrous strange
Ants thus should toil, to fill some petty grange,
When those in Courts, and Cities, with less pain,
Often in an howr get more than Rusticks gain
In their whole life: Clowns toil for cloth and milk,
While Courtiers feast, and flant in gold and silk
Purchac'd in kid-skin gloves a thousand ways;
None ere by sweat did a great fortune raise.
Then to a laboring Ant, the Fly did call,
And makes comparisons odious unto all.
What art thou wretch, to me? worm, thou do creep,
And liv'st in Caves, when I my Palace keep
In Princes Courts, and when the world is May,
About their sun-reflecting towr's I play:
Among Heavens feathered Quiristers I have flown,
And to Celestial Music was the Drone.
Thou water drink'st, and eat'st the bread of care,
And when your squadrons plunder, thou do share
Perhaps one grain of Wheat, gained with more toil,
Than some get kingdoms, and subdue an Isle.
I from the Margents of the golden bowl
Drink liquor, that revives the saddest soul;
Frees prisoners, cures the stripes of cruel rods,
Makes Peasants Princes, and makes Princes Gods.
On gilded seelings my heels upward, I
Ore my broad shoulders looking down, epsy
Feasts for a mighty man, and full cups placed:
At pleasure all those delicates I taste.
Phoebus my father was, me, he begot
When his steeds fainting fell into a trot
In the high Solstice; then my brother Fly
Died by ambition in a Princes eye:
In his vast kingdoms he no place could find,
But that to rest in, equal to his mind.
Why should I boast that sad, yet happy Fate
Of my dear Cosen, the renowned Gnat,
Who with his Trumpet saved a sleeping Swain
From the Snakes tooth, yet for the fact was slain?
But soon the ungrateful Shepher'd did repent,
And built him an eternal monument;
Whose Epitaph the Virgil.
Prince of Poets made,
And the first stone, with pollish'd verses laid.
Then spoke the Ant; Sir Fly, I in a cave
Not golden beds, nor Ivory tables have;
Yet I contented live though under grownd,
When thou do wander like a vagabond;
And where thou sojournests, those high aboads
Are none of thine; thou have no Houshold-Gods;
But when a tempest comes, and Fortunes frown
Tumbles thy King, as other Princes down,
Then in vast circles may the hungry Fly
Round empty Halls, and keep his parched trunck dry;
There shall the Spider subtle meshes spread,
And having seized thee, feast upon thy head.
And while She changes poison for sweet blood,
Thou dying shall in vain thy King and God
Great Beelzebub implore, who minds not thee,
Nor pitying will those mighty slaughters see
That Emperor makes, when he so many days
To kill Flys, off all other business lays.
That thou art Phoebus Offspring thou may pride,
But say, what art thou by the Mothers side?
From excrement, or putrefaction sprung,
Foul ordure brought thee forth, or Madam dung.
Though I inhabit caves, and narrow cells,
Yet mighty kingdoms, and great Common-weals,
Following examples of the industrious Ant,
Rise to their height; who labor shall not want.
Thou that of idleness, and impertinence
The Emblem art, go, seek a safe defense,
In the great Shambles, from the Butchers Flap,
That kills whole hundreds like a thunderclap.
Go drown thy self in snuffes of drowsy Ale,
Or leave the world, a straw thrust through thy tail:
Compare with me? know, that the noble Ant,
With Mirmidons, did once a kingdom plant.
MORAL.
Short life and merry, give me ease, this cries,
While that with sweat and care his marrow dries:
These are extremes; upon the medium fix;
Study, and toil, with recreation mix.
34
THE FOUR AND THIRTIETH FABLE. Of the Fox and Ape.
THe French Ape gives the Fox of Spain bon jour,
Three Congees, and tres humble serviture:
Then thus begins; In France we not endure
To see long cloaks, all there
Go in the shortest wear,
But your large fashion, is the statelier sure.
Pardonne moy, as we are all too short,
In Courtaild Garments, A la modes of the court,
So with the other extreme, yours Sir, does sort.
Be pleased to wear your fur
A little shorter Sir,
'Twill be as grave, and suite well with your port.
Seigneur, I know your Tailor is not here,
My Apeships workman, quickly with his Shear
Shall cut you shorter, and my self will wear
The remant of your train,
Conformable to Spain.
And then Don Degoes both we shall appear.
Si Sennor, said the Fox, we Dons of Spain
Are constant to our fashion, such a train
My fathers father wore, and to be plain,
This long wear I will keep,
Though it the Kennell sweep,
Rather than give an Inch to Monsieur Vain.
MORAL.
Heaven to each Nation several Genius gave;
The French too airy, Spaniards seem too grave:
City, the Country, Courtiers both despise;
Civil, and rude, most their own manners prize.
35
THE FIVE AND THIRTIETH FABLE. Of the Horse and the Ass.
HE was a soal of the winds, or of the breed
Which Circes stole, got by a heavenly steed.
Broad was his back, his belly short, a large
And dimpled breast, the office to discharge
Of swelling lungs: his feltlocks clean, a hoof,
Against stony roads, and rockie mountains, proof.
Eyes full, quick ears, fire when the trumpets sound
From's nostrils flys; nor stands on any ground.
His color Daple-grey, his skin more sleek
Than Venus bosom, or plump Bacchus cheek:
On's breast a feather, on his crown a star:
Such Alexander, or the God of War
Did use to ride, bearing down all before
Their white feet Strawberi'd with Crimson gore.
His flowing main, and bushie tail was tied
With ribands, baffled Rain-bowes in their pride:
His Bridle, Sadle, all you could behold,
His Cloth, and Stirrups, nay his Shoes were gold.
This at Olympus when the prize he won,
Broke fiery Aethons breath, that drew the Sun,
Straind the near pinion of the Northern wind,
And far left all Competitors behind.
This proud of many victories, at a pass
In his grand paw did meet a laden Ass;
To whom he said; Thou son of a dull fire,
Stand up, or else i will trample thee in the mire:
Thou shall lie gasping here beneath thy load,
Cursed by all those thou hindrest in the road.
The silly Beast not daring in his face
To look, nor answer suddenly gave place,
Who, while the clock struck twelve did run a mile,
And shakes with thundering hoofs the rotten soil.
And now the day was come, the hour drew on,
When seven steeds, swift, as those drew Phaeton,
Were matched to run for a huge golden bowl;
Which, cround with wine must glad his masters soul
That wins the cup Daple so well was known
All bett on his side, but against him, none.
To the first post they came, Jockys were weighed,
Great cracks on each sides were, and wagers laid.
The signal's given, at once seven Champions start,
Now spur, now switch, hanck, loose, no little art
Their Riders show: low as their Horses care
Bending their heads, they break resisting air.
The earth with hoofs, the skies with clamors rore,
While voices tumbled echoe on the shore.
But as swift Daple far did all outstrip,
Ah dire mischance, he strains and shot his hip;
Thus shaken out, he and his Rider droup,
While in a dustie cloud on goes the troup.
Here our sad tale begins, This steed unfit
To run the race, or with a burnished bit
To bear his wealthy Lord with proud short steps,
Disgrace for all his former service reaps:
They take from him his trappings, silk, and gold,
And to a cruel Carman he is sold,
Labored all day, and fed at night with grains,
He dreams of loads, steep Hills, and narrow Lanes.
With His Cart at's back weary and ill arraid
The Ass espied him, and thus vapouring braid;
Sir, I Am mistaken if I did not meet
Your Horse-ship lately in this winding street,
But you are much altered in a little time,
You Are lean, and poor, then fat, and in your prime;
Where Is all the gallant furniture you had?
How rustily you look in Leather clad,
Nor your soft neck bends proudly in a trot,
With Ladies in a Belgic Chariot,
Bounding on Velvet Beds; nor I discern
No golden Scutcheons, on your gilded stern,
Your wheels not thunder, nor your axes flame;
This is a Cart, you draw as if you are lame.
Thus are proud mortals paid, and them that know
No mean in bliss, shall have no mean of woe;
And this shall be the greatest gaul to Pride,
Whom they scornd rich, grown poor, shall them deride
MORAL.
Let no prosperity move arrogance;
Like April are the fickle brows of chance:
But when she most seems for thee, then provide
With caution to allay ore-swelling Pride.
36
THE SIX AND THIRTIETH FABLE. Of the Husbandman, and the Wood.
Near a vast Commons, was a mighty grove,
Protected by the Hama-dryades,
Which then had mansion in those long-lived trees;
There flourished Esculus the delight of Jove,
And Phoebus love;
And there were plants had sense, and some could feed,
And fruitful Palms did male and female breed;
Wool-bearing stocks grew there, and some of old
Whose leaves were spangles, and the branches gold;
In aged trees
Industrious Bees
Built Fortreses,
And did their waxen kingdoms frame,
And some, they fame,
From whose hard woomb man's knottie offspring came.
This wealthy grove, the Royal Cedar graced,
Whose head was fixed among the wandering stars,
Above loud Meteors and the elements Wars,
His root in the Adamantine Center fast;
This all surpast
Crowned Libanus; about him Elmie Peers,
Ash, Fir, and Pine, had flourished many years,
By him protected both from heat and cold,
Eternal Plants, at least ten ages old.
All of one mind,
Their strength conjoined,
And scornd the wind;
Here highly honored stood the sacred Oak,
Whom Swains invoke,
Which oracles, like that of Dodon, spoke.
But in the neighboring Commons dwelt a Swain
That to his Hatchet long did want a heft;
Which only was the Royal Cedars gift:
When to the under cops (that did complain
Their Sovereign
A Tyrant was) he su'd, they promised aid,
No Helve of Brier, or Thorn was ever made.
Some rotten-hearted Elms, and Wooden Peers,
Run with the stream, spurd up by Hopes or Fears;
Avarice, Pride,
Make others side;
Hoping more wide,
Some mighty trees removed, they in their stead
Branches might spread
From Sea to Sea, and raise to Heaven their head.
Then to the Cedar he his suit presents,
About whom round his whispering Counsel grows;
Hot they debate, some side, and some oppose,
When, but unwilling, the forced King consents,
And soon repents:
Armed by his gift, trees fall in ranks and files,
Friends, foes, in stacks to Heaven the Rustic piles;
Then hollow Pines first cut with sails unfurld
Lines, that like nets are drawn about the world;
Great trees and small
Together fall,
He ruins all:
But first the Grove told oracles expires,
And all their quires,
Enough to have made twelve Caesar's funeral fires.
At last the Shepherd standing on a hill,
Beheld the havoc his own hands had made,
And with a deep-fetcht sigh, thus weeping said;
Where is the Mast, and Akorns that did fill
My briefly Cattle still?
Ill-gotten wealth, ah me, is ill employed,
And I am poorer the whole Wood destroyed.
Where shall my Kids browze? how shall I maintain
My board with Nuts, and blushing fruit again?
Thus Avarice brings
People, and Kings,
Their ruinings.
Thus grants of Princes have themselves brought low,
And often orethrow
Them, by their fall on whom they did bestow.
MORAL.
Who weapons put into a mad Man's hands,
May be the first the error understands:
But Kings that Subjects with their Sword entrust,
If they do suffer, seems not much unjust.
37
THE SEVEN AND THIRTIETH FABLE. Of the Heart and Oxen.
AH me poor Heart, ah! whether shall thou fly?
A pack of cruel Hounds in a full cry
Are at thy heels, on the bold Hunts-men rush;
In Woods there is no safety, every Bush
My Horns will tangle in: ah! where is the stream
Whose waves commiserating would from them
To farther Shores in safety me convey,
Where I at last my weary lymbs might lay?
Thus the chased Deer his woeful chance bemones
To Hills and Dales, deaf Trees and senseless Stones;
When his own fate by ill advice did call
Him to seek refuge, at the Oxens Stall.
To whom he said; Ah! for acquaintance sake,
Since we in one Park dwelt, some pity take,
Receive me in; a thousand ways you may
Save this poor life, I Will hide in yonder Hay.
When one replied, he might in safety lie
There till the Men, and cruel Dogs pass by;
But if their Master or his Man came in,
The danger greater was, should he be seen.
Keep Counsel Sirs, and I will venture here:
Under the Cock, at all-hid plays the Deer.
When a dull servant entered, one that did
Not half the work his careful master bid,
Returning when the Beasts were served with Hay.
Then flattering hope did the glad Heart betray.
But an experienced Ox, whom Livie made
Once speak before, to him rejoicing, said;
Unhappy friend, thou have small cause to vant;
Were thou as mighty as an Elephant,
Stood where I stand, a Castle on thy back,
This Clown had left thee feeding at the rack.
This is a clod heavier than earth; such souls,
Were all Heaven Sun, would see no more than moles:
But when our Master enters, I advise
That close thou lie, for he has Argos eyes;
To escape from him, that is a work, a task,
Would all the shifts of subtle Proteus ask.
Scarce said, but in the buisy master came,
And first his servants negligence did blame,
Gathers the offals, did the litter spread,
The laboring yoke-mates with his own hands fed;
Here, there, he pries, and searches every part,
Three fathom under Hay he finds the Heart.
Glad of the prize, aloud for aid he calls,
Straight on the Deer, a troup of rusticks falls,
No hope of quarter, he with weeping eyes,
Chief mourner was at his own obsequies.
MORAL.
When urgent dangers press, it is hard to shun;
Stern Fortune loves to end, as she begun:
On Fear, and Haste, bad Counsel still attends;
Let none seek refuge from unable friends.
38
THE EIGHT AND THIRTIETH FABLE. Of the Lion that was sick.
THrough all the Forest was a rumor spread,
The King the Lyon's Sick, some report Dead.
No sooner was it trumpeted by fame,
But wild and tame,
From all parts came,
With countenances sad,
Though inly glad;
A mighthy throng at the Court gates appear:
But sly Sir Reynard was not there.
To whom the King thus with a Porcupins quill
Writ on a leaf; Dear Cosen, I am ill,
And your advice now want to make my will.
If you suspect (but fear is causeless Sir)
Danger at Court, alas I cannot stir,
The holy Woolf here teaches Heavens commands,
Grim Malkin stands,
Wringing her hands,
The Lamb, and Tiger sit
Both at my feet;
But none of these can comfort us, like you:
You shall not friend your coming rue,
Ah let me see thee ere my eyes do fail,
You often have helped me, often your wisdoms tail,
Made on the ground, my Parliament robes to trail.
To whom the subtle Fox replied again,
That he to Heaven would pray, his Sovereign
May former health recover, and once more
From shore to shore
Be heard to rore,
And with his voice to make
The Forest shake:
But to obey his will must be denied,
Because he many tracts espied
Of visitants repaird to's Royal den;
But saw no Print of those returned again.
His Majesty must pardon him till then.
MORAL.
Not too much credence to Kings letters give;
In flowrie Eloquence black Serpents live:
Conster the ambiguous words, and wary read,
For i will advance, that is i will take off thy head.
39
THE NINE AND THIRTIETH FABLE. Of Cupid and Death.
CUpid too careful of his Mother's task
Roving all day did wound a thousand hearts,
With golden or with leaden pointed darts;
At night his sport persuing to a mask,
Where he is Quiver empties, and supplies
Again from beauteous Ladies eyes,
While they in comely motion act their parts:
What Nymphs are these? some whisper, others ask
What Goddess now appears? and as the' admire,
Active and fierce desire
Seven couples shoots at once with mutual fire,
And ere nights wheels could the Meridian cut,
There, thousands more the God to torture put.
The same day Death had at a cruel fight
As buisy been, and mighty slaughter made,
She, and blind Chance on both sides double played;
Then the grim Angel visits Towns by night.
Now weary, and grown late, Death could not well
Reach the Adamantine Gates of Hell,
Where Plague, War, Famine, her Companions laid
On Iron Couches, trembling Ghosts affright;
Nor could blind Cupid Paphos find, so dark
The sky was grown, no spark
In all Heavens face to give the boy a mark,
At one Inn therefore two great Furies lay,
Till Sleep Death's elder brother both obey.
Nor Death long rests her weary bones, but wakes:
Not clearing well her eyes which were two coals
That cast Malignant beams from gloomie hoals;
She Cupid's Quiver for her own mistakes,
And hungry out she flys to Countries far,
To Breakfast at a Massacer.
Nor long the Boy from torturing lovers souls
Cessation made, but out with speed he makes,
And storms with deadly arrows Myrtle groves,
Where perched his Mother's Doves,
Where cunning lovers lose to find their loves;
There while the youth did Cyprian Vigils keep,
Death seals their eyes up in eternal sleep.
Then through the world a mighty change appears,
When the curld youth whom Love and Beauty lead,
Under pale Ensigns muster with the dead,
Sad Verse and Garlonds fixed to Virgin Beers;
While in a dance up the long bedrid leaps,
And Beldams mince with wanton steps,
And their pale cheeks with borrowed blushes spread,
False Lillys trenches fill plowd up with years;
Whom Death had marked for sudden funerals
Now for his Violl calls,
And old remembering, makes new madrigals.
This has a Son, that has a Daughter dead,
And their house cleared the lusty Parents wed.
But while this Trage-Comedie was played,
Of Error long, a youth more happy saw
When to his ear the God did aiming draw
A shaft at him, and thus to Cupid prayed;
O hold thy arrow tipd with Charnell bone,
And shoot me with a golden one,
Thy Darts are winged with Death, against Natures Law;
See in the Groves what slaughter thou have made.
Must the world end? must all our youth be slain?
Must feeble age again
Recruite the loss? then let the Gods ordain
That Winter marrying with North winds be bound
To make, with sharp Frosts pregnant, barren ground.
Admonished thus, he looks about, and spied
Old men and Matrons dancing in a ring,
And joyful Paeans to Lov's Mother sing,
While arm in arm sad youthful lovers di'd.
Straight the mischance Cupid to Death makes known.
Requiring to return his own;
But Death in various Conquests taking pride,
Reserved some featherd with the Sparrows wing
And left him others dipped in the Stygian Lake,
From whence rose the mistake,
That when sweet love Virgins and Youth should make,
It proves sad wills; and Old folks one Leg have
In wanton Sheets, he other in the Grave.
MORAL.
Age burns with Love, while Youth cold ague shakes;
And Nature often her principles mistakes:
So suffers Youth in Ages cold embrace,
As living men to dead bound face to face.
40
THE FORTIETH FABLE. The Parliament of Birds.
WHen Jove by impious arms had Heaven possessed,
And old King Saturn setting in the West
Finished the Golden days, a Silver morn,
Pale with the crime's success, did earth adorn, The Silver Age.

And gave its name unto the second age.
Then Skies first thundered, Seas with tempest rage,
Four Seasons part the year, Men Sow, and Plant,
(The golden times nor labor knew nor want)
Then toil found ease by art, art by deceits,
Then Civil War turned Kingdoms into States,
(For petty Kings ruld first) then Birds, and Beasts
Did with Republics private interests
Begin to build, Eagls were vanquished then,
And Lions worsted lost their Royal Den.
The Birds reduced thus to a Popular State,
Their King and Lords of prey ejected, sat
A frequent Parliament in the ancient wood,
There acting daily for the Nations good.
When thus the Swallow rising from the flock,
To Master Speaker; the grave Parrot, spoke.
Great things for us, Sir, Providence has done,
And we have through a world of dangers run,
The Eagle, and the gentle Falcon are
Destroyed or Sequestered by happy War;
The Kitish Peers, and Bussard Lords are flown,
Who sat with us till we could sit alone:
Like worthy Patriots since, your special care
Has settled our Militia in the air.
All Monarch-hating Storks and Cranes, who march,
Like Sons of thunder, through Heavens Crystal Arch,
When tumult calls, to beat those Widgeons down,
That vainly flock to readvance the Crown.
Of Maritim business, let our Sea-fowle tell,
Who now as far beneath, as it is to Hell,
The Antipodes dive, to fetch home Gold and Spice
From Phaenix, and the Bird of Paradise;
Whom thunder-eating Fire-Drakes safe convey
From royal Harpies, that pickeer at Sea.
War is far off removed, and almost done;
And we now sporting in the golden Sun
Prune, and re-gild our wings; while on hard coasts,
Wedded to Famine, and eternal Frosts,
The Eagle rigid Discipline digests,
Drove from his Godwits to the Byters nests.
We fear no flying Nation, should the King
Plumed Griffons, and his winged-Horses bring,
Of now scorned Pegasus the baffled Sons,
So often chased round our vast Dominions.
But a new danger, with a dire ostent,
(You Gods avert it from this Parliament,)
Begins to threaten. Line unthought upon
Now shades it self, and to a wood is grown,
Luxurious branches shooting to the sky.
This, this behold! is the great enemy;
Man will make nets of this, where he will no fewer
Than thousand silly Birds at once secure;
Under the tyranny of twisted Cords,
Often Lybian Lions groan, those Forest Lords
Wild Bulls, and Boars, make all the wood resound,
When they are taken in this Linen pound:
Fetterd in these, how loud storm salvage Bears?
And took Hyena's weep with unfeignd tears.
This branch and root must up, or else your State
(Which foreign Eagles now congratulate)
Will be short-lived; down, down with it to the ground,
Nor let its place or name be ever found:
Enact with speed, your time, your strength employ
To ruin that, which else, will you destroy.
The Swallow for his wisdom much renound,
Since he the art of Architecture found,
Whose well built nests incircle scarce a span,
Are yet but coldly patternd out by man;
Whose cement smiles at Time, and the Elements rage,
Strengthend with storms, and more confirmed by age,
Had now prevailed, and his great Eloquence,
So sympathizing with the Houses sense,
Persuaded straight an host of Geese and Cranes
Should plunder, and depopulate those plains:
But that the Lynnet (private interest much,
Since Linseed was his food, this Bird did touch,)
Arising said, Most honored House of Birds,
The Swallow has in well-composed words
And handsome language, dressed up scar- Crow doubts
Of some Priapus, or a Thing-of-clowts,
Such as Plumed foragers fright from Corn and Fruits,
And well with his complaining nature suites.
Sure I believe ere since the world began,
This Line has grown, or wild, or sowed by Man;
Yet nere employed our Nation to betray:
Silver Age.
But these times find new Arts out every day,
Lime-twigs are lately known, and Hair and Hooks
Which scaley people draw from Crystal brooks.
But grant all this, will man his cordage pin
To the high Poles, and spread his Linen gin
Ore Heavens broad face like Geometrick lines,
To catch Stars wandering through twelve spangled Signs?
Then, if hot Phoebus burn it not at noon,
How shall our guifted Wood-Cocks reach the moon,
Who now from Churches Lunatic have brought
Revelations, both for use and Doctrine taught.
Or over earths broad surface will he spread
This new device, and with entangling thread
Where ere we light engage our heedles foot?
If so, then grub it up both branch and root.
The worst that can, over some little patch
Of earth, this Yarn deceitful man will watch,
And with some bait the hovering foe entice:
Then let them suffer for their avarice.
But the chief point I most insist upon
Too much we have insenc'd already Man;
Libidinous Doves, and Sparrows, (most unjust,)
Plunder his Wheat to heighten filthy lust:
And wicked Geese, Storks, and insulting Cranes,
Spoil their own quarters, midst his Golden plains.
But humane forces if you long to know,
And aggravating wrong would raise a foe;
Muster your power; your strength consider first,
And the Malignants in your bowels nursed,
Ready to rise at all times, when so ere
Or Bird, or Beast, or Devils, or Men appear.
Unsettled, no such War you can maintain,
Unless the Common foe you home again
With joy invite, unanimous join in one.
But ere I see that fatal union,
And under cruel Eagles Ensigns go,
Let me descend to unclean Birds below.
Brief, it is impossible to join again,
Who Gods and Fiends despise, tremble at Men.
To Heaven, the harmless Vegetive let grow,
And Man incense not, he is a dangerous foe.
May our good Angels those celestial Birds,
Who skreeking Eagles drove with flaming Swords
From this warm Paradise, our State defend,
Against all dire fowl, from Stygian floods ascend.
This said, the House thunders with discording notes,
This for the Swallow, that the Linnet Votes;
The major still the weaker part, decry
The Swallows Counsel, bearing to the sky
The Linnets Wisdom and high Eloquence;
This House by reason was not ruld, but sense.
They act, that Line shall to perfection grow,
And make it treason to call man a Foe.
Soon fiery Syrius joynd with Phoebus rays,
Faint heats increased, with decreasing days;
When Ceres golden locks each where were shorn,
And Line in safety to dry Houses born.
Then said the Swallow, fearing future fates
Whom Jove will ruin, he infatuates;
And straight to Man he flys, and makes a peace,
The Articles they signd in brief were these,
He grants him Chimneys for his stately Nest,
For which his Song must calm Man's troubled breast.
Mean while fine threads are Spun of hatcheld Flax,
And nothing for the Expedition lacks:
The War grows hot, Fowlers both night, and day,
By their Commission thousands take and slay.
Here in vast Fields, Nets coulerd like the Corn
Do execution, evening and morn;
There Dogs, and stalking-Horses many fright
Into the Snare, and lowbels dreadful light;
Eagles and Hauks Auxiliaries they employ,
And treacherous foul their dearest friends decoy,
Thus soon this rising State was overthrown,
And Man ere since did rule the earth alone.
When this sad ditty silvered over with age
A Captive Stare, Sung in his woeful Cage;
When Civil War has brought greater Nations low,
Destruction comes, often with a Foreign Foe.
MORAL.
In perverse Counsels best advice is scornd,
The worst, with Art, and handsome words adornd,
Enacted is; but private interest blinds
The Wisest, and betraies the Noblest mind.
41
THE ONE AND FORTIETH FABLE. Of the Rustic and Hercules.
O Thou that did so many Monsters kill,
And of twelve Labors did none ill,
Help, if it by thy will.
O thou that forced fire-spitting Cacus den,
And gotst thy Cattle then,
Though mine I nere could have again.
Alcides, thou that art the strongest God,
Help with thy long arms out, and shoulders broad,
My Wheels, which stick up to the Nave in mire:
Ah it is a mighty load,
Help, I desire,
Or here I will expire.
In a deep tract his Cart being lodged thus prayed
A lazy Swain to Hercules for aid.
When thus the Deity in a mighty crack
Of thunder to the Rustic spoke,
Then lying on his back.
Fool, whip thy pamperd Horses up the Hill,
Thy Shoulder lay to the wheel,
And there use all thy strength and skill:
Not only me whom now thou do invoke,
But then expect a God at every spoke
To thy assistance; who offended be,
When they implored shall look
From Heaven, and see
A heavy Clown like thee.
We help the active, though thy wicked are;
The Gods nere did, nor will, hear idle prayer.
MORAL.
Under the Tropicks more refined souls
Cherish old piety: but near the Poles
Men follow War, sail, bargain, sow, and reap,
And no Religion love but what is cheap.
42
THE TWO AND FOURTIETH FABLE. Of the Fox and Weesell.
WIth fasting long, Reynard was grown the type
Of seven years famine,
Enforced with hunger, which so much did gripe
His clemd and empty tripe,
At last he came in
To a full larder, through a straiter hole,
Than ever body past, or scarce a soul.
When he had stuffed his Panier like a Sack
With store of Forage,
Until his bellie's Hoops, his ribs did crack,
Straight he resolves to go back
With all his carriage,
By the same pass he entered, nor did think
His sides might larger grow, or the hole shrink.
At last the streights of the long narrow lane
And low-roof'd entry
He came to, but a passage sought in vain;
The Fox repulsed was fain
There to stand centry:
Seven times the rockie pass with teeth and claws
He strives to open, and as often did pause.
Then Conscience pricks, a melancholy fear
Shows all his slaughters,
The Hen
Sad Partlet following of a woeful beer,
Where lay bold Chanticleer
And his three Daughters;
Then jetting Turkies with blew snouts he spied,
And white fleeced Lambs which he in Scarlet died.
Like Hydras hissing Geese extend their necks,
And threatening Ganders;
Ats eyes the Crow took with his Pizle, pecks;
The Hare
Keyward's pale Ghost with squeaks
About him wanders:
That some suppose the Fox this day did dine
On melancholy Dishes, wanting Wine.
Then spoke a jeering Weesell from the Wall;
Sir Fox I know you are crafty,
But you have made a Prison of your hall,
Nor can you escape at all,
Or look for safety,
Until your be as thin, as when
You entered, then you may return again.
Then said the Fox; Hunger did ill persuade,
Yet those are sterving
Often through a Wall of stone a breach have made,
And I may now be paid
My just deserving.
But thou that in such danger jeerst the Fox,
Like Fortune may reward thee for thy mocks:
Revenge draws nigh, beware the Cat; I can
But be uncas'd, and bravely die by man.
MORAL.
Heaven's joys we sell for broth; rather than want,
With Death and Hell consign a Covenant.
Greedy of spoil, with violence and deceit
We daily act, considering no retreat.
43
THE FABLES OF AESOP. The Third BOOK.
THE THREE AND FOURTIETH FABLE. Of the Hawk and the Cuckoo.
UNworthy Bird, base Cuckoo, thou that art
Large as my self in every part,
Strength, length, and color of thy Wing,
Mine much resembling;
Whose narrow Soul, whose no, or little Heart,
Will to thy board
Afford
Nothing but Worms of Putrefaction bred;
Which of the Noblest Mortals are abhorred,
Since they must turn to such when they are dead;
Mount, gorge thy self with some delicious Bird;
Be wise,
Such Banquets leave for Daws, and silly Pies.
Thus the bold Hawk, the Cuckoo did advise.
Who not long after taken in the Field,
Having a harmless Pidgeon killed,
Was in a most unluckie howr
Hung from a lofty towr;
To teach all those, who blood of innocents spild.
The Cuckoo saw,
By Law,
The Murtheresse suffered; when these notes she sung;
Better with Worms to fill my hungry maw,
Than betwixt Heaven and Earth by the heels be hung,
And a cold Bird lie in my stomach raw.
Had I
Thy Counsel took, and forag'd through the sky,
There I had hanged with thee for company.
MORAL.
Some without Conscience plunder, spoil, and kill,
As if for bloody Banquets were no bill:
But Vengeance Spring-tides has, as well as Neap,
When Malefactors short from ladders leap.
44
THE FOUR AND FOURTIETH FABLE. Of the Bear and the Bees.
BRuine the Bear receiving a slight wound
From a too washpish Be,
Joyful to raise a War on any ground,
(It was their wealth had done the injury)
Did now propound
And to himself decree,
Nere to return, till he had overthrown
Twelve Waxen Cities of that Nation,
And seized their Hony-treasure as his own.
This being resolved, he to the Garden goes,
Where stood the stately Hives,
One, after one, the Barbarous overthrows,
And many Citizens of life deprives:
A few survives,
Who in a Body cloze.
For your everted towrs, your slaughtered race,
For your great losses, and your high disgrace,
Fix all your venomed Weapons in his Face.
This said, the trumpet sounds, the vulgar rage,
And all at once in mighty War engage.
Now Bruine's ugly visage did not Freeze,
Nor his foul hands want Gloves;
The monstrous Bear you could not see for Bees,
No Bacon Gamon was so stuck with Cloves:
Who Honey loves
Not with sharp Sauce agrees.
Ore-powr'd by multitude, and almost slain,
He draws his shattered Forces off again;
Then said; I better had endured the pain
Of one sharp sting, than thus to suffer all;
Making a private quarrel National.
MORAL.
Great Kings that petty Princes did despise,
Have often by War's experience grown Wise:
Who whipped the Sea, and threatend Floods to chain,
Brought back for Millions but a slender train.
45
THE FIVE AND FOURTIETH FABLE. Of the Heart and Horse.
LOng was the War betwixt the Heart and Horse
Fought with like courage, chance, and equal Force;
Until a fatal day
Gave signal victory to the Heart: the Steed
Must now no more in pleasant Valleys feed
Nor verdant Commons swaigh.
The Heart who now ore all did domineere,
This conquering Stag
Slights like a Nag
The vanquished Horse, which did no more appear.
In want, exiled, driven from Native Shores,
The Horse in Cities humane aid implores,
To get his Realms again.
Let Man now manage him and his affair,
Since he not knows what his own Forces are.
Thus sues he for the Rein;
For sweet revenge he will endure the Bit,
Let him orethrow
His cruel foe
And let his haughty Rider heavy sit.
He takes the Bridle ore his yielding head,
With Man and Arms the Horse is furnished,
And for the battle neighs.
But when the Heart two hostile faces saw
And such a Centaure to encounter draw,
He stood a while at gaze.
At last known valor up he roused again,
More hopes by fight
There was, than flight;
What Is won by Arms, by Force he must maintain.
Then to the Battle did the Heart, advance,
The Horse a Man brings, with a mighty lance
Longer than the others crest:
The manner of the fight is changed, he feels
No more the Horses hoof, and ill-aimd heels;
They charge now breast to breast.
Two to one ods against Hercules; the Heart,
Though strong and stout,
Could not hold out,
But flys, and must from Conquered Realms depart.
Nor longer could the Horse his joy contain,
But with loud neighs, and an erected main,
Triumphs after fight;
When to the Soldier mounted on his back,
Feeling him heavy now, the Beast thus spoke;
Be pleased good Sir to light.
Since you restored to me my fathers seat,
And got the day,
Receive your pay,
And to your City joyfully retreat.
Then said the Man; This Sadle which you wear
Cost more than all the Lands we conquered here,
Beside this burnished Bit.
Your self, and all you have, too little are
To clear m' engagemens in this mighty War;
Till that is paid, here I Will sit:
And since against your Foe I aided you,
Can you deny
Me like supply?
Come, and with me my Enemy subdue.
Then sighed the Horse, and to the Man replied;
I feel thy cruel Rowels gaul my side,
And now I am thy slave;
But thank thy self for this, thou foolish beast,
That for revenge, to foreign interest
Thy self and Kingdom gave.
Among Rockie Mountains I had better dwelt,
And fed on Thorns,
Gored by the Hearts Horns,
Than wicked Man's hard servitude have felt.
MORAL.
Some injured Princes have, to be revenged,
With their own Realms, the Christian World unhinged,
On any terms, with any Nation deal,
Will Heaven not hear them? they will to Hell appeal.
46
THE SIX AND FOURTIETH FABLE. Of the Satyr and Traveller.
WHen Lucifer the first Grand Rebel fell,
With all his winged Officers, to Hell;
The Almighty Conqueror thought not fit
That then
All should be quartered in the Brimstone Pit
Prepared for bad Angels, and worse Men:
But they, the vulgar Spirits did incense
Against Gods Counsel, with a fair pretense,
That thus Heavens King they would more glorious make,
Were sent by thunder to the Stygian Lake:
But such whose crime was Error, he confines
To Caves,
And Graves,
And tender Gold to guard in hollow Mines:
And some there be, that dare
Make their repayr
To Etheriall air;
These the rough Ocean rule, and others guide
Winged Clouds, and on the backs of Tempests ride.
Such are those Spirits timorous people fright
In horrid shapes, and Play mad prancks by night;
Nymphs, Faireys, Goblins, Satyrs, Fauns,
Which haunt
Soft purling streams, cool shades, and silent lawns,
Begot on Mortals, Sires Immortal vaunt.
Of which our Satyr was, whose cloven hoof,
Rough Thighs, and crooked Horns, were ample proof;
Who by the Mothers side more gentle, gave
To a cold Traveller shelter in his Cave,
Whom Boreas charged with a huge drift of Snow.
The Man
Began,
Having no Fire, his Fingers ends to blow.
Why thus he blew his hands
His Host demands,
And wondering stands:
Who then replied; My Breath, my Fingers will
Straight unbenum, and warm, though nere so chill.
Soon the kind Satyr made a Fire, and got
Boyld Lentils, which he gave the stranger, hot.
The Traveller begins to blow
His Broth,
Then asked the rural Deity, Why so?
My breath will cool't he said; Then wondrous wrath,
The staring Satyr Answered; I that am
The Devils Sister's Son, and to his Dam
As near allied by my dear Mother, which
Is now a famous Callydonian witch,
Dare not a Monster like to thee behold;
A Man
That can
With the same lungs at once blow hot and cold.
Be gone, or else that breath,
Thou shall bequeath,
To me in death.
A Sycophant, and a Backbiter too!
My Uncle himself had best beware of you.
MORAL.
Who Smile, and Stab; at once clear, and attaint,
Like Pictures are, here Devil, and there Saint:
But Fiends and Saints convertible be, for where
We spy a Devil, some say a Saint goes there.
47
THE SEVEN AND FORTIETH FABLE. Of the Rebellion of the Hands and Feet.
REason, once King in Man, Deposed, and dead,
The Purple Isle was ruled without a head:
The Stomach a devouring State swaid all,
At which the Hands did burn, the Feet did gaul;
Swift to shed blood, and prone to Civil stirs
These Members were, who now turn Levellers:
The vast Revenue of the little World
Is in the Exchequer of the Belly hurld,
And toil on them imposed by Eternal Laws;
With a drawn Sword the Hands thus pleads the cause.
Freeborne as you, here we demand our right;
Reason being vanquished, the proud Appetite
In Microcosmos must no Tyrant be,
The idle Paunch shall work as well as we.
The Stomach promised, and so gaind our loves,
Our King dethroned, we should in Kid-skin Gloves
Grow soft again, and free from corn, the Feet
In Cordovant at leisure walk the Street,
Who now toil more than when that Monarch swaid:
Then we did works of wonder, then we made
Egyptian Pyramids, Mausolus toomb,
Built the Gran Caire, great Ninevie, and Rome;
Heaven-threatning Babell, those skie-kissing Towers,
Proud boast themselves, a mighty work of ours;
We Daedalus winged to fly from spire to spire,
And Thunder framed out-ranted Jove's loud fire;
These were our works, which are by fame enrold;
Now we dress Meat, Change it some God to Gold.
Skies, Seas, we spread with Nets, vast Earth with Gins,
To Banquet you, who feast seven deadly Sins.
Did we for this storm the bold Breast, and raze
Joves Image in the Heaven-advanced Face?
Where our sharp Nails a Rubric pend in gore,
And curld roofs from King Reasons Palace tore?
For such rewards the Feet in cooling streams,
Sweating did rush; who by such Stratagems
Did at strange distance disafect with pain
The Head, hurt Reason, and disturb the Brain.
In brief, or work or fast, take up your Staff,
Guird thy Loins Belly, and leave Banquets off.
This said, the Stomach with sharp Choler stird
Cast forth such things, belching at every word.
Rebellious Members, you that be so far
From Peace, that rather among your selves you will War;
What Acts did you, to those that we have done?
Who was it carried the great business on?
The Senses took, the Cinque Ports of the Realm,
With a fair Shade, and a deluding Dream?
Was It you, or we? full with Garlicks and Onyons
Egyptian Gods
The Brainish Monarch drove from his aboads,
Beat up all Quarters of the Heart by Night,
And did that Fort with its own trembling fright?
Who sweld the Spleen? and made the Gall ore-flow?
The Feet and Hands? who made the Liver glow,
Till all those Purple Attoms in the Blood
Which make the Soul, swom in a burning Flood,
From whence inflamed, they seized upon the Head,
And ore the Face their blushing Ensigns spread?
All that you boast of since this War began,
Are but light skirmishes with the outward man;
Leave threatening, must we keep perpetual Lent?
The Members shall as soon as we repent.
Trembling with rage, the Feet and Hands depart,
The Stomach swells, high goes the incensed Heart.
Three days in Pockets closeted the Hands
Refuse to put on Gloves, the vexd Foot stands.
Mean while the Stomach was come down, and cries,
What once a hollow Tooth served, would suffice
The streightend Maw: one bit, one crum bestow:
But still the moodie Members answer, No.
At last an extreme feebleness they felt,
Saw all but skin, and their hard bones to melt,
A pale Consumption Lording over all;
At which a Counsel the faint Brethren call;
The Stomach must be fed, which now was so
Contracted, that like them, it answered, No.
At which pale Death her cold approaches made,
When to the dying Feet the weak Hands said;
Brethren in evil, since we did deny
The Belly food, we must together die.
All that are Members in a Commonwealth,
Should more than Private, aim at Public health:
The Rich the Poor, and Poor the Rich must aid:
None can protect themselves with their own shade.
None for themselves are Born; we brought in food,
Which the kind Stomach did prepare for Blood,
The Liver gave it tincture, the great Vein
Sends it in thousand several streams again
To feed the parts, which there assimulates.
Concord builds high, when Discord ruins States.
But the chief cause did our destruction bring,
Was, we Rebelled against Reason our true King.
MORAL.
Civil Commotions strongly carried on,
Seldom bring Quiet when the War is done:
Then thousand Interests in strange shapes appear,
And through all ways to certain Ruin steer.
48
THE EIGHT AND FOURTIETH FABLE. Of the Horse and laden Ass.
DEear Brother Horse, so heavy is my load,
That my galld back
Is like to crack,
Some pity take,
Or I shall perish in the road;
For thy fair Sisters sake,
Who once did bear
To me a Son, a Mule, my hopeful Heir,
Assistance lend,
My burden share,
Or else a cruel end
Waits on thy fellow servant, and thy friend:
Here I must lie
And die,
The tird Ass said to the empty Horse went by.
Pricked up with Pride, and Provender, the Horse
Denied his aid;
Shall I, he said,
My own back lade,
And hurt my self, stird up with fond remorse?
My prudent Master laid
This on thee, who
Better than you or I know's what to do.
My Sister Mare,
Was given to you,
Our Nobler race to spare,
The Ass and Mule must all the burdens bear.
I must no pack*
Nor sack,
But my dear Master carry on my back.
This said, Heart-broak the Ass fell down and di'd:
The Master straight,
Laid all the weight,
On his proud Mate;
And spread above the Asses hide.
Repenting, but too late,
The Horse then said,
Thou were accursed did not thy Brother aid,
Now on my back
The whole burdens laid.
Such Mortals goodness lack,
And Counsel, which their Friends distressed not aid
Had I born part
The smart
Had been but small, which now must break my Heart.
MORAL.
People that under Tyrant Scepters live,
Should each to other kind Assistance give
The Rich, the Poor, still over-Taxd should aid,
Lest on their Shoulders the whole burdens laid.
49
THE NINE AND FOURTIETH FABLE. Of the Fox and the Cock.
SOon as the Fox to Pullein-furnish'd Farms
Approaches made,
Though valiant, Chanticleere not trusting Arms
Nor humane aid,
Ascends a tree,
Where he
Stood safe from harms:
Loud was the Cackle at no false Alarms:
From ground
About him round
For safety all his feathered Household Flock;
When Reynard thus spoke to the wary Cock.
O thou through all the world for valor famed,
Have thou not heard,
What our two Kings so lately have proclaimed:
Both Beast and Bird
At Amity
Must be:
War which enflamed
Since Adams fall all creatures wild and tamed
Must cease;
In lasting Peace
The cruel Lion, and the Eagle then
Will join their force against more cruel Men.
The sacrilegious Woolf in graves must feed,
And Birds of prey
With humane slaughter must supply their need:
The Popinjay
Needs not to bauk
The Hawk,
The Lamb and Kid
Amongst hungry Bears may in dark Forests feed;
At Feasts
Both Birds and Beasts
Begin to meet; the Cat with Linnets plays,
And Griffons Dine where tender Heifers graze.
Therefore most Noble Chanticleer descend;
And though your Spurs,
Maintaining Pullein Quarters, once did rend
My tender Furs,
When Feathers I
Made fly,
I Am now your friend;
Unless we strive in love let us contend
No more;
Though Reynard's poor,
He Is faithful to his trust, and boldly can
Affirm, no Beast is half so false as Man.
The Cock long weary of devasting War,
And fierce Alarms,
Well knowing what outrages committed are,
By Civil Arms;
And how the Man
Had slain,
To mend his fare,
His Offspring, yet pretending love and care:
Right glad,
To him then said,
I meet your love, Sir Reynard, and descend
To choose among Beasts rather than Men a friend.
While the Cock spoke, a pack of cruel Hounds
The Fox did hear,
And saw them powdering down from Hilly grounds
After a Deer;
Reynard not stays,
Delays
Are dangerous found,
But earth's himself three fathom underground.
At last
The Dogs being past,
All danger ore, again he did appear.
Then, to the Fox returned, spoke Chanticleer;
Learned Sir Reynard, if the words be true
Which you have said,
Why did these Dogs the trembling Deer pursue?
They should have staid;
Like enemies
From these
You also flew.
Then said the Fox, though I the agreement drew,
So late
This Act of State
Came forth, I fear, they the Edict did not hear:
But I shall trounce them, have they killed the Deer:
The Cock replied, but I Will make good this tree,
Is it now true, then 'twill to morrow be.
MORAL.
To what we like we easy credit give,
This makes us often from foes feignd news believe:
Fame mighty Holds has took, and stormed alone,
And false Reports, whole Armies overthrown.
50
THE FIFTIETH FABLE. Of the Lion and the Forester.
VAst Forests and great Cities opend, when
Betwixt wild Beasts and Men
A long Cessation was;
And it was then
That Citizens and Rusticks viewd the Lions Den,
At his vast Courts amazed;
Where now fat Bulls, Colts, and tame Asses grazed,
Through deserts Travelers took the nearest way,
Where, with their Spaniels wanton Tigers play
Foxes among Geese, Wolves among fat Weathers lay.
At Skinners Shops the Bear unmuzeld calls,
Cheapning on furnished Stals
His friend or Cozens fur:
In common Halls
Panthers behold themselves on stately Pedistals.
And now no Yeoman Cur,
Nor Sergeant mastive, Beasts indebted, stir;
The Woods Inhabitants wander every where,
And brizly Boars walk safe, with untouched ear,
After the Proclamation they did hear.
When the great Lion met a Forester,
With whom he often in War
Had strove with various chance,
This with a spear
The Lion gald, that would his strong-spun ambush tear,
Then boldly up advance,
And with his teeth in sunder bite the lance.
To whom the Lion said, Sir, you and I,
Could nere decide our strength by victory,
Let us dispute and it by Logic try.
Then said the Woodman let us wave dispute,
Antiquity shall do it,
Behold! Mausolus toomb,
And then be mute,
If the worlds wonder by example thee confute;
There let us take our doom.
This said, they to the Monument did come,
Where straight he showed him by rare Artists made
A Lions head in a Man's bosom laid:
This no sufficient proof the Lion said.
Could we, as well as you, our stories cut,
We might, and justly, put
Your lying heads beneath
Our conquering foot,
From partial Pens, all truth has been for ever shut.
Where I first drew my breath,
I heard a Carthaginian at his death,
The Roman Nation most perfidious call;
Crying out, by treason they contrived the fall,
Of them, and their great Captain Haniball.
MORAL.
Through a gross Medium by refracted beams
Historians friends appear: still in extremes
The wrong end of the perspective must show
In little, the great Actions of their Foe.
51
THE ONE AND FIFTIETH FABLE. Of the Lion, the Forester, and his Daughter.
WHen they had viewd the wonder, and the strife
Admired of Artists working to the life,
Then drew the Foresters fair Daughter near,
And whispered in her swarthie Fathers ear.
The Lion starts, and feels a sudden wound,
As when at first his Lioness he found,
And made her pregnant, in a shadie wood,
High with man's flesh, and draughts of humane blood.
To whom the Woodman said; Sir, since the Sun
Mounts our Meridian, half his business done,
And your own Court so far, be pleased to share
Part of what is mine, though mean, yet wholesome fare;
Often humane Princes in poor lodges have
Gladly reposed, and low roofs honor gave.
The King the proffer takes, to lowly rooms,
Yet daily visited with clensing brooms,
The Lion is convaid, where he in State
At a full board in ancient Maple sat.
Where, whom the Father never overcame,
The Daughter did: scorched with loves cruel flame
The Lion burns, the valiant, strong, and wise,
Who Javelins did, Dogs, Men, and Nets despise,
Trammels of bright Hair took, a slender Dart
Shot from a Virgins eye, transpierc'd his heart.
The amorous Lion lays his dreadful jaws
Now in her lap, gently with dangerous paws
Her fair hand seizes, shrinking up his Nails:
Fain would, but could not tell her what he ails.
Then staring in her face offers to rise
Ambitious of her Lip; She frighted, flys;
Whom with a groan he draws by the Garments back,
And troubled, to the trembling Virgin spoke;
Sweet Creature fear not me; A Roman slave
Who cured my fester'd foot, once in my Cave
I feasted forty days; and when that I
Was Prisoner took, and he condemned to die
In a sad Theater, where Men sat, and laughed
To see how Beasts the blood of wretches quaff'd,
I mocked their expectation, and did grace
My trembling Surgeon with a dear embrace.
The story known, to him they pardon gave,
And honoring me, sent to my Royal Cave.
Dear if you knew me, I not dreadful am;
How many Ladies have made Lions tame?
My Grand-sires, Berecinthias Chariot drove,
Not by Force coupled, but Almighty Love.
We with your smiles are raised, and when you frown
The greatest Monarch valews not his Crown.
Then to her Father turning, thus he said,
Still holding in his armed foot, the Maid;
Lo! I the King of Beasts, a suter stand,
And this thy Daughter for our Queen demand.
We need not tell you, what our Interests are
In this great Forest, and my power in War
To you is known, but joynd with such a Bride,
Our race deriving from the Fathers side
Such active Spirits, strength, and valiant hearts;
From her woomb taking humane form, and Arts;
How may we be advanced? where shall our Sons
Find limits for their vast Dominions?
The Sybils Man-Lyon, styled the wondrous Birth,
Must rule the Conquered Nations of the Earth.
The Alexander the Great.
Macedonian was a type of this,
Who sent the Spoils of Persia to Greece,
Which to his Father was in sleep revealed,
When his Queens woomb he with a Lion sealed.
Then said the Man; I know great Prince you are
In deserts King, I know your force in War,
But all the Laws of Men and Gods forbid,
That humane Creatures should with Salvage Wed.
The Lion then, ready to lash his side,
Rowsing up anger, with grim looks replied;
Did not a Queen match with an ugly Bear?
And in dark Caverns lived with him a year?
Was not the pregnant Lady, he being slain,
By Hunters brought to her own Courts again?
Did not his Son prove a most valiant King,
And slew all those were at the murdering
Of his Dear Father? Orson was no Beast,
Though like his Sire he had a Hairy Breast.
Thus having said, he cruel Weapons draws,
Sharp Teeth appear, and needle-pointed Claws.
Now wit assist, against the Lions rage
Inflamed with love, what Madman would engage?
Then said the Forester, great Sir sheath your arms,
If you vast Realms will join to humble Farms
My Daughter's yours; my error I confess:
For many Salvage Beasts in Marriages
With Women have conjoynd, the golden Ass
As fair a Lady has as ever was;
Mastives and pious Virgins wed so rife,
Ballads in Streets have Sung them Dog and Wife.
Take Sir my Daughter to your Royal Seat;
Yet one thing for the Damsel I entreat;
For sweet love grant her this; see, how she stands
Trembling to view your teeth, and armed hands!
Meet her with equal arms, that face to face,
She may as boldly charge with strick't embrace:
Then pare, and draw them out. The Lion said;
What ere thou askst, I freely give, O Maid;
I will divest my self of all my power,
And make my Teeth, and Claws, thy Virgin dowre.
No sooner said, but done; with bleeding jaws
On tender feet he stands; the Woodman draws
Then a bright Falchion hanging by his side,
Which to the Hilts he in his bosom died.
The Lyon's slain, and the Cessation broke,
When to the dying King the Woodman spoke;
They that give up their power to foe or friend,
Let them for Love, expect a woeful end:
They that undo themselves to purchase Wives,
Like Indians, part with Gold, for Beads and Knives.
Love is a Child, and such as Love obey,
Like Kingdoms fare, that Infant Scepters sweigh.
MORAL.
The powderd Gallant, and the dustie Cloun,
The horrid Soldier, and the subtle Gown,
Old, Young, Strong, Weak, Rich, Poor, both Fools and Wise,
Suffer when they with frantic Love advise.
52
THE TWO AND FIFTIETH FABLE. Of the Forester, the Skinner, and a Bear.
THe Lion slain, the greedy Forester
Soon strips him of his Robe, and Royal fur;
The Crown and Scepter, old Regalities
Of many former Princes, now are his;
He takes possession of the Palace, which
Trophes made proud, and spoils of enemies Rich:
Where at an Out-crie precious things are sold
At small rates, deer to Potentates of old.
When the same Man that bought the Lions Skin,
Thus to the insulting Victor did begin;
Sir, since the Groves are yours, and you have won
Dark Haunts, impenetrable by the Sun,
The Lion dead; go, and the ambitious Bear
Destroy, who now aspires his Masters Chair.
A Heathen King sent to my Shop this morn,
To have a Lybian Bears-skin to adorn
His spreading shoulders with at annual Feasts,
When barbarous cups, must raise his Salvage Guests.
Call forth thy Dogs, and a fresh War begin,
Then Gold receive, for slaughtered Bruine's Skin.
Then said the Woodman; Will thou buy? I Will sell
The Devils hide, and bring it thee from Hell
For ready Money; come, and give me Coin,
And the Bears Skin, though now he lives, is thine.
And thou shall go along and see the sport,
And how I Will rowse him from his shadie Court:
I Will make him pay now for my slaughterd Bees.
Here they strike hands, and Gold the earnest is,
Then in vast Woods to Hunt they both prepare.
The valiant For'ster trusts his new ground Spear,
The Citizen more wary takes a tree,
Near Bruines Cave, where he might safely see.
The Dogs are straight sent in, such ranting Guest
So troubled Bruine newly gone to rest,
That to the Tarriers he resigns his Cave;
At whose dire Gates the Woodman with a Glave
Did ready stand, thinking to give the blow
Should his Staff Crimson in the dying Foe;
When his foot slipped, his sure hand fails, his Spear
Leaves him to mercy of the cruel Bear,
Fainting, or feigning, to the ground he fell,
As one struck dead, then with a hideous yell
Came the incensed, and arrested him
With his great paw, to tear him limb from limb
Fully resolved; he brake the peace, he slew
The King his Guest, and watched to kill him too.
But when he nuzling laid his Nose to ground,
And from his Mouth nor Lip no passage found
For vital Breath, nor saw his Breast and Sides
To Ebe and Flow with life-respiring tides,
Scorning to wreak vain anger on the dead,
To Man more cruel, he this lecture read;
Let Wolvish Monsters rip up putrid graves
Of buried Foes, and be old malice slaves:
Although thou soughtst my life when thou did live,
Thy friends shall thee due rites of Funeral give;
I War not with the Dead; thus having said,
He coverts in the Woods protecting shade;
When from the tree the Skinner did descend,
And having roused almost from death his friend,
He thus began; Good Sir, what was it the Bear
Spoke, when so long he whispered in your ear?
Who answered, Bruine said I did not well,
Before the Bear was slain, his Skin to sell.
MORAL.
Fortune assists the bold, the valiant Man
Often Conqueror proves, because he thinks he can:
But who too much flattering successes trust,
Have faild, and found their honor in the dust.
53
THE THREE AND FIFTIETH FABLE. Of the Tortoise and the Frogs.
WOuld it not grieve one still to go abroad,
Yet ever be within;
To lie condemned to a perpetual load,
And over-match'd with every gowtie Toad,
And thus be hide-bound, in
A slough
Of proof,
An Adamatine Skin:
No Curase is more tough;
A home Spun Iron Shirt
A Web of Maile still on, would Giants hurt.
How happy are these Frogs
That skip about the Bogs.
Some pitying God ah ease me of my Arms
And native Farms,
That naked I may Swim
Below, now on the Brim,
Among the scallie swarms,
Searching the Bays, and Bosoms of the Lake,
And with these nymble Crokers pleasure take:
Vexed at his Shell, thus the fond Tortoise spoke.
But when he saw, firce Eeles devour the Frogs,
And marked their tender Skin
Pierced with each Rush, which circle in the Bogs,
And his less penetrable then hard Logs,
The Tortoise did begin,
To find
His mind
Contented with his Inn!
And thought the Gods now kind
To grant him such a Fort,
Over whose Roof one drove a laden Cart,
Better to bear his Castle on his back
Though it should crack,
Then to be made a prey
While he abroad did play,
To every Grig, and Jack.
Then thus aloud his error he confessed:
I live in Walls impregnable, at rest,
While all my Friends with Tyrants are oppressed.
MORAL.
Thus at home happy, often fond Youth complain,
And Peace and plenty with soft Beds disdain.
But when in Foreign War death seals his eyes,
His Birth place he remembers ere he dies.
54
THE FOUR AND FIFTIETH FABLE. Of the Tortoise and Eagle.
BUt now again she cries, ah, must I creep,
Still as I were asleep,
All creatures else can swim, or walk, or run;
I in the dusty road lie like a Stone:
The Birds do fly
So high,
That often they singe their Feathers in the Sun.
Most Princely Eagle bear me through the Sky,
That I may measure the bright Spangled Arch,
Where the great Planets march,
And I will give thee jems
Such as do Shine in Princes Diadems
With a huge Pearl I in a Scollop found
In the Hellespontick sound
Thought worth nine hundred ninty thousand pound.
This said, the Eagle lifts her, and her house
Up like a little Mouse;
Through the cold quarters of the Stars they go,
And Magazines of Rain, Hail, Wind, and Snow:
Such was their flight,
They might
See the dark Earths contracted face below,
To cast forth sullen beams, with brazen light,
Like a huge Moon, and turning on her poles
Dark Seas like Phaebes moles,
Casting a dimmer ray.
Then rolling East they view America,
Asia, and Africa; Europe next a rose:
No Map so perfect shows
How the great Midland Sea, betwixt them flows.
But here the Eagle his reward did ask.
Due for so great a task.
But when the Tortoise saw his threatening Beak,
And cruel Sears, amazed he could not speak.
The Royal Bird
Then stird
With indignation, thus did silence break;
Thou that did boast as if thou had a hoard,
And did with promised jewels mock a Prince,
Now for thy insolence
I Will strip thee from thy Shell;
Cheaper thou might have seen the Gates of Hell
Then the high Stars, who raised thee from thy hole
To Seats above the Pole,
Shall now devide, thy Body from thy Soul.
MORAL.
What to gain Treasure will not greedy Kings,
Sweet smells the Coin draind from Merdurinous Springs:
But Promisers who Princes hopes defeat,
Often pay sad forfeits with their Lives and State.
55
THE FIVE AND FIFTIETH FABLE. Of an Egyptian King and his Apes.
REalms, marld and watered with the fertile Nile,
A King did rule, who loved nor Care nor Toil,
Nor with devasting War his neighbors land to spoil.
Nor he in ostentation Riches spent
Vexing poor Israelites,
Proud Pyramids to build,
Whose pointed spires still wound the firmament,
Darkning our Western Nights,
Whey they our rising Moon and Stars unguild.
Nor took he pleasure to Hunt Salvage Beasts,
But entertainment loved and Princely Feasts,
Pleased with his own, or to here others witty jests.
When, at full Boards a jolley Peer did start
This question, whether Apes might learn the art
Of dancing, and be taught to act a humane part:
The Novell fancy much the King did please;
When thus he said, my Lord
This project i will advance;
Since here are none, weel send beyond the Seas,
To Realms far off well stord
With Masters, that shall teach them how to dance,
Both Greece and Rome the art of Ocastrie
Always esteemed, where dancing Masters be
Whose feet Historians are, and tell a History.
Mars in a Net this in a figure shapes,
That ravished Proserpine, these, the several rapes,
Of all their wanton Gods and lustful Joves escapes.
But there are Masters in a Realm far West,
As Trvellers relate,
More for our purpose fit;
Where the whole Nation like our Apes are dressed
And grave long Garments hate,
Being much of their Capacity and Wit.
Go then and dancing Masters fetch from France,
The best choose by their Apish countenance,
To teach our Apes like men, or like themselves to dance.
Sails from Marcellies a stout vessel sets,
Laden with dancing Masters, and their Kits,
To purge the King of all his mellancholy fits.
Now Eastern Apes ply Gallick dancing Schools,
Where the dull German, joynd
With the raw English Ass,
That imitate all Nations, looked like fools;
The Apes were so refind,
That all our Allamodes they far surpass:
How they a Brawl, a Saraband would do!
How stately move in a Coranto! who
From their great Masters, now, the cunning Scholar knew.
Often for his Monsieur the King pleased to ask:
But when he heard they had performed their task,
He Solemn Order gave to have a stately mask.
And now the expected night was come: when late
Enters the joyful King,
And takes his lofty Chair:
About him Peers and Princes of the State,
And in a glorious Ring,
Sat Gypsy Ladies, there, accounted fair.
The Scean appears, the envious Curtain drawn
In Gold and Purple, tufted with pure lawn,
Beasts Frenchifi'd, showed like the blushing dawn.
When from the Scean, a nimble Hermes springs,
With his Caduceus, golden Shoes, and Wings,
Conducting in a Dynastie of ancient Kings:
That had been Mummey many thousand years
Before our Authors say,
Adam the world began:
Each in his hand a mighty Scepter bears,
And from their heads display
Twelve Silver rays, shot from a Golden Sun.
Like demie Gods the Apes began to move,
Semele saw, such a Majestic Jove,
The men admire, the taken Ladies fire, with love.
When one that knew what best would please the King,
A Musse of Nuts did among these Hero's fling;
Which suddenly did all to great disorder bring.
Figures they quit, and alter soon their pace,
And scambling run to seize
Their most beloved Nuts:
Respecting not the Majesty of place
These would Kings Palaces
Forsake to reign in well stored Squirrels Huts.
At last the Dancing Kings began to rage,
Scuffling for prey, old Princes seeming sage,
All Laws of revels brake, and in fierce War engage.
They fight, they scratch, they tumble ore and ore,
Their Masking suits are all in Mamocks tore,
The Stage with green cloth spread, is now a Field of gore.
There Apish Masters taken with the sport,
Among the thickest run,
Where scambling down they fall:
Then showts and laughter shake the joyful Court,
Which had not yet been done,
But that the King did cry a Hall a Hall.
All silent then, he gravely thus began.
Rich Clothes, nor cost, nor education can
Change nature, nor transform an Ape into a Man.
MORAL.
Nature in the old worlds infancy was strong:
But Education, Diet, Art, so long
Amongst Mortals has prevailed, that Apes and Owls
Not only shapes transform, but change their Souls.
56
THE SIX AND FIFTIETH FABLE. Of the Eagle and the Beetle.
O Thou most noble Beetle, thou that art
Stild by some Nations the black flying Heart,
O save my life, and do a friendly part.
The towering Eagle threatens from the Skies
Poor The Hare.
Keyward to destroy.
Help thou whose troops of Hornets, Wasps and Flys
The Bestiall Army did annoy,
More in that fatal day the Lion lost,
Then they, who Wings like spreading Sails might boast:
Armed trumpeters they were, whose numerous swarms
Thundered about their ears still fresh alarms,
And in their faces fixed their venomed arms.
Thus at approaching death the Hare dismayed
To the poor Beetle for protection prayed,
Who pitties and to safety him conveyed.
The Eagle lights, and asks whose in that Cave,
She straight replies, I here
A harmless Beast my meniall servant have,
The Hare whom I esteem most dear.
But the Eagle tore him straight without remorse.
Then said the Beetle, I that killed a Horse
With Hornets nine in that victorious day;
And do thou thus thy Soldiers service pay,
Those that can help, to hurt may find away.
And now the Eagles Queen laid Royal Eggs:
When the vexed Fly aid of Alecto begs;
Who sprinkles her black wings with Stygian dregs;
And to small Members gave a mighty force.
Soon the high Nest she found
And what an Embrio was, without remorse,
Did break and tumble to the ground.
At which her Husband mounts Etheriall skies,
And to his great Protector Jove thus cries.
The spightfull Beetle to our Palace came,
And our dear race, which should preserve our name,
She has destroyed, and I most wretched am.
To whom thus Jove in pleasing language said,
Thou broughtst me Ganimed on wings displaid,
Thou needst not thus for our high favor plead.
When next thy Queen brings forth a happy Birth,
And has supplied her Nest,
Bring them to me up from the dangerous earth,
And those I Will cherrish in my Breast.
Pleased with the grant the Bird descends again,
And did his Spouse with sweet Love entertain:
Who straight another hopeful Issue brings,
With which to Heaven he mounts on spreading wings
And bears them to great Jove the King of Kings.
Hell has no depth, nor profound Heaven that height,
Will not be found by wrong begotten spite.
Thither the furious Beetle takes her flight;
And bears with her fowl Pills of sorded earth,
Which in Joves Breast she threw.
He shakes them out, with them the unhatch'd Birth:
Which when the God did view;
He said, I that have made, and can Unhinge
This worlds great frame, yet cannot curb Revenge.
And therefore Mortals, you that strongest are
Of injuring the smallest Worm beware;
Since they our lap, a Sanctuary, not spare.
MORAL.
To find much Treasure, to obtain a Bride,
For whom so often thou have, and others died;
Hungry and cold, Feasts and Rich Wine to meet,
To sweetness of Revenge are nothing sweet.
57
THE SEVEN AND FIFTIETH FABLE. Of the Fox and the Cat.
THus to the Cat the Fox did boast his parts,
And glorified himself with his own Arts.
Know Madam Pusse, a thousand ways I have
Beloved life to save,
Despising the advantage of a Cave.
When bloody Hounds pursued me, I have often
Traced my own sent, and their vain fury scoffed:
When Dogs the Men, Masters their Dogs condemn,
While I did both contemn
And in contracted circles hunted them.
When me swift Greyhounds followed, though a brace,
I have struck blind, and urind in their face.
When after me both Court and Country throng,
I from a Branch have sprung,
And in a stream on yielding Sallows hung:
Only my mouth above the swelling wave.
The King is mad, the Dogs, and Hunts-men rave.
These arts of mine, would many Volums make,
My slights would fill a Sack,
Of which from many, this short story take.
In a full slaughter house hung round with meat,
I uninvited did descend to eat:
Feasted with Poultrie, Mutton, Veale, and Lamb,
I did attempt the way I came
To have leaped back, but fell short of my aim,
When in a fierce Man comes; no sooner spide,
But with loud voice, the Thief is found he cried;
Then shuts the door and casts at me a stone,
Which bruised my Shoulder bone:
And made me Fiz, 'twas with such Fury thrown.
The fight was long, and doubtful, in short space
I could expect no other but Uncase:
My Liver given in Wine to them that could
By Night no Water hold
And Hectic Lords to drink my Tail in Gold.
At last he threw at me a mighty Stone,
Which fell beneath the place where I came down,
He stoops to take it up: on's back I stepped,
Thence through the Window leaped,
And spite of him my Skin and Breakfast kep'd.
Then said the Cat I have no trick but one,
If that Grimmalkin fail, then she is undone.
While thus she spoke a pack of Dogs they see
Pusse nimbly takes a tree,
The Foxes heels must his deliverers be.
Safe on a Bough the Cat in the open plain,
Mauger all Arts, saw boasting Reynard slain;
When thus she spoke, Friend for thy Death I Am sad,
Much knowledge makes some Mad,
One good Art better is, then thousand bad.
MORAL.
Some think, much Learning and to many Arts
Debillitate the strength of natural parts:
Often one ingenious Mystery fills the bags,
When Men of many Trades scarce purchase rags.
58
THE EIGHT AND FIFTIETH FABLE. Of the Fox and the Goat.
NOw Syrius and the Sun seemed to conspire,
To set the great worlds Artick side on fire:
Countries forbidden by eternal Laws
To feel excessive heat,
Lay in a burning sweat:
Opening ten thousand parched Jaws
Water to get:
To silence put were all those purling streams,
Whose murmur gives to Shepherds pleasant dreams:
And some did think,
Another Phaeton the Sea would drink.
Scarce would Dewcalions flood restore the Grass,
Earth was turned Iron, Heaven had so long been Brass.
In this Combustion, and excessive heat:
The Fox and Goat extremely thirsty met,
Where (but deep dig'd) by chance they found a Well.
Then spoke the Learned Fox,
Dry are all Pipes and Cocks;
For drink I Will venture down to Hell:
Through Adamantine Rocks
To Pluto's Cellers break, to get one drop;
And from loud Cerberus waking, snatch his Sop.
Let it be so,
Come Father let us try these shades below:
This said, they down to the deep Fountain glide,
Where they beheld the Heaven scarce three yards wide.
There they drank deep, and now their hands being in,
Profoundly quaffe to the Lion and his Queen,
Many go downs on Reputation drank;
To the Bull, the Bear and Boar,
To all could fight and rore:
To Animals, then, of the civil rank.
Sufficed gave ore;
For sensual Beasts could always better tell,
Than could the Rational when they are well.
But here the Goat
Stroking his Beard the hard return did note;
And sighing said, to Hels an easy way,
But how shall we again revisit day.
That is a work, a task beyond my skill.
Then said the Fox have a good courage still:
The means is found to Scale Etheriall Skies:
Against these steep Walls set,
Your two fore-feet;
Stand Man-like on your hinder Thighs;
Let your Chin meet
Your Hairy Bosom, that your horns may rise
Upright, as if prepared to But the Skies:
Then from your back to those two Spires I Will leap,
Whence out is but a step,
Then on the brinck, I Will in fit posture stand,
Grave Sir, to bring you off with my strong hand.
The advise is took, who would good Counsel doubt?
And at three skips, the nimble Fox got out.
Then at the Margents like a wanton Hind
Sports, proud of his success,
Nor more his promises,
Nor his forsaken friend did mind;
Who in distress
False Reynard did with breach of Faith upbraid.
The insulting Fox to him deriding said,
Goat, in thy Head had so much Wisdom been
As Hair upon thy Chin,
(But long Beards wittless are) thou would have known
How to get up, before thou had come down.
MORAL.
For Action Youth, Age best with Counsel fits,
But readiest are in danger younger wits.
A Forrest-Beard, grave looks, and Silver locks,
Among shaven Chins show now like Tradesmens blocks.
59
THE NINE AND FIFTIETH FABLE. Of the old Weesell and the Mice.
I That so long maintained this ample house
From bold excursions of the plundring Mouse,
And in huge Weinscot Woods have in their holes,
Where never Cat could venture, freed their souls:
Now growing old, my strength and courage fail,
Just when I have them by the tail,
Like a swift Ship arrested under Sail
By Rocks or Remora's, I stay,
While they the Pillage to strong holds convey.
And when I stand and Cough,
And sharp-breath'd Tysicks shake my panting sides,
The Miceans laugh,
And Old-Rat m'imbecillitie derides.
In this my house Soldiers and Scholars dine,
Inspired with truth from most oraculous Wine,
I heard them say, That Strength, and Courage, are
Inferior much to Policy in War.
There gowtie Generals in Chairs will sit,
And by a Stratagem of wit,
Make stubborn Kings, with all their powers submit.
If it be so, I Will Cunning use at length,
Since with my Youth Courage is gone, and Strength.
In this huge pile of Wheat
I Will shelter, and the Cats invasion shun.
Let Miceans eat
To my retreat,
And dined, then let them from the Weesell run.
The Old Vermin said, and dives into the Hold
Thrice his own length; as soon the news was told
The Foe was dead: then black bands issue out,
And like a deluge through the house are born:
They plunder all the Corn,
And highly feast from Evening to the Morn.
When with the dawn Ceralian Mountains shook,
And a dire spectrum with a ghastly look
Rose from the infernal shade,
Which to the Plunderers did no favor show:
Great slaughter made,
The Weesell said,
Who Questions Fraud or Valor in a Foe?
MORAL.
Often unknown Stratagems shorten a long War;
It Is not how Valiant, but how Wise they are
That Armies lead: but Money is a spell
That Conquers all, and takes in Heaven and Hell.
60
THE SIXTIETH FABLE. Of the Spider and the Swallow.
OH I shall burst
With my own Poison stirred;
Oh that accursed
And most despightfull Bird,
The Swallow daily on spread Wings resounding,
Nere leaves surrounding
These vast and empty Halls;
And bold at once on winged legions falls
Of Flys that sport
About our Court,
And gives whole thousands cruel Funerals:
While I in vain
Have built my lofty Rooms,
From Wind and Rain
Secure, and cruel Brooms.
There I spread Nets to catch the bonelesse people,
High as a Steeple:
With slender hands and thyghs
Spining my bowels, poor Arachne lies
Watching all day
To seize a prey,
And catch not one, this Bird takes all the Flies.
What shall I do.
Now to revenged be?
I Will make a clue
And threads twist three times three:
I know the Chimney top where builds the Swallow,
Thither I Will follow,
The Spider said;
Then ore her Nest, most skillful in her Trade,
All night She spun
Till day begun,
And as she thought, a dangerous Engine made.
The Swallow saw,
And said thus with a smile;
I that gave Law
To the overflowing Nile,
And with huge Bulwarks did keep out his water,
Though floods did batter
A furlong wide,
I with ranged Nests kep'd out his Conquering tide:
And is this Net
To catch me set?
Thou should thy Mesh, fond Spinster, first have tried.
When with the dawn
Out the swift Swallow flies,
And Cobweb Lawn
She breaks, then to the Skies
The Spider, and her vain endeavor carries;
And never tarries,
Until her flight
Did put Spider.
Arachne in a woeful plight;
In one small rope
Was all her hope,
And if that break She on the earth must light.
When thus she said;
I am deservedly
Example made,
That scarce could take a Fly
With all my boasted Art, and fond Endeavor,
To think that ever
In such thin Meshes I could Swallows catch:
I did but ill
Employ my skill
And a Nights toil, my self to overreach.
MORAL.
Jews, Turks, and Christians, several tenets hold,
Yet most one God acknowledge, and that is Gold,
Parent of Love and Hate, in Peace or War
Strength and Craft may, but thou much more by far.
61
THE FABLES OF AESOP. The Fourth BOOK.
THE ONE AND SIXTIETH FABLE. Of Cupid, Death, and Reputation.
CUpid, and Death, with Reputation met
At woeful Hymen's, where the cruel Fates
At once snatched two, fair, young, and noble Mates:
And the unrequired debt
Enforced them to pay,
Long time before the day
That was by nature set:
Conjugall rites are changed, a Funeral torch
Conducts dead lovers through a mournful porch.
The fatal Archers having put up darts
With which glad Offices, and sad were done,
Their fames enrold by Reputation,
And three Gods played their parts:
They in the woeful House
Full Cups of Brine Carowse,
And from sad Parents ^earts,
Kindred, and Friends, which in long order stood,
Quaff'd, broached with sighs, warm spirits mixed with blood.
They then began to vapor, and with Vain
Boasting promote their power; now mellow grown,
Desire to each other to be better known,
And where to meet again,
Such Company to enjoy.
Cupid although a Boy,
Yet eldest there began:
All-Conquering Death, and Reputation, know,
Though Heaven's my Seat, I places haunt below.
But seek not me, where often you hear my name,
In Princes Courts, nor among the City throngs;
They all are Atheists, only in their tongues
My Deity proclaim:
Their Bosoms never felt
My kindly Shafts, nor melt
With true coequall flame.
They Lust, and Wealth adore, to me they bring
Poesies for Offerings, conjured in a Ring.
But I reside in the unfrequented plain,
Where silly Sheep the harmless Shepherd feeds,
Playing sweet Pastoral notes, on Oaten reeds;
There every Youthful Swain,
And blushing Virgin, well
Can tell you where I dwell,
Who in their Bosom Reign;
In those chaste Temples resident I Am
Till the last hour quench the long-lasting flame.
Then Death began; My Habitations are
Not in this world, but at the Gates of Hell,
I with the Devil and his Angels dwell:
The Cruel Furies there
On Iron Couches lie,
And bloody Pillets tie
Their Elf-lock'd viperous Hair.
By Love, nor Reputation to be found,
Three thousand mile and more beneath the ground.
But you shall find me, where in mighty War,
Against his King, some Valiant General stands;
There you shall see me use ten thousand hands.
Or when that burning Star
Joins a pestiferous ray
With the great eye of day,
And towns infected are:
Then the Angel Death you with a sith shall meet,
Mowing down thousands, daily in the Street.
Then Reputation spoke; I have no Seat,
But wander up and down from coast to coast,
Hard to be found, and easy to be lost.
Therefore I would entreat,
Since now you have me, you
Would keep me; there are few
Having departed, meet
With me again; though false or small the ground;
Lost Reputation hard is to be found.
MORAL.
From Honest dealing Reputation springs,
But other notes the Matchivellian sings.
They are most honored, who are most unjust,
And wrong or right stand faithful to their trust.
62
THE TWO AND SIXTIETH FABLE. Of the Gourd, and Pine.
THere was a stately Pine which long had stood
The glory of, and was it self a Wood;
Which when the warring Tempests took the Fields,
Did shake a hundred Arms with leavy shields,
Which watched about her, a perpetual guard,
Against all the injuries of Heaven, prepared.
Conquerors Trophies, Shepherds there their Pipes
Did use to hang; of War and Peace the Types.
Upon the swelling Bark Lovers did put
Their names with knots, and pleasant Fancies cut,
Still intimating, as the Letters grow
With the increasing tree, their Loves should so.
Near to this plant which flourished many years,
In one short night shot up, a Gourd appears:
Which by sweet Seasons, gentle Dews, and Rain,
Did suddenly a mighty Body gain;
Her Boughs were spread, to Heaven her proud head shoots,
With blossoms white, the hopes of blushing fruits.
This Princock, the base Issue of the Morn,
When she beheld the Pine with branches torn,
Her front want Curles, an antiquated grace,
Mixed with times ruin in a careful face,
Her self beholding glorious as the day,
In Green and Silver Liveries of May;
Proud of her self at last forth boldly stood,
Comparing thus with the honor of the Wood.
Give place, base withered Pine, that I may grow,
And at a distance me your better know:
Do thou not see how far we do excel?
My Crown strikes Heaven, and my roots touch Hell.
My Leaves are fairer, and more fresh than thine;
A Prince may on my Golden Aples dine,
When yours are fit to serve a hungry Pig.
See how my tresses flow! thy Periwig
So ruffled and uncurld, with boisterous storms,
Is powdered with the Dust of Canker-Worms,
Of which you are pleased some to bestow on me.
Then gravely thus replied the scorned tree.
I many a raging Winter here have been,
And felt black Auster's and bleak Roreas spleen,
And when loud winds made Cock-shoots through the Wood,
Rending down mighty Oaks, I firm have stood:
So when I with Autumnall blasts have lost
My golden tresses with a biting Frost,
I stood bare-headed, and was naked-arm'd,
When the Sun beams no more than Cynthia warmed;
I, in as extreme heats here also stood,
When Sol and Syrius to the swarthie mud
Drank brim-full Rivers, what the earth did yield
Roasted to powder, in the parched Field,
And to the bellowing Herds, and bleating Flocks
Gave shelter under my thick shadie locks.
Here I stand firm, all changes have endured,
My body with its mighty arms secured.
But when the raging heat, or bitter cold,
Or rough winds rise, Gourd, you will not be so bold.
These gaudie Flowrs and spreading Leaves you boast,
Favors of Madam May, will all be lost:
Then I shall see thy Root and Branches torn,
And blown about, to the proud Winds a scorn.
Of Pride in thy Prosperity beware,
Vicissitudes of Fortune Constant are.
MORAL.
Whose tresses are in Golden billows curld,
Whose eyes give life and light unto the world,
Bald wrinckled age despise, and hate to hear,
They shall in time as ruinous appear.
THE SIXTY THIRD FABLE. Of the Devil and a Mallefactor.
A Mallefactor such a one that made
Of Murder, Theft, and Sacrilege a trade:
One that could Club
Plots to work mischief with old Beelzebub,
And had from him at need especial aid;
A little Devil still
Helped him when things went ill,
And often from Prisons, and strong Warders took,
And when condemned did save without his book.
He was an Honest Devil, and a stout,
A good Solicitor to trot about.
How he would trudge!
There with a Golden dream corrupt the Judge,
Here with like visions a whole jury rout;
On this, a plentious shower
Of yellow drops he would power
To Angel Gold transformed, there he would set
Some Courtier on, that should his pardon get.
Who as his custom now in Jayl thus prayed
Unto the Devil his good Lord for aid:
Almighty Fiend,
To thy poor Barabas some comfort send;
Who most unjustly is in Prison laid:
Whom I so late did stab,
Did call my Mistress drab,
Good Pluto hear, and leave awhile debats
Of striving Princes, and aspiring States.
Thus while he prayed, his Spirit appeared, his Back
With old shoes laden, and thus sadly spoke:
Evening and Morn,
Trotting for thee, out all these Shoes are worn.
No more thy business friend I Will undertake:
To hang then be Content
Since all my Coin is spent:
Without which busy Lawyers will not do
Ought for great Beelzebub, my self, or you.
MORAL.
The Devil often for his servants does his best,
But now since Mortals have the Fiends possessed,
Seek Hell no more, but with worse men, compact,
Would thou to life unheard of mischief act.
64
THE SIXTY FOURTH FABLE. Of the Lion and the Horse.
THe Lion old, his power grown weak, his Crown
By Bestiall commotions trampled down,
Resolves to fill his Coffers with the gown.
Doctorships three,
Of Law, of Physic, and Divinity,
There be:
But which of these may greatest profit bring,
He long debates, then spoke the Quondam King.
Sir Reynard thrives not since this civil War,
Nor pleading Beasts often wake the slumbering Bar,
Suits few be grown, but Bribes more frequent are:
Law has no force
When plains are eaten up by armed Horse,
Her course
Obstructed is, what ever Gods and men
Injustice style, is Law and Justice then.
Nor Woolf.
Isgrims Preaching tribe now better fare,
Though great Incendiaries of this War,
Since Beasts in Buffe full as long winded are:
The Sheep-skin gown,
Lined with Hypocrisy and Rebellion,
Is down;
In his own Clothes the Ass stands without a Ruff,
Beating the Pulpit with an unpaird Hoof.
Law and Divinity of these times farewell,
The Soldier is about to Ring your Knell;
I Will turn Physician, and Diseases sell.
A Turffe, or Stone
Conceals ill Cuers are by bad leeches done,
If one,
Or two we chance to help, up goes our name,
Then patient Beasts come in, both wild and tame.
While thus he spoke, a pamperd Horse he spies;
And clapping on his Doctorships disguise,
Said, on this patient first I Will exercise,
And let him blood,
For me a drench may make him present food,
And good:
Often skillful Empericks do as bad or worse,
And try experiments would kill a Horse.
Then to the grazing steed the Lion spoke,
Your Horseship looks not well, be pleased to take
Something I Will give you for prevention sake:
What Is worldly Wealth,
When sad Diseases shall invade your health,
By stealth;
When in these pastures you shall raging lie,
And tear those pamperd lymbs before you die.
Sir, I in Germany have practiced long,
Where humane Bodies are like Horses strong,
What there I did prescribe, no Beast can wrong;
In England too,
Where men now drink as deep as they, or you,
A few
Cuers I have done, I made on cast a Frog
Had turned his paunch with drinking to a Bog.
Mercurius-Dulcis, Scamonie, and the Flos
Of Sulphur, Colocynthis, each a dose;
Shall purge all humors chollerick or Gross.
And next our art
Directs a cordial to refresh the heart,
A Quart
Of Dyapenthed Muscadell each Morn,
Shall seven years free you from the Farriers horn.
The Horse perciev'd the Doctor was not well,
Did through disguise a hungry Lion smell,
And thus his malladie began to tell.
Sir the other morn,
Leaping a hedge to breakfast on green Corn,
A Thorn
Did pierce my foot; your Doctorship no doubt,
Has so much Surgerie to draw it out.
The Lion joyful was of any hint,
And looks on's foot; which, as the Devil were in it,
Dashed him o'th brow, and leaves in blood the Print,
And dead him lays:
Wheeling about him then the palfrey neighs,
And says,
A double fee dear Doctor is your due
For your great cure, come, and I Will make it two.
At last the astonished Lion rising said;
I am with fraud for fraud most justly paid,
And my own Stratagem has me betrayed.
Who lay a bait,
Should see lest others use not like deceit,
Too late
They may repent having their error then
Writ on their brow, thus with an Iron Pen.
MORAL.
He that in health by Physics prescript lives,
Sickness to himself, Wealth to Physicians gives.
Sick take advice, but well to Nature trust,
Let none, with Doctors deal, but when they must.
65
THE SIXTY FIFTH FABLE. Of the Sun and Wind.
ROugh Boreas proud of many victories, now
Will not pre-eminence to the Sun allow.
While Phoebus stands, in the high Solstice, mute,
The blustering Wind did thus for place dispute.
Phoebus we are not ignorant of your parts,
And profound science in ignoble arts
Of Minstralcy and Physic, and we know
Well you can dart, and use a sounding bow.
But these are toys, let Gods for power contend:
When I my forces muster, when I blend
My Rain and Hail, and Snow; or when I clear,
As now, black clouds from the bright Hemisphere,
(Which you with all your rays could not dispierce,
But sufferd them to drown the Universe)
I shall appear more potent far than thou.
Thou can warp Timber, make green Staves to bow;
But I tall Oaks that lofty Mountains Crown,
And only with my breath, can tumble down.
How many stately Piles have I o're-thrown?
And Towns interred with their own falling stone?
But who at Sea can my great victories tell!
Where I 'twixt billows storm the Gates of Hell;
On watery Mountains and congested Floods,
Then make approaches dreadful to the Gods.
Like racket-Bals with Argosies I sport,
And the whole Ocean is my Tennis-Court.
Saylors in vain then to thy Deity pray,
That thou would let them know there is a day.
But while I thunder through the trembling shrouds,
Thou dare not peep through mellancholie clouds.
And when Autumnus with the year grows old,
Thou looking on, I break hard Rocks with cold,
And turn broad Seas plowd up with thundering keels,
To roads, where Wagons jolt with groaning wheels.
These are the acts that I have done, nor can
They be denied by Fiend, or God, or Man.
Then Phoebus; said words Boreas are but wind,
But let experience judge, then thou shall find
Who strongest is; That Travellour behold:
Muster Riphaean blasts and Russian cold,
And take from him his upper weed, that cloak,
Which trembled at each breath, now while you spoak:
But if thou can not, leave the task to me,
And sease comparing with a Deity.
Here he a Cloud unfolds, which like a pack,
Bore winds to sell to Witches at his back..
And at one soupe he treasures in his mouth,
Dry Northern vapors, and the dropsid-South.
Adding case shot of new created Hail:
His swelling cheeks made frighted Seamen pale.
But on the Man he falls with all his power,
And round beleagures, with a sudden shower.
Storms him with whirlwind, lined with biting cold,
Yet all in vain, he faster kep't his hold.
What rent huge branches from a sturdie Oak,
Could not devorce the crafty from his cloak.
Who fight with Heaven, with Wool must keep out death.
Then Boreas fainting asked sometime to breath.
When Phoebus smiled, and bid the weary rest;
This said, his brows he with much glory dressed,
And at the Travellour a whole Quiver shot
Of fiery darts, he warms first, then grows hot;
From pores exhausted Briny Rivers flow;
He takes short breath, at last he scarce could go;
Weary and faint, then resting in the shade,
Throws by his Cloak, and Phoebus victor made.
Then said the God, Boreas thou art but voice,
Great actions are not carried on by noise;
What Ranters, nor loud blustering can obtain,
A fancy, or facetious jest may gain.
They that contend, they should not only know
The Forces, but the Cunning of the Foe.
Valor and Strength though Warriors great, submit
To Counsel, and the Almighty power of Wit.
Then Northern Boreas saw himself a Fool,
And was resolved to put his Sons to School.
MORAL.
Loud threatenings make men stuborn, but kind words
Pierce gentle Breasts sooner than sharpest Swords.
To Rant and Mouth is not so near away
To Cheat your Brother, as by Yea, and Nay.
66
THE SIXTY SIXTH FABLE. Of the Woolf and the Lamb.
GReat seed of Mars, O Romulus, who art
My Grand-sires foster-Brother, aid impart:
If ere you at a she- Woolfs bosom hung,
If her life-saving Milk made you so strong,
And fierce,
If ere those hands she fashiond with her tongue
Laid Walls which after ruled the Universe,
Then for her sake send help;
I and my tender Whelp
Are like to Die,
Ah for some Food,
A little Blood,
We cry;
Help thou that art the Wolves great Deity.
Scarce were his prayers ended, when he spied
A Bearded Goat, and Lamb walk side by side.
Then said the glad Woolf, I am heard: this Lamb
To me a Present from Rome's founder came.
She Is fat,
Her Guardian is more dangerous than the Ram,
And his known prowess I have tried of late:
The fortune of all fights
Are doubtful, I Will use slights.
Then loud he cries,
Good Mistrisse Lamb,
As is your Dam,
Be wise,
And leave that stinking Letcher I advise.
Seekst thou sweet Milk from rank He-Goats to get?
Return poor Innocent to thy Mothers teat,
There at extended Udders take thy fill,
Kids drain their Dams, the Lamb her Mother still.
Beside
Such Masters of the Flocks are counted ill,
That rough Goats, not from fleecy Sheep divide.
Sweet Lamb forsake this Goat,
Go to thy Mother's coat,
The nearest way
Is through the Woods,
Where tender Buds
You may
Gather, and you and I in shade will play.
Then said the Bleater; know Sir Woolf I am
To follow the instructions of my Dam;
My Parents Counsel, and not yours obey:
She bid me with this armed Father stay.
The Counsel of our friends
Too often have byast ends,
But when a Foe
Shall give advice
The Lamb's so wise
To know,
Some Plot may be to work her overthrow.
MORAL.
Youth that must travel careful Tutors need,
Lest Gods commands, their Parents, and their Creed,
Should shaken by strange tenets be, and they
Return worse principled, than put to Sea.
67
THE SIXTY SEVENTH FABLE. Of the Oak and the Reed.
THe four winds musterd up winds four times seven
From all their Horizontick seats in Heaven,
Thirty two brethren did at once conspire,
Because the Sacred Oak was free,
By Jove's decree,
Both from Celestial fire
And thunder,
On her to wreak their spite,
And in one hideous night
TO extirp and ruin quite,
And all her Boughs and verdant leaves to Plunder.
To the Skies Arbiters since she will not bend,
They are resolved up by the roots to rend.
Stout Eurus mounts his steeds; on Northern Hags
Rough Boreas rides, black Auster sable Bags
And fowl Borachio's filled in the Southern main;
Bright Zephyre now comes muffled up,
And in his troop
Did bring a Heuricane
To render.
They all at once discharge,
Huge arms and branches large,
Against Sun and Wind a targe,
From their proud fury could no more defend her,
But with a mighty ruin branch and root,
Groaning her last, lights at the Mountain Foot.
From whence down on the Rivers back she swims,
Which the fowl night had sweld above the Brims.
Catching her Boughs a small Reed stopped her way;
The hapless Oak, not yet quite dead,
Then raised her Head,
And to the Reed did say;
I wonder
That thou should escape last night,
Who scarce can stand upright,
So huge a tempests spite,
And art not rent like wretched me asunder:
Trusting my own strength, I from Rocks was torn,
And to ridiculous winds am now a scorn.
The gentle Reed then softly whispering said;
I am not of the greatest storm afraid;
When raging Winds among themselves contend,
What way they hurrey through the Sky
That course lie I,
And flexible do bend:
I mervaile
How you so long kept up,
Disdaining still to stoop
To that all-conquering troop
Which wracks tall Ships, and drowns the stoutest Carvell:
I to the strongest yield, what ever chance,
All fortunes vanquished are by sufferance.
MORAL.
Though strong, resist not a too potent foe;
Madmen against a violent torrent row.
Thou may hereafter serve the Commonweal,
Then yield till time shall latter Acts repeal.
68
THE SIXTY EIGHTH FABLE. Of Jupiter and the Ass.
JOve, thou who viewst from thy Imperial Sky,
And pittiest often a Worm or injured Fly,
Leaving to Fate,
That Supreme State,
The March and Muster of the Golden Stars,
And to inconstant Fortune Princes Wars;
Without advice of thy great Counsel send,
And well thou may, aid to the oppressed Ass,
Me from the Gardeners tyranny defend:
Father of Men and Gods,
So heavy are my loads,
That though my Ribs were Steel, my Shoulders Brass.
I in a little space
Must yield to cruel death:
O change my place, or stop my vital breath.
The Gardeners Ass to mighty Jove thus prayed,
Who straight did bind him to another trade,
A Tyller now
His back did bow,
And him with what whole roofs must cover loads,
Through deep ways lashing, and far longer roads.
When thus to Jove the Beast again did pray;
Thou who from slavery broughtst the Golden Ass,
And did prefer to them that Scepters sweigh,
With supercillious look,
He now denies the Book,
And cruel in his place
Often frights sad Prisoners with his Beastly face:
O here me when I cry,
And change this Master too, or else I die.
Jove turned him over to another straight,
A cruel Tanner, who with no less weight
Did load his back
Till it did crack:
But when he found his Masters trade, and spied
Him Currying of his Brother Asses hide,
Struck with sad omens of his woeful doom,
Thus to himself the wretched did complain;
I see that seldom better Masters come,
I should have been content,
With what the Gods have sent;
This, when I am with cruel labor slain,
Will put me to fresh pain,
And what should shroud me in
He will not spare, but dead will Tan my skin.
MORAL.
Is it Decreed, and did the fates consent,
None should with present fortune be content,
Though in right judgment they most happy are?
If so, no wonder Men change Peace for War.
69
THE SIXTY NINTH FABLE. Of the same Ass.
BUt after Jove, pitying the woeful Ass,
Bids Hermes take, and turn him out to Grass;
There let him wander far, in unknown ground,
Nor by his cruel Master soon be found.
There the free born did lead a happy life
Among wild Asses, there he got a Wife,
A dainty female Ass, whose Assian seed,
In Vales and Groves, and on green Mountains feed.
Of Concubins since prosperous his affairs,
He had a whole Seraglio of wild Maies.
The Martial Steed, though spurd with Venus, proof
Was not for his enamourd Rivals hoof;
But when he thought though up to the eyes in Grass
Of his mean House, though Rich, yet still an Ass:
That the brave Horse could boast proud Ancestors,
And great achievements got in ancient Wars,
Then he repind, and when he saw his ears
At watering, brackish made the flood with tears.
But he had friends at Court, the Golden Ass,
TO in-noble him, might see his Patent pass.
While thus he murmurd, mighty War arose,
And great Kings prove (to raise their interests) foes:
Those Horse grazed with him, on Thessallian plains,
Were all took up, and curbed with Bits and Reins,
Yet still he kep'd his walk; at last he saw
Full Legions in thick ranks to Battle draw.
Then sees them charge, when suddenly the Fields
Were strewed with Men and Horse, and Spears, and Shields,
And Steeds he knew thrust through with hostile spears.
At this new light, 'twixt grief, and joy, with tears
He thanks the Gods they coynd him but an Ass,
Nor made a Horse, then said, I here may pass
My life in safety, and when Wars surcease,
An Ass may make a Justice of the Peace.
MORAL.
In Halcyons some repine, others no loss
Deject at all: is thy own fortune cross?
Rectify 't then; with better men compare,
And let their losses mollify thy care.
70
THE SEVENTIETH FABLE. Of the same Ass and his Lions Skin.
AFter that mighty Battle, where the Ass
A sad Spectator was,
Had long been fought, as various Chance did please,
Till many valiant Captains died the Grass,
And their great Souls stood near the Stygian Seas
Begging a pass:
While Dogs, and Vultures feasted on the slain;
The Long-eard went to view the bloody plain,
And though an Ass, not without hope of gain.
Among huge heaps of slaughter, on the green,
He found a Lions Skin,
Once dreadful Trappings to a gallant Steed,
Old-fancy'd honor, as this prize was seen,
To raise Himself and his ignoble Breed,
Did fresh begin,
The shaggie main conceals his back, the jaws
Gape ore his face, long was the train, the paws
Struck fire on's hoofs, and shine with golden claws.
Acoutred thus, he with Majestic pace
Returns unto his place,
And at first view routs all the timorous Flocks,
(The Ass is dreadful in the Lyon's Case:)
Bulls leave their Courtship, and the laboring Ox
As he did pass,
Ran bellowing as if bit by Summer swarms,
Nor Goat, nor Ram, have confidence in arms,
But fly for safety from such fierce alarms.
And now the Ass did ore vast Countries reign,
Commanding all the plain,
Scorning those honors which at first he aimed,
Wondering he thoughts so mean could entertain.
The Lioness a Princess him inflamed,
Her love to gain,
The Impostor said, must be our next design,
The Royal and the Assian house must join,
Then by just title all these Plains are mine.
When Fortune, that delights in casting down
Great Kings, began to frown,
The cruel Tanner who had lost his Ass,
Several occasions sent on foot from town;
He saw the Prodigy, wondering what it was,
To be his own
He little dreamed, What ere thou art, said he,
I Will lose some way, and time, but I will see;
Thou can not sure the dreadful Lion be.
Thus saying, he advanced, the Ass did know
This was a dangerous foe,
Should he go less than what he seemed, and fly,
He would a scorn to his new Subjects grow;
When thus he said, I Will keep up Majesty,
And courage show,
Then to his Master loud he thus began;
What ere thou art, fly hence presumptuous Man,
Else thou art dead, and at him fiercely ran.
Then sudden fear the Tanner did surprise,
But when his ears he spies,
He stands, and by them Prisoner took the Ass,
And wondering at his Royal weeds, replies;
Among these Forresters thou well might pass,
Who have no better eyes
For the great Lion, and possess a throne
In Groves where Asses are no better known,
But you my Ass are, and I seize my own.
MORAL.
The Tailor makes the man, Breeding and Coin,
Of them pass by, as those ride ore a mine,
Are unregarded: great Impostors so
In Royal habits often for Princes go.
71
THE SEVENTIE FIRST FABLE. Of the Woolf and the Sow.
A War- Woolf mangie with an entaild itch,
Sympling Comprest a Callidonian Witch:
She, near her time, with others did embark
In a tight Eggeshell; safe as in the Ark
Mountains they ride to Southern Kingdoms rowld,
While Northwinds loud from sixteen angles scowld.
Then, landing safe, they mount fantastic Foales,
And bent their course to Cocker up their souls
With Gallick Wine. Down in a sacred vault
Where never came the impious race of malt,
Where sweet Lyaeus no small hoops contain,
The Hags descend, in Thunder, Wind, and Rain.
Heightend with Bacchus blood, and Biscuit Sops,
Frolic, they throw Spigots ore houses tops,
Black, and red Seas, mix with the Mediterrane,
While they in Purple Must their anckles stain.
Then hoytie-toytie, frantic Bacchanals
Begin to revell: When the Spirit calls,
Aboard, aboard, the Chariot of the dawn
Rattles on Eastern hills; Their Cobweb lawn
Straight is unfurld, all yare, and tight, they sail
Back, whilst Seas, Seas, charge with an adverse gale.
But here the dame pregnant with Wolvish seed
Delivered was, but when they saw the Breed
A rough she- Woolf, straight inconcocted grapes
Began to work, nine, and no little scapes
Nine Hags discharge at once, and the Infant bore
To Ardens Forest, far off from the shore
A pitying Woolf took up, and nurc'd the child,
And from her wondrous fortune Erswind styled.
She married Isgrim, and if fame be true,
Him, a she- Woolf, bore to a wandering Jew,
Who by his humane nature got the hint
Of Wolvish discipline in Geneva Print,
And his mad zeal first made the Forest blaze;
This by his howling Rhetoric did raise
Arms against his King, did ancient right supplant,
And made Beasts take a beastly Covenant;
This Urchins called, and stird up senseless Moles,
And innocent Sheep inspired with Woolvish souls;
Then Femals, like milch Tigers, first were seen
To rage against the Lioness, their Queen;
Steers, Colts, and Asses, did like Panthers stare,
And Bulls horn-mad for Reformation were.
When Erswind with a blessed Offspring big,
Weary with Lamb, and Mutton, longed for Pig,
And thus She howld to move her surly Mate;
Swines flesh I loath with a Maternall hate,
Yet for the Offspring of the Salvage Boar,
The fat Priests Quarter which I keep in store,
Which at my lying in I meant should feast
My Mother, and her Calydonian guest,
Now I would give to see one Pig depart
To eat the Liver and the bleeding Heart.
When the grim sire replied, Leave off complaints,
Afflictions have been wholesome to the Saints:
But if the Boar her Husband be abroad.
My mortal Foe, by force or pious fraud
I Will get thee one, no scruple is in meat,
And thou and I abundantly will eat.
This said, he hasts unto the spreading Oak,
Where lay a pregnant Sow, and kindly spoke,
Sister, your Husband has great service done,
And by his valor we the victory won;
But since I hear your Spouse in Countries far,
Must for small pay attend a lingering War,
And this your charge is great, take friendly helps:
Some of your Sons I Will foster with my Whelps,
Not in prophaner Arts, like Popish Pigs,
To pettietoe-it on the Organs Jigs,
When Surplic'd Asses chaunt it to the Lyre;
Nor they supine shall wallow in the Mire;
But Pastors be, and them I Will teach to keep
The Sheepish souls of flocks, and shear the Sheep.
They have Prick-ears, and as we Teachers wear,
Howling in hollow trees, such is their Hair.
The Brawny Dame did here break off all speech,
If you are such a friend, Sir, I beseech
You Will show it in your absence, nothing more
Can me and mine oblige, back twenty score,
That is the greatest favor you can do,
You hate all Swine, and I abhor a Jew.
I hear him whet his tusk, the Boar is near,
And you have taken a wrong Sow by the ear.
Cowring his tail, endeavoring to have fled,
Wings fear not added to his feet, but Lead;
Whom suddenly the angry Boar ore-took:
Him, at whose rage the Lions party shook,
No more resistance than a tender Lamb,
Made against this foe, whom straight he overcame;
And with his phang a Window in his side
To Flanck from Shoulder rent, where, as he died,
The deep Hypocrisy and bloody ends,
Writ in his heart, were read by foes and friends.
Soon after that the Boar the Wood enjoyed,
And Wolves as new Malignants be destroyed.
MORAL.
Mischiefs best Plots Women too often have laid,
And tender Females soonest are betrayed.
Some great Seducers make a timely end,
But oftener they in bloody sheets descend.
72
THE SEVENTIE SECOND FABLE. Of the She Goat and Kid.
A She- Goat Widowed by Civil War,
(As many other woeful Matrons are)
Although her sequestration a small fine
Had taken off,
Had little cause to laugh,
For when she rose, she knew not where to dine,
Which made cold cups be Seasond often with brine.
One Son she had, now Heir,
Just of his Fathers Hair,
Her comfort, and her care;
But what did most extol this gentle Kid,
He did
All the Commands which his dear Mother bid.
When to her only hope the Parent said,
I go dear Child (subsistence must be had)
Where I for thee will crop the tender Bud,
And search the ground,
For Moon-wort, rarely found;
Which from our wounds draws steel, and stops the blood,
A Sovereign Medicine and a dainty food.
But Kid when I am gone,
Open the Gate to none,
To friend, nor foe, not one.
The Woolf, although the Boar has brought him low,
I know,
His Nature keeps, and will no mercy show.
Shall I forget how he thy father slew
When from the Cambrian Hills a Goatish Crew
Of British Long-beards with three Sons he lead?
He pierced his throat,
And dronk his best blood hot,
Then on his Bowels, and his Liver fed.
As ill, woes me, thy hapless brethren sped,
When down their arms they threw,
Quarter being granted too,
Most barbarously he slew,
And in his Den their Limbs in pieces tore;
Nay more,
With their gnawn bones he paved his bloody flore.
This said, away she speeds. The Woolf, who long
Had watch his time, skild in the Goatish tongue,
On's loins the British Captains spoils did guird,
With his fair horns
His horrid Brow adorns,
Down from his Chin hung a long silver Beard,
As if the King and Father of the Heard.
Accoutred thus before,
At the dull Goatheards door
He often drank Kiddish gore;
When thus disguised with feigned voice he spoke,
Unlock,
Long-beard is here, the Father of the Flock.
I live, whom Fame reported dead, and bring
Good tidings, never better was the King.
The Lion now is forty thousand strong,
Enumerous swarms,
Both old, and young, take arms,
And he will thunder at their Gates ere long,
Changing their triumph to a doleful Song.
And now the Conquering Boar,
Of those subu'd before,
Does speedy aid implore,
But the dissenting Brethren in one Fate,
Too late,
Shall rue they turned this Forest to a State.
Whom Pan, his Parents, and his King obeyed,
Duty, Belief, and Piety betrayed,
And boulted doors he suddenly unbars:
The Woolf rushed in,
Throwing off his borrowd Skin,
His eyes with rage blazing like ominous Stars,
Which threaten Earth with Famine, Plague, and Wars:
Then on the expected prize,
With open mouth he flies,
His jaws sweet purple dies.
When thus the Insulter did the Kid upbraid,
And said,
Let all thus perish wish the Lion aid.
MORAL.
First, Gods commands, your Parents next obey;
A thousand Snares, Pride, Lust, and Avarice lay:
But other arts now taught in modern Schools,
Style all our wise and pious Fathers, Fools.
73
THE SEVENTIE THIRD FABLE. Of the Youngman and the Cat.
GRimmalkins Grandchild, Tyberts Noble race,
For Beauty gave no Cattish Damsel place,
Round was her face,
Her Eyes were Gray as Germans, or the Gaul,
The Stars that fall
Through gloomy shade, cast no such dazeling light:
Nor Gloeworms that most glorious are by night;
Her Bosom soft and white
Like down of Silver Swans, her Head was small,
And round as any Ball,
Daily she wore a party-collourd gown,
Curiously mixed, with white; black, gray, and brown.
Stolen from her Mothers Teat, a young man bred
This Femall up, and laid her in his Bed;
Each Morning fed,
And Evening, with warm strokings from the Cow,
Would Fish allow,
But not to wet her tender feet afford,
She may in pleasant Gardens catch a Bird,
Or make afeard.
Scorched with Love's cruel flames this Youth did now
At Venus altars bow,
That She, his Love would change into a Maid,
When thus with reard-up hands to Heaven he prayed.
O Citherea, since the cruel Dart
Of thy dear Son, has strangely pierced my heart,
Some aid impart;
Thou at the prayers of sad Pigmalion
Made flesh of stone,
Formed a soft Woman from obdurate Flint:
That had no Soul, this has a Spirit in it,
This has her passions, has affection shown,
And loves or me, or none.
Make her for Marriage fit, and She and I
Will day and night adore thy Deity.
The Goddess heard, first on her Hairy face
Did Lillys of untainted beauty place,
Which Roses grace;
And now her Gray eyes sparkle more by day;
A Milkie way
'Twixt Hills of Snow, which Currall Fountains shows,
And her clear Neck like silver dawn arose,
Her white Foot grows
Now a fair Palm, whence fingers long display,
Where azure Rivers stray:
A Virgin then appeared, so fair, and sweet,
She seemed a Heaven all ore, from Head to Feet.
Nor could the ravished Youth admire too much,
Nor could believe, till by enduring touch
He found her such,
But when she spoke, sweet Love was in his Breast
With joy oppressed,
And loud he cries; Come all my friends, and see
The Gods great gift, what Heaven has done for me,
I shall too happy be.
Bring Silk and Gold, with Jems let her be dressed,
Prepare the Marriage Feast:
All came, and wonder, Wom ens envious eye,
Survaying her, could not one blemish spy.
All rites performed, and Hymen's torch put out,
Who of the joys of Marriage Bed could doubt,
Or fear a flout?
The Cyprian Goddess then, desired to find
If that her mind
Was with her form improved; a little Mouse
Straight she presents on the Evins of the House:
The Bride leaps from her Spouse,
And leaves the Young man to embrace the Wind,
The Cat will after kind;
Just when he thought to reap the joy of joys,
A Mouse she cries, and all his hope destroys.
When Venus thus, highly incensed, stormed:
A hateful Cat to a Virgin we transformed,
But the deformed,
And Bestiall thoughts still in her Breast remain,
The task was vain,
No power can stave off Nature, though our Art
Gave fair dimensions to the Outward part,
We could not change the Heart.
Here she transformed her to a Cat again;
Then did the Youth complain,
Thy pity Venus thou have turned to spite,
Would thou not let me have her one short night?
MORAL.
No punishment, no penalty, nor hire,
Can repulse Nature led by strong Desire.
So barbarous people Civilliz'd with care,
The least occasion turns to what they were.
74
THE SEVENTIE FOURTH FABLE. Of the Cat and the Cock.
SHe that so lately was the Young man's Spouse,
And left the joys of Marriage Bed to Mouse,
Now conscious of her crime, and hooted at
By all the House,
Grew more and more a Cat:
And after that
By day she haunts sad Rocks, and shadie Groves,
When dark, through Gutters ore House tops she roves,
And seeks night-walking Loves,
Who couple not like Doves;
Where round about her Cattish youngsters throng,
(For she was fair) and with a hideous Song,
A dismal note and long,
The haughty Rivals challenge, meet, and fight;
And terrify the silence of the night.
Amongst these she proves: her Pregnant woomb being laid,
The ravenons Beast in neighboring Houses preyed,
That Milkie Breasts her tender young might breed:
Once thus she straid
And not supplied her need,
Nurses must feed.
When thus she spoke, Each Passage, Door, and Lock,
In my Lords House I know: there dwells a Cock
Cheef of a feathered Flock,
Which once my hopes did mock,
But now he shall not escape: hark how he Crows,
What, boasts thou fool ere thou subdu'st thy foes!
This said, on straight she goes,
Through ways unknown, and mischievously bent,
Down boldly leaps, and seized the Innocent.
With her sad Prisoners Pusse was used to play,
Though he must die, she will do it by Legal way,
And thus attainders formally began:
Thou before day
Awakenest drowsy man;
Who Curse and Ban,
Vexed with thy minstralcies unwelcome aires,
At such a time, when Heaven should hear their prayers
To prosper them and theirs.
This said, the Cock declares,
I am the Husband-mans Alarm, and Watch,
Those Sons of toil, that live in Smoke and Thatch,
Raised by my voice, dispatch
(Buckling on Leather, Freeze, and clouted shoon)
A long days labor, often before Noon.
Then said the Cat, is thy impiety
(O wicked Bird) and incest hid from me?
Thou have against all Laws of Men, and God,
Which I did see,
Thy Virgin Daughter trod;
Nay thy hot blood,
Thy Sister, Mother, Grandam, did not spare.
Then he replied, thy last charge less I fear,
Since it is my Masters care,
For him and for his fair
Lady, I should get Eggs, who now is Wed.
Shall thou a Strumpet feed injoys the Bed
From whence I Am banished?
Accumulative crimes have no retreat,
It Is Treason, thou shall die, and I must eat,
Said angry Pusse, and sharp-set with a Groul,
She eats his flesh, and drinks in blood his Soul.
MORAL.
When Tyrants would their empty Coffers fill,
Against some wealthy Peer, they draw a Bill:
The tryal's fair, Charge, Answer, and Reply,
But riches is your crime, and you must die.
75
THE SEVENTIE FIFTH FABLE. Of the Cat and the Mice.
ANd now our Cat which once had been a Wife,
The Iron tooth of time
Had altered from her prime,
Old, she with Nuns lead a Monastic life,
Free from rough Lovers, and proud Rivals strife.
And with those pious Virgins went to prayer,
Who while they number Beads,
About them softly treads,
Disturbing none that at devotion were,
Contented with long Fasts, and Lenten Fare.
Settled for Strength, Convenience, and Health,
Near to the Larder Door,
Some Miceaus had a poor
Plantation raised from Sacrilege, and Stealth,
Almost from nothing, to a Commonwealth.
These Hogen Mogens, when their cruel Foe
The Cat they heard drew near,
Were struck with mighty fear,
And at the tidings straight to Counsel go;
Till then these People knew no face of woe.
When some informed, and they of no mean place,
They Tyberts issue saw,
Her countenance struck no aw,
But full of meekness, heavy was her pace,
And sadness much dejected had her face.
They saw how often She contemplating sat,
Nor in that holy House,
They thought, she will touch a Mouse;
Nor view with jealous eye their rising State,
This was a Saint, a most Religious Cat.
When they this Character had understood,
Commissioners they chose,
(No time they careful lose)
That should bear gifts, and kiss great Pusses hand,
And Leagues confirming lasting peace demand.
Soon they admitted were, and Audience had;
The subtle Cat in State
Heard what they could relate
With mild aspect, her visage pale, and sad;
And thus to them a friendly answer made.
Bold Miceans know (if nere you heard the same)
I have been once a Wife,
Seeking one Miceans life,
I was transformed to what you see I am,
For which bold crime to penance here I came.
Your Suit we grant: but as our custom, nine
Potentates I invite
To Sup with me this night,
So intimate; but you with us shall dine.
Then in their presence lasting Peace I Will sign.
This known, nine chosen march through narrow Ports,
And winding passes forth,
With many Mice of worth:
There the fond vulgar in great troops resorts,
Expecting Banquets in the Cattish Courts.
No sooner in, but stern Pusse shuts the Door,
Stops all the chincks and holes;
Then terror strikes their souls:
And to a Fury she is transformed once more;
Best strews the room with mangled limbs, and gore.
Which to the Senate a new lesson reads,
Fair words, and simpering looks,
Are still deceivers hooks:
None that is wise, outward comportment heeds;
Mortals their face declares not, but their deeds.
MORAL.
Treaties are full of fraud; if rising States
Would join with Princes, and make Kings their mates,
Let them beware how they confirm the League,
Monarchs still jealous for small cause Reneage.
76
THE SEVENTIE SIXTH FABLE. Of the Fox and the Lion.
OH all you Gods and Goddesses that dwell
In Heaven and Earth, in Heaven, Earth, Sea, and Hell*
If all your power conjoynd can one protect,
Save the poor Fox,
Nor prayer reject.
What is it I behold?
His shaggie locks
Are pressed with shining Gold.
It is the Lion; See! his spreading Robe
Covers at least half the terrestrial Globe:
Terror of Beasts and Man,
Whose hard teeth can
Crack brazen bones of the Leviathan.
Help, help, if me he not in pieces tears,
I shall in sunder shake with my own fears.
At first the Fox thus trembled to behold
The Sceptered Lion, Armed and Crowned with Gold.
But when the King the second time he saw
Hunting in green,
Not so much awe
Did in his looks appear,
Less Majesty in's Mein,
Then Reynard drew more near;
But the third day the bold beast had the face
To come up close, and cried Jove save your grace.
At last so near did stand,
He kissed his hand,
Soon after did the Royal ear command,
In which he said Custom makes mortals bold
To play with that they durst not once behold.
MORAL.
Who hate to draw a Sword, and Guns abhor,
Custom has made most valiant Men-of-War.
Love's Novice so, trembling, fresh beauty storms,
Which soon lies ruffled in his conquering arms.
77
THE SEVENTIE SEVENTH FABLE. Of the Lark and her Young.
IT is the sweet and early chanting Lark,
That to the Heavenly Quiresters is Clark,
And mounts the Sky as freely as a spark;
Yet she in haughty Towers not builds her Nest,
Nor on the tops of lofty Cedars dwells,
Which are with all the roaring winds oppressed,
That Northern witches conjure up with spells;
But in Corn Fields her habitations found,
Flanckt round with earth, six inches under ground.
From whence she issuing to her young ones spoke;
Notice be sure of what you hear to take,
And strickt acoount at my returning make.
When thus the Landlord to his Heir begun;
This Wheat is ripe, we must have down this Corn;
Go, and invite my friends with rising Sun
To reap it, and at night it shall be Born.
At this sad news the Larks astonished were,
And told their Mother, struck with mighty fear.
Then said the old Bird; If for his friends he look,
(He may be, but I shall not be mistook.)
This Corn, need fear no danger of the hook.
Giving like charge, out the next morn she flies,
While the Old Man long, did friends in vain expect,
At last he said, grown with experience wise,
Son, call our Kindred, since our friends neglect,
Those from our own loins sprung will not forget,
That we to morrow may cut down this Wheat.
The affrighted Birds this to their Mother told,
Who cheered them thus, Kindred too often prove cold;
This Corn will stand, and we shall keep our Hold.
The second morn made bright the Hemisphere,
When of the Consanguineous none were seen;
Then said the Father to the Son, I fear
We shall not be beholding to our kin;
Stand to me Boy, to morrow thou and I
Will reap this Corn, Cosens and Friends desie.
With these, the Birds their Mother did acquaint,
When with a sigh she said, We time shall want,
For we to morrow must new regions plant.
They that with care to their own business look,
Are in the readiest way to have it done,
But who shall trust to Friends or Kindreds hook,
Shall find it at a stand, or backward run:
As when the arm against the stream is slack,
The Boat in the swift Channel hurries back.
MORAL.
Intelligence best moves affairs, by which,
Both Kings and Commonwealths grow great and rich.
But who their business would have followed, must,
More to themselves than any other trust.
78
THE SEVENTIE EIGHTH FABLE. Of the Hawk and the Nightingale.
WHen the triumphant Sun, in his Caroach,
Cut from an entire Topaz, made approach
To the great tract betwixt the Golden horns
Of the Celestial Bull;
When the Ambrosian tresses of fair morns,
With liquid Pearl were full;
Then Philomel did from her Nest depart,
With a sad Omen, and a heavy heart,
To try neglected Art;
By the Grove side she on a Haw-thorne bough,
Sung her first Song, and paid her yearly vow:
Lovers that heard her, ere the Cuckows voice,
Rejoice,
Since Valentine chose, but she confirms the choice.
While thus she chants, a sharp thorn at her breast,
A prying Swain who late had found her Nest,
Came secretly, and in her absence stole
From thence the Callow young;
A freshs wound anguish in a wounded Soul
What Pen can say or Tongue?
He to his City Landlord bears the prize,
But she sends loud Complaints to Marble Skies,
And moves the Deities:
Which (as relentlesse as their Statues, were)
A Bird of War pickeering through the air,
A fierce Hawk sent, who while she did in vain Complain,
Siez'd, and poor Philomel must now be slain.
Though great her woe was, and she much did grieve,
Yet at Pale deaths approach she fain would live,
And from the proud Foe thus begs quarter then;
This little body spare,
What is to thee a Nightingale or Wren,
A Mouthfull but of air?
Take some large Bird, and Fat, on whom is Meat;
Behold on every Tree, and Bush they seat,
And spare me I entreat.
With frowning look, the Faulcon then replies,
Thus Counsel Daws, no Hauk is so unwise,
When in their pownces they have seized a prey,
That they,
Let it in hope of better, fly away.
MORAL.
A small Estate and sure, is better far,
Than fortunes that in expectations are:
What we possess we have, fancy may feed
The mind, but not supply the present need.
79
THE SEVENTIE NINTH FABLE. Of the Husbandman and the Stork.
THere was a greedy Villager took pain
To Plow deep wrinckles on a Virgin plain,
Where his strong Steers broke such obdurate glebes,
As might have danced into the Walls of Thebes
Instead of stones,
Harder than Pyrrha's moystned Mothers bones.
This Swain while he did whet his blunted Share,
Often to Ceres, and Superior Gods,
Did make no idle prayer,
To recompense his care,
And fruitful render hard and barren clods.
They heard, and nurc'd his hope with timely rain,
That now black grounds did shine with golden Grain.
When a fierce troop of Plundering Cranes he spies,
And wicked Geese to cut the Crystal Skies,
Called in by those domestic Geese he fed
In his own Barn, with what should make him Bread.
His Gander thus
He heard declare; Welcome dear friends to us;
Our spightfull Master, if he see us look
But ore the hedge, with threatening voice will call:
Who can the injury brook?
Come let us deprive the Hook.
This said, the whole Army on the Field did fall.
Plots meet with Counterplots, strong Gins were set,
Which took both Foes, and Traitors in a Net.
Amongst whom he found a Stork, who to the Swain
Thus pleaded innocence; I am no Crane,
Nor impious Goose, nor have I touched your Corn,
But the best Bird am I on wings is born;
It Is I that feed
My Parents spent with age, and in their need
Bear like the Trojan Hero on my back;
The Pelican, that feasts with her own blood
Her young when meat they lack,
Compared to me is black;
Who will not spend their lives to save their Brood?
Great Love descends; to Age who gives respect?
Children, and Friends, Parents grown old neglect.
Then said the Swain; Your boasting will not serve;
You found with these shall find what they deserve,
And with these cursed Malefactors die,
Though as you say you are the best that fly;
Your wicked troop
Would all my Harvest hopes have eaten up:
Were thou the Phoenix, though we lost the race,
A Cherubine, or Bird of Paradise,
Expect from me no grace;
Now thou shall suffer in this place:
You tell your Virtues, Bird, but not your Vice.
To your own Parents you obedient are,
But not for Kings (our Common Fathers) care.
MORAL.
What crimes commit we, or what gross abuse,
That is not palliated by excuse?
Who says he is Guilty? these Bad company load,
The Devil this, and that lays all on God.
80
THE EIGHTIETH FABLE. Of the Eagle and the Crow.
THe Plumed King spreading his feathered sail,
Down through the clouds like a black tempest stoops,
Passing through Quarters of Wind, Rain, and Hail,
He seized a Lamb among the bleating Troops;
While the Dogs bark, and the old Shepherds rail,
That he a King should prey on harmless Beasts,
He flys to cruel Nests,
And bears the prey to Courts nine steeples high:
Then wondrous, Blood and Wool rain from the sky.
A foolish Crow, viewing this gallant Flight
The Eagle made down from the arched Skies,
Sweld with opinion, soars a mighty height,
To rob the flock of such another prize:
Thence on a youngling did with fury light,
And Knee deep strikes himself in Silver Wool,
That thence he could not pull
His tangled feet, with Art, nor Force, again,
But yields himself then Prisoner to a Swain.
Who gave him to the Boys, they clip his Wing,
And amongst the Flocks would with their Captive play,
Taught him new notes, another Song to sing,
And when men asked what Bird he was, to say
He thought he was an Eagle, and a King:
But to his grief he now too well did know
He is a foolish Crow,
Who 'bove his power great things attempting, fell
A sport to Boys, as merciless as Hell.
MORAL.
All imitate, or imitated are:
A shriveld Dwarf has managed in War
A mighty Steed, and boldly charged the foe,
Shooting through loop-holes in the sadle bow.
81
THE EIGHTY FIRST FABLE. Of the Dog and the Sheep.
ROugh with a trundle tail, a Prick-ear'd Cur,
That had nine Warrens of starved Fleas in's Fur,
On whom was manginesse entailed, and itch,
From his Sire Isgrim, and a Cat-ey'd Bitch;
With these endowments Rich,
And some bold vices now we virtues call,
He brought to the Judgment Hall
His accusation against a guiltless Sheep,
That he the staff of life from him did keep,
A Loaf he lent him of the purest Wheat,
And at the high Tribunal seat
At once he charged, and at once claims the debt.
The Sheep denies that ere he had to do
With this strange Dog, that no good Shepherd knew;
Since he no Bond could prove, desired release;
Then bawls the Cur, Behold my Witnesses,
Let them the truth confess;
The Vulture, Fox, and Squint-eyed Kite appear,
Whom God nor Conscience fear,
To whom he promised equal shares before,
For which (as they instructed were) they swore
They saw when he delivered him the Bread,
Refusing bond; and kindly said,
Without such things, Brethren should Brethren aid.
The Beasts had savage Laws, Who could not pay,
Convicted at the Cred'tors mercy lay;
Such was the poor Sheeps case, none could exhort
The Dog to save the honor of the Court,
Since cruelty was his sport,
But at the Sheep with open mouth he flew,
And in the whole benches view,
Sucks his warm Blood, and eats his panting Heart,
And to each Witness quarters out their part;
When one did say, Thus innocence we see,
Was never yet from danger free;
As the Evidence, so must the Sentence be.
MORAL.
While Oaths and Evidence shall bear the cause,
Men of small Conscience little fear the Laws.
What Trade are you? a Witness Sir; Draw near,
There Is Coin, go swear, what I would have you swear.
FINIS.

