A Christian FAMILY BVILDED BY GOD, Directing all Governors of Families how to
act.

1. Gods Timber and framing. 2. Gods Foundation and upper building. 3. Gods
Finishing. 4. Gods Furnishing.
The sum whereof is showed after the Epistle.

BY ROBERT ABBOTT, Pastor of the Church of God at Austines, near Paul's gate in
Watling-street in London.



LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in Paul's
Churchyard, 165^.

TO His dearly beloved FLOCK, my good people of Austines near Paul's stump in
London, ROBERT ABBOTT Their aged and unworthy Pastor, humbly wishes all
happiness, External, Internal, Eternal.
Dearly beloved in Christ our common SAVIOR.
I Know not how little time I shall be with you here; nor how soon I shall go
home, and be no more seen. I speak not this of going to another place (I am
weary with tumbling;) or of not being seen among you here: but of going the way
of all the earth, and not being seen after the manner of the living. The Jews
in the midst of their worst troubles (except the last) complained that they had
no Prophet, none that could tell them how long. I complain not, because it is
an advantage not to know that time, that I may expect and prepare for it every
day: but I am sure that none, except God be pleased to reveal it, can tell my
time of abode in this earthly Tabernacle. I have now lived two, above the great
Clymacterieall year: and it is a great wonder to me, that amidst so many
vexations, and sadding griefs of mind; so many troubles, and tossings of body,
and so many weaknesses of mould, and temper, I should live even to this hour.

But God will have it so, who still cuts out some work for me to do. I am
humbly content, and do with all cheerfulness submit to our good God's
pleasure. Though I desire rest, yet I refuse not labor at his command, or at
his pointing providence.

I confess that three things might put my heart upon the wing to be gone to my
Christ; the burden of Crosses, the burden of the Churches afflictions, and
the burden of Impotent age: and two things might discourage me from any
further working in this shop below, the contempt of the Ministry, and the
poorness of the encouragements, that Ministers have from the most that hear
them.

But when I look upon the place where God has unexpectedly pitched me, and
the loving persons (for the greater part) over whom God has made me an
Overseer; as I do, from Lords day to Lords day, cheerfully work for the good
of your souls (besides at other private opportunities to do you good:) So am I
willing (as I am able) to leave some testimonial of my love to you, and care
over you, when I have made my bed in darkness. If our good God, In whose hands
are our days, and ways, shall add years to my few and evil days, I may be
able by his blessed assistance, to show it in some more spiritual, and
valuable piece. In the mean time, as I am, so is this little Book, which I here
present, yours. And if it may set you but one staff or round, in the ladder of
life nearer to your happy journeyes end, I shall abundantly rejoice over you,
and in you.

You know that the first government that ever was in this world was in a
Family; and the first disorder that ever was in the world was in a Family; and
all the disorders that ever fell out since, sprung from Families. If Families
had been better, Churches and Commonwealths all along had prospered. As we
read it was in Athens of old, the boy ruled the mother, the mother ruled the
father, and he ruled the whole City, and thence sprung many disorders which
made those present times sick of them even to complaining: so has it been in
all ages, and I am sure it has been in ours, all we that live here groan under
it still, even to more then a complaint.

Had young, and old, been right set before they entered into a Family: Had the
Family been founded in marriage in the Lord. Had relations betwixt wife and
husband, children and parents, servants and masters been holily carried on
according to the rule of Christ. Had the house been furnished with a wise,
holy, and careful father and mother of the family: had it been furnished with
a just getting and giving, it had bin a thousand times better with Church,
Commonwealth, and Family, then it has been, or is yet. To this end
(Christians) have I taken this little pains; first by preaching, then by
writing, to present this little Treatise unto you. Read it over seriously
between God and your own souls, and when you find any touch of it to strike
upon any string in your hearts, see what may be done to make your Families
better, and Do it. It may be ye have been rotten timber when you were put into
the Family: Oh pray that the Son of Righteousness would come and bring
healing under his wings. Or it may be, when you were young or old, you have not
been made suitable to the Word of God, pray that now he would write his Law in
your hearts to make an alteration, by an application of the work of the Spirit.
Or it may be you have not laid a good foundation for a Family, by Marriage in
the Lord, but have married for money, or lust: pray that God would forget that,
and give an after establishment to that which was wickedly done at first. Or it
may be you have faithlesly, and unconscionably carried your selves in your
relations: pray for union with Christ, to purge out the wickedness of nature,
and, with hearty sorrow for what is past, you will stand fast in all your
relations hereafter. Or it may be for want of a good Master and Mistres, there
has been no good order in the Family, either every day, or on the Lords day:
pray that God would rule in their hearts, that God may rule in their house,
till they may be saluted, The Church that is in thy house. Or it may be for
want of true justice, both in lending, borrowing, buying, selling, letting,
hiring, and giving, the wages of iniquity are yet in your houses: Oh pray that
there be not self-seeking, nor deceit, no, colored covetousness, nor any
thing that savours of injurious evil to be found amongst you. If God will
bless you by this Book, or any other means, do what you can to be built by
God in your Families. Thus God will prosper the work of his own hands upon
you, and bring out of your Families blessings to the Church, and Commonwealth,
as well as to you. This God requires; this I aimed at among you, and for this,
while I am, you shall have the prayers (Christians) of

Your loving Pastor for Christ's sake, and by his appointment, ROBERT ABBOTT.

The sum of this following Book, which is in stead of a general Table,
referring to every Section, Psalm 127. 1.
1 An Introduction* (Page 1.) A Traction: wherein
2
1 The Doctrine is propounded. If we would have blessed Families, we must get
them builded by God. (Sect. 1.) The Application, where fall 2 quares,
2 1 What Gods building in a Family is 1 Both for matter, (Sect. 2.) And for
rule and square, 1 The word of God, Not carnal policy, (Sect. 3.)
2


2 How we may procure it. By having
2
1 God's Timber, Single persons, (Sect. 4.) which must be framed as they are 1
Old men, (Sect. 5.) Old women, (Sect. 6.) Young men and young women, (Sect. 7.
2 3
2 God's building: which must have 1 A foundation, Marriage in the Lord. In
which we must go along with God, 1 In the Antecedents 1 A right choice, By
right marks, (S. 8)
2
In the concomitants, 1 The gift of the Parents The blessing of the Minister,
The mutual rejoicing of the friends (S. 9.)
2 3 In the consequents, 1 Cohabitation, and Communion. (Sect. 10.)
2
2 3
2 An upper building, which stands in 3 relations betwixt 1 Wife, (Sect. 11.)
Husband, (Sect. 12.) Children, (Sect. 13.) Parents, Sect. 14.) Servants, (Sect.
15.) Masters, (Sect. 16.)
2 3 4 5 6
3 God's finishing by an orderly government, (Sect. 17.) which must be
executed, 1 By a good Father of a Family, (Sect. 18.) By a good Mother, of a
Family, (Sect. 19.)
2 God's furnishing of a Family, 1 By getting goods: which is either 1 By
lending, (Sect. 20.) By borrowing, (Sect. 21.) By selling, (Sect. 22.) By
buying, (Sect. 23.) By letting, (Sect. 24.) By hiring, (Sect. 25.)
2 3 4 5 6 By giving goods, (Sect. 26.)
2
4
A FAMILY BUILT BY GOD: Or a Meditation to direct Householders, how to rise from
the Foundation to the height of a blessed Family.
Psalm, 127. 1. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build
it; or are builders of it in it.
THere are fifteen Psalms which are called Psalms of Degrees, and this is
one. They follow next to the hundred and nineteenth, and are of excellent use
upon several occasions.

There were diverse stairs up into the Temple, and the Priests and Levites did
stand higher then the rest, upon some of them, for the better edification of
the people, when they sung them; and they say, these Psalms had their names
from thence.

The scope of this Psalm is, to confirm this general proposition, That without
Gods blessings the diligent endeavors of men are blasted. This the Psalmist
demonstrates by a Distribution, Opposition, by a Promise, and by an Example. He
distributes all the labors of men into public, and private: in both which he
shows that there is no good success without Gods blessing. He opposes the
carefullest worker, who without this blessing of God is cursed. He promises
sweet contentment to them that work with the blessing of God, They shall have
sleep and rest as Gods beloved Instanceth in children, who are the nursery
plants both of Church, Commonwealth and Family, yet cannot be obtained with
any labor without Gods blessing: therefore above all things we must wait upon
Gods blessing to build the house first by.

Gods people were first in a Family, next in a Church, and next in a
Commonwealth. therefore first he mentions the building of an house.

whether God be become a Carpenter? House is taken figuratively, for all things
that constitute, and maintain the honor and comfort of a family, as wife,
children, servants, goods of all sorts within doors, and without. So to build
signifies whatsoever contributes to raise up, and enlarge a Family by honest,
and good means; as an helpful wife, hopeful children, faithful servants, and
well gotten goods, and inheritances. Thus Exodus 1. 21. 1 Chronicles. 17. 12. 2 Samuel
7. 11.
God is said to make the Egyptian midwives houses, and to build David an
house, over, and over again.

SECT. 1:
If we would have blessed Families, we must get them builded by God. Husband,
wife, children, servants, must not be like rotten posts, and as straw, hay,
stubble upon a good foundation; but must be builded by God: and the whole
state, and house must be finished, and furnished by God. Nabal was the head of
a Family, but a drunken Epicure; and so not builded by God. Jezabel was a main
rib of the Family; but a painted and persecuting harlot; and so not builded by
God. Cain, Esau, Adoniah, Absolon, were Couplings in the Family, but a
murderer, profane, rebellious; and so not builded by God: Zihah was a tyle or
rafter in the Family of Mephibosheth, but a faithless cheating servant; and
so, not builded by God. Dives his house was furnished with great store of
wealth, but if he might go gay, and fare daintily, he regarded not the
afflictions of Lazarus; and so not builded by God.

(good Christians) persuaded to make God the Surveyour, Framer, Joyner; sole
workman in your Families, or else no comforting blessing comes. The speech of
Christ reaches to every thing, without me ye can do nothing; Experience
teaches John 15. 5.
thus much concerning Families. Abraham was built by God, and mark what God,
says, Genesis 18. 19.
I know that my servant Abraham will teach his Family. Joshuah was built by
God, and mark what he says, I and my house will serve the Josh. 24. 15.
Lord. Naomi was built by God, and mark her Ruth 1. 16. and 3. 1. Hest. 4. 16.
Genesis 24.
faithful care of Ruth. Hester was built by God, and mark her speech, I and my
maids will fast likewise. Eleazar was built by God, and mark his godly care in
his masters service.

And if a whole Family be thus built; what a joint serving of God is there?
Husbands, and wives are faithful; servants are careful; children are
obedient; goods are blessed; and then we may say, as Paul, Greet the Church
Romans 16. 5.
that is in thy house. Most complain (and they have too just cause) that
husbands are drunkards and tyrants, wives are stubborn, children are
disorderly, servants are unfaithful. More complain that there is little
charity, much contention, many brawles, floods of drunkenness, vollies of
oaths. The reason of all is, because they are not built by God. What shall I
say then? suffer your selves to be builded by God. He will pull down the old
ruinous building of sin. He will hew you with his own axe, his Word. He will
lay you upon that good foundation, Christ. He will make you grow up into an
holy building in the Lord, and then, the Lord builds the house, and your labor
will not be in vain.

SECT. 2.
BUt to settle this upon you, your consciences will enquire after two things.

1. What Gods building in a Family is? 2. How you may procure it?
1. Gods building is a well ordered Family by the Word of God. Here is the
matter and form of it; and the Rule and square by which it is wrought. The
matter and form of it is a well ordered Family, that is, an orderly head, and
orderly members having mutual and fit relations either to others. An orderly
head is the house governor, who can with good conscience say, I will walk in
Psalm. 101. 2.
the uprightness of my heart in the midst of my house. There are many comely
heads, but they are painted ones in respect of this, or like that in the
Carvers shop which had neither wit nor brains. Orderly members are those that
depend upon the head, whether wife, children, or servants, that can say with a
good conscience as Ruth to Naomi, whether Ruth 1. 16.
thou go I will go, where thou lodgest I will lodge, thy people shall be my
people, and thy God, my God.

The Rule and square of this Family is The Word of God. Thorough wisdom is an
house Prove. 24. 3, 4.
builded, and with understanding it is established, and with knowledge shall
the chambers be filled with riches. of the world, for that is foolishness: but
that of the Word; for that issues from the 1 Cor. 1. 30.
wisdom of the Father; who is made wisdom unto us. And wonder not at this;
because in the Word is contained necessary and absolute direction for all in a
Family; in which respect we may say, I adore the fullness of the Scripture. Yea,
the word directs Plenitudinem scripturae adoro.
not only, but moulds and shapes every person for his employment. We are like
crooked and knotty trees by nature: but then comes the Word and smoothes us for
houswork. Therefore we are very fools when we forsake this Word, which is so
helpful. In matters of private worship men are squared by theit minds, and
customs of forefathers: In matters of Conversation, by examples of men, and
practice of most: In Apparel, by fashion, be they never so disguised: In meat
and drink, by appetite: In Recreation, by company: In Traffic, by profit; In
gathering Riches, by the hors-leaches of desires: In their whole government by
carnal and worldly policy.

SECT. 3.
Prove. 31. 15, 16. 2 Chronicles. 27.
by Bathshebah; and in David, who had one Officer over his treasures, another
over laborers, another over Vineyards, another over Wine, another over Olives,
another over Oil, another over Cattle; and in Nehemiah, who had Officers that
prepared Neh. 5. 18.
daily an Ox, sheep and birds for him, and his retinue: Also in Solomon who
established 1 King. 4. 22, 27, 28.
care for diet, order for his attendants by months. Hence when the Queen of
Shebah saw the meat of his table, the sitting of his servants, the order of his
servitors, and their apparel, she admired it. O for such policy! Yet take heed
of Carnal policy which fights with Gods Word. Therefore observe four rules.

1. Policy must not prejudice the honor of God, as David's did, when he was
before Achish, and slavered, and carried himself like a fool to the dishonor
of him that chose him King.

2. Policy must not ptejudice the truth of a good Conscience, as Rachels did,
when she had hid her fathers gods in the Camels litter. Take heed of faining or
lying; Conscience will cry.

3. Policy must not prejudice that justice which is due to man. Ye know David's
policy to cover his baseness with Bathshebah, and how it fell heavy upon Vriah.
Such policies are not strange to us to build our nests with injustice, and to
make the most of our own, whosoever pinch; but take heed.

4. Policy must not stretch further then our callings. In every policy for the
building of your house, you must make a double enquiry: First into the thing to
be done, whether it be lawful, or unlawful: next into your selves, whether
agreeable to your calings wherein ye must abide. If your policy go 1 Cor. 7.
beyond these rules, it is carnal, and sensual. Therefore remember them; yet so
still, as the Word of God be your rule, and square of all your intendments, and
executions.

SECT. 4.
2. WE come to the next point, namely, how you may procure Gods building in
your Families? Follow God's metaphor still: from plain things it will be made
plain unto you, It is God's building: and if you would have it, you must have
four things:

1. God's timber and framing of it. 2. God's setting up of it. 3. God's
finishing of it. 4. God's furnishing of it.
1. God's Timber. As when Solomon was to build the Temple, he had his timber,
Cedar trees, and Fir trees from Lebanon: so God must have single persons, who
are fit to grow up into a building. Of these he says in general, If they
cannot abstain they must marry, 1 Cor. 7. 9.
for it is better to marry then to burn: Marriage in itself is a thing
indifferent; but by Gods Ordinance it is far better then single life.

1. It was ordained in Paradise before the fall: As then innocence is better
then corruption; so is that estate which God appointed for it.

2, It was ordained upon serious consultation Genesis 2. 18.
of the blessed Trinity; let us make an helper meet for man: therefore it must
come as an high blessing, and privilege.

3. God gave a large blessing to this estate, saying, Increase and multiply,
that it might be Genesis 2.
a Fountain, and Seminary of all other kinds of life in Family, Church, and
Commonwealth.

Therefore if man had continued in Innocence, single life had been nothing
worth. Yea, as the Jews said proverbially, Nothing Wiemse.
is good but a woman: He that has not a wife, is not a man; so, with all men,
a wife had been of singular esteem. But since sin came into the world, to some
men, single life is better then marriage; It frees a man from many cares in
household affairs. It affords more leisure to pursue heavenly things. It makes
present necessity of affliction less troublesome. Yet, if God have not given
resolved dispositions, against the burning lusts of the flesh, it is better to
marry.

You will say, such shall have troubles in the 1 Cor. 7. 28 Prove. 21. 19 Matthew.
19. 11, 12.
flesh: and it is better to dwell in the wilderness, then with a contentious
woman in a wide house. It is true, yet all are not able to receive it, but they
to whom it is given.

that he would grant you the gift of continency.

General, which are necessary for all the godly, as Faith, Hope and Charity:
of these speak the promise, Ask and ye shall have. Particular, Matthew. 7.
of which there is no promise that God will give it to all believers; and such
is single life: for otherwise we should neither have Church, Commonwealth, nor
Family.

Adam the perfectest man, Solomon the wisest man, and Sampson the strongest man
were beguiled by their helpers.

wed your prayers to God in Heaven, that he would wed you to good wives on
earth; for as no worldly comfort is comparable to a faithful yokefellow; so,
woe be to Sampson himself if he be married to a Philistim.

SECT. 5.
BUt to the particulars. These single persons who are Gods timber for a Family,
are of four sorts,

1. Old men. 2. Old women. 3. Young men. 4. Young women.
Of all these I shall show you how God frames them by his Word for his building.

1. Old, or aged men must be Sober, Grave, Temperate, sound in the Faith, in
Charity, and Tit. 2. 2.
in Patience.



Augustine learned Greek when he was old, so must they their duties. John
says, I write unto you Fathers as well as young men, and babes. This is
certain, He 1 John 2. 13 14: Aetate major exemplo maximus. 1 Kings 13
that is great in age, is greater in example. The path of hoary hair is more
Imitable then that bemired with the mudd of youth. The old Prophet deceived the
young, and brought him to be torn to death by a Lion. This is true also, that
virtue will make their age to be an honor and ornament unto them. An old
miser, is as loathsome as a dunghill; an old drunkard, Prove. 16. 31
as rammish as a Bore; an old whoremonger, as noisome as hell: but age is a
crown of honor, when found in the ways of righteousness. This lastly is most
certain, that they have but a short time to live in this world, young men may
die, old men must die; therefore old Alexis going softly, and stooping, gave
this reason of it, I die by little and little; and old Hannah frequented the
Temple, and old Simeon waited for the consolation Paulatim morior. Luke 2.
of Israel, that they might be fit for deaths stroke when it came.

If then old men are not too old to learn, let them hearken to Gods framing.

1. They must be Sober, that is, moderate in the use of meat and drink. That
age is full of coldness, weakness, dryness; and therefore does more desire to
warm, and moysten it self with meat and drink. In this case, without godly
care, it may miscarry as we see in Lot, and Noah. Be Sober, therefore, says
Paul. What a shame is it for them that have lived so long and not to have
learned to use the creatures aright? How shall they be accounted C^ristians,
who for Christ's sake cannot Jude.
deny their lusts, but feed without fear? What an odious thing it is that old
men, who should direct others by example, should, by laying their honor in the
dust, encourage to sin? How lamentable is it to see the Image of Gods
eternity (as the Ancient of days) Dan. 7.
to be wallowing in the mire of sins? How would it break a man's spirit to think
how little time they have to watch (because the Judge is at the door, their
sun is setting), and James 4.
yet that they mispend what they can spare in surfeiting? Oh, be not fools in
Israel, but be Sober.

2. They must be Grave, that is seemly, modest, and gracious in their
carriages. Another age requires other manners. This may be Alia aetas alios
mo^es postulat. Genesis 23: 6. Genesis 6. 9.
pressed by good patterns and by reasons. The Patterns are Abraham, who for
gravitie was accounted A Prince of God among the Hittites; and Henoch, and
Noah, who walked with God. For this Elias was called My Father; and Maximine
the persecuting Emperor durst not look upon Lucianus the Martyr, for fear he
should become a Christian. Yea, Lacon, a grave Heathen, being asked, why he
wore his Vt eam intuens virum me ^sse sciam: and canos intuens capillos nihil
committam illis indignum. Levit. 19. 22
beard so long? Answered, That I, looking upon it, may know my self to be a
man; and beholding my hoary hairs may commit nothing unworthy of them. As to
reasons, God has highly honored them, and put upon them the Image of his own
Paternitie; and has therefore provided a Law for them, Thou shall rise up
before the hoary head. Yea, out of long experience they are to teach others,
and to be eyes to the blind, feet to the lame. If they Job 29. 15. 21.
do thus, it will not be accepted except they be Grave. Yea let me tell you,
old men are easily despised. We know the Proverb, I adore the Sun rising, but
contemn it setting; Job 29 8. and 30, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and Solomon observed all the living with the second child. To prevent this
therefore ponder the precious example of grave Job. Could old men desire
zealously to hold the crown of age to make their counsel acceptable, and to
keep themselves from contempt, they would be Grave.

2. They must be Temperate, that is, subdue all rebellious lusts of sin; as
whoredom, drunkenness, lust, carnal anger, Covetousness, Pride, and the like,
which mostly are too properly incident to the vanity of youth. To be thus is
excellent in the Aged, because these lusts are abominable in all, much more in
the aged. To have eyes full of adultery, mouths full of rotten talk, throats
the Devils tunnels, is damnable. Solon being asked what old age was? Answered,
it was the Vitae hyems.
winter of life; and shall they bring forth the cursed spring of the worst
youth? Besides, old age ought to be set apart for heavenly employments, being
ready to forsake the earth. It is true that we find some old men whose bones
are full of the sins of their youth: Who Job 21.
savor as little of this moderate temper, as they whose blood is hottest; who,
as dregs settled in the bottom of the barrel, are as vile as if they were to
live over their lives again. But take heed, set old Job before you, he Job 1.
would give more liberty, then he would take; for while his sons were abroad
in feasting, he was at home in praying and sacrificing, and forget not old
Barzillai, who would have his son taste of the pleasures of the 2 Samuel 19. 34,
35, 36. 37.
Court, while he would stay at home and die.

4. They must be sound in the faith. The three former concerned them as old
men, but all the next as they are Christian men. This soundness of faith stands
in the soundness of the

1. Knowledge of Christ. 2. Desire after Christ. 3. Receiving of Christ as Lord
and Savior with confidence.
And in truth, this is required in old men, Because they have had the use of
the means longer, and more is required of them that have received much. Yea,
they have had longer experience of Gods love in Jesus Christ. Yea, they have
the place and honor of speech where they come; therefore they Job 32. 4.
Matthew. 11.
must not be like reeds shaken with the wind, or like chaff carried with every
puff. Yea, their bodies and outward man decays, therefore they had more need
to be sound in the strength of the inner man. Oh that old men therefore would
labor for this, and not be as Zachary John Baptists father, or Sarah, whose
ages were means to weaken their faith. Take heed of that (Christians) for this
is a sure note of an heavenly man to be more flourishing, Es. 40, 30, 31.
and fruitful in age; young men shall faint, and stumble, and fall, but they
that wait upon the Lord shall renew as the Eagles. Yea, consider sadly that the
comfort of old age depends upon the soundness of faith. Days are come wherein
they have no pleasure! but faith Eccles. 12.
says, Oh forsake me not in my old age.

5. They must be sound in Charity. As an Apple may be rotten two ways; In
outward appearance, and at the coare! so Charity may be unsound two ways
also, when it is so to the outward eye, by envy, hatred, malice; when it is so
to the Conscience of a man's self. Now the godly aged must have neither of these
rotennesses, but must be sound in loving God, good means and good men; in
loving Pro. 17. 17.
them from the heart root, in loving always; For old men in likelihood are
nearer heaven 1 Cor. 13.
then younger, where all are governed by an eternal Law of Charity. If then
they would not be outed they must be sound in love; for how shall God who is
love receive them into heaven who love not?

6 They must be sound in Patience. Oh that they could see God in all crosses,
that they could humbly submit to him, that they could resolve to have a
shoulder to bear so long as God has an hand to lay on; and that they could as
thankfully carry themselves to God in the worst times, as Job did, and wait
for Job 1.
the issue. Here were sound patience indeed, and in truth old men have need of
it. For age it self is a sickness, and more inclined to frowardness by their
infirmities; yea, they must be willing to hear Christian advice, when age is
ready to slip aside; in both which respects they have need to be sound in
patience. As therefore they possess God in Christ by faith, and men by love; so
themselves by patience: and thus are old men squared.

SECT. 6.
2. THe next part of Gods timber for his building are old women. Now these must
be of such behaviovr as becomes holiness, Tit. 2. 3, 4.
not false accusers, not given to much wine, but teachers of honest things to
younger women. 1 Cor. 14. 35.
the Word to be framed by it, because Paul says, Let them ask their husbands
at home Paul forbids the open and public speech of women in the Congregations,
yet he takes for granted their submitting to Gods Word, without which for want
of good husbands, they would be miserable.

1 Timothy 2. 15.
be saved by childbearing.

Paul signifies is this, that though women have lost many comforts which they
might have had, if sin had not entered by them, yet By or Thorough the worst
misery of their estate here they may be saved, if they continue in Faith,
Love, Holiness, and Majesty.



Christ their Mediator, out of whom is no salvation. Therefore Solomon's mother
requires two things of a virtuous woman, To oversee the Prove. 31.
ways of her Family, and to open her mouth i^ wisdom, that she may show the
law of Grace in her lips, that is, the Word of God. According to this rule
Timotheus mother and grandmother taught him the Scripture from his Infanterie:
and Macrina Basils nurse taught him: Jerome also commends Paula for teaching
her maids the Scriptures: for which end Caecilia an honorable Roman Matron,
never went without the New Testament about her; not to mention Sophia,
Symphorissa, and other Martyrs in the Primitive Church.

And truly, whatsoever may be said, there is great cause why women should be
squared by Gods Word. They are weaker vessels, and Religion is their best
comfort among their weaknesses. Women may have their names 1 Pet. 3. Phil. 4.
3. Acts 2. 47.
written in the book of Life, as well as men; therefore must they be added to
the Church, which must be by Knowledge, Faith, and Obedience. Besides examples
of good women in Scripture do press them, as the chief women of Thessolonica,
Dorcas, Priscilla, Mary, Triphena, Acts 17. 4. Acts 18. 26. Romans 16. 4. 6. 12.
Triphosa, Persis, who believed, were in Christ, and lived.

Weigh therefore how they must be framed in particular.

1. They must be in behavior as becomes holiness, says Paul. That is, their
carriage must be such as must witness the inward holiness of their hearts both
publicly and privately among themselves. This must be discovered four ways.

In countenance, by expressing the inward holiness of their hearts. When Esaias
would Es. 3. 16.
prove the women of Sion to be proud, he does it by their countenance, and when
David Psalm. 130. 1
would prove that he had an humble heart, he does it from his looks, so shall
old Matrons do by themselves.

In gestures, when they express the chastity of their hearts. The Church is
said to have Doves eyes; both beautiful to allure her own, Cant.
and terrible to crush the temptations of wicked men.

In speech, when it does express the wisdom, grace and modesty of the heart.
The fashion of the harlot is to be babbling and loud; Prove. 7. 11.
but the modest woman keeps her tongue under a bridle.

In apparel, when by the outward ornaments of the body, the inward beauty of
the soul is set forth. The matter of it must be measured by Ability, condition
of Life, and Age. The form of it must not be wanton, strange, savouring of
lightness and singularity, lest God visit them for strange apparel. Zeph. 1.


2. They must not be false accusers, or makebates or Devils; for so the word
imparteth. This they must be careful to observe, by reporting no falls things
of others, by reporting true things with a charitable mind, by not suborning
falls witness, or being sinfully silent when they ought to maintain Innocence.
And truly, they had need to watch for this duty, because their age affords
them more familiar access into places, and so they may have more occasion to
speak of themselves and others. Yea, their example would more hurt younger
women, whom they may poison, and from whom they may steal the vail of modesty.
Yea, and it would disgrace their age if they should turn Devils, and blow up
like Satan's gunpowder, the places of peace where they come. Therefore let them
be wary, because He that deals truly is Gods delight, and the good name of
others Prove.
is next to life.

3. They must not be given to much wine, or drink, that is, they must take heed
of the Bibbing disease, of which too many women are guilty. The very Heathens
did account wine and strong drink disagreeable to the nature of women;
therefore had they The kiss of Osculum probationis.
Trial, by which the kinsfolk tried whether their women friends had been given
to wine. Much more must Christians be careful, though sometimes for weakness,
sometimes for honest comfort; they may use that good creature.

If you ask why old women should be thus? It may be it is, because women of
those times had such like meetings, upon womenly occasions as they have now,
and the like practices: therefore Paul puts a bridle upon them, or because the
moderation of old women should be an example unto youger who might easily fall
into excess. Oh therefore that it were thus every where for the honor of that
useful, comfortable, and good sex.

4. They must be teachers of good things to younger women. Though they are not
permitted to teach in public, yet privately they may among themselves, as Paul
warranteth. Every Christian must gather with Christ, or else they scatter: and
all the godly are described to be such as whose lips feed many, and Prove.
whose words are health to their bones, and their tongues a tree of Life. And
that women are not excluded we see in Elizabeth, the blessed Virgin, and
Bathshebah, who says, that the good woman opens her mouth in wisdom. Prove.
31.


what good lessons must they teach the younger?

Paul directs in terms, That they must be Sober, not to be Joviall and
merry lasses; Tit. 2. 4, 5, 6.
That they love their husbands; not to be idle, wanton and careless which end
in the Family goes forward; That they be Discreet, wisely to discern what is
good for their husbands and Families; That they be Chaste; not immodest in
Word, Gesture, Attire, but drink Prove.
water out of their own cistern; That they be keepers at home; not gadders from
house to house to carry news; That they be good, not to suffer their hearts to
swell with pride, or their tongues with scolding, slanders, or oaths; That
they be obedient to their Hubands, not to strive for masterie, and making him
to yield, either by flattery, or brawling. Oh, want of these lessons by the
aged, and want of learning them by younger women has made this good sex to be
despised by Heathens.

Hence Aristippus beholding a little woman, Parum pulchrum magnum malum. Ille
inducit quales esse deberent: Ego vero, quales sunt.
fair, said, Behold a little beautiful Creature, but a great mischief in an
house; and Philoxenas being asked why he still spoke of wicked women, when
Sophocles spoke of good ones? Answered; He speaks of such as they ought to be,
but I, of such as they are. Redeem therefore the honor of your sex, and let
old women be such, and teach so as aged Paul would have them,

SECT. 7.
THe third, and fourth part of Gods timber to be framed, are young men, and young
women. These have a threefold duty put upon them.

1. To rememher their Creator in the Eccles. 12. 1 Tit. 2. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 22
Levit. 19. 32.
days of their youth. 2. To be soberminded, and to fly the lusts of youth. 3.
To honor the persons of the Aged.
They must certainly learn their duties as well as others, for Titus was given
in charge Tit: 2. 6.
to exhort young men; and John does it, and Peter must feed Christ's Lambs, as
well as his Sheep. Yea, the word is directed to them 1 John 2. 13. Psalm 119. 9.
by name as well as others to redress their ways by, and sin fastened upon
them does most harm, as a blast in the Spring does hinder fruit in Autumn.

1. They must remember their Creator in the days of their youth; that is,
consecrate their first years to the knowledge and service of God. He that sails
a long voyage must not sleep while the wind serves, and the ship is strong. As
Abraham rose early to sacrifice Genesis 22.
young Isaac: so must young people begin betimes to mortify their sins. God
loves infinitely Dan. 1. 4.
more then the King of Babel to have young men and well favored to be chosen to
stand in his Court. Their service is acceptable: but to serve God when they can
serve sin no longer is not thankworthie. It is very hard to turn back after
the wildness of that age by repentance. The curse of God frowns upon them,
VVoe to him that has a Mal. 1.
male in his flock, and offers a corrupt thing. The further they run after the
course of the world, the harder will their journey be at the latter end.
Therefore they must take time while time serves, and strike while the iron is
hot. What though some old men give them bad patterns? Let young Shem be sober,
though old Noah be overtaken with wine. Let young Joseph be chaste, though old
Lot fall into the pit of Incest, Let young Samuel be faithful, though old Eli be
indulgent. Let young David be sincere, though old Saul be an Hypocrite. Though
Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin: and though old men fail and
fall, let young people stand and flourish. They have excellent young men to be
their patterns, as Daniel, Joseph, Samuel, Josiah, Timothy: and this they must
know, that the sins of youth wound deeply. David Psalm 25.
cries out, Remember not the sins of my youth; and Job was in pitiful plight
when he complained, Thou writest bitter things against me, Job.
and make me possess the sins of my youth, these have hard teeth; and
wound deep.

2. They must be sober minded, says Paul to Titus, which he expounds to
Timothy by Tit. 2. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 22
flying the lusts of youth. Sobriety is a grace that moderates affections, and
lusts in general: and is fitly required of young persons, seeing their sins
lie in the ill managing of the strength of lusts. They carry wrath,
indignation and envy in their hearts. They are Eccles. 11. 10.
full of pride and presumption, as he vthat said to Christ. All these have I
kept from my youth, when he had not kept one. They are inconsiderate, as that
young fool, who was led by the harlot as an Ox to the slaughter They Prove. 7.
swell with rashness, as Rehoboams green Counselors. Indeed that age is like
a seething pot which casts out scum. Therefore God mocks them, Rejoice O young
man in thy youth; Eccles. 11.
but remember thou shall come to judgment; and warns them sadly to be sober,
and to fly the lusts of youth.

3. They must honor the persons of the aged. Old men are Fathers, and old age
is a blessing in it self; therefore it should be reverenced, by rising up
before them, by being silent before them as Elihu, and by submitting Job 32. 4,
6.
to them with a submission of reverence. Thus is Gods timber framed, and made
fit for Gods building in a Family.

SECT. 8.
2. WE now come to the setting up of this building of God. And because every
house consists of a Foundation, and an upper building, this must have both.

The Foundation is Marriage in the Lord: about which consider two things.

1. What Marriage in the Lord is? 2. How it mny be so undertaken, as it may be
a good Foundation of Gods building?
1. Marriage in the Lord is a Covenant of God, whereby all sorts of fit
couples, may of two be made one flesh, to multiply an holy seed, to avoid
fornication, and mutually to comfort each other. It is a Covenant of God; so
God calls it, when he says of a loose woman, She forgets Prove. 2. 17. 1
Cor. 7. 9.
the Covenant of her God. It is for all fit couples: fit I say, because not for
men and men, women and women, men and beasts, Christians and Infidels: for we
must not be unequally yoked. These fit persons may of two 2 Cor. 6. Genesis 2. 23,
24* Mal. 2. 15. 1 Cor. 7. 2. Genesis 24. 67 Ruth 3. 1.
be made one flesh, to multiply an holy seed, to avoid fornication; and
mutually to comfort each other, when the husband is a rest for his wife. But to
take it up more fully, weigh,

1. From whence it must be sought? 2. Who may seek it? 3. How many may make the
same Covenant at once?
1. It must be sought from God, whose Covenant it is. Therefore Abraham's
servant, Genesis 24. 12 60. Genesis 28. 2, 3.
and Rebekahs friends prayed, and when Jacob was sent to Padan Aram upon this
account, it was with a solemn eye to God. Truly, no good success can be
expected but Jam. 1. 17.
from God; and this is the way to comfort against all troubles in the wedded
estate; yet I doubt we may say as Laban to Jacob in another case, it is not the
manner of this place. Genesis 29. 26.


2. It may be sought of all sorts of persons without exception. The Apostles
(In all) Heb. 13. 4.
does include both things, and persons. And verily, it is honorable in all, in
respect of the Author, God; the Time, Innocence; the Place, Paradise, and the
use and office, to increase the Church. I know that Papists say otherwise, and
make it a means to advance the Doctrine of Demons: but it is but gross
hypocrisy to pretend Chastity for a cover of whoredom: Presumptuous pride to
offer at greater perfection then was in Paradise, and humane Policy, to keep
wealth together to mate the greatest Princes and kingdoms.

3. Though all sorts may seek it, yet two only at once may be made one flesh.
Hence is it that Polygamy was ever against Levit. 18. 18. Matthew. 19. 6 Ephesians. 5.
31.
God his Institution. I know that three things may be said to justify it; the
example of the Patriarks, the speech of Nathan to David, and God's Law, but all
three will be found too weak. As to the examples of the Patriarks, consider the
Original, the Event, the Ground of their having many wives.

The Original was in wicked Lamech, who first spoke this language, Hear ye
wives of Genesis 4. 23.
Lamech: and this is of no credit or comfort. The event was never comfortable
to Families, as ye may see in Lamechs, Abraham's, Jacobs, and Elkanah's. The
ground was misunderstanding of the promised seeds multiplying, which might be
conceived not to be made good without many wives. This it pleased God to pass
over as the fruit of their ignorance, especially it carrying punishment in the
mouth of it, to make them and us wiser.

As to the speech of Nathan to David, God 2 Samuel 12. 8.
gave thee thy lords wives into thy bosom, it pretends to convince David, that
God gave them under his hand, government and authority: or that God permitted
him to take Livery and seisin of his Kingdom according to the guise of that
time, which was by taking the wives and concubines of his predecessors. This
was the reason, that Adoniah desired Abishag, and Absalon went in unto his
fathers concubines. All this comes far short of proving lawfulness. As to that
Law, in Deuteronomy. 21. 15, 16.
which God takes order for one that had two wives, and children by them; God
commanded it not to be done, but when it was done, he provided a law to prevent
the greatest confusion.

2. How marriage may be so undertaken as it may be in the Lord to us? By going
along with God,

1. In the Antecedents. 2. In the Concomitants. 3. In the Consequents of it.
1. The Antecedents of an holy marriage are, A right choice by the right marks.
As for a right choice,

1. You must not choose within the degrees prohibited. 2. You must look more to
inward goodness then to outward goods.
1. The Degrees prohibited, wherein you Levit. 18. 6, 7. etc.
may not choose are set down in the Law. Levitical, and do not bind us.
Canaanites (who were not tied to Levitical Laws) were rooted out for not
observing them. And John Baptist Verse 3. 24, 25.
urged the same Law in the New Testament against Herod; yea, and Nature it self
has Mark 6. 18.
abhorred such conjunctions, which have been prohibited by Heathens.

Adams sons married with their sisters.



If ye say, that after that time Abraham married Sarah, whow he calls his
sister. True, Genesis 20. 12
but sister was a name common to kindred of that sex, and these that were
brought up in the Family, as Sarah was in Abraham's fathers house, and this is
without doubt, that God tolerated many things then which he did not approve,
which the learned call toleration without approbation.

Thou shall not discover the shame of thy brothers wife? Levit. 18. 16. Deuteronomy.
25. 5. Romans 8.
and yet again, if the brother died without issue, the brother raised up seed
unto him; firstborn among many brethren) whom we must honor by bringing forth
fruit unto him: To teach us that that law was in the Jewish pedagogie as proper
to them.

2. In choice, you must more look to inward goodness, then to outward goods.
The neglect of this was one prime cause of destroying the Genesis 6. 2, 3. Genesis
24. 3.
old world, which made Abraham wary in a match for his son, and of our good
God's giving a charge that we be not unequally 2 Cor. 614. Neh. 13. 24.
yoked to the hinderance of Religion. Must we not follow our Bridegroom
Christ, who in the Psalm 50.
choice of his Spouse looks not to outward privileges?



Moses marries an Ethiopian, and connot change either her color or her
qualities; but Christ makes us beautiful with the beauty that he puts upon
us. Must Ezekiel. 16.
we not, lastly, look to that which in true judgment is to be valued above
all? What can this be in man or woman but goodness. It is better with Boaz to
take Ruth from among the gleaners, and with Jacob to serve seven years for a
wench that keeps sheep, then to have an Idolatrous Maacah, a treacherous
Athaliah, a painted Iezabel, or a vexing Zipporah with great revenues. Yet I
pray, what are the questions now? what portion? what jointure? what money in
hand? what security for the rest? Not a word, how religious? how virtuous?
wanton Dinah, subtle Delilah, scorning Michal, sullen Vashti may pass upon
these terms. But were she as obedient as Sarah, as wise as Deborah, as
religious as the Shunamite, as devout as Hannah, as well affected to the Word
as Lydia, if she bring nothing but goodness, she may stand at door and cool
her feet.

God is not the Author of confusion; therefore 1 Cor. 14. 33.
David was not apt to entertain the motion of marrying with a Kings daughter
when she was offered, being himself but the son of Ishi: Besides, this rule
in Scripture, Parents 2 Cor. 12. 14.
lay up for their children, binds to care to bestow them so, that they may
enjoy that blessed thing, to give rather then to receive. Yet take this in,
that it must not be the chief thing in choice. Though Agar and Sarah may dwell
together, yet Sarah must be mistress; so must goodness be predominant above
goods.

But now secondly, What are the right marks which must regulate our choice in
husbands and wives? There are five sorts of marriages: A marriage of Honor,
when Christ and his Church make one mystical body. A marriage of Labor, when
men pull wives to them by the fingers, not by the ears, and do marry portions,
not wives. A marriage of Lust, when the eye is party, Parent, Preacher, all in
all, as in Sampsons. A marriage of Grief, when wicked persons meet, of whom is
that Proverb, Better one house filled, then two spilled. A marriage of Love,
when Christian godly ones are linked together; and this comes on, and is
concluded upon right choice.

1. By report, what fame she has among the godly. A good man and woman dwell
at the sign of a good name. 2. By looks, Wisdom Prove. 17. 24 Es. 3. 9.
is in the face of him that has understanding. This is like the gate of the
Temple which is called Beautiful. 3. By talking and silence; such as a man or
woman is, such is their talk. Talk in a woman must be sparing; Silence is her
best Ornament. She that is full of words, is not likely to prove either quiet,
because always babbling: Or wise, for by thy Prove. 7.
words thou shall be justified to be wise, or to be otherwise. 4. By apparel,
this is the Ivibush of the mind. As the modest woman is known by her apparel,
answerable to her birth, and breeding; so the immodest by her whorish attire,
as we see in Tamar. 5. By Genesis 38. 14, 15.
company, fellows in nature and sin will be fellows in league, as Rehoboam
and his young counselors; therefore David, when he was good, said, Away from me
ye wicked, I will Psalm 119.
keep the Commandments of my God. 6. By education, whether they have continued
in virtuous breeding. Judas may be with the Apostles for his own turn, but
continues not. Let these marks be well applied to every particular, and these
answerably made, and the wedding garment shall not be made of linsey wolsey,
nor the marriage ground ploughed with an Ox and an Ass.

SECT: 9.
2. THe Concomitants with marriage in the Lord are three,

1. The gift of the Parents. 2. The blessing of the Minister. 3. The mutual
rejoicing of the friends.
1. The Gift of the Parents either expressly, or tacitly, (or of those who are
in place of Parents) crowns the wedding with comfort. For marriage is not only
a Civil, but Matthew. 19.
a Divine conjunction, therefore Christ says, those whom God has joined
together. God does Genesis 2.
it not now Immediately, as he joined Adam, and Evah, but by the Parental
prerogative: Therefore, says God, Take ye wives to your Jer. 29. 6.
sons, and give your daughters in marriage. Yea, the light of Nature teaches
us thus much; for let a Son privily alienate his Fathers land; ask nature,
whether this be good? She cries out of every natural mouth; No, because the
land is not the Sons, but the Fathers goods. So is it in this case, because
children are part of the Fathers goods. Hence when Satan had power to spoil
Jobs goods he slew his Children: Job 1. Exodus 21. 7. Non ut* serviant, sed ut
ducantur, ut Rabbi.
and the Jews had power to sell their children, not for vassalage and service,
but for marriage. If then children shall go against their consents in this, it
will breed a pricking at the latter end.

2. The next thing in marriage is the blessing of the Minister, that is,
commending them being contracted, and their state to the blessing of God. For
when God had joined our first Parents, he said, Increase and multiply: so the
Minister in Gods room may pray this Genesis 2.
to be given. Yea, marriage is the Seminary of the Church, therefore cannot be
better set on, then by the solemnest Prayers. I do not say, that marriage can
not be without them; but I am sure that this is agreeable to that rule of Paul,
Let all things be done in order. 1 Cor. 14. 40. Genesis 29. 22. John 2.


3. The mutual rejoicing of the friends comes in next; and surely there is a
lawfulness of feasting, and mutual rejoicing at marriages. Else Christ would
not have blessed one with his presence and first miracle; nor would Es. 62. 5.
God have described the joy that he takes in Matthew. 9. 15 Matthew. 22.
his Church by the joy of marriage; nor would Christ have compared the kingdom
of heaven to a wedding feast. But let me say withal, that there are no greater
sins committed then about things lawful.

It is lawful to eat, drink, wear apparel, and to feast; hence thousands of
excesses, and miseries have come in. Excesses, as at Nabals feast, was
drunkenness: at Absolons, was murder, at Ahasuerus his, was a breach betwixt
him and his wife Vashti; at Belteshazzars carrousing and blasphemy, at Herod's,
wanton dancing, and cutting off of John Baptists head. Mi^^ries, as Elah was
smote and killed while he was drinking: Benhadad was surprised: Israel, while
meat was in their mouth, felt wrath; and Jobs children were stifled. Therefore
warily consider what ye do at weddings, and what ye should do. Ye do rejoice
indeed, but it is with wanton dancings, bawdy jests, and hellish carrowsings.
But what should ye do? Ye should be careful to prevent excess, as Christ
says, Take heed Luke 21.
that your hearts be not oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, lest that
day come upon you at unawares. Ye should bring God into all your thoughts, that
you feed not without fear. Ye Jude. Philip. 4*
should do nothing which is dishonest, or of ill report. Ye should have good
wishes, speeches, counsels, and prayers to the new married couples, like those
that said, The Ruth 4. 11.
Lord make thy wife like Rachel and Leah, which two builded the house of
Israel, and do thou worthily in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethlehem.

SECT. 10.
3. THe consequents of marriage in the Lord are two,

1. Cohabitation. 2. Communion.
1. Man and wife must dwell together. Let the husband dwell with his wife,
says Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 7. Prove. 5. 18, 19.
and Solomon says, Rejoice in the wife of thy youth, and let her breasts
satisfy thee at all times, and delight continually in her. This cannot be
without Cohabitation. The first institution was a remedy against solitariness,
It is not Genesis 2.
good for man to be alone, let us make an help meet for him, and let him cleave
to his wife.



Upon mutual consent for a time for the good of the Family. My husband says
she, is not at home, he is gone Prove. 7. 19, 20.
a far journey, at the time appointed he will come again. Upon Compulsion, when
persecution, or imprisonment forces it. When some weighty affairs either in
Church, or Commonwealth requires it. This was Vriahs case 2 Samuel 11. 11.
when he would not go to his own house while the Ark, and Israel, and Judah,
with his Lord Ioab were in Tents. Yet must they not live asunder out of choice.
It is for an harlot to be called a strange woman, but for a Prove. 2. 16. 2 Samuel
12.
wife to be a lamb in the bosom, as for the other causes, so for samenesse of
dwelling.

2. As Cohabitation follows upon marriage, 1 Cor. 7. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 4.
so Communion, which stands in three things; a communion of Bodies, a communion
of helps, and a communion of joys. They must have a communion of Bodies,
whereby they defraud not one another, except it be by consent for a time, that
they may give themselves ^^ fasting and prayer, yet must not this be excessive:
for there may be too much uxoriousness at home, as well as adultery abroad
Ez^k. 18. 6. 1 Cor. 7. 5. Genesis 25. 21 1 Samuel 1. ^7.
And it must be sanctified by the Word o^ God, and Prayer. Do it by rule, and
with Prayer, as Isaac and Hannah did. They mus^ have a Communion of helps, in
nourishing, and cherishing each other. To this end there must be a communion of
goods; they must have one purse, but not for waste: a communion of Counsel in
matters domestical; they must have one head, as Pilats wife and the Shunamite,
and a communion of labors; they must have one hand, and that an helper.

Lastly, they must have a communion of joy, by having one heart, as Isaac and
Rebeckah, who sported together, and as Solomon gives Genesis 26. 8. Prove. 5. 18,
19.
in rule; Rejoice with the wife of thy youth. Oh how happy a foundation of Gods
building would such a marriage lay, to last till death us do part.

Thus of the first part of Gods setting up of his building in a Family, the
Foundation.

SECT. 11.
NOw secondly, of the upper building, which stands perfectly,

1. In wife, and husband. 2. In parents and children. 3. In masters and
servants.
Begin where God begins, still with inferiors. Amor descendit, officium
ascendit.
Love descends, but duty ascends. The first pair of beams in an house builded
by God are wife and husband, who bear up this frame. The wife must submit to
her husband as unto the Ephesians. 5. 22, 24.
Lord; yea, as the Church is subject to Christ. The woman (says Paul) is bound
to the law Romans 7. 2
of her husband; yea, this is comely; it is the best fashion that ever they
wore. Therefore Col. 3. 18. 1 Timothy 2. 12.
(says God) I permit not a woman to usurp authority. Thy desire shall be
subject to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. Genesis 3. 16.


What it is to submit, that she may conscionably do it?

Paul says, In all things, that are lawful, and honest. Ephesians. 5. 22.


In general, she must submit to her husbands honor. Sarah honored her
husband, and called him Lord. The good wife calls her husband 1 Pet. 3. 6. Hos.
2. Prove. 7. 19.
Ishi, my man; but the harlot says plain Ish, the man is gone abroad; this is
a clear sign that she honors him not.

In particular, she must submit three ways. By an inward act of the mind,
acknowledging Ephesians. 5. ult.
his headship, and taking direction from him, if he be wise, and for him, if he
be a fool. By an inward act of the will conforming to his good manners and
affections. By these outward acts of duty which depend upon these thus;

1. They must answer their husbands wills. Their questions must not be, Whose
will shall be done: for God says, Thy desires shall Genesis 3.
be subject.





2. They must answer their husbands wisedoms 2 Kings 4. 22. Genesis 16. 6.
as the Shunamite, and Sarah who took directions from their husbands.









Abigail call her husband fool? and why may not others also? 1 Samuel 25. 25.


Nabal. She reveals no secret, but speaks of that which was in every bodies
mouth. Besides, it was not to his face to stir up strife; nor behind his back
to disgrace him, but it was to save his life. As Chirurgions to save the body
will cut off a limb, so she was willing to blur his well known name to save his
life.

3. They must answer their husbands natural dispositions which are without
sin. So Rebeckah provided savoury meat forher Genesis
old husband, such as he loved: as a looking glass she showed the countenance
of her husbands nature as it was.

4. They must answer their husbands spiritual endowments, by kindling, not
cooling graces which are given for the family. Therefore she must read and pray
with him, and for him, and hear his advices, and be a better comfort then Jobs
wife was to him in misery.

I remember a sad story upon mine own Note.
knowledge An honest Christian man had a wife, worldly, and distrustful; and
he being much in good exercises, morning and evening in his Family, she would
disturb him, and go about rattling her keys, or making some other noise to
hinder him, pretending that his time spent that way might be employed in
getting money for his Family.

This woman was given over by God to the Devils temptations so far, that she
thrust a knife into the pit of her stomach and killed her self; yet before she
died, she confessed thus much to me, and craved Gods pardon as well as she
could. Oh had it not been better that she and her husband had walked hand in
hand to heaven with her due submission?



The order of Creation requires it: Adam was first created, next Evah for him:
so the wife is for 1 Cor. 11. 8 1 Timothy 2. 14.
the husband, as her head. The order of transgression requires it. The woman
was first in the transgression. She was first in evil, last in good; therefore
she must submit.

The union betwixt man and wife requires it. Ephesians. 5.
The husband is the head of the wife, for direction, protection, and influence.
The woman gives not the name to the husband, but Es. 4. 1. Genesis 2.
the husband to the wife; and to impose a name is a sign of Soveraigntie.

So Evah was called Isha, of Ish: and Solomon's wife was called the Shulamite,
and the Quando ego ero Ca^us, tu cris Caia.
Roman said to his wife, when I shall be Caius, Thou shall be my Caia.

Therefore let all good wives learn this comely lesson to submit. There are
four enemies in some women's breasts unto this. Want of wit, to know their
place; Want of love, because they married not in the Lord; Pride, in aspiring
to mastership; and love of the vanities of this world, against the minds of
their husbands. But pray for mastery over these, and submit.

Be wary of offending your Husbands; Do as their hearts may rest in you; and
carry Prove. 31.
all for the honor, and profit of the Family.

May I not dispose of any of my husbands goods?

to keep from sin, and to preserve their Husbands life: This was Abigails
case: Where the Husband is foolish, 1 Samuel 25. 18.
and sees not what is good for himself and his Family; this also was Abigails
case.

Where the Husband is an enemy to Piety, and Mercy, and will suffer nothing
to be done, either by way of Honorarie, or relief: this was Iohanna the wife
of Chusa's case. Luke 8. 3.


Yet must it be to honor her Husband, not her self: and so frugally, and
wisely, that the Husbands house want nothing to further credit or comfort.

Do thus and prosper.
SECT. 12.
THe husband is next, who must honor his 2 Pet. 3. 7.
wife as the weaker vessel. There is a double honor; Of Subjection, so the
wife must honor her husband: Of Love and complacence, so the husband must
honor his wife. This honor stands in Love, and in the Velle cuique quod bonum
est.
fruits of it. His love to her must be a dear comforting love; not ordinary,
which is to will to every one that which is good, but by which they are glued
one unto another to do good, and not ill unto one another all the days of
their lives. The fruits of it are these that follow.

1. He must account her his yoak-fellow, standing on even ground though drawing
on the left side.

2. He must dwell with her, that he may be Ruth 4. 11. Ruth 3. 1. Prove. 5. 18,
19.
a rest for her, as for his own Vine, that she may prosper.

3. He must dwell cheerfully with her, as Isaac with his beloved Rebeckah.

4. He must direct her, and be the guide of her youth, both in civil things, as
Abraham Prove. 2. 17. Genesis 20. 16.
directed Sarah when he entertained his strangers; and in spirituals, as when
the Shunamites husband directed her.

5. He must protect her and be the covering of her eyes, and spread the skirt
of his garment over her; that is, provide for her, and protect Ruth 3. 9. 1 Samuel 30. 5, 6.
her, as David did his wife, when she was taken by the Amalekites.

6. He must provide necessaries for her according to, but not above, his means,
as God says, Thou shall not diminish her food, raiment, Exodus 21. 10, 11.
and the recompense of her virginity.

7. He must bear with her infirmities: not sinful, these must be cured by
instruction, reproof, prayer,; but passionall, as grief, fear, distrust; and
Penal, as Jacob did bear with Leahs blear eyes, and Rachels barrenness, and
Elkanah, who would not love Hannah the wors for a fault she could not help.

8. He must suffer himself in some things to be advised by her. This will
comfort them Genesis 21. 12 1 Samuel 1. 23
against those things they suffer in their husbands love. This will encourage
them to undergo joint care in the Family.

9. He must not be bitter unto her; Col. 3. 19.
does that stand?

affections, when trifles draw the heart from love to sour hatred. In words,
when their tender natures are unjustly wounded by them. In deeds, when the wife
is used like a drudge more like, then like a wife; as when she is deprived of
household government, when she is wilfully shortened in necessaries; and when she
is ill rewarded with blows. Christ is an absolute Lord, Prove. 31. 27
as well as an husband, and so may correct his Spouse; but we are only
husbands, and may not do that which can never be done without sin.

Now the reasons why husbands must honor their wives are these: Because they
are the weaker vessels. Weakest members are most spared; and brittle vessels
are most tenderly used. It is true, they are vessels, therefore they are for
use: they are helps to piety, helps to society, helps to house-government,
and helps to propagation; yet are they weaker vessels, therefore to be
honored, as being for the Closet, not for the Kitching.

Besides they are heirs together with their Gal. 2.
husbands of the Grace of life. This is the dignity of that sex, that neither
male nor female are looked upon by a different eye in God, but all are one in
Christ. Yea, would ye not have prayers interrupted? then thus honor your wives
says Peter. Yea, they are 1 Pet. 3.
the gifts of God for all comfort; and such gifts are prized.

What therefore remains, but that husbands honor their wives. If an husband
say, my wife is full of weakness, therefore honor her as the weaker; a Venice
glass with good usage lasts long.

If he say, she has bad qualities; love not them, yet honor her, not because
she deserves, but because God commands.

SECT. 13.
THe second pair in this building of God are Couplings, and they are

1. Children, and 2. Parents.
1. Children next to their duties to God are bound to do their duties to their
Parents. These stand,

1. In Reverence. 2. In Obedience. 3. In Thankfulness:
1. They owe reverence to their Parents; for acting of which there are,

1. Duties which they must do. 2. Sins which they must avoid.
1. Their Duties are grounded in a singular love, such as Ruth had to Naomi;
and they Ruth 1.
are two, standing in a reverent awe of them, as God says, Ye shall fear every
man his mother Levit. 19. 3.
and his father. God places the mother first, because they soonest are
despised thorough their own indulgence. Next, they must testify this their
reverence five ways.

1. By speaking reverently unto them, as Isaac, here am I my father; and that
son in the Genesis 22. Matthew. 21. 30. 1 Kings 2. 20.
Gospel, I go Sir; and Solomon, Ask on my mother.

2. By humble craving their blessings. Though they have no prophetical
blessings, as Isaac had for Jacob and Esau; yet God Exodus 20.
says, Honor thy Parents, that thou may live. God has promised them to be
an ordinary means to get life of him for honourers of them.

3. By rising up before them. You know Prove. 31. 28
what Bathshebah says, Her children rise up and call her blessed.

4. By bowing and baring to them (as signs of civil honor.) Thus Joseph though
a mighty Prince, and his father in want, yet Genesis 48. 12 1 Kings 2. 19.
bows to the earth before him, and Solomon to his mother.

5. By not witnessing against them, except Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
in case of Treason and Rebellion! for at such a turn, Levi saw not his father,
nor his mother or brethren.

2. Sins to be avoided by children are; First setting light by Parents:
Cursed be he, Deuteronomy. 27. 16.
(says God) that sets light of his father, that is, gives not respect to him,
as God and nature requires.

Secondly, Mocking of Parents; The eye Prove. 30. 17
that mocks his father, and despises the instruction of his mother, let the
Ravens pick out, and the Eagles devour: and this I speak upon my own knowledge,
that I knew a son many years who forsook the course of his good father, and
neglected the counsel of his religious mother, and as he was going homeward
from his bowzing companions in the evening, he fell among bushes, and died
before morning, and was found by his friends that sought him, with his eyes
picked out either by Crows, Ravens, or some birds of prey.

Thirdly, Cursing of Parents. He that curses Levit. 20. 9
his father and mother shall die the death, says God; and our good Savior
does second it.

Fourthly, Smiting Parents, For he that smites Mark 7. 10 Exodus 21. 15.
father and mother shall die the death. The very Heathens sowed such children
in a sack with a Dog, Cat, Viper, and Ape, as Emblems of unnaturalness, and
drowned them together.

2. They owe Obedience unto their Parents: Obey the father that has begotten
thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old, says Prove. 23. 22. Col. 3.
20.
Solomon: Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is pleasing says
Paul. To Obey is an humble being at the command of Parents, and a patient
holding out to the end, as Isaac to Abraham when he was to be Genesis 22.
sacrificed.

And this Obedience reaches to all things to which the commanding power of
Parents extends. It must be showed in all good things for body, soul, state,
either present or future: Jer. 35. 6. and 18.
In things indifferent, as the Rechabites, who for it, were looked upon by God
with a good eye: In harsh and unpleasing things, as we see in Joseph, when he
was commanded to go to his envious brethren that loved him not, and Gen: 37.
13. 14. Genesis 22.
in Isaac, who was able enough to resist, yet resisted not.

All the question will be, how far children must Obey? And it may be quickly
answered, Luke 14. 26. Puto genus pietatis Impium esse pro Domino. John 2.
Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
so far as may stand with the honor of God; for otherwise ye read of Hating
father and mother; and ye see the best pattern Christ, who checked his mother,
and obeyed not against the hour of his father at the beck, and word of his
mother.

Again, they must obey so far as stands with the honor of Government; for if a
son be in place of honor, and he commanded base things below him, and
unsuitable with his state, he may humbly deny: Yea, and so far must they obey
as stands with the honor of the Family. Genesis 2.
God says, Forsake thy father and thy mother, and cleave to thy wife. How
forsake them? Not forsake the duty of honoring them, or the duty of helping
them; but the duty of Cohabitation, when they have a wife of their own; and
the duties of administering their household affairs, when they have Families of
their own to provide for.

3. They owe thankfulness to their Parents, which must be held forth in three
duties.

First, in relieving their Parents that they may recompense them as Paul
phraseth it. Parents helped them when they could not 1 Timothy 5. 4.
help themselves; so must they deal by their Parents that are helpless. Thus
did Christ, David, and Joseph. Let all children look seriously upon these
examples to follow them, John 19. 26 1 Samuel 22. 3 Genesis 47. 12
or else remember that memorable story of Luther. A good Father had put over
his state to his sons in Germany, reserving only to himself a power by turns,
to come and take his diet at their Tables. One of his sons, being at dinner,
and having a goose before him, spied his father coming, and set the ^oose
underneath the table till his father was gone again. Then takes he up the goose
which God had wonderfully turned into a great toad, which leaped into his face,
and notwithstanding all his striving, it could not be removed till it had
stifled him, to make him an example of all unthankful children.

Secondly, In praying for them. If for all that are in authority, why not for
them first.

Thirdly, In burying them: therefore it is now grown into a word Parentare, to
bury Parents; and the solemnities are called Parentals. Thus did Jacob, Esau,
and Joseph.

Oh that all children would be careful to know these things in Gods building,
and do them. I know what many children plead for themselves.















Absalom, who being unnatural to his Parents, was hanged betwixt heaven and
earth, as unworthy of either, or both. If this, or the like should be thy case,
Farewell life, farewell heaven.

SECT. 14.
NExt I come to Parents, and they must not Ephesians. 6. 4.
provoke their children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture, and
admonition of the Lord.

First, they must not provoke them to wrath. Surely this is not by suffering
them to have their wills: For a child set at liberty Prove. 29: 15
makes the mother ashamed. Neither is it by rebuking them when they do amiss*
for not to do this, undoes many a child, as you see in Adoniah. Neither is it
by correcting them, when rebukes will do no good: for he that 1 Kings 1. 5, 6.
Prove. 13. 24.
spares the rod, hates his son. Neither it is by keeping them under subjection,
for this they must do out of love to God, and their souls, or sin will grow.
What is it then? It is a showing too much rigor and severitie toward them.

As first, when they deny to them what by law of Nature belongs to them
according to state, as meat, drink, cloth, and breeding. For if any man provide
not for his own, he is 1 Timothy 5. 8.
worse (in that) then an Infidel.

Secondly, when they burden them with unjust commands. Saul command Jonathan
to 1 Samuel 20. 31. 34.
fetch David out of a mischievous heart against him; and so vexed Jonathan,
that he kept from his meat.

Thirdly, When they vex them with reproachful words for what they cannot help;
as when Saul called his son, The son of a 1 Samuel 20. 30.
perverse rebellious woman. The fault was Saul's own, and not his sons if he
married such a woman.

Fourthly, when they rage them with undeserved blows. Saul took up a javelin
to throw at Jonathan, and (says the Text,) He 1 Samuel 20. 33, 34.
rose from the table in fierce wrath. If Parents thus provoke their children to
wrath, they Col. 3. 21.
will be discouraged either by dejectedness, or by fearfulness, or by
desperate stubbornness.

2. They must bring up their children in Nurture, and this is a framing of them
like (...).
men and women. It includes four things.

1. Learning. 2. Mann^rs. 3. Labor. 4. Correction.
1. They must bring their children up in learning. Paul was brought up at the
feet of Acts 22. 3.
Gamaliel, and you know the care of Pharaohs Exodus 2. Dan. 1.
daughter for Moses, and of Nebuchadnezzar for Daniel: how much more must
Christians that know better. The blessed Virgin, though she were poor, would
not be guilty; therefore Luke 4. 16. John 8. 6.
we read of her son Jesus, his reading and of his writing.









2. They must bring them up in manners. Riches without manners, is but a Pearl
in a swines snout. Therefore here lies Parents next care. If an Heathen when he
saw a youth carry himself unmannerly, beat his Cur sic instituis?
Master, saying. Why do you instruct him so? much more are Parents to be
blamed.





1. In Silence. 2. In Speech. 3. In Gesture.
1. They must learn them to keep silence in two cases.

First, In giving their betters leave to speak before them. Elihu waited till
the ancients Job. 32. 4.
had done.

Secondly, in not interrupting others while they are speaking; for he that is
hasty in his matters, there is more hope of a fool then of Prove. 29. 20
him.

2. In speech, they must learn them to use fair speeches, as that young man to
Christ, good master, and Luke to that high Christian, most noble Theophilus. To
speak modestly of themselves, Ma^k 10. 8. 17. Luke 1. 3. 1 Samuel 25. 41.
as Abigail to David's messenger, Let thy handmaid be a servant to wash the feet
of the servants of my Lord. To salute lovingly, as Boaz and his reapers, The
Lord be with you, the Lord bless thee. And to thank for kindnesses, Ruth 2. 4.
as Paul to Aquila and Priscilla, to whom not only I give thanks, but all the
Romans 16. 4.
Churches of the Gentiles.

3. In Gestures, they must learn them, To meet those that come toward them, as
Abraham did his strangers: To rise before Genesis 18. 2. Levit. 19. 32. Genesis 18.
their elders, To stand before their betters, as Abraham while his guests did
eat, To bow to them to whom they are subject, as Solomon 1 Kings 2. 19. Luke 14
8.
to his mother: and to give the chief place to betters, and to offer it to
others of courtesy. Oh what a bundle of pride would this dig out of childrens
hearts before it come to a grown surliness, and scorn.

3. They must bring them up to labor, either of body or of brain. Idleness is
a poison to all, especially to youth, who by it have leisure to invent
fantastical fashions, or to gaze upon other fools in Israel, and follow them.
Water, be it never so clean, with standing stinks; and while men slept, the
enemy sowed tares. So long as Sampson warred Matthew. 13.
he could never be overcome of the Philistims, but when he idled it in Delilahs
lap, he lost strength, eyes, and life ere long.

It is true, to try a child to too much were severe niceness, or paternal
cruelty; for 1 Cor. 13
when I was a child, I did as a child: But yet they must know, as strength of
body, and parts increases, they are born to labor, not to loyter.

4. They must subject them (as they do amiss) to correction. As it is not
enough to plant a Vine, except we prune and dress it: so nor is it enough to
have children, except we correct them.

We have the best example in the world, and that is God correcting his
children, who must be our pattern. God does correct them with the rod of his
Son.

Among the Romans none that were free Acts 22. 25.
born might be whipped, but God corrects every Heb. 12. 7.
son, and so must Parents. God corrects them in love: He is angry with
nothing in them, but with their sins; and so should it be with Parents.

Consul Brutus executed his traiterous sons Exuit patrem ut indueret consulem.
with his own hands, he put off the father that he might put on the just Judge:
but Eli, when his sons made themselves vile, restrained them not. Elies anger
waxed lukewarm toward his sons, and Gods anger 1 Samuel 2. Ira Ely tepuit in
filios ira Dei exarsit in illum*
waxed hot against him. He that will not correct, will not take a knife (as
Abraham did,) though God bid him.

Again, God moderates his correction. He Lam. 2,
stands like an adversary, but in the midst of anger he remembers mercy; and
corrects Hab. 3.
with the rod of men. Yea God measures out corrections answerable to sins. He
weighs a path for his anger by weight, number, measure. So should Parents.
Though they correct with the rod of men; yet, if sons rise Psalm. 78. 50
to rebellion, they must bring them forth, and cast the first stone.

3. They must bring up their children in (...).
Admonition of the Lord, to frame them like Christian men, to this end,

1. They must train them up religiously. 2. They must guard their Religion and
Piety.
1. In training them up religiously lies their greatest care and comfort, by
making their Children Gods children.

If Damatria could say, I had rather have a Mallem habere filium mortuum, quam
bello inutilem.
dead son, then to have a son unprofitable for war: much more should a
Christian say, I had rather have none then such as are useless to God.

If Aulus Fulvius said, when his son Ego te non catilinae sed patriae genui
was in Catilines conspiracy, I begat thee not for Catiline, but for thy
Country: much more should we say, I begat not my children for the world,
flesh, and devil, but for God.

This training them religiously does respect two things.

1. Their admittance into the Church by Baptism. To have a child the child
of the Church by Baptism is the glory of a Christian. He can not with truth,
and glory to God think that the children of the Jews should have a greater
privilege then the children of Christians; therefore as the first care of the
Jew was for Circumcision; so his first care is for Baptism and Circumcision
Col. 2. 11, 12.
that is made without hands.

2. Their bringing up in the Church in the fear of God. As in Ieremiah's
visions, God first showed him the Rod of an Almond tree, Jer. 1. 11.
because it blossoms first: so God likes the days of youth to be consecrated
to God.

Therefore Parents must first instruct them so soon as they are capable. It was
a Law in Deuteronomy. 6. 7. 20. Psalm. 78. 5, 6
Israel that the fathers should teach the children.

2. They must instruct them according to their capacity. Train up a child in
his way, says Solomon; as Jacob drove all his, according Prove. 22. 6.
to their paces, They are like us in what they are unlike to God. They may die
in their youth and folly, and then the sins of their youth will lie down with
them in the dust. They are born blind. The first Adam was the Father of living
ones; the second Adam Pater viventium, pater aeternitatis, patres caecorum.
the Father of Eternity, and we are the Fathers of the blind.

Our bringing them up in Gods fear, may by Gods blessing, be a means of opening
their eyes, that they may be turned from darkness Acts 28. Col. 1.
to light, and brought out of the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of
Gods dear Son.

3. They must (so near as they can) make choice of the best masters for them,
As Moses had the chief instructor for the sciences of Egypt; so Iehoash had
good Iehojadah. This (among others) is reckoned a cause of Iulians Apostacy,
that he had two wicked Heathens to be his masters, Libanus and Iamblicus.

2. They must guard their Religion, and Piety three ways,

First by putting them under Gods protection by daily prayer.

Secondly, By providing for them some lawful employment; for God anointed
Saul while he was seeking his fathers Asses; David was taken from the
sheepfold; and two famous Prophets, Elishah, and Amos were taken, the one from
the plough, the other from the herd.

Thirdly, by disposing of them for the best advantage for their souls in
marriage. We have a precept, Take wives to your sons, and Jer. 29. 6.
husbands to your daughters; and the practice of Abraham for Isaac, Manoah for
Sampson, yea, and of Agar for Ishmael.

I now humbly beseech that all Parents would ply these three Rules of Paul, and
that they would not be Judasses, under pretense of a kiss, to betray their
childrens souls. But as Crates was wont to cry out to the people, O men whither
now away? why take ye such care to gather riches for your children, and have no
care to train them up that should enjoy them? So may we say of too many
careless Parents among Christians to the shame of holy Christianity.

SECT. 15.
THe last pair are as rafters in Gods building, when it comes to the highest;
and are,

1. Masters, and 2. Servants.
1. Servants must be obedient to their masters Ephesians. 6. 5.
according to the flesh. By Masters you may not understand those that usurp
authority over the consciences of men: for this none must do, and none must
suffer according to Paul's rule, Be not the servants of men: but 1 Cor. 7.
those that are Masters according to the flesh, that is, who rule over the body.

By Servants, you must understand those that by Covenant cannot dispose of
their service as they please, but must be at the command of those that hire
them. Now, these must be obedient, of which they must weigh,

1. The Ground, 2. The manner, 3. The reason of it.
1. The ground is that subjection which is due from the servant to the master.
By this he stoops under the authority of his master, and it must be discovered
three ways.

1. By inward reverence, his master bearing the Image of Gods soveraigntie; in
which respect God says, If I be your master, where Mal. 1. 6.
is my fear?

2. By out ward expressing of it in speech and Luke 17. 7.
gesture, as that weary servant, when he came from the field, did not refresh
at his pleasure, but waited upon his masters leisure.

3. By patient bearing of rebukes though bitter, and unjust; as Peter says,
servants be subject to your masters with all fear, not only 1 Pet. 2. 18 19.
to the good and gentle, but also the froward, for this is thank worthy.



God forbid, for the Magistrate bears not the sword in vain. Romans 13.


If that cannot be had he may withdraw for the present, till the storm be over,
as David from Saul, and the Egyptian from the Amalekite, and then come again.

2. The manner of his obedience is,

1. Readily. 2. Pleasingly. 3. Silently. 4. Faithfully. 5. Diligently.
1. Readily, having their eyes always to their masters to be directed by a
word, or a Ps. 123. 2.
nod. Thus did the Centurions, when he said Matthew. 8. 9.
to one go, he went, to another come, he came; to another, do this, and he
did it: when it was otherwise with Jobs servants, Job 19. 16.
according to his complaint, I called my servant and he gave me no answer, I
entreated him Quoad Reverentiam Dominorum; quoad Judicium Domini.
with my mouth in vain, it was for want of fear, in reference to reverence to
their master; and for want of trembling in reference to the judgment of the
Lord.

2. Pleasingly, pleasing their masters in all Tit. 2. 9. Tit. 2. 6.
things, says Paul, not as men-pleasers with eye service, but with singleness
of heart as in Gods sight, as good Jacob did to churlish Laban. If you ask
wherein they must please them? God says, according to the flesh in all lawful
and honest things.

The masters are over the flesh, not the spirit: therefore slaves are called
bodies, because Apoc. 18. 13 (...).
commands of masters reach only to the body. The servants must obey only in
outward things. As the dominion of masters is Col. 3. 22.
limited, so is the obedience of servants.

3. Silently, not answering again, says Paul, Tit. 2. 10. Sit servus
monosyllabus Domino.
therefore that rule is good. Let the servant speak in one syllable to his
master.

Yet I shall show you two things.

1. Wherein servants may speak? 2. Wherein they may not speak?
1. They may speak in three cases; First, when just occasion is offered by
questions: for they are condemned who when they understand will not answer.
Prove. 29. 19


Secondly, when they receive wrong from their masters, they may with humble
respect clear themselves, as David did of treason, by 1 Samuel 24. 10, 11.
showing his innocence by three signs, the lap of Saul's garment, his water
pot, and spear.

Thirdly, when wholesome and good advice may do their masters good, as you see
not only in Naamans servants when they advised 2 Kings 5. 13. Job 31. 13.
him to follow the Prophets counsel though it seemed but mean unto him, and
also in Job when he was in his prosperity.

2. They may not speak in two cases. First, by private mutterings and
grumblings against the command of their masters.

Secondly, by open crossing and thwarting them by perverse and snarling words,
to provoke them to anger and displeasure.

4. Faithfully, as, Jacob obeyed Laban, by bearing the heat of the day, and
burden of Genesis 38. 39 40.
the night for his good; and Joseph obeyed both Potiphar, and the Jailer, who
looked not to any thing under his hand, so faithful was he. This faithfulness
stands in two things.

1. In seeking to increase their masters good to their lawful power: for
talents are Matthew. 25. 27. Tit. 2.
put out to the servants for the masters gain.

2. In not diminishing them. They must be no pickers and stealers, says Paul.



thee in more? If Achans tongue of gold lie before thee thou will not spare. God
delights to say to a good servant, Thou have been faithful Matthew. 25.
in a little.





5. Diligently. He that waits on his master Prove. 27. 18. 1 Kings 17. 1. 2
Kings 5. 16.
shall be honored, says Solomon. For this cause servants are said to stand
before their masters, to be always at hand upon every occasion: and Heathens
painted servants with their hands full of tools to imply their diligence about
any work that their masters set them about.



Covenant. Yet they are from the acts of it at three times, when they are the
Lords prisoners by sickness in truth not pretended: when they are to rest in
the night except in extraordinary cases; and when they are bound, according to
good orders of the Family, to serve the Lord either privately with their
masters, or publicly upon the Lords day.

Now thirdly, the reasons why servants must thus obey are these. 1. Because
thus they honor Christ. They are more Christ's then their masters; therefore
they obey as the Ephesians. 6. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20. Col. 3. 24. 1 Pet. 2. 21.
servants of Christ. 2. Because this is acceptable to God, and he will pay
better wages then men; for they shall receive the reward of inheritance. 3.
Because thereunto they are called, and heartned by Christ's example, who served
to the uttermost for our good.

Oh that all servants would learn to be better servants then they are or have
been, according to these directions. I am sure, if they do not, at the last
they will lie down in sorrow. Oh that they would carefully study the lessons
of servants as they are laid Col. 3. 1 Pet. 2. Tit. 2, Ephesians. 6.
down in the good word of God! Oh that the patterns of noble servants in the
Scripture lay before them, as of Eliezer Abraham's servant, that faithful,
praying and diligent man: and of Jacob when he was a servant to Laban, and of
the Centurions servants, who were at such a punctual beck. Oh that they would
never forget Paul's motive, That you Genesis 24. Genesis 31. Matthew. 8. Tit. 2. 10.
may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things! Oh that they would
think what a disgrace it is for unworthy servants to live under the blessed
beams of this Gospel of light, and life. Certainly, if God set these things
home, they would alter their course, and be obedient according to Christ's will.

SECT. 16.
2. MAsters must give unto their servants that which is just and equal. Masters
Col. 4. 1.
must make it their first care to choose servants aright. How watchful was David
for this, when he said, No deceitful person shall live in my sight; he that
tells lies shall not abide before Psalm 101.
me? Truly, so should it be with all masters. This will bless their state as
we see in Jacob, and Joseph; and the contrary will poison children, and all
the comforts of our Families. I heartily pray, that men may be as wary to
choose them as they are to choose sheep, and swine, and dogs, and horses,
according to their races.

And having chosen them, that they would.

1. Give them that which is just. 2. Give to them that which is equal.
1. Masters must give to them that which is just, that is* what is due to them
by positive laws.

This they must perform both,

1. In Thought. 2. In Words. 3. And in Deeds.
1. In Thought, not thinking to exercise absolute dominion over them, but such
as they must account for to God; therefore the Apostle Ephesians. 6. 9.
uses this motive, knowing that ye have a master in heaven.

2. In words, both in commands, and instructions. Pia, possibilia,
proportionalia.
The masters commands must be pious, possible, and proportionable. They must be
pious, that is, things agreeable to Gods will: not as Saul's was to Doeg, to
fall upon 1 Samuel 22. 18. 2 Samuel 13.
the Lords Priests; nor as Absolons to his servants to kill Amnon. They must be
possible of things feazable. Therefore when Eliezer suspected the possibility
of his doing after Abraham's command, he said, what if the woman will not follow
me? Abraham replied, Genesis 24. 8.
then thou shall be clear. They must be proportionable, when they command them
labor, but not above strength. The poor Israelites were servants in Egypt, and
the Taskmaster Exodus 5.
caused them to gather straw, and make their old tale of brick; this was above
strength, and so unjust. But God says, over your brethren Levit. 25. 46.
you shall not rule with rigor or cruelty. They must also do justice in
instructions. Servants must serve their masters as Christ, and this they cannot
without instructions first. Abraham armed all his trained servants, that is,
his Catechized servants, whom he had so Genesis 14. 14
well instructed, that they would follow him through all dangers; and Hezekiah
made the servants copy out part of Solomon's Proverbs Prove. 25. 1.
for their rules to follow. If masters take not this course, their servants
cannot adorn the Doctrine of Christ.

3. In deeds, as masters must be careful for their servants health, if in their
service they be sick, as that good Centurion was, who Matthew. 8. 5, 6.
went to Christ for his help; and in providing sufficient meat and drink for
them, as Solomon did for his workmen, and the good housewife 2 Chr. 2. 10 Prove.
31. 15. 1 Cor. 8. 9.
for hers according to the equity of that rule, Thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the Ox which treads out the corn, and in providing due punishment
for them according to Law, when they do amiss, by which means masters should
be better served: so by justly paying them their wages. This makes up a Deuteronomy.
15. 13, 14.
sweet harmony betwixt masters and servants, according to that expression of
Christ, He agreed with them for a penny, they make a sweet Matthew. 29. 2 (...)
James 5. 4.
symphonie or harmony betwixt them; but the contrary makes a fearful jarre and
cry, which God hears.

2. Masters must give to their servants that which is equal, which is due by
Charity, and Christian meekness. For equal does not comprehend equal honor,
and equal offices of love, that is, such as the servants perform to the
master; for this is a good rule; To Inaequalibus dare aequalia, inaequale est.
give equal things to unequal persons is unequal. But it is to be referred to
the mind and manner of doing, that as the servant performs his duty equally,
so the master must perform his. The servant obeyes as to the Lord, the master
rules as the Lord piously. The servant obeyes from the heart willingly; the
master rules with a mild and fatherly affection.

Now, this equality comprehends four Job 31. 15. Phile. v. 16. Habent cutem
communem licet non vestem. Job 31. 13. 14.
duties. 1. To account that servants are of the same mould; yea, and partakers
of the same grace of Christ. They have a common skin, though not a common
covering: 2. To hearken to them and yield to them when reason, and truth is on
their side. 3. To have respect to humane infirmities, as sickness, age, and
passions. 4. To give well deserving servants more then is due to them by
Covenant and bargain. If they be better then servants, it is but equal that we
be better then masters.

Oh that all masters would labor to be such! I shall give you but three
motives. 1. Our servants are fellow servants with us to God. If the Angel said
to John, I am thy Apoc. 19.
fellow servant, much more may the master to the servant. 2. Death will level
us all; yea, it may be will make the servant above his master, if he be above
him in grace: for there the servant is free from his master. 3. Masters have a
Master in Heaven, that is God, He is Job 3. 19.
Omniscient, and it were impudency to deal wickedly when he looks on. He is
Holy and Just, and will not wink at iniquity, though indulgent masters will,
and do. He is Omnipotent, and able to punish all iniquity he hates. The very
thought of these things ought to make better servants, and better masters.

SECT. 17.
THus I have brought Gods building in a Family from the Rule to the Timber,
from the Timber to the Framing, from the Framing to the Foundation, from the
Foundation to the upper Building, even to the Roof. We are come now to Gods
Finishing of a Family, which is by an orderly government under a good father
and mother of a Family.



Augustines case; therefore he writes to the ministers, seniors, and the whole
City of Hippo, that they would not faint in Epist. 137. quamtumlibet vigile^t
disciplina domus m^ae, ^omo sum and inter homines vi^^. Nec mihi arrogare audeo
ut domus mea melior sit quam Arca Noae, etc.
their course, or judge hardly of him for it. Although says he, the discipline
of my house be quiet, and vigilant, yet am I a man, and live amongst men;
neither dare I arrogate to my self that my house should be better then the Ark
of Noah, the house of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and of Christ. Thus may it be
also with many a good man. Yea, there have been no worse men in the world, then
they that have the best means of grace in the best Families.

In Adams family there was a murdering Cain; in Abraham's, a persecuting
Ishmael; In Noah's, a scoffing Cham; in Isaacks, a profane Esau; in David's, an
undutiful Abshalom; in Mephibosheths, a faithless Zibah; and in Elishahs, a
lying Gehazi. Neither may we wonder at it, because Religion descends not by
inheritance, for Adam begat a child in his Genesis 5. 3.
own likeness, a sinner like himself. Yea, Religion is the work of God, and he
has other Romans 9. 17. 1 Samuel 2. 25.
ends, in means of Reformation, then Conversion, as we may see in Pharaoh, and
in Elies sons.

Yet what then? Shall not therefore a good father and mother of a Family strive
for an orderly government? Yea much more. Ye know what a people God told the
Prophets Jeremy and Ezechiel that they should preach Jer. 1. 19. Ez^ch. 2. 5.
7. and 3. 7.
unto, even as bad as briars and thorns; yet he did it not to cool their
affections, but to make them more zealous: so I present what possibly may be to
whet you to put to all your strength for orderly Families.

Thus did Adam and Evah, whose religious Family was called The face of God.
Thus Genesis 4. 14. Genesis 18. 19 Josh. 24. 15. Acts 10. 2.
did Joshuah, David, Cornelius, or else such high praises of them would never
have been left recorded for our imitation.

Consider therefore seriously,

1. What all Governors of Families must do to this end? 2. What either of the
Governors must do?
1. In general, all Governors of Families must be careful to look to
themselves. If they shine not before the rest, but lie rotting in the dunghill
of nature; ye ^^all have a den of swearers, drunkards, liars, whoremongers,
cheaters, and the like, in a Family. For Jeroboam will make Israel to sin,
Augustus will fill his Court with Scholars, Tyberius with dissemblers, and
Julian with Apostates.

They must care again, to be such at home as they seem to be in the assemblies
of Gods people, that is, truly religious. David prays that his people may be
corner stones, and polished; so do I pray, that all Governors of Families may
be such. They must care (as they can) to draw into their Families such as be
gracious, or at least submit to gracious courses. Though a Family may be named
Good, from the better part, yet it is best when the Canaanites are kept out of
it.

But now secondly to come unto particulars, see what either of the Governors
of a good Family must do for their parts.

1. The Father of a Family. 2. The Mother of a Family.
SECT. 18.
1. THe Father of a Family must care for three things.

1. That his Family serve God every day. When Joshuah says, (I and my Family
will Josh. 24. 15
serve God) he does promise, and bind himself for every day of his life after.
As when David said, thy face will I seek, it binds him for his ever.

To this end the master must either teach (as he can and ought in a private
way) or provide Deuteronomy. 6. 7. 20.
that his Family be taught in Gods will. The command of God requires it: and
the general bond of Christians to exhort, edify, and comfort one another
reaches unto them. Besides, the pattern of good men which does powerfully
invite them. See what God says of Abraham, and it is notable Gen 18. 19
what Solomon says of his father, Hear (O you children) I give you a good
Doctrine: Prove. 4. 1. 2, 3, 4.
for I was my Fathers son, and he taught me.

2. The master must pray (by himself, or other) both with and for his Family.
As the Patriarch's were the Princes and Priests of the Family, so masters are
chief heads; and truly without Prayer they and their Families lie open to the
fearful wrath of God; for he will power out his wrath upon the Families Ier.
10. 25.
that call not upon his name.

Certainly, masters are bound to do what good they can for their Families; and
how can they say so to God, when they have not prayed for, and with them, which
is a special means.

when they must do it?

pray continually, argues morning and evening 1 Thessalonians. 5.
at least.

1. They must do it in the morning (if they be at home, and well:) because
though their family rise well, yet ere night they may fail, fall sick, and die
Though they seem faithful now, they may be faithless, if God deliver them not
from their own hearts. Er and Onan were alive in the morning, but dead before
night. Abimelech well in the morning Genesis 38. Jud^ 9.
but his brains almost near beat out before night. Jobs children well in the
morning, Job 1.
but crushed to death before night. How would such accidents sting masters
Consciences, if they had not cared to prevent such accidents by prayer?

2. They must do it in the Evening, because thieves may spoil us of our goods,
bloud-suckers may bereave us of our precious lives, winds may blow down our
houses, fire may devour our goods and persons, the malicious Prince of the air
may annoy us. Oh how had we need to bring Gods hedge about them by prayer, an
internal sleep, or any sad accident shall be the less unwelcome to us and ours.

2. He must care that his Family serve God on the Lords day. To carry Gods
sense distinctly I shall tender three Rules. 1. Masters must care that their
households keep the Lords day as well as themselves. That Law of God, Thou Deuteronomy.
11. 2
shall write the Law upon the posts of thy house and gates, does look two ways.

To all under government, and tells them what should be required of them so
long as they lived in the Family, and to all masters, what they were to look
after from all them that went in and out there. For in this Commandment more
specially, what we are bound to do our selves, we are also bound to be a means
to further others in: therefore God says, Thou, thy son, thy daughter, thy
Exodus 20.
manservant, thy maidservant, and the stranger that is within thy gates.
Equity and Justice does also require it: that as they help us in many things,
we should help them in the best; and as God has made them ours, so we should
make them Gods.

2. Masters must be careful so near as they can, to bring their whole Families
to the public exercises of Religion. I mean those that are in a capacity to
make any profit by them.

When Jacob went up to Bethel; he called Gen 35. 2, 3 Psalm. 42. 4.
his people and assembled them together; and when David went to the house of
God, he carried a great train with him; so should good masters do now. This
savours of a spirit fit for the Gospel, and these times of grace, whereof it is
prophesied we should say, Come Es. 2. 2, 3. Zach. 8 21 22, 23.
let us go up to the House of the Lord: Let us go speedily to pray before the
Lord, and seek him, I will go also.

3. Masters must have what care they can over their peoples profiting in
Religion: for this is that which gives life to all the rest. Therefore they
ought familiarly to talk with them of what they have heard, as Christ did with
his Disciples. They shall find these blessed benefits by it; Attention to the
public ministry; Retention of what is heard; and Duties better performed to
God and to themselves.

3. He must have care that his Family be kept in a course of good order. He
must have a watchful eye over every soul in the Family. If Solomon would have
them to take heed to Prove. 27. 23
their herds, and to know the state of their flock^s; much more of their
people. Surely God loved this in Job, when he said, It may be my Job 1.
sons have sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts.

He must also see the orders of Gods word to be observed in it. And if there be
a scoffing Ishmael, he must out of doors with him: Psalm 101.
or if such as David speaks of, he must not let them abide in his sight, so
far as he has power to help.

If a King were to come to thy house, and there were some traitor in it,
would thou not discard him? how much more must thou have care to cast off
presumptuous sinful traitors, seeing God must come and dwell with thee, or
else thou die for it?

SECT. 19.
AS for the Mistress, or good wife, God must have her keep an orderly Family
also.

To this end,

1. She must ordinarily keep at home. 2. She must govern the house in her
place.
1. She must ordinarily keep at home. The Tit. 2. 5.
harlot sits at the door, and walks idling in the streets: but Abraham said of
his wife, she i^ Prove. 7. 12.
in the Tent. And indeed a wife is fitly compared to a snaile; not because she
must be Genesis 18.
slow, and sluggish as a snaile, nor because she must be foul and sluttish,
where she goes, as a snaile; not because she must dwell alone from her husband,
as a snaile, but because she carries her house upon her back, to show where
her mind and ordinary abode must be.

For gadding brings to harlotrie, as we see in Dinah, who by gadding came
cracked home; and gadding makes idle and busy bodies, as Paul says, Going
about idly from house to 1 Timothy 5. 13
house, and being busy bodies. What? Idle and busy too? How can that be? Idle
in their own affairs, and busy in other folks matters.



Shunamite, and Hannah. To friendly meetings for visiting one another; so the
blessed Virgin visited Elizabeth, and other neighbors visited Luke 1. 39. 40,
48.
her. For household necessaries in her charge; so the Canaanitish woman came to
Christ for her daughter, and the wife of Jeroboam Matthew. 15.
came to the Prophet for her child. And with her husband, when he shall
require her, as Sarah, Rebeckah, Naomi, and the blessed Virgin did. Yet must
they not be from home idly, or frequently.

2. She must govern the house in her place, as Paul says, Unworthy are they to
have good 1 Timothy 5. 14
wives, and worthy to be punished with worse, who deprive them of all Household
government, and use them only as servants and drudges.



By exercising her self in some profitable employment, as seeking wool and
flax, and laboring cheerfully Prove. 31. 13, 14.
with her hands, being like a Merchants ship that fetches her food from a
far: By appointing her maids work and overseeing them in it. For if Hester
appointed her maids religious Hest. 4. 16. Prove. 31.
work, surely she would not fail in the rest; and by ordering her children and
servants in wisdom, as that good Housewife Prove. 31. 26 27.
did.

Oh how gloriously is Gods building finished when it is thus ordered? It is not
enough to provide for the bodies of them under you, but specially for their
souls: therefore be vigilant to pull down the Synagogues of Satan in your
Families; let the Devil be cast out. Bring in the private exercises of Religion
into them.

Cornelius, brought in prayers and alms; Acts 10. 2.
there is one.

The Bereans, searched the Scriptures when Acts 17. 11
they had heard; there is another.

Eunice, Catechized her child, there is a 2 Timothy 3. 15.
third.

Christ, sung a Psalm in his Family after Matthew. 26. 29.
supper; there is a fourth.

Lastly, labor sincerely to keep the way R^m. 16.
of God publicly and privately in your family, and then that honorable
Inscription will come to you, which came to Aquila and Priscilla, To the Church
that is in thy house.

Thus is Gods building finished.
SECT. 20.
4. LEt this building be but furnished with Gods furniture, and then ye have
The Lords building of the house, and they shall not labor in vain that build
it.

Now this house is furnished two ways.

1. By getting goods. 2. By giving goods.
This may seem to be a Paradoxe; but I shall smooth it before I leave it.

1. We may get good six ways.

1. By lending. 2. By borrowing. 3. By selling. 4. By buying. 5. By letting. 6.
By hiring.
And if ye do them according to Gods Rule, ye furnish the House of God.

1. As for lending, We must lend, looking for Luke 6. 35.
nothing again.



his seed does inherit the blessing. Psalm 37.


To conceive the Rule then, weigh;

1. What is meant by lending? 2. What is meant by looking for nothing? 3. Why
we must so lend?
1. Lending stands either in turning over of the property of goods to another
to spend, upon condition of returning the same in kind, or worth, after the
time set, as money, victuals; or in turning over the use of a thing to another
for a time, to be returned the same in number and worth at the time appointed,
as when we lend any utensil; For lending comprehends two things.

First, Mutuum, that is, Meum, and tuum, or ex meo tuum; now mine, now thine,
to return in kind or worth: Next Commodatum, mine in possession, and thine in
use for a time freely to be restored in the same.

This lending is a free putting over: for this is the nature of lending, as
Christ says here; and thus it is distinguished from buying, selling, letting,
hiring, changing, and all mercenarie acts; and it is for a time, to distinguish
it from free giving which is for ever; and it is but till the time appointed,
and this is just. Then it is no longer ours, but to be restored.

2. About looking for nothing again, I shall clear three points.

1. What we may look for again? 2. What we may not look for again? 3. How it
appears to be Christ's sense?
1. We may look for again. First what 1. Mu^ui aequalitatem. 2 Kings 4.
justly answers to the thing lent: therefore Elisha charge the widow to
pay her debts.

Secondly An action of debt, if they can pay 2. Ream actionem.
it and do not; and if there be no other remedy; for this is one of the ends
of judicature, by which Law is administered, and which is good if it be used
lawfully, because the sword Romans 13.
is to defend the oppressed.

Thirdly, The like courtesy in times of Amorem and gratitudinem.
need; this is but equal; support one another in Love; do good one to another.

Fourthly, Love and thankfulness. This Paul paid cheerfully unto Aquila and
Priscilla, Romans 16. 4.
unto whom I give thanks. These things we may look for; yet here we must be
careful that our hearts do not carry us to lend for these things sake, for then
are we selfe-seekers.

2. We may not look for again, The like good turn to be done to us for lending
sake, as lending; because it is a free act: nor any gain for lending, as if we
wished that what we lent would come laughing home: because this overthrows the
nature of lending, which ought to be free; and this takes away the equity of
lending, which is only that the Exodus 22. 14, 15.
lender be no loser.

3. It appears that this is Christ's sense, in the word Nothing; because by this
rule he does only oppose the Pharisees, who were Luke 6. 32, 33, 35.
willing to lend only to them that were able and willing to benefit them
again, and from whom they looked for the like.

4. The reasons why we must so lend, are taken from Christ himself, which are;
First, the command of God. Secondly, the promise of Christ, your reward shall
be great in Luke 6. 34, 35.
Heaven. Thirdly, the sign of sonne-ship; ye shall be the children of the
Highest. Fourthly, the example of God, he is kind to unthankful ones. Fifthly,
and a difference from ungodly men, sinners lend to sinners to receive as much
again; but you are not in communion with such, therefore you must look for
Nothing.

Now from this rule of Christ, there is a double inference,

1. That lending is a duty. 2. That lending must be free.
1. It is a duty, because Christ says, Lend; and we must take his word. To
help you therefore in it, I shall show you,

1. Who must lend? 2. To whom we must lend? 3. Why we must lend?
1. Every one must not lend; but first, he that has this worlds goods of his
own. This excludes servants, they must not lend their masters goods: children,
they must not lend their Parents goods: Condemned persons, they must not lend
confiscated goods though they were their own; unlawful getters may not lend
unlawfully gotten goods, b^t should restore them to the true owners. Secondly,
He that has wisdom to lend for the good of the public body, he must lend
when he has to lend of his own.

This excludes all unthriftie persons; who are under tutours and governors,
and madmen, who want wisdom to manage such a work.

2. Those that may lend, must not lend to those to whom they can do no good;
as to Spend-thrifts who live in wicked courses; to Gallants, who spend all upon
back and belly; to men not able to manage their trades; for so they pull down
a Commonwealth; to men not able to pay again; these are not the objects of
lending, but of giving; to men that live above their states; for this feeds
pride, and ruineth them; and to men that seek lending for spending, as
Drunkards, who spend on the Lords Day in drink and Tobacco, more then they get
in the week to pay debts.

But if ye lend, ye must lend to those to whom ye may do good, whether they be
good rich, to whom you may lend out of courtesy; Gal. 6. 10.
or good poor, to whom (if ye are able) ye must lend out of mercy, for a good
man Psalm. 112. 5
shows favor and lends.

I can not lend to all.

a good man lends, and will guide his affairs with judgment. Psalm. 112. 5.


3. The reasons why they that may, and can must lend, are because it is a
commanded duty, If thy brother be poor, thou shall not Deuteronomy. 15. 7. 8.
harden thy heart, but thou shall lend unto him sufficient: Yea, because by
this means we provide for our children, The righteous is Psalm. 37. 26.
merciful, and lends, and his seed inherits the blessing: and because we may
not be a means to multiply the poor, and so, lessen the givers. A little lent,
many times, by Gods blessing and man's industry, may make a giver, and keep
from poverty.

4. It is also inferred necessarily that lending must be free: look for
nothing, therefore receive but thine own. Look for nothing, therefore lend for
nothing. I cannot say, but that they who have plenty of money may, not by
lending, but by another contract, place out their money with those that have
plenty of trade, by which they make gain, and receive profit by it: for there
is neither reason nor conscience, but that when money is made fruitful the
owner should have a share in the fruit: yet do not as common Usurers, who
strive to take this excellent duty of lending out of the world. For it takes
from it three things; The Nature of lending which is free. The Equity of Nullo
interposito praetio Ex^d. 22. 14. 15.
lending, which is only to make the lender no loser, whereas they are gainers:
and The Use of lending; for if they can lend for gain, no man will lend freely.

Deal you better with lending, and use this duty well which Christ requires.
In general, do it out of true love, not self love: for others good, whether
you lend to rich or poor. In particular, lending is double: Naked and bare,
upon a word of entreatie, promise, and no more Clothed and palliated with
pawnes, pledges, bonds or bills. It is not absolutely lawful in all cases to
take pawnes and pledges; therefore mark the Scripture expressions, If at all
thou take a Exodus 22. 26. D^ut. 24. 6. ve^^. 17. Job 24. 13. Prove. 20. 16
raiment for a pledge, you must not take the upper garment, or nether millstone,
nor a widows raiment, nor a widows Ox: That in Solomon, take his garment
that is surety for a stranger, and take a pledge of him for a strange woman,
is not spoken of a poor borrower, but of a desperate fool that will rashly be
bound for a stranger, and wickedly get money for harlotrie. But if thou do take
pawns, things of necessary use are not to be withheld though they pay thee not.
For raiment pawned must be delivered; and the milstones, and so any necessary
instruments by which a Exodus 22. 26.
living is gotten; because the life is gotten and maintained by them. Use
lending according Deuteronomy. 24. 6. 12, 13.
to these Rules and prosper.

SECT. 21.
2. AS for Borrowing, you must if you would furnish with God, pay justly when
due, and fully without defalcation. For this is your rule, O we nothing to any
man, but Romans 13. 8.
that ye love one another.

borrow at all.



But to remedy all, First labor to owe as little as possibly you can; for it
is a baseness to borrow, The borrower is a servant to Prove. 22. 7.
the lender, says Solomon.

Secondly, If you owe any thing, labor to pay: so long as thou art in debt,
thou art Prove. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
in a snare, deliver thy self says Solomon: abate thy expenses in meat, drink,
clothing, and refreshment till thou be at liberty.

Thirdly, think often how unjust it is that thou should be better in thy
estate by another man's loss.

Fourthly, let that note of a godless man stare upon thy Conscience to
affright thee, The wicked borrowes, and pays not again. Psalm. 37. 21.


2. Use what is lent thee so, as thou restore it well, and honestly. To this
end, use it to that end it was lent thee, and restore it safely at the time
appointed. This is just according to Gods Word, and thy Conscience, and will
bring Gods blessing to the building of the Family by it.

SECT. 22.
3. FOr buying, selling, letting, hiring, God gives one general rule; Defraud
not, or go not beyond your brother in any matter. 1 Th^ss. 4. 6
Dealing is so intertwisted with deceit, as if tradesmen generally had another
rule to walk by, from another Bible of their own devising.

But God will have an account from every tradesman of this rule which he has
given them.

Enquire,

1. Who is meant by our Brother? 2. What is meant by going beyond, or
defrauding? 3. Why you must not do it?
1. By brother, you must understand every one that you are to deal with. Have
we not Mal. 2. 10. Caveat emptor.
all one Father? and so we are all brethren. That speech therefore is rotten,
Let the buyer beware. he was a stranger, he should have looked better to it. I
have read of some Heathens who would teach their children to lie to strangers
and enemies, but not to friends, But these children forgot this distinction,
and made bold to lie to their best friends. so we find it in tradesmen, who
mistaking brother for a friend only, deceive poor strangers, and out of
custom make bold with their friends, and give them a currish and unkind nip
upon this account, that he is my friend that I can gain by.

2. By going beyond, or defrauding, you must understand overreaching, cozening
in bargaining one with another, as in buying, selling, letting, and hiring.

3. The reasons why ye may not do it may be these:

First, Because God is the avenger of all such, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6 Qui tantum timet
est inimicus Iustitiae.
as Paul has it. I know He that does a duty only for fear, is an enemy of
justice: Yet an eye to the punishment is one ingredient which must have a
stroke here. And this is most true, where man's justice fails, Gods vengeance
comes in to make a supply as in the case of Ahab, Iesabel, and Naboth. Gods
rules are excellent; Rob not the poor because he is poor, Prove. 22. 22, 23.
for the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of them that spoiled
them.

Secondly, Because there is a kind of Adultery or worse filth in it. The Law
says, that Nature has made a marriage betwixt the heart V^rba concipiuntur in
adulterio.
and the tongue; therefore when the heart and tongue do disagree, words are
conceived in adultery: so may we say betwixt words and truth of things in
bargaining, so far as acts are produced without the concurrence of words and
truth, they are brought forth in adultery.

If therefore there must be no defrauding in any matter, you must first be
equal in selling.

To this end weigh,

1. Who must sell? 2. What must ^e sold? 3. How it must be sold?
1. For the person that must sell, he must be a just professor, one that ownes
a commodity by good r^ght, and has judgment to do it. This is but equal,
and so excludes thieves, fools, and all that have gotten goods unjustly, which
must be restored (if they would have pardon) and not sold.

2. That must be sold which may be valued with money. Not the graces and gifts
of God either miraculous or ordinary, as the pardon 2 Kings 5. 20. Acts 8.
of sin, or the like, of which sale Teceliris was a great Merchant for the
Pope in the days of Luther, no nor justice must be sold by bribery, which is
to be reckoned for in too many places of ^udicatures, nor must lies be sold by
false witnesses, or ungodly Lawyers; nor courtesy, mercy* time, by the common
Usurers; but that which may be valued by money.

Yea, Thirdly, It must be worth the money we sell it for.



goodness of the thing, if it be not counterfeit and vicious, as Esd. 1. 22.
Amos 8. 6.
when wine is mixed with water, dross with silver, chaff, and refuse with
wheat: and by the rareness of a commodity; in this case 2 Kings 5. 18. 25.
a cab of Doves dung, and an Asses head is valued above their natural or usual
worth. Yet no commodity must be made rare by our engrossing Prove. 11. 26
and forestalling; for he that withdrawes the corn hoping for a dearer market,
the poor shall curse him, but blessing shall be to him that sells it; and so
for other commodities.

May a man in no case sell for more then a commodity is worth? Thuriaci made
the seller swear before the Magistrate, that he sold for no more then his
commodity was worth.

when he sels for time?

Pious, betwixt brother and brother; Discr^et, Dium, disc^e^um: ^igidum
augmentatum.
betwixt man and man, Rigid, betwixt Christian and Turk; and Augmented above
these three. The first three exceed not Justice, if a tradesman be worsted by
delay. But the fourth does. For it biteth and devoureth for times sake, and
which is not in a man's power to sell.

3. As the how and manner of selling, it must not be deceitfully in word or
deed. Not in word, by flattering the buyer, or praising the commodity above
its worth, or by concealing the faults. Not in Deeds, when they Es. 1. Amos 8.
deceive in the kind, as by selling dros for silver or refuse for wheat; or in
the Quality, as by making it seem better then it is by false glosses, false
lights, or by comparing it with Prove. 11. 1. Amos 8. 4, 5, 6, 7. Levit. 19. 35,
36. Deuteronomy. 25. 14, 15.
worse: or in the Quantity, by false weights and measures, both which are
alike abominable to God.



that light gain makes an heavy purse: And forget not two excellent Proverbs
of Solomon, An heritage hastily gotten shall not be Prove. 20. 21 Prove. 28. 20
blessed, and a faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he that makes have
to be rich, shall not be innocent.

SECT. 23.
2. IF there must be no defrauding in any matter, you must equal in buying.

To this end consider.

1. The person of whom you must buy. 2. The thing you buy. 3. The manner of
buying.
1. You must only buy of him that has right to sell, whatsoever pennieworth
you may have, you must not (as near as possibly you can) buy stolen and
uniustly gotten goods.

If you do, you do communicate with him in sin, and countenance him in it.
Remember what God blames, Thou saw a thief, Psalm. 50. 18. Prove. 29. 24
and runnest with him; and what Solomon says, He that is partner with a thief,
hates his own soul: Yea, if you do, you bind your selves to loss, by
Restitution, though you have paid for it. For ye must restore that which is
another man's, how precious so ever it be to you, and seek your remedy of the
seller. If you say you have bought it. You may also buy another man's house and
lands, shall you therefore possess them. So nor ought you to possess any
things that is another man's right, howsoever it be made yours. If all the
unjust persons and plunderers in these times, who without martial warrant have
gotten estates by this way would think sadly of it, their crests would soon
fall.

2. Consider the thing bought. It must be a thing to be sold, not the gifts of
God, nor remission of sins, nor holy orders; but a Acts 8. 18, 19.
thing to be sold; and a thing worth no more then we buy it for, at least
between brother and brother. Amos blames them that buy the poor Amos 2. and 8.
6.
for silver, and the needi^ for shoes. This is done when ye set small prices
upon poor peoples works, and commodities, which is a crying sin of these
times; and when great prizes are set upon such commodities as the poor must
buy and live upon, which is as crying a sin as the former. ^ob says, If I
have eat the fruits of the land without silver (except it were given him) let
thistles grow Job 31. 39. 40.
in stead of wheat, and cockles in stead of barley. Most people care not how
dear they sell, and for how little they buy. They would have it for less then
it cost the seller, they cannot endure honest gains. But they will find this
to be unequal, and that it will breed gravel in their teeth.

3. The manner of buying must be lastly considered, and must be void of all
deceit, either in word or deed. It must not have deceit in words: for the buyer
must not debase and dispraise the ware below the worth. If he do, Solomon pulls
him by the sleeve; It is naught, it is naught says the buyer, but when Prove.
20. 14
he is gone he brags of his penny worth. It must not have deceit indeed by
paying counterfeit, and clipped coin, or less then they agree for; both are
faults of the miserable wretches of this time.

SECT. 24.
Equal in letting.

To this end Consider,

1. What letting is? 2. How it must be performed?
1. Letting is the putting over the use of a thing to another for a price, the
property remaining in our selves. I say, for a price to distinguish it from
lending which is free I say, the property remaining, to distinguish it from
lending of money, wherein the property in laying of it out, passes away.

2. This letting must be performed upon these terms.

First, that which is let must be fit for the use for which it is let. To let a
fool or idle person to do a wise man's business is unjust. To let a lame, dull,
weak horse, to do a sound quick horses work is unjust. To let barren and ill
conditioned Land, for good and fruitful; or to let an house that is ready to
fall, for a sufficient one, are unjust: we do not as we would be done unto.

Secondly, that must be let whose use must be distinguished from the
property, that the Letter may have his own again, which can not be in money.

Thirdly, In letting profit must be so proportioned, that he that hires may be
sufficiently recompensed for his labor, and charge. Solomon let his Vineyard
in Baalhamon to keepers, so, as he had A thousand pieces of silver for his
Rent, and the keepers Cant. 8. 11, 12.
Two hundred, for their labor, and charge. But if we look to most Landlords
now, we shall find such penny worths, that the tenant laboring never so
hard, can scarcely live.

Fourthly, He that is the Letter must bear the hazard of the thing let, if it
miscarrie not thorough the hirers fault: therefore they are unjust who exact
recompense above Exodus 22. 15.
Covenant. Certainly, Laban was wicked who would not stand to a plain bargain
with Jacob about the discolored sheep, Exodus 30. 20. to v. 3. c. 31.
though by his care Laban had been made rich. Such Landlords, and Letters may
increase, but not be built by God.

SECT. 25.
4. IF there must be no defrauding in any matter, you must be Equal in hiring:
and because hiring is of two sorts, I shall show that you must be equal in both.

First, If you hire persons for labor, you must allow an equal stipend. Their
labor is great as Jacobs, and the labourer is worthy Genesis 31. 6. 39. 40.
Levit. 19. 13. Deuteronomy. 42. 14, 15. James 5. 4.
of his hire. You must (if he be poor) give it him without delay. The
workemans hire, (If his work be done) Thou shall not withhold till morning,
says God. If you do, God calls it Oppression, and that sin Cries as well as
others.

Secondly, in hiring of things: First, you must acknowledge God the great
Landlord, as David says, The earth is the Lords, and the Psalm. 24. 1
fullness thereof. This will breed Conscience in the use of it, as if ye had
hired it of him immediately. Secondly, you must use the thing hired in that
manner, and to that end for which it was let, both in regard of Commodity and
owner.

It was a great indignity when the Householder sent his servants to receive
Fruits according Matthew. 21. 33, 34, 35.
to the bargain, and they were ill entreated and persecuted. These respected
not the ends of their hiring, and were used accordingly; so may justly all
unjust hirers be served in the end.

Secondly, You must restore and deliver it up at the time appointed. The
Parable of the Talents teaches thus much where you M^tth. 25.
see the Talents were called for, and delivered to the Owner, with the
improvement of them.

Thirdly, You must make what was hired good, if it have miscarried thorough
your default. This ^od requires of things committed unto your trust; much more
of things Exodus 22. 12.
which are hired by you.

Oh, that all this Justice were in fu^l use* But it must be confessed that it
is too great a stranger till death comes, and the Books are opened, and then,
many times it is too late, when men are in as bad a case as they who call to
the mountains to fall upon them, and the hills to cover them?

SECT. 26.
THus you have had the furnishing of Gods building by getting; now secondly,
you shall have it by giving goods.





Solomon says, Cast thy bread upon the waters, Eccles. 11.
that is, the poor, in respect of multitude, and moisture by crying for bread;
and after many days thou shall find it. Paul says, Gal. 6. 7.
What a man sows he shall reap; and he that sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully; 2 Cor. 9. 6.
and Solomon again, what a man gives to the Prove. 19. 17
poor God will pay him.

Therefore, for giving, remember that speech; It is a blessed thing to give,
rather then Acts 20. 35.
to recieve.

From hence I shall render two Rules about giving.

1. There is a giver, as well as a receiver. 2. To be a giver is blessed,
rather then to be a receiver,
1. There is a giver certainly; For the Prove. 22. 2. Matthew. 5. 42
rich and poor meet together, and God is the maker of them both. He has
charged the one sort to give; he takes order for the 1 Timothy 6. 7. Es. 58. 7.
Luke 12. 13.
other sort by moving for relief; Break thy bread to the hungry; call the
poor; and by ordering relievers to the best advantage of the poor, He gives
also Patterns of both, and Acts 6. 1. 2, 3.
that amongst his own people. He tells you of Abraham the purchaser, Jacob that
had enough, Solomon that had gold like stones; others who have either been
always poor, as Paul who says, Unto this hour we hunger; and Lazarus; or
been made poor, as they 1 Cor. 4 11 Heb. 10. 34 and 11. 37.
that suffered the spoiling of their goods, and wandered in sheep skins, and
goat skins. All which God does order for the exercise of the grace of
liberality, and mercy in some; and of faith, patience, and contentment in
others. Therefore be you thankful in both; be you content: and holy in either
because of God.

2. To be a giver is blessed rather then to be a receiver. Let me open this
unto you and show,

1. What it is to be a giver? 2. What it is to be a receiver? 3. What it is to
be blessed? 4. Why it is thus blessed to be a giver?
1. To be a giver here is not to be a giver Quod meum est tuum efficere nullo
iure cogente.
out of justice, but out of bounty, and mercy. To give is to make what is
mine thine, no outward Law forcing me. A giver is he that freely makes that
which is his to become, another man's.

2. To be a receiver is he, that accepts as his own, what is given from a right
owner; either out of bounty, as when Solomon received from the Queen of Sheba,
or out of mercy, and when the poor receive from the rich.

3. To be blessed, is to be in good case or happy state in this present world.



Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways. How
Psalm. 128. 1. 2, 3.
blessed? He shall eat the labor of his hands, happy shall he be, and it
shall be well with him: his wife shall be as a fruitful Vine. In which words
you see, though he that fears God be blessed before God, yet here he speaks of
a blessedness in this world, that is, an estate that is more commodious, and
comfortable, as Christ says, Blessed are the barren in the days of
persecution, and banishment.

4. The reasons why it is thus blessed to be a giver, are; 1. Because he that
gives feels not the poor receivers troubles, and temptations. He need not say,
What shall I eat, what shall I drink? 2. He most resembles God, and Matthew. 6.
31
Heaven, and Jerusalem which is above, which are spent, and spend, by perpetual
blessings, and influences. 3: He is in this an Actor and doer in the providence
of God, whereas the receiver is a sufferer; and the more active we are, ^he
more like to God are we, who is a pure act.

Hence I would persuade every giver to see the excellency of this estate, and
to use it well. If you ask how this may be done? I answer; 1. Acknowledge it a
duty to give. The whole course of nature receives to give. The comfortable
sentence in the last judgment is Matthew. 25. Si non panisti occid^sti. Dan. 4.
27.
to givers. If we give not as we can, we may may be guilty of murder,
therefore Daniel said to that great king, Let my counsel be acceptable to thee,
break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquity by mercy to the poor.
Joseph, am not I under God? God took from Laban, and gave it unto Jacob, God
took from the Egyptians and Luke 19.
gave it to Israel; but you are Gods stewards, and may not say as Nabal, shall I
take my meat and my drink, which I have provided for my servans and gave it
unto strangers? No, no; you know what became of him, know then for certain, as
preaching, hearing, prayers are duties, so also is the giving.

2. Labor to give as you should, weigh with me four things.

1. Who must give? 2. To whom wy must give? 3. The order to be observed in
giving? 4. The manner of giving.
1. They must give, first that own things by Quod meum est dare. 1 Timothy 6. 1
Io. 3. 17.
proper or delegated right. It must be of what, by some right is our own. These
givers are of two sorts; either they that have abundance of this worlds goods;
or they that have from hand to mouth. These must give in some cases as we see
in that poor widow, who cast in her Luke 21. 2 Ephesians. 4. 28.
mites; and the labourer who must work that he may give to others. But hence
are excluded children, servants, and all that have not a right in what is to be
given. 2. They that can judge of what they do, to do it as a duty. For it
must be done with understanding, and conscience. Hence therefore are excluded
mad men who cannot do what they do from well settled conscience; and prodigal
fools and children who are under the tuition, and government of others.

2. We must give to those that are Gods receivers, whether they are friends, or
foes. Matthew. 25. 35, 36. Levit. 25. 35. Gal. 6.
Brothers, Believers, and Enemies, if thy enemy hunger, feed him. 2. Such as we
are not forbidden to give unto by the Law of reason and conscience. Now there
are 4 sorts of persons that ask. 1. Travelers in their way, like Romans 12. 20
the wounded man betwixt Jerusalem and Jericho, or the straggling Egyptian in
the field; to 1 Samuel 30. 11, 12.
whom David gave bread and water. Though these may be knaves, yet because we
know not their persons, and their necessities, and they may be better then they
show for, therefore it is good to give to them, for it is better that ten
knaves be relieved, then that one of Gods servants go empty away.

2. Aged and Impotent persons, as that Acts 4. Deuteronomy. 15. 4. 11. 1 Timothy 5. 4. 16.
Creeple at the beautiful gate of the Temple, blind Bartimeus, and the like.
For such God provides comfortably in both Testaments. These are Gods receivers,
sometimes for Christ's sake dwelling in them: sometimes for Gods sake who
created them, and will Es. 58.
not have us to forsake the work of his hands: sometimes for our own sake,
whose flesh they are.

3. Bedlams and distracted people, who though I fear that some of them are
counterfeits, and there be a fault that they wander about, yet because we know
nothing certain, and we find how hard it is for distracted persons to work and
settle; therefore though the man bc overlookt, yet must we relieve the
humanity in him from that golden rule, Do as ye would be done unto.

4. Travelers never out of their way, who wilfully have no abiding place.
These surely are non of Gods receivers while they are such; and though by
importunity sometimes they get something from us, and by the negligence of
Officers they hunt from us the fat of the true poor; yet their course is
detestable, and not willingly to be maintained, both because they live without
God, irreligiously, and without govermnnt, inordinately. 1 Timothy 5. 8.


5. The order to be observed in giving three texts shall direct first, says
Paul, If any man provide not for his own, he has denied the faith, Gal. 6. 10.
and is worse then an Infidel in that. Here then is the giver first to look, to
his own. Next says Deuteronomy. 15. 7.
Paul: Do good unto al, but especially to the household of faith. Here the giver
must next look, to the faithful.

Lastly, says God, If there be a poor man among you of one of your brethren,
thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother. Here
the giver must in the next place look to the poor brother, yet with this
exception, that greater present necessity calls for it, first to those that
are furthest off from us either in the flesh, or in the spirit.

Now, lastly, we are come to the manner of giving, which mostly is set down by
Paul to the Corinthians. You must give as Christ's 2 Cor. 8. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 8. 2.
3.
almners; therefore liberality is called The Grace of God. Ye must give richly
in affection, and action, according to necessity. Ye must give your selves
first to Christ, and afterward to others uses by the will of God. Ye must 2
Cor. 8. 5.
give freely; for if there be a willing mind, it is 2 Cor. 8. 12
accepted of God. Ye must give so, as other men be not eased, and you
burdened, and grieved: for 2 Cor. 8. 15
thus you may be thieves, and murderers to your selves in doing good to
others. Ye must give in charity, for otherwise all your giving, 1 Cor. 13.
is as a sounding brass, and tinkling cymbal. Ye must give in faith, believing
the promise that God will give it back again, in kind, or in a Gal. 6. 9 Prove.
11. 18
greater blessing. He that sows righteousness, shall receive a sure reward.
And that ye may be encouraged, look upon our blessed Savior, who though he
were rich, yet for your sake he became 2 Cor. 8 9.
poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.

And thus I have plainly pencilled out unto you the Lords building of a
Christian Family. I have ascended from the square, to the timber; from the
timber, to the framing; from the framing, to the laying of the foundation; from
the foundation, to the upper building; from the upper building, to the
finishing; from the finishing, to the furnishing; that God may dwell in it and
have glory, and* you may have comfort and say,

Grace, Grace, unto it.
FINIS.
The Author (...) Treatise has published four other Books, viz.
1 Mil It for Babes, or a Mothers Catechism, wherein ^hief saving Principles of
Christian Religion through the Body of it are first briefly propounded, then
fully expounded, Lastly usefully applied, whereunto is annexed 3 Sermons: 1
Secret sins discovered, on Psalm 19. 12. Who can understand his error. 2 On
Matthew. 13. 45, 46. A Merchant seeking Pearls having found a Pearl of great
pri^e, sold all that he had and bought it. 3 On Psalm 31. 5. Into thy hand I
commit my Spirit, etc.

2 The young man's warning piece, a Sermon at the burial of M. Rogers with a
History of his sinful life, and woeful death, with a discourse of the use of
such examples.

3 Four Sermons: 1 On Judges 11. 27. The Lord the Judge be Judge betwixt the
Children of Israel and Ammon, 2 On Matthe^ 7. 12, Whatsoever you would men
should do to you, do ye even so to them, 3 and 4 On 1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding Faith
and a good Conscience.

4 A trial of Church forsake^s, proving the Church of England to ^^ a true
Church, has a true Ministry and true worship. On Heb. 10. 2^. Not forsaking
the assembling of our selves together as the manner of so^^ is.

All which Books are to be sold by Philemon Stephens, ^^ the gilded Lion in
Paul's Churchyard.


