AN AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE FOR A firm and present Peace, upon grounds of
common-right and freedom;

As it was proposed by the Agents of the five Regiments of Horse; and since by
the general approbation of the Army, offered to the joint concurrence of all
the free COMMONS of ENGLAND.

The Names of the Regiments which have already appeared for the Case, of The
Case of the Army truly stated and for this present Agreement, VIZ. Of Horse
1. Genesis Regiment. 2. Lifeguard. 3. Lieut. Genesis Regiment. 4. Com. Genesis
Regiment. 5. Col. Whaleyes Reg. 6. Col. Riches Reg. 7. Col. Fleetwoods Reg. 8.
Col. Harrisons Reg. 9. Col. Twisldens Reg.
Of Foot.
1. Genesis Regiment. 2. Col. Sir Hardresse Wallers Reg. 3. Col. Lamberts Reg. 4.
Col. Rainsborought Regiment. 5. Col. Overtons Reg. 6. Col. Lilburns Reg. 7.
Col. Backsters Reg.


Printed Anno Dom. 1647.

An Agreement of the People, for a firm and present Peace, upon grounds of
Common-Right.
HAving by our late labors and hazards made it appear to the world at how
high a rate we value our just freedom, and God having so far owned our cause,
as to deliver the Enemies thereof into our hands: We do nowhold our selves
bound in mutual duty to each other, to take the best care we can for the
future, to avoid both the danger of returning into a slavish condition, and the
chargable remedy of another war: for as it cannot be imagined that so many of
our Countrymen would have opposed us in this quarrel, if they had understood
their own good; so may we safely promise to our selves, that when our Common
Rights and liberties shall be cleared, their endeavors will be disappointed,
that seek to make themselves our Masters: since therefore our former
oppressions, and scarce yet ended troubles have been occasioned, either by
want of frequent National meetings in Council, or by rendering those meetings
ineffectuall; We are fully agreed and resolved, to provide that hereafter our
Representatives be neither left to an uncertainty for the time, nor made
useless to the ends for which they are intended: In order whereunto we declare,

I. That the People of England being at this day very unequally distributed by
Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, for the election of their Deputies in
Parliament, ought to be more indifferently proportioned, according to the
number of the Inhabitants: the circumstances whereof, for number, place, and
manner, are to be set down before the end of this present Parliament.

II. That to prevent the many inconveniences apparently arising, from the long
continuance of the same persons in authority, this present Parliament be
dissolved upon the last day of September, which shall be in the year of our
Lord, 1648.

III. That the People do of course choose themselves a Parliament once in two
years, viz. upon the first Thursday in every 21. March, after the manner as
shall be prescribed before the end of this Parliament, to begin to sit upon the
first Thursday in April following at Westminster, or such other place as shall
be appointed from time to time by the preceding Representatives; and to
continue till the last day of September, then next ensuing and no longer.

IV. That the power of this, and all future Representatives of this Nation, is
inferior only to theirs who choose them, and does extend, without the consent
or concurrence of any other person or persons; to the enacting, altering, and
repealing of Laws; to the erecting and abolishing of Offices and Courts; to
the appointing, removing, and calling to account Magistrates, and Officers of
all degrees; to the making War and peace, to the treating with foreign States:
And generally, to whatsoever is not expressly, or implyedly reserved by the
represented to themselves.

Which are as follows,
1. THat matters of Religion, and the ways of Gods Worship, are not at all
entrusted by us to any humane power, because therein we cannot remit or exceed
a tittle of what our Consciences dictate to be the mind of God, without wilful
sin: nevertheless the public way of instructing the Nation (so it be not
compulsive) is referred to their discretion. 2. That the matter of impresting
and constraining any of us to serve in the wars, is against our freedom; and
therefore we do not allow it in our Representatives; the rather, because money
(the sinews of war) being always at their disposal, they can never want
numbers of men, apt enough to engage in any just cause. 3. That after the
dissolution of this present Parliament, no person be at any time questioned for
any thing said or done, in reference to the late public differences, otherwise
then in execution of the Judgments of the present Representatives, or House of
Commons. 4. That in all Laws made, or to be made, every person may be bound
alike, and that no Tenure, Estate, Charter, Degree, Birth, or place, do confer
any exemption from the ordinary Course of Legal proceedings, whereunto others
are subjected. 5. That as the Laws ought to be equal, so they must be good,
and not evidently destructive to the safety and well being of the people.
THese things we declare to be our native Rights, and therefore are agreed and
resolved to maintain them with our utmost possibilities, against all opposition
whatsoever, being compelled thereunto, not only by the examples of our
Ancestors, whose blood was often spent in vain for the recovery of their
Freedoms, suffering themselves, through fradulent accommodations to be still
deluded of the fruit of their Victories, but also by our own woeful experience,
who having long expected, and dearly earned the establishment of these certain
rules of Government are yet made to depend for the settlement of our Peace and
Freedom, upon him that intended our bondage, and brought a cruel War upon
us.

For the noble and highly honored the Freeborn People of ENGLAND, in their
respective Counties and Divisions, these.
Dear Countrymen, and fellow-Commoners,
FOr your sakes, our friends, estates and lives, have not been dear to us; for
your safety and freedom we have cheerfully endured hard Labors and run most
desperate hazards, and in comparison to your peace and freedom we neither do
nor ever shall value our dearest blood and we profess, our bowels are and
have been troubled, and our hearts pained within us, in seeing and considering
that you have been so long bereaved of these fruits and ends of all our
labors and hazards, we cannot but sympathize with you in your miseries and
oppressions. It Is grief and vexation of heart to us; to receive your meat or
moneys, whilst you have no advantage, nor yet the foundations of your peace
and freedom surely laid: and therefore upon most serious considerations, that
your principal right most essential to your well being is the clearnes,
certainty, sufficiency and freedom of your power in your representatives in
Parliament, and considering that the original of most of your oppressions and
miseries has been either from the obscurity and doubtfulnes of the power you
have committed to your representatives in your elections, or from the want of
courage in those whom you have betrusted to claim and exercise their power,
which might probably proceed from their uncertaintie of your assistance and
maintenance of their power, and minding that for this right of yours and ours
we engaged our lives; for the King raised the war against you and your
Parliament, upon this ground, that he would not suffer your representatives to
provide for your peace safety and freedom that were then in danger, by
disposing of the Militia and otherwise, according to their trust; and for the
maintenance and defense of that power and right of yours, we hazarded all that
was dear to us, and God has borne witness to the justice of our Cause. And
further minding that the only effectual meants to settle a just and lasting
peace, to obtain remedy for all your greivances, and to prevent future
oppressions, is the making clear and secure the power that you betrust to your
representatives in Parliament, that they may know their trust, in the faithful
execution whereof you will assist them. Upon all these grounds we propound your
joining with us in the agreement herewith sent unto you; that by virtue
th^reof, we may have Parliaments certainly called and have the time of their
sitting and ending certain, and their power or trust clear and unquestionable,
that hereafter they may remove your burdens, and secure your rights, without
oppositions or obstructions, and that the foundations of your peace may be so
free from uncertainty, that there may be no grounds for future quarrels, or
contentions to occasion war and bloodshed; and we desire you would
consider, that as these things wherein we offer to agree with you, are the
fruits and ends of the Victories which God has given us: so the settlement of
these are the most absolute means to preserve you and your Posteri^y, from
slavery, oppression, distraction, and trouble; by this, those whom your selves
shall choose, shall have power to restore you to, and secur you in, all your
rights; and they shall be in a capacity to taste of subjection, as well as rule,
and so shall be equally concerned with yourselves, in all they do. For they
must equally suffer with you under any common burdens, and partake with you in
any freedoms; and by this they shall be disinabled to defraud or wrong you, when
the laws shall bind all alike, without privilege or exemption; and by this
your Consciences shall be free from tyranny and oppression, and those
occasions of endless strifes, and bloody wars, shall be perfectly removed:
without controversy by your joining with us in this Agreement, all your
particular and common grievances will be redressed forthwith without delay; the
Parliament must then make your relief and common good their only study.

Now because we are earnestly desirous of the peace and good of all our
Countrymen, even of those that have opposed us, and would to our utmost
possibility provide for perfect peace and freedom, and prevent all suites,
debates, and contentions that may happen amongst you, in relation to the late
war: we have therefore inserted it into this Agreement, that no person shall be
questionable for any thing done, in relation to the late public differences,
after the dissolution of this present Parliament, further then in execution of
their judgment; that thereby all may be secure from all sufferings for what
they have done, and not liable hereater to be troubled or punished by the
judgment of another Parliament, which may be to their ruin, unless this
Agreement be joined in, whereby any acts of indemnity or oblivion shall be made
unalterable, and you and your posterities be secure.

But if any shall enquire why we should desire to join in an Agreement with the
people, to declare these to be our native Rights, and not rather petition to
the Parliam^nt for them; the reason is evident: No Act of Parliament is or can
be unalterable, and so cannot be sufficient security to save you or us
harmless, from what another Parliament may d^termine, if it should be
corrupted; and besides Parliaments are ^o receive the ext^nt of their power,
and trust from those that betrust them; and theref^re the people are to declare
what their power and trust is which is the intent of this Agreement; and its to
be obse^ved, that though there has formerly been many Acts of Parliament, for
the calling of Pa^liaments every year, yet you have been d^prived of them, and
insl^ved through want of them; and therefore both necessity for your security
in these freedoms, that are essential to your well-being, and woeful
experience of the manifold miseries and distractions that have been lengthened
out since the war^ended, through want of such a settlement, requires this
Agreement and when you and we shall be joined together therein, we shall
readily join with you, to petition the Parliament, as they are ou^ fellow
Commoners equally conc^rned, to joy a with us.

And if any shall inqui^e, why we undertake to off^r this Agreement, we must
profess, we are sensible that you have bien so often deceived with
Declara^ions and Remonstrances, and fed with vain ^oper that you have
suffi^ient reason to abandon all confidence in any persons whatsoever, from
whom you have no other security of their intending your freedom, then h^ve
Declaration: And therefore, as our consciences witness, that in sim^licity and
int^grity of heart, we have proposed lately in the Case of the Army stated,
your freedom and d^liverance from slavery, oppression, and all burdens: sow
desire to give you satis^ying assurance thereon by this Agreement whereby the
foundations of your freedoms provided in the Case, etc. shall be settled
unalterably and we shall as faithfully proceed to, and all other m^st vigorus
actings for your good that God shall direct and enable us unto; And though the
m^lice of our enemies, and such as they delude, would blast us by scandalls,
aspersing us with designs of Anarchy, and community; yet we hope the righteous
God will not only by this our present desire of settling an equal just
Government, but also by directing us unto all righteous undertakings, simply
for public good, make our uprightness and faithfulness to the interest of
all our Countrymen, shine forth so clearly, that malice it self shall be
silenced, and confounded. We question not, but the longing expectation of a
firm peace, will incite you to the most speedy joining in this Agreement: in
the prosecution whereof, or of any thing that you shall desire for public
good; you may be confident, you shall never want the assistance of

Your most faithful fellow-Commoners, now in Arms for your service. Edmond
Bear Lieut. Genesis Regiment. Robert Everard Lieut. Genesis Regiment. George Garret
Com. Genesis Regiment. Thomas beverley Com. Genesis Regiment. William Pryor Col.
Fleet woods Regiment. William Bryan Col. Fleet woods Regiment. Matthew Weal
Col. Whalies Regiment. William Russell Col. Whalies Regiment. John Dover Col.
Riches Regiment. William Hudson. Col. Riches Regiment.

Agents coming from other Regiments unto us, have subscribed the Agreement to
be proposed to their respective Regiments, and you.
For Our much honored, and truly worthy Fellow-Commoners, and Soldiers, the
Officers and Soldiers under Command of His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.
Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers;
THe deep sense of many dangers and mischiefs that may befall you in relation
to the late War, whenever this Parliament shall end, unless sufficient
prevention be now provided, has constrained Us to study the most absolute and
certain means for your security; and upon most serious considerations, we judge
that no Act of Indemnity can sufficiently provide for your quiet, ease, and
safety; because, as it has formerly been, a corrupt Party (chosen into the
next Parliament by your Enemies means) may possibly surprise the house, and
make any Act of Indemnity null, seeing they cannot fail of the Kings
Assistance and concurrnece, in any such actings against you, that conquered him.

And by the same means, your freedom from impressing also, may in a short
time be taken from you, though for the present, it should be granted; we
apprehend no other security, by which you shall be saved harmless, for what
you have done in the late war, then a mutual Agreement between the people
and you that no person shall be questioned by any Authority whatsoever, for any
thing done in relation to the late public differences, after the dissolution
of the present house of Commons, further then in execution of their judgment;
and that your native freedom from constraint to serve in war, whether
domestic or foreign, shall never be subject to the power of Parliaments, or
any other; and for this end, we propound the Agreement that we herewith send to
you, to be forthwith subscribed.

And because we are confident, that in judgment and Conscience, ye hazarded
your lives for the settlement of such a just and equal Government, that you
and your posterities, and all the freeborn people of this Nation might enjoy
justice and freedom, and that you are really sensible that the distractions,
oppressions, and miseries of the Nation, and your want of your Arreares, do
proceed from the want of the establishment, both of such certain rules of just
Government, and foundations of peace, as are the price of blood, and the
expected fruits of all the peoples cost: Therefore in this Ag^eement we have
inserted the certain Rules of equal Government, under which the Nation may
enjoy all its Rights and Freedoms securely; And as we doubt not but your love
to the freedom and lasting peace of the yet distracted Country will cause you
to join together in this Agreement.

So we question no^: but every true English man that loves the peace and
freedom of England will concur with us; and then your Arrears and constant
pay (while you continue in Arms) will certainly be brough^ in out of the
abundant love of the people to you, and then shall the mouths of those be
stopped, that scndalize you and us, as endeavoring Anarchy, or to rule by the
sword, and then will so firm an union be made between the people and you, that
neither any homebred or foreign Enemies will dare to disturb our happy
peace. We shall add no more but this; that the knowledge of your union in
laying this foundation of peace, this Agreement, is much songed for, by

Yours, and the Peoples most faithful Servants.

Postscript.
GENTLEMEN.
WE desire you may understand the reason of our extracting some p^inciples of
common freedom out of those many things proposed to you in the Case truly
stated, and drawing them up into the form of an Agreement. Its chiefly,
because for these things we first engaged against the King, He would not permit
the peoples Representatives to provide for the Nations safety, by disposing of
the Miliria, and otherwise, according to their Trust, but raised a War
against them, and we engaged for the defense of that power, and right of the
people, in their Representatives. Therefore these things in the Agreement, the
people are to claim as their native right, and price of their blood, which you
are obliged absolutely to procure for them.

And these being the foundations of freedom, its necessary, that they should be
settled unalterably, which can be by no means, but this Agreement with the
people.

And we cannot but mind you, that the ease of the people in all their
Grievances, depends upon the settling those principles or rules of equal
Government for a free people. and were but this Agreement established,
doubtless all the Grievances of the Army and people would be redressed
immediately, and all things propounded in your Case truly stated to be insisted
on, would be forthwith granted.

Then should the House of Commons have power to help the oppressed people,
which they are now bereaved of by the chief Oppressors, and then they shall be
equally concerned with you and all the people, in the settlement of the most
perfect freedom: for they shall equally suffer with you under any Burdens, or
partake in any Freedom. We shall only add, that the sum of all the
Agreement which we herewith offer to you, is but in order to the fulfilling of
our Declaration of June the 14. wherein we promised to the people, that we
would with our lives vindicate and clear their right and power in their
Parliaments.

Edmond Bear Lieut. Genesis Reg. Robert Everard Lieut. Genesis Reg. George Garret
Com. Genesis Reg: Thomas Beverley Com. Genesis Reg: William Pryor Col. Fleetwood Reg:
William Bryan Col. Fleetwood Reg: Matthew Wealey Col Whaley Reg. William
Russell Col Whaley Reg. John Dober Col. Rich Reg. William Hudson Col. Rich Reg.

Agents coming from other Regiments unto us, have subscribed the Agreement, to
be proposed to their respective Regiments and you.

