CLERICVS MERCATI, etc.

An Humble Remonstrance of the several Heads and groundwork conceived, for
the draught of a Bill of Information, to be exhibited into the High Court of
PARLIAMENT.

Concerning the general Clarke of the Market, and the Legal proceedings
thereof.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

Clericus Mercati, etc. ss. An humble Remonstrance of the several heads, and
groundwork conceived, for the draught of a Bill of Information, to be
exhibited into the High Court of Parliament, concerning the general Clarke of
the Market, and the legal proceedings thereof, etc.
FOrasmuch as the plenty of every Commonwealth, does principally consist upon
mutual commerce and Traffic, and such Co^merce is solely continued by the
conformity and equality of Weights and measures; so on the contrary (the
diversity of weights or measures) introduces many frauds and deceipts; The
examination and reformation whereof, together with the Inquisition and
punishment of the deceipts and abuses practiced by unconscionable persons,
buying or selling by weights or measures, does anciently and properly appertain
to the duty and office of a Clarke of the Market; And as the just and due
examination of the said Office, is very necessary and behoovefull for the
public weal of the Kingdom, so the misse-after thereof, does draw and
procure many grievances and oppressions upon his Majesty's loyal subjects, for
redress and prevention whereof, these ensuing particulars, would be maturely
considered off. viz.

The Office it self is executed diversely. viz. 1. By the Kings general Clarke
of the Market. 2. By the Clarks of the Duchy of Lancaster. 3. By Magistrates
of Cities and Corporate Towns. 4. By sundry other Charters and Fra^chised
Liberties.


1. The Kings Clarke of the Market is charged, etc. viz. 1. For taking common
Fynes. 2. For exacting more Fees then are due. 3. For imposing Fynes without
due trial of offenses. 4. For quarrelling with Weights and measures produced
before him, for the purpose only to get new Fees for the sealing thereof.
2. The Duchy Clarks are charged, etc. viz. That the Office is executed by
them, without respect of ease to the Subject, for the lands of the Duchy being
so intermixed with the lands of the Guildable, and the Liberties of both (in
many places) lying in very small parcells together, so that neither Officer can
make a reasonable days work or court, without much trouble to the subject, in
calling some of them 12, and sometimes 16 miles distance and remote from either
Courts; And where a Town or Tything is part Guildable and part Duchy, there
the Duchy Clarke summoneth all, and takes Fees of all persons, and the Kings
general Clarke, coming after him does the like with the Guildable, to the
double grievance of the Tennants and Resiants of them both; And moreover the
Duchy Clarke is not free from the particulars aforesaid, laid to the Kings
general Clarks charge.
3. The Clerks of Cities and Towns Corporate, are charged, etc. viz. 1. That
they consist most of Tradesmen, as Bakers, Brewers, Maulsters, and Inholders or
the like, who for the most part are offenders, yet are made principal
Officers, and in these also, with the rest, the Clarkeship of the Market does
reside, and those rather intend their own profits, then public conformity. 2
That these also under colorable pretenses, give allowance to greater Measures
then the Law allows, suggesting thereby that the trade of their Town is
increased, the buyers enriched, and the poor more plentifully used, whereas in
truth it begets confusion and leaves the subject, the one to defraud the
other. 3. That these also being both Judge and party within themselves, no
punishment seems greevous, in respect the Fynes (for the most part) being
their own, the forfeiture is seldom taken, by reason the fault is among their
natives generally. 4. That these likewise commit the trust and custody of their
Seal to one of their Sergeants, and the sizing of their Measures to some poor
Cooper of their City or Town, both which persons, being but in nature their
servants, and are in such subjection, as they dare not offend, and by this
means all measures are made there of an extraordinary large content, for the
buyers advantage; for it is evident, that most corporate Towns, buy in by the
greater measure, and sell out by the lesser, which is a monstrous oppression to
the Subject.
4. The Clarks of other Franchises, Leets, or Liberties, are charged, etc. Viz.
That these for the most part do no execution of this kind at all, and where
they do, it is out of course, for no reformation ensues, which is rather a
protecting of offenses, then a punishing; for all these (with many others) the
imputation lies, and is always objected to the Kings Clarke of the Market;
for the Country (ignorantly supposing) there should be no other Clarke but him
and his Deputies, finding themselves reformed by him only, and others at
Liberty and not reformed, cast all the scandal and reproach on the Kings
Officer only.

To remedy all these miscarriages, and that a fair and legal course may be
held in general throughout the Kingdom, as well within Liberties as without;
It may be enacted according to these ensuing particulars. viz.

1. That no person be chosen to execute the said Office, but such as shall be
of sufficiency in estate, to be responsable for all wrongs done by them, and of
ability to execute the duties incident to the said Office. 2. That such persons
as shall be chosen and authorized to execute the said office, shall before he
meddle with the execution of the same, enter into a recognizance in a good
sum of money, and also take a corporal oath, to execute the said office
justly and uprightly during the time he shall continue in the said office,
without exacting unjust fees, or discharging offenders without punishment. 3.
That no person authorized to execute the said office, receive any greater fees
then anciently have been accustomed, and hereafter are allowed and expressed,
nor receive any common Fine, or any gift or reward for discharging of any
offense inquirable or punishable by or before him, upon pain of forfeiture of
a good sum of money, being thereof lawfully convict. 4. That the said office
be not granted to the chief Officer of any City, Borough, Town Corporate, or
Market Town, for that such persons (for the most part) acquire their chiefest
livelihood by buying and selling, and are generally conscious of the frauds and
deceipts committed in different Weights and measures, and therefore altogether
neglect the due execution of the said Office. 5. That the said Office be not
granted unto such person or persons, who have the Fines and Amercements set by
or before the Clarke of the Market, granted unto them, because such persons
aiming at their own particular profit, do impose immoderate Fynes upon
offenders, and therefore are not compotent Judges in such cases. 6. That
whereas every City, Borough, Town Corporate and Market Town, does now a days
strive to exceed each other in the greatness of Weights and Measures, well
knowing that all buyers will frequent that Market, where they may have greatest
measure, and that all sellers most repair, where there are most ready buyers;
therefore that every City, Borough, Town Corporate, and Market, might keep
and maintain a common Bushel or two (according to the greatness of the
Market) containing full eight gallons neither more nor less, and agreeing to
the standard of his Majesty's Exchequer, and not suffer any other measures to
be used, but such as shall be agreeable to the same measure in quantity or even
proportion, and that the same measure or measures, may be continually
(especially upon the Market days) hanging up fast fixed with a chain in the
public Marketplace, and also common with both Troy and Avoirdupoise ready in
the same Market, to be used by the subject, both buyer and seller as need shall
require. 7. That whereas most Bakers do usually buy their corn, by a Bushel
which shall contain ten gallons, and sometimes more, and yet do nevertheless
assize their bread, but after the rate of eight gallons to the bushel and
sometimes under; That no Bakers do buy by any other measure, then after eight
Gallons to the bushel, and eight bushells to the quarter, upon a good penalty;
unless he buying by any other degree or even proportion, warrantable by Law or
common usage, may always be constrained to assize his penny and halfe-penny
loaves accordingly. 8. That no Chandler, Badger, Loader, Miller, Mealeman,
Maultman, or any other person do keep, buy, or sell by any other measures
then as aforesaid. 9. That every person do buy or sell their corn and grain,
or other commodities by just and equal Weights and measures agreeing with the
standard of the Exchequer, and that every such measure be even striked and not
heaped up, and that the strike or strickle wherewith the said corn or other
commodities shall be stricken, be made even, and not above the thickness of one
inch in breadth, without any manner of running in the stoping or hollownesse of
it, now too much abusively used in public Markets; and that the use of all
Roles, and other deceitful strikes, now used in most parts of the Realm, be
absolutely suppressed, being so evident, that by the use of them, the seller is
always extremely injured and oppressed. 10. That no Baker sell, nor any other
person or persons buy to sell again, above 13 peny-loaves for 12. pence, and
that no poundage be given by the Baker to any Inkeeper, Victualler, or any
other person, in money or otherwise. 11. That all Inholders and Hostlers, do
sell their Hay and Provender at indifferent rates and prizes, and that every of
them have one Gallon measure sealed, and agreeing with his Majesty's said
standard, hanging fixed with an Iron chain at his stable or hostrie door,
public in the view of all his guests. 12. That whereas the excessive gain of
Innes, Victualling houses and Hostries, is most grievous to the Commonwealth,
which is chiefly occasioned by greedy desire of unlawful gain, in letting to
farm their Hostries and Tap-houses to their Hostlers, servants, and Tapsters,
some paying to the Master 15. s. for that barrel of Beer, for which the
Master paid 8. s. or less to the Brewer, and 11. s. 8. d. for the bushel of
Oats, which cost the master but 14. d. 18. d. or 20. d. at the most; thereby
enforcing the said Hostlers and Tapsters, to sell to the Kings Subjects, by
far lesser measure, then the Kings standard, to make themselves some profit
by the said Farm; it being often found by surveigh of the general Officers
Deputies upon examination of the said Measures, that the half peck, which
should contain eight pintes, has not contained full five pintes, and the
groat Jugges sold for 4. d. has not contained two quarts, which should
contain four, and the 2. d. Jugges not a full quart by the standard, which
should contain two quarts. 13. That it may be enacted, that no Inkeeper,
Victualler, or Hostler, do let or set to Farm his Seller, Tap-house, Stable,
or Hostry, but to keep the same in his own hands, and sell only by lawful
measures, sealed, and agreeing with the Kings standard, and to sell his Hay and
Provender, for moderate and indifferent prizes, viz. A fourth part in the value
over and above the rates in the Market, as it shall be then from time to time;
and this to be performed upon forfeiture of a good sum of money for every
offense found and presented by Jury. 14. That no person or persons shall vent
or sell his Beer or Ale by Iugges or Stone pots, that shall not contain full
pintes, quarts, pottles, gallons, and that no such pots or jugges be imported
or made within the Kingdom, but such as shall be of the proportion and content
in quantity as aforesaid, and to have some mark of distinction in the framing
of them, which may be conspicuous to all men. 15. That Brewers be restrained
from selling their Beer and Ale at excessive rates, as at ten shillings,
twelve shillings, fourteen shillings, fifteen shillings, eighteen shillings,
and sometimes twenty shillings the Barrel, but that all Brewers brewing to
sell in Hoggs-heads, Barrells, Kilderkins, or Firkins, may be confined, to sell
according to the Statute of 23. Hen. 8. 16. That whereas there is yet no
direction, neither by Statute, nor other Order, to guide any Officer for the
true Assize of Bread, made of any grain but Wheat only, and that the Bread
most used to be put to Sale by Bakers, for the relief of the poorer sort, is
made of Rye or Masslyn, which is Wheat and Rye or Barley mixed together, in
which the poor are daily pinched and wronged; may it therefore please this
Honorable Assembly, to take the same into their consideration, and pray that
the Officers of his Majesty's Bake-house, may be directed to make a trial of
the same Grain, and in their judgments upon their Oaths set down a certain
Assize to guide both Officer and Baker, beginning from Twelve shillings the
quarter unto 3. l. 6. d. the quarter, for want of which experiments, the common
Bakers are at their own appoinment for sinister advantage, but the poor are
ground inevitably by unconscionable Bakers. 17. That whereas the usual course
for the discovery of these and other offenses inquireable by the foresaid
Clerks of the Market, is either by making particular search or by general
summons, neither of which being able to make a perfect discovery, it being
still voluntary honesty, whether any will leave (or shelter) their false
Measures or Weights at home or not; That the Clarks of the Market or their
Deputies, may be enabled to give oath to such as shall give cause of suspect,
whether directly or indirectly, he has any false weights or measures at home,
or in the custody of others. 18. That the original standards of the Exchequer
may be reviewed and examined, to see whether they differ in proportion the one
from the other or not; forasmuch as the brazen Quart standard, has been found
different from the other, occasioning the Officer to miss guide or frame some
me^sures uncertain, if corrected by that original quart standard. 19. That
whereas there are at this day in diverse Cities, Boroughs, and Corporate Towns,
and in many other parts and places of the Kingdom (especially in the Northern
and Western parts and Dominion of Wales) false and deceitful Weights and
measures, of different contents one from another, and all repugnant and
disagreeing from the original standard of his Majesty's Exchequer, appointed
(by Law) to be the rule and direction for them all; may it be enacted upon a
severe penalty or forfeiture of Franchises, that upon a set time prescribed a
due reformation and conformity may forthwith he obtained and procured, within
all such refractory Franchises or Liberties. 20. And lastly, that the ancient
and accustomed Fees, which have been formerly by long custom and use approoved
off, and settled by sundry Proclamations appertaining to the general Clarke of
the Market only, and to none other such like Officer; may be revised,
considered, ratified, confirmed, and declared by public authority, and so
made plain and conspicuous to general view and notion; To the end such a
necessary Officer, and his several Deputies may be supported, continued, and
encouraged to execute their places with diligence and integrity, the which
acquire such assiduall trouble, travel, and charges; Forasmuch, as it does and
may appear that the Country generally in former times, have borne this
Officers charges, besides his recompense, whereupon a particular Statute was
afterward enacted, restraining and confining him to travel but with six
horse, to avoid (as it seemed then) unnecessary burden and charges to the
subject.
The substance and contents of a Book of Assize and plain direction, as well
for Officers as the subject generally, and how to understand and put into
general practice and execution, all, and every the contents of the premises
which shall be thought meet and expedient; The Tract is entitled The general
Clarke of the Market, ready composed and provided for the Press and public
use and service of the Commonwealth of England and Ireland, and Dominion of
Wales, etc. viz.

The Argument, Contents, disposition, and convenient use of the whole work,
etc.
1. A plain declaration of the general proceedings of the Clarke of the
Market, or a true Assize of all things vendible by Weights or measures, drawn
and collected as well from the sacred Laws of divine institution, as also from
the common Laws and practice, and most ancient Statutes of this Kingdom of
England still in force and unrepealed.

2. Together with a true and general calculation of all sorts of Weights and
measures, with a proportionable differnece, yet just agreement upon due and
lawful Assize, with a new revised and enlarged book of Assize for bread
alone, necessary for the use as well of public Officers as common Bakers; and
also very fit to be known, understood, and practiced by all men generally,
especially in matters of mutual commerce and Traffic, between man and man,
one Country and another, whereby a just and equal conformity upon Weights and
measures, may be always and every where practiced and observed
proportionably, according to the standards of his Majesty's Exchequer;
nevertheless every County or Shire may reserve among themselves, their ancient
customs and usages, avoiding all color of any sinister fraud or deceit.

3. And lastly, a due regulation of that most ancient Office of the Clarke of
the Market of the Kings Household according to its Primary and first
institution, digested into a plain and settled form and demonstration (by way
of an Inquisition) to be holden before him, or any other Officer, that has
lawful power or jurisdiction therein; very beneficial for all his Majesty's
Subjects in general, but chiefly for all Majors of Corporations, Bayliffes of
Liberties, Portreeves, Constables, Ale-tasters, Tything-men, or any other
Officers, to whom the weekly or monthly observation of the due Assize of all
things (especially of Bread, Drink, or any other victual) does, shall, or may
appertain, very need full to be practiced throughout his Majesty's Dominions,
as well within Liberties as without.

Per me BEN: AGAR.

FINIS.

