His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury's ADDRESS, to his MAJESTY, For the
Suppression of Monasteries, Fryeries, Nunneries, and other Popish Seminaries,
or allowing any General TOLLERATION to the Roman Catholics of ENGLAND.
May it please your Majesty,
I Have been too long silent, and am afraid by my Silence I have neglected the
duty of the place it has pleased God to call me unto, and your Majesty to
place me in: But now, I humbly crave leave, I may discharge my Conscience
toward God, and my duty to your Majesty; and therefore, I beseech you freely
to give me leave to deliver my self, and then let your Majesty do with me what
you please. Your Majesty has propounded a Toleration of Religion, I beseech
you take it into your Consideration what your Act is, what the Consequence may
be. By your Act you labor to set up the most Damnable and Heretical Doctrine
of the Church of Rome, the Whore of Babylon: How hateful it will be to God, and
grievous to your good Subjects, the Professors of the Gospel, That your Majesty
who has often disputed, and learnedly written against those Heresies, should
now show your self a Patron of those wicked Doctrines which your Pen has told
the World, and your Conscience tells your Self, are Superstitious, Idolatrous,
and Detestable. And hereunto I add what you have done in sending the Prince
into Spain without consent of your Council, the Privity and Approbation of your
People: And although you have a Charge and Interest in the Prince, as Son of
your Flesh; yet have the People a greater, as Son of the Kingdom, upon whom
next after your Majesty are their Eyes fixed, and welfare depends; and so
tenderly is his going apprehended, as (believe it) however his return may be
safe; yet the drawers of him into this Action, so dangerous to himself, so
desperate to the Kingdom, will not pass away unquestioned, unpunished. Besides,
this Toleration which you set up by your Proclamation. cannot, be done without
a Parliament, unless your Majesty will let your Subjects see that you will take
unto your self ability to throw down the Laws of your Land at your pleasure.
What dread consequence these things may draw afterward, I beseech your Majesty
to consider, and above all, lest by this Toleration and discountenancing of the
true Profession of the Gospel, wherewith God has blessed us, and this Kingdom
has so long flourished under it, your Majesty do not draw upon this Kingdom in
general, and your self in particular, Gods heavy wrath and indignation.

Thus in discharge of my duty toward God, to your Majesty and the place of my
calling, I have taken humble leave to deliver my Conscience. Now Sir, do what
you please with me.

FINIS.
Collect. V. I.
Printed in the Year, 1689.


