A DESCRIPTION AND EXPLANATION Of 268. Places in JERUSALEM And in the Suburbs
thereof, as it flourished in the time of JESUS CHRIST.

Answerable to each of the 268. Figures that are in its large, and most exact
Description in the MAP; Showing the several places of the Acts and Sufferings
of Jesus Christ, and his holy Apostles. As also of the Kings, Prophets, etc.

Very useful for the more clear and fuller opening of very many places in the
Prophets (as also in Josephus, and other Histories) especially in the GOSPELS,
and the Acts of the Apostles.

Translated by T.T. Reviewed, and in many places rectified according to the
Holy SCRIPTVRES, and some things further cleared: With Additions of many
Scripture proofs:

By H. Jessey.

Imprimatur Joseph Caryl.

London, Printed for R I. and P.S. and are to be sold by Tho. Brewster at the
Three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard, near the West End. 1653.

To the sincere lover of the peace of JERUSALEM, The Translator hereof wishes
increase of knowledge, and an improvement of that Talent here, to Gods glory,
and perpetual felicity in the world to come.
FOrasmuch as (Noble Reader) Jerusalem, Act. 17.^2.
the City of our God, even upon his holy mountain the joy of the whole earth,
and the City of the great King, that fair and most ancient City, by a special
Prerogative is by God himself beautified above all other Cities, and was
therefore the chief, most noble and famous City of the world: Many Travelers
and Pilgrims, have at sundry times, both in Maps and Histories, described the
same. By the advantage of whose labors therein, now of late years, one
Christian Adrichom, [Anno 1585.] has performed a most lively description, and
in the Latin tongue, enriched with diverse Antiquities. The profit that might
come hereby to my Countrymen of the vulgar sort, both for the better
understanding of the story of the Bible, where Jerusalem, and the parts thereof
are oftentimes mentioned, and also for the ready conceiving of Josephus his
history, moved me to translate it into the English tongue: And the book thus
translated, with the charts expressed in natural colors, I have presumed to
present unto your view. And because the Master-workman in this new plat of old
decayed Jerusalem, has left behind him some rubbish and relics of the Romish
superstition; I have in some measure purged and swept the streets and corners
of the same, with the broom of truth, and carrying them out by the Scoure-gate,
or Dung-gate, have laid them on the Leystall of oblivion [and as for some that
do yet remain, here is now left a purgation, by addition of Annotations.] My
pains herein taken, though not so great, as the laying of Jerusalems
foundation, or the raising of a chief corner stone, or the squaring and
finishing any part of this exquisite plat: yet such it is, as even in the
meanest degree of a poor labourer, that does but sweep the streets, I beseech
you to accept as a small mite of my good will. The which I gladly offer, to the
end that amidst the burdens and snares of your worldly affairs, you beholding
this most brave City, adorned with so glorious a Temple, and contemplating the
Passion of our Savior Christ therein, may be delighted and recreated: And
further, that viewing this terrestrial City, whose glory is now vanished, you
may think still as the Apostle did say, Non habemus hic manentem civitatem [We
have not here an abiding City, Heb. 13.14.] and so aspire to that heavenly
Jerusalem, garnished, and full stored with all manner of delights, which
abides for ever; Wherein I do most humbly and heartily wish you a most happy
residence, after you have performed your short course in this life, in the
service of your God, and of your friends and Country, and the general benefit,
and comfort of your own soul.

THE PREFACE.
By the Author Chri. Andric.
For So Much as the truth of History, is the foundation of faith, and of
spiritual understanding (Christian Reader) and the history of things done,
blind, Hieron. Tom. 3. Epis. 27. ad Dard.
and imperfect, without the knowledge of places, the which knowledge gives
much light, both to the truth of History, and also to the spiritual
interpretation thereof; The scope of this Book.
therefore I have thought good to observe two things with great diligence in
this work. First, that I might portray and set forth the true and lively Image
of Jerusalem, of all other Cities the most glorious and famous throughout the
whole world, whereof mention is made in sacred and in profane histories, as it
flourished in Christ his time; and also the form of the Temple (the fame
whereof has been extolled above the heavens, and was worthy of eternal memory)
by the sacred Scriptures, by approved Writers, and by ancient tradition of
faithful and trusty men, in a lively plot, or Map, most exquisitly drawn,
together with the names, originals, s^ituations, and forms of every place, and
the most worthy Histories concerning the same, with all brevity. Secondly, that
I might rightly dispose the places of Christ his Passion, and represent every
thing which he suffered in every place, even as if they were now done before
our eyes, and so represented, that I might explain it with plainness and
brevity. For hereby all those things which he suffered for our sakes, will be
both more plainly understood, and also more profitably remembered. But
peradventure there will be some which will mislike this our endeavor, and the
rather because we have many things by tradition of Elders; to whom I answer out
of Hierom, where he says, That Ecclesiastical traditions, which are no
hindrance to faith, are so to be kept, as they were delivered by the Ancients.
In the mean time I will not say, that they are too rash, and too too wicked,
which will deny that thing, Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 28. ad L^cinium.
which has been godly received at all times, and of all men. So many of us
therefore as are washed with the blood of Christ, do bear his name, and are
called Christians, if our faith the answering to our name, and our life, not
disagreeing from the truth, hoping to be saved by the merits and grace of
Christ our Savior, let us believe that, which incorrupt and reverend Antiquity
has left, let us in no wise depart from those things [which our Ancestors have
celebrated without any superstition, and] which by the consent of the whole
world, are come even from them to our hands, and with thankful godliness, and
godly thankfulness, let us call to mind those places oftentimes, which may put
us in remembrance of the Passion of Christ; to which places this Map will lead
us, as it were by the hand; and with the eyes of faith, and of our mind, let
us look upon the same Son of God, and inwardly behold him, who being urged
with the great love of our salvation, having finished his last Supper in the
Parlour of Sion, [The sum of Christ's Passion.]
and being come into the Garden of Olivet, prayed and swet blood, through the
anguish and grievous consideration of the imminent afflictions. Immediately he
was betrayed by the most wicked Judas; he was taken, bound, and thrust forward
by the Jews, even as a Lamb by the Wolves, most cruelly amidst the noise of
clamors and weapons, and then was lead to the house of Anna the high Priest;
There he was stricken; from thence he was drawn to the Palace of Caiphas; in
the same he was falsely accused, condemned, spit upon, blindfolded, buffeted
with fists, and sundry ways all the night scorned and afflicted. In the
morning he was violently carried through the midst of the City to the house of
Pilate. From thence he was lead to the Palace of Herod, and accused again,
despised of him, mocked, and apparrelled like a fool in a white garment, and
brought back again by another way of the City to Pilate. There again he was
accused of many faults, stripped, and grievously whipped, clothed with purple,
crowned with thorns, diversely derided, spit upon, buffeted with fists, and
stricken with a reed, and being thus misused, was made a gazing stock to the
people, and adjudged to death. Then he was laden with a heavy Cross, and in
the sight of all the people, with grievous and bloody steps he was drawn,
punched, and urged by the furious violence of the soldiers, through a great
part of the City, and by the gate of Judgment out of the City, by a hard and
stony way, even unto mount Calvary. And being come thither he was stripped
again, and being both faint and weary, was refreshed with gall instead of
drink; and about highnoon he was fastened to the Cross, and so lifted up on
high; and hanging on the cross by the space of three hours, was derided with
taunts and reproachful words; being thirsty, they gave him vinegar to drink.
Finally, he which could save the world with one drop of his blood, would needs
bestow upon us by the five rivers of his wounds, his life, with all his blood.
A figure hereof was that Brazen-serpent, Number. 21.3. Ioh. 3.14.
which Moses caused to be exalted in the wilderness. To this spectacle also our
heavenly Father calls every faithful soul, Cant. 3.11.
Come forth (says he) ye daughters of Sion, and see King Solomon; Nay one far
greater then Solomon. In like manner Christ hanging on the Cross cries out,
Lam. of Ier. 1.12
O all ye which pass by the way, behold, and see, if there be any sorrow and
grief like mine.

And not only to the consideration and meditation of these things, but also to
the imitation, God in the holy Scripture exhorts us in these words
(spiritually interpreted) saying, Look, and make all things according to the
example or fashion which was showed thee in the Mount. Exodus 25.40. Heb. 8.5.
For all the precepts of life, which our Savior taught all the time of his
preaching, The best book is Chirsts pattern.
as well by word, as by example, the same he expressed in himself in one day of
his passion; wherefore if we would follow Christ, not only in word, but also in
work; we may, by his lively crucifying on mount Calvary, as it were out of a
golden book, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. Ioh. 19.20.
entitled with the noble title of Three most principal languages, written with
the quils of the spear, of the nails, of the thorns, and of the whips, in the
most pure parchment of the Immaculate Lamb, and with the purple blood of the
same, both learned and unlearned, learn easily and briefly perfect Theology,
the most wholesome remedies of Physic, the full knowledge of Law, and of
Justice, the science of liberal Arts, of true humility, of obedience, of piety,
of charity, of patience; finally of all manner of virtues, and of things most
perfect; and may also be inflamed and drawn to love and follow Christ. Thus the
blessed Virgin, standing near to the Cross of Christ, did not only with bodily
eyes, but also in heart, through faith (which wavered not in her) behold the
wounds of her Son, and seriously thinking thereon, was so comforted, Ambros. in
Luc. cap. 23. John 19.
that now (as Ambrose says) she was prepared also to dye for the good of
mankind. So S. John both seeing the side of Christ opened with a spear, blood
with water coming forth of the same, and so giving testimony thereunto, did by
the meditation thereof so greatly profit, Luke 23. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 13. ad
Paulinum. Mar. 15.
that at the last he became a most perfect divine, and a soaring Eagle to
behold the most holy, and blessed God the Father in the Son. So the Thief, when
he saw and heard Christ Jesus crucified, incontinently turned unto Christ, and
confessing him, he made the punishment of murder, Martyrdom, and changed the
Cross for Paradise. So also the Centurion by this spectacle, received so great
strength of faith, that under the Cross he was made a famous Confessor of
Christ; and further (as Chrysostom says) was afterward crowned with
Martyrdom: Moreover Thomas beholding and touching the wounds of Christ
crucified, was so illuminated with faith, Chrysostom. in Mat. c. 27.
that he plainly and openly professed Christ, John 30.27.2^
to be both his Lord, and his God.

This being so, and love procuring love, even as the Loadstone draws Iron;
who is he, I pray you, whom so vehement love of Christ, nay rather a heat and
flame will not affect, kindle, and set on fire? Who is he, when at the death of
Christ all creatures do suffer with him, the Sun darkened, Mat. 27.45.5^.
the vail of the Temple rent in sunder, the earth quaking, Rocks breaking,
graves opening, and the dead arising; Who, and what is he (I say) that will
not wonder, and that will not be abashed? Only Adams children, for whose
cause he dyed, are not moved with this so great a benefit.

The Adamant, that most hard stone, is mollified with the blood of a Goat; Iron
with the heat of fire is made soft; Heb. 8.10.
but the hearts of Christians, more hard then Adamant or Iron, are not
mollified with the blood and fire of Christ, but do crucify a fresh unto
themselves the Son of God, and do tread under their feet the blood of the
Testament.

What I pray you can be more beseeming, more meet, more just, and more
profitable for us, then to love again him that so loves us; and imitate him
whom we love? For if any thing herein seem hard, if any thing grievous, that
thing, love (the sweet yoke of the Lord) makes light and easy; 1 John 5.3.
for all labor is light, to him that loves, according to that notable
sentence of that ancient Gregory, Greg. Epist.
Nihil adeo grave est, quod non aequanimiter toleretur, si Christi passio ad
memoriam reducatur. There is nothing so heavy and burdensome, but the same is
willingly born, if so be the Passion of Christ be remembered.

For we will endure all things with patience as light and easy, Heb. 12.2, 3*
if we call to mind what hard words, harder stripes, and most hard pains and
afflictions he suffered for us, whose head was crowned with thorns, his eyes
blind-folded, his ears filled with reproaches, his mouth with gall and vinegar,
his face polluted with spitting, his cheeks bruised with buffeting, his knees
shaking, his shoulders laden with the Cross, his heart replenished with sorrow,
his body torn with whips, his members racked, his hands and feet bored; to be
brief, from the crown of the head, to the soals of the foot, he sustained an
innumerable sort of wounds and sorrows. Wherefore as the waters of Mara, being
sometimes bitter, were made sweet by Moses, Exodus 15.25.
at what time he cast wood into them; even so all our tribulation, if we
patiently endure the Cross of Christ, will wax sweet, and the gall thereof
will turn into honey. For by the meditations of these afflictions of our
Savior, faith is illuminated, hope strengthened, charity inflamed, and all
virtue increased. Wherefore holy Augustine, a light of the Church, no less
truly then godly, provoking us by very forceable words thereunto; says thus,
Behold the wounds of him that hangs, August. in lib. de virginitate
the blood of him that dies, the price of the redeemer, the scars of him that
rises; His head boweth to kiss thee, his heart is opened to love thee, his
arms stretched abroad to embrace thee, his whole body set forth to redeem
thee. Consider what, and how great these things be, weigh them in the balance
of your hearts, that he may be wholly fastened in your hearts, who for us was
wholly fastened on the Cross. Thus far Augustine. So that it is not enough to
meditate of these things once, but it is profitable to think upon them often;
yea the oftener, the more they avail and profit. In the wholesome contemplation
of whose Passion, although we profit much, yet we shall never attain to the
perfect knowledge thereof, but there will remain still somewhat that we may
seek for, the full knowledge whereof is reserved to our heavenly Country. In
the mean time, let us contemplate in these things day and night; in these
things let us recreate and busy our selves. In these let us watch, in these
let us sleep, yea to dye in the meditation of these things, is most Christian,
and available to everlasting salvation.

Places of holy Scripture to the praise of Jerusalem.

[Psal. 48.2. Beautiful for situation the joy of the whole earth is Mount
Zion, in the sides of the North, it is the City of the great King.]

Lam. 11.15. Is this the City of perfect beauty, the joy of the whole earth.

Ezech. 5.5. This is Jerusalem, I have set it in the midst of the Nations and
Countries, that are round about her.

2 Cor. 7.12. I have chosen this place for my self, to be a house of sacrifice.

Isa. 2.3. Mich. 4.2. The Law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem.

Apoc. 21.9. I saw the holy City, New Jerusalem, come down from God out of
Heaven prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband.

To these agrees Tobit 13. v. 9, 10.18. O Jerusalem the holy City, many
Nations, shall come from far to the name of the Lord God, with gifts in their
hands, even gifts to the King of heaven; all Generations shall praise thee, and
give signs of joy. Cursed are all they which hate thee, but blessed are they
for ever which love thee. Rejoice and be glad for the children of the just, for
they shall be gathered, and shall bless the Lord for the just. Blessed are
they which love thee, for they shall rejoice in thy peace. Blessed are they
which have been sorrowful for all thy scourges; for they shall rejoice for
thee, when they shall see all thy glory, and shall rejoice for ever. Let my
soul bless God the great King; for Jerusalem shall be built up with Saphires
and Emeraulds, and thy walls with precious stones, and thy Towers, and thy
Bulwarks with pure gold. And the streets of Jerusalem shall be paved with
Beril, and Carbuncle, and stones of Ophir. And all her streets shall say,
Hallelujah, and they shall praise him saying, Blessed be God which has
extolled it for ever.

SEVEN GENERAL RULES For Expounding Scriptures that speak of Christ's coming,
and Kingdom, and Judging, and of destroying Babylon; and of the calling of the
Jews, and Israel.
I. AS the Truth of God is fulfilled, both by the outward work, by which he
appears in the World, and by the secret Mystery by which he reveals himself in,
and to the Spirits of his Saints, (which two answer one another:) So in the
Testimony of the Scripture, there is frequently, not only the History in the
Letter, but a Spiritual Mystery in the sense thereof, as is clear in that of
Hagar and Sarah, Gal. 4. And of the Rock and Manna, and of Melchisedech, etc. 1
Cor. 10.3, 4. Heb. 7.1, 2.

II. In all Scriptural Interpretations, the Analogy of Faith is to be
respected, Romans 12.5. That is, Undeniable principles of Truth clearly held out
in other Scriptures, which have a special proportion to the place which is to
be interpreted, according to which, the sense thereof must needs be.

III. And hence, as Christ's coming and judging imply sometimes some special
manifestation of him, and sometimes his personal coming at his Incarnation, or
that second coming that shall be at the restoring of all things, ( Heb. 9.28.
Acts 3.19, 20, 21. with Romans 11.26. and Isa. 59.29. So some of such Prophecies
are appliable to both his comings, and to several times of his manifestation,
Mal. 3.1, 2, 6. Matthew. 16.20. with Mark 9.1, 2. Joh. 6.18. Zach. 14.1, 4. Psalm.
97.98, last verses.

IV. As there is Babylon and Egypt Mystical* as well as Literal, (Revel. 17.4.
and 11.8.) So some Prophesies (as Psalm. 137. Jer. 50. and 51.) seem appliable
to the sin and ruin of both those Babylons.

V. As there are Jews and Israel, seed of Abraham, as well spiritual as
natural, Romans 2.3 last verses, Gal. 6.17. Rom 9.6. So some Prophesies of
Isreal's sins, punishments, and merciful restorings, are applyable to both Zion
and Jerusalem, Gal. 4. ult. Isa. 54. with Isa. 51.52. and 53 chapters.

VI. As both of Natural and Spiritual Israel, there was a First Fruits to God
in the Apostles days; and there is a Harvest that is to come (Romans 11.16. Jam.
1.18. Revel. 14.4.) So some Prophesies of glorious Blessings are applyable to
both times, and are fulfilled already to the First Fruits, in a less degree,
that are to be fulfilled at the Harvest plenteously, and very gloriously, Romans
15.4. 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Cor. 5.17, 18. from Isa. 43.18, 19. with Revel. 21.1, 5.
Jer. 31.31. with Heb. 8.8. and 1 Cor. 11.25. and Romans 11.12, 15, 26, 27. Luke
1.31, 32. Hos. 3.4 5. Ezekiel. 37.24, 28.

VII. All Holy Scriptures (and therefore all those Scriptures that foretell the
calling of the Jews, the fall of Babylon and Antichrist, and the comings of
Christ) are inspired of God, and are profitable in all Ages, for Instruction,
for Conviction, for Reformation, and for leading on in Righteousness, 2 Timothy
3.16. Romans 15.4 1 Cor. 10.6, 11.

A Preparation to a more full Explanation of the Emblem Page 4.
of the Lion Couchant, over the Earths Globe, under Two Crowns, become one,
etc. By Seven Propositions.
1. ALL the Posterity of Jacobs Twelve Sons, are often called Israel: 2 Samuel
5.5. 1 King. 11.26, 42.
The Judges, Saul, David, and Solomon, ruled over all; they then being but one
Kingdom.

2. Under Rehoboam, Solomon's Son, 1 Kings 12.20 2 Chro. 13.4, 15. Isa. 7.1, 9.
Hos. 5.13, 14. and 6.4. and 7.1, 8, 11.
Ten Tribes rent from him under Jeroboam (who was of Ephraim, which was the
greatest of the Ten Tribes.) Thus the Kings that succeeded Jeroboam were called
Kings of Israel, and reigned (for most part) in Samaria, and that people are
often called Ephraim, from the principal Tribe: The successors of David's seed,
were called Kings of Judah, and they reigned in Jerusalem.

3. Before Ezekiels prophecy, Israel were carried captive by the Assyrians,
into Assyria, and Media, and other Eastern Countries, 2 Kings 17.6. with Ezekiel
1.2. and 40.1.

4. In Ezekiels days, Judah was captived by the Chaldeans, or Babylonians, for
seventy years, Jer. 25.11. and then returned from their captivity, Dan. 9.1,
23, 24. Ezra 1.1, 2, 3.

5. Babylon being vanquished by Medes and Persians, and these by the Grecians
under Alexander (whose Kingdom was divided amongst his four Grand Captains, of
which, the South and North obtained all at the last) The Grecians were
vanquished by the Romans above forty years before Christ's Nativity.

6. Hence after the Jews returned from the captivity of Babylon, Dan. 2.32, 33,
38. to 46.
(that Head of Gold, in Daniels Image;) they remained (as in captivity) under
the Medes and Persians, (the Breast and Arms of Silver.) Nehe. 9.32, 36, 37. And
then under the Grecians (that Belly and Thighs of Brass;) and lastly, under the
Romans, [those Legs of Iron (the Eastern and Western Empires,) and Feet of Iron
and Clay,] which end in Ten Toes, so in Ten Kings, Revel. 17.12, 13.

7. Under this last (and longest) captivity, they are (and so they account of
it) still, unto this day. From this Fourth Monarchy that captived them, they
shall shortly be restored by Jesus the Messiah, who will destroy all their
enemies, and will set up the Fifth Monarchy, that is held forth in the Emblem,
which shall never be destroyed; but it shall break in pieces and consume all
these Kingdoms, and it (as a Mountain) shall stand for ever, Dan. 2.34, 45.

The Explanation it self, according to the Letters A B C D E F G H I that are
in the Emblem at the top of the Map of Jerusalem.
TWo Sticks; A B
(A) for Judah; (B) for Israel; These two Kingdoms, C
(C) shall become one Kingdom under Christ, Ezekiel. 37.15, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22.
as in Ezekiel. 37.15, 16, 17. The word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of
man, Take thee one stick, and write upon it; A
For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions. B
Then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph the stick of Ephraim (
Joseph's son) and for all the house of Israel his companions. C
And join them one to another into one stick, and they shall become one in
thine hand. Verse. 19. I will put Isreal's stick with the stick of Judah, they
shall be one in mine hand. Verse. 21. And say unto them, Thus says the Lord
Jehovah, Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the Heathen
whether they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into
their own Land. And I will make them one Nation in the Land; and they shall not
be divided into two Kingdoms any more at all: Verse. 23. Nor shall they defile
themselves any more with Idols. Verse. 24: And David my servant shall be King
over them, and they shall all have one Shepherd. Verse. 25. For ever.

This is meant of the Reign of Christ, who is called The Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, D
the Root of David, (Revel. 5.5.) Of whom Jacob foretold; saying, Judah is a
Lions whelp; he couched as a Lion, and as an old Lion; who shall rouse him up?
Gen 49.9.

He is called a Rod out of the stem of Jessei, E
and a Branch growing out of his root, Isa. 11.1.

Also a Star out of Jacob, F
and a Scepter that should rise out Of Israel; G
who shall smite through the corners of Moab (typing Antichrist) and shall unwal
all the children of Sheth, ( that is, All Nations; For all came of Noah, and he
of Adam, Sheth, H
Aenosh, etc.) Numb. 24.17. He shall strike through Kings: He shall wound the
head over many Countries (Antichrist.) Psalm. 110.5, 6. Revel. 19.15, 20. He
shall break in pieces the Oppressor. All Kings shall worship him, all Nations
shall serve him; Men shall be blessed in him. Psalm. 72.4, 11, 17. Yea all
Nations, all the Families of the Earth, even to the ends of the Earth, shall be
blessed in him, and shall call him blessed. Gen 22 18. and 28.14. Acts 3.25.
Psalm. 2.8. and 67.47. All, that is, The generality of those that survive, after
the great slaughters that shall be in the Earth; many of each of those seventy
Families of Noah, that became of seventy Languages, Genesis 10.1, 5, 31. and 11.1,
9. Zach. 13.8, 9. Psalm. 46.8, 9. Mal. 4.1, 2, 3. Zeph. 3.8. Isa. 24.3, 18, 21.
and 26.21. and 27.1, 7. and 34.6. Then shall all worship the Lord, with one
consent, Zeph. 3.9. Then swords shall be turned into ploughshares, and wars
shall all cease, Micah 4 3. Isa. 2 4. Psalm. 46.9. Then Jerusalem shall have
peace, and be the praise of the Earth, Psalm. 128.5. Isa. 62.7. And both it, and
all Cities shall be without walls, Ezekiel. 38.11. Number. 24.17.

Then the great Dragon, the old Serpent, called the Devil, H
and Satan, which deceives the whole world, shall be bruised under the feet of
his people, and shall be cast out, Romans 16.20. (Revel. 12.9.) That he may
deceive the Nations no more, till a thousand years shall be fulfilled; and
after that, he must be loosed a little season, Revel. 20.1, 2, 3. And the
Martyrs, or Witnesses of Christ against Antichristianism, being raised, shall
reign with Christ those thousand years. But the rest of the dead live not
again, until those thousand years shall be finished, that is, the first
Resurrection. Blessed and holy are all such unto days of eternity, Rev 4.5, 6.
See that place.

The Spirit, and the Bride say, Come; and let him that hears say, Come. He
that testifies these things, says, Surely, I come quickly; Amen, Even so,
come Lord Jesus.

An Explanation of the Authors names that are abbreviated in the Margent of
this Book; for help to the weak.
Breid. Julii 12. Breidenbach, on July 12. Broc. Itin. Brocard his Itinerary or
Journal. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. Eusebius Ecclesiast. History. Jerome. Tom 1.
Jerome, Tome 1. Jacob. Vitr. Jacob us Vitriac. Pas. Die 197. Pasch on 197 day,
etc. Saligniac, Tome 6, etc. Salig. Tom. 6. etc. Will. Tyrens 8th Book of the
Holy War. Will. Tyr. lib. 8. Bell. Sac. Joseph* 15 Book of Antiquities, 14
Chapter, and of the Jews Wars, 6 Book, 6 Chap. etc. Joseph. 15 Ant: 14.6. Bell.
6.

The other Abbreviations are more easy; of which, and of all these, you may
see more fully at the end of the Book, after Number 268, at Sect. 10. Sect. 6.
and 23. Sect. 4. and 14, 15, 16, etc.

The Reasons why some Traditions of Relics are forborne in the Translation;
and why some are published.
IT is to be granted, that this Breidenbach, Brocard, Pasch, Saligniac, (as
also Tyren) were Roman Catholics, and that they desired the promoting of their
Religion; a great part whereof, is, in visiting of Saints Relics; and they
received from their Ancestors many Traditions, which they respect and uphold as
much, as, yea, more then the Word of God it self.

Hence several such Passages that were in the Latin, are left out by the
Translator; as that of Veronica's Neckerchere, Or Section 42. of the Book.
Numb. 42 and of Pelagia's House: So also this about Helen's finding the Cross,
by the wonderful smell or odor of the Spices and Ointments, which the Earth
sent forth: By which miracle, that venerable Empress was confirmed, say those
Popish Authors (in Number 240.) Which argues. That the Women anointed Christ's
Body with that precious Ointment or Odors upon the Cross: For that anointing of
Christ's feet, was six or seven days before Christ's death, Joh. 12.1, 2. Whereas
the Scriptures show most plainly, That the Women bought not those Spices for
Ointments and Odors to Christ's Body, until Christ was taken from the Cross, and
buried: Which Odors they brought, not to the empty Cross, but to the Garden
where Christ was buried, some way distant from the Cross; and there they would
have anointed him, but did not, because Christ was risen before they came, Luke
23.53, 56. and 24.1. Matthew. 27.57. and 28.1, 2. Mark 16.1, 2, 6.

Hence the Translator forbears this, and diverse of such vain Traditions, as
tend to make the Word of God of none effect ( Matthew. 15.6, 9.) some of them
remain, that the Reader may know, in what place the Relickmongers will show
such and such things, which never were there; as the Note added from Holy
Scriptures, makes evident. Which Note being observed in love to the truth, may
tend to prevent that dreadful doom of the damnable deceivers and deceived,
denounced in 2 These. 2.10, 12. With all deceivableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved. And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusions, that
they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned, who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. I could name one whom I knew, noted
for miserable covetousness, when in sickness he prevailed not to be absolved by
a Minister, was prevailed with by a Priest that (it Ieems) absolved him, to
visit Saint Anne of Buxtons Well; which he did, and returned a confirmed
Papist, by this lying strong delusion; which he (poor wretch) believed, viz.
That he was showed, and saw the very Well it self, into which Saint Annes head
fell, being cut off by a villain that would have abused ber. Her Brother
hearing of it, came after Mass was ended, took his sisters head, and put it
right upon her neck and presently she revived. I saw the Well it self, where
this was done, said he.

This warning is premised, That by being forewarned, thou may be fore-armed
against the poison of such Basilisks, and may tread such Serpents under thy
feet. Remembering 2 These. 2.10. Many things are here truly recorded from Holy
Scriptures, and Josephus, and Jerome, and others, cited by those men. But can
any good come out of Galilee; or shall we receive truth from Papists? Answ.
Truth is more precious then Silver, or Gold, or Rubies. Can you be content to
take up Silver, or Gold, or precious Pearls, though you epsy then on a
Dunghill, or in the Kennel? Then disdain not to own Truth, which is far more
excellent, wheresoever you can epsy it: Only look up to the God of all grace,
who has given us his own Son, to be our Way, Truth, and Life; that he would
reveal his Son to us, and in us; that by him we may savingly know, and love the
truth, as it is in Jesus; and may by his light, discern and abhor every false
way. Try all things (that are held out for truths) hold fast that which is
good; (as the noble Bereans did, to their souls everlasting benefit, Acts
17.11.) and abstain from all appearance of evil. And the very God of peace
sanctify you wholly, 1 These. 5.21, 22, 23. This is the humble request of

Thy souls wel-wishing Friend, H. Jessey.

T. N. To the Christian loving Reader, of the Use and Benefit of this Pithy
Treatise.
THat Stately place, that Princely bower,
that Seat of mighty King: Psalm 48.2. Josh. 18.28.

That flower of Be njamin his Tribe,
whose fame through World did ring.
Ennobled with such Royal styles,
and titles of renown;
And over worldly Cities all
most meet to wear the Crown,
Lo, here presented is to view
in such good current sort,
As no Pen heretofore performed,
or made thereof report.
So that we need not now to run,
or gad from place to place,
In dangers great, through Countries strange,
to try or know this case.
That brave estate which erst it had,
is now (alas) defaced.
King David's house, 1 Chro. 11.4, 7
and Temple now
is quite and clean disgraced.
Yet here with Book and Map in hand,
we now may plain behold
The state of each thing as it was,
in times that were of old.
Where Christ did preach, where Christ did sup,
where Christ did fast and pray,
Where Christ was caught where Christ was whipped,
where thieves did him betray. Matthew. 26.27.

Where he a precious ransom paid
for man, who had offended;
Where he was Buried, where he Rose,
and eke where he Ascended;
Where Annas kept his pompous Court,
where Caiph as Palace stood;
Where wicked Pilate dwelt, that did
condemn most guiltless blood.
This and much more is here discourst
from some, that both had read,
And seen with eye, the City rare,
that is here deciphered.
This work and pains, as they deserve,
much thanks and hearty praife.
So such their Guerdon well may reap,
of all men in these days.
Who like to Candles waste themselves,
in giving light to others:
More such, God grant to take like care,
to help their Christian Brothers.
A brief Description and Explanation of Two hundred sixty and eight places of
Jerusalem, and the Suburbs thereof, as it flourished in the time of CHRIST.
Answerable to the same Figures that are Engraven in the Map thereof.
I. Erusalem, the choice City of God, The Original places from whence this
Commentary is taken, and where more is to be read. Psalm 48.2. and 87.1, 2, 3.
Matthew 4.5. Psalm. 74.27.
holy and most glorious, built upon the holy Mountains, excelling all the
Cities of the World; as well by the loftiness of the Seat, as by the moderation
and temperature of the Heavens, and fruitfulness of Soil, was situated in the
midst of the whole World, and of Judea, as it were in the very Center and Heart
of the Earth; and being as a Queen amongst all other Neighbor Cities, had the
pre-eminence as the Head over the Body, Ezekiel. 5.5.
and shined as the Sun above others in sumptuous and glorious Buildings: Having
such surpassing excellency, she was by a certain singular privilege in time
past, Joseph. Lib. 3. de Bello Iudaico. cap. 2. Deuteronomy. 16.17. Psalm. 48.2. Lam.
2.5.
the only place which God had chosen to himself; and was a figure not only of
every faithful man's soul, but also of the Elect Church of Christ Militant upon
Earth, and of that blessed Triumphant Church in Heaven. A City of perfect
Beauty, the Virgin of the World, the Paragon of all the East, and the joy and
rejoicing of the whole Earth.

This City was builded (as some judge) about the year from the Creation of the
World, Two thousand twenty and three, in the time of Abraham, Gen 14.18.
Joseph. 7. Antiq. Iud. cap 7. and l. 7. Belli Iud. c. 18, 28. Genesis 10. Josh.
15.8. Judge. 1.19. 2 Samuel 5.5. 1 Chronicles. 11.4, 7.
by Melchisedec the King: In Hebrew it was called Salem, and in Greek Solyma;
and it seems, that he possessed the same Fifty years. The which afterward
the Jebusites enjoyed, who sprang from Jebusi, the Son of Canaan; of whom it
was called for a time Jebus, and Jebusaeum, at what time Joshua slew the King
thereof. And the Jebusites held the same, Eight hundred twenty and four years,
who trusted so much to the strength of their City, that when King David
assailed the same, in contemp tof him, and of his Army, they placed upon their
Walls, the blind, the halt, and the maimed, saying, That these were sufficient
to beat back the Enemy.

But when David, through Gods help, enjoyed the City; the Jebusites being
expulsed, Joseph. l. 7. Antiq. cap. 3. Jerome. Tom. 3. de loc. Hebr. lit. i.
Eusebius. Evang Praep. l. 9. 1 King. 3.5, 6, 9, 10, etc. See Number CXXIV. Joseph.
lib. 8. Antiq. cap. 2. and 5.
he re-edified the same round, fortified it with a Castle, dwelt therein, and
made it the Metropolitan City of the whole Province of Judea, and the Head of
all the Kingdom; and from thenceforth, called it Jerusalem, as it were,
Jebussalem the letter B (to make the better sound) turned into R. [Or rather
from Jireh and Salem, Genesis 18.2, 14. with 2 Chro. 3.1.] Notwithstanding, there
are some which write, That it is called Jerusalem, of the magnificent Temple
which Solomon built therein, as it were, Hieron Solomonis. For the Greeks call
a Temple (...), Hieron. In continuance of time, Solomon and other Kings of
Judea, greatly enlarged the same, and so fortified it with most strong Gates,
Towers, Walls, and Trenches, and so adorned it with a Temple, with Palaces,
and with most exquisit Buildings; that among other Cities, it was a miracle of
the whole World, and is therefore more honored with silence, then with all that
can be said concerning the same. It stood in the Tribe of Benjamin, Josh.
18.28. Some borders of it were in Judah, Josh. 15.8. In this glory and
excellency, Jerusalem flourished Four hundred seventy and seven years, Joseph.
con. Appion. lib. 1. Strabo Geograph. l. 16.
as if it had been an Earthly Paradise, being in compass round about, Six miles
and two hundred and fifty paces. And by the Wall and circuit of the City, there
was a Stony Trench or Vault Threescore foot deep, and in breadth Two hundred and
fifty, wherein was abiding about One hundred and fifty thousand men. But when
the wickedness of the Princes and People, not only had profaned the Temple, 2
Kings 16.21, 24, 25. 2 Chro. 28.33, 36.
with the abominations of Idols, but also had filled the City even to the full
with innocent blood, most cruelly shed; the City together with the Temple,
Princes, and people by the just vengeance of God, was by Nabuchodonozer, Micah
3. Jere. 25.26, 29, and 52.
King of Babylon (but Gods whip) so utterly overthrown, and desolated
Threescore and ten years, that Sion was ploughed up like a field, and Jerusalem
was become as a heap of stones, and the Mountain of the Temple, as it were the
height and top of Woods; so as in the mean time (as Jerome witnesses) that
neither so much as a Bird, Hier. Tom. 3. Trad. Heb. in 2 Chro. 15.
nor a Beast, could fly, or pass through the same.

Afterward the Temple only being with much a do, and very hardly builded,
wanting Gates, Towers, and Walls, was inhabited again by the Jews (returning
out of the captivity of Babylon) Threescore years.

Moreover, within the space of Two and fifty days, Esdr. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Nehe.
1.2, 3, 4.5, 6, 7, etc. 1 Mac. 12.13. and 14. Joseph. 6. Bell. 6. Joseph. 1.
Bell. 13. etc.
Nehemiah enclosed it in compass Three miles and seven hundred and fifty paces,
with Gates, Towers, and a strong Wall; and afterward, the same being beautified
by the Maccabees, by Herod, and by others very stately, with public and
private Buildings, recovered the former dignity, being very famous and populous
by the space of Five hundred four and twenty years; having in it many narrow
Streets, by reason of the exceeding number of Houses therein: At what time
there, as in a Theater, Jesus Christ wrought our Salvation; and from thence,
Isa. 2.4. Micah 4. Acts 2.1. Mark 16. Psalm. 18. Joseph. 6. Bell. 13. and 7. Bell.
14.17. and 18.
as from a Center, the Apostles spread forth the Evangelical Doctrine
throughout the World.

But Titus, Emperor of Rome, being brought by the just judgment of God, to
take vengeance for the death of Christ, the Thirty and eighth year after his
Passion, besieged it round, casting a bank about it; and shut up the Jews in
the City, as in a prison, which came out of every Tribe to celebrate the Feast
of Passover there. Whereupon that City, the wonder of the World, was made a Den
of thieves, and a Sepulcher of dead men: For by reason of civil murders,
famine, pestilence, and sword, there perished in the same Eleven hundred
thousand Jews. And as for the City it self, Titus did so utterly subvert it,
that men which came unto it, would scarce believe that ever it had been
inhabited. Nevertheless, he left three principal Herodian Towers, that is to
say, Hippic, Mariam, and Phasel, which were more notable then the rest, as well
for greatness, as for beauty; and that part of the Cities Wall, which compassed
them from the West, unshaken; to the end, that both it might be a Castle for
the Roman Soldiers, which should be left there for a Garrison, and also to
show unto posterity what manner of City, Luke 19.41. Eusebius. in Chro. and Hist.
Eccles. l. 4. c. 6.
and how well fortified, the force of the Romans had subdued. But after
threescore and five years, the Jews rebelling again, Aelius Adrianus the
Emperor slew many thousands of them, and utterly subverted those Towers, with
the remainder of the Wall, and commanded the City to be strewed with Salt;
Hier. in loc. Act. Apost. lib. H. Niceph. 3. Hist. Eccles. 14. Broca. in
Descrip. locorum terrae sanctae, itinere. 6.
whereby it came to pass according to the prophecy of Christ, That there was
not left one stone of the City upon a stone. And building the City again in
less compass, he excluded Mount Sion, with the Palace of Solomon, and that of
the Queen, and the House of the Forest of Libanus; also the Gate of the North
corner, and the Tents of the Assyrians; and all the North part, even to the
Dung Gate, and to the Gate of Ephraim: But the Mount of Calvary, and the
Sepulcher of the Lord, which were aforetime without the Walls, he enclosed with
the North Walls of the City; and set the Picture of a Sow cut in Marble upon
the forefront of that Gate, by which men go to Bethleem; thereby giving to
understand, That the Jews subject to that Law of Swines flesh, were under the
power of the Romans; Will. Tyr. Hist. Bell. Sacri. lib. ^4. c. 12. I^ob.
Vitriac. ^.55.
whom by an Edict he forbad never more to enter into that City, or look into
the same from the top of any higher place, and from thenceforth commanded it to
be called Aelia Capitolia, after his own name. But after this, being inhabited
of the Christians, and dignified with a Patriarchal Seat, receiving again in
continuance of time, the name of Jerusalem, flourished five hundred years in
Christian Religion.

And in the year after the Birth of Christ, Onuphr. in Chro. Eccles.
Six hundred thirty and six, it was taken by the Saracens which reigned in
Egypt, and so possessed Four hundred threescore and three years.

After this, in the year of Christ One thousand ninety and nine, Wilbelm. Tyri
Arch. Hist. Bell. Sacri. l. 8. c. 5, 18, 19, 20, 21. and l. 9. c. 1, 2, 9.
the City Jerusalem was recovered by the Christians, having for their Captain
Godfrey of Bullion, who was the first that entered upon the Wall of the City
with great courage and most fierce assault, the Ides of July, the very same day
and hour wherein So I the Author try this.
Christ died. And so great slaughter was made, throughout all the Streets,
Lanes, and corners of the City, that no man could pass but over the dead bodies
of the slain: And so exceeding was the effusion of blood, Jacob. de Vitriac. c.
20. B. Salig. in Epist. ad Joan. a Lotharing, Cardin.
that men went over their shoes in the blood of the dead; insomuch, That the
Conquerors themselves were from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head,
imbrued with blood. Who when they enjoyed the City, putting off their Armor,
and cleansing themselves from their blood, visited the places of Christ's
Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension (which the faithful that dwelt in
Jerusalem showed unto them) and beheld them with reverence. The eight day
after, with one consent, they elected Duke Godfrey, and created him the King of
Jerusalem; but the man being full of godliness and humility, would not be
crowned with a Crown of Gold, after the manner of Kings, in the holy City; but
contented himself, and reverenced the like Crown of Thorns, with the which, the
Emperor of Mankind was crowned in the same place, when he went to be Crucified
for our Salvation.

Jerusalem therefore being recovered by the Christians, Bas. Hero. Bell. Sacri.
cont. l. 1. c. 7. and l. 6. c. 10.
was so held and enjoyed by them Fourscore and eight years: Afterward, namely
in the year One thousand one hundred eighty and seven, the second day of
October, the Christian Princes (woe and alas) disagreeing among themselves,
Matthew. Palmerius in Chron.
Jerusalem was delivered up to Saladine the Sultan of Egypt, upon this
condition, That it should be lawful for the Christians to depart with bag and
baggage; the which Saladine held it Three hundred and thirty years. But in the
year of our Lord, Mossaeus in Chron.
One thousand-five hundred and seventeen, it was invaded by Selimo, the Emperor
of Turks, and is at this day in the same compass of Walls possessed by the
Turks; who name it Cusumobarech or Codsbarich, Onuphr. in Chron.
that is to say, A Holy City. So that from the first Foundation thereof, unto
this present year One thousand five hundred ninety and four, are passed Three
thousand five hundred thirty and one years.

The places within the City.
The first part of the City.
II. MOunt Sion, Psalm. 2.6. and 15.1. Joel 2.15. and 3.17. Joseph. 6. Bell. 6.
and 15. Antiq. 14. Niceph. 8. Hist. Eccles. 30. Brocard. Itiner. 6.
which is called The Mount of the Lord, and the Holy Mountain, is much more
higher then other Mountains, and larger; after the fashion of a Theater, in the
form of a half Circle, compassing the City on the South part: And being set as
a Looking-Glass on a high place, founded by God upon a firm Rock, on every side
broken off, had a Plainness thereon like to a Town; and being very pleasant and
recreative, it represented the excellency and delights of Heaven. Whose top the
Jebusites first of all fortified with a strong Castle, and the compass thereof
with firm and lofty Walls, with Gates, and with Towers: Salig. Tom. 6. cap. 6.
Isa. 14. and 20.
Whom when David the King had expulsed, he made the Castle and the Walls round
about, the Gates and the Towers, much more defensible, and made the top and
plainness of the Hill, Bas. Hero. Bell. Sacri. con^in. lib. 1. cap. 8. 2 Samuel
5.6, 7. 1 Chro. 11* 5, 7. and 15.1.
into Streets and Lanes; and builded there for himself, for his Nobles and
Worthies, Houses, and called it The City of David; which also Josephus calls
The Higher City, and The Holy Part. The Maccabees reedifying the same Mountain
in compass, made it most strong with many Walls, and lofty Towers, in such
wise, as notwithstanding any force, it was invinsible, only by Famine it might
be surprised: Where were many straight and narrow passages, and many houses of
Citizens placed.

From this Mountain, Psalm. 48.2. and 87.1, 2. Joseph. 6. Bell. 6. and 1. Bell. 1.
1 Mac. 4. Joseph. Bell. 15. and 16.
according to the foretelling of the Prophets, a Law, and an Evangelical Light
came forth, and as it were from the Head it self, it was spread forth into the
whole Body of the World for the saving health of all Nations. The which, when
the Romans by the judgment and will of God, against all hope of man, and
without bloodshed had taken (the seditious within the City, being stricken
with a sudden fear, and roaming here and there from the wall, and hiding
themselves in their sinkes) being dispersed in all corners and streets with
their naked swords, slew all that they met with all, having no regard of
persons or sex, and set fire on the houses, burning them, Actor. 13. Joseph. 7.
and Bell. 16.
and all those that were fled into them, and destroying many houses whereinto
they entered for pillage sake, where finding whole families dead (whom the
famine had consumed) they so abhorred the sight thereof that they returned back
again empty, running thorough with their swords all that they met, and so
filling the streets with dead bodies, that the whole City flowed with blood in
such abundance, that ( as Josephus witnesses) many things burning, were
quenched with the plentiful blood of the slain. But night coming on the
slaughter began to cease, but the burning increased. The next day following,
Titus being entered into the City, wondered at the fortifications of the City,
and at the Rocks of the Towers, which the Tyrants through folly had willingly
forsaken.

To be brief, when he had seen their substantial altitude, and invincible
force, we have fought (says he) by the manifest help of God, and it was God
which drove out the Jews from these holds. For what hands of men, or what
engines of war might have prevailed against these?

Many such words spoke he to his friends. This mountain though it were
excluded out of the City, yet afterward it was builded again and inhabited. But
now being in the Suburbs most ruinous, it lies waste.

The places of Mount Sion.
III. THe Castle of Sion being ancient and strong, was set on the very top of
Mount Sion, round like a Crown, and was a sure defense and beauty both of the
City and Temple, and was as the capital or chief place of so great a City. 2
King. 19.31. 2 Samuel 5, 6, 7. verse. 11.
Herein the Jebusites dwelt at the first, whom David casting out by force,
enjoyed the Castle, and receiving from Hiram King of Tyrus, stones, wood, and
Artificers, builded out of the same a strong Palace for himself, and a house
of Cedar, 1 Kin. 5.1.10. 1 Chronicles. 11.3.7.
with a Kingly Throne. In the which Castle afterward, David himself, and other
Kings of Juda inhabited, ^^s. 6. Bell. 6.
and used the same for the Kings seat. And for this cause it was continually
kept with a strait guard of soldiers. And in process of time it was called
the Kings Castle, and the house of David, the seat and Throne of David, also
the Court and Kings house. Arista^^ l. de 72. interpr. 1 Match. 1. 1 Match. 13,
14. chap.
In this Castle the most cruel of all Tyrants Antiochus King of Syria, which
in Greek was called (...) Epiphanes, that is to say, Renowned (but more truly
(...) Epimanes, that is, Mad, he deserved to be called) placed a Garrison of
Gentiles, whereby in the time of the Machabees he afflicted the Jews very much
a long time. The which when Simon Machabaus had enforced to yield through
famine, and had cleansed the Castle from the pollution of Idols, they entered
there-into with palms in their hands, with Cymbals, with Psalterions, with
hymns and songs; and he placed therein men of the Jews to defend the City and
Country. Yet now there is nothing to be seen but the ruins thereof.

IV. The Kings Prison with a lofty Tower, which overlooked the Kings house.
Nehem. 3.25. Jer. 33.1. chapter 39.14.15.
Into this prison Jeremy was cast, because he prophesied that the City should
be taken, and at the last was delivered out of the same by Nebuchadnezzar, when
the City was taken.

V. Caesar's and Agrippas Hall, Jos. 15. Antiq. 11. and 1 Bell. 16* and 6. Bell. 6.
was the Kings house, which Herod the Ascalonite builded for himself in the
uppermost City: for he builded in his Palace two great and fair houses of
polished marble, and fine gold, whereunto the Temple it self was not
comparable, and calling them after the names of Caesar Augustus, and of Agrippa
his son in law, his friends, he named the one Caesar's, and the other Agrippas.

VI. The upper Chamber of Sion (as some writ^) was situate about the midst
of Mount Sion, Mat. 26.18. Mark 14.14. Luke 22.11. Ioh. 13, 1.
being large, paved, and very fair, wherein Christ in his last supper did eat
the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples, Luke 24. Ioh. 20.
washed their feet, and instituted the Sacrament of his most blessed body and
blood. In the same (say some) on the day of his Resurrection (when he was
entered, the doors being shut) standing in the midst of his Disciples, he
showed unto them the wounds of his side, of his hands and feet, and did eat
before them; after that, breathing upon them, he gave them the Holy Ghost, and
therewithal power to remit, Ioh. 20.
and retain the sins of all manner of persons: That the eighth day after
this, here he offered unto Thomas the Apostle the prints and scars of the spear
and nails to see and feel. Act. 1.2. Hier. tom. 1. Ep. 27. ad E^stoc. vir. and
tom. 3. Epist. 1. ad Paulin. Niceph. l. 2. hist. Eccl. cap. 3. Act. 6.5.
Here (as some conjecture) after the Lords ascension, Matthias was by lot
chosen into the Apostleship of Judas the Traitor. And that here on the day of
Pentecost, the Holy Ghost came down in a great sound, and in the form of fiery
tongues, lighted upon one hundred and twenty believers; and at the first Sermon
of Peter three thousand Jews were converted and baptized. In this place (as
some guess) James the Lords b^other, firnamed Just, was by the Apostles
desired to preside with the Church in Jerusalem; and Stephen with six more,
were ordained Deacons. Act. 15.
And that here the Apostles entered into the first consultation, or council, and
set down the Rules of Christian peace, for the good of Jews and Gentiles.

VII. The Cypress Trees of Mount Sion, which were very excellent, Eccles. 24.13.
whereof the Book called Ecclesiasticus, makes mention.

VIII. The House of Annas, the chief Priest, the Father-in-law of Caiaphas;
wherein Christ was examined of Annas, Ioh. 18.13.24.
concerning his Disciples, and his Doctrine; at what time he answered, That he
had taught openly before all men; for the which, he received a blow on the
cheek by a servant.

IX. The House of the Worthies, Nehem. 3.
wherein (as some say) the strong men, and valiant Peers of King David dwelt;
where also as in a wrestling place, the chief Wrestlers and Champions, for
exercise sake, used to try masteries.

X. The House of the Virgin Mary, wherein after the death of her Son, she dwelt
with John the Apostle, Niceph. 2. hist. Eccles. 3. and 21
[as Nicephorus says.]

XI. The House of Uria, 2 Samuel 11. and 23
one of the most valiant Soldiers of David, whose wife Bethsheba, bathing her
self in a Fountain of her Garden (which also is to be seen in the Map) by her
beauty allured David to adultery; beholding her from a Gallery of the Kings
House.

XII. The upper Market, by reason whereof, the upper City also, was called
sometimes the upper Market. Ios. 6 Bell. 6.


XIII. The stairs of the Castle, Acts 21. last, and 22.1.
or prison, whereon the Apostle Paul stood, when he made answer for himself.

XIV. The stairs of Sion, Nehem 3.15. and 12.37. Ios. 15. Antiq. 14.
by which men went up to the City of David.

XV. The Kings Garden, Nehem. 3.15. 2 King. 23.18.26.
the which also was called the Garden of Oza, wherein Manasses and Amon, Kings
of Judah, were buried.

XVI. Mello, a Valley or Dale, very deep and wide, which lay between Mount
Sion, and the lower City, and extended it self from the Watergate to the
Fish-Gate. David builded and compassed Mount Sion round about from this Valley;
Bas. Hero. 1. Bell sac S. Bro itin. 6 2 Samuel 5.9. 1 Chronicles. 11.8. 1 King. 9.15.
and 11.27. Nehem. 8.1.3.16. and 3.26. and 12.37. 2 Chronicles. 32.5. 2 King. 12.20.
Joseph. 6. Bell. 6. B^ocord. itin. 6.
the concavity and bottom whereof Solomon did make level and plain, that it
might be a convenient street; and from thenceforth it was called the street of
the Watergate. He also beautified the same with buildings, which being
decayed, was repaired by Ezekias. In this place it was that Joaz King of Juda
was slain by his servants in the way down to Sela. But in Josephus time, this
valley was called Tyropoeon, and was very large and full of dwelling houses. At
this day this valley is so filled up with earth and stones, that there
remains only a small show of the former concavity and deepnesse.

XVII. The Palace of Caiphas, belonging to every high Priest, large and
square, Nehem. 3.20. Mat. 26.3.57. and 27. Mar. 14.15. Luke 22 and 23. Joan.
18.24.28
wherein sometime dwelled Eliasib the chief Priest. In this Palace the
Princes of the people being gathered together, consulted among themselves what
policy they might use to catch Jesus, and to kill him, to whom he was there
sold by Judas for thirty pieces of silver. Afterward also he was thrice denied
by Peter, and was by false witnesses of the Jews, accused before Caiphas in
the counsel of the Priests and Elders, to whom when he answered nothing, being
straightly charged by the high Priest, to tell whether he were christ the Son
of God. The which when he confessed, he was accused of blasphemy; the chief
Priest calling for the sentence of the counsel, threescore and ten Elders
condemned him to be worthy of death, saying He is worthy to dye; Whereupon the
servants and soldiers did presently spit in his face, they blinde-folded him,
buffeted him with their fists, commanding him to prophecy, scorned him all the
night with sundry mocks, and vexed him with many blasphemies. And that I may
speak much in few words, no mortal man in this life is able to express, what,
and how much he endured this night. And in Mat. 27.1. Mar. 15.1. Luke 22 66.
Io. 18.28.
the morning following, the Rulers of the Jews assembled together in this
place again, to deliver him up to death; and leading him bound, they delivered
him to Pilate the Deputy.

XVIII. The Fountain of Sion, Nehem. 3.
the which was made with great labor and cost.

XIX. The Bridge of Sion, by which men went through the valley out of the upper
City unto the Temple. Ios. 15. Antiq 1^. and 7. Bell. 13, 15.


XX. The Gates of Sion which the Lord loves more then all the Tabernacles of
Jacob. Psalm. 87.2.


XXI. The upper Gate by which Joas when he was crowned King of Juda in the
Temple, 2 Chronicles. 23.5.13.
and guarded with the Princes of the Jews, was lead into the Palace of the
Kings of Juda.

XXII. The Sepulcher of David, together with the field wherein the Kings were
buried, 1 King. 2, 10. and 11.43. 2 Chronicles. 21, 20 and 24, 25. and 28, 27 Nehem.
2.3.5. and 3.6. Ios ^.7 Antiq. 16 and ^3. Ant. 15 and 16 Ant 7. Act. 2.29.
Niceph. hist. Eccl. 30. Breid. 12. Jul. Sal. tom. 7. cap 2 Pasch. day 1846,
the which very stately was placed aloft in the City of David, wherein David
himself, Solomon, and other Kings of Juda, also Jehoida the chief Priest were
buried. Into this Monument of David's Sepulcher* Solomon brought great treasure
at his burial; the which Hircanus the high Priest, and Captain opening brought
from hence thirty thousand talents of silver. Not long after this, Herod the
Ascalonit King of Jews, went about also to bring much treasure out from thence,
but a flame of fire breaking forth and consuming two of his soldiers, he left
off his enterprise, and to make satisfaction for himself, he adorned the same
Monument with fair shining Marble, which continued there a long time after:
where the Saracens afterward builded a Church for themselves, which stands as
yet, which place they greatly reverence, and suffer not any Christian to enter
into the same.

XXIII. The Sepulcher of Stephen the first Martyr, Acts 8.2.5.34.22 3. 2 Samuel
6.17.
of Nicodemus, and of Gamaliel, Paul's Schoolmaster, [removing their bodies by a
miracle from the valley of Josaphat hither, after three hundred and sixty
years, say Relick-mungers.]

XXIV. The Tabernacle of Sion, Exo. 26.1.7.14. 2 Chronicles. 1.3. 2 Samuel 6.17. 2 Chronicles 5.2. 1 Chro. 16.1.39 verse. 37. Josep. Ant. 4. 2 Chronicles. 1.3, 4. chapter 5.2.7.
Breid. 12. Jul. pasch. day. 184. Zach. 14.10.
not that covered with skins, which Moses caused to be made; King David placed
the same in this City in Sion Gibeon, and with great reverence put the Ark of God therein, and appointed Priests and Levites continually to minister from day
to day by turn, which remained there about four and twenty years, until it
was carried by Solomon into the Temple. In the same (says Breid.) David
sorrowing for his adultery with Bethsheba, and murder of Urias, made certain
Psalms of repentance.

XXV. The Kings Presses, wherein the Kings wine was pressed.

The Second part of the City.
XXVI. THe Daughter of Sion, Psalm. 9.16. Zach. 9.9. Matthew. 21.5. Jos. 6. Bell.
6. etc
so called becaused it seemed to grow from Mount Sion, the which was also
called the lower City, being another part of the City, whereof there is often
mention made in the holy Scriptures, and in Josephus.

The places of the Daughter of Sion.
XXVII. THe Mountain of Acra was sometime in the lower City very lofty and
steep, Jos. 13. Ant. 9. and 6. Bell. 6.7. and Bell. 13.16.
the height whereof afterward Simon Machabaeus abated, and made plain by the
continual labor of the people, which he employed herein by the space of three
years day and night, that the Temple alone might be higher then all other
places of the City.

XXVIII. The Amphitheater, Ios. 15. Ant. 10.
that is a place environed with Scaffolds and Stages, capable of fourscore
thousand men, where the people were wont to behold their Games, which Herod the
elder first of all other builded in the field at Jerusalem with great labor
and cost. Wherein, to recreat the beholders, wrastlers, and sword players,
showed many feats of activity; and sometimes, Lions, Leopards, Bulls, Bears,
Bores, Wolves, and other exceeding wild and fierce beasts, fought one with
another, and sometime condemned men were cast unto these to be devoured, and
captives taken in war. At which time of their Games, the place beneath was
strowed with sand, to the end that neither the Sword-players should fail in
their footing, nor the fighters might be defiled with the blood of the slain,
nor yet that the sprinkling of the blood should bring horror to the lookers on.

XXIX. The Castle Antonia, Jos. 15. Antiq. 14 and 18 Ant. 8 Item. 1. Bell. 3.
and 4, 16. and 6. Bell. 6. and alias sae^e.
strong, and well fortified, lying near to the North-side of the Temple, which
was builded in time past on a high rock fifty cubits high, and very steep round
about, and the Tower was called Baris. In this the chief Priests which came of
the Machabees even till Herod's time inhabited* where, in a Cell made for that
purpose, the sacred stool of the chief Priest was kept, the Governor of the
Tower lighting a candle there every day. Herod the greater having gotten the
Kingdom, and seeing that this Castle was conveniently situate to command the
Citizens that they might not seek innovation through sedition, repaired the
same to his great cost, and fortified it within with a Royal Palace, even like
a City, and with four lofty Towers at each corner, whereof three were fifty
cubits high, and the fourth threescore and ten, from whence the whole Temple
might be seen; and for the favor which he bare to Marcus Antonius his friend,
he called it Antonia. In this Castle the Roman soldiers, kept always watch
with their soldiers, having an eye and principal care lest the people should
work any innovation in the Temple on the feast days. And so the Temple
belonged to the City, and the Castle Antonia to the Temple.

XXX. The Court of Records which we commonly call the Court of Chancery, or of
the Rouls, that is to say, a house wherein the Acts of the City, and of the
Citizens, and also their public Records, and the account of Creditors were
kept; the which the seditious burned, Ios. 2. Bell. 17. and 7. Bell. 13.
the keepers thereof flying from thence, to the end they might destroy all the
evidences of the Creditors, and join unto them all the Debtors.

XXXI. The Castle of Antiochus Epiphanes, Ios. 12. Ant. 6. 1 Mac. 1. Dan.
8.11.12.
both high and strong, the which, after the slaughter of many Citizens, the
spoil of the City and Temple, and the burning of most fair houses, he builded
upon the mountain Acra, and fortified it with strong walls and towers, and
placed a Garrison of Macedonian soldiers there, mingling with them certain of
the most rascal fugitive Jews, by whom the continual sacrifice was taken away
by the space of three years, Ios. 13. Antiq. 9.
and the City it self vexed more then six and twenty years. But after this
Simon Machaeus won, and destroyed this Castle.

XXXII. The common Prison of the City wherein the Apostles being shut up by the
Rulers of the Jews, Act. 5 18.19. Iose. 6. Bell. 6.
were in the night time brought forth by the Angel. Josephus seems to call
this Prison Betiso.

XXXIII. The Corner Parlour belonging to the corner house, Nehem. 3.24.
where the public Suppers were kept.

XXXIV. The Vaulted Cave, Ios. 19. Ant. 14. B reid. 14. Iul.
leading from the Castle Antonia into the Temple, which Herod the elder made,
setting a Tower thereon, that by the same he might pass privily into the
Temple, if so be the people intended to make any insurrection against the
King; which remains as yet very wonderful and large, insomuch that six
hundred horses may very conveniently be placed therein.

XXXV. The Court in Hebrew called Gasith; Joseph. 6. Bell. 6, 7. Bell. 13. Number.
11.24. Act. 22, 30. Mar. 13.9. Act. 5.2. Hier. Tom. 3. Epist. 25. ad Fabiol.
man's. 11.
Which in the inner City was joined to an old wall thereof: Wherein were
threescore and ten Senators and ordinary Judges, which were called of the Jews
Sanhedrim, in Greek Synedron, that is to say, in English the Council of the
Elders and Seniors of the people. These dealt in the affairs of the
Commonwealth, gave Laws, and determined the doubtful and weighty causes, yea
even of other Cities also; they ended strifes and controversies, and gave the
sentence of death, generally they dealt in all capital causes, except only in
the difficulties and mysteries of Gods Law and of the Jews Religion, Deuteronomy. 17.
the which the Priests only determined. In this confistory the Apostles were
examined, whipped, and forbidden to preach, Act. 4, 5, and 5.27.
and yet went rejoicing from the Council, because they were counted worthy to
suffer shame for the name of Jesus. Here it was that St. Stephen standing
before the Council, Act 6.12, 15.
and his countenance shining like an Angel, lifting up his eyes, saw the
Heavens open, and the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God, from thence, he being cast with violence out of the City, was stoned.

XXXVI. The house of Ananias the high Priest, Ios. 2. Bell. 1.7.
which the seditious at the length fiered.

XXXVII. The house of holy Anne (as some write) the Grandame of Christ, Breid.
26. Iul. Sal. Tom 8. cap. 6. Iac. Vitri. cap. 58. Luke 1.26.
wherein she with Joacim her husband abode when the feast was at Jerusalem,
where they both dyed. Here the blessed Virgin Mary (as some conjecture) abroad
during the passion of Christ [ That there she was conceived, some vainly
record; for this was at Nazareth in Galilee.]

The house of the rich Glutton (says Breid, Luke 6. Breid 14. Iul. Sal. Tom.
8.62.6
etc.) which burned in hell according to the Evangelical story (or Pa^able.) In
the which house that he dwelt, it is reported by some Antiquities, a high wall
whereof is showed at this day to Christian Travelers.

XXXIX. The house of Massa, whereof mention is made in the second Book of
Kings. [The house of withdrawing, or of guard, that should not be broken into.
2 King. 11.6.
]

XL. The house of the Nathinaeans or Nethinims that is Given, which carried
wood and water into the Temple. ( These seem to be the remnant of the
Gibeonites whom David gave to such service, Neh. 3.26.31.
Ezra 8.20. with Ezra 2.70.)

XLI. The house of the Rulers of the Pharisees, in the which Christ touched the
man sick of the dropsy, Luke 14.1.
and healed him.

LXII. The house of the Forest of Libanus, 1 King. 7 2. and 10.17.21. 2 Chronicles.
9.16.20. Jer. 22, 23. Iosep. 18. Aut. 5, 6, 7.
in length one hundred cubits, in breadth fifty, and in height thirty cubits,
the which Solomon builded most brave and glorious of polished Marble, of Cedar
trees, garnished with silver and gold, having a flat roof with Walks and
Galleries (according to the fashion of Palestine) and within lively
counterfeits of sundry trees and plants most artificially made, that the leaves
thereof seemed in some sort to shake. And near unto the same he planted a grove
and a green arbor made of all manner of trees, and watered with fountains;
also he made Parks and Fish-pools, Mier. tem. 3. Epist. 33. ad Suniam. Eccles.
2.5, 6.
wherein it is like were all manner of wild beasts, birds, and fishes. This
house was a storehouse of meat, an Armory for weapons of war, a house wherein
ointments, paintings, and sweet perfumes were laid up, and preserved. Beside
these, two hundred shields of gold for horsemen, and three hundred large
targets of gold for footmen which Solomon made, were in this house by him laid
up. All other vessels also of this House were of gold. To this house the King
and his Peers came when the weighty affairs of the Commonwealth were ended, and
recreated their minds, with banquets, with sports, and with pleasant walks.

XLIII. The House (as some say) of Simon (the Leaper) the Pharisee, Mat. 26.6.
Luke 7.36.44. Job 22.3.
which is at this day to be seen, wherein Christ sitting at the Table forgave
unto Magdalen the sinful woman (bewayling her sins, and washing his feet with
her tears, wiping them with her hair, kissing them, anointing him, and much
loving him) many sins. (According to Matthew. 26.6. and Joh. 12.3. this house
was in Bethanie, and not in Jerusalem. If it be the same Simon that is spoken
of in Luke 7.44. and Mat. 26.

[ The XLIV. in Latin, was thus,

Domus Veronic 2 Ang. the corner house of Veronica. This Veronica gave the
linen Kercief of her head to Christ, that he might wipe his (sweaty) face with
it. To it the Lord imprinted the image of his face (say some) and restored it
to her, as a pledge of his love; which to this very day being notoriously
marked with the face of Christ. At Rome in the Royall-Temple of S. Peter built
in Vatican-mount by Constantine the Great, with grand honor it is preserved,
and on set days it is showed unto the people. So the Latin book tells us from
the Tradition of John Pasch a Friar Carmelite, writ Anno 1527. and of Dr.
Bethlem a Priest, and Bredenbach, Dean of Mentz, Anno 1483. Why did the English
omit this Relick? Ans. It seems, because not one word of it is in the holy
Scripture; no, nor in Polycarpus, nor Ignatius, nor Justin Martyr, nor of any
ancient approved Authority, but forged afterward to delude such as prefer men's
Traditions before Gods word, so making it of none effect, as Jesus Christ said,
Mat. 15.6.9.) One questions of what cloth that Handkerchief of Veronica was
made, that is so durable after sixteen hundred years? that they may have some
of that durable Cloth?]

SLIV. or XLV. The House of the common people, wherein they exercised
themselves with dartings, and other exercises of the arm, Ier. 39.
and with feasts, with other plays and walksrefreshed their minds.

SLV. or XLVI. The Great Market which was in the midst of the City, and near
adjoining to the Castle Antonia, Ios. 13. Ant. 20. and 1. Bell 3. Ios. 14. Aut.
22. item. 1. Bell. 7. and 11.
wherein Alexander the King of the Jews, and the chief Priest, crucified eight
hundred Jews, killing also the Wives in the presence of their Husbands, and the
children in the sight of their Mothers; the which spectacle himself with his
Concubines beheld, at what they were banqueting in the Castle Antonia. For the
which cruelty he was surnamed Crucida. In the same Market place, Herod the
greater fought a great battle with the Parthians, which went about to bring
again Antigonus into the Kingdom. Furthermore when the famine through the
Roman siege was exceeding great in Jerusalem, I^s. 6. Bell. 14. and 7. Bell. 7.
and 8.
in such wise that it consumed whole families, and replenished the tops of
houses with fainting women and children, and the ways of the dead carcasses of
old men, (in which extremity they did eat Leather; their Girdles, their Shoos,
Hay, and Mothers their own children:) Then a man might have seen lusty young
men, which before time were most flourishing, pass through this Market place,
like shadows of dead men. And when those which remained alive, were not able to
bury the dead, by reason of their exceeding multitude, and could not endure the
stink of the bodies unburied, they cast them over the wall into the valleys of
the City. The which when Titus saw, as he went about the walls, full of dead
bodies much putrified, he fetched a great sigh, and holding up his hands to
God, protested, that it was not his deed; for the obstinate Jews refused
peace, to them oftentimes offered.

XLVI. or XLVII. The Market place of Wares, Act. 12.2. Eusebius. 2 Hist. Eccl. 9.
Niceph. 2.
the which was in the upper part of the lower City, in the which, Fish, and
sundry other things were sold. In this Market S. James the greater, [or elder]
the brother of John, suffered his martyrdom by the tyranny of Herod Agrippa
[as Eusebius. records]

XLVII. or XLVIII. The Vpholsters Market, wherein all manner of old garments
that had been worn aforetime of others were to be sold.

XLVIII. or XLIX. The School of Gentility, which Jesus the false high Priest of
the Jews (who after the manner of the Gentiles would be called Jason) and other
Jews apostatas (by the permission of Antiochus Epiphan. Hist. Eccl. 2. Match.
1, and 2. of Mac. 4.
) set up, even under his Castle over against the Temple; wherein the people
were taught the laws and fashions of the Gentiles, and the youth instructed in
the studies and disputations of the Greek Philosophers. Where they being naked
and anointed with oil, exercised themselves in feats of activity, in martial
actions, and in enterludes. Furthermore in same place, the said Apostatas set
up EPHEBIAM, that is to say a Stewe^ of fair young boys, Sodomy.
wherein they committed most filthy things against nature; by reason thereof
many fell from the Law of God, to the manners and abominations of the Gentiles,
being as it were sold to commit monstrous wickedness, insomuch that some of
the Priests forsaking the Temple and worship of God, gave themselves to the
exercise of feats of activity; here hence also there sprang up among the Jews
diverse Sects, namely the Pharisees, the Sadduces, the Essenes, etc.

XLIX. or L. The Houses of the Priests, Lyra in Neh. 3
and of the Levites whose houses were shut up by the outward part of the wall;
but from the former part they had a prospect toward the Temple.

L. or LI. etc. The Habitation of the Target (or Shield) Bearers, 2 Chronicles.
12.11 2 King. 11.6. Joseph. 20. Ant. 15:
was builded before the West-gate of the Temple; where first the Jews, then
the Roman soldiers upon the solemn feast days had the stations for the guard
of the Temple.

LI. The Lysts or Tylt, which was placed over against the South part of the
Temple, wherein horses by running, Io^. 15 An. 10. and 17. Ant. 9, 10 13.14.
It. Bell. 21. and 2. Bell. 2.
agillity and swiftness were exercised. And the Wrastlers and Champions did
contend before the people who should run swiftest on foot with Chariots
diversely drawn, who should break most spears, and in other masteries, and feats
of valiency. Where Herod the King for the honor of Augustus Caesar ordained
the game and prise of five years continuance, appointing unto the Victors great
rewards. The same Herod when he should dye, called all the more noble sort of
the, Jews of all places within his dominion, by an Edict threatening death to
such as should not obey, and caused them to be shut up in the Lysts, to the end
that after his death they all bebeing there slain, every house might have cause
to wail even in despite of all Judaea.

LII. The Mountain Moria, Genesis 22.2. Mich. 3.12. 1 Match. 13. and 16. chap Isa.
10.16. Joseph. 15. Ant. 14. and 6. Bell. 6.
the which in another place is called the land of Vision, and the Mountain of
the Temple, and the Mountain of the Daughter of Sion, lying near unto the
East-wall of the City, being very high, stony, and very steep round about. In
this Mountain Abraham being ready to offer up his son Isaac, instead of him
offered up a Ram which was taken by the horns in a thicket. This was the very
same Mountain which David bought of Streuna or Ornan the Jebusite for six
hundred shekels of Gold, and erecting an Altar in his threshing flower, he
offered a burnt offering unto the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 21. Jos. 7. Ant. 13. 2 Chr.
3.1.36.
which the fire from heaven consumed. Afterward in the same Mountain Solomon
builded unto the Lord a most excellent Temple both for largeness and beauty,
whereof mention shall be made hereafter.

LIII. The first Wall, the which was called the old Wall, both in regard of the
valleys, Jos. 6. Bell 6, 7, etc.
and a hill which was aloft above them, and also in regard of threescore Towers
whereinto it was divided, the which made it very defensible and strong.

LIVE. Ophel, which Josephus calls Ophlam, was a Tower of an exceeding height,
whose top seemed to reach unto the Clouds; it was fortified with a Castle, 2
Chr. 27.3. and 23, 14, Neh. 3.26, 27 Neh. 11.21. Jos. 2. Bell. 18. and 6. Bell.
6, 7. and 7 Bell. 13.
and compassed about with a firm wall near unto the Temple, notwithstanding it
was without the wall, which shut off the habitation of the Priests. Herein
dwelt the Nethinims. Into this Manahemus the Tyrant flying, was taken and
slain. This same was at the last burned by the Soldiers of Titus.

LV. The Palace of the Machabees, 1 Mac. 13.
builded by them on a very lofty place on the West side of the Temple, from
whence they which would behold the City, and those things which were done
therein, Jos. 17. Ant. 14. and 20. Ant. 15.
had a most pleasant and delectable prospect. The which King Agrippa afterward
exceedingly enlarged, and made it a Court for himself; from whence out of his
Parlour he might behold whatsoever was done in the Temple. 2 Bell. 2 and 16, 17
and 7. Bell. 15.
For the which cause the Rulers of the Jews builded a very high Gate between
that and the West part of the inner Temple to hinder the Kings prospect. This
thing both King Agrippa, and Festus also the Lieutenant of the Country took in
very evil part, who also commanded them to pull down the said Gate. But the
Rulers entreated* that they might have leave to send Ambassadors to Nero the
Emperor concerning this matter, saying, that they could not live if any thing
were cast down of the buildings of the Temple. The which liberty when they had
obtained, they sent Ishmael the chief Priest, and Helchia the Treasurer, and
with them ten of their chief Rulers. And Nero at the earnest suit of Poppea his
wife, a godly woman, which she made for the Jews, pardoned the building of
the said Gate, and permitted the same to stand.

LVI. The Palace of Pilate, and of the Lieutenants of Rome, Mat. 27.1. Isa.
50. and 53, 63 Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Luke 23.3. Io. 18. Ioh. 19.
adjoining to the Gallery which lies on the North side of the Castle Antonia;
which Palace was much more large, lofty, and fayrer, then all the buildings of
the City, and had an ascent or mounting of eight and twenty steps of Marble.

Here when Christ was falsely accused, and required to be crucified by the
Princes and people of the Jews, for (that as they said) he perverted the
people, forbad tribute to be given to Caesar, said that he was Christ a King,
and therefore approved himself a seditious person, Pilate condemned him to be
whipped under the form of this sentence, which was found in a most ancient
Chronicle, as follows; Jesum Nazarenum virum seditiosum, and Mosaicae legis
contemptorem, per pontifices and principes sua gentis accusatum, expoliate,
ligate, and virgis caedite; Breid. 21. Jul. Sal. Tom. 8. cap. 7. Pasch. day 108
that is to say, Take ye Jesus of Nazareth accused by the chief Peiests and
Rulers of his own Nation to be a man seditious, and a contemner of Moses Law
strip him bind him, and whip him. Whereupon the soldiers of Pilate led him
into the Judgment hall, stripped him before the whole band of soldiers, and
other people, tied him to a pillar, beat him most cruelly with rods, Mat. 27.
Io. 19.
and rent and tare his most tender body. After this, they put on him a purple
Robe, platted, and in forcible manner broided on his head a crown of sharp
thorns, delivered into his right hand a reed, and in scorn saluted him as a
King bending the knee before him, many ways mocked him, they did spit on him,
they did buffet him, and strike him upon the wounded head with a Cane.

LVII. The Queens Palace, 1 Reg. 7. and 9. 2 Chro. 8. Jos. 8. Ant. 5.
which Solomon most royally builded of precious and polished stones for the
habitation of his wife, which was Pharaohs daugher.

LVIII. Solomon's Palace, exceeding great and fair, the which he builded in
thirteen years magnificently, and most sumptuously on the South part of the
Mount Moria, 1 King. 7. and ^0
of bright marble, and Cedar trees, supported with many pillars for his own
habitation; this he wonderfully garnished with gold and silver round about, and
made all the vessels thereof of gold. In the same place afterward, the
Christian Kings of Jerusalem had their Palace, where first began the order of
the Templers.

LIX. The Castle Pisan, Sal. Tom. 7. cap. 1.
compassed about with deep Trenches and Towers; the which was builded on the
West part of the City, by the Christian inhabitants of a Town in Italy
belonging to the Pisans, at what time they had the Dominion of the Holy Land.
Where first the Pisans, after them the Saracens, and now the Turks, do exact
of the Pilgrims of the Holy Land sacrilegious tribute.

LX. The inner Fountain, 2 Samuel 20. 2 Chronicles. 32. Eccles. 48. Brocar. Itin. 6.
which King Hezekias made in the midst of the City at the North side of the
Temple. For he brought into the City the waters of this Fountain, from the
higher Fountain of Gition, by conduct pipes which were under the earth, and
made them to issue forth in this Fountain. This Fountain he compassed about
with a Well to water the whole City, that the people in time of siege might not
be distressed with the want of water.

LXI. The Pool Probatica, Ioh. 5.1.2.
that is to say, the Sheep-pool, wherein the sheep, and other beasts were
washed that were appointed for sacrifice. In Hebrew it is called Bethesda (and
corruptly Bethsaida) that is to say, the house of effusion, because the rain
waters ran into the same [or rather Beth-chasda; Sol. Tom. 8. cap. 5.
that is, The house of Kind-mercy, so the Syriack] It was situate between the
Gate of the Valley and the Temple. It was the most principal Pool, or water of
the whole City, having five Porches, which King Solomon made for the service of
the Temple. Pasch. day 192
And this Josephus called Solomon's Lake or Pool. For in this Pool the Nathenims
washed the oblations which they delivered unto the Priests to be offered in
the Temple. The Water hereof was moved at certain times by the Angel of the
Lord, and who so after the stirring thereof went first into the water, he was
healed, whatsoever disease he had. Jo. 5.4, 5.
And therefore there lay a great multitude of languishing people in the Porches
thereof, as blind, lame, withered, waiting for the moving of the water. Among
which number Christ healed a man which had languished eight and thirty years.

[ The Figures in this Book should resemble the Figures that are in the MAP OF
JERUSALEM, which are not Roman Figures, but such as these that follow.]

62. The Old Fountain, together with a River, Isa. 22. Jos 7. Bell. 24.
which issuing out of the same runs through the whole City into the brook
Cedron.

63. The Bridge, and Porch with Gates, Jos. 14. Ant. 8. and 15. Ant. 14. and 1.
Bell. 5. Item. 2 Bell. 15, 16. and 7. Bell. 6.13
by which men went from the Gallery, and from the Castle Antonia, over the
valley of Cedron into the Temple, the which at the first the favorites of
Aristobulus against Pompey, and afterward the seditious against Florus, cut
off, lest by the means of the Castle Antonia, the Temple should be gotten.

64. The Warders [or Prison] Gate so called, Neh. 12.39.
because certain of the Kings guard warded there, at such time as the King
entered into the Temple.

65. The Horse-Gate, so named, Lyr. in Neh. 3.
because men might ride so far as that place; but then leaving their horses,
they went on foot into the Temple. At the which place began the habitations of
the Priests.

66. The Gate of the Essens was situate in the old wall of the City. Jos. 6.
Bell. 6.


67. The first Gate, whereof the Prophet Zachariah makes mention. Zach. 14.10.


68. The Porch of Pillars, situate before Solomon's Palace, the which was
fifty cubits long, and thirty cubits broad, 1 King. 7.15.21
and supported with strong Pillars.

69. The Beast-Market, called Probatica, where Sheep, Oxen, and other beasts
for sacrifice were sold in the open Market.

70. The Palace of Queen Bernice, Act. 25. and 26. Jos. 2. Bell. 15, 16. and 17.
sister of King Agrippa, who with her brother at Caesaria heard Paul's
supplication before Festus. And afterward paying her vows to God at Jerusalem,
she came barefoot before Florus sitting in his judgment seat, tyrannizing
against the Citizens, whom she beseeched in vain as concerning them.

71. The Palace of Grapta, Jos. 5 Bell. 9.
the Niece of Izata King of the Adiabens, which she built for her self:
Wherein afterward, John the Captain of the seditious, abiding, left there his
money, and spoils of Tyranny.

72. The Palace of Helen, Ios. 20. Ant. 2. and 6. Bell. 7. and 7. Bell. 13.
Ease^ 2 Hist. Eccles. 12. Act. 11.28.
which exalted it self in the midst of the mountain Acra. She, being the
Queen of the Adiabens which dwelt beyond Euphrates, was converted from
Gentilisme* to the Religion of the Jews, and came to Jerusalem to dwell; where
she being become a Christian, at what time that great famine (whereof Agabus
prophesied) in the days of the Emperor Claudius, pinched the whole world, but
specially the land of Judea; this good Queen (I say) at her proper costs and
charge sent for great store of corn out of Egypt, which she distributed among
the poor and needy at Jerusalem.

73. The Palace of Monobaz, King of the Adiabens, the son of Helen, which was
situate in the East part of the City. Ios. 6. Bell. 7.


74. The Temple of the Lord, otherwise called the Lord house, and the
Sanctuary: 1 King. 5, 6 7.8, 9 chap. Joseph. 8. Ant. 3 2 Chronicles. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
and 7 cha.
The which Solomon the peaceable King builded of the matter prepared by David
his father, and of elect, hewn, and pollished stones, and of timber cut from
Mount Libanus, by the labor of more then a hundred fifty three thousand men in
the mount Moria, without any sound of Axe or Hammer in seven years, Arist. lib.
72. interpret.
so sumptuous and magnificent both within and without with shining gold, that
it was counted the miracle of the world. Concerning the wonderful excellency
whereof, nothing can be sufficiently spoken. When Solomon dedicated this
Temple, the cloud and glory of the Lord filled it, and the fire which came from
heaven consumed the sacrifices which were offered therein.

As concerning the entrance of this Temple, the same was contrary to the
fashion now used, being Eastward, and the back part tended West; whereupon the
Priests and people prayed turning to the West, and worshipped God herein with
great reverence, until through the impiety of the Kings and people of the
Jews, it was profaned with the pollutions of Idols oftentimes: Therefore [Some
compute the years about four hundred and thirty.] 2 King. 25. 2 Chronicles. 36. 1
Es. 3.5, 6. 2 Mac. 3. Ios. 2. Bell. 17, and 10. 1 Match. 4, 6, 13 chap.
four hundred forty and one years after the first foundation thereof, by the
just judgment of God, Nabuchodonozer King of Babylon burnt the same, and so
destroyed it, that it lay desolate threescore and ten years. But after that,
Zorobabel repaired the Temple again in excellent sort with squared stones, and
the best timber in the same Mountain, within the space of forty and six years.
And this also was of so great estimation that it was honored throughout the
whole world, and was from all parts enriched and beautified with the greatest
gifts and honors of Kings and Princes. The which after three hundred fifty and
four years, was spoiled by Antiochus Epiphanes King of Syria, and polluted with
Idols. In the third year of the contamination thereof, the most valiant
Captain of the Jews, Judas Machabaeus, purged it, and restored to the same
again the golden vessels, and the worship of God. And that it might never more
be defiled, he did wall it about in manner of a Castle with deep Trenches, with
strong and high walls, and with Gates and Towers both forcible and fair. Ios.
14. Ant. 8. and 7. Bell. 4.9.


Wherein he being besieged a long time with one hundred and twenty thousand
Gentiles, could not be commanded.

But about one hundred years after this, when that famous Captain of the
Romans, Pompey the Great fought against it, he won it with main force, and in
the entering thereof he slew therein twelve thousand Jews; Strabo. Geogra. l.
16. 1 Match. 6.
and Pompey himself with his Peers entering into the most holy place, and
beholding the Temple, the Candlestick, and other things there of shining gold,
and finding also two thousand talents of the holy Treasure this heathen Prince
moved as it were with a certain godliness, would not so much as touch any of
them; but the next day after the siege commanded the keepers of the Temple to
cleanse the fame, and to celebrate their lawful and solemn sacrifices. This
self and same Temple being afterward decayed, Herod the A^calonit King of the
Jews, by the space of nine years and a half, repaired and beautified it, with
sumptuous buildings.

And according to the Prophecy of the Prophet Haggai (even as the Church is
preferred before a Synagogue, and the blood of the Gospel is more precious then
the gold of the Law) greater was the glory of the second Temple, Agg. 2, 3,
7.9. Luke 2. Matthew. 4. Johan. 7.8. chapter 10. etc.
then was that of the first; because Christ with his presence, doctrine, and
miracles, glorified this. For in this, when he was a child he was offered. In
this he sat in the midst of the Doctors; In the pinnacle of this Temple he
was tempted of the Devil, when he fasted forty days, and forty nights. In
this likewise he preached oftentimes, and was vexed by the Jews. All which
things, as they make much for the glory of the Temple, so they did nothing
avail, but that the very same Temple, in the year from the Foundation thereof
under Zorobabel five hundred eighty and six, An. Dom. 72.
by the Army of Titus Caesar, after a doubtful and bloody battle, was won with
great force and violence, and so great a slaughter of Jews made about the
altar for burnt offerings, that the blood of the slain ran like a River by the
stairs of the Temple; Jos. 7. Bell. 9, 10.18.
and the Temple it self in the first brunt and fury of the battle was set on
fire by a certain soldier moved by divine motion, not attending to the
command of any, even without the Emperors consent: And by this burning, a
work of all that ever was seen or heard of the most wonderful, and the
ornament of the whole world, the tenth day of the Month of August, was consumed
into ashes; to wit, even the very same day and month, whereon aforetime the
Temple was burnt by the Babylonians. Eusebius. in Chapter and 4. hist. Eccl.


Yet for all this after threescore and five years, the Jews rebelling again,
and going about to restore the Temple in the same place where it was before,
Aelius Adrian the Emperor, slew of them in one day five hundred and fourscore
thousand, Niceph. 3. hist. Eccl. 24.
and utterly rased the rest of the buildings of Jerusalem, and levelled the
mountain Moria, whereon the Temple was builded, and made it even, casting the
rubbish and earth thereof into the vale Jehoshapat, and into the Brook Cedron,
lest the City, trusting to the defense of the Mountain and Temple, should rise
up, and rebel any more against the Romans. He wasted also with fire and sword
nine hundred and fourscore Villages. But the Emperor Julian the Apostata,
Ruffin. in Eus. hist. Eccl. l. 10. c. 37, 38, 39. Theod. 3 hist. Eccl. 17.
Z^zo. 5. hist. Eccl. 21. Niceph. 10. ^ist. Eccl. 32, 33.
after two hundred and seven and twenty years, to make the Oracle of Christ
false, which he had prophesied concerning the Temple that there should not be
left one stone upon another, gave unto the Jews money out of the common
Treasury, and commanded them to build anew the Temple, and to sacrifice there
according to the Law of Moses.

The Jews glad of this, came from all parts of the world to Jerusalem, and
threatening grievous things against the Christians, they prepared and got unto
them skillful workmen, stones, timber, mortar, and all other things necessary
for the building; also they caused to be made silver mattocks, spades, and
baskets, and thoroughly purged the place where the Temple stood, with such speed
and willingness, that their women also bestowed all their ouches, taches,
bruches, and other Jewels for the building, and carried out from that place all
the rubbish in their laps. And when the Foundations were opened and cleansed,
the day following they should have begun their Foundation, but the same night
there came such an exceeding and vehement tempest, that it carried away and
scattered abroad their stone, timber, and mortar, with other their necessaries.
Over, and besides this, a great Earthquake shook all the stones of the old
foundations of the Temple, and dispersed them, disordered the houses next
adjoining to the Temple by a downfall and killed many Jews.

And when they which remained, in the morning enterprised again to build, a
fire falling from heaven, a flame also breaking forth from the foundations of
the Temple, destroyed more Jews then before, which either were busy about the
work, or which came thither to see and look on; and all that day burnt, and
consumed into ashes, their Mauls, Hammers, Axcs, Spades, and all other working
Tools, that nothing was left. The Jews being yet obstinately bent, the next
night following, a bright sign of the cross appeared in heaven, and the
garments of all the Jews were marked as it were from heaven with figures of the
cross, and replenished therewith as the Firmament with stars, which when the
day appeared, they seeking to put out, could not by any manner of means do it.
And thus being astonished and confounded, they left off both their vain
enterprise, and also the place. So that by their wicked endeavor, the divine
Oracle was not only not made frustrate, but also more fulfilled and confirmed.

The Jews being in this sort beaten from their enterprise, the Christians
nevertheless were not afraid to build in the same place; for they erected a
Temple there in a round form, made of great hewne, With. Tyren. lib. 8. Hist.
Bell. facri c. 20 and lib 9 c. 9. Broc. i^i. 6. Brci^. 14 Iul.
and pollished stones, covered with a leaden roof, very large, high, and
beautiful to behold. The which in process of time, was honored with the
Patriarchal seat, and became famous by reason of the true and pure worship of
God which was therein maintained. At the length being invaded by the Saracens,
it was contaminated four hundred threescore and three years, with the filthy
worship of Mahomet.

Finally, in the year of Christ 1099. the very same Temple, though it was
fortified with a wall, with Towers, and strong gates by the Christians, yet was
it violently won by Godfrey of Boloigne, a valiant man, who killed within the
circuit of the Temple ten thousand Saracens, in such wise that the upper face
of the earth was covered with the blood of the slain. In the which place the
said Godfrey erected a College of divine service, giving continual
maintenance to the same, furnishing it with necessary habitations, which so
continued by the space of fourscore and eight years. The which expired, the
same was possessed again by the Saracens, through the pernicious discord of
Christian Princes; who in the top thereof (according to their manner) set up
the figure of the Half Moon; and in the Courts thereof they planted Figs, and
olive Trees. The same being now possessed of the Turks, is defiled with the
detestable worship of Mahomet. And all Christians are commanded by an Edict,
not to enter thereinto upon pain of death. For it any Christian be known to
have entered therein, he is by and by either compelled solemnly to deny the
faith of Christ, or else publicly to lose his head.

The first Part of the Temple.
75. THe Holy of Holies [called the Holy place, Exodus 26.23. Lev. 16.2.17.27.
Heb. 9.22.25.3.7. 1 King. 6.19.20. 2 Chro. 4.20. and 5 7.
and the most Holy] which is so called, because of the singular holiness of
that place. It is also named the Oracle, and the inner house. For it was the
secretest part of the Temple, [whereinto the high Priest came only once a
year] it being twenty cubits long, and as many in breadth; the height whereof
was twenty cubits, [not a hundred and twenty cubits.] Whose floor was laid over
with fur boards, covered with plate of Gold, and paved with Marble [as some
write] The gates were made of polished stones inwardly framed with bords of
Cedar, and covered with golden plates; the which being fastened with nails of
gold, shined most gloriously, as if it had been a divine work; whereon were
graven Cherubins, 1 King. 6.30.] Ios. 6. Bell. 6. 1 Chro. 29.2
precious stones, palms, flowers, imbossements, and pictures of diverse sorts,
representing the celestial beauty. The roof also was covered with golden
plate, the very top whereof was set full of golden prickets, or sharp spits to
fray away birds, lest by sitting thereon, it might be polluted. Into this
sacred Holy of Holiest, Heb. 9.3.7.13. Lev. 16.3.
the chief Priest for the divine Majesty thereof, entered but once every year
alone in the feast of purgation; on which day the Jews did fast and afflict
themselves. And then that great and chief Priest of God, prefiguring the
person of Christ, offered the blood of a calfe burnt without the host, for his
own sins, Deuteronomy. 23.10.
and for the sins of the people. Who if he were legally polluted, but so much
as in sleep entered not in his own person, but by his substitute.

The Parts of the most holy Place.
76. THe Arc of the Covenant, Exo. 25.10. el^. 37.1. and 40.3.20. Number. 17.
Deuteronomy. 31. Ios. 3. aut. 83.
the which by the commandment of God was made of Set him [or Sittim] wood,
which corrupts not, by Moses in the desert covered within and without with
plate of pure gold, being set in the midst of the Holy of Holiest, shining
like the Sun with the glittering brightness of gold; whose surpassing beauty
is rather to be wondered at, then with words to be expressed. In this Arc the
two Tables of stone, containing the ten Commandments written with the finger
of God, 1 King 8 9. Deuteronomy. 16.5. Exodus 25.10. Ex. 16 34. Number. 17.10. 2 Match 5.2.
were kept with a singular care and holiness. The Pot wherein was Manna, and
Aarons flourishing Rod were put [before it, and not into it.] The Ark abode in
this place about four hundred and thirty years. It is written in the
(Apocryphal) book of the Machabees, that in the time of the Captivity of
Babylon, the Prophet Jeremy, [See 2 King. 25 9. and below here at *]
by the Commandment of God, hid the same privily together with the Altar of
Incense, and the perpetual fire in a cave of the mount Nebo. But the Hebrews
conjecture, that it was carried by Nebuchodonozer into Babylon, and that it
never returned again; but another made by the Jews instead thereof, 2 Chro. 36.
Dan. 1.3. Esd. 1. Esd. 1 Hier. in Jo^l c. 3 Jos. 10. au^. 13.7 Pel. 24. Su^o^
in vit. Vespasi. Rodolph. Langius de urbis Hirosol. Templique crigine, and
excidio l. 2 c 15.
after the return from the Captivity. Othersome think that Nebuchadonozer
carried away the same with five thousand and four hundred vessels of silver and
gold which belonged to the Temple of Jerusalem, and put them into the Temple of
Bell his god, but preserved by Gods providence (as it was sometime in
Philistaea) after threescore and ten years of the Captivity, they think (I
say) it was restored again to the Jews at their return by Cyrus, together with
the said vessels. But after the besieging of Jerusalem, Titus, and Vespaesian,
carrying out of the Temple to Rome ( as some See Number 84. at the end. 2 King.
25.9. 2 Chronicles. 36.19 2 Chro 3.15. Jer. 5^.21.
Relickmungers say) the Arc of the Covenant, the two Tables of the Law, with
both the rods of Moses and Aaron; also the golden Table, and some of the
shewbread; the golden Candlestick, and the four (or two Pillars) made these to
be carried among other spoils, by the Jews themselves, round about the City in
an open triumph, wherein with great pomp they triumphed over that Nation:
Simon Giora Captain of the seditious, and seven hundred Jews Captives (which
were selected from among the rest for youth and come linesse) going before the
Triumpher half naked, with their hands bound. This triumph being ended,
Vespasian laid up all the vessels of Jerusalem in the Temple of Peace at Rome,
which he in most sumptuous manner had builded; But the Law of the Jews, and the
purple vailes of the most secret places, he commanded to be safely laid up in
his Palace.)

77. The two Cherubims of glory, Exo. 25.18.20. and 37.9. 1 King. 6.23.28. and
8.7. Heb. 9.4, 5. Josep. Ant. 3.
the which as it appears by the Hebrew text of Paralipomenon, are like unto
young boys, made of the wood of the olive tree, ten cubits high, and covered
with plates of gold, and shining with Angelical brightness, stood at each end
of the Arc with their wings spread, covering the propitiatory [or Mercy-seat.]
[and not with the other couple touching the gate on both sides] whose faces
were directed toward the Mercy-seat, and looking one toward the other, they
beheld both themselves, and also the propitiatory.

78. The Propitiatory (or Mercy-seat) otherwise also called the Oracle, the
which being above the Arc, See Proofs at 77. next before
between the wings of the two Cherubims, and shining with most pure gold in
brightness above the Sun, representing the divine Majesty, was as it were the
seat of God speaking; from whence he gave Oracles and answers [to the High
Priest; so does Christ Jesus our great High Priest from God the Father, Joh.
12.50. Matthew. 17.5.]

The second part of the Temple.
79. THe holy place called the Sanctuary, Exodus 25.8. Levit. 10.4. 1 King 6. 1 Chronicles. 22.1^ and 24.5. 2 Chro. 3. Ezekiel. 44.17. Luke 1. Heb. 9. Jos. 8. Ant. 3.
and 15. Ant. 14. and 6. Bell. 6. and 7. Bell. 10.
the outward house of the Lord, and the Priests Court. This is the other part
of the Temple, forty Cubits long, and twenty broad, in height one hundred and
twenty Cubits. The doors hereof were of gold. The floor, made of fur boards,
was covered with plate of gold. The gates were made of pollished stones, and
being within lined with boards of Cedar, were covered outwardly with plates of
gold; whereon was graved Cherubims, precious stones, palms, flowers, and
sundry carved works, and pictures, which wonderfully delighted men to behold.
Above it was covered with a fair roof, shining as if it had been fire.

From the entrance hereinto, such as were not clean, were forbidden by the Law.
2 Chr. 23.19. 1 Chr. 23.3.5.
Only the Priests [and Levites] (which King David reckoned to the number of
eight and thirty thousand, and distinguished the Priests by Lot into four and
twenty orders) entered daily thereinto. 1 Chronicles. 24.1. chapter 25 31. chap. 27 1.4.
Lev. 10 9. Ezekiel. 44.21. Exodus 28.42. Lev. 6.10. Rev. 3 18. Rev. 1.5, 6. R^v.
9.9. P^i^ 3.9.


All which being without spot, according to David's Ordinance, weekly by turn
from Sabbath to Sabbath, abstaining (as elsewhere) from wine, and from all
other strong drink, their privities covered with linen breeches, outwardly
clothed and girded with a linen garment, in due order, and with great
reverence, they worshipped God, they offered sacrifices, and made their
prayers, [^yping Jesus Christ our High Priest, who clothes his Saints (who are
all Priests to God) with fine linen, that is their Righteousness.]

80. The Altar of Incense of gold, Exo 30.37. Levit 2. 1 Mac 4. Luke 1.8, 9.19.
which by Gods Commandment was placed over against the veil hanging before
the most holy place, (called the Holy of Holies) whereon the Priests, every
day, morning and evening offered unto God, for a sweet savor, Frankincense,
and sweet perfumes. The Angel Gabriel standing sometime at the right hand of
this Altar, told unto Zachary, as he was offering Incense, the conception of
John Baptist.

81. The Golden Candlestick, Exo. 25.26.27, 37. Chapters. Levit. 24. Jos. 3.
An. 10. Exodus 26.7.14.
the which having seven branches, and so many Candles, was placed on the South
side of the Temple; the which being lamps of most pure oil, burned
continually, and gave light as well by day as by night, to all the holy place
[which was covered with vails, and had no other light. This is no warrant for
burning Candles, or Torches where no need is in the day time.]

82. The Fountain of water, Ezekiel. 47. Joel 3. Aristea^ li^de 72 interpret.
Corn. Tac. l. 21.
which issued forth on the right side of the Temple, the water whereof Solomon
derived into the sea of brass, and into the Copper Laver; the which being
carried from thence by Conduit pipes under the earth, breaking forth half a
mile from the East side of the City, ran into the Brook Cedron, (or Kidron.)

83. The Golden Table, Exodus 25.26.37. Chap. Levit. 4. ^. Sam. 21. Mar. 2. ^^s.
3. Ant. 9.
the which stood on the North side of the Temple, whereon were set twelve
loaves made of the most pure and fine flower of Wheat. The which being stale,
remained to the use of the Priests, and then new were supplied again every
bath day: upon the which were laid two golden Cups full of Frankincense.

84. The chief Priest his Image, and holy apparel, Exodus 28, 39. chap. Lev.
8.1^
every part whereof show forth unto us a divine and heavenly magnificence. For
when he went to offer sacrifice, or to enter into the most holy place, he put
on not only the under garments, spoken of before under the number seventy
nine, but also above upon them a Tunicle (or little coat) of Jacinth [sleeves
down to the Ankles was man's device] at the lower hem whereof there did hang
threescore and two golden bells, and in another border as many Pomegranats. The
Tunicle was girt with a girdle four fingers broad woven with silk, gold,
precious stones, and flowers of sundry colors. Aloft above this, he did wear
an Ephod or Superhumeral that is to say, a most fair cloak, made of gold, of
Jacinth of purple, scarlet, and fine silk most curiously woven together,
dazeling of the eyes by reason of the variety and glittering brightness of the
colors and flowers. Exodus 28.9, 10.
Upon each shoulder whereof there was a Beryl, or Onyx stone included in gold
(which Josephus called Sardonix) in either of which stones, six names of the
children of Israel were graven.

Beside these, Verse. 15.
he had the Reasonable (or Breast Plate) of Judgment, which he carried upon
his breast, wherein was doctrine and truth. The [Breast-plate of Urim] was a
square thing about the breadth of a man's hand, woven and made of gold, Jacinth,
purple, scarlet, and fine silk, whereto were fastened twelve precious stones
of diverse sorts, having engraven in them the names of the twelve sons of Israel
according to the order of their nativity.

Moreover, on his head he wore a long round Cap [in form of a Miter] made of
Jacinth and fine silk; upon the front whereof was set a brooch of gold in
form of a half globe, which figured the ineffable name of God,
Tetragrammaton, with these four Hebrew letters (...) that is, Exodus 28.36.
Holiness to the Lord] thereon engraven, setting forth by the wonderful
brightness thereof the excellency of the divine Majesty. Also the golden
Censer in his hand, by which he offered unto God the most fragrant odor of
Frankincense, is a part of his ornaments.

All which things as they are full of mysteries, so some of them excelled the
rest: For [some boldly say, that stone which the high Priest did bear on his
right shoulder, so often as he had pleased God with sacrifices, did so
wonderfully shine, that they which stood a great way off might perceive it.
Heb. 7.25.26. Heb. 2.17. and 5 2. Jer. 31.20.32. Luke 15.20.21
And (which is no less wonderful) the twelve stones which were on the
Breast Plate did foreshew unto them which went to the war, victory.] [But this
is more clear and profitable; Here was typed out, how our great High Priest,
bears up all his Israel by his mighty power, and bears them all in his heart
before the Lord, who seeing them there, has bowels of compassion on them, and
remembers them continually.]

Both the Reasonable, Jer 52.13. Neh 7.65. Dan 9.24, 25.
and the Onyx also have ceased (one hundred and five years, say some, yea above
five hundred years before the Nativity of Christ to give their wonted shine and
brightness. [Yea they were no more in use after the Babylonians burned the
Temple.]

85. The Veil was woven of Jacinth, Exo. 26.31.33 and 36.35: 2 Chronicles. 3.14.
Matthew. 27.51. Mar. 15.38. Luke 23.45.
purple, scarlet, and fine silk, in most beautiful variety, and was adorned
with Cherubims, and all manner of flowers imbroydered thereon, which hung at
the gate before the most holy place, and at the death of Christ was rent from
the top to the bottom, even in the midst.

The third Part of the Temple.
86. THe Jews I Will, 1 King. 6.3. 2 Chronicles 3.4. Ezekiel. 40.7.48. Heb. 9.3. Joseph.
8. Ant. 3. and 15.14. and. 6 ^el. and 7. Bell. 4.16. and l. 2. cout. Appionem.
which also is called the Entry, the Hall, the Holy Secular, and Solomon's
Porch, being the third part of the Temple. Into the which men went up by sour
steps, whose pavement checkered with marble of sundry forts, was open to the
air, and uncovered, and was compassed about with a wall made with three
degrees of stones of sundry colors. To the which were annexed great Porches
broad, and above threescore and ten cubits high, borne up with marble pillars
of fingle stones which were five and twenty cubits high, the roof covered with
Cedar. The ins^t gates covered with gold, shined most gloriously: And it had
three high gates; whereof the first tended toward the East, the second toward
the South, and the third toward the North; every one of the which gates were
shut with two silver doors thirty cubits high, and fifteen broad; but the West
part had no gate, but was enclosed with a whole wall. And this was called the
Jews Isle or Hall because only the Jews being clean, and not polluted, Luke
1.8, 9. Joh. 10. Act 3, 4, 5. Jos. 15. Ant. 14. and 2 Bell. Jud. 16. and 6 Bell
6. and 7. Bell. 4.
prayed there, and heard the words of the Law. In the which place, Christ
taught the people oftentimes, and where the Jews would have stoned him; and
Peter when he bad healed the lame man spoke unto the people, and converted five
thousand men. Before this Hall enclosed with a lattice, there was a Table set,
containing this Law engraven with letters of Greek and Latin, Every stranger
that shall enter into the holy place shall dye. And the Romans had given
authority to the Jews to put to death as well Romans as Jews, which transgress
this Law.

The parts of the Jews I Will.
87. THe Altar of burnt offering of brass which stood in the midst of the I Will
open to the air and uncovered, Ex. 27.1.8.38.1. 2 Chronicles. 4.1. Lev. ^1.15. and
6.9. and 9, 7.8 Ex. 40.10.
wherein that perpetual fire was daily maintained by the putting to of wood,
which fire in old time the Lord sent down from heaven, when Aaron at the first
time offered sacrifice in the Desert. On the which Altar, the Priests every day
morning and evening, burnt sundry sort of Male-beasts, etc. which were clean,
and without blemish, as Sheep, Oxen, and Goats, Turtles, Pigeons, and such
like; which were consumed with this holy and perpetual fire, for a burnt
offering and odor of sweet savor unto the Lord. But (Apocrypha fabulously
says) how in the time of the Captivity of Babylon, this perpetual fire was
hidden by the Priests in a dry Pit or Well, 2 Mac. 1.18.3^.
and being sought for by Nehemiah the Priest threescore and ten years after the
same, there could be no fire found in that place, but a certain thick water,
which by divine power at the prayer of Nehemiah was set on fire. [So says
Apocripha, Neh. 8.8.9. Neh 12.26.
in holy Scripture i^ no word of this; but Nehemia is called Tirshata, or
Governor, and Ezra the Priest]

88. Boaz and Jochin (signifying strength, and establishing) two pillars of
brass of wonderful beauty, 1 King. 7.2. 2 Chronicles. 3.15.
two and thirty cubits high, whose circumference or circuit comprehended twelve
cubits, which Solomon caused to be made artificially, and placed them in the
porch of the Temple, one at the right hand, which he named Jachin, and the
other at the left hand, which he called Boaz.

89. The Laver of brass, a vessel of great capacity, full of water, placed by
Solomon on the North side of the Temple, 1 King. 7.23. 2 Chronicles. 4.2. Ios. 8.
Ant. 3.
whereon were carved the pictures of Cherubims, Lions, and Oxen. In this the
Priests washed the beasts which should serve for burnt offerings, which
nevertheless were first washed in the Sheep-pool, called Probatica.

90. The house of Council, Mat. 26.3.27.1 Luke 22.66.
at the South side of the Temple, where was the assembly of the Elders of the
people.

91. The Closets, 1 King 6.5.10. 1 Chro. 9.26. Jer. 35.2. Ezekiel. 92.13. 1 Mac.
4. -- Ios. 5. Bell. 9.6. Bell. 6.
or Treasuries, were side houses, long, broad, and high, like towers; In the
which, the Priests when they should enter into the holy place, did put off
their woollen garments, laying them up till their service was ended; wherein
also they did eat the parts of the peace offerings.

92. The Sea of brass, containing very great store of water, which Solomon
made, Exo. 30.18. and 38.8. 1 King. 7.23. 2 Chronicles. 4.2.
containing very great store of water, which Solomon made, and placed on the
South side of the Temple upon twelve Oxen brass, wherein the Priests entering
into the Temple to serve at the Altar, washed their hands and their feet.

93. The new Gate, Jer. 26.20. and 36.10.
which was in the I Will of the Temple toward the South, where Jeremy fore-shewing
that the City and Temple should be destroyed, was taken. And where Baruch read
before the people the Prophecy of Jeremi^h.

94. The holy Gate, 1 Esd. 9.38.
otherwise called the brazen Gate, which being in the In-set part of the
Temple, opened toward the East; before the which Esdras read the Law of God
before the people; and where the Rulers of the Jews, a long time after that,
exhorted the seditious unto peace.

95. The Porch of the Temple, 1 King 6.3. and 7.6. 2 Chr. 3.4.
builded by Solomon before the Sanctuary, the which was twenty cubits long, and
ten broad.

96. The Kings Seat which was very lofty, 2 Chronicles. 9.17. Hier. in 2 Chro. 3.
which Solomon prepared for the Kings.

97. The Loft (or Chambers) of the Singers [where divine praises were sung with
voice and with diverse Instruments. So some say, Ezekiel 40 44.
but no word of this in Ezekiel. 40. which points at a time not past, and legal,
but to come, and Evangelical.]

98. The place of Zacharias, 2 Chronicles. 24.20 Mat. 23.35.
where he was stoned between the Temple, and the Altar.

99. The place where the Jews would have stoned Christ. Joh. 10.3^^


The fourth part of the Temple.
100. THe I Will which belonged to the Gentiles, being also called the out-set
Court, which is the fourth part of the Temple, [Ezek. 40. See Number 97.] Jos.
15. Ant. 14. and 6. Bello. 6. and 7 Bell. 10. and lib. 2. contra Appionem. Ezekiel.
10.5. 2 King. 21, 5.
into the which men ascended by many stairs, whose in-set space open to the
air paved with all manner of beautiful stones, had four excellent gates
opening toward the four parts of the world, which were shut with doors of
brass. This being a square porch much like a Cloister, upholden with pillars
of Marble, and seeled over with Cedar, was thirty cubits broad. The whole
circuit and compass of which porch, was five hundred paces. Into this Court or
porch all sorts of Jews and Gentiles might enter, both clean and unclean;
whereupon it was called the Court of the Gentiles. [Here hence it was that
Christ did cast out twice the buyers and sellers, and suffered not any man to
carry so much as a vessel through the same. So say some, but we find it was
the Temple it self, Joh 2^ 16. Mat. 21.12 Luke 19.45. Mark. 11.7. Joh. 1^.^^^
See Number 110.] Here he discharged the woman taken in adultery. Here he
taught oftentimes. Here also the Jews would have stoned him. Finally here it
was that he was glorified before the Gentiles with a voice from heaven.

The parts of the Court of the Gentiles.
101. THe Golden Eagle was of great weight set up by Herod the greater, Ios.
17. Antiq. 8. and 12. chap. Also 1 Belli Iud. 21. and 2 Bell. 1.
over the greatest gate of the Temple; and was at the last pulled down by the
Jews, and cut in pieces, whereupon arose a great tumult, and many were slain.

102. The Treasury of the Temple, in Hebrew called Corban, a chest wherein was
offered, and kept such money, as served for the necessaries of the sacrifices
for the sustentation of the poor, Mar. 7.7. Mat. 27.6. 2 King. 12.9.
and for the repairing of the Temple. When Helidore, who was sent by the King
of the Syrians, sought to take the spoil of this treasury [it is said] he was
scourged by Angels from heaven: And when Pilate by the like temerity would have
bestowed this holy treasure for the bringing in of waters; 2 Chronicles. 24. 2 Mac.
3. Ios. 18. Ant. 5. Ios. 17. Bell. 11. 2 Mac. 4. Joan. 8. Mar. 12 Luke 21. Ios.
18. Ant. 13. and 19. Mat. 20.19. Mar. 10.33. Lu. 18.32. Mar. 12.41.
he was let and hindered by a general uproar of the people, the which
nevertheless the Romans, when they had won the City, took, and carried away.
Also we read [in 2 Maccab.] that Lysimachus was slain near unto this place:
Here it was that Christ taught himself to be the light of the world, and said
that he should be lifted up upon the Cross by the Jews (or the Romans
rather.) Christ sitting here, pronounced that the poor widow, offering two
mites, had given more then all the rich. Over this treasury, for a monument of
his adverse fortune turned into prosperity, King Agrippa hanged up that golden
chain, which the Emperor Cajus gave unto him, being equal in weight to that
iron chain with which his hands were bound by the command of the Emperor
Tiberius.

103. Achas (or Ahaz his) Dial, 2 King. 20.11. Isa. 38.8.
the King, which he made, wherein the King Ezekias being sick, for a sign of
recovering his health, the shadow of the Sun, by divine miracle, went backwards
ten degrees.

104. The North Gate, 1 Chro. 26. [Ezek. 40.23]
whereof mention is oftentimes made in the Scripture, and in Josephus.

105. The South Gate mentioned oftentimes in Scripture, 1 Chro. 26.13.
and in Josephus.

106. The West Gate, 1 Chro. 26.13 1 Chro. 23.
the which also in the book of * Chronicles is called the gate of foundation.
[* Qu. If meant of the gate of the fountain, Neh. 3.15.]

107. The East Gate, which also is called the gate Sur, otherwise Seir; also
the Kings gate, and the Beautiful gate, 1 Chon 9.26. Nehem. 3. 2 King. 11.15.
chap. 2 Chronicles. 27. Acts 3.1, 2.
because of all the rest it was the greatest, highest and fairest, by which
also there was the principal entrance into the Temple. This being decayed was
repaired by King Joatham. And near unto this gate the Apostle Peter with his
word (in the name of Jesus Christ) healed the man which was lame from his
mother womb, and sat there begging of alms.

108. The Towers of Trumpeters, Number. 10. Jos. 5. Bell. 9.
which were erected aloft in the west corners of the Temple. In the tops
whereof, the Priests, wanting the use of bells, with two silver Trumpets, Number.
28.
called the people unto the Temple. From thence also they told the people of
Festival days, of Sabbaths, of Fasts, and of solemn Feasts.

109. Here Christ writing with his finger on the ground made the accusers of
the women taken in adultery ashamed, John 8.2, 3.
and set her free.

110. Here Christ making a whip of cords, [See Number 100] Joh. 2.16. Mat.
21.12. Mar. 11.17.
cast out the buyers and sellers, together with their Merchandise.

Thus far we have spoken of the Temple, and of the parts thereof, and now we
will prosecute the other parts of the Daughter of Sion.

111. The Theater which was builded in form of a half circle, by Herod the
Ascalonite King of the Jews, Jos. 15. and Ant. 9. and 20. Ant. 15
near unto the Palace of the Macchabees. In the circuit whereof in Imagery was
set forth the Titles, the Victories, and Spoils of Augustus Caesar, shining
with silver and gold; where the better, and more worthy sort sitting upon
stairs and seats made round in compass, and the rest standing therein, beheld
the players, and actors, and Musicians playing their Comedies and Tragedies,
and other Plays.

The Places of the Daughter of Sion.
112. THe Throne of Solomon. 1 King. 10. 2 Chronicles 9.17. Jos. 8. Ant. 5.
It was a very great Throne of Ivory, covered over with shining gold, close and
round in the top like a Judgment seat, having six steps or stairs, at each end
whereof were twelve Lions set. In this Throne King Solomon sat, when he heard
the controversies of the people, and pronounced Judgment, and capital
sentences, appointing Laws and Statutes. Lyra in 3. King 7.
Herein also he sat, when in royal manner he would show forth his pomp,
glory, and riches, and when he intended to bestow upon his faithful servants
rewards.

113. The Passage which King Solomon made of strong timber, to go from his
Palace into the Temple. 2 Chronicles. 9.


114. The Tribunal, was a public place, set before the house of Pilate, John
19.13. Mat. 27.19. Mar. 15.
and appointed for Judgment, where the Lieutenants of Rome were wont to give
sentence, which in Greek was called LITHOSTROTOS, that is, a place of pavement,
and in Hebrew GABATHA, because it was high and lofty. Pilate sitting in this
judgment seat, and having good will to free Jesus standing before him, took
water and washed his hands before the people, saying, I am innocent from the
blood of this just man: But all the people crying out, Crucify him, Crucify
him, his blood be on us, and on our children: And further laying treason to his
charge in that he made himself a King, he condemned Christ to the death of the
Cross in this form of words: we may find them in a certain Author, from
whence we faithfully report them.

Jesum Nazarenum subversorem Gentis, contemptorem Caesaris, and falsum Messiam,
ut majorum suorum testimonio probatum est, ducite ad communis supplicii locum;
Salig. Tom. 8. cap. 7.
and cum ludibrio Regiae Majestatis, in medio duorum latronum cruci affigite. I
lictor, expedi cruces; that is to say, Carry ye to the place of common
execution Jesus of Nazareth, a subverter of his Nation, a coutemner of Caesar,
and [This seems to cross that in Joh. 19.19, 20.22.]
a false Messiah, as is proved by the testimony of the Elders of his own
people, and crucify him between two thieves in reproach and scorn of his
Kingly Majesty; Go Hangman, and make ready with speed the crosses. The which
sentence being pronounced, he delivered him to the Soldiers to be crucified:
Who brought forth Jesus, deprived of all beauty and comeliness, and more like
a Leaper, Isa. 53, 2.3.
then to himself, by reason of the pains which they had laid on him; but that
he might be known unto the people, they put on him again his own garments, and
carrying his cross, with two thieves through the Gate of Judgment, to be
crucified in Mount Calvary.

Pilate sitting in this Tribunal seat in time of an Insurrection for bestowing
the holy treasures of the Temple, Jos 18. Ant. 5. and 2 Bell. 8. Eusebius. 2. Hist.
Bell. 6. Niceph. 2 Hist. Ec. 10.
which were called Corban, gave a secret sign to the Soldiers which were
privily armed under their clothes, that they should not use swords, but clubs,
to beat down the tumultuous Jews; By which means many of them were slain, many
sore wounded, and very many trodden under foot, even to death, by their own
company in the tumult.

After this Florus the Lieutenant sitting in the same judgment seat, caused
many of the Noblemen, Jos. 2. Bell. 14.15.
and Gentlemen of the Jews, to be beaten and torn with rods and whips and to
be fastened on crosses, who also caused many other massacres about the City,
nothing sparing neither women, children, nor sucking babes. The which were
certain beginnings of vengeance taken by Almighty God upon the obstinate Jews
for the shedding of the innocent blood of Christ.

115. The Tower of Strato, Jos. 13. Ant. 18. Bell. 3.
in Greek called Pyrgus Sratonis, situate between the Castle Antonia and the
Temple, it was a hollow and an obscure passage where Antigonus was slain by the
soldiers of his brother.

116. The Valley of Cedron, 2 King. 23.4.6.12. Sopho. 1. Ios. 14. Ant. 8 and
15. Ant. 14. Item 1. Bell 5. and 6. Bell. 6, 7. and 6. Ios. 20. Ant, 16. Eus. 2.
Hist. Ec. 23*
[or Kidron] broad, deep, and dark, which in manner of a ditch or trench
compassed the Temple round about. And because it was disposed after the fashion
of a Mortar, it was called in Hebrew Macthes, and in Latin Pila. This was so
exceeding deep, that men could not look down from the roof of the Temple into
the bottom thereof, but their eyes would dazzle, and their heads seem to turn
with giddiness. Herein Merchants, and all sorts of Chapmen dwelled. Into this
Valley James the brother of the Lord, first Bishop of Jerusalem (say Roman
Writers) for professing Jesus the Son of God on the feast of Passover, was
cast down headlong from the battlements of the Temple at the command of Anani a
Saduce, chief Priest, and was immediately knocked on the head with a Fullers
club, and was there buried near unto the Temple; his Monument remaining there a
long time after (as some write.)

117. The Wall of the Cross [as some note it] by which Christ having received
his judgment to be cruicified, went forward with painful and bloody steps to
mount Calvary. D. Petrus Poteus, and M. Matthaeus Stenberch did measure the
City of Jerusalem long since, by whose report this Description is made [many
hundred years after.]


Sect. 2. For [ thus * some Romanists write of it] beginning at the Palace of
Pilate, he made six and twenty steps (which make threescore and five foot) unto
the place where the cross was laid upon him.

Sect. 3. From whence (all the City gazing on him) carrying his cross on his
sore shoulders, he came toward the West, or rather North-west fourscore steps,
which make two hundred foot, to the place, where men say, that he fell down
under his Cross.

Sect. 4. From thence going forward by threescore steps, and three foot (which
make a hundred fifty, and three foot) he came to the place where (they say) the
blessed Virgin Mary, Also Petrus Calentinus in his book entitled, The way of
the Cross. See Number 123.
with John the Apostle, met with him. And proceeding from hence by threescore
and eleven steps, and one foot, and a half (which make a hundred seventy and
nine foot) he came to a certain crosse-way, where Simon of Cyren was compelled
to bear the hinder part of the Cross with Christ. [Is not this a notable proof
with Scripture for saying on beads Latin prayers at crosse-wayes.]

Sect. 5. Taking his way hence by one hundred ninety, and one step, and half a
foot (which comes to four hundred and seventy foot) [How punctually did some
thus measure the feet some hundred years after] he came to the place where [
they write Veronica] met with him. And from thence going three hundred thirty
six steps, and two feet (which amount to eight hundred forty and two feet) he
came to the Judiciary gate, where once again he fell with his Cross.

Sect. 6. From thence he ascending faintly a very hard and stony way toward
the North, he gained three hundred forty and eight steps, and two foot (the
sum eight hundred seventy and two foot) which brought him unto a twofold
way, where certain women weeping spoke unto him: And from hence laboring
forward threescore steps and one, and half a foot (which make four hundred
and four foot) he fell down the last time, at the foot of the Mount Calvary.
From thence he wearily, and faintingly went forward eighteen steps, or forty
five foot to the place where the Hang-men drew off his clothes, where they gave
him to drink wine mixed with mirrh and gall.

Sect. 7. Then he went on twelve steps, or thirty foot, even to the place where
he was nailed on the Cross on mount Calvary. So that from the Palace of
Pilate, unto the place where Jesus was crucified, the distance is a thousand
three hundred and seven steps, or by another account, three thousand two
hundred sixty and eight foot.

We have made such exact description ( says the P. P. Author) and
demonstration of the Way of the Cross (as also the Way of the Captivity
hereafter expressed under the Number of two hundred and five) to the end that
every Christian man, in all places, even in the doors of his house, or walking
oftentimes in his Garden, or being in a journey, or in the Temple, either lying
in his bed, may by the imagination of his mind conceive the like way, and with
godly affection of the heart may meditate upon the passion of Christ; the which
no doubt, is both acceptable unto God, and for our own souls health most
profitable, as the writings of good men by their often exhortation do testify.
[ But a far better help is appointed and afforded of God, even the holy
Scriptures themselves, that do best and most affectingly set forth Christ's
Passion, as Isa. 53.1, 2. Mat. 26.20. to the end of Mat. 27. Mar. 14. Joh. 18.
and 19.]

118. The way of entrance for the Horses, Neh. 3.28. 2 King. 11.19. 2 Chronicles 23.
Jos. 9. Ant 7.
which was between the Palaces of Solomon, and of the Queen. By which Athalia
the Queen being brought out of the horse-gate, was slain in the valley of the
brook Cedron (or Kidron)

119. The Gallery, made in form of a stone bridge, with many arches, extending
it self with ample largeness over the common street, adorned with open walks
upon the same. From the which there was a passage from the Palace of Pilate
into the Castle of Antonia, and so from thence into the Temple. From this
place, being very safe, Joan. 19.
the Lieutenants of Rome were wont to speak unto the people; whereon Pilate
standing, exhibited Jesus to the Princes and people of the Jews to be looked
on, being very sore scourged, spit on, Breid. 14. Jul. Salig. 8. cap. 7.
clothed with a purple cloak, and wearing a sharp crown of thorns upon his
head, saying unto them, Behold the man, that he being thus afflicted, they
might have compassion on him: But they with confused voices cried, Crucify
him, Crucify him. Whereas yet an arch of stone is to be seen, Ios. 2. Belli
Iud. 6. and 5. Bell. 9.
and is showed unto strangers (written by Relick-mungers some hundred years
after) with this Inscription, Toll, Toll, crucifig -- the rest cannot be read
by reason Antiquity has worn it out. From this Gallery King Agrippa pronounced
an eloquent Oration to pacify the seditious people exhorting them to obey the
Romans. Josephus makes mention many times of this Gallery.

120. The Cross of Christ, Pasch. Descrip. Ierus. 207.
which was laid on his shoulder, was fifteen foot long, and eight foot over, as
we have received by Tradition of the Elders.

121. Here it is said that Christ fell the first time under his Cross. Pasch.
d. 207.


122. Here also by Tradition of some Fathers, it is said, that the blessed
Virgin Mary with John, and certain godly women stood, as Christ passed by with
his Cross.

123. Christ being come to these two ways ( of which in Number 117. Sect. 4.)
and being wearied with the heavy burden of his Cross, is said to have fallen.
For the which cause, Mat. 27.32. Mar. 15.21. Luke 23.26. Breid. 14. Iul. Sa.
1.8. c. 7. Pas. d. 208.
the soldiers and Jews, fearing that he would faint before he could be
crucified, took a certain man coming out of the Country, named, Simon of Cyren,
and compelled him to carry the Cross after Jesus; (or to help him to carry
it.)

The third Part of the City.
124. The second City, this is, the third part of the City, 2 King. 22. 2 Chronicles. 34, 8. Sopho. 1. Hier. in 2. Chron. 34.8. Ios. 6. Bell. 10. See page 2.
the which also had many narrow ways whereof mention is made sometime in the
Scripture; wherein, among others, many Prophets and Noblemen dwelt. This when
the Romans had gotten, they were by the seditious again driven out of the City.
[ The name of it in Hebrew is Jerushalajim of the dual number, implying, (it
seems) two Cities, the higher above the lower, to which the Apostle seems to
allude, Gal. 4.25, 26.]

The places of the second City.
125. The Lake Amigdalon, Ios. 6. Bell. 12.
near unto which Titus erected a Bulwark.

126. The house of Mary, the Mother of John, and of Mark, one of the seventy
and two Disciples of Christ, Acts 12.12.4.
wherein the faithful of the Primitive Church were wont to assemble
themselves, and to pray. Where also after the Martyrdom of James the Apostle,
when Peter was cast into prison by Herod Agrippa, they prayed without ceasing
for his deliverance: Sal. Tom. 8. c. 4.
Who at the last being brought out of prison by the Angel, and knocking at the
door of this house, was by a Damsel brought into the same. In the which place
afterward a Church-house was builded, which was the first of the Christian
Greeks. And is an Episcopal Seat, which the Syrians hold unto this day; [said
the Author.]

127. The house of Olda [ or Hulda the Prophetess, 2 King. 22.14. 2 Chro.
34.22.
[not a Nun, but] the wife of Sellum [a famous Nobleman, the great Uncle (say
some) of the Prophet Jeremy] whose counsel being asked by the King Josias, she
foretold him of the destruction of Jerusalem.

128. A Conduit, Ios. 2. Bell. Iul. 18. and 6. Bell. 6.
and Fountain, which by Pipes sent forth water aloft, and by the like Pipes
derived water into Herod's Palace, and about the same, filling the Cisterns
thereof.

129. The Wood market, Ios. 2. Bell. 24.
which Cestius set on fire.

130. The habitation of the Rechabites; Jer. 35.2, 3.
(say some) who living Religiously according to the Commandment of their
Father, possessed neither fields nor vineyards; and like pilgrims of this
world, dwelt not in houses, but in tents, and wholly abstained from wine.
Wherefore when through the necessity of war they were compelled to come into
the City, Jeremy [not drinking wine unto them, but] by the Commandment of God,
bidding them drink wine, they would drink no wine. By which example of their
obedience, the same Prophet reprehended the disobedience of the obstinate Jews,
neglecting the Commandment of God, and therefore he did set before the one a
punishment, and before the other a reward.

131. A Lake (or a Ditch) which was situate between two walls of the City,
Isa. 22.11.
whereof mention is made in Isaiah the Prophet.

132. The middle Tower, Ios. 6. Bell. 9.
which was in the middle wall.

133. A Monument of Alexander Jannaeus the high Priest and King, Ios. 13 Ant
21. and 6 Bell.
wherein he was buried by the authority of the Pharisees, very sumptuously.

134. A Monument of Johannes Hircanus, high Priest and Captain, of whom
mention is often made in Josephus. Ios. 6. Bell. 7.


135. The second Wall, the which is also called the Middle-wall, 2 Chronicles 32.
Neh. 3.8 and 12 Ios. 6. Bell. 6.
beautified with many gates, and divided with fourteen Towers; the which wall
Hezekias the King repaired, and made more strong and higher.

136. The Palace of Herod, which was builded by Herod the Ascalonite King of
the Jews (who killed the Innocents) with sundry sorts of pollished marble
stones near unto the West-wall of the City, from the old wall, even to the
middle wall, Mat. 2. Ios. 6 Bell. 6.
being most singularly beautified with silver and gold, most strongly fortified
with an iron gate, and three most excellent Towers, to wit, Hippic, Mariam, and
Phasel, which in greatness, strength, Ios. 2 Bell. 17. Ios. 6. Bell. 6.
and beauty, excelled all the Towers of the whole world. Within was the Kings
Hall, which being builded on high, and very lofty with unspeakable
magnificence, was wholly compassed about with most beautiful Towers, Parlors,
Chambers, Galleries, Porches, and with Pillars, with which there was an
enclosed Court, open to the air.

In this Hall Christ was presented to Herod Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilee (who
had killed John the Baptist;) This Herod asked Christ many questions, Luke
23.8. Mat. 14.1. Verse 10. Luke 23.9, 10. Verse. 11. Mat. 27.28. Breid. 14. Iul.
who was there constantly accused by the Jews; whom when he answered nothing,
the same Herod, and his whole rout, despised, and scorned, and so sent him to
Pilate clad in white, and in scarlet, as if he had been a fool, or a Kingly
Jester [ No wonder therefore if Christ's members be scornfully used. Then they
should look unto Jesus, and follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Heb. 12.2.] Now
that Hall, or Palace, is a School for children of the Infidels.

137. The Middle Gate of the second wall wherein the outwardmost walls being
broken, Jer. 39.3. and 52.
the Princes of the King of Babylon did sit.

138. The outwardmost Court, compassing the Hall of Herod round about, Jos. 2.
Bell. 1.7.
where the Kings soldiers did watch and ward; Wherein was the Kings prison
whereinto malefactors were put. In this prison Saint Peter was shut up by King
Herod Agrippa, who had slain James the greater. Which Peter being bound with
two chains, Act. 12.1, 2.
and most safely kept by four quaternions of soldiers all the days of sweet,
(or unleavened) bread: But in the night before the day whereon he should have
been put to death, he was by the Angel of the Lord loosed from his chains, and
by him brought forth through an iron gate, by the first and second watch into
the City. (As in Act. 12.)

139. The Lake called Strutium, Jos. 6. Bell. Jud. 12.
which was the middle Lake. Here also Titus caused a Bulwark to be made.

140. The Tower Hippic, which being four square, was builded in the second wall
upon a high hill. Ios. 6. Bell. 5, 6, 7.
which being four square, was builded in the second wall upon a high hill. It
was fourscore and five cubits high; and having two tops, was to be seen afar
off. It was marvelous strong, builded by Herod the elder, who having in the war
lost his friends the Hippicks, called this Tower after their name, Hippic.

141. The Tower Mariamne, which being fifty cubits high, stood aloft in most
beautiful manner, Ios. 15. Ant. 9. and Bell. 16. and 6 Bell. 6.
upon a high hill of the old wall, which Herod builded for a memorial of
Mariamne his best beloved wife, whom he had slain, and called it after her
name Mariamne. And because it carried the name of a Queen, therefore it was
more beautiful in show then the other.

142. The Tower Phaselus, Ios. 14. Ant. 22. and 16. Ant. 5.
which being fourscore and ten cubits high, set upon a high place of the old
wall, and made aloft in form of a ball, was of wonderful height and exceeding
strong; Which Herod builded after the fashion of the Tower Pharus in
Alexandria. And in the honor of his brother Phaselus called it Phaselus, who
being taken prisoner by the Parthians, Ios. 17. Ant. 14. and 1. Bell. 11. and 6
Bell. 6. and 7. Bell. 18.
and having no liberty to use neither weapon nor hands, ran his head against a
stone, and so killed himself. How this, and the other two Towers were left
standing after the destruction of Jerusalem, read under the number of (1) going
before.

143. Herod's Park, which had in it an Orchard and a Garden, watered with Ponds,
Rivers, and Fountains, Jos. 6. Bell. 6.
replenished with sundry wild beasts, Fishes and Fouls, having many large
Walks, and round about the same, many towers of tame Doves.

144. The Hospital, Jos. 13. Ant. 15. Egesi. 1. Hist. Jud. 1.
which Hircanus the high Priest founded with the money which he got out of the
Sepulcher of David, wherein pilgrims, poor men, and such as were impotent, were
sustained and kept.

145. The wrestling place, Ios. 6. Bell. 6.
the which was placed in Herod's Palace. It was large, serving in the Winter
time for Wrestlers, and for other exercises, and pastimes, wherewith men
recreated themselves.

The fourth part of the City.
146. THe new City, called in Greek Kaenopolis, Jos. 19. Ant. 7. and 2. Bell.
15. and 6. Bell. 6.7.9.13
the fourth part of the City, the which was severed as the other parts of the
City were with walls, and many narrow ways, which went cross, extending to
the walls of the City; wherein dwelt Woolsellers, Carpenters, Smiths, and other
Workmen and Artificers.

Latin Bazetha.
The places of the new City.
147. Bezetha, a Mountain, Jos. 6. Bell. 6.
the which having many houses built thereon, was inhabited by the common sort
of people.

148. The Castle of the Assyrians, Ios. 6. Bell. 8. and 13.
near unto the which Titus pitched his Tents at such time as he had gotten the
wall of the City. This Castle stood more then an arrow-shoot from the second
wall.

149. The third Wall, the which also is called the out set wall, which King
Agrippa made upon the common charge of the Citizens, Ios. 19. Ant. 7. and 2
Bell. 10. and 6. Bell. 6.
extending it more broad and high then it was before. This wall was very firm
and strong, five and twenty cubits high. It had fourscore and ten square and
lofty Towers which were of great force, distant one from the other two hundred
cubits, whose building and beauty in stone work, was nothing inferior to that
of the Temple.

150. The broad Street, Neh. 8.16. Neh 12.39.
the which also was called the street of the gate of Ephraim.

151. The Kings Caves, Ios. 6. Bell. 6.
upon the which the third wall of the City was builded in length.

The Gates and Towers about the City.
152. Caphenetha, 1 Match. 12.37.
the East wall of the City upon the brook Cedron, which Jonathas Machabees
repaired.

153. The corner stone, Isa. 28.16. Psalm. 87.1. Ps. 118.22. 1 Cor. 3.11. Acts
4.11. 1 Pet. 2.6, 7.
which was most hard, being the firm foundation of mount Sion. This was a
figure of Christ, who is the strong and stable foundation of his Church.

154. The Gate of the Corner, so called because it was situate in the
North-east corner of the City, 2 King. 14.13. 2 Chronicles 25.23 Jer 31.38. Za^h.
14.10. Broc. itin 6 Sal. Tom. 8. cap. 5.
next unto the brook Cedron. The which also was called the gate of Benjamin,
because the way lead through the same unto the tribe of Benjamin. By this gate,
wood was brought into the City out of the Desert. In this gate also Jeremy the
Prophet was apprehended, whose ruins are now to be seen a great way out of the
City.

155. The golden Gate, situate between the gate of the valley, and the gate of
the Fountain, so called, because it was gilded with gold; It was also called
the Eastgate, Ezekiel. 43.4. Broc. itin. 6. Sal. Tom. 9. cap. 4 Breid. 14. Pasch.
die. 184. Mat. 21. Joh. 12
because it was builded on the East Side of the Temple: And because it lead by
a very short way, from the Temple to mount Olivet, it was rather a gate of the
Temple then of the City; and therefore Nehemias made no mention thereof. By
this gate Christ came riding upon an Ass into the City of Jerusalem, at what
time men cut down palms and strowed them in his way, crying, Hosanna before him.

156. The Gate of Ephraim, which now of some is called S. Stephens gate, 2
King. 14.15. 2 Chronicles. 25 23 Neh. 8.16. and 12.39. Jos. 9. Ant. 10. Broc. itin.
6. Sal. Tom. 8. cap. 5
situate on the North part tending toward the way which leads unto the tribe
of Ephraim, whereupon it was called the Gate of Ephraim. From this gate unto
the gate of the corner, Joaz King of Israel, beat down the wall of Jerusalem by
the space of four hundred cubits, and in triumphant manner he being carried
into the City in his chariot through that breach, became Lord of the City.
Which wall, together with the Towers thereof, Uzziah King of Juda afterward
restored again.

157. The Watergate, Neh. 3, 15.26.28. Ne. 8.1.16. 2 Chronicles. 23. Ier. 19.31.
Broc. itin. 6. Salig Tom. 8. cap. 5.
the which was situate between mount Sion and the mount Moria in the valley
called Mello, toward the East. It was called the Watergate, because it opened
a passage unto the Fountain of the water of Siloe; and because horses were
carried through the same to be watered in the brook Cedron. And for this cause
it was called the East horse-gate, and it tended toward the the valley Gehennom.

158. The Gate Genath, or the Gate of King Herod's Garden, which was not far
from the second wall of the City, Jos. 6 Bell. 6, 7, 8
by which water was brought up into the Tower Hippic. By this gate the
seditious privily sallied out many times upon the Romans.

159. The Gate of the Kings Garden, 2 King. 25.4^
which in mount Sion was placed between two walls of the castle, by which King
Zedechias fled in the night.

160. The Gate of the high Priests Palace, Neh. 3.26.28.
at the South side of the City.

161. The Fish-Gate, Neh. 12.39. 2 Chro. 33.14 Sopho. l. 10. Nehem. 3.3. Broc.
itin. 6. Sal. tom. 8. cap. 1, 5.
the which was situate next to the Tower of David in the valley of Mello,
between mount Sion, and the lower City, toward the West; and by the vault
adjoining to the same, it gave a convenient passage to and from the City to
every man. And it was called the Fish-gate, because through the same Fishes
were brought into the City from Joppe, and from other Towns of the Seacoast.
This also had other names, as the gate of David, and the Merchants gate. David's
gate, because it was next to David's Tower; and the Merchants Gate, because by
the same much Merchandise were carried into the City from Bethelem, Hebron,
Gaza, from Egypt, and from Aethiopia. By this Gate strangers that came from
the West, were wont to enter into the City.

162. The Dung-gate, on the East Side of the City, toward the Comer-gate, Neh.
3.14. and 12.31.
on the North-east, carried all the dung and filth of the City which the rain*
gathered together, into the brook Cedron, whereupon it was rightly called the
Dung-gate.

163. The Gates of Women's Towers. Broc. iti. 6. Sa. tom. 8. c. 5. Ios. 6. Bell.
2. and 5.
On the North end of the City, by which the seditious brake forth upon the
Romans, when they besieged the City.

164. The Valley Gate, 2 Chronicles. 26.9: Neh. 2.13.15. Neh. 3.13. Broc. itin. 6.
Breid. 14. Iul. Sal. tom. 8.6.5.
so named, because it made way into the Valley of Jehosaphat, situate in the
midst between the Dung-gate, and the Golden-gate, and not far distant from the
Sheep-market, and the Pool called Probatica. The which also for this cause
deserved to be called the Drove-gate, because the flocks of Cattle which were
sold in the Sheep-market, and were to be offered for sacrifice in the Temple,
were brought in by this gate. But now it is called S. Stephens gate, of the
first Martyr Stephen, which was stoned to death not far from the same.

165. The old Gate, Neh. 3.6. and 12.39. Deuteronomy. 22.24. Ruth 4.1. Heb. 13.12.
which being on the West-part of the City, was called in time past by the
Jebusites the Gate Jebus. It was also called the Judgment gate, because in old
time, the Judges did fit there in Judgment. For then the Seniors did exercise
Justice and Judgment in the Gates of their Cities; and such as were condemned
to dye, went out at this Gate. Broc. itin. 6. Sal. tom. 8. cap. 7.
Whereupon Christ was lead out of the same to be crucified. Of this Gate there
are at this day some old remainders and ruins to be seen.

166. The Rock, which was very high, going along from the Tower Psephina unto
Mount Sion, Broc. itin. 6.
upon the which the whole West-wall of the City stood.

167. The Tower Hananeel, the which being not far distant from the Corner-gate,
toward the East, and by North, Jer. 31.38. Zach. 14.10. Neh. 3.1. and 12 39.
was very strong and notable, whereof the holy Scripture makes mention
oftentimes.

168. The Corner Tower, standing aloft upon the Corner gate, 2 Chronicles. 26.9.
which King Ozias did strongly repair, and made it one hundred and fifty cubits
high.

169. The Tower of David, strong and lofty, 2 Samuel 5.9. Vuil. Tyr. 9. be, sac.
3. Broc. itin. 6.
the which was builded by King David in a corner of two deep Valleys, on the
top of a broken rock, with four square stones most firmly joined together with
Iron and Lead, whose singular fortitude, and notable beauty, for the
commendation of Christ's Spouse (which is the Church) is spoken of by Solomon,
when he says, Thy neck is like the Tower of David, builded with Bulwarks,
whereupon there hang a thousand shields, yea all the weapons of the Giants.
Cant. 4.4.


170. The high Tower, 2 Chronicles. 26.9. Ios. 9. Ant. 11.^
which was builded upon the gate of the Valley. The which also King Ozias
repaired; and that it might be seen beyond mount Olivet, he made it one hundred
and fifty cubits high.

171. The Lantern Tower [or Tower of Furnaces] situate on the North-end of the
City, which men think was so called, Neh 3.11. (...). 12.38.
because fire was continually kept there, to serve as a Mark both for Land and
Seafaring men, to direct them in the right way.

172. The great Tower, Neh. 3.27.
which standing near the wall of the Temple, was higher then the rest.

173. The Tower Meah, Neh. 3.1. and 12.39.
otherwise Emat, that is say, of one hundred cubits, which was not far from the
Temple.

174. The Tower Psephina, Jos. 6 Bell. 2.5, 6 Broc. itin. 6.
which was eight square, of seventy cubits high, founded at the North-west
corner of the City upon a very high rock, being like a strong Tower, which by
reason of the exceeding height thereof, was fearful, from whence on a clear
day, men might behold Arabia, the Sea, and the uttermost borders of the
Hebrews. The ruins whereof are as yet to be seen.

175. The Tower of Siloe, which falling in Christ's time, slew eighteen men.
Luke 13.4.


176. The deep valley, Broc. itin. 6.
which compassing mount Sion on the North and South part, went all along the
West side of the City, even to the gate of Ephraim, making a fit and convenient
ditch for the City.

The places without the City.
The places at the East part of the City.
177. The Water which was brought out of the Temple by Conduit pipes under the
earth, Arist. lib. de 72. interpret. Jo. 18.1.
issued forth here with great noise, and so ran into the brook Cedron.

178. Bethania, the Noble Castle of Mary and of Martha the sisters of Lazarus,
Mat. 21.17. chapter 26.6. Mar. 11.1. Luke 10.29. Ioh. 11.1. and 12.1.
having many houses, the which was situate beyond mount Olivet, distant from
Jerusalem fifteen furlongs, that is, two Italian miles. From which place,
though it were but a little way off, yet by reason that mount Olivet ^ay
between the City Jerusalem could not be seen, except from a little hill, from
whence part of mount Sion might be seen. Christ oftentimes lodged in this
house of Martha, where he preached the word of God to Mary sitting at his feet.
Here he raised up Lazarus to life, after he had been buried four days, and
began to stink. Here, he sitting in the house of Simon the Leper, at the table
together with Lazarus, Martha serving them, Mary anointed him with a most
precious ointment.

179. Bethphage, a little village, belonging to the Priests, seituate at the
East foot at the mount Olivet, Mat. 21.1. Mark 11.1. Luke 19.22. Ioh. 12.1.
Luke 19.41, 42
from whence Christ sent two of his Disciples unto the Castle Opposite, or over
against them, to fetch the Ass and the Colt; which being brought, and the
peoples clothes laid on the Colt, he road on the same into Jerusalem;

But coming down from mount Olivet, and seeing the City, he wept on her, and
prophesied her utter ruin, because she knew not the day of her Visitation.

180 The Castle [or Village] Opposite, Mat. 26.6, 7. Mat. 11.3. Luke 19.23.
or which lies over against you (to use the words of Christ) when he sent his
Disciples to fetch him the Ass. It was a Village right over against Bethphage.
[It seems to be Bethany.]

181. The Well, near unto Bethany, where when the Lord came to raise up
Lazarus, Martha first met with him, Ioh. 11.30.
and afterward called forth her sister Mary. [The Scripture has not one word
of any Well in that place.]

182. The Little Hill, at the foot of mount Olivet, Jos. 6. Bell. 13.
near unto the Dove-house a little above the valley of Siloe.

183. The withered Fig Tree, planted beside the way of Bethany, Mat. 21.19.
Mar. 11.15.
which for bearing no fruit, but being garnished only with leaves, was cursed
of Christ, and so presently withered.

184. The Dragon Fountain, which does spring even at this day, which was
between the Valley and the Dung-gate. Jos. 15.8. and 18.16. 2 King. 23.10. 2
Chr. 28.3 and 33.6. and 19.2 and 32 35.


185. Gehennom, the which also was called Benhinnom, that is to say, the Valley
of the sons of Ennom, (or Hinnon.) It was a place which was situate in the
Suburbs of the City of Jerusalem toward the South-east. In which place of
Benhinnom was the Tabernacle, and the Idol Moloch: the which Idol as it was
chief and principal among all the other Idols, so the same being the greatest
abomination, and most hated unto God, he oftentimes forbad the same in the
Scriptures. It was an Idol, the matter whereof was brass, made in the
likeness and smilitude of a King, (of which some write thus.) It was hollow
within, and had a head like to the head of a Calfe, the other parts or members
of the body having the shape and fashion of a man, the arms whereof were
stretched out, whereto the children that should be offered were made fast, and
with the vehement and extreme heat of the Idol were burned, and utterly
consumed, being so holden as it were of the same between his arms. For when
the Idol was made red hot with the fire which they had put into the
hollownesse of the same, then the most wicked parents of these children in most
cruel and barbarous manner, Lev. 18.21. and 20 2, 3. 1 King. 11.7.
delivered up their sons and their daughters to (and into) these detestable
and develish imbracings of the Idol, that so they might be burnt. And this
they did of a certain divelish devotion, offering them up to the devil Moloch
for a burnt offering of most filthy savor. Amidst these horrible torments
wherewith they were thus tormented, the miserable Clamor of the children could
in no wise be heard, Act 7.43. 2 King. 16. and 21.
whereby the parents might in any sort be moved to pity or compassion, for that
the Priests of this Idol Moloch, during the whole time of the sacrifice, did
usually make an exceeding great noise both with the Trumpets, and Drums, or
Tabrets. Whereupon that place was called also Tophet.

In this abominable manner, 2 Chronicles. 28.33. 2 King. 23.10.
Achaz, and Manasses also, Kings of Juda, being even as mad as the common
people, offered up their Sons to the Devil Moloch. The which detestable
madness, the godly King Josias seeking at the length to redress, brake in
pieces the Image of Moloch, cut down his Groves, and defiled the place thereof
with the filthiness of dead Carcass, of bones, and of other unclean things,
and appointed it to be a perpetual dunghill for ever. Jer. 7.5. and 19.7.32.35.
Isa. 30.


In this Valley Jeremy at the Commandment of God, breaking an earthen pot in
pieces against the ground before the Elders of Juda; prophesied that God would
after the selfsame manner, break and destroy both the City, and the people.
According to which Prophecy, there was so great and mighty a multitude of
people slain there, because they had filled this place with the blood of
innocent children, that this place was called no more the valley of Tophet, but
Poly and ron, that is to say, a heap of many dead bodies, whose carcases lying
there unburied, became meat for the birds of the air, and for the beasts of
the fields.

186. Gethsemani, a firm place at the foot of mount Olivet. Matthew. 26.26. Mar.
14.32.
This had many fruitful Olive trees. When Christ intended to go unto the Garden
that was in mount Olivet, he came from his last Supper into this place, heavy
and sorrowful unto the death.

187. The Garden of Olivet, Mat 26.39. Mar. 14.35. Luke 22.41. John 18.1. Hier.
in loc. Heb lit. G. Broc. it in 6. Bre. 14. Jul.
in the mount of Olivet, where Christ prayed unto his Father three times, that
the cup of his Passion might pass from him. And being in an agony as he
continued in prayer, he swet blood which fell drop by drop unto the earth, at
what time he was comforted by an Angel from heaven. In Hieroms time, there was
a Church builded on this place, which is as yet to be seen.

188. The Kings Garden, 2 King. 25.4. Cant. 4. Jer. 39.4. and 52 Jos. 7. Aut.
15. and 9. Aut. 11.
the which also was called the enclosed Garden. It was in the Suburbs of
Jerusalem, walled round about. And like to a Paradise it was planted with
trees, of all sorts of fruits, with herbs, with flowers of most sweet savor,
and what soever else that might delight the senses. It had also most pleasant
and convenient walks. In this was that famous fountain Rogel, and the stone
Zoeleth, of both which there is often mention made in the Scripture, where
Adonias when he purposed to reign, offered oblations, and with his followers
made a feast.

189. The Grove of Moloch, consecrated to the Idol Moloch, where the
worshippers thereof, after they had ended their sacrifice, 2 King 23.10. Hier.
in Jer. 1.19. and in Mat. 10.
committed fornication under the shadow of the trees.

190. The Mount of offense, it was a very high mountain, 1 King. 11.7. 2 King.
23.10.
situate on the South Side of the Kings Garden; where the most wise Solomon
being now old, was seduced and made foolish by his strange wives, building a
Temple to Melchom the Idol of the Ammonites, which also he worshipped.

191. The Mount Olivet, Dan. 11.45. Psalm. 87.1. Dan. 9.16.20. Zach. 8.3. Act.
1.12. See Number 178. Broch. itin 6. Breid. 14. Iul.
or Mount of Olives, so called by reason of the great plenty of Olives which
grew there, called also in Greek Elaeon, which otherwise also is named the
famous [or glorious] and holy Mountain. It was situate on the East side of
Jerusalem. It was separated from the high City, the valley of Cedron lying
between, distant from the City a Sabbath days journey, according to the
Scripture; but according to Josephus, it was distant five furlongs, who also
adds that the top of the hill was six, furlongs from the City; for it was of
so great height, that from the same, not only almost all the streets of
Jerusalem, but also the dead Sea might easily be seen. And besides the Olives,
it abounded with Palms, Pines, Mirtels, and other fruitful Trees.

In the top of this hill, 2 Samuel 15.
the holy King David flying from the face of his son Absalom, weeping, and
barefooted worshipped God. In this Mountain also his Son Solomon forgetting
all godliness, erected a Temple to Astaroth the Idol of the Sidonians, right
over against the Temple of Jerusalem (from whence every one that committed
Idolatry might be seen.) 1 King. 11 7. 2 King. 23.3.
The which also with all other places dedicated to Idols, Josias utterly
destroyed.

Christ oftentimes came up into this Mountain, both for quietness sake, Luke
19.29.41. Luke 22.2. Mat. 21.1. John 18.8. Act 1.12.
and also to pray, tarrying there all the night. Also from the top of this
Mount he ascended into heaven in the presence of his Disciples standing there,
and beholding him, after he had blessed them.

192. The Mount of Offense, a high Mountain, on the other side of the brook
Cedron, 1 King. 11.7. 2 King. 23.8. Broc. itin. 6. Sal. 6. cap. 5.
and on the North side of the mount Olivet, distant from Jerusalem four
furlongs; whereon Solomon by the motion of his heathenish wives, builded a
Temple to Chumosh the Idol of the Mo^bites. This also Josias brake down. In the
time of the Machabees a Castle was builded on this Mount, some tokens whereof
are to be seen at this day.

193. The Fullers Monument; Jos. 6. Bell. 6.
the which was not far from the Corner gate, in the North-east.

194. The Palm Trees, whereof mention is made in Nehemiah, Neh. 8.15. Joh.
12.13.
and in St. John's Gospel.

195. The Dove-house, on the South end of the Mount Olivet; Jos. 6. Bell. 13.
It was made of stone, round, lofty, and fashioned like a Tower, wherein were
store of Doves to the number of four or five thousand.

196. The Bridge of Cedron, made of stone, Breid. 14. Jul.
with one arch erected over the brook Cedron, which Helena the Emperesse caused
to be made in that place.

197. The Sepulcher of the Virgin Mary, Joan Damas^. de dormitione. Deipar.
which was in the valley of Jehoshaphat near unto the firm place of Gethseman,
at the foot of Mount Olivet wherein the body of the most holy, and blessed
Virgin, was decently buried by the Apostles. [From this Traditional Relicke,
not once mentioned in Scripture, is sucked no small advantage.]

198. The Common place of burial, 2 King. 23.32. Ier. 26.
which was in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, where the common sort of people were
buried.

199. The Fountain of Siloe, whereto was joined the Pool of Siloe, Isa. 8. and
22. Neh. 3.15.
the which also is called the lower Pool, lying on the West Side of the valley
of Jehoshaphat, and springing from the root of Mount Sion. The water thereof
being clear, sweet, and plentiful, ran with a still and calm stream into the
brook Cedron.

This Fountain King Hezekias repaired. J^h 9.7.11. Broc. itin. 6. Breid. 14
Iul. Pasch. die. 197. Io. 6. Bell. 11.
In the Pool of this Fountain the man which was borne blind washing his eyes
which Christ had anointed with clay, and his spittle, received his sight.
Josephus testifies that Siloe, and all other waters which were without the
City, did so fail and vanish away before the coming of Titus Caesar, that
water was sold near unto them. And after his coming, they did so abound to him
and his host, Salig. Tom. 10* cap. 1.
that they had water enough for them and for their cattle. Concerning the
virtue of this water, the most diligent Surveyer of this place Saligniacus
writes in this sort, The water of this Fountain is of great price at this
day, even among the Saracens themselves. For where as naturally they be rammage
and stink like Goats, they washing themselves and their children therein, do
mitigate the evil savor thereof. The Turks also make great account thereof,
for that they find by experience, that the use thereof is good for the sight
of their eyes.

200. or 201. (See before Number 44.)

Stephen the Deacon, Act 7.58. with Act. 6 5.
in the very flower of his youth, was stoned to death, praying to God for them
that stoned him, whose garments the young man Paul kept. This man was the first
that triumphed with the palm of martyrdom.

201. or 202.

The Brook Cedron, 2 King. 23.4, 6.12. Jer 31. Jos. 8. Ant. 1* and 6. Bell. 13.
Ezekiel. 47.8.
[or Kidron] is a River on the East side of Jerusalem between the same and
Mount Olivet, which being increased with diverse springs issuing from all parts
out of the Mountain, and Pooles, ran through the valley of Jehoshaphat, and
Gehennom with a silver stream, and so passed through the plains of the
wilderness into the dead Sea.

On the banks of both sides this River, there grew many fruitful Trees, Broc.
itin. 6. Sa^. Tom. 9. cap. 1 2 Samuel 15.30.
the pleasant show whereof, together with the Gardens near adjoining, which
were watered with the Crystal streams of Cedron, greatly delighted the eyes
and minds of such as walked by the same. King David passed over this River bare
footed, bare headed, and with watery eyes, accompanied with his most trusty
friends, flying from the face of his son Absalom. Christ also went over the
same, Joh. 18.1.
with his Disciples, when he went to the Garden of Mount Olivet. [203. In
Latin was Tugurium S. Pelagia. As the 44. Number, so this of Number, 203. was
not judged worthy the Translating by T. T. nor by H. J.)

202. in Latin 204.

The Valley of Jehoshaphat, Jos. 6. Bell. 3. H^er. in loc. Heb. l. ^t. C. Zach.
14. Broc. itin. 6. Sal. Tom. 8. c 8. 1 King. 15. 2 King. 23.6.12.
the which also is called the Valley of Cedron, and the Valley of Mountains. It
is a wide and deep Valley between Jerusalem and Mount Olivet, compassing the
City on the East part, which is made very fruitful by the passage of the brook
Cedron. The great deepnesse of this Valley was much filled by Titus and Adrian
the Roman Emperors, casting into the same great store of earth with the ruins
of the Temple and City, yet it was not therewith any thing near levelled. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.9.30.
In this Valley, the godly and religious Kings of Juda, Asa, Ezechias and
Josias burned the Idols of the Temple, and cast their ashes into the brook
Cedron.

This Valley was the common place of burial for the whole City, where all the
common sort of people were buried. Joel 3.2.12. Sal. Tom 9. c. 2.
For it was the manner of the Jews to bury their dead Coarses out of the City.
And in the same place, the Turks are now buried.

203. or 205. etc. See before Number 44.

The Valley of Siloe, so named of the Fountain of Siloe, Jos. 6. Bell. 13.
Salig. tom. 8. c. 2. Jo. 9.7.
wherein the Jews which at this day dwell at Jerusalem, are buried.

204. The Wall of the Fullers Field, lying between the water of Siloe, and the
South-east corner of the City. 2 King. 25. Isa. 7 3.14.
Here the Prophet Isaias foretold King Achaz, that Christ should be borne of a
Virgin.

205. The way of the Captivity. Joan. Pasc. in pereg. s. die.
190.193.194.197.200. and 207. Ioh. 18.1. Isa. 53.10, 11. Mar. 14.32.43.53. Mat.
26.36.47.57. Luke 22.39.47 54. Ioh. 18.1.3.13.
These small pricks traced forth in length (as you see) do demonstrate the
way, by which Christ was lead captive for the redemption of mankind. For being
come into the Garden of Mount Olivet to pray after his last Supper in the
Parlor of Mount Sion; and having offered to God his Father the holy sacrifice
of prayers, returning from thence he met with his enemies which came to take
him, to whom he yielded himself; who had scarce gone forty steps from the
place where he prayed, but the Soldiers which were sent from the high Priests
and rulers of the people, laid hands on him, took him, and bound him.

From whence he was presently carried as a meek Lamb by those ravening Wolves,
armed with weapons, over the brook Cedron, to the house of Annas [which was
distant from the place where he was taken, Mat. 27.2. Mar. 15.1. Luke 22.66.
Ioh. 18.28.
two thousand three hundred and sixty paces.] And from hence he was carried to
the Palace of Caiphas [three hundred and thirty paces.] And so afterward he
was conducted by the Soldiers, and by the people to the Palace of Pilate
[which was distant from that of Caiphas a thousand paces.] Luke 23.7.11.
And from thence to the Palace of Herod [which was distant three hundred and
fifty paces.] Lastly, from thence again to the Palace of Pilate he was
carried [by another way then that which he came, the distance of six hundred
else, which make about the length of half a mile and more.] The paces whereof
we speak here, contain two foot and a half.]

206. The way to Anathoth, Broc. it in 6. Jer. 1. Luke 10.30. and 18.35. Mar.
10, 46. Mar. 26.36. Mar. 14.32. Luke 22 39.
to Bethel, and to the wilderness.

207. The way to Jericho, [and to Gilgal] of the which there is mention made in
some of the Evangelists. Matthew. 20.29.

208. Here the three Apostles, Peter, James, and John, sat, while Christ
prayed in the Garden, being about a stones cast from the selfsame place. Mat.
26.36.


209. Here the other eight Apostles tarried, being distant about a quarter of a
mile from the other three places.

210. Mat. 26.47. Mar. 14 43. Ioh. 18.3. Luke 22.47.
Here Christ, to make us free, was betrayed with a kiss by the Traitor Judas,
and bound with hard and straight bands (as if he had been an evil doer) by the
Jews, whom he beat down backward to the ground by the word of his mouth. There
Simon Peter moved suddenly with great fervency, struck the servant of the high
Priest, whose name was Malchus, and cut off his right ear, which Christ
immediately restored again. But the rest of the Apostles being afraid, left the
Lord and fled.

211. Mat. 23. and 24. and 25. Mar. 13. chap. Luke 21. chap.
In this place of Mount Olivet [a few days before that beforesaid] right over
against the Temple near to a certain water, Christ sat with his Disciples,
making a long Sermon concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, the afflictions
of the godly to come, the coming of false Prophets, the signs of the end of
the world, and concerning the manner of the last judgment. In the which place,
there was afterward builded a Temple which is now desolate.

212. Mat. 21.1. Mat. 11.1. Luke 19 29. Ioh. 12.15.
This Way [a little before that] Christ came to Jerusalem, sitting upon the
Asses colt, waited on with a great company of men, some going before, and other
some following after them; whereunto also a great number which came out of the
City joined themselves. Matthew. 21.9. [Ps. 118.25 26
So that he seemed to be received of all men with so great favor, that many
spread their clothes in the way; some cutting down the bows of Palms, Olives,
and other Trees, to honor him therewithal, strowed them in the way. And the
voices of such as rejoiced were heard in every place as he went resounding with
these cries, that is, Save now.
Hosanna in the highest, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.
With this pomp and triumph the true King, and humble Triumpher, entered in at
the golden Gate, and rode about the Temple, and the greatest part of the City.
With this new spectacle, the whole City was moved, saying Who is this? The
multitude which followed him, answered, This is Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth a
City of Galilee. Then the cry of those that rejoiced, and were glad, increased
more and more, and men and women, young, and old, yea (which is wonderful) the
very Infants which came from all parts, cried out together, Hosanna to the
Son of David, Blessed be the King of Israel, which comes a King in the name
of the Lord. Blessed be the Kingdom that comes in the name of him that is
Lord of our Father David: Peace in Heaven, and glory in the highest; Hosanna in
the highest. With these joyful voices and cries, they proclaiming their
Messiah, followed him even into the Temple: Where this new King happily
beginning his Kingdom, presently healed the blind and the lame. In the mean
time the wicked and envious Pharisees, the chief Priests and Scribes do fret
and fume, who seeing the great marvels which he did, and the children crying
in the Temple, Hosanna to the Son of David, said among themselves, Do ye not
see how we profit nothing? Behold the whole world goes after him. Whereupon
they begin with Jesus himself, saying, Master, do thou bear what these say?
Rebuke thy Disciples. To whom he showing that this was long before prophesied
of by the Prophet, answers, Why should they not? Have ye not read, Psalm. 8.2.
Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklings thou have ordained praise? I say
unto you, if these hold their peace, the stones shall presently cry.

The places on the South part of the City.
213. HAbbacuc. Apoc. D^n. 14. [For true Daniel has only 12. chap.] Breid. 14
Iul. Salig. tom. 10. cap. 2.
Here [as Apocrypha says, but not a word of it is in the holy Scripture] the
Angel of Lord takes up the Prophet Habbacuc by the hair of the head, as he was
carrying to the Reapers in the field their dinner, and carried him with the
same meat into Babylon to feed Daniel, being shut up in the Lions den: Who
being fed, he brought Habbacuc hither again. [Thus far from Apocrypha.]

214. Aceldema, or Haceldemach, that is to say, the Field of blood. It was a
Potters field, Zach. 11.13. Mat. 27.8.6. Act. 1.19. Niceph. 8. Hist. Ec. 13.
Broc. it in. 6. Breid. 14. Iul.
situate at the South part of Mount Sion, having behind it a hill of the same
name. This field by the counsel of the Jews, was bought with the thirty pieces
of silver for which Judas sold Christ, that it might serve to bury strangers
in; the middle part whereof the Emperesse Helen caused to be enclosed with a
four square wall, in length seventy and two foot, and in breadth fifty; And
the same to be covered over with a roof, having seven loop holes, Silig. Tom.
6. cap. 5 and tom. 10. cap. 1. Pas. d^ 197.
by which the dead bodies of Christians might be let down.

The virtue of this earth is reported [fabulously] to be wonderful, and
almost incredible; to wit, that it brings and consumes into dust the bodies
of the dead men within the space of four and twenty hours, leaving nothing
but the bones.

215. The Fullers Field, which lay all along at the South end of the City, 2
King. 18.17. Isa. 7.3. and 36 2
even from the Valley of Siloe Eastward unto mount Gihon, toward the West, and
between the wall of the City, and the water. In this Field the Fullers did
scour their clothes in the Brook next adjoining, and did set them on
Tainters, and so dry them.

216. The Den, Hier. Tom. 1. in catal. script. Ec. 1 Cor. 15.7.
or Cave of James the less, wherein he is said [by Relick-mungers] to have hid
himself by the space of three days, having vowed not to eat bread until
Christ was risen again. The Lord appeared to him apart after his Resurrection.
[But (not) for this cause] For none of the Apostles then believed that he would
rise the third day, nor would they believe it when others told them he was
risen.

217. The Cave of Peter the Apostle, Breid. 18. Jul.
wherein after he had denied the Lord thrice, he repented him, and mourned with
many tears. [ Relick-mungers can show a Cave, and say, Peter and the Apostles
were in it, to get money. But not a word of it in any of the four Evangelists,
or other Scriptures, no nor that he, nor James, nor Jeremy were in any Cave at
all.] [See Number 222.]

118. The Tents of the Assyrians, 2 King. 18.17.35. and 19.12.35 2 Chronicles. 32.
August. tom. 18. ad fratres in ere. sermon. 25.
of whom for a revenge of their blasphemy, the most strong to the number of one
hundred fourscore and five thousand, in the very first night of the besieging
Jerusalem, were slain by the Angel of Lord, and (as Augustine, (not the
Scripture) reports their bodies were brought into dust, that they might not
infect the air, their garments, armor, and weapons notwithstanding remaining
whole and sound, that the people of Jerusalem might have the spoil.

219. The house of Elias, Breid. 4. Iul. 1 Kin. 17.1.9 and 18.20. and 21.1.
wherein it is said (by Papist Breidenbach) that the Prophet Elias sometime
dwell; where afterward also a Church was builded. (But the holy Scriptures show
that he was a Prophet to them of Israel, and dwelt near Gilead, Zidon, Samaria,
or Carmel, far from Jerusalem, which was in Judea.)

220. The Mountain Eroge, Josua. 15.8. and 18 12.16. 2 Chro. 26.16. Amos 1.1.
Zach. 14.4, 5. Ios. 9. Aut. 11.
otherwise called the South Mountain, being very high and lofty, bowing a
little toward the West. Coucerning this Mountain, it is noted (by some) That
when Ozias King of Juda presumed to put on him the Priests attire, entered into
the Sanctuary of the Temple, and offered upon the golden Altar, the incense of
sweet savor unto God; by and by there came a great Earthquake (whereof also
Amos and Zacharias the Prophets make mention (whereby the upper part of the
Temple was shaken, Adam Reisnerus and Joan. Herdenus inde. scrip. urbis Hi.
rosol. l. 7 c. 2.
and this Mountain cleft in the midst, with so great and terrible violence,
that one part thereof falling and tumbling down was rolled and carried by the
space of four furlongs even right over against the East Mountain (which is
called the Mount of offense) were at the length it stayed. King Ozias himself,
in the mean time blasted and terrified with lightning, was stricken in the
forehead with a Leprosy. For the which cause he being presently cast out of
the Temple and City, languished all his life long, and was shut up in his
house, and separated even till the day of his death.

221. A Fountain. M^t. 2 9.10. Breid 14. Iul. Sal. Tom. 10 c. 2
At this Fountain ( Papist Bredenbach says) the Star which vanished away when
the three wise men, which came from the East, were entered Jerusalem, appeared
unto them again, and lead them unto Bethlehem. [ Neither Matthew, nor any
Scriptures show any word of any Well or Fountain to have been in that place.]

222. The Cave of the Prophet Jeremy, Lam. 1.2, 3, 4, 5 Nicep. 8. Hist Ec. 30.
[See before Number 217]
wherein he sitting with a grieved and sorrowful mind, wept, mourned, and
bewailed the destruction of Jerusalem with sobs and sighs; Where Helena the
Empress (as Nicephorus testifies) builded a notable Monument.

223. Isaias. Argum in Isaiam. Hier. tradit. Heb. ju. c. 2. Pa. 33 Broc. it in.
6. Breid. 14 Iul.
Here that notable Prophet Isai, when he Prophesied in Jerusalem about
threescore and ten years, by the Commandment of King Manasses, was sawne
through the body with a Saw, and was buried under an Oak, whose Sepulcher is
to be seen at this day. [ says Bredan etc.]

224. The Caves of the Apostles. There are many Caves, wherein eight of the
Apostles (as it is reported) [but not in Scriptures] hid themselves, during the
time of the Lords Passion. ( See Number 217.)

225. The Monument Absalom, is a Marble Pillar, with an Inscription on the
same, 2 Samuel 18.18. I^s 7. Au. 1.10.
distant from Jerusalem two furlongs; which Absalom being alive set up to
himself for a Monument in the Kings valley, where there is yet to be seen a
great heap of stones, which daily is increased more and more. For the Pagans
and strangers passing by that way, use this for a custom, that every man cast
a stone at the Pillar, and challenging as it were, according to the Law, his
rebellion against his Father David, they curse him with this malediction,
Cursed be the Parricide Absalom, Br^id. 14. Jul. Pasc. d. 191.
and accursed be all they for ever, which unjustly do persecute their Parents.

226. 2 King 18.17. and 20.20. 2 Chronicles. 32.30 Isa. 7.3. and 36.2. Hier. in loc.
Heb. lit. T.
The River of the upper Fountain, situate on the South part of Mount Sion
(which Hierom calls the Fullers Fountain) the which the noble King Hezekias
repaired with the conduit thereof also. This he choked with earth, at what
time the Assyrians besieged Jerusalem.

227. The Sepulcher (as some say) of Zacharias, the Son of Barachias, whom the
Jews slew between the Temple and the Altar.

The places of the West side of the City.
228. BAalparazim, is a field in the valley of Raphaim, wherein David the King,
at the first time, overthrew the Philistians, 2 Samuel 5.20. 1 Chronicles. 14.11
and buried their gods which he found in their Tents.

229. Herod's Tents, which as Josephus witnesses, Jos. 14 Ant. 24. and 1 Bell.
12.
he pitched on the West part of the City.

230. The Fountain Gihon the lower, which sprang up in the end of the Fullers
field, 2 Chr. 32.30. and 33.14. Broc. itin. 6.
the waters whereof Hezechias brought unto the upper Fountain.

231. The Fountain Gihon the higher, 2 King. 20.20. 2 Ch^o. 32.30. Eecles. 48.
Broc. itin. 6.
springing from the Mount Gihon, which afterward Hezekias stopped up, and
cutting deeper into the rock, he brought the waters thereof unto the West part
of the City of David, by Conduit pipes under the earth, by which he brought it
through the midst of the City, into the innermost Fountain, lest when the City
should be besiedged the people might want water.

232. Judas, who of an Apostle being become a Traitor hanged himsefe (upon a
wild fig tree, Mat. 27.5. Act. 1.18.
there are some say, an Elder tree) and being hanged, burst asunder in the
midst, and all his bowels gushed out.

233. The Mount of Calvary, Jer. 31.40. Mat, 27.33. Mar. 15.22. Luke 23.33.
Joh. 19.17.
a rocky Mountain of mean height, called in the Hebrew tongue Golgotha, which
was next to the North-west part of the City. In the which place offenders,
condemned in open judgment, were put to death: Where at all times, a man might
see the bones and bowels of men hanged, or otherwise put to death. Here, Christ
Jesus our Savior, which knew no sin, became (as he Apostle says) sin for us
(that is to say, was made sacrifice for our sins) and, as if he had been an
evil doer, 2 Cor 5.21.
was hanged between two Thieves, and for our salvation crucified. So that now
Mount Calvary, which aforetime was a place most infamous, by the passion and
blood of Christ, is now mode famous, and honorable.

234. Mount Gihon, Broc. itin. 6. Sal. Tom. 6. cap. 5.
a Mountain full of stones, high and long, which running along by the West
part of the City, growing less and less toward the gate of judgment, is
severed from the City by a deep Valley. In this Mountain, at the commandment
of David, 1 King. 1.33.38
Solomon was Anointed King, by Sadoc the chief Priest, and by Nathan the
Prophet, with the holy Oil. To whom immediately all the people cried, God save
King Solomon.

235. The Monument of Anani the chief Priest, of which Josephus makes mention,
Ios. 6. Bell. 13.
in his sixth Book, and thirteenth Chapter of the Jews War.

236. The Pear Trees (or Mulbery-Trees) of the Valley Raphaim, 2 Samuel 5.18.24 1 Chronicles. 14.
the which Josephus calls the wood of weeping; near unto the which David,
assisted by God from Heaven, gave a second overthrow to the Philistines,
pursuing them a great way.

237. The Sepulcher of Christ, was a new Monument, Mat. 27.60. Mat. 15.46. Luke
23.53. Joh. 19.41. Niceph. 8. Hist. Eceles. 30. Beda in Mar. 6.16 Broc. itin.
6. Breid. 12. Iul.
eight foot long, distant from Mount Calvary one hundred and eight foot, and
from Moun- Sion about a mile, which Joseph of Arimathea, a noble Senator, had
hewne out in the Rock for himself, in the Garden near unto Mount Calvary. In
the which Sepulcher he, together with Nicodemus, and the Virgin Mary, with
other godly women, buried the body of Jesus, being with the consent of Pilate
taken from the Cross, and then trimmed with Mirrh and Aloes, and wrapped in a
fine linen cloth, Sal. Tom. 7. c. 3. and 6.
was put honorably into the same [the head laid toward the West, faith
Bredan.] and rolling a stone of exceeding weight to the mouth of the Monument,
he went his way. Mat. 27.64. Mar. 16* 46.
But in the mean time, the Chief Priests, and Pharisiees, going about to
hinder the Resurrection of Christ, Pasc. d. ^25.
taking unto them a strong guard of Soldiers watched the Sepulcher, and sealed
the stone which shut up the mouth of the Sepulcher, lest the keepers and
watchmen being corrupted with money should deal deceitfully. But this diligence
of the Jews, by which they went about to hold Christ in the grave from rising
again, increased the Miracle, and confirmed the faith of the Resurrection. And
there he first of all appeared to Mary Magdalen, at the Monument, as she was
weeping, Mar. 16. Joh. 20.14.16.
in the likeness of a Gardener; [or, as John says rather; she turned her
self back, and saw him; and he asking, Whom seek thou? She supposing him
to be the Gardener, said, Sir, If thou have borne him hence, tell me.]

238 A Wood, near unto the City, [ Jos. Bell. Jud. li 6.6. c. 14.]
as is to be gathered by Josephus in his Book and fourteenth fixed Chapter of
the Jews War.

239. The Brook, or River Gihon, at the South-west corner of the City; 2 Cron.
32.30. Neh. 2. Broc. intin. 6.
which King Achas had begun to bring from the lower Fountain Gihon into the
upper Fountain, the which King Hezekias at the last finished.

240. The Valley of dead Carcasses, Jer. 31.40. Lyra ibid.
which lay between Mount Calvary, and the walls of Jerusalem, so called,
because the dead Carcasses, bones, and ashes, of such as were put to death, or
burnt on mount Calvary were cast thereinto. [Divers vain Traditions of men
herein opposing the plain Divine Scriptures, were not judged worthy the
Translation.]

241. The Valley of the Fountain Gihon, 2 Chro. 33.14. Jo. 6. Bell. 13. and 15.
Ant. 18.
whereof mention is made in the book of the Chronicles, and in Josephus.

242. The Valley Raphaim, 2 Samuel 5.18.22 and 23.13. 1 Chro. 11.15. and 14.9.
Isa. 17.5.
that is to say, of Giants. It is a Valley on the West side of the City, very
large and great, which begins at the North part, and extends unto the
South, bringing forth most plentifully in time past excellent Wheat, Wine,
Oil, and all other fruits. In this Valley David by the help of God, twice
overcame the Philistines which sought to invade him with a great Army.

243. The Ways to Bethlehem, Act 8. Broc. itin. 6.
Emaus, to Gaza, and to Joppa, which Solomon made with flint and stone; even as
he did other ways, which lead to Jerusalem, both to make the passage more
easy, and also to show forth the magnificence of his Kingdom in this point.

244. The way to Siloe, and to Gabaon, whereof Brocardus in his sixth book of
his Travel, makes mention.

245. Here Christ fell again, Pas d. 10.
according to the Tradition of the Fathers of old.

246. Here Jesus turning himself about to the women that mourned and wept,
Luke 23. Bried. 14. Iul. Salig. To. 8. c. 7.
said, Ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves,
and for your children, because the day shall come, etc.

247. Here Christ fell down the third time under his Cross, Breid. 13. Jul.
as the Fathers of old time have affirmed. Pas. d. 181. and 2.2.


248. Here Christ was stripped out of his garments, whose body being all to be
torn with whips, could not but be very sore, Psalm. 22.18. and 69.21. Isa.
13.4, 5. Mar. 27.26.28, 35. Mar. 15.23. Breid. 12 Jul. Pas. d. 213.
whereunto his bloody garments cleaving, gave new occasion of pain, when they
were violently pulled off. And standing there naked all the while that the
Cross was a preparing in the cold and wind, he sat down at the length upon a
stone, where he drank wine mixed with gall and mirrh.

249. Here Christ being laid on his back on the Cross and stretched out upon
the same, Psalm. 22.1.17. Zach. 12 10. Joh. 20.37. Salig. Tom. 7. cap. 4. Pas.
d. 21.4.
his hands and feet was nailed thereunto with Iron nails, and his tender
members were with such force strayned and racked upon the Cross, that the very
arteries and sinews were loosened, and all his bones might be told.

250. This is, the most notable and memorable place of the whole world, Mat.
27.35. Mar. 15.25. Luke 23.33. Joh. 19.18. Lev. 23 5.6. Number. 28.16 17 Exodus
12.18.
even the clift of the Rock of Mount Calvary, wherein the Cross bearing the
body of Christ was fastened about high noon of the feast day of Passover, being
the day after the Passover. Upon the top of which Cross, a white table was
fastened expressing the cause of his death, written with Pilates own hand (or
by his appointment) in these words of Hebrew, Greek and Latin;

JESUS OF NAZARETH, KING OF THE JEWS. Further it is [written by some] that the
Jews did in such manner erect and set Christ upon his Cross, that his back
parts might be toward Jerusalem, and his face toward the West. For they
deemed him unworthy to have his face toward the holy City. But we must think
that this was not done altogether by fortune, or without a mystery, but rather
by the singular dispensation of God. Jer. 18.17. Beda in Luke cap. 23. Breid.
12. Iul.
His miseries seem to be no false Prophets of our felicity, by this means and
by this deed fore-warning them of that which the Prophet Jeremy had Prophesied
should come to pass, saying. I will scatter them with an East wind before the
Enemy, I will show them the back, and not the face, Salig. Tom. 7. car. 5.
in the day of their destruction. For as St. Jerome says, seeing they are
dispersed throughout the whole world, and do call upon God ^ight and day in the
synagogues of Satan, God shows unto them his back, and not his face, that
they may know that he is always going from them, Hier^n. in Jer. cap. 18.
Psalm. 5.9. Isa. 10.27.
and not coming toward them: And that even in the day of their destruction
(that is to say, during all the time after the passion of our Savior unto the
very end of the world) that when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, the
remnant of the people of Israel may be converted at the last, To. 9. and 11.25
and be saved. And I verily conjecture, that by this their cruelty, they were
foretellers of our felicity. For in that they did set the most sweet and
amiable face of our Savior toward the West, it seems unto me to note no
other thing, but the very same which the Kingly Prophet long before him had
told should come to pass, Psalm. 66.7.
saying, His eyes behold the (Nations or) Gentiles: For he having the eyes of
his mercy opened and fixed upon us, from the time of his passion, will not
cease to look upon us with a favorable countenance even unto the end of the
world.

Therefore, Christ being on this manner hanged on the Cross, three hours
(from the sixth to the ninth hour, that is from noon three hours) naked,
bloody, wounded, crowned with thorns, did hang between two thieves in most
grievous torments, partaker with them of the pain and punishment, as if he had
been a companion with them in their wickedness. The which thing the Prophet
Isaias fore-shewed should come to pass, Isa. 53.
saying, He was reputed among the wicked. Whom in the mean time, the Jews, the
high Priests, together with the Scribes and Elders of the people passing by,
yea the common soldiers also, and the thief that was crucified with him,
instead of consolation (which belongs to all that are afflicted) in most
reproachful manner scorned him, shaking their heads, and saying, Thou which
destroyest the Temple of God, Mat. 27.39. to 46.
and buildest the same again in three days, save thy self; if thou be the
Son of God, come down from the Cross; He saved others, himself he cannot
save. If he be Christ the King of Israel, let him come down now from the
Cross, and we will believe him. He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if
he will have him; for he said, I am the Son of God.

Jesus most patiently suffering all these things, more bitter then the Cross,
was so far from revenging them, that he prayed for them that mocked him, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. And to the other of the Thieves
requiring mercy, he promised Paradise, saying, Verily I say unto thee, This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise. Joh. 19.26, 27.
And then beholding his wellbeloved mother, and the Disciple also whom he
loved, and commending a Virgin to a Virgin, said unto his mother. Behold thy
Son. Behold thy Mother, who from that hour forward took her for his own. While
these things thus proceeded, the Sun abashed at those passions, which the
Creator of all the world suffered on the Cross, as it were mourning hid his
face; Joh. 11.9.
and was darkened from the sixth hour (that is the mid day) at what time it
shines in greatest glory) until the ninth hour: (That is, until the midst
of the afternoon.)

Then Jesus complaining that he is forsaken of his Father, Psalm. 22.1.
cried out with a strong voice, saying, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken
me? This done, I thirst; Streightway one running, as though he would do him
some good, Psalm. 69.
when he had taken a Sponge, and filled it with Vinegar, he put it upon a reed,
and gave him to drink. Jesus wonderfully thirsted for the salvation of men,
but the Jews offered him nothing but gal and vinegar. And so soon as Jesus had
tasted the vinegar, Heb. 5.8.
It is finished, giving thereby to understand, that the Sacrifice was truly
ended according to the will of his Father. And once again crying out with a
loud voice, and with shedding of tears, Psalm. 31.
he says, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit; and so bowing down his
head (a man of flourishing age) he yielded up his spirit and) breath, (fifteenth
day of the first mouth) being the five and twentieth day of March, and in the
three and thirtieth year of his age, in the year from his Incarnation the
thirty and four; (or rather two and thirty, and a half.)

By this Sacrifice, the most high and everlasting Priest, Heb. 4.14.
inflamed with most singular and unspeakable love, offered himself a
Sacrifice, and a Peace Offering to God his Father, Heb. 2.14, 15. Col. 2.15.
Ephesians. 2.15.
and by his death destroyed death, overcame Satan, brake asunder Hell gates,
restored life, and opened unto all believers the everlasting Kingdom of
Heaven. For this cause (some say) the Fathers of old time ingraved in silver
these words of the Psalm in Greek, and set it in the circumference of the hole
which was made on the top of Mount Calvary, wherein the Cross of Christ was
fastened, but now they are engraven in Copper thus: Pas. d. 223. and 224.


(...) that is to say, Here God our King before worlds wrought salvation in the
midst of the earth.

The which one, and only bloody Sacrifice most truly and lawfully made, Heb
10.1.2.12. and cap. 9.26
he would not by and by so soon as he was dead be taken from the Cross, but
even as when he was alive, so when he was dead, by the space of three hours,
he hung as a spectacle to all men. And as he spared no one member from torment,
so his will was to shed all his blood, even to the very last drop of his most
precious heart, Zach. 13.1. Isa. 12.1, 2, 3. Zach 12.10.12
and to open the Fountain for the washing away of our sins, the which we may
use to our endlefle comfort: Therefore one of the Soldiers perceiving, and
opening his side and heart, presently there issued forth blood and water as
from a most lively spring, to the sanctifying and salvation of his Church. In
the mean season all things gave testimony to their Lord, Mat. 27.52.53.
and makers death. The veil of the Temple rent asunder in two parts, the earth
was shaken and quaked, the graves opened, the dead bodies of men arose again,
and the stony Rocks (to the shame and reproach of the Jews for the hardness of
their hearts) clave a sunder, and burst in pieces.

251. Here the blessed Virgin Mary, Ioh. 19. Luke 2.31. Breid. 12. Jul. salig.
To. 7.0.5. Pas. d. 225.
accompained with John, with Mary Magdalen, and with other women, stood with a
firm mind, and constant faith, where according to the Prophecy of Simeon,
The sword of sorrow pierced her soul.

252. Here the Soldiers which crucified Christ, parted his garments among
them, Joh. 19. Psalm. 22. Breid. 12. Iul. Sal. 7. cap. 3.
and cast lots for his seamlesse coat who should have it, that the saying of
the Prophet might be fulfilled, They parted my garments among them, and for my
vesture they did cast lots.

253. Here the dead Corpse of Christ, being taken down from the Cross, Breid.
12. Based. 225.
was delivered to the blessed Virgin Mary to be buried, [ says Bredan. Matthew
says, to Joseph of Arimathea, and not to her.]

254. Here Christ meets with the women, Matthew. 28.9.
which returned from his Sepulcher toward Jerusalem, and saluteth them, who
embracing and kissing his feet worshipped him.

255. Here Christ in the form of a stranger, Luke 24 13. Mar. 16.12.
went with the two Disciples toward Emaus, and in the way as they went
together, he interpreted Moses, and the Scriptures of all the Prophets, which
he proved to be fulfilled in him.

The places on the North side of the City.
256. THe Tents of the Chaldeans. 2 King. 25.4. Jer. 39.2. and 52.4.7.
On this North part of the City, Nebuchadonozer King of Babylon, and the
Chaldeans, scaled the walls of Jerusalem, and wan it.

257. The Tents of the Romans which were pitched between the Woman's Towers,
Jos. Bell. 2.3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 7. Bell. 1.2.4.9, 10 15, 16.
and the Tower Psephina. On this part, although enclosed, and fortified with a
triple wall, Titus and the Romans assailed Jerusalem. For on this part only,
the City was assailable. And albeit the other parts were compassed round about
with one single wall only; yet the same being very strong, and set upon stony
and cragged rocks, and having also deep Valleys or Trenches impassable, were
inexpugnable: Therefore they began to scale the first wall, which was the
outermost and third wall of the City. After that they took in hand the second
wall: And then the third wall of the City, which was also called the old wall.
Next they took the Castle Antonia: And so the Temple, which was fortified like
a Castle; and last of all they entered Mount Sion, of all the rest the most
strong. At what time also the Christians ( Anno 1099) took this City in hand to
win it, they began their enterprise on this part, Will. Tyr. Bell. Iac. lib. 8.
cap. 5, 18.
among whom Godfrey of Bullion was the first that entered the wall, near unto
the Gate of Ephraim, whose Soldiers following the assault like men, opened
immediately the said Gate, and so wan the City. The which also the Saracens
besieging on the same part, wan from the Christians.

258. The Hill Gar^^, Jer. 31.39.
the which was near to Jerusalem on the North.

259. Erebinth, Jos. 6. Bell. 13.
was a little village on the North.

260. Gardens and Farms, Jos. 6. Bell. 2.4.7.
enclosed with walls and hedges; where Titus taking a view of the City was in
danger.

261. The Sepulehre of Helene Queen of the Adiabens (who victualled Jerusalem
in the time of the Famine with wheat) which she most sumptuously builded with
three pinnacles, Jos. 20. Ant. 2, 3 and 6. Bell. 2.5, 6. Eusebius. 2. Hist. 12.
Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 23. ad Eustoch.
about three furlongs distant from the City; Wherein she was buried with her
Son Isates, which also was standing in the time of Eusebius and Hierom.

262. The North Mountain, Ios. 6. Bell. 13.
where Pompey pitched his Tents.

263. The Monument of Herod Agrippa, Act. 12.1.21.23 Ios. 19. Ant. 8. and 6
Bell. 3.4.
who for his intolerable pride being stricken by the Angel of the Lord, and
consumed of worms, dyed.

264. Sapha, Ios. 11. Ant. 8. and 2 Bell. 24. and 6. Bell. 3.4.
in Greek called Scopos, that is to say, A place of espial, situate toward the
North, distant from the City about 7 furlongs. It was so named, because from
thence, both the City and Temple might be seen. Or Jaddua.
Here Jaddus the chief Priest, and the rest of the Priests, in their Priestly
attire, and all the people clad in white garments, went forth to meet Alexander
the Great, King of the Macedonians, when he came with his Army to destroy
Jerusalem; Whom when Alexander saw, by and by suppressing his fury, in humble
sort worshipped the name of God, which shined in golden Letters in the
Reasonable (or Breast plate of judgment) of the high Priest, and gave
reverence to the high Priest. Then entering into the City and Temple, he offered
sacrifice to God, and granted great privileges unto the Jews.

265. The Fruitful Wood, Ios. 6. Bell. 4 and 7
which Titus caused to be cut down.

266. The Lake of Serpents, Ios. 6. Bell. 4.
which in old time was called Bethara.

267. The Way, by which men went into Samaria and Galilee. Broc. it in. 6.


268. The Village noer to Jerusalem, Neh. 3.
whereof Nehemiah makes mention.

THese (Christian Reader) are the most notable and famous places of the City
and Temple of Jerusalem. By the placing whereof, the situation of the rest may
easily be known. Therefore if we have made a true Description, let the praise
be given to God, the giver of all good gifts. But if otherwise there be any
defect, impute that to my want of skill, and not to my ill will; who for that I
was not able to give toward the furnishing of the Temple gold, silver or
precious stones, have notwithstanding offered a little oil to lighten the
Church; trusting that the same will be acceptable, both to Christ, who allowed
the two mites which the poor Widow offered; and also to those that be good
Christians, whom it becomes well to be like unto their Head, JESUS CHRIST.

[ Try all things. Hold fast that which is good, I These. 5.21. Embrace what is
sound, though somewhat is rotten. Embrace not the rotten, because much here is
sound. Jer 23.28, 29. The Prophet, to whom is a dream, let him tell it as a
dream; and he that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the
chafe to the wheat, says Jehovah? Is not my word like a fire, says Jehovah?
and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?]

The names of the Authors out of whose Works and Travels this Description of
Jerusalem is taken and made.
[The most of them were Romanists Superstitious: Yet as the Be can gather
Honey from some noisome flowers; So God and his people, can make good use of
such Authors.]
Sect. 1. THe holy Bible, of the Old and New Testament. 2. Flav. Josephus, a
Priest of the Jews, who flourishing in the seventieth year of Christ exactly
described the situation, the form, and the besieging of the City of Jerusalem.

3. Exemplars of the famous Doctor of the Church Hierom, as well Printed as
written; Who lived in the Year of Christ, 380.

Sect. 4. James of Vitriac, who traveled into the Zach. 2.12. Mat 4 5. 2 Pet.
1.18. Dan. 9.16.20.
Holy Land, and returning, was made Bishop of Acon, who wrote a book concerning
the Holy Land, and the wonders which he saw there. He flourished in the year of
our Lord, 1231.

Sect. 5. James Pantaleon, a Frenchman, Patriarch of Jerusalem, his book
concerning the Holy Land. Who was famous in the year of Christ, 1247.

Sect. 6. The exact Description of Jerusalem, and of the places of the Holy
Land, made by Brocardus a Monk, published at Basil by Hervage, and at Antwerp
by Stelsius; Who in the year of Christ 1283. after great search, and diligent
survey of that City and Land, and the view of the ancient ruins thereof,
described the same most carefully.

Sect. 7. The Description of Jerusalem, and of the holy places, by John
Mandeville Englishman, who finished his peregrination in the year of our Lord,
1322. and diligently described the same: Printed at Antwerp by Nicol. Wouver in
Anno, 1564.

Sect. 8. A Table of the City Jerusalem, a very ancient description of all the
Holy Land, portraied one hundred and fifty years since, and more in parchment,
which John Huls procured from the Library of the College of S. Hierom at Delph
in Holland.

Sect. 9. The Original of the City of Jerusalem, and of the Temple in the same,
described by Rodulph Langius, Anno 1476. and Printed at Colen, Anno 1517.

Sect. 10. The Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and to Mount Sinai, of Bernard
Breidenbach, Dean of the Church of Mentz, which he accompanied with others more,
finished Anno 1483. and most diligently described the same: Adding thereunto a
Portraiture of the most principal places of the Holy Land, and of his travel,
which he caused a cunning Painter to make upon the view of every place, whom he
had in his company for that purpose; Printed at Mentz, An. 1486.

Sect. 11. A Description of the voyage to Jerusalem, published in the year
1520. by M. Gerard Kuynretorff and others.

Sect. 12. A Delineation of the City of Jerusalem, which Mr. John Scorrel, with
the help of a skilful Painter drew forth by the view of the eye, sitting on
Mount Olivet, 1521.

Sect. 13. The Description of Jerusalem, and of the holy places, by Joan.
Heuterus, Praetor of Delph, which he set forth in An. 1521.

Sect. 14 The like Description mas wade by Bartholmew of Saligniac Knight, and
Professor of both Laws, 1525.

Sect. 15. A Peregrination, with an exact Description of Jerusalem, and of the
holy places made by John Pasch Doctor of Divinity; Printed at Lovane in the
year, 1563.

Sect. 16. The Histories of the Holy War, whereof there were three and twenty
books; showing how in the year 1099. Jerusalem, and the whole Land of promise,
was recovered again by the Christians, and so possessed of them fourscore and
four years by William Archbishop of Tyren, Chancellor of Jerusalem, Printed at
Basil in the year 1564.

17. Six Books of History concerning the Holy War, set forth by John Herold;
Printed at Basil in the year, 1560.

18. A Delineation, or Map of the City Jerusalem, and of the holy places of all
the Land of Palestine, by Herman Broculoo; Printed at Utrict in the year 1538.

19. Bonaventure of Mirica his Description of Jerusalem, and of the holy places
thereof, who made three voyages thither, and dwelt there a long time, in the
years 1538. and 39.

20 The universal Cosmography of Sebastian Munster.

21. The Description of the City of Jerusalem, and of Palestine by Wolfgang
Weyssenburch: Printed in the year 1542.

22. A diligent Description of the places of the old and new Testament gathered
out of many Authors; as out of Ptolomy, Pliny, Pomponius Mela, Strabo,
Herodotus, Hieron. Josephus, Egesippus, Stephanus, Raphael Volateran, Lyra,
Bocas. And out of the more later, as James Ziegler, Wolfang, Wessyenburg, and
Andrew Althamer, men that herein have taken great pains; and Printed at Paris.

23. A Delineation and Description of the City Jerusalem, and of the Land of
Promise, most exquisitly done by Bonaventure Broccard, in the year 1544.

24. A Description of Jerusalem, and of the places thereof, by Mr. Gerard, Joan
of Leiden, in the year 1556.

25. A Map of the City of Jerusalem, and of the whole land of Promise, made by
Tilmannus Stella, in the year 1557. and Printed at Antwerp.

26. A Topographical Description of the City of Jerusalem, by Fabian Licinius a
Venetian; Printed at Venice in the year 1560.

27. A map of Jerusalem set forth by Adam Reiszner, exhibited to the Emperor
Ferdinando in the year, 1559.

28 The way of Calvary, written in Latin, by Laurence Surius.

29. The way of the Cross, from Pilates house to Mount Calvary; published by
Peter Calentine; and Printed at Lovane in in the year, 1561.

30. The Itinerary of John Godscalci of Delph, which he finished in the year,
1561.

31. A description of Jerusalem, and of the places thereabout by Isbrand
Godfrey, which he finished in the year, 1563.

32. The voyage of the noble Knight Baptist van der Muelen of Mechlin, who by
word of mouth described unto me oftentimes Jerusalem, and all the places
thereof, which he surveyed in the year, 1567.

33. The Description of the Old and new Jerusalem made by Peter Lackstein, and
painted in a Map by Christian Sgrothen in the year, 1570.

34. A Topographical delineation of the City of Jerusalem made by Antony de
Angelis, a Minorite, who dwelt a long time at Jerusalem, set forth in the year
1578.

35. A very large Map of the City of Jerusalem, and of all the Holy Land, drawn
in Parchment with the hand of Biron a Frenchman, with lively colors, and
beautified with gold, and described in the French-tongue: which Map Michael
Eyzinger of Austria, a most diligent Historiographer, delivered unto me.

THese are for the most part the chief Authors among them, which of set
purpose have handled this Argument, and of whom I make special mention. I have
used many, of whom I have nothing spoken: And to make mention of all such
Writers, which having another purpose, and yet given me matter to write of,
were to make a tedious Catalogue.

A Table Alphabetical, whereby the Reader may find the principal matters
contained in this Book.
[The Figures annexed, show not the Page, but the Number.]
A.
A Arons rod Number 76 Abacuc to Daniel Number 213 Abrams offering Isaac Number
52 Aceldema Number 214 Absoloms Pillar Number 225 Anani his Monument Number 235
Ahaz D^all Number 103 Acra Number 27 Annas his house Number 8 Adultresse freed,
Joh. 8. Number 109 Amphitheater Number 28 King Amon, and Manas. Sepul. Number
15. Antonia Castle Number 29 Ark of the Covenant Number 76 Altar of Incense
Number 80 Altar of burnt offering Number 87 Angel slayes Assyrians Number 208
Appears to Zachary Number 80 S. Annes house Number 37
B.
Baalpharazim Number 228 Ba^^^^ reading Number 93 Betbania Number 178 Benhinnon
Number 185 Bethph^ge Number 179 Bethsheba Number 1 Broad-street Number 150
Bethesda Number 61 Bridge of Cedron Number 196 Bridge of Sion Number 19 Bridge
from the Castle Antonia Number 63 Brook of Cedron Number 201 Brook Gihon Number
239 Booz and Jakin, Pillars Number 88 Bigness of Christ his Cross Number 120
C.
Caesar and Agrippas hall Number 5 Caiphas Palace Number 17 Calvary mount
Number 233 Castle Antonia Number 29 Castle of Antiochus Number 31 Castle P^san
Number 59 Castle of the Assyrians Number 148 Caves, called the Kings Caves
Number 151 Castle opposite Number 180 Cave of James Number 136 Cave of the
Apostles Number 224 Cave of Peter Number 117 Cave of Jeremy Number 212
Capheteta Number 152 Cherubims Number 77 Candlestick of Gold Number 81 Christ's
his Cross before Number. I. and 120 Christ rides to Jerusalem Number 211 Christ
falls down under his Cross Number 245, 247, 1.21 Christ speaks to the
mourners Number 246 Christ stripped out of his clothes, Number 248 Christ racked
and nailed on the Cross Number 249 Christ delivered to the Virgin Mary Number
253 Christ's garment parted by lot Number 252 Christ speaks to the women after
his resurrection Number 254 Christ talks with his two Disciples going to
Emaus Number 255 City Lower Number 26 The Court Number 35 Court of Records
Number 30 Corner parlor Number 33 Corner stone Number 153 Court of Herod's
Palace Number 138 Conduit, or Fountain Number 128 Closers Number 91 Common
place of burial Number 198 Cypress Trees of Zion Number 7 Cross. See before.
Number 1
D
Daniel fed Number 213 David's City and Tower Number 2 Dial of Achas Number 103
Dove-house Number 195 Dragon Fountain Number 184
E.
Eliasib's house Number 17 Essens Gate Number 66 Eagle of gold Number 101
Erebynth a village Number 359 Ephraims Gate Number 156
F.
Face of Christ Number 44 Fountain of Sion Number 18 Fountain the innermost
Number 60 Fountain old Number 62 Fountain in the Temple Number 82 Fountain
Number 128 Fountain Dragon Number 18.4 121 Fountain of Silo Number 199
Fountain Gibon the lower Number 230 Fountain Gihon the higher Number 231
Fruitful wood Number 265 Fullers field Number 115 Fig tree withered Number 183
G.
Gamaliel and Nicod Sepulcher Number 23 Gabaon hill Number 24 Gabriels
appearing Number 80 Garden belonging to the King Number 15 and 188 Gareb-hill
Number 258 Gardens enclosed Number 260 Garden on mount Olivet Number 187
Garments of Christ parted by lot, Number 252 Gates of Sion Number 20 Gate
called the Upper-gate Number 21 Gate of Warders Number 64 Gate called the
Horse-gate Number 65. Gate belonging to the Essenes Number 66 Gate the first
Number 67 Gate called the Newgate Number 93 Gate called the middle-Gate Number
137 Gate called Holy-Gate Number 94 North Gate Number 104 Gate South Number 105
Gate in the West Number 106 Gate of the corner Number 154 Golden Gate Number
155 Gate of Ephraim Number 156 Gate called the Watergate Number 157 Gate
Genath Number 158 Gate of the Kings Garden Number 159 Gate of the high Priests
Palace Number 160 Gate called the Fish-Gate Number 161 Gate called the
Dung-Gate Number 162 Gate of women's Towers Number 163 Gate called the
Valley-Gate Number 164 Gate called the Old-Gate Number 165 Grove of Moloch
Number 189 Gehennom Number 86 184 Golgotha Number 213 Godfrey of Bulloigns
victory Number 1
H.
Hellen Adiaben Number 72 House of Annas Number 8 House of the Worthies Number
9 House of the Virgin Mary Number 10 House of Uria Number 11 House of Ananias
Number 30 House of S. Anne Number 37 House of the Rich Glutton Number 38 House
of Mesa Number 39 Houses of the Nathineans Number 40 House of the Prince of
Phariseis Number 41 House of the Forest of Lybanus Number 42 House of Simon
the Pharisee Number 43 House of the common people Number 44 Houses of the
Priests Number 49 Houses of the Target-bearers Number 50 House of Council
Number 90 House of Mary the mother of John Number 126 House of Olda the
Prophetess Number 127 House of Elias Number 19 Helens Cross. See before
Number 1 Hill Garee Number 258 Hole where the Cross stood Number 250 Hill
which is little Number 182 Herod's Park Number 143 Hinnom Valley Number 184
Hospital Number 144 Holy place Number 79 Holy of holiest Number 75
I.
Jerusalem Number 1 Jaddua's meeting Alexander Number 164 Iebusites in
Jerusalem Number 2.7.9 I Will of the Jews Number 86 Isle of the Gentiles Number
100 Joseph Arim. Number 237 Jeremy Number 130.222 Isaias martyred Number 223
Judas hanged on a Tree Number 232 Julian Number 24 K. Ioash Number 16.162
K.
Kidron Brook Number 201 Valley Number 202
L.
Lists or Tiltyard Number 51 Laver of brass Number 89 Lofts of the singers
Number 97 Lake, or Ditch between two walls Number 131 Lake Amigdalon Number 125
Lake of Serpents Number 266
M.
Maccabees Towers Number 29 192. Market place Number 12* 45, 46, 47, 69, 129
Mary and John behold Christ as he passes by with his Cross Number 122 Their
house Number 126 A deep vale or dale Number 178 Mello Number 16 Moloch his
Grove Number 189 Mount Sion Number 3 Mount Moria Number 52 Mountain Bezetha
Number 147 Mount of offense Number 190, 192 Mount Olivet Number 191 Mountain
Eroge Number 220 Mount of Calvary Number 233 Mount Gihon Number 234 Mountain in
the North part Number 262 Monument of Alexander Number 133 Monument of John
Number 134 Monument of the Fuller. Number 193 Monument of Absalom Number 225
Monument of Anani Number 235 Monument of Herod Number 263
N.
Nethinims house Number 40 North mountain Number 262 North gate Number 104 New
City Number 146
O.
Olda or Hulda's house Number 120 Oak Rogel Number 224 Ophel Number 54 Olivet
mount Number 191
P
Parlour of Sion Number 6 Parlour in the corner Number 33 Palace of Caiphas
Number 17 Of Agrippa Number 55 Of David Number 3 Palace of the Maccabees
Number 55 Palace of Pilate Number 56 Palace of the Queen Number 57 Palace of
Solomon Number 58 Palace of Queen Bernice Number 70 Palace of Grapte Number
71 Palace of Helen Number 72 Palace of Herod Number 136 Palace of Monobaz
Number 73 Passage of the Temple from Solomon Palace Number 113 Palm trees
Number 194 Palm trees Number 236 Place of Z^charias death being slain Number 98
Place where the Jews would have stoned Christ Number 99 Place where the woman
taken in adultery, was absolved Number 109 Places of Christ's fall Number 121
Place where the three Apostles sat wh^le Christ prayed Number 208 Place where
the eight Apostles tarried Number 209 Place where Judas betrayed Christ with a
kiss Number 210 Place where Christ preached of the destruction of Jerusalem
Number 211 Place where Mary, with others stood at Christ his death Number 251
Porch of Pillars Number 68 Porch of the Temple Number 95 Potters field Number
214 Prison, called the Kings prison Number 4 Prison common, belonging to the
City Number 32 Pool, called Probatica Number 61 Priest, called the high Priest
Number 84 Propitiatory, or mercy-seat Number 78
R.
Rephaim Number 242 Rechabires habitation Number 130 Rock of the West wall
Number 166 River of the upper Fountain Number 226
S.
Solomon's buildings Number 16.42.53.56 58 etc. Sedduces Number 48 Seir Gate
Number 106 Sion Number 32.6.27 Sepulcher of David Number 22 Sepulcher of
Stephen, Gama. Nico. Number 23 Sepulcher of Christ Number 237 Sepulcher of
Helen Number 261 Sepulcher of the Virgin Mary Number 197 Of Zacharias Number
227 Stairs of the Castle Number 13 Stairs of Sion Number 14 School of Gentility
Number 48 Sea of brass Number 92 Seat appeartaining to the King Number 96
Singers seats aloft Number 97 Solomon's Throne Number 112 Simon of Cyren bears
the Cross Number 123 Second City Number 124 Sodom Number 48 Stephen stoned
Number 200
T.
Tabernacle of Sion Number 24 Of Moloch Number 185 Temple of the Lord Number 72
Table of gold Number 83 Temple Number 74 Tents of the Assyrians Number 218
Tents of Herod Number 229 Tents of the Chaldeans Number 256 Tents of the Romans
Number 257 Theater Number 111 Throne of Solomon Number 122 Tribunal Number 114
Towers of the Trumpetters Number 108 Tower Strato Number 115 Tower in the
middle Number 132 Tower Hippie Number 140 Tower Mariamne Number 141 Tower
Phaselus Number 142 Tower Ananiel Number 167 Tower in the corner Number 168
Tower of David Number 169 Tower called the high Tower Number 170 Tower called
the Lanthorn Number 171 Tower called the great Tower Number 172 Tower Meah
Number 173 Tower Psephina Number 174 Tower of Siloe Number 175 Treasury of the
Temple Number 102.
V.
Valley called the deep Valley Number 176 Valley Iehosaphat 202 Valley of Siloe
203 Valley of dead carcases 240 Valley of the River Gihon 241 Valley of Cedron
116 Valley of Raphaim 242 Vaulted Cave 34 Vail of the Temple rent 85 Village
near to Jerusalem 208 Uria his house 11 Veronica, before 44
W.
Winepresse belonging to the King 25 Walls first 53, Second 135, Third 149 Way
of the Cross 117 Way of entrance for the horses 118 Water issuing forth of the
Temple 177 Way of the Fullers field 104 Way of the Captivity 205 Way to
Anathoth 206 Way to Jericho 207 Way to Siloe 244 And to Bethlem 243 Way to
Samaria and Galilee 267 Well 181 Whipping of the buyers and sellers 110 A Wood
138
Z
Zacharias place where he was slain between the Temple, and the Altar. 98
FINIS.
JERUSALEM with her suburbs, and the most principal places thereof, as it
flourished in CHRIST his time, most trewly described
To the courtrouse behoulder. Those things which the Grauer by his Art could
not possibly explain in this Figure thou shall find at large in the book
conformed to the nombers herein ^^^ressed: Farewell. Thy Friend. T. Tymine.
LONDON. Anno. 1697




