THE Glory of Women: OR, A Treatise declaring the excellency and pre-eminence
of WOMEN above MEN, which is proved both by Scripture, Law, Reason, and
Authority, Divine, and Humane.

WRITTEN First in Latin by Henricus Cornelius Agrippa Knight, and Doctor both
of Law and Physic. AND Presented to Margaret Augusta, Queen of the Austrians
and Burgundians. AND Now translated into English, for the Virtuous and
Beautiful Female Sex of the Commonwealth of England.

By EDW. FLEETVVOOD, Gent.

LONDON Printed for Robert Ibbitson, 1652.

To the most Clement Margaret Augusta, Queen of the Austrians, and Burgundians;
Henry Agrippa wishes all health and happiness.
Most Wise Princess,
I Have entered upon a matter hitherto unheard of, but not disagreeing with
truth; boldly I have done it according to my ability, but not without some
blushing: It is to describe the Nobility and Excellency of the Female Sex; I
do confess boldness with shamefac'dnesse has often strived within me; For
as I did think it a thing full of ambition and boldness, to comprize the
innumerable Praises, Virtues, and highest Excellencies of women; So it did seem
as a childish modesty of wit to prefer women before men: Hence I alleged an
Argument, wherefore none hitherto (as I certainly know) have dared to exalt the
eminency of women above men, when very few dared to write so much as concerning
their praises. Therefore I did think it a thing full of ingratitude to be
silent, even as to envy, and rob so deserving a Sex of its most just, and due
praises; so that while I did stick perplexed within my self amongst these
various and dissonant opinions, I was made more bold in writing, with this
wonderful fear of ingratitude, when as indeed I should have been more bold,
had I suppressed such a truth by my silence. I cannot then but interpret it for
a good omen, as if the province of this matter had been left and decreed to me
from above, which hitherto the multitude of learned men seem utterly to have
neglected. I shall freely therefore declare the glory of women, and their
accomplishments I shall not hide; in doing which, far be it from me that I
should be ashamed of the argument taken in hand, that if I prefer women before
men, I may think I ought to be dispraised for this, as scarcely I can believe
that I shall be excused, who have composed a matter so sublime with a lower
form of speaking then ought to be, except the straightness of time,
difficulty of the matter and justness of the cause did defend me, as also,
because I have entered upon this work with no desire of flattery or
assentation: therefore I have not so much studied to adorn my words with
Rhetorical fictions, and officious lies for praises; as to show the matter it
self by Reason, Authority, Examples, and by the testimony of Holy Writ, and of
both Laws. To you, most Illustrious Margaret (whose other part amongst the
most famous women of this age through the whole world, Apollo, Diana, Dies,
Aurora, Vulcan, five gods have not sufficiently illustrated, as well for your
Nobility of birth, as glory of your Actions) I appoint this work: therefore
devoted, and dedicated, that the luster of your Sex may shine forth in you, as
in a Sun, who has ascended to the highest degree, because you have exceeded
whatsoever has bin blazed abroad concerning the praises of the Female Sex,
both in Life and Manners by a present example, and a most faithful witness of
the same Sex. Farewell most happily, the Grace, Ornament, and Glory of most
Noble women, and Princesses, absolute in all respects.

Henricus Cornelius Agrippa.

TO THE Virtuous and Beautiful Female Sex of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
Illustrious Crown of the Creation,
OVt of a grateful desire to do right to that Sex, to which mankind owes but
its all, I both meditated within my self, and read several Authors, among
which happily I met with a subject very suitable to be exhibited to you, It is a
Tract of Cornelius Agrippa, a judicious learned Author, who writes not unfitly
of your praises. I found it in a Roman dress, but I present it to you in your
own natural language; I use the Authors own expressions, and term you the
Crown of the Creation, not unworthily, because if you look into Genesis you
shall find that Woman was the last work in the Creation, and so the most perfect
and absolute; As we see, when Artificers make an excellent piece, they keep
pollishing till the last, as being the perfection and Crown of it. I cannot
disagree in judgment with the Author, because when I behold your splendour and
glittering beauty, I take it as a great confirmation of the opinion: Nor do
you glitter in your outward alone, but also in your inward beauty, which is
your Wit, and Understanding, as appears by your quick and acute Answers; For
seldom have I seen Men so subtle in return of Answers, as Women. I will say no
more, but this, now you are apprehensive of your own Excellencies, let God have
the glory, and esteem of me as

The admirer of your Virtues Edward Fleetwood.

De foeminei sexus praecellentia L. Bliaquettus
DEsine, vaniloquax, Sexum laudare virilem
plus aequo, laudum ne sit acervus iners.
Desine (si sapias) sexum damnare malignis
foemineum verbis, quae ratione carent.
Si been lance tua sexum perpendis utrumque
foemineo cedet quisque virilis erit.
Credere si dubitas and restibi dura videtur
haud alias visus nunc mihi testis adest.
Quem nuper vigilans extruxit Agrippa libellum
ante viros laudans foemineumque genus.
Englished thus.
Cease idle Prater for to raise a mount
Of praise to Men, which I but words account.
Cease (if thou art wise) to load with envious words
The Female Sex, no reason such affords.
If well thou weighest both Sexes in thy mind,
The Male must yield unto the Female kind,
Which if thou doubtest, nor yet to thee is clear,
We have a witness here shall mak't appear,
I mean this book, which learned Agrippa writ
In praise of Female 'bove all Mankind wit.
The Speech and Declamation of Henricus Cornelius Agrippa, concerning the
Nobility of the Female Sex.
GOD the Creator of all things, in whom the plenitude of both Sexes dwells, has
made Man like himself: Male and Female Created he them: It is manifest that
the difference of the Sexes consists only in the different Situation of the
parts of the Body, which the office of generation did necessarily require. But
certain it is, he gave one and the same in different soul to Male and Female,
in which undoubtedly there in no distinction of Sex: The woman is endued with
the same rational power, and Speech with the man, and indeavoreth to the same
end of blessedness; where Luke 20. Matthew. 22. Mark. 12.
there is no exception against Sex, for according to Evangelicall truth, they
rising again it their proper Sex, do not perform the function of Sexes, but
become like unto the Angels. Therefore there is no pre-eminence of Nobility
(between man and woman, by the essence of the soul) of one above the other,
but an equal inbred dignity to both. But as for the exercise and operation of
the soul, the illustrious Sex of women, infinitely almost excells the rough
and unpolished generation of men. Which then at length shall be made firm and
good, when the same shall appear to be so (and which is our purpose to make)
not by adulterated and painted speeches, neither with logical snares, by which
many Sophisters are wont to entangle the unskilful; but by the judgments of
all best Authors, truth-speaking Histories, undeniable Reasons, as also by the
testimonies of holy Writ, and firm sanctions of both the Laws.

Arg. 1.
First of all therefore, That I may begin the Matter, The Woman is so much the
more excellent then the Man, by how much the more excellent name she receives
above him; for Adam signifies Earth, but Eve is interpreted Life, by how much
then, life it self is more excellent then earth, so much woman is to be
preferred before man. Neither is there cause, wherefore it may be said this
Argument is weak, to judge of things themselves by names; for we know that the
great Creator both of Things and Names, knew things before he named them, and
his Wisdom, which cannot be deceived, therefore framed Names that they might
express the Nature, Property and Use of things. That there is truth, and
consonancy, and significativenesse in ancient Names, the Roman Laws witness:
Therefore from names, an Argument both with Divines, and Lawyers is of great
moment: As concerning Nabal, we read in Scripture, according to his name, He is
a fool, and foolishness is with him. Hence Paul in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, going about to show the excellency of Christ, uses this Argument,
saying, He is made so much better then the Angels, by how much he has by
inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they: And else where, He has
given him a name above every name, that in the name of Jesus every knee should
bow, of things in heaven, of things in earth, and things under the earth. Add
hereunto, no small force and power does arise to both Laws, from the obligation
of words, from the signification of words, from conditions, demonstrations, and
disputations of that kind, nay, even from the heads and titles of both Laws.
So in Law we well argue from the interpretation of a name, from the force of a
word, also from the Etymology of a name, and the reason of the Etymology, and
order, and the placing of words. For the Laws themselves do not a little look
into the significations of names, that something they may collect from thence.
Cyprian against the Jews argues the first man to have obtained his name from
the four Parts or Quarters of the World, (...).
East, West, North, and South: and in the same book he expounds the same name
Adam, because the earth is made flesh, although such an exposition differs
from the tradition of Moses, because it was written by the Hebrews, not with
four, but with three Letters; notwithstanding this exposition in so holy a man
is not altogether to be dispraised, who had not learned the Hebrew tongue,
which very many Expositors of holy Writ are ignorant of, without much blame.

Now if the same license may be indulged to me, that I may according to my
fancy frame a like Etymology of Eve in praise of the Female Sex, they must give
me leave to say this one thing, from those mystical Symbols of the Cabalists,
that the name of woman has more affinity with that unspeakable four-letter'd
name of the divine omnipotency, then the name of man, which agrees with the
divine name, neither in characters, neither in figure, neither in number. But
to pass by these, for they are read by few, understood by fewer, and they
require a larger narration, then can suite with our purpose. In the mean while,
we will find out the excellency of women, not by Name only, but by Realities,
by Offices, and Merits. We will search the Scirptures, and take our rise from
the beginning of the Creation, and discuss what dignity she has obtained
above the man. In the first order of production, we know, whatsoever are
created by God, differ in this, that certain of them perpetually abide
incorruptible, certain are subject to corruption, and mutation; and in creating
these, God proceeded in this Order and Method, beginning at the more noble of
the one, that he might end at the noblest of the other: therefore he created
first the incorruptible Angels, and souls: For so Augustine contendeth, that
the soul of our first parent, before the production of the body, was created
together with the Angels. Moreover, he created incorruptible bodies, as the
Heavens, Stars, and Elements, which I call incorruptible, although they are
liable to various changes, out of which he made all other things, which are
subject to corruption, so by ascending through every degree of dignity, from
the more vile, proceeding to the perfection of the Universe. Hence first were
brought forth Minerals, after Vegetables, Plants and Trees, next the sensible
plant, Gen 2.
at length sensible creatures, in their order, creeping, swiming, flying, and
going upon four feet. At last he created two like himself, the Male first, and
then the Female, in whom the Heavens and the Earth, with all their ornaments
are perfect; for the Creator coming to the Creation of the Woman, he rested in
her, as the most honorable of the whole Creation; and indeed in her is
concluded, and consummated the whole Wisdom and Power of the Creator; so that
beyond her there is not to be found nor imagined a more excellent Creature.

Since then, Woman is the last of all Creatures, the end, and complement of all
the works of God, and the perfection of the Universe it self, who will deny
her to be most worthy of pre-eminence? without which the world, now indeed
absolute, and perfect in every degree, had else been imperfect, which not
otherwise, then in the perfectest of all creatures could have been perfected:
for it is erroneous, and absurd to think that God ended his days of Creation
in an imperfect work: For since the world was created of God, as a most entire
and exact circle, it was necessary that it should couple and unite the first of
all things with the last. So woman while the world was created, was the last in
time of all things were created, but in the divine Idea, and Conception was
first, both as well for Authority, as Dignity. As concerning her it is written
by the Prophet, God elected her before the heavens were created, and
fore-elected her.

That is the common opinion of Philosophers (that I may use their own words)
That the end is always the first in intention, and last in execution. But the
woman was the best work of God, brought in of God into this world, as the Queen
of it into a palace prepared for her, adorned, and decked in all respects;
deservedly therefore, every creature, loves, reverenceth, and observes her;
deservedly, every creature is subject, and obeys her as their Queen, being as
the end, so the glory, and perfection, of all the works of God. Wherefore the
wise man speaks concerning her, He glorifieth the Nobility of the Woman, having
fellowship with God; and above all, the Lord loves her.

How much also in respect of the place, in which the woman was created, she
excels man, the holy Scriptures plainly testify, in that the woman was
formed in Paradise (being a most Noble and most pleasant place) with the
Angels; when as the man was made in the ordinary field, out of Paradise with
bruit creatures, and afterward, for the sake of the woman to be created was
brought into Paradise: therefore the woman by especial, and extraordinary
privilege of nature, as it were accustomed to the highest place of her
Creation, although looking down from high, is not giddy, neither do her eyes
dazzle, as it is wont to happen to men. Furthermore, if it happen, that a woman,
together with the man, be in danger by waters, all outward helps being laid
aside, the woman longer swimmeth above the water, when the lumpish man
presently sinkes to the bottom,

That the dignity of Place, makes to the Nobility of a man, both civil Laws,
and holy Canons, do abundantly confirm: and it is the general observation of
all Nations, not only of men, but of every animate creature, yea, and inanimate
also, That by how much more worthy soil they draw their originals from, by so
much the more generous they are counted. Wherefore Isaac commanded his Son
Jacob, that he should not take a wife in the land of Canaan, but from
Mesopotamia of Syria, being in better condition. Not unlike to this is that in
St. John, which Joh. 1.
Philip said, We have found Jesus the son of Joseph of Nazareth. Nathaniel said
unto him, can any good thing come out of Nazareth?

But to proceed to other Arguments. The woman excels the man in respect of
the matter of which she was made, which Genesis 2.
was not dead, and vile clay, as man's was, but a purified substance, enlivened,
and endued with a soul; yea, a rational soul, participating of the divine
mind. Hereunto I shall add, that man was made of the earth, which of its own
nature (heavenly influences cooperating) produces living creatures of all
kinds. But the Woman, (above the influences of heaven, promptitude, and
potentiality of nature, and concurrence of secondary causes,) was made by God
alone* in all things like unto him, entire and perfect; man loosing but one
single rib, of which the woman was formed, to wit, Eve of Adam sleeping, and
that so deeply, that he did not feel, when it was taken away; which God taking
from the Man, gave to the Woman: Man therefore is the work of Nature, but
Woman the Artifice of God. And therefore, for the most part, Woman is more
capable of divine splendour then Man, and often is found full of the same, which
may easily appear, from the serenity and pulchritude, with which she is, even
to wonder, blessed. For since beauty, is nothing else but the divine light, and
splendour shining through fair bodies, he certainly has chose to dwell in, and
fill with it, Women rather then Men.

Hence the Body of WOMAN is most delicate to the eye, and touch, her flesh most
soft and tender, her color bright and lustring, Skin clear, Head comely,
Locks fair, hair soft, shining, and long, her Countenance majesticke, Aspect
pleasant, her Face surpassing in beauty, neck milk white, forehead high,
eyes sparkling with a lovely cheerfulness, mixed with ten thousand graces;
above them, eyebrows smooth and thin, divided with decent distance, from the
middle of which descends her nose, straight and of due proportion, under
which is her mouth neat, round and lovely, with small, fresh, and red lips,
within which her teeth appear when she gently smiles, being very small, and
evenly placed, overcoming Ivory with their whiteness, and to whom they are
fewer in number then to man, because she is not given so much to eating, and
consuming. About them her jaw-bons rise handsomely, and cheeks of a tender
softness, a rosy brightness, and full of modesty.

Next, take view of her round and dimpled Chinne, in a pleasant manner, under
which the neck is placed, which is small, but something long, fairly erected
upon her round shoulders, a delicate throat, white, and of an indifferent
thickness, her voice sweet and pleasant, her breast somewhat large and
prominent, adorned with two Nectar-fill'd Paps, the roundnesse of which, does
suite and agree well with the roundnesse of her belly, her sides soft, back
smooth, and erect, arms stretched out, hands small and slender, fingers ^^^tly
joynted, her flanks and hips more full, the calves of her legs more fleshy, the
tips of her hands and feet ending in a round orbicular compleatnesse, and every
member full of juice and moisture.

Add to these, her composed gate, modest deportment, graceful motion, gallant
carriage, besides the order, symmetrie, figure and habitude in all parts most
specious, that I may say, there is no creature so admirable, no wonder so to be
admired, and that no man, except he be blind, cannot but see God himself, what
pulchritude soever the universal world is capable of, to have heaped upon
women, to the end that every creature might stand amazed at her, love, and
reverence her, as we see by experience, that incorporeall spirits doat upon
women with most ardent affections, which is such an approved truth, that none I
think dare offer to deny it.

And that I may omit that, which Poets manifest to us, concerning the Loves of
the gods, and their Paramours, as of Apollo, and his Daphne; Neptune, and his
Salmonea; Hercules, and his Hebe; Jole, and Omphale, and of the Mistrisses of
other gods, and more then many of Jupiter himself.

The holy Scriptures in many places highly commend beauty in women, above all
other gifts and graces: hence it is read in Genesis 6. Genesis 12.
Genesis, that the Sons of God, seeing the daughters of men, that they were
fair, took them wives of all they would. We read also of Sarah Abraham's wife,
that she was a fair woman to look upon, above Genesis 24.
all other women in the Land. When the Servant of Abraham saw Rebecca, a maid of
an excellent beauty, he said silently within himself, This is she which the
Lord has prepared for Isaac the son of Abraham. And Abigal the wife of
wicked Nabal, as she was prudent and discreet, in like manner she was 2 Kings 2*
fair and beautiful, and therefore she saved the life, and the goods of her
Husband from the fury of David; and the evil man was saved, by the fair and
virtuous woman; for with these words David spoke unto her, Go in peace unto
thy house, behold I have heard thy voice, and honored thy face. For since
every beauty is either spiritual, vocal, or corporeal, Abigal was wholly
beautiful, both by prudence of spirit, comeliness of body, eloquence of
speech, upon which account, when Nabal was dead she became one of the wives of
David. And Bathsheba 1 Chronicles* 1*
was a woman of so excellent a form, that David was taken with the love of
her, and after the death of her* Husband did extol her with Queenly dignity
before the rest, when she was espoused to him. Abishag the Shunamite, because
she was a Virgin most fair, therefore was chosen to lie with the King in his
extreme age, to recover his heat: Whereupon the King being old, did enrich her
with the highest honors, and after his death, she was accounted in the place
of Queen. Hitherto appertain those things which we read concerning Hest. 1. 2.
the wonderful beauty of Queen Vasti, and Hester, who was yet preferred before
her, and was more excellent, and of a more exceeding fair and comely face.

Judith 8*
We read concerning Judith, whose beauty the Lord increased so much, as in
beholding her, men were struck with astonishment. Din 13.
We read concerning Susanna, which was ravishingly delicate and beautiful. We
read concerning Job, that Job last.
after his various temptations, and his involved miseries, besides other things,
the Lord gave to him three most fair daughters, more gracious then the three
Graces, fairer then whom, there was not any in the whole earth found out. If we
read the history of holy Virgins, truly we cannot but admire their wonderful
beauty, and specious* form before other children of men: But above all, both
far and near, as the immaculate Princess of all, shines forth the blessed
Virgin Mary, Mother of Christ, at whose beauty the Sun and Moon stands amazed,
from whose glorious countenance, such a luster of chastity and holiness
flows, as that it was able to dazzle the minds of all men, no man for all
that, at any time through the temptation and inticements of so stupendous a
beauty, falling in the least thought.

These, although more largely set down in the holy Bible, where so often
mention is made concerning beauty, I have Number. 31.
related almost in the very words themselves: by which we are given plainly to
understand that the beauty of women, not only with men, but with God is
esteemed, and has its honor: Therefore we read in holy Writ, that God
commanded every male child to be slain, but the fair women to be saved alive.
In Deuteronomy the children of Israel were permitted Deuteronomy. 21.
to choose themselves Wives out of the fair women captives. Besides this admired
beauty, also, the woman is endowed with a certain grace of comeliness, which
happens not unto men. For the hairs of women grow to such a length, as that
they may cover those parts of the body, wherein there is less comeliness. Of
which parts it is not necessary at this time I should treat. Only this I shall
say, that in wonderful decency Nature has ordained these in women, being not
prominent, as in men, but biding within in a more secret, and sure place.

Furthermore, Nature has afforded women more modesty then men: Wherefore often
times it happens that women, being diseased with the dangerous Ulcer in the
secrets, they have rather chosen death, then to submit themselves to the sight
and handling of a Surgeon, that they might be healed. And they retain this
grace of modesty not only living, but dying, yea, and also dead; which
appears chiefly in those, which perish in waters. For as Pliny writes, and
experience testifies, the woman lies with her face downwards, nature sparing
the modesty of the dead, but the man swimmeth with his face upwards. To these
may be added, the worthiest member in man, by which we differ chiefly from
bruits, and show forth the divine nature, is the head, in which head, the
chiefest part is the countenance: the head in men is deformed with baldness,
the woman contrariwise, by a great privilege of Nature, waxes not bald. The
countenance moreover in men, is often times so soiled with a most odious beard,
and covered with nasty hairs, that they can scarcely be discerned from beasts;
in woman contrariwise, the face always abides pure, and comely. Hence there
was in the law of the twelve tables, that women should not shave their cheeks,
least when a beard should bud forth, their modesty might be hid: and it is to
all for an argument of the cleanliness of women, that when a woman is once
cleanly washed, as often as she washes afterward in clean water, the water
receives not the least foulness: but man when he has been washed often times
very clean, he muddieth, and soileth the water.

Moreover, by the ordinance of nature, women through secret places every month
expel their superfluities; but men's are continually expelled through the face,
the most comely part of the body. Furthermore, since amongst all other living
creatures, it is given only to man to look with the countenance erect toward
heaven, Nature and Fortune have respected woman chiefly in this, and are so
propitious, that if by chance she falls, she almost always falls upon her
back, and seldom, or never on her head or face. There is another thing which
we may not omit: Do not we see that in the procreation of mankind, nature
prefers women before Gal. 2. de sperm. 14.
men? which is chiefly perspicuous, because the woman's seed alone, as Galen and
Avicen say, that is the matter and nutriment of the child, not the man's,
because it enters into the woman as an accident into the substance. For, as
the law says, that is the greatest and chiefest office of women, to conceive,
and to nourish the thing conceived; for which cause we see that many are like
their mothers; because they are procreated of the blood of them: and that holds
also very much in the habit of the body, always in the manners; if the mothers
be foolish, also the sons are foolish; if the mothers be prudent, the sons are
prudent. But contrary wise in fathers, if they be wise, for the most part, they
beget foolish children, and foolish fathers wise children, provided always,
the mothers be wise. Neither is there any other reason why Mothers love their
children, more then Fathers, except that, because the mothers are sensible they
have more of their own substance, then the fathers; for the same cause also, I
think it is natural to us, to be more affected toward the mother, then
toward the father; so as we seem but to affect the father, but passionately to
love the mother. And therefore nature affords to women milk of such a
strength, which does not only nourish infants, but also restore them being
sick, which also when they are grown up, may suffice for saving of life. The
experiment we read in Valerius Max. concerning a young maid of the common
people, which by suckling nourished her mother in Prison; when otherwise, she
was condemned to have Val. l. 5. c. 4. Arist. l* anima lib. Eccl. l. 26.
perished with hunger: for which piety of hers, life was not only given to the
mother, but a settled maintenance to both; and the prison was afterward
dedicated to the goddess Piety. For it is most commonly seen, that the woman
is more full of compassion and piety then the man, which Aristotle gives as
Arist. l. de animal. Eccles. 26;
proper to the Female Sex. Wherefore it is I think Solomon says, where there is
not a woman, the sick languisheth; either because by serving and assisting she
is of wonderful dexterity toward the sick, and also full of cheerfulness, or
else because woman's milk is a remedy to the sick, and weak, and to them that
are next neighbors to death, by which they are restored to life. Hence
Physicians report, that the heat of their paps applied to breasts of old men,
stricken with extreme age, exciteth, increases, and confirms vital heat in
them. Which thing David was not ignorant of, who chose Abishag the Shunamite
maid, in his old age to cherish him by her imbracements. Moreover woman is more
apt then man, for that mysterious office of Generation, for that she is ripe at
10. years and under, but he not many years after. And besides, it is very well
known that the woman alone of all fruitful creatures, after she is with
child, and begins to bear in her womb; also not long after she is delivered,
inclines to the foresaid act again, whose vessel is so affected to humane
conception, that it is said sometimes without lying with a man, she has
conceived. So Averrois 2. Collig.
that Naturalist has delivered in those his famous Monuments of learning,
concerning a woman which conceived of seed that was spent in a Bath. To this
may be added, another wonder of Nature, that a woman if being with child, she
have longed, as we say, without hurt has fed on raw flesh, raw fish, often
times upon coals, loame, stones; also has concocted metalls, poisons, and
many things of this sort, and converted them into wholesome nutriment: how
great miracles, besides these mentioned, Nature her self desires to produce
in women; no man will wonder that has read through the Volumes of Philosophers
and Physicians.

I will lay down one notable example from them, which is ready and at hand. And
that is, that the menstruous blood of women, besides from quartan Agues, freeth
them from Hydrophobia, being a disease when one is extremely afraid of water,
from the Falling Sickness, the Leprosy, Bruises, Melancholy, and Madness, and
other most pernicious Maladies of that kind* and many other things no less, if
not more wonderful it effects, as that it quenches great flames of fire,
allayeth tempests, saves from danger of drowning, drives away whatever is
noxious, counter-works Witch-crafts, and puts to flight evil spirits. Many
more things they say, which is not my mind at present to urge. Yet this I will
add to the rest, as a vantage, that there is in women, according to the
traditions of Philosophers and Physicians, which are proved by experiences, a
divine gift, by which they by their own proper helps and benefits are able to
heal themselves in every kind of disease, without the assistance of any
outward means.

But that which goes beyond all Miracles, being it self the greatest Miracle
is, viz. that Woman alone without man is able to produce humane nature, which
in no wise is given to man; which things even by the Turks and Mahumetans is
confessed; with whom, many are believed to have conceived without mansseed,
whom they call in their tongue Nefesol^i. And Isles are spoken of, where women
conceive by the blast of wind; which thing notwithstanding we will not grant to
be true, because the Virgin Mary alone (I say) she alone without man conceived
Christ, and brought forth a son of her own proper substance, and natural
fruitfulness: the most blessed Virgin Mary is the true Mother of Christ, and
he true Christ, and the natural son of the Virgin Mary: I say natural,
because a man; and again, the natural son of a Virgin, in regard the Virgin
Mary was not obnoxious to corrupt nature, wherefore she neither brought forth
with any pain, neither was she under the power of man; Such was her
fruitfulness by the overshadowing of the Holy Spirit, that she did not need
the Orig. in primo cont. Faust.
help of man. Amongst brute creatures, it is manifest that some Females have
conceived without Males: as the Females of Vultures, which is storyed by
Origin, in his first against Faustus: also certain Mares to have conceived by
the West wind blowing, Antiquity has found, concerning which these Virg. 3.
Georg. Pin. ^2.
things are sung,

All with face turned against the West wind do stand
And take in air, on rocks so high from Land,
And often times without conjunction sprung,
And with cool winds they were begot with young.
Now what shall I say concerning speech, a divine gift, by which one thing we
chiefly excel beasts, which Trismegistus Mercurius esteemed of the same price
he esteemed immortality, and Hesiod names it the best treasure of man: Now is
not woman more eloquent of speech then Man, more terse, and fluent? do not we
(all of us) learn first to speak either from Mothers or Nurses? truly Nature it
self, the wise disposer of all matters, in this has wisely provided for
women, that scarce at any time you shall find a woman dumb; It is a glorious
thing then to excel men, in that by which men chiefly excel other living
creatures.

But from profane, let us return to sacred writ as by re-enterance, and let
us begin the matter from the very fountains of Religion. We know in the first
place without doubt, that God blessed the Man for the Woman's sake; which
benediction for as much as Man was unworthy, he deserved not to have, before
the woman was created. To which is consonant that Pro. 18. Eccle. 26.
Proverb of Solomon; Who finds a good Woman, finds a good thing, and
obtains a blessing from the Lord; And that of Ecclesiasticus, The Husband of
a good Woman is blessed, and the number of their years are doubled; and no
other man is able in dignity to be compared to him, which is worthy to have a
good woman. For as Ecclesiasticus says, A good Woman is a grace above every
grace. Therefore Solomon in his Proverbs calls Prove. 12. 1 Cor. 11.
her the Crown of a Man, and Paul, the glory of a Man; but glory is defined,
the consummation, and perfection of a thing resting and delighting in its own
end, which is so complete in it self, as that nothing can be added to make
its perfection greater:

August.
The woman therefore is the Consummation, Perfection, Felicity, Benediction,
and Glory of the Man: And as Augustine says, the first society of mankind in
this mortality: therefore there is a necessity, every man should love her, and
who does not, he is estranged from all virtues and graces; nay, I will say
more, even from humanity. Hitherto might be referred those Cabalisticall
mysteries, how Abraham was Genesis 18. 28.
blessed of God by reason of a woman, Sarah; the letter H being taken away from
the name of the woman, and added Genesis 17.
to the name of the man, and he was after called Abraham. How Jacob had his
blessing by a woman also, to wit his mother, who got it for him: There are many
things in holy Writ of this kind, but not to be explained in this place:
blessing therefore Genesis 2.
is given for the woman's sake, but the law for the man; the law I say, of anger,
and malediction; the man was forbid to Genesis 17.
eat of the fruit of the tree, the woman not so, who neither as yet was
created, when the command was given to the man: for woman God willed to be free
from the beginning; the man therefore sinned by eating, not the woman; the man
brought death, not the woman; and we all have sinned in Adam, not in Eve; we
have drawn original sin, not from Genesis 3.
the Mother the Female, but from the Father, the Male; therefore the old law
has circumcised every Male, and the Females abide uncircumcised, ordaining
original sin to be punished in that sex only which transgressed; neither did
God accuse Eve because she had eaten, but because she had given occasion of
evil to the man, and that unwittingly, by reason she was tempted of the
Devil: The man knowingly sinned, the woman ignorantly, and deceived has
erred; for she was tempted of the first devil, who knew the woman to be the
most excellent of all the creatures. And as Bernard says, the devil seeing
her beauty to be admired, knowing her to be such a one as he had known before,
whilst he stood, which above all Bernard.
Angels had the fruition of God, he cast envy against the woman alone, for her
excellency: Wherefore Christ was borne most humble into the world, that he
might by his humility Genesis 3.
expiate the pride of the sin of our first parents; he took the man's Sex as
being more humble, he took not the woman's Sex being more sublime and noble.

Moreover, because we were condemned for the sin of the man, not for the
sin of the woman, God willed, that by which Sex the sin came, in the same
the expiation of sin should be made, and the Sex which through ignorance was
deceived, by the same punishment should be made: Therefore it was said to the
Serpent, because the woman, or which is truer read, because the seed of the
woman shall bruise his head; not the man, neither the seed of the man. And
hence it is that the order of Priesthood is committed by the Church, rather to
the man, then to the woman, because every Priest represents Christ; but
Christ, the first man, being a sinner, to wit Adam, from this the Canon is
understood which begins thus, This Image: that woman is not made to the
Image of God, to wit, the corporeal image of Christ; for God wills (I say)
Christ to be the son not of the man, but of the woman; whom he honored so
far, that he would put on the flesh of woman alone, for in regard of the woman
alone, Christ is called the son of man, not in regard of the man. This is the
great Miracle which the Prophet was very much amazed at, because a woman
compasses a man; to wit, when the whole Sex of man is comprehended in a
Virgin, and she bears Christ in her body. Also Christ rising ftom the dead
appeared to women first, and not unto men; neither is it unknown that after the
death of Christ, men departed from the faith, but women (it is manifest) never
fell away from the faith, and Christian Religion.

Furthermore, no persecutions for the faith at any time, no Heresy, no Error
has ever risen from women: but otherwise it is concerning men, Christ is
betrayed, sold, bought, accused, condemned, suffered, was crucified; at length
put to death, and all by men. Yea, he was denied of Peter, forsaken of the rest
of the Disciples, accompanied of women alone to the cross, and to the
Sepulcher. And the wife of Pilat a heathen did more endeavor to save Christ,
then any of those men, which had believed. To this may be added, that almost
all the whole School of Divines affirm, that then the Church abided not,
except in one woman alone, to wit, the Virgin Mary, and for that thing
deservedly the Female Sex is called religious, and holy. Now if any should say
with Aristotle, that the Males are more strong, more wise, and more noble
amongst living creatures, the excellent Doctor Paul answers this saying; God
has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak
things of this world God has chosen, to confound the strong, and the ignoble,
and contemptible God has chosen, and those things which are not, that he might
destroy those things that are. For who amongst men, in all gifts of Nature was
more eminent then Adam? but a woman humbled him: Who stronger then Sampson? but
a woman over-came his strength: Who chaster then Lot? yet a woman provoked him
to incest: Who more religious then David? but a woman perverted his holiness:
Who wiser then Solomon? but a woman deceived Job.
him: Who patienter then Job? whom the devil stripped of all his goods, killed
his Daughters and his Sons, filled him with Ulcers all over his body;
notwithstanding he was not able to provoke him from his ancient sincerity; but
the woman (being in this superior, and of more power then the devil himself)
provoked him to curse. Yea, if it were lawful to call Christ himself into
these comparisons, then whom nothing is more powerful, nothing more wise,
since he is the eternal wisdom and power of God; did not he suffer himself
to be overcome by the Woman of Canaan? he saying, Mat. 15. John 18
It is not good to take the childrens bread and cast it to dogs. She again
answered, Yea Lord, but the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their Masters
table, and now, with reverence be it spoken, as it were overcome by this
Argument, he blessed her, saying, Be it done unto thee as thou will. Who more
ferventer in the faith Mat. 20. Mat. 14. Luke 22.
then Peter, the chief of the Apostles? a woman seduced him, not the least
Pastor of the Church, to deny Christ. Let the Canonists say what they will, that
their Church cannot err, but has not the woman Pope, her name Joane, deluded
it with an Plat. de Joan. 8.
egregious imposture? but who ever shall say these things, more bend themselves
to the reproach of women, then to add to their praises: To whom women in this
manner shall answer, If there be a necessity that one of us make a loss of some
good or life, I had rather destroy thee, then be destroyed my self; and that
by the example of Innocent the third, who in his own Epistle decretall to a
certain Cardinal, whom he sent Legate for the Roman See, who left this in
writing, If it cannot be avoided, but that I, or thou must be confounded, I
will choose rather to confound thee.

Furthermore, the civil Laws take that care of, and provide for women so,
that they shall be sure to have their right, although it cannot be without
damage and injury to men. And in holy Writ, is not even the wickedness of
women commended and extolled oftentimes more, then men doing well? Genesis 31* Gen*
27.
Is not Rachel praised, which deluded her Father with a neat invention, when he
sought his Idols? Is not Rebecca praised, because she got Jacob the blessing
of his Father by deceit, and afterward warnes him to fly his brothers wrath?
And Rhaab the Harlot did deceive those that sought the Spies Josh. 2.
of Joshua, and it was accounted to her for righteousness. Jael went out to
meet Sisera, and said to him, enter in O my Lord; and she gave to him,
requiring water, a bottle of milk to drink, and covered him lying down: and
Sisera sleeping, she entered in unto him, and drove a nail into his head, and
slew him, who had trusted himself with her for safety: and for this Judith 11*
notorious betraying, she was blessed among women, in her tabernacle. Read the
History of Judith, and note her words to Holefernes, she says, Take the words
of thy handmaid, because, if thou will follow them, the Lord will keep thee
safe, saying, I will tell to thee all things, so that I may lead thee through
the midst of Jerusalem: and thou shall lead the people of Israel as sheep
without a shepherd, and not one dog shall bark against thee, because these
things are spoken to me by the providence of God. And Holofernes, lulled a
sleep with her flatteries, she struck into the neck, and cut off his head: I
pray you what more wicked counsel, what crueller treacheries, what more
capital treasons can be invented? And yet this woman therefore, was praised
and magnified: so then the wickedness of woman is higher reputed then man's
well doing. Did not Cain do well in offering the first of the fruits of the
earth for a sacrifice? and yet for that very thing he was rejected of God: And
did not Esau do well, while in a pious obedience he hunted after Venison for
his decrepit father? and in the mean time he was defrauded of the blessing,
and hated of God: Vzzah for his zeal to Religion, holding up the Arc sliding,
and almost fallen down, was struck down with sudden death. King Saul for
sparing the fat beasts of the Amalakites, although for a sacrifice to the Lord,
was deprived of his Kingdom, and delivered up to an evil spirit. The
daughters of Lot were excused from the incest with their father, but their
drunken father was not excused, and his posterity was cast out from the Church
of God. Incestuous Tamar was defended, and called more just then the Patriark
Judah, and notwithstanding that fraudulent Incest was thought worthy to
propagate that line, of which our Savior should afterward be borne.

Go now ye stout and valiant men, go ye great Scholars, that have Pallas
and the Muses most propitious to you, go I say, and by as many examples (which
all your Poetical helps are too few for) prove the contrary opinion, namely,
that the wickedness of a man is better then a woman's well doing. Sure I am you
cannot be able to defend that, except you run to blind Allegories, where also
the authority of woman shall be equal at least with that of man.

But let us return, even this may be a most evident Argument to all, of the
excellence of so happy a Sex, because the purest of them, the most blessed
Virgin Mary, was conceived (as some divines affirm) without original sin. This
is a strong Argument of Aristotle; the best of which kind is more noble then
the best of the other kind, that kind is more noble then the other: In the
Female kind the best is the Virgin Mary, in the Male kind there has not risen
a greater then John Baptist, but how much the blessed Virgin, which is exalted
above all the companies of Angels excels John Baptist, no sound Christian
can be ignorant of. In like manner, on the contrary, we may argue, the worst
of which kind, is worse then the worst of the other, that kind is inferior
Mat. 14.
to the other: But we read of some men worse then the worst of women. We will
not here dispute whither he might be Judas, that betrayed Christ, concerning
whom Christ says, It had been better for that man he had not been borne; or
Antichrist, in whom the whole power of Satan dwells. Furthermore, the
Scriptures declare many men to be condemned to eternal torments, when no woman
at any time condemned may be read of: to this may be added in way of testimony
a prerogative of brutish nature, because the Eagle which is Queen of all Birds,
always of the Female, never of the Male is found: and it is said, that there is
but one only Phaenix, and that a Female, which is in Egypt. But on the
contrary, of the Serpent, which has its name from King, I mean the Basiliske,
the most poisonous of all venomous creatures, there is none except a Male,
which is impossible to be gendered a Female.

Furthermore, the excellency, virtue, and innocence of this Sex, even by these
Arguments abundantly sufficient may be showed, because the rising of all
evils is of man, none of the woman, because the first formed Adam, he durst
transgress the Law of the Lord, he has locked the gates of Heaven, and has
rendered us all liable to sin and death, for we Genesis 4.
all have sinned and dyed in Adam, not in Eve: In like manner, the first
begotten of him has unlocked the gates of Hell, he was the first Envyer, the
first Manslayer, the first Parricide, the first despairing of the mercy of
God; the first that had two Wives, Lamech; the first drunkard, Noah; the first
discoverer of the nakedness of his father, the son of Noah, Ham; the first
Tyrant and Idolater, Nimrod. Man first committed Genesis 9. Ibid. Genesis 10. Genesis
3^. Exodus 1. Genesis 18.
adultery, man was first incestuous, men first made covenants with devils, and
found out profane arts; the sons of Jacob first sold their brethren, Pharaoh
the Egyptian first killed children; men first lascivious against nature,
Sodom and Gomorrah, in times past famous Cities, being witnesses, which for
the wickedness of men perished.

We read of some men having two Wives for their goatish pleasure; some more,
such were Lamech, Abraham, Jacob, Esau, Joseph, Moses, Sampson, Helcana, Saul,
David, Solomon, Assure, Roboham, Abia, Caleph, Ahasuerus, and innumerable
others, which had each of them many Wives and Concubines; neither content with
the use of them to fill their lusts, they have mingled themselves with their
hand-maides also. But on the contrary, we find that no woman, except only
Bathsheba, but has been contented with one man alone, neither shall thou find
any that had two husbands, if they had Offspring of the first; for women are
much more continent, by reason of their shamefacednesse and modesty, then men;
who, because they have known themselves unfruitful (we read) that they have
abstained from lying with men, and to have brought into Genesis 16. and 19.
their Husbands strange women, as Sarab, Rachel, Lea, and many others
unfruitful, which have brought in their handmaids to raise up posterity to
their husbands. But what man I pray you, how old soever, cold, barren, and
unfit for women, is of such goodness toward his wife, or at any time of that
charity, that they will appoint some in their places which might bedew the
fertile womb of the Wife with fruitful seed? although we read that Lycurgus
and Solon established Lycurgus* Solon.
laws of this sort in times past, as if any old man, and unfit for marriage, or
less active, then is required for the service of Venus, had married a Maid,
that it might be lawful to the wife to choose one of the young men, approved
for his strength and activity, with whom she might sweetly sport and dally,
provided always, that the issue might be her Husbands; neither was it lawful
for any to account such issue adulterous or mis-begotten; we read of them not
kept, not so much by the rigidnesse of men, as by the continency of women
refusing them. There are innumerable most famous women, who in modesty and
conjugal love have excelled all men, such as Abigal the wife of Nabal,
Artemisia of Mausolus, Argia the wife of Polinices the Theban, Julia of
Pompeius, Portia of Cato, Cornelia of Gracchus, Messalina of Sulpitius, Alceste
of Admetus, Hypsicratea of Mithridates the Pontic King, Dido the builder of
Carthage, the Roman Lucretia, and Sulpitia of Lentulus: there are infinite
others, whose immovable Virginity, and chastity could not be changed by death,
examples of which offer themselves, Atlanta Calidonia, Camilla Volsca,
Iphigenia a Greek, Cassandra and Crise; to these may be added the
Lacedaemonian, Spartan, Milesian, and Theban Virgins, and innumerable others,
which the histories of Hebrews, Greeks, and Barbarians number to us, who made
Virginity of more account then Kingdoms, yea, then life it self: if now
examples of piety be required, amongst others these offer themselves: Claudia a
Vestal Virgin toward her father, and that mean Plebeian Maid, concerning
whose pious affection to her Mother, we have spoken of before: But some Zoilus
will object against these, that there have bin destructive marriages and which
have made direful Tragedies, as those of Sampson, Jason, Deiphobus, Agamemnon;
which if any will see into with Lynceus eyes, he shall find that wives are
falsely accused; none of which at any time have proved bad to a good Husband,
for there were never ill Wives, but to ill Husbands; to whom although they
should prove good, oftentimes they are corrupted with the vices of their
husbands. Do not you think, if it might be lawful for women to make Laws,
write Histories, but that they could write Tragedies concerning the
unmeasurable malice of men? amongst whom many are found Manslayers, Thieves,
Ravishers, Forgers, Incendiaries, Josh. 7. 2 King 19. ^ Chron. 4.
traitors, which in the time of Joshua and David the King did rob in so great
multitudes, that they did appoint Princes of their companies: yea, also in
these days, there is an infinite number of them. Hence all Prisons are filled
with men, on every hand all places are burdened with the carcasses of men: But
on the other side women have been the inventors of all liberal Arts, of every
Grace, and Virtue, which the feminine names of Arts and Virtues clearly
manifest. To which I will add that notable thing, that the Orb of the earth
is named from the names of women, to wit, from Asia the Nymph, from Europa, the
daughter of Agenor, from Lybia the daughter of Epaphus, which is also called
Africa. To conclude, if a survey be made through the singular kinds of virtues,
women every where obtain the principal place: It was a woman, the Virgin Mary
her self, which first vowed virginity Lactant. l. Instit. Eus. de praep.
Evangel. Aug* de civit. Dei Exodus 15.
to God: women Prophetesses were always inspired with diviner gifts then men,
which is noted concerning the Sybils, as Lactantius Eusebius, and Augustine
testify. So Mary the sister of Moses was a Prophetess, and, Jeremiah being in
prison, the wife of his Uncle, by name Olda, was raised up to be a Prophetess
to the perishing people of Israel, greater then all the Prophets they then had.

Let us search the holy Scriptures, and we shall see the constancy of women in
faith and holy duties, commended far above men, as Judith, Ruth, Hester, which
are mentioned with so 2 Chro. 22. 2 Chro* 34.
much glory, that they give names to books in holy Scripture. Abraham himself,
who for his eminency of faith, the Scripture has called just, because he
believed God, notwithstanding he must submit to his wife Sarah, and by the
voice of God is commanded, All things whatsoever Sarah says, hear her voice.
So Rebecca firmly believing, proceeds to ask of God, and for an answer, she
hears a miracle, Two Nations are in thy womb, and two people shall be
divided from thy belly. And the widow of Sarepta believed Eliah, although he
did tell her a difficult thing. So Zacharias, reproved of the Angel for
incredulity, was dumb, and Elizabeth his wife prophesied in voice and womb,
and is commended, because she believed faithfully, who afterward commends
the blessed Virgin, saying, Blessed art thou which beleevest what things are
said to thee of the Lord. So Anna the Prophetess did confess God after the
revelation of Simeon, and did speak concerning him to all willing to hear,
who did expect the redemption of Israel* and Philip had four Daughters, Virgin
Prophetesses.

What shall I say concerning that woman of Samaria, with whom Christ did speak
at the Well, and filled with faith of her believing, he refused the food
offered him by the Apostles. See the faith of the Mat. 27. ct 28. Mat* 15. and
16. Luke 23. and 25.
woman of Canaan, and of the woman, which had the issue of blood: is not the
faith and confession of Martha, like the confession of Peter? Yea* how much
constancy of faith was in Mary Magdalen is noted to us out of the Gospels; for
she, while the High Priests and Jews crucify, weepeth at the cross, carries
ointments, seeks in the Tomb, asks the Gardener, re-acknowledgeth God,
goes to the Apostles, and tells that he is risen, they doubt, she believes.
What Act. 18.
again shall I say of Priscilla? a most holy woman, who instructed Apollos, an
Apostolical man, most learned in the Law, the Bishop of the Corinthians:
neither was it an unseemly thing for an Apostle to learn of a woman, which
could teach in the Church. Add moreover, those which have testified the
constancy of their faith by patience in Martyrdom, by contempt of death, whose
number is no less then men's.

Neither is to be past by with silence, that wonderful mother, and 2 Mac. 7.
worthy of the memory of all good men, who seeing her seven sons perishing by
cruel martyrdom* was not only of good courage, but also strongly did exhort to
put them to death: and she her self, trusting in the Lord in all conditions,
after her sons, was also put to death, for the Laws and Liberties of her
Country. Did not Theodelina, the daughter of the K. of the Bavarians convert
the Lombards to the faith of Christ? Greisilla the sister of Henry the first,
Emperor, the Hungarians? and Clotildis the daughter of the K. of the
Burgundians, the Franks? and a certain Apostlesse a woman of a low rank, the
Iberians? and each of them, innumerable other people besides wone over to
Christian Religion?

Finally, This most Religious Sex alone, or at least chiefly is it, in which
the Catholic faith, and the continued works of godliness shine bright
continually to this day; but least any should doubt that women are not able to
do all those things appertaining to men; let us run over the matter by
examples, and we shall find, there is no famous action in any kind of Virtues
performed by men, which may not as excellently be done by women: Melissae
Cybeles in times past were famous for the Priesthood; from whose name other
goddesses Priests afterward were called Melissae: Hypecaustria was the Priest
of Minerva, Mera of Venus, Iphigenia of Diana and women were the Priests of
Bacchus, famous by many names, as Thyades, Maenades, Bacchae, Eliades,
Mimalonides, Aedonides, Euhyades, Bassarides, Triaterides; with the Jews, Mary
the sister of Moses together with Aaron did enter the Sanctuary, and was
accounted as a Priest. In our Religion, although the office of Priesthood be
forbidden women, we know notwithstanding, that Histories declare, that women
sometimes concealing their Sex have ascended to the top of the High Priests
office. So many there have been most holy Abbesses and Nuns, whom antiquity
was not ashamed to call Priests. Famous in prophecy with Nations of all
Religions, Cassandra, Sybillae, Mary the sister to Moses, Debora, Holda, Anna,
Elizabeth, the four daughters of Philip, and many other holy women of later
days, as Brigida, Hildegardis have been

Furthermore in Magic, whether by the familiarity and acquaintance of good or
evil spirits I dispute not, Circes before the rest, and Medea did far more
wonderful things, then even Zoroastes himself, although the Inventor of this
Art, as he is believed by many.

Again, In Philosophy there is famous Theano the wife of Pythagoras, and his
daughter Dama, famous for expounding the dark sentences of her father: also
Aspasia, and Diotima the Scholars of Socrates, and Mantinea, and Philesia
Axiochia, both the Shollars of Plato. To conclude, Plotinus extolleth Gemina,
and he praises Amphiclea, and Lactantius Themistis: The Roman Church
rejoices in her Katharine, which maid alone, did far excel all the
learning of wise men in that age, Neither may we forget in this place Zenobia,
the Queen, and Scholar of Longinus the Philosopher, who for her abundant and
excellent skill of letters, obtained the name of Ephinissa, whose holy works,
Nicomachus has turned into the Greek tongue.

Let us proceed to Oratory and Poetry: behold Armesia, by surname Androgenea,
Hortensia, Lucrea, Valeria, Capiola, Sappho, Corinna, Cornificia Romana, and
Erimna Telia, or Telbia, which were named Epigrammatists, and in Salust
Sempronia, and Calphurnia among the Lawyers; yea, except it had been forbidden
women to learn letters in these days, even now, as yet might be had women of
most famous learning, more excellent in wit then men.

But wherefore do I speak concerning this? because women (by nature it self
alone) without doubt seem to excel Artificers in all Disciplines: do not
Grammarians boast themselves to be Masters of Well-speaking? and do we not
learn that better from Nurses, and Mothers, then from Grammarians? has not
Mother Cornelia framed the most eloquent tongue of the Gracchi, and the mother
of Istrinus, taught Sylem the son of Aripithus the King of Scythia the Greek
tongue? did not always children (born in Colonies brought in with strange
Nations) hold the speech of their mothers? Not for any other cause, Plato and
Quintilian carefully gave Order concerning choosing a fit Nurse for children,
that their speech might be rightly and discreetly formed by the tongue of the
child.

And are not also Poets in their Trifles and Fables, and Logicians in their
Notionall contentions overcome by women? There is not an Orator so good, or so
happy, but the persuasion of a light Huswife will overcome him.

What Arithmetician by casting up falsely can deceive a woman of her due
benevolence? What Musician can equal a woman by singing and pleasantness of
voice? Philosophers, Mathematicians, Astrologers, are they not in their
Divinations, and Prognostications oftentimes inferior to plain Country women?
and often an old woman excells a Physician. Socrates himself the wisest of all
men (if credit may be given to the testimony of Pythius) and mature in
judgment, yet disdained not to learn something of the Lady Aspasia: So neither
was Apollos the divine, ashamed to be instructed by Priscilla.

Now if Prudence be required, Opis, related amongst the goddesses, Plotina the
wife of Trajanus, Amalasuntha the Queen of the Ostrogoths, Aemilia the wife of
Scipio, are examples: to whom may be added, Debora a most Prudent woman, the
wife of Labidoth, Judge. 4.
who alone, as may be read in the Book of Judges, some time judged over the
people of Israel; and the children of Israel went up to her for every
Judgment: who also was chosen Captain of the Host of Israel (when Barach did
refuse to fight) and wone the Field, her Enemies being slain and put to flight.

Furthermore, It is read in the History of the Kings, that Attalia the Queen
Reigned and Judged seven years in Jerusalem; and Semiramis after the death of
Ninus the King, judged the People Forty years, and all the Candaces, Queens of
Aethiopia, Reigned being most wise, and potent; concerning whom mention is made
in the Acts of the Apostles.

1 King. 10. 2 Chronicles. 9
Josephus that faithful Writer of Antiquities, tells wonderful things of
them: Add hereunto Nicaula, the Queen of Sheba, who coming from the uttermost
ends of the Earth to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, by the testimony of the
Lord, condemned all the men of Jerusalem.

And also there was one Technites a most wise woman, which staggered K. David
with an Interrogation, taught him by a riddle, and appeased him by an Example
of God. Neither here again is to be passed by in silence Abigal and Bathsheba,
the one of which freed her 2 King. 14. 1 King. 25. 1 Chronicles. 1.
Husband from the anger of David; The other, the Mother of Solomon, prudently
obtained the Kingdom for her Son.

Furthermore, in the invention of matters, Isis, Minerva, Nycostrata are
examples. And in modelling Governments, and Cities, Semiramis holding the
Monarchy of the whole World, Dido, and the Amazones. In Wars, Thomiris Queen
of the Massagetans, which conquered Cyrus the Monarch of the Persians.

Also Camilla of the Nation of the Volscians, Valisca of Bohemia, both mighty
Queens; and Pande of the Indians, the Amazones, Candaces, Lemnenses, and the
Phocians, Chians, and Persian woman. We read of many other most famous women,
which restored safety to their Nation, in the highest despair thereof, amongst
whom is Judith, whom Jeremy extolleth in these words, saying, Hieron in prolog.
sup. Judith.
Receive ye Judith the widow, an example of chastity, with triumph, perpetuate
her never-dying memory with praises; he gives her out not only to be imitated
by women, but by men, because being an example and rewarder of chastity, such
were her virtues, that she overcame the invincible, and excelled the most
excellent. We read also that a certain wise woman called to Joab* and gave into
his hands the head of Siba the enemy of David, that he might save the City
Abela, which was the Mother of Cities in Israel. And that a certain woman cast
a piece of Mil-stone, and dashed out the brains of Abimelech, Judge. 9.
being the rod of divine vengeance upon him, because he had done evil before
the Lord, against his own Father, his seventy brethren Hest. 7. 8, 9
being slain by him upon one stone. So Hester the wife of King Ahasuerus not
only freed her People from a certain death, but also enriched them with great
Honor.

When the Roman City was besiedged by the Volscians, Cneus Martius Coriolanus,
being Captain, and the men were not able to defend it by their Arms, Veturia
a woman of noble birth, and the Mother of Coriolanus saved it by the chiding of
her Son. Arthemisia defeated the Rhodians of their Army rising up against
her, brought the Isle into subjection, and erected a Statue in the City of
Rhodes for a Monument of her noble acts.

Who can sufficiently praise that most noble Maid, although of mean descent,
who in the year of Christians One thousand four hundred twenty eight, the
Kingdom of France being possessed by the English, taking Arms like an Amazon,
led the Army so stoutly, and fought so happily, that she did restore the lost
Kingdom to the King of France, the English being overcome by many Battles; to
whose perpetual memory a Statue is erected at the Town Genabum, which is now
called Orleans, on the Bridge which is over the river Ligur.

I could reckon up besides these, others innumerable most excellent women of
the Greeks, Latins, Barbarians, as well from old as modern Histories. But I
will study brevity, least the work should swel too big. For Plutarch, Valerius
Bocatius, and many others have writ concerning them. Hence it is that I have
not spoken so many things of the praises of women, as I have kept silent;
Because I am not so ambitious, that I should presume that I am able to
comprehend the infinite Excellencies and Virtues of women in so small a speech.

Who can be sufficient to enumerate the infinite praises of women, on whom all
our being, and the whole conservation of mankind (which otherwise in short
time would perish) and every Family and Commonwealth depends? Which thing
Romes Builder understood very well; who, whilst he wanted women, doubted not to
ravish the daughters of the Sabins, and in defense of the Rape, made War with
their Fathers, for he knew that an Empire of men alone would be but of a short
age.

At length the Capitol being taken by the Sabins, when they had fought most
bloodily together in the midst of the Marketplace, at the running in of women
between the two Armies, the War ceased, and at length a Peace, and League was
made, and they entered into a perpetual Friendship; wherefore Romulus put the
names of them upon the family of the Curii, and by consent of the Romans, it
was set down in public Records, that women should neither grind, nor play the
Cook: That women should be forbid to receive any thing from the Husband by
gift, and the Husband to receive any thing, by gift from the Wife, that they
might know, that all good things were common. Hence arose the custom, that in
their marriages, the wife should be brought in saying ubi tu, ego; denoting,
where thou art Master, I am Mistress; where thou art Lord, I am Lady. Afterward
when the Bands of the Volscians pitched their Camp within five miles of the
City, when, their Kings being expelled, (Coriolanus Martius was Captain) they
were turned back by women: In honor of which exploit, a famous Temple was
dedicated to Women's Fortune: Yea, notable ensigns of great honor and dignity
were given to them by Decree of the Senate. So it comes about, that they take
the upper-hand in the way, and men rise up and give them place.

Furthermore, Purple garments with gold Lace, Ornaments of Gems, Earings,
Golden-Chains are allowed them, for it was provided by the Laws of following
Emperors, as often times as there were Statutes made which prohibited certain
Garments and Ornaments, that women's Garments should not be comprehended under
them; they were also rewarded with successions of inheritances and possessions:
and it was permitted by the Laws, to celebrate with public praises the
Funerals of Women, as the Funerals of famous Men: in regard, that when the
present was to be sent to Delphian Apollo, by the desire of Camillus, and so
much gold could not be had, the women brought the Ornaments of their bodies of
their own accord toward it.

Furthermore, In that War with Cyrus, carried on against Astyages, the Army of
the Persians being turned to flight, it was by the reprehension of women made
ashamed, and brought again into a good posture of defense, and gave to their
enemies a notable overthrow; for which deed it was determined by the Laws of
Cyrus, that the Kings of Persia, as they enter the City, should give to each
woman some sums of gold; which Macedo twice entering the City, twice paid.
Moreover he commanded the gift should be doubled to women with child; So
women were presented with every kind of honor by the ancient Kings of the
Persians and Romans, from the cradles (as I may say) of the Roman City and
Empire, yea, and not less honored by the Emperors themselves. Hence,
Justinianus the Emperor did think fit, that the advice and counsel of his Wife
should be taken in making Laws. And elsewhere the Law says, because the Wife
shines in the honor of the Husband, that he might take notice of her
splendour, as in how much the Husband is exalted, so much is the Wife: So the
Wife of an Emperor, is called an Emperesse; and the Wife of a King, a Queen;
and the Wife of a Prince, a Princess, and illustrious howsoever she was borne:
And Vlpianus says, a Prince or Emperor is freed from and above Laws; but
Augusta, which is the Wife of an Emperor, although she be not free from the
Laws by her self, notwithstanding the Prince, or Emperor brings the same
Privileges to her, as he has himself. Hence it is that famous women are
permitted to judge, and to arbitrate, and that they might be capable to investe
into Fee-Farme Land, and of being invested, and to determine what right
vassalls have: And it appertains to the same thing, that women may have
particular Servants, as the man has, and the woman is able to judge amongst
strangers; she is also of power to put a name upon a family, so that Sons might
be denominated from their Mother, not from their Father; they have also great
Privileges concerning Dowries, here and there expressed in diverse parts of the
body of the Laws, where also provision was made, that women of honest life,
and fame, ought not to be imprisoned for civil debtes yea, that Judge was
punished with death, which should put her in prison. But if she were suspected
of a fault, she was thrust into a Monastery, or was delivered to the custody of
women to be secured, because by the testimony of the Law the woman is in better
condition then the man: as also in the same kind of offense, the man offends
more then the woman. Hence the man taken in Adultery is punished with death,
but the woman Adulteress she is but commanded into a Monastery.

Many privileges Azo gathers in his summary upon the titles of the Velleian
Council, and Speculator upon the Renunciations; yea, those ancient Lawgivers,
grave men, by their wisdom, as I may say, Artificers of Commonwealths, in
knowledge most eminent, Licurgus, and Plato (I say) when as they knew out of
the Secrets of Philosophy, that women neither by excellency of mind, nor by
strength of body, nor dignity of nature, were inferior to men, but equal to
them in all things; they appointed women to be exercised with men in
Wrastlings, and Tournaments; also in all things that appertain to Warlike
Discipline, in the Bow, in the Sling, in the casting of Darts, in shooting, in
scirmishing in Armor both by Horse and Foot, in pitching of Camps, and
ordering of Armies, in leading of Hosts, and (as I may speak briefly) they
gave all those things to women, which now are the exercises of men.

Let us read Writers of antiquities worthy of belief, we shall find in
Getulia, Bactris, Galletia, that the manner has been for the men to be given
to effeminatnesse, and luxury, but the women, to Till Ground, Build, Trade,
Ride, War, as men with us do now.

With the Cantabrians, men did give portions to women, Brothers were given in
marriage by Sisters, and the Daughters were appointed Heirs. With the
Scythians, Thracians and Gauls Offices were common both to women and to men:
And in Councels, either for War or Peace, women were adhered to in judgment as
soon, or before men; which the league of the Celtans with Haniball does
demonstrate in these words, If any one of the Celtans complains that he is
injured by any of the Carthaginians, let the Magistrate or the Rulers of the
Carthaginians, which are in Spain, be Judges of the matter: If any one of the
Carthaginians has suffered any unjust thing from any of the Celtans, let the
women of the Celtans be judges concerning that matter.

But you will say, that liberty and privilege which was given to Women, is
restrained by the Laws of men (whose tyranny usurpes against God and Natures
Laws) abolished by use and custom, and extinguished by the manner of their
education; for a woman by and by as soon as she is borne, and from the first
beginning of her years is detained in sloth at home, and as incapable of
another Province, she is permitted to think of nothing besides her Needle or
the like; when afterward she reaches to ripeness of age, she is delivered up
to the jealous rule of her husband, or else shut up in the perpetual Bridewell
of Nuns; also public Offices are forbidden them by Laws, it is not permitted
that any one plead in judgment, be she never so wise.

Furthermore, They are not to meddle in jurisdictions, arbitrements, adoptions,
intercessions, procurations, Guardianships, in causes Testamentary or
criminal. Also it is not lawful for them to preach the word of God: which is
against express Scripture* in which the holy spirit promises to women by the
Prophet Joel saying, And your daughters shall prophecy; even as in the time of
the Apostles, they did publicly teach, as it is noted by Anna the wife of
Simeon, and the daughters of Philip, and Priscilla the wife of Aquila: So great
is the wickedness of all late Lawmakers, that they have made void the
commandments of God by their own traditions; because, Women, otherwise by the
prerogative of Nature, and excellency in dignity most noble, they pronounce
more vile by condition, and inferior to all men.

By their Laws, women are compelled to give place to men, as the conquered to
the conquerors in War, not either by natural or divine Command or Reason;
But by Custom, Education, Fortune, and by a certain tyrannical humor of men
enforcing.

There are moreover which assume Authority to themselves over Women by virtue
of Religion, and do prove their Tyranny out of holy Writ; who have that curse
of Eve continually in their mouths; under the power Genesis 3.
of man thou shall be, and he shall rule over thee: That if it be Answered
them, that Christ has taken away the Curse, they will object the same thing
from the words of Peter, 1 Pet. 3. Col. 3. Ephesians. 5.
of which thing Paul also speaks, Let Women be subject to their Husbands, let
Womem be silent in the Church,

But those who know the various Tropes and figures of Scripture, will easily
perceive those places differ not really, and internally, but only in bark and
outside; for there is that Order in the Church, that Men are preferred before
Women in the Ministry; but only as the Jews before the Greeks in the
Promises. Romans 2. Acts 20.


Nevertheless; God is no respecter of persons; for in Christ neither Male nor
Female, but a new creature is accepted.

But also for the most part things are permitted to Men, by reason of their
hardness of heart against Women; as in time past Bills of Divorcement were
granted to the Jews, which notwithstanding abridge not the dignity of Women;
for Men being deficient and weak, Women had the power of Judgment, to the
reproach of Men.

And the Queen of Sheba shall one day judge the men of Jerusalem. Who
therefore are justified by faith, are made Sons of Abraham, but Sons (I
say) of the Promise, are subjected to Women, and are obnoxious to that Command
of God, speaking to Abraham, Genesis 21.
All things that Sarah says unto thee; hear her voice.

And thus, that I may now recollect my self, very briefly I have showed the
excellency of the Female Sex by many Arguments, (viz.) by Name, by Order, by
Place, by Matter: And what dignity the Woman has acquired (above ^e Man) from
God. Afterward we have demonstrated by Religion, Reason, Nature, Humane Laws,
by various Authority, Reasons and Examples. Notwithstanding, we have not said
so many things, but we have left as many yet to be spoken, because not moved
by ambition, or for Vaine-Glories sake I came to write, but by Duty, and Truth,
that I may not seem as an envious, and detracting man to snatch away from so
Noble a Sex, their due and just praises, by a certain wicked silence, if I
were silent.

If any more curious shall find some Argument passed by, which he may think
ought to be added to this Work, I shall think my self not reprooved of him,
but helped, so far as he may render this our good work better by his wit and
learning. But least the work should arise to an exceeding Volume, here let
there be an end.

FINIS.

