The Phrygian Fabulist: OR, THE FABLES OF AESOP: EXTRACTED From the Latin
Copy, And MORALIZ'D.

By LEONARD WILLAN Gent.

Puerilia Ludibria
Hominum Studia.
LONDON, Printed by W. D. for Nicolas Bourn, at the South Entrance of the
Roial-Exchange, 1650,

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Edward Earl of Dorset, Knight of the most noble Order
of the GARTER.
SIR,
IN those happy days, while yet Apollo's Tree (as a preservative against the
wrath of Heaven) flourisht at every noble Patriot's Gate: your careless eye by
chance surpised a Virgin scarcely dressed, Poor Astraea, whose Tongue and Habit
I had fashioned to our use; by Her Access to your Protection, pretending to
have won fair shelter from the blasts of Critic Tongues; and as the Right of
my Respects, to have tendered unto you, My Lord, the first fruits of my Pen;
but e're her Pastoral Reed could vent her humble strains, 'twas silence't by
the clamours of the Drum. My Designs are the same they were, my Lord; the
Subject's only changed with the Times, which (since most Pens were fashioned
by the Sword) Weight want's not in the Election; In which regard, my Lord, by
chance This falling to my hand, I have adventured to prefer to yours. Although
perhaps the Character thereof would in a vulgar eye scarcely win Credit to
move Acceptance or Perusal; A Piece so Antic, even worn out of use. And truly
had I as slightly it perused; I should in my Judgment have blemished your
esteem, and in your Judgment forfeited my Own, to have presumed to give it so
eminent an Introductor, as your Self; The public Oracle to whom all Doubts
appeal: But finding so large a Catalogue of the choicest Autors of every Age,
become Interpreters to This (though I confess but slight Expositors) It added
yet new Fervor to my Will, to make This your Divertisement, the only Object
of my Industry, wherein I hope the Errors you shall find will meet a favoring
Censure, when you, My Lord, are pleased to weigh the variety of the Subject,
not absolutely scrutable; The Troubles of the Times in which it formed was;
and the Integrity of His Passion to your Interests; who is

My Lord Your humble Servant LEONARD WILLAN.

THE LIFE of AESOP, Collected from Maximus Planudes.
Many (in all Ages) have made it their peculiar study to search into the
nature of humane things; but amongst those, whose Notions have com to the light
of Posterity, few or none have Aesop paralleled; who, as by divine Inspiration
atteining the perfection of moral Knowledge, may justly be said, therein, to
have born away the Glory from them All: who neither by intricate definitions,
nor abstruse reasoning nor from preceding examples admonishing, but only by
pleasant Fables instructing, so won the affections of the Hearers, that it
seemed to them a shame, that they endued with reason, should not wisely act,
and foresee those things that might be for their advantage or prejudice, as
did the Beast and Fowl he figured. In which image of his Philosophical
Commonwealth* seeming rather to Philosophize in works, then in words. He was
a Native of Ammoria a City of Phrygia, surnamed the great; by fortune a slave;
but the subjection of his Body could not corrupt* nor yet inthral his Mind.
As little gracious in his form had Nature likewise been to him, being of all
men of that Age the most deformed: Sharp-headed, flat-nos'd, pouch-mouth'd,
short-neck't, crook-back't, tun-bellied, Baker-kneed, bow-leg'd,
inverst-footed, all which were varnish't with a hideous black, which gave him
the distinction of his name, Aesop implying Aethiop. To these a voice obscure
and inarticulate; so that in him all Pieces did agree, as he were predesign'd
to ignomie. But though in Body thus irregular* his wit was sudden, and
invention sharp, yet because not communicable, his Master him (as fit for no
domestic use) employed only to dig up the soil: to which with much alacrity
he still applied himself. The Steward to this Lord (to show himself careful
to his Master's trust, and the Soil grateful to his Master's cost) presented
unto him the choicest Figs the Season had afforded, which to the trust of a
domestic given, till he disposed were thereof to eat: the Trustee with his
Fellows privately contrived to eat the Fruit, and to charge Aesop with the
theft thereof: who by these Mates accused, was judged guilty, and to Supplice
brought: But Aesop prostrate at his Master's feet, obteining a Repriev, a
flaggon of warm water brought before them all, whereof part drinking, he to his
Fellows the remainder gave, the warmnes of the water suddenly a loathing
caussed in their Stomachs, provoking them to vomit: from Aesop only the pure
water came; but his Accusers with the wa^er straight disclosed their guilt; who
justly suffered what they had prepared for the Innocent: while Aesop with
Applaus dismissed, returned to his work. On which intentive two of Diana's
Priests, by chance, had lost their way, to him repaired for direction, to
which (after some small refection given them) Aesop became their Guide: for
whose benevolence, the grateful Priests addressed their zealous Preirs to
Heaven, like Grace from thence might be enlarged to him. Aesop returned travel
had soon o'recom his sens with sleep, in which he dreamed Fortune appeared to
him, loosing his fettered tongue, and him inspiring with this moral faculty;
from which he waking, found the success of what was figured; thankful to
Heaven, Aesop, o'recom with joie, himself addressing to his task again, espied
the Steward Zenas (for some slight fault) sharply correcting one of his Mates
with blows: Aesop reproaching him his daily cruelty, threatened to make
complaint unto his Lord. The Steward much amazed to hear him speak, and jealous
now he might provoke his Master to displeasure against him: to frustrate
which, he against Aesop (with falls suggestions) prepossest his Lord, which
credit winning, wrought so much dislike, that Aesop was surrendered solie to his
hands, him to dispose of, as best liked him: whereon a passing Merchant
requiring of him what he had to sell; Zenas presented Aesop; the Merchant much
incenst, as he had mocked him, in contemt of the proffer turned suddenly
away: accosting whom, Aesop desired him to accept the sale, he might be
useful to him; in that, perhaps he might at home have some unhappie Boys,
over whom if he might but preside to keep them in aw, he should to them as an
Hobgoblin be. The Merchant pleased with the conceit, tendered his Price, and
among his new Mates, bid him choos his Pack: Aesop heeron took a great Basket,
which was filled with bread for their Provision, whereat his Fellows much
derided him, in that he had the greatest, might have took the least: but ere
they traveled far, few meals had Aesop's carriage made so light, they envied
him his burden. The Merchant with his Troop to Sames com, exposed Aesop and his
Mates to sale: whom Xanthus a Philosopher abourding (neglecting Aesop) strictly
examined of their Faculties, they made reply, That they could all things do;
at which Aesop laughed scornfully: which Xanthus scholars observing, they
desired him, he would Aesop prove; to whom addressed Xanthus ask't, What he
was? Aesop said, Black: Xanthus said, he mistook, he ask't, Whence he was
born? Aesop replied, from his mothers womb. Xanthus said he yet not
apprehended him, he asked him. In what Place he was born? Aesop replied, His
Mother never told him, whither it were above stairs or below. Xanthus ask't,
What he could do? Aesop said, Nothing; his fellows All but lately had ingrost,
and nothing left to him. Xanthus ask't him if he bought him, if he would not run
away? Aesop replied, if such his purpose were, he would of his Counsel not his
Master make. Xanthus objected, that he was deformed; Aesop replied A
Philosopher ought to make the Mind and not the Body the Object of his choice.
The Scholars much delighted with his wit, tendered his Price; and gave him to
their Master for their use. The standers by o'rehearing of the Price, much
wondering at the meanness of the same, ask't, who it was that bought him; who
him sold. But (ashamed of his value) neither would declare themselves: Whereon
Aesop said, He was the Party sold; Xanthus the Chapman; The Merchant made the
sale; if neither this avouch't, then he was free; Aesop brought home, no
pleasing object was to Xanthus wife: But Aesop showing her the prejudice a
handsome slave might be unto her Fame, restrained the violence of her Passion;
which better yet to pacify, Xanthus to a Public Garden went, to buie for her
a Present of the choicest Fruits, with him Aesop taking to conveie them home.
Arrived there, the fruit being gathered and delivered; for which Xanthus
being about to pay; the Ga^dner prayed him to accept of them, he only did
desire of him solution to one doubt, which was, Why those Herbs planted by his
hand, though watered and manured diligently, yet slowly took increas: but what
sprung from the Earth of their accord, although neglected, sooner germinate?
Xanthus (not knowing what else well to say) replied, this, as other things was
in the Government of Divine Providence: at which Aesop laughing; Xanthus
incenst, ask't, if in it, he had derided him? Aesop replied; not him, but who
him taught: For what was by Divine Providence don, by wise men only should be
scrutable: desiring that the resolution might be left to him; which granted,
Aesop thus answered it; A Woman having children by the first, became the Wife
unto a second Husband, who children also by a former had: unto the children
she brought forth, the Wife a most indulgent Mother was; but unto those of
which she found her Husband prepossest, a churlish stepdame, whose rights she
often them abridg'd, to cherish more her own: So the Earth, to those that were
her proper Issue, as Legitimate, plentifully administered: But unto those that
planted were by Art, as Bastards, scarce afforded Nourishment. The Gardner with
the Answer satisfied; bad Aesop fetch fruit gratis when he would. When home
returned: Xanthus bad Aesop (among other things) prepare a pair of Hog's feet
for his Supper, which on the fire set; Xanthus, occasion seeking to correct his
Slave, as he was busied on some other thing, took privately out of the Pot a
foot; which Aesop not long after missing (foresaw some snare was laid to entrap
him) ran forthwith to a Stall at hand, and from a Hog, lately shut up to fat,
chopped off a foot, dressed it, and cast it to the rest in the Pot* Xanthus (in the
Interim) doubting, when Aesop should miss the foot he took for fear of
Punishment would run away, went secretly, and cast it in again: when they were
boiled, as Aesop poured them forth. Xanthus discovering five feet in the dish,
ask't, How that came to pass? Aesop abash't, required, How many feet two Hogs
should have? Xanthus said, eight; Aesop replied, the number then was right;
five in the dish, and the other three the fat Hog had, was enclosed in the
Stall. Xanthus incensed; Aesop desired his Patience, saying, He well knew,
that from addition and reduction in quantity could happen no error in the
whole sum. Next day a solemn feast was held by Xanthus Scholars, where he
collecting of the choicest meats, to Aesop them delivered, with a charge, he
should to them present it, loved him best: he on his Mistress thinking to be
revenged: came home, and in her hearing, uttering his late charge, Licaena
called, a little Cur his Master of en played with in his lap, and gave to him the
meat* his Mistress heeron high in rage and grief, withdrew unto her Chamber,
there with many tears bewailing this affront, as supposed from her Husband.
Aesop returned; a great dispute arose amongst the Philosophes, When the
greatest disturbance should befall mankind. The Question not at Table
satisfied, Aesop had leav to speak, who said* This happen would in the last
Resurrection of the dead, when each one should require, what once they had
possessed. Aesop's facetious wit heeron all much approved, and by them strait
another was propounded: Why Sheep led to the slaughter, as Swine no clamours
vent: The Question at a stand; Aesop replied; Sheep usually were handled to be
milkt, and of the burden of their Fleece to be divested; in which took from
their feet, no ill suspected from the sight of iron: but Swine that neither
milked were nor shorn, well knew for these respects not to be drawn, but for
their flesh, which only was of use; therefore just reason for their out-crie
had. Aesop's conceit much laughter moved till the Feast broke up. Xanthus
returned Home, his Wife reproach't him her indignity, as judging it from him;
who much amazed, called Aesop to enlighten the disorder; Aesop said, he
performed but his commands in giving this his Present to the Dog; as to them
loved him best: for though his Mistress seemed benevolent, yet when reproved,
she would revile again, the Dog though threat and beat, returned with new
endearments to his Master's Lap. But all this in his wives opinion could not
Xanthus clear, who to her Parents strait in this distaste repaired; to the
disturbance of her anxious Husband; whom Aesop finding much perplexed, to
pacify this trouble, by his act procured; practiced this slight, to fetch her
home again. With a great Basket he to Market went, which he well stored with
the choicest Fowl, then near the dwelling where his Mistress was, enquired for
such rarities, might grace a Nuptial Feast. Which being by one of the
Domestics overheard, he busily curious, unto Aesop came, to know for whom
this Preparation was* Aesop (faining him not to know) replied; for Xanthus the
Philosopher, who on the morrow should a fair Virgin wed. The Servant home
returning with this hasty news, filled Xanthus wife with rage and jealousy,
who strait flew home to frustrate this design, where joifully received, with
the Provision, feasting, she was reconciled. And to congratulate this new
Union, Xanthus next day his Scholars made his Guests; commanding Aesop for the
entertainment buie the best of things. Aesop (whose aim still was to mock his
Master's learning) thought, he would punish him for this his unadvised
Commission to Market went, where buying naught but tongues, home he returned
and dressed them sundry ways. The Guest arrived; first boiled tongues he sent
in, whereat they all commended Aesop's ingenuitie that to Philosophers for the
first Mess thus had served Tongues, the Ministers of knowledge. For the next
service, roasted Tongues was set, for the next baked; So that in Sum they
nothing had but Tongues; at which the Guests were much abash't, and Xanthus
much incenst; who Aesop calling rebuked with much fury: Aesop returned thanks
to him; in that he favored him with that advantage in this his reproof, to
call him to account for this his default, in the presence of Philosophers, who
had capacity to judge the Nature of his Crime, if such there any were, then
turning to his Master, said, He bad him buie of all things the most excellent;
Appealing then to the Assembly, ask't, What there could be more excellent
then Tongues; by them all knowledge was communicated. Cities erected, Laws
established, Nuptials celebrated, Men protected, Friendship confirmed; in brief
the Commerce of man's whole life consisted only in the use thereof: At which
all smiling approved what Aesop said; Xanthus himself (on Aesop's fault)
excusing to his Guests; said, they should sup with him; and to the end they
should no farther be abused in their Entertainment, they should be witness to
the charge he gave; then calling Aesop, with purpose to entrap him, bad him
for their Supper buie the worst of things: Which Aesop did; and for their
Supper nothing served but Tongues again. Summoned heeron to answer his
Delinquencie: Aesop for his Defense insisted o'th particulars of his Charge,
that nothing ever wors could be then Tongues: By these, quarrels were begot,
Men slain, Lies forged, Execrations dispensed, Perjurie vented, Kingdoms
overthrown; and in brief thereby the whole life entangled in error; whereat the
Guests not so well pleased, one of them said, If Xanthus were not armed with
Patience beyond the suffrance of a Man, Aesop would make him mad: whom Aesop
strait reproving, said, He was a busy curious fellow to incens the Master so
against his Servant. Xanthus occasion taking to beat Aesop, in that he blamed
his Friend as curious; imposed a Charge on him to bring him One, that was not
so. Which to effect, Aesop went forth into the street, where looking earnestly
about him; he descried a man a long time in a corner had sit still immov'd:
Aesop (him judging some simple idle drone) invited him to Dinner from his
Master; the Clown not asking who his Master was or where, went home with him.
Xanthus admiring much this his new guest, asked Aesop, who he was: Aesop
replied a man not curious, such as he had commanded him to bring. Xanthus his
wife strait whispering in the ear; desired her to fulfill what ere he bad her
do, he might advantage win to punish Aesop's Insolence: forthwith his voice
exalting, bad her bring some water to wash the feet of this his welcome Guest:
Prefiguring to himself, his Guest would in civilitie refuse so mean a Ministry
from so fair a hand; and in so doing Aesop might be convicted; of which his
wife desirous applied her self thereto with diligence. The Clown esteeming this
as a peculiar grace to honor him, his feet extended without Cerimonie; which
washed, as rudely he sat down. Xanthus pursuing still his Purpose; bad fill his
Guest some Wine imagining his Guest would in good manners move the Cup might
first have been preferred to him; the Clown esteeming this as right to his
respect, accepted it, and cleared with the Cup the doubt; then eagerly fell on
the Mess that nighest was to hand; which, Xanthus following his design,
condemned much in that it not well ordered was; and calling for the Cook,
reviled him with sharp rebukes, which were pursued with blows; the Clown
without intermission feeding, said, The Meat was very good, Xanthus might
say, and do his Pleasure, it not concerned him. Xanthus much vexed he could
not trap his Guest; at last service a Marchpane, seemed much to mislike, and
calling for the Pastrie-Cook, reproacht him many defects in the composure; who
made reply, Had it not been well baked, he might have born the blame; but the
fault being in the making, his Mistress therein was to be condemned, who
only had a hand in it: Xanthus a private signal giving to his wife, stepped in a
fury to her, saying, since 'twas her fault, she only for it should be burnt
alive, then to the fire bearing her in his Arms, paused a while, exspecting
when his Guest would run to rescue her. But he fast tied by the teeth, praid
Xanthus, if he pleased to hold his hand awhile, he would fetch his Wife too,
they both might burn together. Xanthus admiring the immotion of the Clown,
yielded the Victory unto Aesop's choice: and forthwith sent him to the common
Bath, to be informed what company there was, if few or none, his resolution
being then to bathe himself. Aesop on his errand hasting, encountered the chief
Magistrate; who knowing he belonged to Xanthus, asked him, Where he went?
Aesop in haste replied. He did not know; the Magistrate believing this slight
answer made in scorn of him, committed him to Prison: Passing to which, Aesop
said to the Magistrate, he now might see how pertinently he had answered him,
he did not know that he should go to Prison: The Magistrate much pleased with
his ready wit, forthwith enlarged him: Who coming to the Bath, observed many
there, who at the entry stumbling at a stone, past to and fro not much
regarding it: Only One came, and ere like chance befell him, it removed. Aesop
returned, informed his Master there was but one man only in the Bath. But
Xanthus thither com, finding a multitude, reproved Aesop for abusing him: Aesop
replied; all coming to and fro, had stumbled at a stone just in the entry
lay, One only had removed it ere he past, to whom the rest compared he
could not judge them men, giving such slight evidence of that faculty, which
should for such distinguish them: heeron Xanthus not judging it a fit time to
bathe, withdrew from thence unto a private Feast of his Society, to which some
time before he was invited; where on discourse of lusty Bibbers, he high in
wine and fancy boasted, he only would exhaust the Sea, by drinking it, which
proffering by wager to make good, found an Accepter there, who from their hands
deposited their rings, to confirm the Contract, which was the losers dwelling
house consigned was thereby unto the winner. Xanthus, his wits recovering with
his sleep missed his ring next morning, as he washed; whereof Aesop he
examining, found to his grief the Error he had don, and to his succor, with
large proffers, summoned Aesop's wit; Aesop replied, to win there was no
possibility, but his Engagement to withdraw, that he assured him of. Which as
Aesop advised, was thus pursued: Th'Assemblie met the wager to determine;
Xanthus immov'd no part of it denied, himself preparing to the enterprise; of
the sea water taking a full Bowl; first loudly published the Particulars, which
were, he should the Sea drink dry, his adversary therewith summoning, as his
part to stop all rivers fell into the deep, it being the Sea he only was to
drink, not the fresh waters thither issuing, which demand held but just, and
either Part impossible; the wager was withdrawn. Xanthus securing both his Fame
and Goods by Aesop's subtlety. When home returned; Aesop required his freedom
for his recompens, to which unwilling, Xanthus bad him first to go forth, and
if two Crows he did discover, to bring him word thereof, it would be to him a
good Omen; if but one, it did protend ill hap. Aesop went forth, and spying
two, returned* informing thereof, Xanthus, who, hasting forth to see them,
found but one; the other in the interim being flown away: whereon Xanthus
believing Aesop had derided him, fell on his skirts with blows: during which
fraie a Messenger came in to invite Xanthus to a Public Feast. Which hearing*
Aesop reproacht his Master this his Augurie: saying He that had two Crows seen
was heaten, his Master that but One, was feasted: Xanthus to gratulate this
Entertainment; another made soon after: at which Aesop had charge to let in
none but such were lettered men. Aesop (as he was wont) his Master's learning
to deride, kept the Door shut, and as the Guests knocked, asked, what the Dog
moved? At which without reply, distasted All returned; but one, who when Aesop
asked, What the Dog moved, replied, his Ears and Tale, to whom free entry Aesop
only gave. Xanthus perplexed to see his Guests, but this, had All deceived him,
was at next meeting informed of the Cause: Aesop to judgment called, objected in
defens, his charge was only the literate to admit; for Proof whereof, he
only asked, What the Dog moved? But they not able to resolv, he could not judge
them of those Guests, his Master purposed to receiv. Xanthus (for shame,
concealing his displeasure, till time produced a juster cause of Punishment)
went forth with Aesop to view the Public Monuments of the dead; where on a
Column, Aesop finding this Inscription ((...).) asked of his Master, If he
could interpet it; Xanthus confessed his doubts; Aesop desired to know what his
reward should be, if he thereby a secret Treasure should disclose to him.
Xanthus replied, His Liberty. Aesop heeron four Paces measuring from the Tomb,
dig'd up the Earth, and found a Pot of Gold; which to his Master bringing, he
his Promiss clame'd. Xanthus said, first he should expound to him the Sens of
the Characters, which he more prized then the Gold, was by them figured; which
Aesop thus did, (...): which is, Going from hence four Paces, digging thou
shall find a Treasure of Gold. Xanthus said, Since he was so subtle he
should not be made free. Aesop vexed* thus abused, said, He must further let
him know, This Treasure should be given to the Bizantian King. Xanthus
demanded, Whence he had learnt that. Aesop replied, the same letters did infer
the same, (...). Which is, Give the Treasure of Gold which you have found to
Dionysius the King. Xanthus now fearing to be dispossessed, bad Aesop silent
be, he should enjoie his liberty, with half the Gold to boot. Aesop said,
half was his right without his Gift by the Intention of the Erector of the
Monument. Xanthus asked* Where he found that? Aesop replied, in the same
Characters it was figured, (...): which is, Received, going away, divide the
Treasure of Gold, which you have found. Xanthus said, when he came home he
should both have his share and liberty. Both being returned: Xanthus in fear
that Aesop should divulge his new adventure; cast him in Prison. Where Aesop
shamefully reproaching him the breach of his Promiss, was at length set free:
but not restored to his liberty: which Aesop him assured he should ere long
attein against his will; about which time happened this accident in the Samian
State. As they were in the Cerimonie of a solemn Feast, an Eagle had trust up
their Public Seal, and dropped it in the bosom of a Slave. Amazed at this new
Prodegie, the Magistrates repaired to Xanthus as the chief Philosopher,
t'expound the Mystery: but he as full of doubt as they, some time required
thereon to deliberate. In which Aesop perceiving Xanthus full of trouble,
knowing well the cause, desired him to cast the burden of his doubts on him, and
the next day to let the Samians know it was no part of his Profession to
interpret Auguries, but that he had a Boie, who skillful was therein, and what
they sought was able to resolv; and if he did enlighten the Presage, it would
an honor to his Master be, who had in his Possession such a slave, but if he
failed therein, the hazard of the Error would solie fall on him; to which
persuaded, Xanthus next day what Aesop had adviz'd, communicated to the
Samians, whereon Aesop summoned, Publicly stood forth and said, That Fortune
(still the Minister of strife) had cast the prize of Glory betwixt the Master
and his slave, which if the servant from the Master bore, in envy he should
nothing gain but blows: and if he failed in the Enterprise, like stripes would
punish his Presumtion, which disadvantage to avoid, He first desired the
People to procure his liberty; the People heeron all with one assent, required
Xanthus to enlarge his slave, as a peculiar Grace unto the City. Xanthus not
very forward to the motion was checked by the President, assuring him, if he
did not assent thereto, to make it their own Act. Xanthus perceiving no
evasion, yielded his right, which by the common Crier published; Aesop the
Augure thus interpreted: The Eagle, as the King of Birds, impli'd a Regal
Power; The public Seal, the Government of their State, the ravishing of the
same, and fall thereof into a Bondmans breast, prefigur'd the Power aforesaid
should force from them their Liberty, reducing them to servilitie. The Samians
on this Presage filled with grief, dissolved: Soon after Letters had from
Craesus King of Lydia, by which they summoned were to be his Tributaries,
which not accepted, to prepare for War. The Samians doubtful what heerin to do,
ere farther they proceeded, would consult with Aesop, who them assured; there
was, as then, no Place for Council left; since the more powerful still must
be obeyed; to which at present he advized them, saying, That Fortune had in
each man's life laid forth two several ways: The one of Liberty, the Entry
whereof was difficult and rough, but the end smooth and pleasant. The other was
of servitude, whose entry plain and easy was of access; but The Issue thereof
penable and rude. But his advice rejected by the Samians, Craesus thereof had
soon intelligence who straight resolved to decree a war against the Samians:
But was advised by his Ambassadors, to facilate his Victory, first to draw
Aesop from them; which moved to the Samians by a second Embassy with releas of
their purposed tribute, was accepted of, resolving to deliver Aesop to their
hands. Which known to Aesop, he to the People publicly declared his liking to
their Purpose* but for Instruction told them, He had a Fable to commend to
them, which was, When Beast had one with other conference, the Wolvs waged war
against the Sheep, who had the Dogs for their confederates, against whom the
Wolvs not able to prevail, sent to the Sheep an Embassy; whereby was promised
peace, if they the Dogs would yield up to their hands, to which the Sheep
assenting, became unto the Wolvs an easy Preie. The sens heerof was by the
Samians quickly understood, who thereon would retract their first intention.
But Aesop not assenting thereto, with Promiss to be helpful to them, was
disinist with the Ambassadors, who to Craesus brought, the Spectacle at first
incensed him with scorn, so vile a thing should be an obstacle to his
Enterprise. Aesop said to the King (with great Humility) he nor by force, nor
by necessity was compelled to his Presence, but of his own Accord; therefore
desired his Pardon and Liberty to speak: which granted; Aesop said; A certain
man, who Locust sought to slaie, by chance had took a Grasshopper, whom he
about to kill; the Grasshopper desired him, not to destroy him without any
Cause: she did the Ear no hurt, nor yet in other Action injure him; the motion
of her little tongue did but delight the Passenger. Th'Allusion heerof making
to himself, surpised the King with wonder and delight; who promised Aesop, he
would his Life not only, but his Fate enlarge, commanding him to ask what he
desired, it should forthwith confirmed be to him. Aesop requested only he to
the Samians would be reconciled; of which the King assuring him, Aesop tendered
him thanks, and thereon writ these Fables, which to the King presented by him
esteemed highly were, and from that time preserved to future Ages. Soon after
Aesop receiving letters to the Samians from the King, containing that he was
in favor unto Aesop reconciled to them, with rich Gifts laden, to Samos sailed
again. The Samians at his return, receiving him in triumph, brought several
Crowns to him as their deliverer: whereon the Kings Concessions to them
published, Aesop for this Beneficence, was highly by the State rewarded. From
whence departing. Aesop began his travels, disputing where he came with the
Philosophers. Coming to Babylon the reputation of his wisdom, brought him in
great favor with Licerus King thereof. In which times it was a custom amongst
those Princes were at Peace together to send Aenigma's or dark Sentences one
unto the other, and who resolved them, contracted tribute from the tender
gained, or failing forfeited to him; In which, by Aesop's help Lycerus both
enlarged his Fame and Treasury, Aesop being childeless, adopted for his son,
one Ennus a young man of noble Family, who falling into league with Aesop's
Concubine, soon after was by him expelled from his house. Ennus heeron incenst,
a letter forged with Aesop's hand and seal, wherein expressed was Aesop's
contriving with Licerus adversares to his Prejudice, in the Solution of their
Problems, which by him to Licerus shown, he facile of belief, yielded no truce
to ire; but forthwith strict command gave to Hermippo, he should kill Aesop
without more delaie. Hermippo being Aesop's friend belied not the Character,
concealing Aesop in a secret vault, whither still privately he convei'd him
food, while Ennus by Licerus order seized on his Possessions; Soon after this,
Nectenabo King of Egypt hearing Aesop was slain, took that advantage, to send
unto Licerus Problematical Letters; requiring him to send him such Architects,
could build a Tower might touch, nor Heaven, nor Earth and there with a man,
that should resolv, what ever he should ask, which if he did, he tribute
should receive if not pay to him. Licerus on receipt heerof, reflecting on the
prejudice he had (in Aesop's loss) procured to his proper Interests, perplexed
was in mind; which Hermippo distinguishing, laid hold on this occasion as
auspitious, to let Licerus know, Aesop was by him yet preserved alive, least
that the execution of his sudden wrath, might after by him be repented of. At
which Licerus overcom with joie for Aesop sent, with floods of tears restoring
him to favor. Aesop his accusation knowing, and licenst now to speak, soon
cleared himself in the discovery of his Dilator's treachery, for which Ennus
by the King condemned to die, the sentence was repealed by Aesop's suit. who
him received again to his Adoption: with gracious Council him admonishing,
which gentle usage pierced so much his wounded Conscience with the horror of
his former guilt, that in the inward conflict thereof he soon after died.
Lycerus communicating to Aesop the Contents of Necienabo's letter. Aesop the
reat smiling, adviz'd him to return for Answer, That in the ensuing Spring, he
should receiv from him what he required: With which the Ambassador dismissed.
Aesop in the Interim four chois Eaglets dressed so to hand, that each could
bear into the upper Region of the Aer a Child suspended in a Basket, and
therewith make descent at his discretion. With this strange Aequipage, the
Winter past, Aesop to Egypt came, where in the Presence of the Egyptian King,
he let his Eaglets with their carriages in a square figure fly; who in the
Aer exalted the Boys called out to them that were below to bring up the
materials for the Structure. The King abasht, said, He no flying men had for
the carriages; and in this part of his demand confessed himself convinced. Next
followed the Aenigma's, the first propounded by the King, was, That he had in
his Possession certain Mares, who hearing the Horse neigh in Babylon, forthwith
conceived. Aesop desiring respite till th'insuing day, for the Solution;
commanded his Attendants to take a Cat, which tied in a line, to draw her
through the Streets, pursuing her with blows; This put in execution, The
Egyptians, who worshipped this Animal, seeing her thus miserably treated, ran
forthwith to her succor, and from her Persecutors rescuing her, complaint made
of the outrage to the King; who Aesop summoning required the reason, why what
they held in Reverence, he used with such conteme. Aesop replied, That Cat had
but last Night don to Licerus a signal displeasure, devouring a generous
fighting Cock, he had in great esteem. The King replied; That was impossible,
the Cat could in one night so long a voyage make: at which Aesop smiling, said;
So it likewise was, that Mares should at that distance be conceived with Fool.
The King well pacified heerin, approved Aesop's ingenuitie. And for farther
trial, assembled the chief Sophisters of his Realm, inviting them with Aesop to
a Feast; at which one of them addressing himself to Aesop, said, He by his God
was sent to ask a Question of him. Aesop replied, He both his God abused and
himself; God had no need of man's intelligence; whereat he silene't; Another
thus accosted him; There was a mighty temple in which a Column stood twelv
Cities had each one by thirty beams supported, round which still ran two
women. Aesop replied, With them, even children could expound such riddles. The
Temple was the world; the Column was the year, the twelv Cities thereon, were
the twelv months thereof; the thirty Columns supported each were days; the
women that surrounded it continually were might and day, which alternately
succeeded each other. The King heerat perplexed he could not Aesop foil,
assembled all his Peers; to consult with them how he might avoid the payment
of his tribute, made forfeit to Licerus by Aesop's subtlety. One of them said,
They Aesop should enjoin to propound a Question to them, that they neither
knew, nor ever heard. The Advice received, and of Aesop required; who having
respite till the following day, framed a Contract, in which Necienabo confessed
himself a thousand talents indebted to Licerus, which at the appointed time
close sealed delivered to the King in presence of his Nobles (ere the
inscription was unfolded, to overthrow Aesop's purpose) they said, they all had
that often heard and knew it to be true. Aesop replied, in respect of the
payment, he was engaged to them for their testimony. The King the writing
opening and purusing, said, He nothing was indebted to Licerus, all they were
present could it testify; which, all confirming, said; They never knew nor
heard of such a Matter. Aesop replied, If that were so, they had received what
they sought of him. Nectenabo heeron applauding Aesop's ready wit; tendered to
him the contracted tribute, and from his Court dismissed with much honor. Aesop
returned to Babylon, recited to Licerus what had past, presenting him his
tribute he had won. Licerus heeron to perpetrate to after ages Aesop's Fame
and Memory, in honor of him caussed his Statue to be erected in Gold. Soon
after Aesop obteining license of the King to travel, on promiss to return and
end his days with him; passed thorough Greece with great applaus, and unto
Delphos came: The Delphians curious to hear, but careless of what heard: made
small Account of him: In reproof whereof, Aesop compared them to a Log at Sea.
which floting on the instable Billows, seemed to them that were remote from it
something of ualue; but when viewed near at hand was found contemtible. The
Delphians hearing this, applied the Allusion thereof to themselves; which seized
them with jealousy, that Aesop might this Judgment of them publish through the
world, which if he did the high esteem all held of him would much eclyps their
Glory: this to prevent, they privately took from Apollo's shrine a Cup of Gold
and secretly conveied it among Aesop's Goods; who on his departure thence was
apprehended and accused of Sacrilege: which Aesop denying, they unbound his
carriages, discovering to the tumult they had raised the Cup; whereon Aesop
into Prison cast, his Judges his Accusers being, was soon convicted, and to
supplice led; where calling to the multitude, he said; When Beasts could
speak; the Mous made friends unto the Frog, invited him to Dinner; to gratulate
which the Frog the ensuing day would have the Mous his Guest, and to avoid the
danger of the Passage to his Cell, which was a Pool, the Mous unskil'd in
swimming, the Frog his foot unto his Guests had fastened by a line, therewith
to train him over; but having won the deepest of the flood, the Frog plunged
over head and ears the Mous: who drowning said; He treacherously was slain;
but a more powerful would avenge his death. When dead, the Mous lay floting
on the stream was by an Eagle trussed for her Preie, and with him the
suspending Frog, who likewise with the injured was devoured. The Application
heerto Aesop made was that Licerus and all Greece, would for his death like
vengeance take of them. But this restreining not the Delphians from their
purposed Act: Aesop fled from them to Apollo's Temple for his Sanctuary: But
from thence also forced to the Precipice again. Aesop attemting farther to
dissuade them; said; An Eagle had pursued a Hare into a Beetle's Den, the
distressed Beast requiring sbelter; the Beetle praid the Eagle not to despise her
impotence; but spare the refug'd Hare. The Eagle yet insulting more, struck
down the Beetle with her wings, and made the Hare her unresisted Preie: The
Beetle to revenge this outrage sought out the Eagle's Nest, and from thence
cast her eggs unto the Earth; the Eagle to avoid this injury shifted her Nest
much higher then it was, yet not there also from her Foe secured: The Eagle
being of Jove beloved, took refuge in his bosom, the Beetle this perceiving,
dirt gathered from the Earth, and in Joves bosom cash it amongst the eggs: Jove
of the eggs unmindfull, shaking off the dirt, cast both unto the Earth
together, who reproving the Beetle for this revenge, as an indignity to him.
The Eagle arrived, and heard, by Jove was not excused; yet being unwilling
that the Eagle's kind should ceas, adviz'd them to be reconcu'd, but that
accord soon broken; Jove transferred the season of the Eagle's breeding to
another time, in which the Beetle not able is to appear. The sens thereof Aesop
to them, inferred was, that they should not slight that God to whom he fled,
though but an image they had figured him, yet could not the impious escape his
punishment: But this not availing also; Aesop thus concluded, A Husbandman, who
in the Country had grown old, yet never saw the City, commanded his
Domestics to prepare for this his purposed Journie: who from their work not
being to be spared, in stead of Horses, as the more easy Beast, joined Asses
in a Car, and left them only to the old Man's Direction: as on his way a
hideous storm arose, whose obscure shrouds advanced the distant Night: wherein
the Asses erring, from off a steep rock overwhelmed their Guide; who as he
fell, said, Jove, what had he don, to merit such a shameful end, not procured
by the conduct of the generous Horse, or strenuous Mule, but of all Beast the
most despised Ass: Like Fate, said Aesop, did enlarge his Grief. Whereon yet
more incenst, they turned him off the Precipice; whose death being followed by
an incessant Plague, the Delphians to their Oracle appealed for redress: from
whence was answer made, they first should expiate the Crime of Aesop's death;
of which they conscious, erected to his Memory a Monument. But the
neighboring Princes not satisfied heerwith, when informed what had past, to
Delphos came; where making strict inquiry into Aesop's Death, became severe
avengers of the treacherous Murder.

ERRATA.
Page 2 lin. 23. for often. read often. p. 12. l. 4. for from, r. on. p. 21. l.
16. for strave, r strove, p. 42. l. 17. for shadow, r. shallow. p. 47. l. 11.
for frame r. Fame, Page 75. l. 13. for Ears, r. Ear, p. 97. l. 9. for end, r.
and. p. 122. l. 18 for soer, r. sower. p 141. l. 3. for evil, r. evils. p. 167.
l. 13. for when, r. which. p. 167. l. 16. for which, r. when.

The Phrygian Fabulist: OR, THE FABLES OF AESOP.
1. The dunghill Cock.
A Dunghill Cock, whose innate habits press
To scrape the dirt, through want or wantonness,
A Jewel there disclosed, thus did despise;
What splendid trifl's this divert's mine eyes?
Or what blind power to me this lot direct's?
Welcome it were to him such toies affect's;
But to my use, which limit's my esteem,
A grain of Barley I more worthy deem.
MORAL.
A stupid temper of ignoble stock
Is figured to us in the dung-hil Cock;
Who Nature's Beauties, and Art's Mysteries,
Does, when presented, with such scorn misprise,
Whilst he pursues, with delightful toil,
Those sensual Pleasures, which the soul defile.
2. The Wolf and Lamb.
A Wolf was drinking at the fountain head,
Had far beneath a Lamb discovered,
Refreshing Nature likewise; t'whom he went,
And thus exclaming did his fury vent;
Why troubled'st thou the stream wherein I drunk?
The Lamb, dismayed, fain would away have shrunk;
But urged again, alleged it could be
Unto the Wolf no incommoditie;
Since from himself the water did descend.
It Is not a month, the Wolf insisted, Friend,
Since in like manner you affronted me.
Your pardon, Sir, that your mistake must be,
Replid the Lamb; for born I was, not then.
Thou eat'st my Food, the Wolf affirmed again;
The trembling Lamb yet hereto answered;
Alas, I have not one tooth in my head.
The Wolf cried out; thou art too like thy Sire,
And for that crime thy life thou shall exspire.
MORAL.
Licentious Powers, thus, often circumvent
By fals-pretences the poor innocent.
But if those fail their purposes to form,
Another's crime must then his guilt suborn,
As Accesser to what the charge had mist;
It Is crime enough that he cannot resist.
3. The Mous and Frog.
'TWixt Mous and Frog there was a fraie,
Who should the Fennish Empire swaie:
The Mous more subtle; tufted Grass
His sure Retreat and Ambush was:
The Frog in agile strength prevailed,
His foe more openly assailed:
Their dreadful weapons were of Rush,
Wherewith each did at other push:
The duel sharp, yet doubtful stood,
Had, questionless, spilt little blood;
Until a Kite did them surveie,
Who made both Combatants her preie.
MORAL.
Here, weak, yet factious Cities are expressed,
Who only for improper Rule contest:
While blind Revenge is busy on the effects
Of hostile Acts, their safety each neglect's;
Till diverted, or spent their faculties,
Both are exposed to common Enemies.
4. The Dog and Shadow.
A Leering Cur a piece of flesh had stole,
Whereof to raven crep't into a hole:
Sudden pursuit this ardeur yet suspent,
And to soon force't him change that Element;
Taking a brook with his beloved Rape:
(The greater danger facilate's escape)
The current and the sky were both so clear,
As each to other perfect Mirror were,
And to the Cur, who there the figure viewed
Of that dear Prize, for which he was pursued.
This unknown shadow soon his rage revived,
Chopping at which, he was of both deprived.
MORAL.
So greedy minds, although possessed of store,
Pursue vain hopes, attempting to have more;
Till, thus, deluded in their eager chase,
Their vanished substance leav's them but disgrace.
5. The Lion and other Beast.
A Day of general Hunting was assigned
'Twixt the Lion and Beast of sundry kind;
The fearful Heart became their tragic Game,
Who, with much toil to all, at length was slain:
Which to divide each Beast strait rushed in,
And, as contracted, their parts challenging.
The Lion frowning, published that he
Held one part his by right of Dignity;
Another part did unto him belong,
For that he was then all the rest more strong.
A third part his he challenged, as gain;
For in the Chase he took the greatest pain,
Only for one part, rested, they could look,
Which as a Present of their Loves he took.
Each eie'd the other with remiss dismaie,
Silent and empty shrinking all away.
MORAL.
Greatness invested with unbalanc't Power
Subvert's the Office of a Governor;
Whence some infringe what their own Acts decree,
As mere dependants to their Ministry:
But if such Notions will not All advance,
The Rest is tendered for their countenance.
6. The Wolf and Crane.
A Wolf, a Lamb devouring, felt a bone
Stick in his throat; but help could have of none,
Though many sought to; All reproach't him, he
The Price bore justly of his cruelty:
With soothing words, and promises as fair,
The Crane was won to succou r his despair,
Who in his Guel thrust her exalted Neck,
And thence the bone extracted with her Beck;
Which don, forthwith she her reward desired;
The Wolf affirmed, she had, what she required,
Nor in his power, was greater good to give,
'Twas by his grace and suff'rance she did live;
For when her head was in his mouth, he might
Have sent her swiftly to her latest night.
MORAL.
To simple Natures, men indu'd with might,
In their extremes, much promise; pay with slight.
When in their powers, so, the wicked still
Think they do good to them, they do no ill.
7. The Husbandman and Adder.
A Country man, in a sharp winter storm,
Went to secure his Cattle and his Corn;
Where in a field he saw, benumbed with cold,
An Adder fettered in her native Fold.
With pity moved, her home with speed he bring's
And at the fire chafe'd her frozen limbs;
Til she her former vigor took again,
With which, her Host attempted to have slain;
Who, thus, with mortal strokes returned the strife,
Would thou give death to him, who gave thee life?
MORAL.
Mischievous men, when pres't with miseries,
Seem to cast off their harmfull qualities;
Under which semblance, often the bosoms win
Of simple Natures no ill harboring;
But he whose bounty their fallen state erect's,
Thus, of their Malice feel's the first effects.
8. The Ass and Bore.
THe stupid Ass did the stout Bore deride;
Who grin'd his tusks, and thereto thus replied,
(With restrained ire) ill thou deserve of Me,
But not deserve, ill I should do to thee.
Safely jeer on; thy meanness thee protect's;
Revenge is wanting, where no worth reflect's.
MORAL.
Who from inferiors, thus, disgrace, despise,
Turn's on their heads their purposed injuries;
But where unequal Might pursue's Redress;
That seems the more, which we would have seem less.
9. A Citie-Mous and Field-Mous.
A Citie-Mous richly arrai'd,
To her Allies a Progress made.
In a Champian seated stood
The Palace of his noble Blood.
Not far from whence encountered him
The Field-Mous, top of all his kin.
Which interview past solemnly,
With all due Rites of Cerimonie.
Whence he conduct's him to his Cel,
The Roof whereof was Pimprenel;
The Entrance traced sundry ways,
(Like to the windings of a Maze)
For strength, not state, was ordered so,
To keep out rain, or wind, or snow.
Suddenly served was the Feast,
Travel had Hunger-stroke our Guest;
A Mushrome spread with Codlin-skin
The Table was and Covering.
A mighty Mess first ushered came,
Which did all sorts of Pulls contein:
Of Wheat, Oat, Pea, Tare, Rye and Rice,
Of Bean, Buck, Barlie, mix't with Spice
Of sundry Seeds, contrived so;
This may be called their Oleo.
Next course, of Roots was ordered,
Of Parsnip, Carret, White and Red;
Turnip, Radish, Potato sweet,
Skerret, Oringo, and of Beet;
Some were hatched, some mince't, some slice't;
And with post powder all were spice't.
And for their Ragou and Haugou
Were Onions served, and Garlic too.
The Intercours did next succeed,
To urge fresh Appetite to feed.
Of Mellon, Pumpi'on, Cucumber,
Cabbidg, Colwort, and Colli-flour;
Of Thissel-succors hatched small
Which were well peppered with Fusball.
Their Liquor from a Crystal stream
They had, whereon never shined Beam.
In which for Ambergris, or Musk,
Infused was in Acorn-husk,
A Pearl of Dew, or else of Hail;
As Heat or Moisture did prevail
The Deser, hereto closure put's;
Of Wall, of Hair, of Hassel-nuts:
Of Pears and Apples, Plums and Cheries,
Dew, Straw, Raspe, Mull, Bill and Black-berries.
Of Medler, Service, Corm, they fed,
Of Grapes and Currens, white and red;
But of Beech, Oak, Thorn, Bramble-Maste
They far more sparingly did taste.
The Grasshopper, the Gnat, the Be,
In Consort were their Minstralsie.
The Citie-Mous, the Feast thus past,
Soberly seemed to distaste
The meanness of the Country fare;
Boasting the Cities to be rare.
That which might be no vapor thought,
The Field-Mous he to City brought;
Where, in a Store-hous he beheld
Such Dainties, as there most excelled:
Here a Custard, there a Tart,
Of a fat Capon there a part;
Here a Gammon stuffed with cloves;
There did a Pie Red-Dear enclose;
Here Pheasant, Partridge, Woodcock, Quail;
There Knot, Snipe, Tiel, Turtle and Rail;
Spice, Sugar, Suckets wet and dry,
Were all disper'st confusedly:
Whereof so eagerly both fed,
Order was none distinguished.
E're long, in the door ratled a keie,
Which scared both Host and Guest away.
The Field-Mous who her course forgot,
For haste fell in a Honie-pot,
Which being nigh full, and candid over.
Bemired much, he got to shore.
Thence in a Barrel skip't of Soap,
Whence he escaped by a Rope,
The Balance fastened to the Scale,
From thence he rush't into a Frale
Of Raisins, which, struggling therein,
His clammie Coat stripped from his skin.
Thence to a hole, where both remain,
Till they came in, went out again.
Then issued out the Citie-Mous,
Frisking with joie about the house,
While the poor Field-Mous therewith dread
Remained trembling, almost dead.
'Til him the Citie-Mous invite's
Again to taste of his Delights;
Assuring him the Peril over.
Out snek't the Field-Mous, yet forbore
To feed; jealous surpised to be,
Asking the Citie-Mous, if he
Were often thus assaulted; who
With confidence, replied thereto,
Each hour, each hour; Custom make's light,
Where that is weigh^^ (...) wants foresight.
The Field-Mous much amazed, cried;
Was ever sens so stupefied!
With my mean Cates, I rest secured;
Rest thou with dangerous sweets immured.
MORAL.
The humble, calm and innocent estate,
This of a Country life does intimate.
Whose sober temper only thus relie's
On what succesfull Industry supplie's.
While City lives, their riot to support,
Make Rapine, Fraud and Violence a sport:
With whose Alarums hourly pursued:
So often their lusts, so often are griefs renewed.
10. The Eagle and Daw.
AN Eagle had a Cockle got,
Which he to open knowing not;
The prating Daw, searching for Game,
E're sent for was, to Council came.
And him adviz'd so high to fly,
As hardly he might earth descrie:
From whence, if on a stone it fell,
It, questionless, would break the shel.
The Eagle that no art would scan,
Her self to lessen strait began.
While the Daw leering for the prey
Never to the Fall; snatched it away.
MORAL.
High soaring minds, from base suspicion free,
Frame Others Trust from their Integrity.
Whence Men of mean parts them often circumvent,
While on high speculations they are bent.
So busy knaves whispering to all new shifts,
Level the way to facilate their Drifts.
11. The Crow and Fox.
A Crow had got a Prey, wherewith, a tree
Exalted took, for more security.
Thereon (joie scarce contained) with lofty strains,
She her good Fortune through the woods proclames.
The subtle Fox, whose ears erected are,
This understood, so soon as he could hear:
Continued clamor led him to the place,
The Crow saluting with unusua'l grace;
He, thus, accost's. Fame famed a liar, we
Have often heard; Now, find it true in thee.
She speak's thee black, and often does others stain
With like Deformity, implying but thy Name.
Yet thou more white then Swans, my sens does prove
Far whiter then the Lilly, or the Dove.
Had thy voice equal to thy Beauty been,
I should style thee, of all the Birds, the Queen.
The Crow surprised thus, had at first sight
(About to feed) prepared her self for flight;
From Foot to Bill shifting her loved Prize;
But stayed was, with these sweet Fallacies;
Which tickled so her sens, she must apply
To show that Grace, might gain this Dignity.
But as her Bill op't, her Tone to give birth,
Down dropped her envied Morsel to the Earth:
Which the Fox seized on, and with scornful laughter,
Left the Crow there her studied Notes to chatter.
MORAL.
In Man is found this strange Infirmity;
What Nature gave not, most affect to be:
Whence, soonest they are took with flatt'ries sounds,
Who, in themselves, have thereof smallest Grounds.
So, crafty shirks use with success their Art;
When, by the Ear, they thus infect the Heart.
12. The declined Lion.
A Lion, who had been the terror of the Field;
To Time's assaults was forced his strength to yield:
Which Impotence discovered; by each Beast
He was with equal violence oppre'st;
The Bore with Tusks gored; the Bull with his Horn;
But what most grieved him, was the Asses scorn;
Who to wipe out the blemish in his Fame,
With far more Ardeur, then the others, came.
His heels assailed him, while his words upbrai'd;
At which the Lion much perplexed, sai'd,
The ill I did, I justly have from them;
Why then the good return'st not thou again?
MORAL.
Injurious Powers, when divested, die
By their Foe's vengeance, their friend's jealousy;
Least having reap't the good, in former times,
As Accessers they should the will of their crimes.
In generous minds grief is redoubled, thus,
To fall by them are doubly infamous;
Ingrates and cowards in one figured be,
There Love meet's Hate; Here Courage Cruelty.
When Princes fall; none so injurious be
To their Persons, as the Rascalitie.
13. The Dog and Ass.
A Painful Ass afflicted was to see
His Masters too parti'al Indulgencie
Unto a little Cur. His hands did clap,
Stroke, feed, and oft'entice unto his lap;
Where eas and plenty pollish't so his skin,
His wanton frisks invite new cherishing,
While the more useful Ass, still laden, wrote;
Felt many lashes on his tattered coat:
Knapt on a Thissel. Nor could gracious be
With his loved Master, or his Family.
At which repining; with himself conclude's;
If Sport gained this; He Would have his Interludes.
Which, next his Master saw, he practices.
Fetching around, till almost out of breath,
Then, as to kiss, his Master he did meet,
On either shoulder clap't his clubbed feet.
Whereat his Master called the Hindes for aid.
Who, with their Flails, the Asses courtship paid.
MORAL.
How wanton Masters fawning servants prize
More then the useful. This to us implie's.
Whose Artless rudeness, when to jest they fall,
May seek to tickle, seldom shun to gall.
Nor can the seeds of Nature changed be,
But with ridiculous improprietie.
14. The Lion and Mous.
A Lion tired with heat and action lay
Under a shade; where Mice presumed to play.
Disturbing him; he in a fury rose;
And for example, one amongst them chose.
The trembling Mous implored his clemency,
Small Honor in his worthless death could be.
The Lion freed the captive; but at length,
The Lion snared, found little veiled his strength,
Where his vain struggling him intangl'd more:
Restrained fury made him loudlie rore.
The grateful Mous this nois distinguished;
And by the same was to his succor led;
Where with his teeth the knots he did divide:
And with like freedom thus him gratified.
MORAL.
Thus of frail Nature generous minds obeie
The first Motives, the next they overswaie.
And that Revenge disgraceful think to be,
Which with themselves hold's no equality.
So grateful Minds to their requital speed:
Nothing so small the greatest may not need.
Both, this Rule figure to Supremacy;
'Twixt such extremes, how useful Amity.
15. The sick Kite.
A Young Kite sick, besought his mother, she
Would pray the gods for his Recoverie.
Who replied, Son, No help exspect from thence,
Their sacred Rites thou have with violence
From their bright Altars ravished. Then no more
Insist to move, that I their aid implore.
MORAL.
Those men, whose Actions do a God deny;
When Death assail's, believe a Deity:
To whom rejecting Nature, thus, shall be,
Even in themselves condemning Testimony.
16. The Swallow and other Birds.
THe Season come the fatal Hemp to sow,
The Swallow let us the lesser Birds to know
Their ruin was at hand, for of that seed
Should be framed Nets, to catch them, and their breed:
Which to avoid, he wil'd them, e're too late,
Devour the seed, which else would prove their fate.
The silly Fowl deride him, nor did fly,
So to secure their future Liberty.
The Hemp wax't green; the Swallow to them made,
And wil'd them, yet in time, pull up the Blade:
Which they neglecting, The Hemp ripe became;
The Swallow to them bent his course again.
Wishing them then, in cloudie flocks appear,
And stoop, like Thunder, on the shaking Ear.
But none regarded what the Swallow said;
Whereon he left them, and a Covenant made
Of Love, with Man. With whom he dwel's with joie:
While Hemp mak's Nets, which Nets the Birds destroy.
MORAL.
Wisdom's true Object is the Public good,
Of few win's credit, is of all withstood:
Nor by disgraced repuls retract's her Flight.
So long as Nature can yield Reason light,
She may, without impeachment, Author be,
If not of theirs, of her Security.
17. The Frogs and their King.
THe Nation of the Frogs, who once were free,
Would for more state, become a Monarchy.
Jove they petition, them assign a King;
To whom, Jove smiling, down a log does fling:
Which waitie Lump shaking with nois the Flood;
With silent Reverence, far retired stood
The Frogs affrighted: which Agitation spent,
With more assurance to their King they went.
Whose passive Nature finding, Fear cast off,
And make, in sport, their suffering King their scoff.
Jove they importune, once again, to send
A King, whose valor might from Foes defend.
Jove give's the Crane, who stalk's to view his power,
And, in his way, does all the Frogs devour,
Of which cruelty they to Jove complain.
Who sought, must suffer. Jove they move in vain,
And every Evening (when the Crain's not there)
In their hoars Murmurs publish their despair.
MORAL.
Th'affected Glory, here impli'd we see,
Of meaner States asspire to Sovereigntie:
Who though from Heaven they therewith be indu'd:
God cannot pleas the giddie Multitude:
If mild and peaceful, they him Coward style;
If warlike; Him with Tyranny revile.
But in the issue, all conclude it just,
Who could not bear the Best, should bear the worst.
18. The Doves and Kite.
A Long War waged 'twixt Doves and Kite;
The Doves, too feeble for the Fight,
Elect the Hauk to be their King,
They might be sheltered by his wing.
But he, more fiercely then the Kite,
Prei'd on Them for his Appetite.
They open War now judge to be
Better than civil Tyranny.
MORAL.
So weak States think their Freedoms to protect,
When, then their Fo's, they greater strength elect:
But such unequal Power, by theirs more High,
Thus, soon reduce them into Serviltie.
19. The Thief and Dog.
A Thief to still a Dog, held Bread,
Who, wary, thereto answered;
Thy subtle snares I often mark;
This thou giv'st me, I might not bark:
But I deceitful Presents hate,
Other's Goods should remunerate:
For if this Morsel I accept,
Thou will my Master's Goods exspect.
MORAL.
With surly Tempers, so, sly Craft proceed's:
The pow'rfull'st Flatteries framed are on Deeds.
But cautious men, when strangers gifts present,
Thus wisely weigh the scope of their intent.
20. The Wolf and Sow.
THe Sow her fertile Litter laid,
Tender of whom, she was affrai'd.
The Wolf their Guardian sought to be:
The Sow thank't him most courteously:
His Diligence she did not want:
But him desired this favor grant
(Since He would so officious be)
She might not have His Company.
MORAL.
All things, from All, believ not. Shadowed be
Unusual Favors with self-propertie.
Where Office and Officiate not agree,
Force't Nature tel's us, it is but Furberie.
21. The Mountain's birth.
ARumor far and near was spread,
A Mount should be delivered
Of her huge Burden; which to see,
Of curious flock't great company.
With Fear and Wonder all were struck;
And for some Prodigy did look:
Immov'd and silent All become;
A Mous skip't from her pregnant womb:
Whereat was raised such a laughter,
The Mountain trembled at the clatter.
MORAL.
So swelling Rumors gather as they fly,
Til they extend t'impossibilitie.
Which with such frenzy do the Rout possess,
Their Fears and Wonders, thus, are fathomless.
But when Time does, her issue, Truth produce;
Of their Experience, Mirth's the only use.
22. The old Hound.
A Dog, grown old, pursuing of his Game,
With frequent shouts, his Master strave t'inflame
New ardeur in him; which not? much availed;
His Limbs grew stiff. At length the Beast assailed:
But ere his Master got in to his Aid;
(His teeth decai'd) the Beast escape had made.
The Master's threats, far off, his fury show's;
Which, nigh, descend upon the Dog in blows.
The Dog cried faults of my Age (had thou truth)
Might be excused by th'service of my youth.
Nothing but Profit can thy favor win;
Else me thou would cherish, for what I had bin.
MORAL.
So churlish Masters greedy of their Gain,
Think they lose that, which they cannot attain.
And often beyond their strength their Servants press,
'Caus they did more, they still must do no less.
Ungrateful Minds, not weighing their friends store,
Forget what is don, when they can do no more.
23. The Hares in a Storm.
THe Woods so roared with unusual storms,
The fearful Hares were frighted from their forms:
Nor could be stayed in their erring course;
Til foll'wing danger drove them to a wors.
A deep vaste Moor, where, to enlarge new dread,
Lay floting Frogs, to them apeared dead:
Whereat, step't forth One stouter then the rest;
And, thus, the vainness of their fear expre'st:
Rash speed but danger changes. We may see,
Who in our Heels place our Security:
Those with success are used, when thereto's joined,
For their direction, a well judging Mind,
But that in us is wanting; else this storm,
Is our disturbance, would have been our scorn.
Extremes not lusting are: Nor need we fear.
That Danger much, which first salute's the Ear.
MORAL.
From their repose, so, timed Natures rise,
On every empty Terror them surprise:
But while to shun vain Hazards they resolv,
In real Dangers they themselves involv:
In which Distraction, finding th'Impotence
Of that Arm Nature gave them for defense,
Place higher their Tranquillity; and teach,
The strength of mind no accident can reach.
24. The Kid and Wolf.
A Goat to pasture went to feed,
Had shut the door upon her Kid:
Commanding Her, til she return,
Not open it to any one.
This, undiscerned, the Wolf over heard:
The Dam being gone, soon thither steered,
Who the Goats voice does counterfeit;
Bidding the Kid open the gate.
This craft distinguishing, the Kid
Said, I to open am forbid:
Though that I hear a Goats voice be
Yet, through the chink, a Wolf I see.
MORAL.
Filial obedience is with safety crowned;
Indulgent Nature yield's the surest ground:
To cheat the sens, though Art nigh Nature be;
Instinctive lights disclose an Enemy.
25. The Heart and Sheep.
BEfore a Wolf, the Heart convinced a Sheep,
That she from him a debt long due did keep:
Which he affirmed, of wheat a Bushel was.
Though falls it were; the Sheep agreed to pass
A day of payment; which e're long exspir'd,
The Heart brought to him, who his Debt required.
The Sheep, what was assented, did deny:
Alleging, that the Wolf was now not by:
Nor was that promiss to be kep't, which she
Was forced to make, for life's security.
MORAL.
When weak Abusers cannot circumvent,
By their own Strength, the yielding Innocent:
To their more powerful Foes appeal for Right,
What could not be by force, might be by slight:
Where the Defendant to falls Pleas give's way,
Rather then prove his cruel Judges preie.
To deceive the Deceiver's no Deceit:
What violence forged, Truth may violate.
26. A Countrie-man and Snake.
A Clown a Snake aprivoised,
With whom he played, and often fed:
Til the Clown into anger brake;
And with an Ax wounded the Snake.
Whereon her Host she strait forsook,
And to her native Grove betook.
E're long the Clown became so poor,
That quite exhausted was his store:
Seeking what thereof cause should be,
He found it was the injury
Don to the Snake; whom out he sought,
And with kind words, would home have brought.
The Snake replied; she him forgave;
But would no more such traitment have:
With him safe she could not be; where
At hand, so many Axes were.
The scar perchance outworn might be,
But never outworn the memory.
MORAL.
Vnciviliz'd Minds with Passion soon overflow,
And rashly thus, the good they did overthrow:
But therewith find th'increas of Blessings be
By Heaven restrained, crowned Hospitality.
(In her Emblem) wisdom shows wrongs may be
Remembered, without stain to Piety.
27. The Fox and Stork.
THe Fox had made the Stork his Guest,
And on the Table poured his Feast;
Which being liquid so diffused,
The Stork her beak but vainly used:
While the Fox, lapping up the stream,
Left but his empty Guest the steam.
The Stork his sly Host to requite,
Did him as formally invite:
Where, in a strait neck't vessel stood,
What she provided had for food.
The Strok, the Fox wil'd not to spare,
Whose slender Beak extract's her fare:
While the Fox, as he did deserv,
Might only see his food and sterv.
MORAL.
Th'Insolent wills the simple to resort
Unto their Table, to become their sport.
But when th'affront reverted thus we see,
Of Disgrace, Mirth wipe's out the Infamy.
28. A Wolf and carved Head.
A Wolf had to the Work-hous got
Of a rare Sculptor; who had wrought
A humane Head so perfectly,
Such by the Wolf 'twas thought to be,
Til to and fro it often he drove,
Yet thereof naught perceived to move,
Cried, strange it was, that noble part
Should have no Sens, had so much Art.
MORAL.
So curious Pedants, to enlarge their Fame,
Their Works with Arts choice Ornaments do frame:
Glorious Inscriptions, an elaborate Style;
Crotestick Terms, dark Mysteries compile:
Which catch with wonder the illiterate Sens;
Till farther search yield them Intelligence,
Life's civil Notions therein wanting be,
Who then thus mock their fruitless Industry.
29. The Jaie.
THe chatt'ring Jaie would once assume
For Ornament, the Peacock's-plume:
Who to himself appeared so fair,
His proper kind disdainful were;
Whence he, to dignifie his stock,
Intrude's into the Peacock-flock:
Who soon discovering the cheat,
With blows him of his Coat defeat.
MORAL.
Of mean extraction Mercenar'es, we see,
With tricks and toies fleece the Nobility:
By which Investures, they often mix't with them,
Till Those by These divested are again.
30. The Fly and Ant.
A Desperate brabble rose 'twixt Fly and Ant;
The Fly of his more noble Birth did vant:
He flew, and did in Palaces reside;
She crep't, and did her self in Dunge'ns hide:
She knap't the sheaf, and water drank with pain:
He feasted bravely; nor nigh labor came.
The Ant replied, she was of mean descent,
But not ignoble, framed to her content.
He wandering was, she stable, her course fare
Gave her those sweets, as him his cates more rare:
And what therein exalted her delight,
Her travel raised, and fed her appetite:
She safe and cheerful was, grateful to All;
Who Industrie's example her install.
He, to his peril, incen'st other's wroth:
And to all men the example was of sloth.
She mindeful was for Winter to provide,
While he then sterv'd, or e're that season di'd.
MORAL.
Obscurely bred, the Husbandman does dwell
Secure and cheerful in his humble Cell:
Whose care his hands to labor does engage;
Which youth prolong's, and support's healthful Age.
While roving Gallants Palaces resort,
Enticed by th'allurements of the Court:
Where danger, fear and strife their youth oppress,
Want cut's of Age, if not before Excess.
31. The Ox and Toad.
THe Toad the Oxe's bulk to reach,
Began her subtle skin to stretch
Her Young thereon did her advize,
Desist from this her enterprise:
For to the Ox, she might conclude,
She nothing was in Magnitude.
The Dam hereat, yet swelled more;
Her Young adviz'd her to give over:
For e're that she could equal him,
She, certainly would crack her skin.
Whereat the Dam (rage re-inforc't)
Add's all her strength, and therewith burst.
MORAL.
Wise Nature does appropriate to each thing
Peculiar virtues, needful to their being:
And to what proper every man was born,
His own productions, so will each inform.
But Envy, thus, improper Forms take's on
To Nature's utter dissolution.
32. The Horse and Lion.
THe Horse the Lion purposed for his preie,
But age had took the flower of strength away:
Art he put's on; which unto Art pretend's;
And for a Leech, him to the Horse commend's.
The wary Horse, perceiving his intent,
Feigned in his foot a Thorn by accident;
Which he desired the Lion to pull forth,
Since skilled to do, to will he knew his worth.
To which the Lion seeming to apply;
The Horse with kicks repai'd the Fallacy.
Who breathless left him; bad him make his Will:
Or on himself to practice his own skill.
MORAL.
When in such habits men to us appear,
To use or Nature quite repugnant are.
We may conclude, they are but so put on
(Even as a vizard) for Illusion.
As open Force may resist open Foes,
So privy slight may private craft oppose.
More dangerous This, therefore less Innocent:
Fraud is no Fraud, which does but Fraud prevent.
Exposition.
The aged Lion, here, does intimate
The declined Power of a Prince's State.
The wandering Horse, the People does explain,
Whose stubbornness to check, has Bit nor Reign.
The Art to which the Lion does pretend,
Is by good Laws, disorders to amend:
The Light, the Horse has of's weak state and plot,
Is what he wil's, that he commands not.
The Foot, the Instrument of Liberty,
Wherein the people complain grieved to be.
Which, as the Prince to enlarge does apply,
In stead of Mast'rie, gain's his Destiny.
33. The Horse and Ass.
A Horse in his rich Trappings being adorned,
With lofty neighings (as if earth he scorned)
Ran on the way, but where he was to pass,
He in his course, met with a laden Ass.
More fierce, thus angered, champ't the foaming Bit,
Threatening the Ass to tread him under feet,
If way he gave not: The patient Ass stood by
And gave him place, but therewith no reply.
His renewed speed the struggling wind declined,
But e're his course performed, had cracked his wind.
By which sad accident, was useless made,
Or for the Course, or yet for the Parade.
Away was took his Ornaments of Gold,
And to a Carter was, for little, sold.
E're long the Ass Him in his new Function meet's,
And, in derision, thus accosting greet's:
Where are your studded Trappings, your gilt Bit?
This your high mind does better much befit.
MORAL.
Vain, headie Natures this to us implie's,
Who on their backs bear all their Patrimonies,
Which gaudries so their self-conceit foment;
Over suffering Natures th'insult with contempt;
But when Excess ru'ns Person and Estate,
The despised, then, with scorn them gratulate.
34. The Birds and Beast.
'TWixt Birds and Beast a Fight arose;
Fear, peril, hope, each side oppose.
The Bat his party did desert;
And to the Enemy convert;
But to the Fowl victory, at length,
Was attained by the Eagles strength.
Th'Apostate Bat they then condemn
Never to associate them.
And lest he should distaste their sight,
Enjoined him only fly by night.
MORAL.
The daily combat, this to us implie's,
Betwixt the mind and senses faculties;
Clear-sighted Reason, and who to her side,
Are with a glorious vict'rie dignified:
But such functions from her revolted are
Dare never after to the light appear.
35. The Wolf and Fox.
THe Wolf of booty got great store,
And forth to rove had long forbore:
The Fox desire's to know hereon
The cause of his vacation:
The Wolf believing this a fetch,
The Fox might to his banquet reach;
Fain's the cause sickness to have bin,
And wil's the Fox to pray for him:
The Fox craft followed by the sent;
And forthwith to a Shepherd went,
Whom he shows where securely lie's
His heedless Foe; Which to surprise
The Shepherd made no long delaie,
But in his Den the Wolf did slaie:
Hereby the Fox posse'st was then
Both of his Preie and of his Den:
But long herein he had not joi'd
E're him the Shepherd there destroi'd.
MORAL.
The wicked thus the wicked do detect,
When those with these partake not of their theft:
Under which shadow they more credit gain
Of farther Ils to facilate the train;
Till by the same discoveries they had made
They traced be, and thereby are betrayed.
36. The Heart.
THe Heart a stream his mirror made,
Where he his shadow oft'survaid:
He was much taken with the Form
Of his large Front, and branchie horn:
Which in him much abated grew,
The smalness of his shanks to view.
While he was in this ecstasy,
He heard the Hounds pursuing cry;
Away (like lightning, or the wind)
He left the cloudie dust behind.
Til through a Thicket forcing way,
His horns were tangled in the spraie.
Where he was took, and too late proved,
How much obnoxious, what he loved;
And what distasteful seemed to be,
How useful was their property.
MORAL.
So simple minds are took with specious shows,
Which in the issue prove their overthrows.
But what most useful Nature gave to be,
Or few, or none do prize that faculty.
37. The Viper and File.
A Viper in a Work-hous found
A File was scattered on the ground.
Which as to gnaw he did begin,
The ruffer File thus spoke to him;
Fool, break thy teeth thou sooner mai'st,
Then any whit my body waste:
The hardness of what is hardest Steeled,
To my more hard assaults does yield.
MORAL.
So malice will beyond her power attempt:
Nor can the dead be from her rage exempt.
But when th'unblemish't, or more strong endure;
They shame or Damage to themselves procure.
38. The Wolf and Sheep.
'TWixt Wolves and Sheep, Nature we see,
Has placed a great Antipathie,
Yet they at length Agreement make;
And in exchange do hostage take:
From the sly Wolf, her young Cubs went;
The Sheep to send their Dogs consent.
Who then securely thought to graze;
Til the young Cubs their howlings raise,
Wanting their Dam, who thither came,
And on the Sheep did much exclame;
That void their League, and Faith was made;
Nor for their answer hereto stayed:
But rush't on them with all her powers,
Whom, their Dogs wanting, she devour's.
MORAL.
The Sheep a Nation without fraud implie's:
The Wolf a Nation full of treacheries:
Those think they can exact no greater tie,
Then where Nature enforces piety:
These seem less strict, and strangers but demand:
But such, whose skill and strength their craft withstand;
Which when removed, their Pledges rescue may,
And make their heedless foes their cruel Preie.
39. The Wood and Countrie-man.
'TWas in those days that Trees had sens,
A Rustic went with diligence;
And o'th Grove did a Helv request
Unto his Ax: the Grove expre'st
Consent thereto, nodding her head;
Which when the Clown had finished;
He to cut down the Trees began:
The Grove repent's, too soon the Man
Her easy Nature had o'recom;
More grieved to be herself her Doom.
MORAL.
So soft and debonarie Minds, we see,
Want confidence to wave a courtesy:
But Impudents hereby encouraged,
Never desist, till by them ruined.
40. The Belly and Members.
THe Feet and Hands the Belly often blamed,
Her sloth devoured the profit they had gained:
Her they command to labor, or not eat:
The Belly vainly did their help entreat,
Til quite through want exhausted; at the length
Began to fail the active Arters strength:
The Hands relent, and would officious be;
But too late came their profer'd courtesy:
The disused Belly now debile became,
And what received, returned it back again:
So that these Members this dissension bred
Must justly perish with the envied.
MORAL.
As in the Natural, so in the Politic, we
Ought not to envy other's Ministry:
Nor from their use our Functions to restrain;
Lest they declined, like Damage we sustain.
Each has a commerce with each faculty,
From whence result's a perfect Harmony:
To every Office proper Gifts are lent;
Nay even the Exscreate serv's for Ornament.
41. The Ape and Fox.
THe Ape does of the Fox beseech
Part of his Tail to hide her breech;
What was a burden unto him,
Would use and honor to her bring.
The Fox replied, yet never the less,
He must hereto be succourless:
His tail he on the ground would train,
Rather then it should hide her shame.
MORAL.
So rich Churls often, burdened with Excess,
Refuse to cover the poor's nakedness:
And rather had their coin, as useless hide,
Then other's wants should therewith be supplied.
42. The Stag and Oxen.
A Pursued Stag, for harbor fled
Into a Stall, where Oxen fed;
Of whom he seek's himself to shroud,
That he their Crib might be allowed:
They grant, but therewith tell him, he
E're long would there discovered be,
Or by the Master, or the Hind,
Whom suddenly he there would find,
The Stag replied, Me not betraie,
The fear of them I do not weigh.
Soon after this, the Hind came in,
And forth returned, but saw not him:
Whereat the Stag exalt's his head,
And quite shook off his former dread:
But one Ox wiser then the rest,
This fleeting joie quickly suppre'st:
Assuring him, the Hind to be
A Mole in perspicuitie.
But what should crown the Enterprise,
Was to charm his Lord's Argus-eies.
Hereon what the Hind might neglect,
The Master enter's to correct:
Whose hand, as he the Crib would try,
Made o'th Stags horns discovery.
His Hindes he summoned to him,
Who quickly shut the Stag therein;
Where he with fruitless tears does die
In his assumed Sanctuary.
MORAL.
The fearful Stag unto us does express,
What slight helps men take hold of in distress.
Th'Oxen plain, honest, painful men implie,
Willing to succor other's misery.
The Hinde's demeanor, herein represent's
Of most servants the usual negligence.
The Master's actions unto us do show,
What every Master that would thrive should do.
43. The Lion and Fox.
THe Lion sick, the Beasts to visit went,
Only the Fox was herein negligent;
To whom the Lion send's an Embassy;
Which shows, how grateful should his presence be;
Nor was there cause of peril he should fear,
Since ancient ties of friendship 'twixt them were;
Or if this were not, the Lion infirm,
Ill if he would, to act he could not turn.
The Fox replied, the Lion's health he wished,
For which to pray he would with zeal insist:
But to this visit with Excuse denied:
His visitants Footsteps him much terrified,
Which all unto his Cave directed were,
But from thence back not any did appear.
MORAL.
Specious pretenses of unusual Love
From secret sources of bie-ends do move:
But wisdom of her safety circumspect,
On every circumstance does still reflect;
So a-far off her danger to foresee,
Shunning her own by other's misery.
44. The Fox and Weezel.
A Fox with hunger lank become,
Through a strait cleft crep't to a room:
Where his stuffed panch so full did strain,
He could not thence return again.
As he was struggling out to get,
A Weezel came, far off was set,
And scoffingly advised him,
Empty return, as he came in.
MORAL.
When greedy Minds and empty Fortunes meet
Thus with vast gains, timely make not retreat:
But to improper greatness them extend,
And unadvis'dly so procure their end:
Or else are forced to disgorge their Rape;
They with their Persons only might escape.
45. The Horse and Heart.
THe Heart and Horse long warfare held;
The Horse from Pasture was expelled;
Who then implored Humane aid,
With whom he did the Heart invade:
Til he had lost, the victrie gained:
Yet to the victor's yoke restrained:
For now the Man with bit and rein
Make's use of him to save his pain.
MORAL.
So meaner States, when foiled by their foes,
Implore more potent Power, them oppose:
But when suppressed by their joint Aid they be,
Who win the vict'rie, lose their Liberty.
46. The two Young Men.
TWo young Striplings, pretending meat to buie,
Went to a Cook, who busied had his eye
On other things; while from a basket, one
Filch't a joint, and gave it his companion
To hide with his coat; which when the Cook had mist,
Either to charge did of the Theft insist.
Who took it, swore by Jove that he had none;
Who had it, swore, that he none took; whereon
The Cook replied; the Thief will not be known,
He see's and know's, by whom ye both have sworn.
MORAL.
Who cal's to witness Ils, him Judge shall be.
Think's Ils are passed with impunitie.
It Is not the shadow covert of our tongues,
Can from his vengeance hide our secret wrongs.
47. The Dog and Butcher.
A Cur meat from the Shambles steal's,
Wherewith betake's him to his heels:
The Butcher troubled at the loss,
Long silently confused was:
At length his sens recovering,
Thus afar off cried out to him;
This time securely thou mai'st feed,
Thy safety now procured by speed;
But I hereafter, thou shall see,
Will of thy slights more cautious be.
MORAL.
So gross and stupid spirits become wise,
Only by Expens of their Substances.
To whom in vain, you Reason's lights reveal;
These seldom understand but what they feel.
The best use from Ils are past remedy,
Is to prevent succeeding misery.
48. The Dog and Sheep.
A Dog summoned a Sheep by Plea
To answer to a debt, which he
Had lent the Sheep, the Sheep denied
Any Debt could be verified.
The Kite, Wolf, Vultur called be,
To give hereto their Testimony;
Which they affirm; the Sheep condemned
The rav'ning Cur does soon distend.
MORAL.
So greedy Misers, when as kept in aw,
Secure snares to their rapine make the Law;
They Innocents might ruin, to falls Pleas
Producing, thus, int'ressed Witnesses.
49. The Lamb and Wolf.
A Wolf a Lamb met following a Goat;
The Wolf demand's, why under his rank Coat
To shelter, she her sweeter Dam had left,
Whose pent Tets were with milk, e're then, nigh cleft;
While she wooed her return with mournful bleats;
This to betraie he fawningly repeat's:
The Lamb replied, her careful Dam had chose
Him for her Guardian, and safer it was
Unto a Parent's purpose to obeie,
Then by seducing Words become his Preie.
MORAL.
So when by Parents frail Youth is resigned
To strangers conduct, Seducers they find
Tickle innate Propension to reflect
On the Indulgence of the Armelet;
T'intice them from Tuition's sower Aw,
Them to their ruin in debauch to draw:
But prudent Nature rather thus incline's
To Parents pleasures, then strangers designs.
50. The Young Man and Cat.
A Young Man much enamored on a Cat,
Importuned Venus in his Prayers, that
She to a Woman would the Cat translate;
She wrought the change, to Him compassionate;
Whose form and color, so exact, so white,
The Suppliant took with wonder and delight:
With whom withdrawing to his chamber, he
In Mirth and Play the day past pleasantly.
Venus e're long desirous was to try,
If, with her shape, was changed her Property:
This to determine; she let slip a Mous
Through the open Evings of the House;
Which the translated Woman strait pursued;
As never with other Form then Cat's indu'd:
Which in the Goddess such an anger bred,
She to a Cat her re-transfigured.
MORAL.
What form or semblance any one put's on,
None wipe out quite Nature's Impression:
Art may embellish; Industry restrain;
But to her source Nature revert's again.
51. The Husbandman and his Sons.
A Husbandman had many youthful Sons
Which disagree'd; the Father, as becom's,
Striving to draw them into mutual love;
Bad, singly, every one of them to prove.
If they could break a bundle bound of wands;
Which they in vain attempting with their hands;
The Father it unti'd, and to each one
Giving a wand, bad try their strength thereon;
Which they with much eas breaking: even so
Replied the Father, none can you overthrow,
While thus you are united: but all may,
When thus divided, make of you their preie.
MORAL.
This shows unto us, how weak States become
Invincible by common union:
And how great States by civil Discord may
Unto less Potent soon become a preie.
52. The Countrie-man and Horse.
AN empty Horse a Clown drove with an Ass,
By many fardels, that sore laden was:
The wearied Ass required for safetie's sake,
The Horse but part would of his burden take:
The Jade refused; the Ass e're long with weight
Oppressed, sunk down, and di'd beneath his freight.
The Horse forthwith the Asse's place supplied,
On whom was cast the Asse's load and hide.
Who then conclude's, he justly was oppre'st,
That would the Ass not succor, when distre'st.
MORAL.
In Family or State, who will not free
His joint Companion from extremity
Of Care and Travel; but laie's band to none,
When these thus fail, bear's their share and his own.
53. The Collier and Fuller.
THe Collier to his obscure Cel,
Invite's the Fuller with him dwell:
The Fuller said, their Trades were cross,
This courtesy was to his loss:
For what he had took pains to scour,
His trash would sullie every hour.
MORAL.
Who would unblemish't manners keep or fame,
Must with the wicked seldom entertain.
Society insensibly does pierce
Us with their habits, with whom we convers;
Whence all, or most men's characters are known,
By the image of their conversation.
54. The Fowler and Ring-dove.
A Fowler on his Game intent,
Espied a-far off, as he went,
A Ring-dove nestling in a Tree,
Whom he abord's with treachery,
Take's in his net; but soon does feel
An Adder bite him by the Heel:
Wherewith exspiring, cried, while I
Others ensnare, ensnared I die.
MORAL.
So crafty minds while they intentive are
How they the heedless innocent may snare;
Just Providence or'ecast's the natr'al Eye,
Which should protect their own security:
While on the ill they thus are too intent,
They for the ill do meet the punishment.
55. The captive Trumpeter.
A Trumpeter took Captive by his Foe,
Intreat's, unharm'd, to let the harmless go;
His Arms, his Trumpet was; had he the will,
Therewith he could not any one man kill:
His Foes hereat seem more incenst to be;
And threaten Death with present cruelty,
For that he had nor power, nor skill to fight,
Them to destroy did other Men incite.
MORAL.
Who by lewd Counsel Prince's power o'reswaie,
More guilty are, then who to act obeie:
Th'Instruments often are senseless of the Ill;
But they the proper Agents, move the Will.
56. The Wolf and Dog.
A Wolf a Dog encountered on his way,
In a thick Wood, e're it was perfect day;
This Fortune they, saluting, gratulate:
The Wolf demand's the Dog, how he so fat,
So clean, so neat became; the Dog replied
His Master's strokes and Table all supplied:
He never slept abroad; but welcome he
And gracious was to all the Family.
The Wolf admired the Dogs so happy state,
And wished thereof he might participate.
The Dog does promiss him the like, if he
Would but cast off his late ferocitie,
And be more tractable, th'agreement past,
They both together to the Town do haste.
Pleasant discourse less tedious made the way,
Until the Wolf discerned, b'increasing day,
The Dog's neck was with a bald circuit marked;
The cause whereof he prayed him to impart.
The Dog heeron relace's, how he at first,
Was both to known and unknown alike cursed.
Which his Master not brooking, with sharp blows*
Bad him but only thievs and Wolvs oppose:
By which correction mild, did seldom bark,
Yet of his former fierceness bore that mark.
The Wolf this hearing, bad the Dog farewell,
His Master did too dear his friendship sell:
He rather had, though barely, yet live free,
Then to enjoie a wanton Serviltie.
MORAL.
To free born spirits many things are rude,
Even in the most glorious Servitude:
Who can inthral the mind unto the Sens,
Yet never tasted the minds Excellence.
He according to Nature live's, live's free,
Cares, fears and griefs tend Superfluity.
The meanest that but on themselves depend
Are to themselves a King, a Lord, a Friend.
Giving to great minds, is felicity:
Receiving is a mutt'ring Injury.
57. The Husbandman and Dogs.
A Husbandman had in his Function past
Many sharp Winters, yet was force't at last
(Through extreme want, which ruin menaceth)
To put his Hogs, his Goats, his Sheep to death:
At length his Oxen he was forced to slaie,
Which the Dogs seeing, ran for fear away;
Least their turns next should be, alleging then,
There was no hope of safety left for them:
Since now the Oxen their Master slew for food,
Who were Supporters of his livelihood.
MORAL.
So greedy Masters may be said to eat
Their servants, when they scarce afford them meat:
Nor are contented on their labors feed,
But must devour their persons thorough need;
But useless Drones being nourish't by Excess,
Stay not to bear the bane of Greediness.
But when thought useful, from their Masters fly,
Leaving them first in their Necessity.
58. A Fox and Lion.
A Fox unused was to see
The Lion's strange immensitie;
The first and second time was struck
With fear to see his awful look;
And from his Presence therewith fled,
He scarce himself recovered:
But the third time his interview
To such a bold Assurance grew;
As he (with confidence herein)
Familiarly saluted him.
MORAL.
So Rustic men, who are unused to see
Of Prince's States the Port and Majesty:
With superstitious fear do shrink aside,
Abash't by such a glory to be spied;
And so confused are some time: but when
Assured by frequent visits they are but men;
They then to such a hardy rudeness grow,
They scarce observe the distance which they ow.
Exposition.
A servile fear on Ignorance await's,
Til Use confused Reason animate's.
Whence Custom formed, such Habits does put on,
Fear is transfigur'd to Presumtion.
59. The Fox and Eagle.
A Fox's-Cub too soon abroad did straie,
Was by an Eagle trussed for her Preie.
The Cub implored the succor of his Dam,
Unto whose rescue out forthwith she ran;
But him perceiving forth her reach to be,
The Eagle prayed she would her Captive free:
But she relentless to her Eaglets bore
Her howling Rape, to be for food their store.
The Fox enraged, a firebrand had caught,
Wherewith pursued to inflame her Fort:
The Tree asscending, the Eagle she forewarned,
Then, if she could to keep her young unharm'd;
The trembling Eagle su'd to be forbore,
And what she had of hers, she would restore.
MORAL.
So powerful Rapine seiseth on the Poor,
Who moved to Mercy, prosecute the more:
Till Justice threats their Interests call to stake,
To stay whose hand they Restitution make.
60. The Husbandman and Stork.
FOr Cranes and Gees, that on his green Corn fed,
A Husbandman his Nets had closely spread,
Which to the heedless Fellons proved a Trap;
With whom the harmless Stork had equal hap;
Who su'd for pardon to her Innocent,
Nor Goos, nor Crane, but the most excellent
Of Nature's Volarie: With care she fed
Her aged Parents, when even famished.
Her Plea was vain: the Clown made this reply,
Since with the guilty took, with them you die.
MORAL.
Imprudent Youth, here warned are again,
How dangerous it is t'associate wicked men:
If present, though from The Will our Hands we draw,
As Accessers, we are guilty by the Law.
61. The Cock and Cat.
A Cock surprised by a Cat,
To justify her purposed Act,
Him of his clamors did condemn,
So often disturbed resting men:
The Cock objected, he thereby
Summoned to work mortality.
The Cat alleged farther, he
His Parents knew incestuously.
The Cock insisting him to clear;
The Cat persev'ring bad forbear:
For now of death the chiefest cause,
Was that he fell into her Claws.
MORAL.
So violent men, when they advantage win
Over the heedless, no ill figuring,
Endeavor all they can, their wrong may be
Over glozed with the form of Equity:
But if that reach not, shame not to fulfill,
What undertook by unrestrained Will.
62. The Shepherds and Husbandmen.
A Wanton Shepherd's-boie did keep
O'th'upper plains his bleating Sheep,
Had sundry times cried out in sport,
Help, help, the Wolf; to whom resort
The Husbandmen on each side are,
Who finding they deluded were,
(When the Wolf thither came indeed,
And he cried out to be relieved)
Came not, still thinking he did play,
While the Wolf made the Sheep her preie.
MORAL.
Who ask, yet want not, Charity deride,
When wanting thereof shall not be supplied.
Who use to lie, this wrong themselves they do,
They seldom are believed when they say true.
63. The Eagle and Crow.
AN Eagle from a high Rock seized
A tender Lamb; which action pleased
The rav'ning Crow so well, he would
Try if another truss he could,
Which he too weak away to bear,
In The wool his claws so fettered were,
That thence himself he could not free,
But taken was immediately,
His towering Pinions plumed short,
And to the Boys flung for their sport.
MORAL.
When greedy minds, yet with mean Power indu'd,
Would heat those Tracts the Potent have pursued,
To gain their Ends, do find the subtle Laws,
Which those broke, them entangle by some claus.
With heedless Rapine, thus ensnared they be,
Themselves procuring Shame and Poverty.
64. The Dog and Ox.
A Dog to eas himself that lay
Upon a Crib was stuf't with haie.
The Ox whereof coming to feed,
The snarling Cur did him forbid,
The patient Ox thus by him cros't,
Cried, how in envy art thou lost,
That wilt not eat, nor yet agree
That I thereof relieved should be.
MORAL.
Such Churls there are, roost on their useless store,
Yet with revilings aid deny the poor:
But their own crime their punishment does frame,
From what they others, they themselves restrain.
65. The Crow and Sheep.
A Crow upon a Sheep's back rid,
And there his Clamor published:
The Sheep said, his loud Notes to him
Would with some Dog, Misfortune bring.
The Crow replied; he knew over whom
He thus insulting was become;
He on the Gentle might trespass;
But to the fierce he friendly was.
MORAL.
Over suffering Natures Cowards domineer,
Whose innate Mildness their Outrages bear:
But by the hardy when encountered be,
Their Insolence stoop's to base Servil'tie.
66. The Peacock and Nightingale.
THe Peacock besought Juno tell,
Why sung so sweetly Philomel?
And her hoars voice when any heard,
Derision moved, or else them scared?
Juno replied, each One from Heaven
Had a peculiar Dow'rie given.
Thy Plumes then Hers much fairer be,
As she in Voice excels thee.
MORAL.
Nature, that None despised, or env'ed be,
Her gifts to all dispenses mutually:
Great Imperfections great Orn'ments disguise;
Some great Endowment great Defects supplie's.
67. The Aged Weezel and Mice.
AN aged Weezel, wanting her preie,
Her strength perceiving to decaie
So much, she could not now pursue
The nimble Mice, that daring grew:
In practice put this stratagem,
He in a Meal-heap covered him:
Whereof, when the Mice came to taste,
He them devoured to the last.
MORAL.
The body's vigor when through Age declined,
Nature supplie's it with an able mind:
And to secure us, does her Spirits shift,
What she took from the Arm, she giv's the wit.
Thus where the Lion's skin will not prevail,
Advising thereto join the Fox's tail.
69. The Countrie-man, and his Citie-Lord.
A Countrie-man had in a neighboring field,
An Apple Tree, did every season yield
Delicious fruit in plenty, of which he
Present's his Citie-Lord for their great raritie:
The which so pleasant to his Palate proved,
He to his Court would have the Plant removed:
But the o're-aged stock so spread his root,
That in transplanting died tree and Fruit:
Which told the Lord; passion checked passion, thus,
Was It not enough, the fruit was pulled for us.
MORAL.
So Lux and Avarice violate Nature's course
With their adult'rate Arts untimely force.
But when Experience the issue bring's to light,
Her innate virtues found exstinguish't quite.
Where Art Nature improv's; observe it thus,
We follow her, she will not com to us.
69. The Lion and Frog.
A Lion heard indistinct nois,
Whereat he made a sudden paus;
Starting aside, trembling stood he,
Exspecting some new prodigy.
At length skip't from a neighboring bog,
With active slight, a croking Frog.
The Lion then shaking off dread,
Did under foot his terror tread.
MORAL.
The Minds first Motions Reason cannot reach,
Nature th'obeie, yet Reason not impeach
The most confirmed Resolutions are
Sometime surprised with ridic'lous fear:
Because the courage formed is on discourse,
Which Master's not, what yet is in the source.
70. The Ant and Dove.
A Thirsty Ant went to a Well
Thereof to drink; but therein fell:
A turtle- Dove, her thence to free,
Dropped a Branch from off a Tree,
Which she asscending saved her life;
But found her Savior's was in strife:
For to the Dove a Fowler came,
Who lurking nigh, had took his aim.
But to prevent his eager shoot,
The Ant had bit him by the foot;
Whereat he starting, scared away
What he intended for his Preie.
MORAL.
Fate to that height does no one man prefer,
But may, if gracious, stoop to minister
To th'meanest: None in so abject a State,
But may, if grateful, good remunerate.
Virtue from virtue no Distance divide's,
Her secret tenor in each Heart reside's;
In all Extremes they meet, as here we see,
Compassionate Love, and grateful Industry.
71. The Peacock and Pie.
THe feathered Nation, who were free,
To choose a King to them agree.
The Peacock him most worthy held,
For that in Form the rest excelled.
To whom received for such, the Pie
Propound's this Ambiguitie:
During thy Reign most splendid King,
If the swift Eagl's towering Wing,
Do us, as they were wont, pursue;
Us to secure, What will you do?
MORAL.
Sage Council on the end does first reflect,
E're she to Action does her course direct.
Princes properties are not understood,
Set up for show, but for their Peoples good;
Which to th'exterior form is not assigned,
But t'th'Courage and Prudence of the mind.
72. The Patient and Physician.
A Raw Physician took in cure
An infirm man, did more endure
In his Prescriptions, then his Grief;
But could of neither find relief,
Till he exspir'd; the Doctor then,
Said, His Intemp'rance killed him.
MORAL.
Doubtful Conclusions knaves too often try
On others Intr'ests, their own to supply:
But if they do miscarrie in the event,
The Faults cast on the suffering Innocent.
73. The Lion, Fox and Ass.
THe Lion, Fox and Ass their force unite,
To make a chase might feast their appetite.
When fair success had fully crowned the day,
The Lion bad the Ass divide the Preie;
Wherein the Ass far more exact then wise,
In equal parts laid forth their properties:
Whereat the Lion much offended grew,
And in contempt the unadvised Ass slew.
Then on the Fox the fatal office laid,
Who for himself the meanest Portion made.
The Lion ask't, who taught him to carv so,
The Fox replied, the Asse's overthrow.
MORAL.
So in their actions cautious men do steer,
To shun those shelvs, where others ruined were.
They at an easy rate may happy be,
On others harms frame their security.
Who with the Potent would not disagree,
Must think extreme Right, extreme Injury.
74. The Kid and Wolf.
A Kid did from a Window spy
A roving Wolf was passing by;
With bitter taunts reviled him;
To whom the Wolf replied again:
Thou wretch, do me not this disgrace,
But I well know, it is the Place.
MORAL.
In times and places privileged be,
Cowards presume to vent their Contumely
Against such persons before whom elsewhere,
They but at distance dare not to appear.
75. The Ass.
A Gardeners Ass besought great Jove to free
Him from his Master's stubborn cruelty,
And change his servitude: Jove hereto joined,
And to a Tiler the dull Ass resigned;
Who with far greater burdens loading him:
The Ass for change to Jove returned again,
Craving a milder yet; Jove smiled, yet he
Would not resist his Importunity;
But to a Tanner him surrendered,
Whom when the Ass knew his grief thus published,
Wretch that I am was never content herein,
I Am now to one fallen, will not spare my skin.
MORAL.
With their own Function no one is content:
All covet change, though change bring Detriment.
In humane state each Office and degree
Has his peculiar Incommoditie.
76. The Old-wife and her Maids.
AN Old-wife many Maidens kep't,
Much after Midnight seldom slep't;
For at first Cock-crow (long e're light)
Their Dame to work would them incite.
The Maids with daily labor spent,
Sought this disturbance to prevent:
And their Alarm (i'th'Hous fed)
Attaching they chop't of his head:
Hoping the Watch silent become,
They might molestless sleep til noon:
But soon their hopes were frustrated,
The Cock their Dame perceiving dead:
As soon as they were laid to rest,
The yawning Maids pulled from their nest.
MORAL.
Each body move's more swiftly as't draw's near
Unto the center of his proper sphere.
Age bend's to Earth, and with more eager strains,
Till Earth possessed, pursues earthly gains:
What should allaie, exalt's their Appetites,
While in their course they overthrow Nature's Rites.
None can escape their fury, if they shun
One slight of theirs, they in a worser run.
77. The Ass and Horse.
THe Hors's happy fate the Ass did pleas,
Who fat and slick was, past his days in eas:
While he unhappie was with burdens wrought,
Gal'd, tattered, lean, and even to death nigh brought.
E're long the envied Horse to War set forth,
Was force't to yield more painful proofs of worth:
His Back to th'armed Horsman he impart's,
His mouth to th'Bit, his Body to the Darts.
Which when the Ass saw, to Heaven his thanks he paid,
That he no Horse was, but a poor Ass made.
MORAL.
Clowns envy Peers eas and delicious fare,
Til Glory cal's to th'painfull Theater:
An anxious Mind does Regal Power foil,
While cheerful Hindes make music to their toil.
78. A Lion and a Goat.
A Goat that on a steep Rock fed,
A Lion had distinguished,
Whom he advised to descend,
And to the greener Meddow bend*
The Goat replied; if he were gone,
She happily might feed thereon:
It was not for her Pleasure's sake,
That he did this Proposal make;
But on her, that with eas he might
Supply his ravenous appetite.
MORAL.
Civil or Natural Lives are best secured,
When unto pain and hardiness inured:
Security alluring Plenties bring;
Security neglect, Neglect Ruin.
When unsought Councels would express our good,
It Is then their own that should be understood.
79. The Vultur and other Birds.
THe Vultur feigned his Natal Feast,
To celebrate which, invite's for guest
The smaller Birds: most thither came,
Whom he seemed fairly t'entertain:
But when they all were fully met,
His craft removed the counterfeit:
All Cerimonie cast aside,
The Guests themselves the Feast supplied.
MORAL.
When greedy minds Inferiors entertain,
It Is but the secret Preface to their gain;
Where often the freedom of the heedless Guest,
Defraie's th'Exspenses of the bainful Feast.
80. The Geess and Cranes.
A Flock of Geess and Cranes there fed
Together in an unshorn Mead:
Notice whereof to the Rusticks came,
Who on them flew for sport or gain.
The Cranes that were of body light,
Secured themselves by sudden flight:
The Geess surcharged with their own weight,
The forfeit proved to their Deceit.
MORAL.
To shun th'Incursions of an Enemy,
To sure Retreats the poor and empty Fly:
While the rich engaged to his burd'nous Pelf,
Nor that secure's, nor yet can save himself.
81. Jove and the Ape.
OF mortal Creatures Jove desired to see.
Which had produced the fairest Progeny.
The Convocation published, from each place,
Flock't Fowl and Beast with their pretending Race:
Amongst which the Ape, in either arm enclosed,
Her deformed Cubs to all their views exposed:
Whereat from laughter no one could refrain;
Even Jove Himself Himself could not contein:
The Ape unabash't, said Jove their Judge knew well
Her Cubs all present did in form excel.
MORAL.
This innate folly is in all expressed,
Their own Productions to each one seem best.
And prudently proceeded Nature so,
Few else would cherish, what we All must ow.
This hold's in Arts the like Analogy,
T'extract Perfection from Infirmity:
Where still the works self-blandishing delight's,
The Industrious hand t'unwearied toil excite's.
82. The Fox and Goat.
A Fox and Goat oppressed with extreme drought,
Descend a Well, whence neither could get out.
The Fox the Goat wil'd of good cheer to be,
He had contrived a way to set them free:
Which was, the Goat himself upright t'erect,
And against the Wall his former feet should set,
Then to his breast inclining down his chin,
By's back and horns the Fox the banck would win,
Whereon escaped, he forth would draw the Goat,
Or by his horns, or by his shaggie Coat.
The Advice the Goat approved, thereto agreed;
And from the Well the Fox with success freed.
The Fox at liberty much joie expressed;
But left th'exspecting Goat still much distressed:
Who, when thus gul'd himself perceived to be,
Accused the Fox of Infidelity:
Him in derision the Fox answered,
Had thou had so much wisdom in thy head,
As thou have rev'rent Gravitie on thy Chin,
T'hadst foreseen to get out, e're thou got'st in.
MORAL.
Necessitie's most men inventive make;
But few observe the vows that then they take:
Who in Affairs to fair success pretend,
E're they begin, should first consult the End.
Years bring experience, experience mak's wise,
Age wants else his proper Dignities.
83. The Cocks and Partridg.
A Certain man that many Cocks had bred,
A Partridg bought, made tame, and with them fed.
The Cocks by turns, disliking their new Mate,
Chace't too and fro, and with much fury beat.
The Afflicted Partridg much perplex't in mind,
Imputed this to his estranged Kind:
Til he astonished had observed one day
Betwixt themselves a bloody mortal fraie;
Said, amongst your selves, since thus ye disagree,
I Will weigh no more your Injury to me.
MORAL.
Where powerful Nature and Society,
Slighted Engagements of true Concord be.
Strangers to both may well be pacified,
If they resent the outrage of their pride.
84. The boasting Traveller.
A Vap'ring Youth some time had spent abroad,
Swelled with conceit, returned to his abode;
Boasting how many brave adventures he,
In many Regions had past manfully:
Chiefly at Rhodes in leaping amplifie's,
From all pretenders bore away the prize.
In which most Rhodians then of Eminence,
Were to his fame applausive evidence:
If this be true, replied a Stander by,
We need thereof no farther testimony:
See! Rhodes is here! the contestation this!
Then make's a leap, and bad him equal His.
MORAL.
Where proofs are present witnesses are vain;
Truth is suspected only words sustein.
In man's own mouth ill sound's his proper prais,
In stead of Honor, 'twill but Laughter raise.
85. Apollo's Tempter.
A Wicked Fellow unto Delphos went,
To try the Oracle; Apollo circumvent;
Under his Cloak a Sparrow held in hand,
And to the Tripod uttered this demand:
What in my right hand I have covered,
Tell me Apollo, is it alive or dead?
Had he sai'd dead, thus did his craft contrive;
He would have then produced it alive;
If it was living, had been answered;
He strait had killed it, and produce't it dead.
But Apollo perceived his subtlety,
And returned, forthwith, thereto this Reply;
That in thy hand, Consultor, thou do close,
Living or Dead, as thou will it expose:
The power and the choice rest in thy will,
Which thou approvest, that thou mai'st fulfill.
MORAL.
The deepest Base to the highest mischief,
Is found to be a profane unbelief.
Who vice affect, endeavor to make vain,
What th'entrie threat's, or progress should restrain;
In which conclusions the All-seeing Eye
Shows his Truth, showing their fallacy.
86. The Fisher and the small Fish.
In The Sea his Net a toiling Fisher threw,
Which he from thence but with one small Fish drew,
Who thus craved freedom: I am of the Fry;
Leav me t'increas, and others multiply;
That I hereafter to thy profit may,
With small forbearance, be thy better Preie.
The Fisher made Reply, to this pretens
Should I yield, I had surely lost my sens.
What is in hand, though small, did I remit,
In hope of future good, though never so great.
MORAL.
The Futur's uncertain, that only ours,
Which we possess within our present powers;
Who part's with this, alluring Hope to feed;
Prejudgeth not the Hazzards may succeed.
87. The Man and Satyr.
A Civilized Man a League of Friendship made
With a rough Satyr, from the Desert strai'd;
Setting to eat from Heaven a cold storm rose,
Whereat the tender Man his fingers blow's:
The Satyr seeing this, the cause demand's;
The Man replied, he blew to warm his hands:
Soon after hotter meat to th'Table came;
Whereon still feeding, the Man blew again.
The cause hereof the Satyr did entreat;
The Man replied, he blew to cool his meat.
The Satyr hereat much astonished,
With sudden haste, forth from his new Friend fled;
Bad him farewell, he would no more comerce hold
With him from one mouth could blow hot and cold.
MORAL.
Nature and Truth unblemish't when they be,
Hold in their course one single Ministry:
But when corrupted either are by Art,
Deceit is introduced by common craft:
From whence this caution follows; disguised wrong
Lurk's always shrouded in a double Tongue;
A Base unfit for Love to build upon,
Whose End still is one common Union.
88. The Fox and Leopard.
'TWixt Fox and Leopard variance fell,
Which of them did in form excel.
The Leopard much exalt's his Note
In prais of's var'ing color'd Coat.
The Fox seemed heerto to aver,
In that he could not his prefer.
Yet him returned this Reply;
How much more beautiful am I!
Who not in body, as you find,
But var'ing formed am of mind.
MORAL.
Frail are the Beauties only meet the Sens,
Compared to them guide the Intelligence:
Time in his hasty summons those conclude's,
While these withstand all Time's vicissitudes.
89. The Woman and her Hen.
A Widow kep't a Hen did lay
An Egg on each ensuing day.
The Widow her hopes cherished,
Her Hen would more lay, better fed:
Which don, the Hen so fat was grown,
In-sted of more Eggs, she laid None.
MORAL.
Thus Gluttony fair Nature does oppress,
Ruin her Funct'ons by each wild excess:
And so blind Avarice is to All extent;
Whilst her own ways thus weav her punishment.
90. A Man bitten by a Dog.
A Man who by a Cur was bit,
Finding no Remedy for it;
Of all his Visitants he sought,
If they for Cure could tell him ought.
Amongst the rest One him adviz'd,
(If he his present safety prized)
To take a Crust dip't in his Blood,
And give it to the Dog for Food:
The wounded Man in Exstasie,
Returned thereto this Reply;
If this I did, then worthily
Of each Dog should I bitten be.
MORAL.
True Friends advize us to do Good for Ill;
Heaven might thereby his healing Balm distill:
But pervers Nature figure's to the Sens,
Ils are Encouraged by such Recompens.
91. The two Friends and the Bear.
TWo Friends together trav'ling on the way,
A Bear encountered both did much dismaie:
The One more frighted ran unto a Tree,
Which he asscended with Dexterity:
The Other thus abandoned, did suppose
Himself too weak, should he the Bear oppose;
Fell to The Earth, Him counterfeiting dead;
Foreknowing Bears on Carrion never fed.
The Bear approach't him, smel't his Neck and Ear,
Who, with much pain, did long to breath forbear.
The Bear, him dead believing, went away;
Whereon descended He in Covert lay;
And of his Friend required, what the Bear
So closely to him whispered in his Ear:
His Friend replied, He fairly warned Me,
No more to travel with such Friends as Thee.
MORAL.
Many Companions Friends instyl'd there be,
Few stand the trial of Adversity:
When proper Interests are in balance set
With their friend's safety, most prove Counterfeit.
92. The Reed and Olive Tree.
STrife rose 'twixt Reed and Olive Tree
Touching their strength and constancy.
The Olive Tree reproach't the Reed,
He was at each blast wavered.
The patient Reed long silence kept;
And farther trial did exspect.
E're long arose a violent wind,
With which the Reed was each way twinde,
While the Olive struggling with the storm,
From his seat by the root was torn.
MORAL.
Whose supple Natures their will pliant yield,
Them from the fury of the Potent shield.
Who to repugnant Times with slight give way,
Shall with success their malice overswaie:
While stubborn tempers, struggling with their rage
Both Lives and Fortunes oftentimes engage.
93. The Beaver.
THe Beaver, 'bove all Beast beside,
Does in the water most reside:
But in such close Retreat immured,
From vigilant foes is not secured.
All for his Genitals are bent,
In Medicine held most excellent.
When he by Hunters is pursued,
(As Instinct Knowledge had indu'd)
His Genitals he off does bite,
And cast's them in his follow'rs sight;
Who having their desired Rape,
Suffer the Beaver to escape.
MORAL.
Many an Ambush for the Rich are laid,
Who wealth reteining are by it betrayed:
But from his Person who divide's his Pelf,
With timely Exspence, wisely save's himself.
94. The Tunie and Dolphin.
A Tunie before a Dolphin fled,
Who in his course by fear misled:
And being nigh took, to save himself,
Had cast his body on a Shelf.
The Dolphin, who himself had wound
Into like danger, ran a-ground.
Whom a-far off the Tunie viewed
Exspiring, and did thus conclude;
With joie my life I now resign,
Seeing his Death that caussed mine.
MORAL.
Fear does disarm what Nature should defend,
And too secure, does often procure our End.
Thus wronged Men are something eased to see
Their Persecutors in Adversity;
And greedy Minds, with their blind Fury led,
So often perish with the injured.
95. The South saier.
A South-sai'r in the Market sat
Foretelling to the Rout their Fate:
To whom a Messenger rush't in,
Did woeful tidings to him bring;
The Door of's House was open broke,
And all his Goods from thence were took:
The trembling Wizzard in his course,
To hasten Home add's all his force;
Whom One espying, as He ran,
Cried to the People; See the Man,
By whom your Affairs are fore-shown!
Why could He not foresee his Own?
MORAL.
Who do beyond their Faculties pretend,
With their own Damage mocked are in the end.
Truly Authentic he his Council make's,
First on himself prove's what he undertake's.
96. The Physician and his Patient.
A Physician not long in the Function dealt,
Asked his Patient how himself he felt.
Who answered, he with distempered heat,
As then lay bathed in a clammie sweat:
The Physician replied, that was well;
And for that visit, gave him the farewell.
The like Question He moved when he came next;
The Patient said, he was with griping vex't.
The Physician said, that was well likewise;
And therewith think's his Fears he pacifie's.
The third time He the same inquiry made:
To which the Patient, much perplexed, said;
He with a Flux was then brought very low:
The Physician sai'd, that was well also.
After Whom One of his Familiars came,
And of the Patient demanded again;
How yet he did. The Patient made Reply;
Well, well I am; but yet, alas, I die!
MORAL.
Many such Charlatains each where there be,
Shadow their Ignorance with like Flattery:
But who for want of Knowledge or of Will,
Preside Another's, yet approve their Ill;
To their dishonor, guiltily do thus
Conspire with our Ils, but to ruin us,
97. The Wolf and Ass.
UNto a Wolf thus spoke an Ass was lame:
Behold! the Vultur's preie, or Yours I am!
I die with pain! this favor only I
Request of your admired charity.
Pull from my gangrened foot this stump, I may
With lesser anguish close my latest day.
This glosing style his savage Nature charm's,
It Is strange! a Wolf relent's at others harms:
And therewith him applied to yield redress,
Which suddenly was finished with success.
The Ass forgetful of his late good turn,
Did with the self-same heel his Healer spurn;
Which laid him welt'ring in his blood, from whom
The Ass risk't away, as if by him o'recom.
The Wolf as guilty did himself impeach,
That of a Butcher would become a Leech.
MORAL.
For abject minds who does good Offices,
Shall be rewarded with such injuries:
And who desert their Functions for the use
Of those unpracticed, reap Damage and Abuse.
98. The Fowler and Blackbird.
A Fowler spreading of his Nets,
To him a perking Blackbird jet's;
And busily made this demand,
What present work he had in hand?
The Fowler (jealous of suspect)
Said, he a City would erect:
And therewithal stepping aside;
Went afar off himself to hide.
The Blackbird facile of Belief;
Hoped to the Bait for her Relief,
(Was nigh the Net on purpose laid)
Wherewith, poor Bird, she was betrayed,
Seeing her caught, the Fowler ran:
To whom the Blackbird cried, O Man!
Truly, if you such Cities plant,
You Will scarce have one Inhabitant.
MORAL.
The greatest mischiefs for Rapine or Blood
Have still been shadowed with the public Good:
To which the credulous Innocents give way,
Till they themselves become the heedless Preie:
But where such Rulers do preside a State
They quickly will the Land depopulate.
99. The Traveller.
A Traveller about to undertake
A long Journie, to Jove a vow did make,
Half of his findings offered should be;
Whereon set's forth with great Alacrity:
Far on the Progress had he not advance't,
E're he to find a Bag of Almonds chance't
Mixed with Dates, which greedily he eat,
To th'stones and shells, all that thereof was meat.
These useless Relics he together cast's,
With which to The Altar most devotely hast's;
Where unto Jove himself he thus addressed,
And no small Zeal there seemingly expressed;
Behold! Great Jove! what without or within,
I bring to Thee, as my vowed Offering.
MORAL.
Some for sinister Ends themselves apply
To the exterior Forms of Piety:
But when their Actions truly are survei'd,
We find Devotion fraudulently pai'd.
100. The Boie and his Mother.
A Little Boie but late to schole put forth,
From thence a Horn-book stole, of little worth,
Which to his Mother did, returned, present;
And she received, neglecting Chastisement.
This daily practice he persever'd in,
Till use to greater things encouraged him:
For which he by the Magistrates condemned,
Was to the Gallows led, to make his End.
Whom his bewailing Mother following;
He of his Guard craved, she might speak to him:
To which assenting; She with speed drew near,
And to his mouch applied close her Ear:
Where in his teeth set (with such fury led)
That strait her Ear he pulled off from her head,
For which his Mother, and the standers by,
Reproached him with this new Infamy:
But unabash't, he published that she
The only cause was of his misery:
For the Horn-books theft had she corrected him,
He had no farther Progress made therein.
MORAL.
Indulgent Parents to correct deny
The seeming trifles even of Infancy:
To how imperi'us a Guide they resign
Their pliant Wills, do truly not define:
Custom a second Nature is, though blind,
O'reswai's the clearest functions of the Mind:
"With what liquor we vessels first inure,
"Longest in them that Odor will endure.
101. The Shipwrackct Shepherd.
A Wealthy Shepherd up and down did rove,
Close to the Sea his scattered flock had drove;
Which being calm, his wonder and delight,
Had him transported at so rare a sight;
That he his present Function did despise,
Resolved to plow the Sea for Merchandise.
To which effect, his Sheep he forthwith sold,
And into Dates converted all his Fold:
Put forth to sea, a hideous storm arose,
Did to much danger him and goods expose.
Th'o'reladen Bark each coming wave took in;
Which him enforce't, i'th'sea her freight to fling:
Emtie escaping, home returned again;
A few days after to the same place came:
Where he beheld the Sea's unwrinkled face,
Smile again on him with alluring Grace.
Whereon he cried, In vain with me you gloss;
Content your self; I Have no more Dates to lose.
MORAL.
So glorious fools are took with spetious Shows,
Nor knowledge gain but from their overthrows,
By loss and danger grossest Minds are taught,
Their Wit is soundest, when the dearest bought.
102. The imprisoned Heir, and the painted Lion.
A Nobleman, who was through Age declined,
One only Son had of a generous Mind:
Whose Inclination Hunting did o're-swaie,
Wherein his Game was most for beast of Preie.
On him the indulgent Sire his fancy set,
Nor could removed be by Death's counterfeit:
One Night he dreamed (to his no little pain)
This hopeful Son was by a Lion slain:
At which much troubled, fear sought to prevent,
That his Dream were not followed by event:
A stately House he built, whose rooms for grace
Had many Pictures of each several chase;
The Youth's mind to divert, herein confined,
And to the vigilance of a Guard resigned:
This more his unrestrained Courage checked,
And on the Cause yet caused him more reflect:
Which, amongst the rest there viewing, drawn to life,
He with the shadow enter's thus in strife;
Oh: cruel Beast! must I, for fear of thee,
Be here cag'd up deprived of liberty:
Whereat attempting to pull out his eyes,
An unseen Nail his finger scarifie's;
Which hurt so fester'd it a Fever bred,
The raging Fever life exstinguished,
MORAL.
In things to com, shallow Man's curious Sens
Is cheated still with like Aequivalence;
Who by his Prudence Heavens Decree would shun,
Weaveth the Thread wherewith his Fate is spun.
103. The Bald-man.
ONe Bald through Age or accident,
A Periwig wore for Ornament;
Which, as a Horse he managed,
A blast of wind drove from his head*
This laughter raised in the Standers by,
To whom, he laughing, made Reply:
No mar'l Falls hairs are from me blown;
Since they not on kep't were my Own.
MORAL.
Since Gifts of Nature fugitive are found;
For stay in Fortunes there is little Ground:
He from Disgrace the Blemishes take's off,
That on his own Shame first revert's a Scoff.
104. The Eagle and Fox.
THe Fox and Eagle, friendship made, agree
(Frequent Commerce might confirm Amity)
To be nigh Neighbors; the Eagle, to that End,
Did on a lofty Tree her Nest distend,
Whose declined Age had level to the Foot
Wrought a small Concave in the disclosed Root;
Where the Fox quartered; some time past hereon;
The Fox from's hole to quest for food being gone:
The Eagle in like want, flew to his Hole,
From whence the Fox-whelps for her Eaglets stole:
The Fox returned, finding her treacherous Rape,
Whose towering Wings made from Revenge escape:
In Execrations his high fury vent's;
The sole recours of wretched Impotents,
His injured Love converted into Hate;
Held now no ties too near to violate.
A rural Feast hereon soon issued
A Goat for victime had immolished;
The Eagle, The Altar rounded, sharp for preie,
Stooping for which, a Fragment bore away;
Whereto fast cleaved a light firebrand,
Which to her nest brought, the wind thereon fan'd,
Till it the same had fier'd, of matter light;
From whence the Eaglets (bee'ng unapt for flight)
(Yet Nature prompting to avoid the Flame)
Dropped to the Earth, and by the Fox were slain:
Who, unresisted, in the Eagle's sight,
Glutted his Passion and his Appetite.
MORAL.
'Twixt greedy Minds what ties so e're there be,
Discord's fomented by Vicinitie:
The Cause is evident; boundless Desires
In small Extents move with unequal Fi'rs:
Their wants even All Is too little to supply;
Excess through use becom's Necessity,
All ties of Friendship with them needs must fail,
Who for by-ends the Altar dare assail:
But what from thence their Rapine bear's away,
Will both their House and Family decaie;
While the oppressed by like vengeance shall
Restored be in their destructive fall.
105. The Eagle and Beetle.
A Hare was by an Eagle long pursued,
Who to resist with strength nor Art indu'd*
In this extreme a Beetle met, implored
That by his Aid her peace might be restored;
The Beetle of his new Electi'n proud,
Solemnly forthwith, her protection vowed:
And as the Eagle insisted to invade
This his new charge, the Beetle to her made;
Willing her not his Servant to molest:
The Eagle, persev'ring, much contempt expressed
Unto the Beetles little size and power;
And in his presence did the Hare devour.
This Injury the Beetle bore in mind;
And where the Eagle built long sought to find:
Passion, at length, direct's him to her Nest;
What had his speed, had there his force increast:
Th'exalted Eggs down to the Earth he fling's,
And hasten's thence with yet more active wings:
So joie's the Act, so fear's to be surpised.
The Eagle to prevent the like, deviz'd
Many vain shifts; at length she humbly moved
Her Patron Jove (Jove her entirely loved)
He to secure her Eggs, his bosom yield's:
Who dare assault what Jove's own presence shields?
Yet thither will the spiteful Fly attempt,
And undescri'd, there lurk't to circumvent:
Jove saw th'Eggs move, He sought the cause to know,
Shaking his Bosom, Both did overthrow.
MORAL.
Thus timid Minds, in their Extremity;
For succor to the meanest trifles fly:
Yet let the Greatest not provoke the Least;
Nothing so small may not the Great molest:
Who his own safety has but once contemned,
Is become Master of Another's End.
In vain to Heaven for Refuge any flie's,
Who reconcile not old Inemnities.
So blind Revenge to The Altar will asspire,
Though with his Foe he perish in one Fire.
Exposition.
The Hare, here, Fear (the Child of Guilt) implie's,
Who, the Eagle, Wisdom (Truth's discoverer) flie's;
Convinced of Error by the Natural Light;
And of the Bane molested with foresight,
Join's with the Beetle, here blind Ignorance,
By Unbelief to take away the Sens:
Whose true Attendant Fear is, but The Event
Shows such weak Safeguards, but haste puishment.
The prosecution of the Beetl's Hate
Against the Eagle, here, does intimate;
Though Ignorance can wisdom not impeach;
Yet will his Malice her Productions reach,
In Arts and Sciences delivered us;
Which to overthrow he still endeavour's thus.
Till Wisdom to The Altar ( Jove's Bosom) flie's,
To shelter there her sacred Mysteries.
Where yet attemted by her spiteful foe,
Who working hers, work's his own overthrow.
106. The Nightyngale and Hawk.
A Lone sat Philomel warbling on a Tree,
(Passion affecting no Society)
On whom a sharp Hawk, roving for his Food,
Suddenly seized for his livelihood:
The harmless Bird now on the point to die,
Humbly implored the fierce Hawk's Clemency
Her to dismiss, alleging in her right;
She too small was to serve his Appetite;
For which he only should the Great regard,
To Use and Travel might bring full reward.
The Hawk upon her cast an Angry Eye:
And in new Fury, made her this Reply;
Foolish it were, what we hold to forsake,
To pursue that we are not sure to take.
MORAL.
Thus savage Natures never do relent
At the sweet Music of the Innocent.
Nor greedy Minds, although their aim be All,
In any wise do yet neglect the Small.
All Hopes and Promises to them are vain
Objected to forbear their present Gain.
107. The tailless Fox.
A Fox, who only with loss of his Tale
Escaped a snare, did much his Fate bewail:
His Life more Grief, then Death approaching, bred;
So much with Shame his Spirits languished:
At length he under show of public Good,
Bethink's himself to cheat his Brotherhood;
In them advising to desect their Train;
Of his disgrace so to wipe out the stain:
To which purpose a great Assembly made:
The taleless Fox did with much Art persuade
His Fellows to cut off that burd'nous Freight,
An Ornament but merely in conceit:
To whom One subtle as himself replied;
Brother! this purpose you may cast aside;
If this be only thy Commodity,
T'advize it other's, ill becomes thee.
MORAL.
It Is Good to sift all Councels by their End:
Most do their own, when they our Good pretend.
So vicious Natures, blemish't in their Fame,
Would All corrupt to lessen their own Shame.
108. The Fox and Bramble.
A Fox, whose clamorous Foes did him pursue,
A hedge asscended Peril to eschew;
Where his rash Foot a lusty Bramble found
The Pat thereof did in the encounter wound:
Trembling with Anguish; yet in Passion wild,
For this offense, the Bramble thus reviled;
Distressed I to thee for Refuge fly,
And thou betrai'st me with new Injury:
The Bramble answered; 'twas his Error, thought
With craft to catch her, as he others caught.
MORAL.
Extremes the soundest Judgments often obscure,
The Present Ils o're-balance the Future.
But who for succor to rough Natures make,
Must not blame them, but blame their own mistake.
109. The Crocodile and Fox.
THe Crocodile and Fox contest,
Of Race which was the Nobelest.
The Crocodile most vainly high,
The worth boast's and Antiquity
Of his Progenitors; which said,
The scoffing Fox this Answer made;
Friend, had thou not averred this,
By thy Coat it apparent is,
Of all the Glories of thy Kin,
Thou have, long since, divested bin.
MORAL.
Virtue the Source is of Nobility:
With which, whose Actions hold no Sympathy,
To their Disgrace do extract from the Dead.
An Honor in themselves extinguished
The empty Titles of a lasting Name,
But ruined Monuments are to Others Fame.
110. The Fox and Hunters.
A Tier'd Fox by Hunters close pursued,
A Woodard, cleaving Wood, by chance had viewd;
To whom he ran, requesting, by his Aid,
To some close shelter he might be conveid:
By whom directed to an obscure shed,
The Fox, with speed, to hide him, entered:
The Hunters, following, of the Woodman sought,
If of the Fox he could inform them ought:
The Woodman's words, affirmed he did not know;
But where he lay did with his finger show:
The Hunters not distinguishing this Sign,
From farther pursuit did forthwith decline:
Which when the Fox perceived, without delaie,
He creeping forth slunk silently away.
In whose Retreat, him as the Woodman viewed,
He him reproached with Ingratitude:
The Fox replied, had hand to tongue been true,
What you now'challenge, I had tendered you.
MORAL.
Men's words amd Actions seldom do agree,
Yet All or Most pretend Integrity.
But when Truth is discovered by Event,
Slight prov's th'Evasion from the true Intent.
With the Performance weigh but what was spoke,
For an Hyperbol, take an Aequivoque.
111. A Man and his Wooden Idol.
A Certain Man a wooden Image made
His Houshold-god, to whom he often prayed;
The theme of his request was, all things might
Flow in with Plenty, issue with Delight:
But still as he more fervent grew in Prai'r,
All things at home went more against the hair:
Whereon, at length, to Rage his Zeal being grown,
He, in a Passion, had his God o're-thrown:
Which in the Fall divided from the Head,
From thence of Gold great plenty issued.
At which the Suppl'ant joifully admired,
O! Pervers Perfide! cried, when I required
Thy Aid with Reverence, nothing would dispens,
But to rude Blows yieldst up this affluence.
MORAL.
The Object of vulgar Zeal, we learn from hence,
Who judge naught Good, but what affect's the Sens:
Which not attained so, violate, as vain,
Those sacred Rites their vices did restrain:
Which once let loos; all Courses do pursue,
By which they may their sensual Ends acrew:
And if succesful, think they are supplied,
Because they have such Powers vilifi'd.
112. The invited Dog.
A Wealthy Man, little did cost regard,
Friends to receiv a sumtuous Feast prepared:
The Household Dog, by his Example led,
A neighboring Cur to frolique summoned;
Who thither com, transported was to see
Of so great Dainties such variety;
Concluding in himself, so well to feed,
For many days he might no victu'll need:
While for the Future thus his joie provide's:
His fawning Tale clap't his yet emtie sides;
The Cook this Rapture by his Gesture guest,
Him by the Tale did silently arrest;
Many a Round him swinging; at the last,
The Affrighted Cur forth of a Window cast;
Who from the Ground astonished arose,
With flying Clamors publishing his woes.
The neighboring Curs him full of wonder met,
Demanding him what dainties he had eat;
Who faintly said, with Cheer I so abound,
In my Return, I never felt the Ground.
MORAL.
Alluring Hopes do empty Minds extend,
But seldom reach to what they do pretend:
Who for support on Other's Goods rely,
Feed Exspectation with vacuitie.
113. The Man and Eagle.
A Simple Countrie-man an Eagle snared;
Her Pinions pulled, and cast her in his yard:
Amongst his Poultrie. Her another bought,
And with new Plumes her empty Pinions fraught:
With which the Eagle flying trust a Hair,
Wherewith reward's her Benefactor's Care.
The Fox, observing this, the Man adviz'd,
No more to cherish what he so much prized:
Lest, as o'th Hair, her yet asspiring Wing
Should in like sort be turned upon him:
The facile Man with this to credit led,
The grateful Eagle re-impov'rished.
MORAL.
By Ignorance Nature's high Works deface't,
Are in improper Uses thus misplace't:
Which when restored by Industrious Art,
Reward Another, prove their own Desert:
Till All perverting Malice do detect
Their approved Issues by unjust suspect.
114. The dying Husbandman.
AN aged Husbandman, whose End drew nigh,
Desirous was to cherish Industry
In his remiss Succession, called his Sons,
Told them that now his life to Period run's;
The Goods end Treasure he had to conveie
Amongst them, only in his Vineyard lay.
The Father dead, the Sons believing hid
This Treasure there, the Vineyard often dig'd;
But found not what their eager Travel moved,
Til the succeeding Season came, which proved
More fertile by such Culture, then before
Many years were; and made them rich, were poor.
MORAL.
Wealth from persev'ring Industry still flow's,
Though sometimes meats not what it did propose:
Error may guide the over greedy Intent,
But Success crown's it with unsought Event.
115. The silly Fisher.
A Silly Youth in fishing inexpert,
Yet with much Zeal pretending to the Art:
His Net and Pipe close to the River brought,
Where he sat piping, thinking to have caught
The easy Fish with this his Melody:
Which finding not succesful, Pipe laid by;
And to his Net betook him, which, in haste,
He with fresh Ardeur in the River cast;
From whence of Fish he drew a numerous heap,
Which on the shore cast, seeing them to leap;
Cried, Sullen Race! to move Pipe could not win,
But now I pipe not, you to dance begin.
MORAL.
T'improper Times and Subjects who apply
The perfect'st Art, make void their Industry:
Proportioned Functions first must meet our Skill,
E're to our Purpose we can form the Will.
116. The fortunate Fishers.
A Troop of painful Fishers put to sea,
Long tired were with fruitless Industry:
Hungry and grieved that they naught could take,
Homeward, perplex't, as they began to make;
A Fish pursued before Another swum,
Who to secure him in their bottom sprung:
On whom the joiful Fishers strait laid hold,
And at a high Rate, when returned, sold.
MORAL.
What Art and Labor could not bring to pass,
A secret Providence unexspected has;
None on their Strength or Knowledge might rely,
Without due ref'rence to the Deity.
117. The poor sick man.
A Poor Man sick, made to the Gods a vow,
A hundred Oxen he would them allow
In Sacrifice, for his Recoverie;
The Gods to prove this his Integrity;
Assent to his Request, and Health restore:
The cured Suppl'ant, 'caus he was but poor,
And Biefs had none, a hundred Oxen bones
Gathers together, and to The Altar come's,
To which addressed, thus publicly does say,
Behold, you Gods! my vow to you I pay:
The Gods intending to revenge the cheat,
Him, sleeping in a vision, instigate
Next Morning to the Seaside to repair,
And he should find an hundred Talents there:
On his dream mindeful, he got up e're day,
But was by Thievs encountered on his way,
To whom for Ransom he a Promise made,
A thousand Talents should be to them paid.
MORAL.
Man in Extremes, often to advance his Ends,
Beyond his power his promises extend's:
Wherein, who mock the all-discerning Eye,
Will still pay Man with equal Fallacy.
118. The unfortunate Fishers.
CErtain Fishers hailing to shore a draught,
By the weight judged it succesfully fraught;
Which did their senses with such joie elate,
Hope the possession did anticipate:
Until the Net upon the Coast was thrown
With some few small fish, and a mighty stone,
Which to an Ebb returned their tide of Mirth,
As dull and silent as the passive Earth.
Whereat one of them, most advance't in years,
Thus sagely his dejected Fellows cheers.
Appeas your trouble. Grief and Joie are Twins,
Alternate Changes rule the course of things.
Think All the Ils will happen you, which may,
That when they com, they may the lighter weigh.
MORAL.
Hopes are but shadows, mocking often the Sens,
Raised on The Affections, not th'Intelligence:
Which unprescribed in their loos Extent,
Swollen Exspectations frustrate the Event:
But the best Arm the Mind can use against Chance,
Is, e're it com's, t'exspect her Repugnance.
119. The Old man.
A Feeble Man, through Age and Travel spent,
To a remote Wood for his fuel went:
Which on his shoulders in a bundle he
Bore to supply his sad Necessity.
Returning home his Burden to conveie,
With the weight tired, and the tedious way:
Again his Bundle to the Earth restored,
And to end Grief, he sadly Death implored:
Death, unexspected, came as he desired;
And ask't the Man, what he of him required.
Who made reply, that you would take the pain
To help me with my Burden up again.
MORAL.
Weak Resolution Death through despair invite's,
But in th'Approaches most prove Hypocrites:
Life with what change of Ils soever spun,
Frail Nature still would Dissolution shun.
120. The Woman and Physician.
AN Old-Wife a thick film had in each Eye
Oppressed much the visive Faculty,
Was for the perfect Cure engaged become
Unto a Doctor in a certain Sum:
Provided still, his pains and cost imploi'd
Should, if they failed, be with the Covenant void.
The Physicion on his Reward intent,
To Effect his Cure on daily visits went:
And from his Patient's dwelling brought away,
By secret slight, some parcel every day,
Til in the Issue, He (his cure being wrought)
The Sum contracted of the Woman sought:
Which she refusing, summoned was t'appear
Before the Judge, he might the Difference hear:
Who thither com, her contract not denied.
But she not cured was, thus she justified,
E're in his hands, I saw my house well fraught
With Household Stuff, but there I now see naught.
MORAL.
Physicions visits sometime Health restore,
But always make the lingering Patient poor,
Who to like slight may justly have recours,
Since curing one ill, they still leav a wors.
121. The two Enemies.
TWo Fencers in one Bark put forth to Sea
Betwixt whom was invet'rate Emnitie;
Which since near Other neither would allow,
One to the Poup got, the other to the Prow:
E're far advanced, arose a hideous storm,
Wherewith the struggling Bark extremely torn:
To sink beginning, He sat in the Prow
Ask't of the toiling Sailers, which part now
Of their wrack't vessel would the first be drowned,
Who made Reply, The Poup cause first a ground;
Whereat he cried, Death's now no grief to me,
Since I my Foe to perish first shall see.
MORAL.
How strange distemper does the Soul disguize,
T'extract such Joie from others Miseries;
While yet frail Nature cal's us to resent,
With theirs, our own united Detriment:
Malice does proper Safety little prize,
Her thirsty Fury where she satisfie's.
122. The Calf and Ox.
A Fat Calf yet unyok't, beheld at Plow
A painful Ox, to whom he would allow,
Compared to him in Esteem, but Contempt;
In that the Ox wrought, in eas his days he spent:
But when the Day of Sacrifice drew nigh,
The Ox was dismis't; the Calf retained to die,
Thou were not wrought, the Ox to him smiling sed,
Because designed to be immolished.
MORAL.
Fair Industry the natural Life secure's;
While wantnn Sloth untimely Ends procure's:
So the divine Judge does inflict on those,
Whom they would save, variety of Woes:
But pamper's with Excess of worldly joie,
Whom he intend's in Justice to destroy.
123. The Boie and Fortune.
A Silly Boie did Cattle keep,
Near to a Well was fallen asleep.
Fortune arriving, waked him,
Thus saying, drew him from the spring.
Rise idle Knave from hence be gone,
For thy own Folly blame will none:
If thou heerin should chance to fall,
But I shall be condemned of All.
MORAL.
We frail Man's common Error here express;
His proper Error no Man will confess:
But rather thus their ill Successes lay
On some blind Powers their Action's overswaie.
128. The Mice and Cat.
A Ravening Cat an antic Fabric found,
Where sporting Mice, with freedom did abound:
Thither he went, and many made his Preie,
Till they themselves perceiving their decaie,
A Council called, wherein they did conclude,
Within his Access no One should intrude.
But to an upper Seiling to confine
Themselves, whereto the Cat could no way clime:
The Cat their purpose soon discovered,
Thus counterplotted, he himself feigned dead;
Hanging himself up by the heels upon
A hook was fast'ned to an inward stone.
One of the Mice did downward sharply pry;
He of the Cat might make discovery:
Cried to him, Friend! did I Cat thee know,
Though thou were dead, I Would not descend below.
MORAL.
So prudent Men from Others Harms collect,
Where, and on whom to ground a just suspect:
What Forms soever faithless Men put on,
They circumvent not their firm Caution.
125. The Ape and Fox.
THe Beast a general Council held,
Which of them in rare Parts excelled:
With the Ape's Frisks they so were taken,
Most votes him for their King proclaim.
The Fox, with a repining Eye;
Him envying this new Dignity;
Finding a snare laid in a pit,
Had a flesh morsel baited it;
To which that he the Ape might lead,
Thus his Prerogative did plead:
A hidden Treasure brought to light
(Which by the Law, Sir, is your Right)
Not far off lie's: this, if you pleas,
Your own hands may assume with Eas:
The Ape by his persuasion led,
With thirsty Ardeur hastened,
Whereat arrived with little Care,
Became intrapped in the Snare:
The chatt'ring Ape, with irefull Eye,
Reproach't the Fox his Treachery;
Who replied, Others you would protect,
Yet cannot your own ways direct.
MORAL.
Who from the Judgment of the Multitude
Election for a Government conclude:
In The Issue, find, what Reason should despise,
Misled their shallow giddie Fantasies:
Since of Mankind the greatest part are fools:
Such must be He, who by their Sentence rule's:
Nor is it fit, such men preside a State,
Who their own Actions cannot regulate;
But on this erring light still fix the Eye,
Which thus seduceth frail Mortality:
Envy and Malice, this also infer's,
Are unto Craft the sharpest Ministers.
126. Jove and the Crow.
UNto the Fowl of every kind
A day of Council Jove assigned;
He might elect him for their King,
The fairest Ornaments could bring:
Which when the Crow perceived, He,
Conscious of his Deformity,
Of various Colors others Plumes
To deck himself forthwith assume's:
In which, when All assembled were;
To Jove the fairest did appear;
For whom about to give his Vote,
Each Bird their own stripped from his Coat:
Whereat the naked Crow became
Exposed to more then usual Shame.
MORAL.
On borrowed Notions, swell the Memory,
Ostentive Minds raise their Sufficiency;
Which in their shallow Judgments, groundless so,
Fail in the use, and only serve for Show:
But when each Author is restored his own,
Their innate weakness is with dishon'r shown.
127. The Smith and Dog.
A Painful Smith a dull Cur kep't,
Who, while he forged, always slep't:
But when his Master went to eat,
Then suddenly He up would get;
And what was under Table thrown
With nimble Gesture prei'd thereon.
The Smith observing this, began
Against his Cur thus to exclame;
When I my self apply to work,
In Sloth thou do in corners lurk:
But when I 'gin my Teeth to move,
Thy fawning tail does this approve.
MORAL.
So idle Drones on Others Labors feed,
Shrink from the Action does supply their need:
But when the Fruits of Industry ensue,
None so Officious as this fawning Crew.
128. The Mule.
A Mule become with plenty fat,
Grew wanton in his present state;
Soothing himself, He for his Sire,
A Courser had, Active as Fire:
To whom, in all things, like was he,
Chiefly in his Celeritie.
Soon after this; without Respite,
Forced to run with all his might;
He restie in his course became;
Whereat, cried out, Wretch that I am!
To think me of a Horses Race,
Knowing my Sire was but an Ass.
MORAL.
Of mean Extraction ill bred Men there be,
Swell in conceit with their Prosperity;
Pretending to such S:ock and Faculties,
As Other Persons truly Nobilize:
But falt'ring in the Practice, soon reflect
Both on their Natural and Acquired defect.
129. The Physician and the Dead-Man.
AN infirm Man did long fick lie,
Happened under Cure to die:
Unto whose Funeral many went,
Encountering there th'Impertinent
Physician, who did much insert,
To save the credit of his Art;
Affirming, had the Deceast took
Frequently Glisters, and forsook
The use of Wine, he had not died:
To whom an Assistant replied;
Friend! This Advice you should produce,
Only when it might be of use:
But now it nothing can avail,
Your Purpose and our Proofs must fail.
MORAL.
Untimely Counsels silly Bablers vent,
Not for the future, but past Accident.
Of mortal Judgments it is the erring Fate;
All Men still wise are when it is too late.
130. The Dog and Wolf.
A Dog without Door sleeping lay
Was by a Wolf surpised for Preie;
Who to his slaughter being addressed;
The fawning Cur made this Request:
Sir Wolf; for present kill not me,
For lean I am, as you may see;
At hand my Master's Nuptials are,
Where I with such delicious fare,
My self will glut, that fat I may
Become your more agreeing Preie:
The Wolf relying on his word,
Did freedom to the Dog afford:
And thither soon returned agin:
But found the Dog sleeping within:
Yet of him he his Promise clam'd;
To whom the Dog this Answer framed;
When you me sleeping without Door
Find, Nuptials then exspect no more.
MORAL.
The Rites of Nature first preferred should be;
Nor Rites held, which with these hold contrariety:
That Vow or Contract in it self is void,
Injoin's us by our selves to be destroid.
So cautious Men, when they a danger shun,
Are in like Hazard seldom seen to run.
131. The Bull and Lion.
A Lion long a mighty Bull assailed
By sundry slights, yet of his purpose failed:
Approaching near, the Bull did thus invite;
Friend! if you pleas, pray Sup with me to night;
I have a Sheep slain, whereof we will feast,
Without more Cer'monie, pray be my Guest:
The Bull assenting, forthwith followed
The leering Lion, who to his Den him led:
The Bull arrived, saw many a vast Cauldron,
And mighty Spit, but Sheep he there saw none:
Whereon returning with unusual Haste;
The Lion ask't, What moved this distaste.
Who made Reply, those Instruments you keep
To dress a Bull more fit are, then a Sheep.
MORAL.
When to Inferiors Potent men profess
Unusual Friendship, it is but to oppress:
But disproportioned Entertainments may
Show such Pretenses tend but to betraie.
132: The enamored Lion.
A Lion of a Maid enamoured,
Sought of her rustic Father her to wed;
Who made Reply to his disdained Request;
His Daughter was no Marriage for a Beast:
But when the Lion hereon looked a-wrie,
A grin'd his teeth; the Clown seemed to complie;
Affirming, what the Lion had required;
As earnestly he had the same desired:
So that his Teeth and Nails dissected were,
Whereof the tender Virgin stood in fear.
The Lion with excess of Passion loved,
This his Objection suddenly removed;
Then for the Maid unto the Sire returned;
Who seeing him of Teeth and Claws unarmed,
A club took up wherewith he did oppose
The Lion's pursuit with pursuing blows.
MORAL.
When as more potent Princes would become
Joined to weak States in civil Union:
By slights in Treaties, proper Strengths lay down,
To blind suspect of Usurpation,
Find, so divested, their weak Foes insist
To punish that which they could not resist.
133. The Lion and Fox.
THe Fox reproach't, with Infamy,
The Lioness's Infecunditie:
In that she never could bring forth
But One Whelp only at a Birth:
Who replied; yet it came to pass,
That only One a Lion was.
MORAL.
Unequally Worth measured is by Sens,
When prized for Number, more then Excellence:
Nature her self produces on this Stage
Scarce One exact Man in a treble Age.
134. The two fighting Cocks.
TWo Cocks together long had strove
Who Master of the Hens should prove.
At length, One overcom became,
Was force't to hide his Head for Shame.
The Victor swelled with vanity,
To the Ridg of the House did fly;
Where he with loud Applaus proclaimed
The Trophies from his Foe obtein'd:
While arrogant Boasts he there crew out,
An Eagle sharp, roving about,
Trussed the Gallant for her Preie,
And to her Young bore him away.
Which when the subdued Cock espied,
(As on his Ruins glorified)
He publicly stalk't forth again,
To take sole Freedom of his Game.
MORAL.
Vain Minds, the Sens unapt to moderate,
Become extrav'gant with their Prosperous Fate;
And thus insult over their dejected Foe,
Till Fate restore these by their Overthrow.
Here Fortune's Changes show to us how nigh
Each Extreme is unto his Contrary.
135. The Calf and Stag.
A Calf, who with the Hind yet went,
Held with a Stag this Argument:
Since thou the Dogs do far exceed,
Both in thy Magnitude and speed:
And with thy branchie Frontlets might,
Far better armed art for a Fight:
What is the Reason then, my Friend,
Thou do their Pursuit apprehend?
To whom the Stag, smiling, replied;
Though all thou sai'st be verified;
Yet I can not my self assure,
The yelping of the Hounds to endure;
But when I their fierce clamors hear,
I take my sudden flight for fear.
MORAL.
Nature there vainly does her Gifts produce,
Where she give's not the Gift to lend them Use:
Reason unaptly travels to repair
Defects by Nature that inherent are.
136. The Be and Jove.
THe Be one day to Jove her King
Of Honey brought an Offering:
With which Oblation Jove became
So much delighted; bad her clame
What ever her wish could suggest,
He would assent to her Request.
The Be with Passion overswai'd,
To Jove this her Petition made;
Who ever came a Pilfering
To her Hive, so she might them sting,
Therewith they might for this their theft
Be suddenly of Life bereft.
To which Demand Jove doubtful stood,
Before Hers, preferring humane Good.
At length returned this Reply;
Let this thy blind will satisfy;
If any com unto thy Hive,
Thee of thy Treasure to deprive,
And thou, by Chance, so prickest him
To leav within the Wound thy Sting:
That Prick to thee thy Death shall be,
Let Life thy Sting accompany.
MORAL.
Revenge the highest Passion of the Will
Neglect's her Good to procure Others Ill:
But the All-judging Eye, to check the Sens,
As over-partial to her own Offense;
Ordein's, who on his Foe inflicteth All
He Can, shall by his proper Fury fall.
137. The Fly.
A Fly chance't in a Flesh-pot fall,
Nigh suffocated there withal;
Thus, with himself, made his Retreat;
So much I drunk have, so much eat,
And so well bathed my self, that I,
In Right, may now contented die.
MORAL.
So prudent Men, in Ils they cannot fly,
Reflect on their former Felicity,
To counter pois the weakness of the Sens,
Ore-whelm's the Mind with headie Violence.
138. The Swallow und the Prodigal.
A Youthful Gallant sensually had spent
His Patrimony to his vestement:
Seeing a Swallow e're the Season came,
Judged Summer nigh, and forthwith sold the same.
But Winter from this Relaps soon arose,
And pinch't the Gallant stripped of his Clothes;
Who with the Cold seeing the Swallow dead;
Cried, faithless Bird! Us both have ruined.
MORAL.
Who on irrational Subjects do reflect
The Progress of their Actions to direct.
To their Destruction, in the issue, see
How far they Err, trust such uncertaintie.
From this Conclusion, here, collect we may;
Things out of Season don do soon decaie.
139. The Woodman and Mercury.
A Woodard selling Trees, a stream ran nigh,
Was consecrated unto Mercury;
Wherein, by chance, his approved Hatchet fell,
Which to his work was no small Obstacle.
Down on the Bank he much perplexed sat,
Where his fresh Plaints his Griefs exagerate.
To him, in Pity, Mercury appears,
Seeking the Cause of his excessive Tears:
Which to him shown, said Mercury, Behold!
Is this thy Ax? showing an Ax of Gold:
Which when the poor Man had for his denied,
With One of Silver Mercury him tried;
This yet disclaming, Mercury inferred
The Ax of wood, which he for his aver'd.
Mercury heeron gave to him all three;
So to reward this his Integrity.
Who to his fellows coming, did relate
The Circumstance of his auspitious Fate:
Of whom, One this Adventure would pursue;
Com to the Stream, therein his Ax he threw:
Then down sat weeping on the bank, til he
Discovered had officious Mercury.
To whom, when he had his disaster told,
Mercury to him showed an Ax of Gold:
Asking, if that were his? He void of shame,
Stoutly affirmed, 'twas the very same.
Whose Impudence to Mercury thus known;
He nor gave that, nor yet restored his Own.
MORAL.
So honest Minds by their Afflictions tried,
From Heaven, have their Possessions amplifi'd:
While fraudulent men, ensnared by their Deceit,
Their proper Substance justly ruinate.
140. The Woman and her Hen.
A Woman kept a Hen of old,
That each day laid an Egg of Gold.
She thinking her all Gold within,
Her Head did from her carcass wring:
Then to dissect her went about,
Pulling her hopeful Entrails out:
Where finding her like Others made,
Desiring more, lost what she had.
MORAL.
So greedy Minds would bounteous Nature force,
Till from her Functions virtue they divorce.
Contemning thus the Good they did enjoie,
To pursue More, the Means of both destroy.
141. The Frog and Fox.
A Frog sat croking in a Fen
To Other Beast incountring him;
That he a skilful Surgeon was:
To whom replied a Fox, did pass;
If thou will this to us assure:
Thou thy own limping first must cure.
MORAL.
Who Others Errors to reform pretend
Must their Own Imperfections first amend,
Present Example is a powerful Guide,
Place't in their Persons would our Works preside.
142. The Husbandman and Adder.
AN Adder near a Countrie-man
His lurking Hole had; to which ran
His wanton Son, and with a Blow
Incence't the heedless Adder so;
On him she with such Fury flew,
That she forthwith the Infant slew.
At which the Father much perplex't,
This to Revenge himself addressed;
Taking an Ax her to assail,
Wherewith cut off the Adders Tail.
The Man at length Agreement sought;
Meal, Water, Salt, and Honey brought
To reconcile this Injury;
And make a League of Amity:
Then He the Adder called upon;
Who lying underneath a Stone:
Thus, hissing, said, Thou work'st in vain,
Friendship betwixt us now to frame:
Reason with Sens will not prevail,
While thou thy Son want, I my Tail.
MORAL.
Debates Subject not removed from the Sens
Again take's fire on slight Accidents:
Nor is firm Reconciliation made
Where Restitution is not to be had.
143. The Hen and Fox.
A Fox had to a Hen-roost pressed,
Found there a Hen sick on her Nest:
On whom with fierce Aspect he star'd;
Asking her, How in Health she fared?
Who replied, she should better be,
If he would leav her Company.
MORAL.
Unusual Favors from professed Foes,
Suspected Trains are to our Overthrows:
We on our Safeties most should jealous be,
When to our Aid we them Officious see.
144. The Lion and Man.
A Man and Lion to travel set forth,
As in discourse each amplified his worth;
They to a Pillar came of Stone, whereon
Was cut a Lion by a Man overthrown.
The Man this Figure to the Lion show's,
His Subject by Example to oppose:
Saying, how far Men Lions do exceed
In Strength and Courage, here you plainly read;
The Beast replied, as Men, had Lions Art,
Far more such Marks you would find of our Desert.
MORAL.
Vain Boasters, so, on feigned Trophies raise
Unequal Proofs to their affected Prais:
While the Deserver does in Silence pass
Worthily those Acts he achieved has.
145. The Fox and Grapes.
A Fox on Grapes had cast his Eye
Were in their full Maturitie:
Which he desirous to attein,
Attempted often had in vain:
At length his will thus pacifie's,
Defisting from the Enterprise.
Tush! let them pass; I fondly fret:
They are, as yet, but sour meat.
MORAL.
When Prudent Men their Ends cannot attein,
Thus, the blind Passion of the Will restrein:
And to the Motions of the Sens implie,
In The Subject sought some Incommoditie.
146. The Child and Scorpion.
AN Infant seeking Lobsters on the sand,
Laid on a Scorpion, by mistake, his hand:
Who on his tender years casting an Eye;
Thus piti'd much the Childe's Simplicity.
Sweet Boie! in Peace, withdraw thine hand from me,
Least Ignorance procure thy Misery.
MORAL.
So headie Minds, their Purpose to pursue,
Fall often on that, which they should first eschew.
And so the Harmfull sometime do relent,
Charmed with the Image of the Innocent.
147. The Fowler and Partridg.
A Fowler had a Partridg tain,
Who on the Period to be slain;
Cried, trembling, Fowler! let me fly;
I will thy favor gratify:
For by my Call I will entreat
Many more Partridg to thy Net:
To which the Fowler made Reply;
For this thou more deserve to die:
That would betraie, for private Ends,
To secret Snares thy native Friends:
Nor can thou true be to thy Foe;
That to thy Friends wilt not be so.
MORAL.
Who from Oppression would their Persons free
By the suggestion of base Treachery;
Just Cause administer, where there was None,
By their Oppressors to be overthrown.
For some Advantage Treason loved was ever;
But as suspected, was the Traitor never.
148. The Hare and Snail.
A Hare, by chance, a Snail espied,
Whose creeping she did much deri'd.
The Snail for wager would become
Engaged with Her a Race to run.
The Hare this proffer took in Scorn,
Yet could for shame but it perform,
The Fox (of all the Beast most wise)
Elected was for Compremise,
Who limit should the Course, and be
Discider of the Victory.
Sloth and Neglect laid by, the Snail
Set forth, with Success to prevail:
Nor Intermission suffered,
Till he his Course had finished.
The Hare, relying on her speed,
Lay loitring without farther heed,
Till sleep from limbs did sens divorce,
Starting from which ran forth her Course,
Where the Snail finding ere she came,
Was force't to yield it lost, with shame.
MORAL.
The perfect'st Gifts that Nature can Imploie
Sloth and Neglect insensibly destroy.
While with success, persev'ring Industry
To Subject's none had yield's Capacity.
149. The Willow and Ax.
THe Ax to cut the Willow laid;
First of the same some Wedges made;
The solid Stock might thereby be
Cloven with more facility.
Which when the Willow had perceived,
Trembling, thus, inwardly she grieved;
I not so much bewail my Fate,
To feel the Ax me ruinate:
As I these Wedges am to see
My Body tear, were part of Me.
MORAL.
Foes by their Art divide us from our Friends:
And make these Agents to advance their Ends:
But wrongs from them most sensible must be,
Where Love and Nature framed an Unity.
150. The Pomegranate and Apple Tree.
TWixt Apple Tree and Pomegranate,
Touching their Beauty, rose Debate:
Many and bitter Outrages
Past to foment their Vanities.
At length to reconcile these Foes,
From the next Hedge a Bramble rose;
Who, with reproof, bad them no more,
Shame to avoid, make such uprore.
MORAL.
Shame of Dissension does salv up the Breach,
When the Contentious do Agreement preach:
It ill becom's the Moderate not give way,
When the Licentious stickle to the Fraie.
151. The Mole and her Dam.
THe Mole, a Beast by Nature blind,
His Dam told, he felt, from the Wind;
An unknown Odor pass to him.
Not long after, affirmed agin;
That he the Forgers hammers heard
Beat on the Anvile: next aver'd;
He did a mighty Furnace see:
At which the Dam replied; she
Should judge by this; he, as his Eyes,
Had lost his other Faculties.
MORAL.
Vain Boasters so to light betraie their Lies,
Extending them t'Impossibilities:
Who, to have don More then they Can, recite,
Afford just Proofs they have not what they Might.
152. The Wasp, Partridg and Husbandman.
THe Wasp and Partridg, which extreme thirst pressed,
Themselves together for Relief addressed
Unto a Husbandman, who water drew,
And with large Proffers, thus for water sew;
The Partridg said; she would his Vineyard dig,
Replenish't Clusters might enrich each Twig.
The Wasp said, he the Vineyard often would round,
To keep off Thieves from entering on his Ground.
The Husbandman replied, he had two Beevs,
That nothing promised, yet performed both These.
To whom far fitter 'twas his water give,
Then by his Travel he should them reliev.
MORAL.
More fit it is, our Gratitude to show,
T'acquit our selves of Benefits we ow,
Then to fair Promises present our Gifts,
Which, in their Trial, leav us to our shifts.
153. Jove.
AS Jove his Nuptials celebrate's,
Each Beast on him with Offerings wait's,
To gratulate the Cerimonie
To every one's Capacity.
The Serpent for his Present chose,
Sprinkled with Dew a fragrant Rose;
Which in his mouth he brought to Jove,
Who strait affirmed, he did approve
Of every Beast the Offering,
Save what the Serpent brought to him.
MORAL.
Not only Man, but God himself detest's
Sweet flowing Words spring from malicious Breasts.
Man may secure himself from any wrong,
But from the Poison of a Glozing Tongue.
154. The Indulgent Ape.
AN Ape at once two Whelps had laid,
Only for One affection had:
Which she brought up in much Delight;
The Other she abandoned quite;
It happened that in Pleasure bred,
The sleeping Dam had stifeled.
The Other had neglected been,
Heeron became the Dams darling:
Which she nursed to Maturitie
With equal Love and Industry.
MORAL.
The ill success, we may collect from hence,
Of Parents over-partial Indulgence
Unto their Issue, whom with cock'ring, they,
Seeking to cherish, to ruin do betraie.
While the neglected often restored are;
So Fortune's power exceed's humane Care.
155. The Captive Flea.
A Flea a Man had sharply bit,
By him was captive took for it.
The Man ask't, who it was that fed
On his Limbs with pain nourished.
The Flea said, she was of that kind,
Whom Nature so to live designed:
Nor did she him intend to kill,
For she could do but little ill.
The Man heerto replied again;
For this you rather shall be slain;
In that Hurt much, or little, you,
In any wise, ought not to do.
MORAL.
Guilt by the Damage measured should not be,
But by the Agents true Capacity:
Who to his Power in Evil has excelled,
Of all the Evils guilty may be held;
So, in small wrongs who priviledg'd would be,
Should perish, as to Right an Enemy.
156. The escaped Flea.
A Flea, by Nature prompted to it,
A Man stung smartly by the Foot;
Which him incensed so, she taken;
He would between his nails have slain:
The Flea being active in the strife,
Escaped his Hands, and saved her Life.
The Man cried out, O Hercules,
Exterminer of villainies!
Why present were thou not with me
To suppress this my Enemy?
MORAL.
So shallow Men, pressed with Impatience, call
To Heaven for Aid, on Subjects trivial:
Whereas the Object of our Prai'rs should be
From all relation to the Senses free.
157. The Ants and Grasshopper.
THe Winter Solstice being past;
The Ants their Wheat a Sunning cast;
The Grasshopper this discovered,
Who was with want nigh famished;
With humble suit did them aboard,
They would thereof him Alms afford.
The Ants ask't, what in Summer he
Had don? or why past slothfully?
The Grasshopper replied; he then
Sung cheerfully to passing Men,
To take from Them the dull delaie,
And tedious travel of the way.
Which heard, the smiling Ants replied;
Their Suitors folly to deride.
Since thou in Songs have Summer spent,
For Passenger's Divertisement:
In dancing now thy Limbs unfold,
Least thou be starved with the cold.
MORAL.
Who has their Youth in idle pastimes spent
In Age may vainly beg their Nourishment:
While the Industrious on his Plenty Feasts,
And make's their Wants the subject of his Jests.
158. The Man and his two Wives.
A Sensual Man his life in Pleasure led;
When wasting time half grisled had his Head,
Two Wives of different Ages, to him took:
But neither Partner could a Rival brook.
The Elder of them well advanced in years,
Scratching his head, pulled off his youthful hairs;
By such resemblance to procure his Love
Solely to her, the like effect would prove
The Younger also; scratching every day
For the like purpose, pulled out all the Graie:
Till he, at length, betwixt them bald became,
And with much Laughter was exposed to shame.
MORAL.
This figure's to us, how ill disagree
Declining Years with Sensuality.
To differing Tempers who resign's his Will,
Shall neither Theirs, nor yet his Own fulfill;
This Inconvenience must inherent be
To all their Actions prove Polygamie.
159. The poor sick Man.
A Poor Man sick had long time kept his bed,
When the Physicians him abandoned,
Unto the Gods addressed himself; to whom
He for his Safety vowed a Hecatomb,
His Wife this hearing, ask't where he would get,
When well, the hundred Oxen should complete
This Sacrifice; who said, shall I well be,
Think thou, the Gods might this require of me.
MORAL.
When humane Aid fail's Man's Extremity,
To Heaven for Succor Unbelievers fly.
Who to their Powers limit not their Vow,
'Caus, whom they make them to, they not avow.
How can they then exspect to be supplied
By them, whom they intend but to deride.
160. The Frogs.
TWo Frogs, who in a Fen were bred
By Summers drought when exhausted,
Forsook the same, and roved about,
To find a waterie Region out.
At length a Well profound they met,
Wherein o'rejoi'd, One would have leapt:
Till, thus, his Fellow checked him;
If we should, Friend, descend here in;
And this also be dried with Heat,
From hence how shall we then retreat?
MORAL.
First with the Issue wisemen do advize,
E're undertaken is the Enterprise:
And by their Reason Accidents fore-run,
To find th'evasion e're the Evil com.
161. The Dog and Cock.
A Dog and Cock in friendship joined,
'Twixt whom a journie was designed:
Set forth; the Evening com; a Tree
The Cock resolved his Roost should be:
The Foot whereof a hollow had,
Wherein the Dog his kennel made.
The Cock, as he was wont to do,
Soon after Midnight often crew.
Which new Alarm thither brought
A roving Fox, for Preie that sought:
Who standing underneath the Tree,
Required the Cock most earnestly
Descend from his exalted Place,
He much desired to embrace
So rare a Singer as he was:
In vain that passion should not pass:
The Cock replied; advizing him,
The Porter wake to let him in:
Who underneath the Root was laid,
To which, the Fox no small haste made:
But when, so roused, the Dog forth came,
The Fox was by the Porter slain.
MORAL.
With the deceitful who in Treaties join,
Find Craft to Craft the surest Countermine.
So by their Craft who Others circumvent,
Sometime by Craft do meet their Punishment.
162. The Lion and Bear.
A Lion and a Bear together caught
A tender Fawn; for which they fiercely fought;
Each one so Other sharply had assailed,
That in the Combat both their vigors failed,
E're the Strife was decided, breathless they,
And tired, in a Truce, fell by their Preie.
Whom when the prying Fox had prostrate seen,
With the affected Prize that lay between:
This he snatched from them with a nimble slight;
And from the Peril saved himself by flight,
Which they, for Pursuit both unapt, lament,
That for the Fox they had their labors spent.
MORAL.
So Potent Men will in the Pursuit bear
A Partner, when they will not in the share:
While in Contention for th'affected Prize
They quite exhausted have their Faculties,
Some busy Knave their Actions did surveie,
Of their Industry bear's the Fruit away.
163. The Bat, the Bramble and Cormorant.
THe Corm'rant, Bramble, Bat together made
A League, agreed to drive a Foreign Trade.
The Bat much money on Exchange had sought.
The Bramble Garments for his venter-brought.
The Cormorant, for his Commodity,
Embarked Brass: so forth they put to Sea.
As in their hopeful voyage, rose a storm,
Wherewith the Bark was under-water borne:
They with much hazard, only gained the Cost,
Where still the Corm'rant dive's for what he lost:
The Bat his Creditors to avoid, by Night
Dare's for Provision only take his flight:
The Bramble every Passenger goe's by
Take's by the Coat to find his Property.
MORAL.
So greedy Tempers tempted with the Itch,
In their frail Minds, to become sudden Rich;
Attempt unpractiz'd Hazzards; till they be
Involved in the snares of pressing Misery;
Some walk in Darkness; Others shift their Clyme:
Some Others Goods by violence purloin.
164. The Fox and a singular Beast.
A Singular Beast, that in a tree was set,
Though unprovok't, began his teeth to whet:
The Fox this seeing ask't the Cause, why he
Sharp'ned his teeth without Necessity?
Who made Reply ingenuously heerto;
When Danger com's, this be not then to do.
MORAL.
This Notion is for Princes singular;
In time of Peace thus to provide for War:
In vain it is our Weapons then to frame,
When to the Fight Alarums cry, Arm, Arm.
165. The Lark.
A Lark was taken in a snare,
Thus groned forth her last despair;
Nor Gold, nor Silver have I taken,
To make Another's Loss my Gain,
For one poor grain of Wheat it is I
Must, to my Grief, untimely die.
MORAL.
To lofty Minds it is double Grief to fall
In those Attempts whose Ends were trivial:
Where the Sens only meet's not present Pain;
But Reason wound's the Soul with future Shame.
166. The covetous Man.
A Covetous Man his Land and Goods had sold,
And All converted to a Mass of Gold,
Which he to hide, in secret dig'd a hole,
Wherein entombed his Treasure and his Soul:
This Idol He to worship often repaired,
Till frequent visits had the cause declared
Unto a prying Workman, who e're Day
Entered the Shrine, and bore the Saint away:
Soon after the Devotare thither bound
With wonted Zeal, the Temple empty found:
Whereat he much lamented, tore his Hair;
And in strange Passions figured his Despair.
Which deploration when a Neighbor had
Observed; thus adviz'd him not be sad;
For having Treasure, thou, alas, had none,
Therefore again fill up the Hole with stone:
Then think it Gold, and such 'twill be to thee;
Since to thy Use both serve indifferently.
MORAL.
Possessions can but small Content produce,
Where the Will is restreined from the Use:
If Fancy can but overswaie the Sens,
'Twixt This or That is little Difference.
167. The Tortois and Eagle.
THe Tortois of the Eagle sought,
She might by Him to fly be taught.
The Eagle bad her change her mind;
This was repugnant to her kind:
The Tortois, in her suit, heerat
Became far more importunate.
The yielding Eagle here to pressed,
Her in his Talent did invest;
With whom to the upper Region flew,
From whence, to practice, he her threw;
Who falling on a heap of Stones,
Shattered to pieces Shell and Bones.
MORAL.
Earth creeping Minds to Speculations press,
Unapt thereto, seldom meet fair Success:
Beyond their Power things struggling to comprize,
Extinguish often their natural Faculties.
168. The Stag.
A Stag, an Eye by chance had lost,
Was feeding near to the Seacoast,
The perfect Eye to Earth imploi'd,
He might the Hunter's Wiles avoid:
The Other turned to the Sea,
For which he had no Jealousy.
A Man sailed by observed his Craft,
And to Death struck him with a Shaft.
Who thus in Tears his Fate bewailed,
Where I most feared, no Ill assailed:
But where I thought none could invade,
From thence to Ruin am betrayed.
MORAL.
On our Defects we should most cautious be,
For which Advantage wait's our Enemy.
Those Forts or Places double guarded are;
Or Art, or Nature leav Irregular:
What Both most strengthen, let no One neglect,
That part is weakest, which we least suspect.
169. The Stag and Lion.
A Stag before the Hunters fled,
A Cave, for safety, entered:
Where he was by a Lion taken,
Who on the Period to be slain:
Lamented thus, from Man I fly,
To fall by a Beast's Cruelty.
MORAL.
The Lights of Nature sudden fears obscure,
And to avoid Ill, greater Ils procure:
A humane Foe to act restrein's his Will;
But savage Fury more then once would kill.
170. The Stag and the Vine.
THe Hunters pursuit to decline
A Stag him sheltered with a Vine;
Who when they all were by him run,
The leafs thereof to knap begun,
Till having round nigh pulled them clear:
The Hunters back returned were:
Supposing him (as then he did)
To be in some thick Covert hid:
Where so exposed to their view,
With unexspected shafts him slew:
Who dying said; Just is my End;
To ruin that did me defend.
MORAL.
So barbrous Minds (their Extremes past) oppress
Who gave them Refuge in their sad Distress:
But when again like Evil on them com,
Find, by such loss, themselves they have undon.
171. The Ass, the Lion, and Cock.
A Cock was feeding by an Ass,
Near whom a Lion chance't to pass.
The Cock in his shrill Clamor crew,
Whence, terror struck, the Lion flew.
The Ass confirmed 'twas from his fight
The timid Lion took his flight;
Pursued him til past the Nois
Of the fierce Cocks redoubted voice;
The Lion then returned on him,
And from his carcass pulled his skin:
Who dying cried, wretch that I am,
I not of fighting Parents came:
What Ground should move me then, I durst
My self into such conflict thrust.
MORAL.
So shallow Men in Self-opinion strong,
Take to themselves more then to them belong;
Which in their Minds Presumtions form so high,
They tempt those Hazzards they should rather fly:
Till in the Issue their own Ruin show,
What their frail Natures first them framed to.
172. The Gardner and his Dog.
A Gardner's-Dog by mischance fell
Into the bottom of a Well;
The Gardner, him to draw from thence,
Descended in great diligence;
Where (as to rate him he begun,
No more into such danger run)
The Incensed Cur turned on him;
And sharply bit him by the shin.
Who cried, I justly suffer, have
Endeavored my Murderer save.
MORAL.
Who churlish Tempers, with Reproof, reliev,
To reward Bounty, Damage often receiv:
They seldom Grateful prove unto their Friends,
Who dislike Advice, but to their Good tend's.
173. The Sow and Dog.
A Sow and Dog at variance were;
The Incensed Sow by Venus swear:
She with her teeth would him divide;
The subtle Cur heerto replied:
Thou vow'st to Venus for our Aid;
As if she thee in Favor had.
Who does thy foul flesh so defpise,
She will thereof no Sacrifice:
The Sow replied, she does me love,
Your Argument does rather prove.
Since neither me to hurt or kill
Can be agreeing to her Will.
But thou art neither quick nor dead
To any one well savoured.
MORAL.
Weak are Conclusions drawn from humane Sens,
Since double Senses meet our Arguments.
But they the happiest Orator must be,
With his own Proofs convince their Enemy.
174. The Sow and Bitch.
THe Sow and Bitch could not agree
Concerning their Fertility:
The Bitch said, herself to prefer,
That no Beast heerin came nigh her:
The Sow replied, but yet we find,
You still produce your Puppies blind.
MORAL.
Nor Speed, nor Number give to works the Prize;
But the Perfection of the Enterprise.
Abortive Labors seldom do produce
But Fruits imperfect and unfit for Use.
175. The Serpent and Crab.
A Crab and Serpent did agree
To enter in Society.
The Crab, whose Manners were sincere,
The Serpent wil'd his Craft forbear;
Who little weighed admonishing;
But still persevered therein:
Till the Crab sleeping took her Mate;
And to Death pressed him with her weight;
To whom (extended forth) when dead,
The Crab this Notion uttered,
Thus simple to have been you ought,
You had not suffered what you taught.
MORAL.
In Commerce who themselves to Craft apply,
Against themselves fraud teach and justify:
For such Disguise aim's but at private Ends,
Which would supplant the Interest of their Friends:
Nor can in Friendship long Agreement be,
Where Natural Habits hold Antipathie.
176. The Shepherd and Wolf.
A Wolf's Cub, lately whelpt, a Shepherd caught,
Which with his Dogs to foster home he brought:
Who, as to riper Age and Strength he grew,
With his Companions would the Wolvs pursue.
When from the Flock they had surpised their rape,
Who from the Dogs although they made escape,
The fostered Cub continued still his way,
He with the Wolvs might partake of their Preie:
Then Home returned; but if they none had taken,
Then by himself One privately was slain,
Which with the Dogs, he eat; thus often he
Feasted himself with Friend and Enemy.
Until the Shepherd found how it was don,
And on a Tree the subtle Fellon hung.
MORAL.
The seeds of Nature, in their Blosoms taken,
Soft Education may a while restrein:
But when their vigor is assumed, we find,
They still retein the Habits of their kind.
Of All the Ils this should avoided be,
To harbor a Domestic Enemy.
177. The Lion and Wolf.
AN aged Lion Bedrid long had lain,
To visit whom (except the Fox) all came.
On which Occasion the fell Wolf laid hold*
T'accuse the Fox of Defaults manifold,
How useless he was unto him their King,
And of his neglect now in visiting:
The Fox arriving in the Int'rim heard
The latter words the Wolf had uttered:
Which against him did the Lion much incens,
Till the Fox made his Excuse in Defense;
Which thus was followed; none about him stood,
Had so much labored for his Sovereigns good,
As he, who had each Climate traced round,
To learn his Cure, which he in seeking found:
The Lion, thus appeased, commanded strait,
He should the Medicine to him intimate.
To whom the Fox with low Obedience, said,
Command great King! a living Wolf be flai'd,
And forthwith, thereof, make the yet warm skin
Unto thy Grief a helpful covering.
Then, smiling, thus, the prostrate Wolf reproved,
Thou should our King to Love, not Hate have moved.
MORAL.
With Slanders who foment a Prince's Ire,
By their Foes craft, prove fuel to the Fire.
For others Harms first having dig'd a Pit
Are justly thus the first that fall in it.
178. The Woman and her drunken Husband.
A Woman had a drunken Husband wed,
For Cure thereto, this Device practiced.
When Natures lights, in drink, she perceived drowned
And He, as dead, lay senseless on the Ground;
She on her shoulders took him, to inter
In an obscurely vaulted Sepulcher.
Where laid, she left him, till the time drew nigh,
Nature might work her own recoverie.
Then to the vault returned, often where
At Door she knocked, til he ask't, who was there?
The Wife replied; it is I that com to bring
Food to the Dead, their usual offering:
To which He answered; Bring Me not to eat;
But bring me drink, I humbly thee entreat:
When thou of Meat rememb'rest me, I Am sad;
But give me drink, and thou will make me glad:
Whereat the Wife thus mourning, struck her Breast,
By slight or reason thou naught profitest:
So far from mending, wors thou will return,
This thy Diseas an Habit is become.
MORAL.
Of all the vices humane Frailties have,
This, as the last, associate's to the Grave:
Age and Diseas disable us for some;
But unto This both Ministers become.
179. The Swan.
A Rich man bred together Swans and Gees,
For Pleasure Those, and for the table These.
Whenas the Gees to suffer were the End,
To which the Owner did them first intend;
The Night was so obscure there could not be
Distinction had in this Society:
Which caussed a Mistake: for on the Swan
The fatal Lot beyond Intention ran.
The mournful Bird heeron her self applie's
In Songs to celebrate her Obsequies:
By which her Nature was discovered soon,
And with her sweet Notes so her freedom won.
MORAL.
Approaching Death those shadows do dispers
Man is disguised with in civil Commerce:
Defects or Virtues then disclosed are All,
Man's perfect'st Trial is his utmost Fall.
The force of Music, this may yet implie,
Asswaging thus the Rage of Cruelty.
180. The Blackmore.
A Wealthy man a Niger bought;
Whose Color he assumed thought
By his Neglect who first him bred,
Thereon him to his dwelling led:
Where he by sundry washings tried
How the Skin might be purified:
But found unchanged still the hew,
While from the Pain a sickness grew.
MORAL.
Art and Industry thus are both left void,
When on Subjects incapable imploid.
Who strive the force of Nature to o'recom,
Sooner then change, work Dissolution.
181. The Crow and Swallow.
THe Crow and Swallow did contend,
Which of them did in Form transscend.
The Crow objected against him;
His Color flourish't but in Spring:
Whereas her tincture was so pure,
It every Season would endure.
MORAL.
Those Parts of Beauty best affect the Sens
On which Time's changes have no Influence:
The Superficial varnish may the skin,
But that win's Prize that take's his Source within.
182. The Bittour.
A Bittour in a Window hung,
The Bat ask't, why by night he sung,
And cheerful Day past silently?
To whom the Bittour made Reply;
I, heertofore singing by day,
Became the Fowlers heedless Preie:
From whence I cautious am to vent
Such Seasons my Divertizement.
The Bat said, now 'twill little stead;
Before the Ill thou should take heed.
MORAL.
So shallow Judgments out of Season shun
Those fatal Tracts by which they were undon:
And after practice, what they should before;
When the Steeds stolen they shut the Stable Door.
183. The Cockles.
A Rustic Boie some Cockles had,
Which he to roast in the fire laid:
Wherein the Cockles hissing, he
Cried out, worst of Mortality;
Do you so pleasantly now sing,
Your Houses when on fiering?
MORAL.
Man's exterior Demeanor, Decency
Wil's with his present Fortune to agree:
Philosophy with Reason does commence;
Nor is that Reason which belie's the Sens.
Extremes are but distempers, which arise
From struggling Natures too weak Faculties.
But when th'Effect's contrary to the Cause,
Reason revolteth from her proper Laws.
184. The Sorceress.
A Sorceress, who undertook t'appeas
The divine wrath in humane miser'es:
Many strange things to effect perserver'd had,
Whereby she long had no small profit made.
At length, accused, detected and condemned,
She was led forth to make a shameful end:
To see whose execution many flock't,
Where One amongst them thus her folly mocked:
You the Decrees that could decline of Heaven;
Why could you not the Councels change of men?
MORAL.
Vain Boasters so when in Distress they fall,
With their Defects derided are of All:
While vulgar Scorn, evil on evil set's,
When their own Damage prov's them counterfeits.
185. The Husbandman.
A Husbandman digging the Ground,
A secret heap of Treasure found:
For which he thankful crowned the Earth,
To him enlarged this fruitful Birth.
Fortune, arriving, ask't why he
Asscribed her Benignity
Unto the Earth? Since if the time
His late found treasure should resign
Unto Another's Hand; he then
Would for the Loss strait Her condemn.
MORAL.
So worldly Men to the exterior Means
Attribute still the cause of all their Gains:
But of their Loss the Author judge to be
Some secret Power in the Divinity.
186. The Travelers.
TWo Men together traveled,
One whereof an Ax finding, sed
Unto the Other, I have found,
For a share to frame some Ground:
The Other thereto made Reply;
Say, We have found, and say not, I.
Soon after, who it lost them viewed;
And in great Haste them both pursued.
Who found it, seeing this, cried, We
Shall perish now infallibly.
Whereto the Other answered,
Not we, say I, as you first sed.
MORAL.
In civil Commerce faithless Men do use
With doubtful Words thus to play fast and loos:
They in the Profit sharers may disclame;
But in the Damage might them entertain.
187. Two Frogs.
TWo Frogs there were nigh Neighbors bred,
Whereof One in a deep Pool fed.
In shallow slows the Other lay,
Adjoining were to the High-waie.
The Frog, who in the Pool was fed,
His Fellow often admonished
To com to him into the Flood,
More safe to get his livelihood:
The slow Frog not assenting, said;
Custom had that his firm seat made:
Till a Cart passing on him rush't,
And suddenly to pieces crush't.
MORAL.
Custom the use of Reason take's away,
Where Practice only can the Will over swaie.
Error most Men hold well Authorized,
When time has Error once established:
But like Success will in the Issue prove,
What need may be long habits to remove:
So many Changes in a State we see,
Good Laws prove bad, if they not changed may be.
188. The Bees.
A Pilf'ring Knave, the Owner being from home,
Went to a Bee-hive, whence he took the Comb.
The Owner returned, finding the Stock bereft,
Sta'd there, amuz'd, to gather what was left:
The Bees returning met the Fellon fled,
And with their Stings him sharply punished:
Who cried, i'th'theft ye me dismissed unhurt,
On your work busied; will you me subvert?
MORAL.
So vicious Men do conceal from their Friends
The secret Scope of their sinister Ends:
But rashly their Disorders do expose
Unto the view of circumventing Foes.
189. The Halcedon.
THe Halcedon, a Bird, which usually,
In solitude, frequent's the vastest Sea:
She, lest by men her young should be suppressed,
On a Sea-coasting Rock, erect's her Nest;
Whence issuing, abroad to seek for food,
Wherewith might be relieved her helpless brood:
The swelling Sea chafe't with a ruffling wind,
Within her limits could not be confined:
In whose wild tumor the Nest overspred,
The struggling Nestlings, at length perished:
The Dam, returned; soon the disaster found,
Thus, her sad Plaints did mournfully resound;
Earth, as suspected, rashly I desert,
To seek thy Refuge, far more faithless art.
MORAL.
Without more slights, A watchful Jealousy,
Secure's Man from a constant Enemy:
But his Assurance in unconstant Friends
Betraie's him soonest to their private Ends.
190. The subtle Fisher.
A Fisher had a clear stream met,
Extended over the same his Net,
Which with the stream left floating, He
To either line ti'd cunningly
A weighty stone, wherewith he stood
Alternately beating the Flood,
That so the frighted Fish might get,
More heedlesly into his Net:
Which by the bord'ring Dwellers seen,
Against him exclame'd troubled the stream,
Whereby 'they could not from the Brink,
Attein clear water for their drink,
Who made Reply; content you Friends;
My Success on my Art depend's:
Should I the stream forbear to beat,
I certainly shall nothing eat.
MORAL.
Desperate Fortune's Dissentions move in State,
Securely so wealth to accumulate,
By their sheltered disorders; when as they
In Peace naught act, free Laws do not betraie.
191. The Ape and Dolphin.
IT much in use was among Seaf'ring-men,
Monkies and Apes to have Abord with them
To be their sport; it happened one of these,
With Men, made Shipwreck in the Attick Seas.
Nature or Imitation taught the Ape
To swim, as did the Men, for their escape.
A passing Dolphin seeing the Ape swim
Among the Men, for such believed him,
Whom he took up, and to the Landward swum,
Til to the Athenian Naval harbor com,
Was called Pyraeus. The kind Dolphin there
Ask't of the Ape, if he Athenian were?
The Ape for such affirmed himself to be,
And in that Place of noble Family.
The Dolphin ask't, if he Pyraeus knew?
Whereon the Ape yet more assured grew;
Believing it to be a humane Name,
Affirmed thereto, that the very same
His Ancient friend was; the Dolphin this Lie
Incensed so, He left him there to die.
MORAL.
When Ign'rant Men in their discourse would seem
To know more then they do, to win esteem.
The shallow current of their babbling Sens
Is soon betrayed by their Impertinence:
Whereby they are exposed to more contemt;
And often times meet farther Detriment.
192. The Fly.
OF Honey in a Store-hous shed,
The eager Flies with freedom fed,
Till thereto cleaved were their Feet,
That full, from thence they could not get.
Where drowning, cried, O wretched brood!
To perish for a little Food!
MORAL.
Their stupid Folly here we figured see,
Who hasten Death through sensuality:
The End of eating Life is to afford:
Yet more die by the Mouth, then by the Sword.
193. Mercury and the Statuist.
Mercury being desirous once to know
In what esteem men held him here below,
A Statuist's yard entered in humane Guize,
Where of Jove's Statue he required the Price:
The Statuist said, a Drachme the least would be:
Passing from which, thereat smiled Mercury;
And turned to Juno's; Asking, how much that;
The Statuist said, that was of higher rate.
Then of his Own ask't, thinking still the Prize
Would in the value, as the Order rise:
The Statuist thereto this slight answer gave;
If Those you buie; you That to boot shall have.
MORAL.
By Herme's, Jove's and Juno's Statues be
Figured to us, Wisdom, Wealth, Dignity:
That more then this depraved Mankind prize;
The Other with them we scarce assimulize:
Who these two have, shall in their high Repute,
By vulgar Credit, that possess to boot.
Exposition.
Virtue no Object has beyond her Sphere,
Despising that which tickle's but the Ear:
Whence empty Souls, but moved with common Fame,
Seeking their Glory, needs must find their Shame.
194. Mercury and Tiresias.
Mercury curious being once to try
The truth of blind Tiresias Prophecy.
His Oxen from the pasture stole, then came
To him disguised, and declared the same:
Tyresias busied on the Augurie,
Bad Hermes tell what Bird he could discrie:
Mercury told him, An Eagle took flight
From the Left hand, and flew unto the Right.
Tiresias said, that nothing did pertain
Unto his Purpose; bad him look again.
The second time Hermes informed him, he
A Crow beheld descending from a Tree,
Now to the Earth, then mounting to the Sky,
To that, then this, directing often her Eye.
The Prophet said, By Heaven and Earth she swore,
He, if he would, his Cattle could restore*
MORAL.
Men's secret'st vices shall not rest concealed;
But by their Mouths their guilt shall be revealed,
Whilst creatures void of Reason thus shall be
Perfect Dilaters to their Treachery.
195. The Dogs.
A Countrie-man two Dogs together bred,
One for the Chase, the other to guard his Shed.
When as the Hunter did his Preie Home bring,
The House Cur thereof would partake with him:
The Hunter not brooking this, reviled his Mate,
For that he idle, of his Labors eat.
The Other said, My Master reprehend
Who taught me heeron only to depend.
MORAL.
By Education Nature's Gifts are led
To Use, which else thus lie extinguished:
Whence, who preside Youth, yet neglect the same,
Shall of their Errors justly bear the blame.
196. The Husband and Wife.
A Quiet Man a Shrew had to his Wife,
Who with his Servants always was at strife.
The Good Man heeron (being resolved to try
How to her own Paternal Family.
She stood affected) with a fair Pretens,
Sent her unto her Father's Residence.
Soon after she returned, he of her sought,
What of her Parents Domestics she thought?
She made Reply, the Hindes and Herdsmen be
Possessed with a Jealousy of me:
The Husband heeron said, O Wife! if these
Are early forth, and late return displeas.
What then, alas! of all those judge I may,
Who were Conversant with thee all the Day.
MORAL.
To froward Minds nor Time, nor Place agree,
'Caus their Distemper Them accompany:
How then should Others have Peace in their life,
When with Themselves they always are at Strife.
197, The Kid and Wolf.
A Kid, who from the Flock was straid,
To her pursuing Foe thus said,
O Wolf! Since I thy Preie must be,
Permit me to die merrillie.
Play on thy Pipe, that dance I may:
The Wolf assenting set to play:
While the Kid to his Measures dance't,
Which notes to hear the Dogs soon chance't,
And suddenly pursued him,
The frisking Kid so rescuing:
At which the Wolf afflicted, said,
I by my folly am betrayed;
Since I a Cook ought only be,
No medler with the Ministralsie.
MORAL.
What Use and Nature have Us framed unto,
That with Success the meanest Minds may do:
But in our Practice when both these we leav,
We with disgrace must our own Damage weav.
198. The Crab and Fox.
A Crab asscended with the tide,
From Sea to Land, would there reside;
On whom a Hungry Fox, past by,
Casting, by chance, his searching Eye,
Unto her went without delaie,
And of her made his welcome Preie:
Who, on the Period of her Death,
Expired sadly thus her Breath:
I justly die; since of the Sea,
I coveted of Earth to be.
MORAL.
Such Damage simple Men incur (we see)
Affecting Change, seek strange Community:
Long Habits only Them have Judgment lent;
Whence they thrive not, but in that Element.
199. The Harp.
A Harp, imperfect, long in the House had lain
Among chalk and rubbish, crusted with the same*
As it was wont to do, began to play:
Whose untuned Notes much hoarsness did betraie;
But she, heeron, Her self esteemed to be
The only Paragon of Harmony:
And in this Rapture, would her self prefer,
To be the wonder of the Theater;
To which set forth, her disagreeing Tones
From thence was driven with a shower of stones.
MORAL.
Vnpractiz'd and imperfect Men swelled high
In Self-conceit of their Sufficiency;
'Caus they the Theorie of the Schools have read;
And undigested Notions uttered:
When to the practick they in Public com*
To show those seeds of Ostentation;
They so defective in the Action prove,
Instead of wonder, they derision move.
200. Thieves and the Cock.
Thieves in a House themselves had wound,
Where nothing but a Cock they found.
Who on the Period slain to be
Desired them, they would him free:
Saying, He useful was to Men,
By night to labor waking them.
The sly Thieves heerto made Reply,
For this thou more deserve to die;
In that them waking to their Thrift,
Thou us to steal wilt not permit.
MORAL.
Who on his Audients would work his Intent,
To their Affections fit's his Argument:
Virtues win Favor; but it is understood,
When as This Object only meet's the Good.
201. The Crow and Raven.
A Crow the Raven envying, that he
By Augurie should Prophecy:
As on the way she men saw traveling,
Leapt to a Tree where she sat clamoring:
The Men stayed with the nois, astonished were,
So fierce a Clamor from one Bird to hear:
Until One of them had distinguished
What Fowl it was, who to his Fellows sed;
Let us pass on, it only is a Crow,
Which nothing can in Augurie foreshow.
MORAL.
As Shadows Bodies in the Light succeed:
Virtue in Fame from Envy never is freed:
But when in Act, she would her Equal be,
Disgrace still fallows this her Mimiqu'rie.
202. The Crow and Dog.
A Crow proclaimed with loud cries,
She Would to Minerva sacrifice:
Unto the Plenty of which Feast,
Invite's the Dog to be her Guest:
The Dog demand's, why vainly she
To her held such Solemnity;
Since her the Goddess could not brook,
But from her had her Augure took?
Much rather I (the Crow replie's)
Her to appeas should sacrifice.
MORAL.
So worldly Men in their Afflictions urge
They should desist to honor who them Scourge:
But pious Minds a Motive thence collect,
More earnest Zeal should reconcile the effect.
203. The Raven and Serpent.
A Hungry Raven chance't to spy,
Beaking in the Sun, a Serpent lie:
Which she trust up with eager speed,
Intending thereon largely feed.
The nimble Serpent 'bout her wound;
And bit her so, she fell to the ground.
Who dying, cried, unhappie I!
To find the Food whereby I die.
MORAL.
So greedy Minds at all gains rashly fly,
Whereof their Sens can make discovery:
But with more Potent when they grapple, they
Become destroyed by their purposed Preie.
204. The Daw and Doves.
A Daw had Pige'ns spied well fed,
Himself with Lime white colored;
Then to the Dove-coat slily went,
He might receiv like Nourishment:
The Doves thinking him one of them,
While silent, to eat suffered him;
But having once his craft forgot,
When chattering by chance a Note:
His Nature they did soon disclose,
Chasing him thence with many blows.
Who thus deprived of his Food,
Returned to feed among his Brood:
Which him not knowing for his Hew,
To drive him thence, upon him flew.
Thus coveting of both the Gain,
Of neither he possessed became.
MORAL.
Disguised with Art, so double hearted Men
Side with that Faction most advantage them:
But where th'Intern with th'Extern not agree,
Practice soon shows Professions Fallacy:
When disclosed to be led by private Ends,
By Foes are cast off, forsook by their Friends.
205. The Daw.
ONe, having taken a Jack-Daw,
Tied a string above the Claw;
Then him delivered to his Son,
He might to play therewith be won.
The Daw not brooking servile bands,
At length, escaping from his hands.
With joifull speed, himself addressed
Unto the Refuge of his Nest,
Abording which, the trained Line
About a Bough did chance to twine;
Where He again ensnared, cried,
I have my Evil multiplied;
While from Man's bondage thus I strive,
My self I of my Life deprive.
MORAL.
Pressed with Impatience present ils to shun,
So giddie Heads do into greater run.
The silly Rout, unfit their Guides to be,
Break Civil ties to reach at Liberty:
But such Disorders follow the Attemt,
That common Ruin meet's with the Event.
206. Mercury.
JOve once commanded Mercury
A Potion mix might move to Lie:
Then charged him it to prefer
Unto every Artificer.
When in a certain Measure don;
He equally gave each one some.
The Tailor only mist his share,
Which yet remained much to spare:
Which he, least any lost should be,
Quaft up with great Alacrity:
Whence Lying to all Trades befell,
While Tailers therein all excel.
MORAL.
Gain the Supplanter of the Truth does tie
All Tradesmen's words to this Necessity:
It Is for their Living, with deceitful Lies
To set more value on their Merchandise:
But they heerin will act a double share,
Who in the Profit their own Carvers are.
207. Jove.
JOve having framed all mankind,
With each habit indu'd the Mind:
Modesty only he forgot;
Whereof he Leven having not:
Commanded Her into the Troop,
To which, by no means, she would stoop:
Till Jove it often with Anger pressed,
Agreeing yet to her Request;
Which was, if Lusts impurer fire
In Mankind came, She might retire:
From whence to pass it after came,
That all Whores still are void of shame.
MORAL.
All sorts of Vices in Appearance show
A kind of Sens to fail in what they do:
But raging Lust inflamed by Defense,
To cast Restraint off, put's on Impudence.
208. Jove.
JOve celebrating his Nuptial Feasts,
All Animals received for Guests.
The Snail alone arriving late,
Jove would the Cause capitulate:
Asking, why sooner she came not?
The Snail (her Courtship had forgot)
Replied, her House, her House so dear:
At which Jove angry did appear;
Condemning her dear House to be
Born on her back eternally.
MORAL.
Neglect in pious Rites worldly Men use
With their Domestic Business to excuse:
But whose dull Souls thereto so wedded are,
Shall for their curs be burd'ned with that Care.
209. The Wolf and Sheep.
A Wolf by Dogs had bitten been,
So long in blood lay weltering,
Unable on his Feet to get,
He nigh starved was for want of meat:
Till he at length a Sheep espied,
To whom he pitifully cried;
She would from the o'reflowing Spring,
To quench his thirst, some water bring:
If this of her he might entreat,
He should himself provide him meat.
The Sheep replied, if from the Flood
I bring thee drink, I am thy food.
MORAL.
Deceitful men, at last Extremity,
Can not cast off their innate Treachery:
But prudent men their Purposes forerun;
And by their Theme find their Conclusion.
210. The Hares.
THe fearful Hares long, heretofore,
With the fierce Eagles warfare bore.
The Hares too weak, the Preie being made,
The subtle Fox called to their Aid.
The Fox said, thereto I agree,
But first I, of Necessity,
Must be informed, who you are,
Then next, with whom it is you war.
MORAL.
Weak States to oppose more potent Foes, elect
Crafty confederates, wise and circumspect;
To counterbalance their unequal might
By the Diversion of some powerful slight:
Who wisely thus their Faculties compare,
E're on the Action they intentive are.
211. The Ant.
Who now an Ant is, has been heertofore,
A Husbandman, not content with his store;
But of his Neighbor's fruits had every day,
Unto his own, born a large part away:
Till Jove his angry judgment had let fall;
And him transformed to this Animal:
Who though in figure thus he changed be,
Yet still retein's his former quality:
Of others Labors daily taking still,
Which he hoard's up, even to the Earth men Till
MORAL.
What form soever greedy Man indue's,
Gain is the Object which his Toil pursue's:
Of Means thereto, the nighest he prefer's,
Without distinction of the Ministers;
Wherein the Passion is so blindelie led,
Often useless things are not distinguished.
212. The Bat and Weezel.
A Bat, by chance, that fell to ground,
Was by a roving Weezel found:
Of whom, she, on the point to die,
Required freedom earnesilie:
The Weezel said, He could not free
To Fowl so great an Enemy:
The Bat replied, she was a Mous
No Bird: And by that slight got loos.
Soon after to Earth fallen again,
She by another Weezel taken:
Of him her freedom sought likewise:
The Weezel said, she was to Mice
An Enemy: The Bat aver'd
She no Mous was; she was a Bird.
Whereon dismissed, her twice changed Name
Her Life's security became.
MORAL.
So variformed are frail Man's designs,
Securest he is, can change with the Times:
Man to the world may lend th'Exterior part;
Provided still he keep entire the Heart.
213. The Travelers.
TWo Men together trav'lling near the Sea,
Entering a Cave, had made discovery
Of Boughs and Branches floting on the flood,
Where, with Impatience, both expecting stood,
With Belief it a great Ship was, at hand,
Which, to their Gain, would make wrack on the sand.
But as the Wind had driven it nigher them,
They but a Fisher's Boat supposed it then:
Till it approaching, they drew it a ground,
And the true Nature of the Subject found.
Whereon t'each Other said, abash't with shame,
That we for nothing should exspect in vain.
MORAL.
Remotest Hopes the largest Objects frame,
As they Approach, they still are in the Wain:
The Cause is, they proportioned to the Sens,
Which Bounds meet's none, can no Equivalence.
214. The wild Ass.
A Wild Ass had an Ass domestic viewed
Beaking in the Sun half covered in his food:
To whom he went, applauding much his Fate,
That had designed him to so happy State.
But when soon after, he him saw agin
Laden, his foll'wing keeper whipping him:
Said, Thee no more I happy judge to be,
Since such lls mix with thy Felicity.
MORAL.
So rustic Minds even envious are to see
The splendid Lux of Rich men's vanity;
Until their second thoughts reflect again
O'th Cares and Troubles that associate them;
Then are their Judgments so from Error led,
They even Pity what they worshipped.
215. The Asses.
ASses (of old) 'caus they o'reburdned were,
For Eas, to Jove had sent a Messenger.
To whom Jove fig'ring this could not be don,
Said, they from Labor then should free become,
When they by pissing had a River made.
Which they believing in the Sens, as said,
From thence forth ever after pissing stood,
Where Piss they saw, striving to raise a Flood.
MORAL.
Weak men, by care toiled, Heaven appeal them free
From this condition of Mortality:
And by the Error of their Sens are led
To think their state may so be perfected,
With some ridiculous Means, attemting still
Their Translation by Miracle to fulfill.
216. The Ass and Fox.
AN Ass hid in a Lion's skin
Thorough the Forest wandering:
All but the Fox had put to flight,
With terror of this awful sight,
But him attemting to have feared:
The crafty Fox his voice had heard,
Said, truly, I had been affrai'd,
If that, by chance, thou had not brai'd.
MORAL.
With glorious Spoils invested, mean Men may
At Distance move their Betters to give way:
But when the Tongue has once betrayed the Mind,
Slight borrowed shadows for deceit designed.
217. The Ass and Frogs.
AN Ass sore laden was with wood,
Passing a Fen, fell in the Flood:
Whence he not able to arise,
Proclame'd his Grief in hideous cries:
Which when th'astonisht Frogs had heard;
They all about him gathered.
What he would do, demanding him,
So long as they, were he therein?
MORAL.
Accustomed troubles, though they grievous be,
Weak Minds often brook with much indifferency:
Yet yield to Passion, even in slight Events,
When surpised with unusual Accidents.
218. The Ass and Raven.
AN Ass at Pasture, had his back
Sore galled with a heavy Pack:
A Raven to the raw flesh came,
And with his Claws pinched the same.
The Ass began to kick and fling;
While nigh his Keeper laughed at Him;
Which when a passing Wolf had seen,
Said, if his ils tickle your Spleen.
Woe be to us, wretches! when you
Shall our disclosed Tracts pursue.
MORAL.
Who can deride their Mis'ries do him Good,
Without more Proofs, it may be understood;
Relentless will with cruelty fulfill
On them his vengeance, who have don him Ill.
219. The Ass and Fox.
AN Ass and Fox, did League embrace,
Set forth together for the Chase:
Where both a Lion did pursue,
The Fox the Danger to eschew;
Said, if the Lion would him spare,
He Would lead the Ass into his snare.
On which contract forbearance gained,
The Ass was to the Ambush trained,
Where being fast. The Lion flew
Upon the Fox, and first him slew.
MORAL.
The Fox and Ass, implie's to us two States,
Crafty and simple, made Confederates:
When by more powerful these assailed be,
The crafty thus betraie's by Treachery
His joint associate, himself to secure:
Which when their potent Foes have once made sure,
They seis on that, who farther'd bad their end,
And ruin first, who ruined had his Friend.
220. The Hen and Swallow.
A Hen had Serpents Eggs found out,
To hatch them fondly went about.
The Swallow seeing this, said, she
Possessed was with Lunacie.
To nourish them, who as they grow,
Will first attempt thy overthrow.
MORAL.
The rage of Malice charmed is by no ties,
When time has fully formed her Faculties:
On him, who in his Bosom has her bred,
Shall this her rancor first be vomited.
221. The Camels.
When Camels first discovered were,
Their mighty Bulk struck Men in fear,
So much, that these astonished fled,
While those could be distinguished.
But when succeeding Time had shown
Their gentleness to every One:
Men then so confident became,
By them aborded were the same:
And after this a little while,
They finding in the Beast no Bile.
With more contemt went to them yet,
On them imposing Rein and Bit.
Then as too mean a care for Men,
Gave them to Boys to govern them.
MORAL.
Unusual Objects terrify the Sens,
Till Judgment be through use informed from thence
The Nature of the Subject, which once known
To Have with the Fancy no proportion.
Men by degrees from this so far dissent,
What was their Terror becom's their Contemt.
222. The Serpent.
THe Serpent by Men trodden on,
Complained of this Oppression
To Jove; who said, if who thee kicked,
Thou would before but him have bit,
The second Progress could not be
By them offensive unto thee.
MORAL.
The first Evasion who can but repel,
Shake's off his Foes, to them redoubtable:
But they, with Suff'rance, in the first shock sit still,
Encourage the Pursuit to farther ill.
223. The Dove.
A Dove oppressed with thirst extreme,
For water roving long had been,
Espied a Picture as he went,
A Cup thereof did represent.
On which, she it believing true,
With more exalted rage she flew;
So that her Pinions thereon broke,
She fallen to Earth, was captive took.
MORAL.
Who, in Extremes, th'Emotions of the Sens
Pursue with unrestrained violence;
Those Faculties therein they did imploie,
Misled by Error, in The Event destroy.
224. The Pigeon and Crow.
A Pigeon of the Dove-coat free,
Grew proud in her fertility.
Which heard, the Crow unto her came,
Wil'd her not glory in the same:
For look how many she had bred,
So high her Griefs were numbered.
MORAL.
The Pains and Troubles; This to us implie's,
Inherent are to heads of Families;
Birth, Education and Provision, are
Alternate marks of their incessant Care:
And if all these be need full unto One;
What Measure tend's on vast Succession?
225. The rich Mourner.
A Wealthy Man two Daughters had,
For One, late dead, a Fun'rall made:
At which, such was their custom then,
Hired Women did lament over them.
The living Maid abasht heerat,
The sens of Grief to aggravate,
Said, Wretches we! to whom this woe
Belong's, to utter it not know:
While they, it nothing does concern;
Express Groans make our bowels yearn!
To which the Mother made Reply;
Wonder not Daughter at their cry;
Since what thou see or hear'st them do,
The Gain of money promt's them to.
MORAL.
Nature has limits; Art extremes put's on,
That tend's to Use, this but to Fiction:
No wonder then if this do that exceed,
When Money lends high Action to the Deed.
For which man so bewitched is, that he
Would take on him Another misery.
226. The Shepherd.
A Shepherd on his flock attend's,
A neighboring Oak, to shake, ascends,
While under it his Coat was spread,
To catch the Fruit he shattered.
The Sheep drew near, seeking their meat,
Who of the Acorns could not eat,
Began his Coat to know and tear,
Til they by him discovered were.
Who strait descending in a rage,
Found his Coat in sad Equipage.
Whereon he cried, You worst of things!
To make your sport my Sufferings:
To others you do Garments give;
Me, who you feed, of mine bereav.
MORAL.
So silly Men endamage often their Friends,
Without advantage to their proper Ends:
And without respect, unto them do good,
Relation none have to commerce or blood.
227. The Heardsman.
A Heardsman of his Cattle negligent,
A Calf had lost, in search whereof he went.
Many vast places trace't he had in vain,
Till he, at length, despairing of his Pain,
To Jove a Kid vowed for an offering,
If who his Calf stole he would disclose to him:
Whence onward going, to a Grove he came,
Where he his Calf saw by a Lion slain;
Whereat he trembling raised his hands to Heaven,
Saying, a Kid I promised should be given
To thee great Jove in wonted Sacrifice,
If thou the Thief would present to mine eyes:
But now a Bull thy offering shall be,
If thou from him wilt but deliver me.
MORAL.
Weak men, in extrems, guide their Prayer by sens,
Find, in The Event their own Improvidence:
If God to Man's will should in all assent;
His vain Requests would work his Punishment.
228. The Eagle.
A Stone an Eagle made his stand,
His view might more extent command.
Where watching for a Hare, his eye
Neglected his security.
By which, the Fowler with small craft
Approaching, him struck with a shaft;
The fether'd notch whereof stuck right
Before the wounded Eagle's sight:
Who said, it is double Grief to see
These my own feathers ruin me.
MORAL.
So greedy minds for others harms do watch,
What they intend to Other often catch:
While all their Force is on their purpose bent:
They thus lie open to their detriment;
But by how much the Agents near us be,
So much more weighty is our misery.
229. The Worm and Fox.
A Worm long in the dirt concealed,
At length, himself to sight revealed.
Proclaming him to every Beast,
A Physician the perfectest:
Betwixt whom and Apollo the Gods Physician
Poean the Gods,
There was, or none, or little ods.
The Fox said, can thou others cure,
Yet that thy lameness wilt endure.
MORAL.
When our own Interest the first Rites do clame;
If proofs be wanting, words no credit gain:
Experience then his Masterpiece has wrought,
When with the Subject the Example's brought.
230. The Wolf and Nurs.
A Hungry Wolf roving for Preie
Came where he heard a Nurs to say
T'her crying Child. Peace, or this hour,
The greedy Wolf shall thee devour*
The Wolf, these words believing, stood,
Exspecting many hours this food,
Until declined was the day,
Where listening still he heard her say,
If that the Wolf com to my Boie,
We will the howling Cur destroy.
Whereat the Wolf returned to wood,
To seek more certain livelihood.
MORAL.
Men's Speeches often reflect on others Ends;
Such promiss fair, not often prove our Friends.
Who only for their livelihood rely
On empty Words, scarce Nature satisfy:
Till tired with Exspectation, pressing need
Enforce them rather in a Desert feed.
231. The Gnat and Lion.
A Gnat unto a Lion came,
His fury thus sought to inflame;
I fear thee not, though I be less,
Thy strength equals not my Address:
In fight thou usest Tooth and Nail,
As vixen women men assail:
But if thou dare give proof of might,
I challenge thee with me to fight.
The Gnat (heerto the Summons rung)
Her Foe by th'Nostrils sharply stung;
Then to his tender eie-lids flew,
By slight the peril to eschew:
With rage this made the Lion roar,
Who to catch her, his own flesh tore:
The Lion vanquished, judged to be,
The Trumpet sounded victory
Unto the Gnat; who from thence fled
Into a Spider's cunning Web:
Where she surpised bewailed her fate
Did life so vildely terminate:
Since she the mighty could overthrow,
Should fall by so despised a Foe.
MORAL.
Mean minds sometimes great Ils immov'd withstand,
Mastring themselves, even Fate it self command:
Yet when to Passion is inclined the Sens,
Yield up their Reason to slight Accidents.
Exposition.
When with the needy Potent men do strive,
In vain themselves of Fame and wealth deprive;
Such naked Trunks, nor Honor have, nor gold;
Where Injury might for Revenge take hold.
With Beggars who contend Themselves may fret,
Yet in The Advantage but a Lous shall get:
But to their Equals when they vent their brags,
They meet with those divest them of their Rags.
FINIS.

