Against the Observation of a Day in memory of Christ's birth, written in 1659.
and now tendered to the consideration of all sober and serious Persons, this
present December. 1660. by a reverend Divine.
1 HAve we any command or example in holy Scripture for the observation of this
day or of any other in memory of our Lords birth? Scripture is perfect, Psalm.
19. if there be no command or example, it is no duty.

2 Did the Apostles after our Saviors ascension keep this day or any other in
memory of Christ's birth? do you pretend to more holiness then they?

3 Would they have omitted it if it ought to have bin observed?

4 Was it observed in the primitive Church for the first hundred years?

5 How came it to be Christ's day? tell us the original hereof that we may know
whether it be of God or man? Is it like to be of God and no footstep at all
left hereof in his word! Neither precept nor example looking that way?

Hence we may safely conclude that it was set up by man; And what man sets
up, man may pluck down.

6 Whether may not the Papists say as much for their heaps of Traditions as is
ordinarily said for the observation of this day.

He that would read more on this subject may see in Master D. Cawdry his Book
against Doctor Hammond of superstitious worship and holy days, also in Mr.
Baxter.

If it could be proved to be the mind of God that we should observe a day in
memory of Christ's birth, I doubt not but that there are many yet left among us
who would make conscience hereof, although it be now forbidden by the
Magistrate. But it is so far from being a duty that it is no hard matter to
prove it to be a sin.

For first it cannot be denied but that there is such a sin as will worship,
which is a breach of the second Commandment, (...). Therefore secondly, see if
this be not that sin.

Paraeus defines it thus, (...) est species subtilior Idololatriae quum Deus
colitur commentis humanis, Col. 2.8. Hominum traditiones, Jdem. verse. 16.18.
and 23. A show of wisdom, cultu voluntario, etc.

Def. Will Worship is a more refined kind of Idolatry, when God is worshipped
with ways of Man's devising.

Again thus. Superstitio est Peccatum precepto secundo prohibitum quo vero Deo
cultus adhibetur indebitus quoad actus and media religionis externa.

If then the observation of a day in memory of our Saviors birth, be an
invention of man; If it be cultus indebitus (especially being counted a matter
of conscience by some) It cannot escape the just censure of will worship,
superstition, and a breach of the second Commandment.

Objection. Do not men apoint days of thanksgiving for mercyes received, and
it is esteemed a duty? yea some men keep yearly their birthday or wedding day,
and on that day feast and give to the poor. How much more may we apoint a day
to keep in memory the greatest mercy that ever mankind enjoyed? Is this great
memorial of our Savior esteemed will worship, and superstition; and therefore
sinful. And are our ordinary days of thanksgiving for providential transient
mercyes esteemed duties?

Answ. If man apoint days of memorials and commemoration of mercies received,
it is lawful for the same power that appointed them, or any succeeding powers
to alter them, or take them clean away. Here is no superstition, we enjoy our
Christian liberty, no obligation lies on the conscience, but for this memorial
of Christ's nativity, we contend for it as necessary, and find fault with them
that omit it, which proves that we affect this time superstitiously.

2d. Answ. If God had not already laid down, and appointed what memorials of his
Son Jesus Christ he would have to be observed in his Church: we then might have
done it, and the objection might have the more strength: But where God has
deelared what memorials of Christ he will have: For man to come in and
super-ad, is a breach of the second Commandment; and a sin frequently condemned
in Scripture; This is to worship God with men's inventions, to find fault with
his wisdom, as if he did not enough; and therefore we will do more: This is
to set our post by his Posts, and our threshold by his threshold, as Ezekiel.
43.8. which the holy Ghost calls abomination. The memorials which God has
appointed are in every week the first day, and this merely in thankfulness for
Jesus Christ, for before the coming of Christ there was another day set apart
for the service of God.

And 2dly, The two Sacraments are commemorations of the Lord Jesus, among other
uses of them. The Lords Supper we are commanded to celebrate often, that so we
may keep a frequent remembrance of our Savior Christ. And observe that it is a
constant beginning of departure from God to worship him in ways of our own
devising, and consequently with times of our own devising, when as we have
times prescribed by himself. In this we follow the Papists, who in all parts of
Gods worship have some addition of their own, aliquid amplius, God has given
two Sacraments, they add five more, God has given one way to expiate sin, they
find out more, as Masses, Pilgrimages, etc. So here to the memorials of Christ
which God has commanded, we will add, aliquid amplius, Hose. 8.14. Israel has
forgotten his Maker, and builds Temples: It is strange he should be found
fault with for building Temples; yes, if God will have but one Temple, and they
build more, it is called a forgetting his Maker; so for building Altars, verse.
11. Gualter. If the written word of God be not a rule to direct us, how far
shall we run? and where shall we stop: If it cannot be manifested by scripture
or by arguments derived from Scripture, we may as well observe all the Papists
unwritten Traditions. Specious pretenses of love to religion, first brought in
Images into Churches, and then a reverent esteem of the Persons they
represented brought in worship of Images; And an ill-guided love to Christ
brought in the adoration of his Mother; and so Idolatry came in with a
side-wind, the same which has ushered in this Christmas day. Give way to this,
and I pray tell me where we shall stop. Jeremi. 10.3. The customs of the
people are vain. We may invent a thousand several sorts of services to almighty
God, and urge our zeal to his service, and our good meanings, and as much as
is said in defense of this solemnity, and yet all will in the end meet with
that objurgation, Quis haec a manu vestra postulavit?

If we have not Scripture for our rule, there will be no bounds to our
services. I will add a word more, (though no Argument) It is a solemnity which
God did never bless, it has been kept like the heathen Bacchanalia, diceing
and drinking, fooling and lewdness, as if the Christians God were a master of
Revels, the Devil has had for the most part more service in the twelve days
then God in the twelve months.

Master Mocket has also written a Book on this subject. And read Master
Baxter's Arguments. Whatever concerned our Savior Christ, which the holy Ghost
thought fit to make known, is exactly laid down in Scripture. As 1. The Town
where he was born. 2. What House? An Inn. 3. The place in the Inn, a stable,
where he was laid in the manger. 4. Yea, a further particular is mentioned, the
very clothes he was wrapped in. Luke 2. But for the time! (...). as foreseeing
our distemper. Yet is there a great aversness in people from letting go this
solemnity.

1 One reason may be, because of our natural inclination (especially in youth)
to merriments, gamings, and such kind of gambols as are ordinarily the chief
keeping of Christmas. 2. Another reason may be because it was forbidden by that
Authority who were guilty of introduceing so great evils among us, as in the
state arbitrary government; and in the Church contempt of Gods Ordinances, etc.
Now when the people saw this solemnity checked by such men; Quis tulerit
Gracchos? They thought sure it was done on as little grounds as some other
things then removed. But if they had done no worse things then taking away this
festival, we should not have had so much cause to mourn under their
misgovernment as we had.

Object. Oh but the Angels in heaven rejoiced at his birth, and shall not we?

Answ. This is arguing, a baculo ad Angulum. Rejoice in your Savior. What is
this to keeping holy days for his birth? Just thus the Papists for the Virgin
Mary, what can you do too much, in honor of Christ's blessed Mother? Resp.
Yes, if we give her such honor as God does not approve of, even so in this
case. Besides, consider the many inconveniences attending hereupon, Men must
neglect their callings diverse days together to spend their time in fooling,
and break the command, which says 6. days shall thou labor.

Object. A time of relaxation from labor is but convenient once in the year.
Semel in Anno ridet Apollo.

Answ. If this be granted, it must be upon a civil not on a religious account.

If we act without ground from the written word of God, if it be in spiritual
things it soon becomes will worship, if in temporals we are out of Gods way and
so out of his protection.

Object. Why was not this looked into before, have we not had truth among us
till now?

Resp. Do not corruptions grow in any Church and then there must be a time to
remove them; blessed be God we keep fundamentals. It was always the will of God
that Adultery should be punished with death, yet has it not been so by the law
of the Land till of late.

FINIS.

