A SHORT INSTRUCTION FOR THE BETTER UNDERSTANDING AND PERFORMING OF MENTAL
PRAYER. PRINTED AT PARIS By L. SEVESTRE, over against Grassin College.

MDCXCI.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS, AND VERTVOVSE DAME D. IGNATIA FITZJAMES RELIGIOUS OF THE
HOLY ORDER OF S. BENEDICT AT PONTOISE.
MADAM,
The interest your Goodness allovvs me to take in the highest of your concerns;
is the only apology I can make for taking the freedom to present you with
this small treatise of mental prayer; which being to make on of the Chiefest
dutys of your Life in Religion, your present, and future hapiness cannot but in
a great measure depend upon it. Never can you attain the perfection you aspire
to, in the happy state you have embraced, never can you be intierly united
with God, nor solidly virtuous but by the frequent use of this heavenly
exercise.

You was presented last year with an abridgement of the highest maxims of
Evangelical perfection, left unto you as a rich legacy by our savior as he
was leaving this world; but little will all these Treasures avail you, if
they be not applied to your soul by solid reflections, strong resolutions, and
affections which only are the fruits of mental prayer. We may say without
fear of saying too much that never person had greater incouragment to
perfection, never child more forcible domestike examples, of heroical uertues,
then you, from your Royal Father. His gracious Majesty has been pleased to
assure you by the tenderest expressions of his Royal mouth of the true
satisfaction he received to see you make so happy a choice, esteeming you
hapyer a thousand times under a Religious uaile, then a diadem, so convinced
he is, of the vanity of this world. But who can see without admiration such
a Complex of the rarest virtues a Christian soul can be adorn'ed with? has
ever King been endevved with more piety, And Religion? were Ever such
adversitys carried with morer equality, resignation, and conformity to the
vvil of god? with what constancy, and true Christian generosity has he born
the vicissitudes of fortune? who could ever be so practically and thoroughly
convinced as he his of the great difference there is betwixt temporal, and
eternal? were not his soul so enabled by a lively faith, so strengthened by
steadfast hope, and so united to god by true Charity as it his: by which means
giving so rare examples of all Christian virtues, who can but be sensibly
moved to devotion, and encouraged by them to the practice of virtue? and if we
at so noble a sight feel our souls even to melt in devotion within us, what
effect must it needs produce in you? but shall I omit hear to place before
you that unparalleled, pious and accomplished Princess, our most gracious
Queen, who with such great devotion honored both your happy Ceremonys, of
Clothing, and profession, with her Royal presence, signing, and ratifying,
your sacred Nuptials with the vesture of immortality, I mean those holy
vailes which give a right to follovv the Lamb in eternal glory. To this let
us add the examples you have constantly before your eyes of a community
composed of so many solidly virtuous and pious religious women that the like
else where is not easy to be found; where greater regularity? greater union
with god? more peace, and charity one with an other? where greater emulation
in virtue? where more chearfullness amidst all the mortifications of a
religious life? where greater submission in inferiors? where more love
charity and condescende^ce toward her inferiors, joint with a certain
character of resolution and firmness so becoming a Superior as in your most
worthy lady Abbess? whom we may say god has placed upon the candlestick
that the ligth of her hidden virtues may shine to the whole house. Is it not
this so svveet a harmony of so many truly virtuous and religious souls that has
already wrought so povverfully upon your that as to make you fall so much in
love with virtue, to make you so generously despise the world, as you have
don, by so cordially imbraceing a religious life entering so couragously the
narrovv path of perfection vvherby you give us equal edification, and comfort,
by the hopes we have of your attaining an eminent degree in what you pursue
with so much zeal.

But dear Madam how wonderfully will they increase. And vvhatspeedy progress
shall we see you make in solid virtue if these veritys on which so exemplar
virtue is grounded be once deeply imprinted in your soul by frequent
meditation. Receive then honored Dame this small translation which if you
measure not by the bulk, but by the affection of the presenter and his most
earnest desire to contribute in some measure to your advancement in perfection,
I presume so much of your goodness, as to hope it may have a favorable
reception at your hands, and serve for a true mark of the profound respect of.

Most Religious and virtuous DAME, Your most humble and obedient servant and
perfectly vvelvvisher C. A. S. I.

A SHORT INSTRUCTION FOR THE BETTER UNDERSTANDING AND PERFORMING OF MENTAL
PRAYER.
FIRST SECTION. General Maxims concerning the better understanding of Mental
Prayer.
I. THE Gift of prayer is a present from heaven that depends more upon the
grace of God then our labor or industry; the holy Ghost who is the source
and fountain of all supernatural gifts, is the only master able to teach us
this important lesson: its he that calls us to this heavenly exercise and its
from him we must expect all the success we can hope for in it. We may
nevertheless dispose our selves to it by a great purity of heart, recollection
mind, and a constant practice of virtue by which a soul is enabled and
Rendered capable of conversing with God almighty, use and experience,
contribute also very much to make easy this holy exercise and the conduct of a
wise and prudent Director, is neeldfull to avoid all illusions of the devil,
which are so ordinary and dangerous in this Matter.

II. The end and aim of prayer Being to unite us with God by the application
of our understanding and Will; the more and Perfecter it is, the more it units
us with him and gives us more strength to practice what is Good, by
communicating to us the Spirit of god.

III. Amongst all the Kinds of prayer we undertake to make use of; that is the
best and most to our purpose, to which we find our selves interiourly drawn
and inclined, which succeeds better with us, and out of which we reap more
profit, what ever Kind of prayer it be.

IV. All that defiles the heart, as sin, passion, disorder in our senses, or
what may cause any trouble or anxiety, in our mind; as too much Business,
scruples, unquietness of mind; hinders all success in prayer.

V. Go to prayer with a pure and upright intention, to seek nothing, but god
and with an humble resignation to his will, to do and suffer in it what
ever shall be his pleasure.

VI. At the Beginning of your meditation, before you apply your mind to the
subject you have prepared; keep for a little time in suspense the facultys of
your soul, and let your thoughts for a moment be at a stand, without
produceing any sort of act; this will contribut very much to allay the
agitation of your senses, passions and imagination; to bring your mind into a
quiet and even temper, and to settle you in a profounde interior peace; which
composition of mind is absolutely necessary to dispose a soul to receave the
operations of the holy ghost.

VII. This don, put your self in the presence of god by an act of faith which
will be fitting you renew now and then, even during the time of your prayer.

VIII. Keep your self in that posture of body, which may mark your respect to
god, in who's presence you are, but which may also be as little subject as
you can to any agitation or motion, for even the tranquillity of the Body
contributs to a certainequality, and peace of mind.

IX. Let your application be serious, but moderate; both in regard of the
subject of your prayer, and of the acts you are to produce by the faculty of
your understanding, and your will; not permitting your self to be so carried
with that application of mind, and attention of spirit which may prejudice
the Breast, or distemper the head.

X. Take as little notice as you can, and be not the least disquieted at the
extravagant representations of a restless imagination, let only your
application be to hinder your mind from following it, whilst it is thus running
astray, and as soon as you remark it has bin a Wandering out of its subject
be-cause of the connection it has with the imaginative faculty; Bring it to it
again with all svveetness and evennesse without so much as making reflection
on the distraction you have had.

XI. Be persuaded, and doubt not in the least, that although you did no other
thing all the time of your meditation but fight and Wrestle against these
importune thoughts and distractions, never admitting them voluntary, nor
consenting to them, but suffering all the pain, Disgust, Tediousness, they make
you feel, without being cast down or dijected; your prayer has had very Good
success, and may prove more benficiall, and meritorious then if you had prayed
with more sweetness and fervor.

XII. If you hapen to find your self, in that hardness of heart and stupidity
of mind, that you neither can meditate nor produce any Good affections, suffer
with patience that dryness and aridity, and be satisfied; with standing thus
humbled in the sight of god. There is no disposition fitter to mollify even the
hardest of hearts and more capable of changing that inward insipidity into the
tenderest sentiments of devotion.

XIII. It is fitting you insist longer on that part of your subject, which
moves and touches you most, stirring you up to a great tenderness and feeling
of Devotion; but let your endeavors be always to employ your will more then
your understanding; for often entims we need not much discourse to discover what
is our duty and to be persuaded of it; but we have very much need of strong
purposes, and solid resolutions to come to practice it.

XIV. Remember in fine since that meditation or prayer is not to be accounted
the best in which we have had most facility, consolation, and sensible
devotion, but that in which we have been more faithful, constant, submisive
to the dispositions of gods holy will: the surest means we can find to have
good success in our prayer, is to show that fidelity, constancy, and
resignation to gods divine will, in bearing the whole weight of our Miserys
and natural weakness without ever being in the least dejected or
discouraged. On our side let us do what lies in our power, and we may hold
for most certain that in what ever disposition we find our selves at prayer,
if we are faithful to god and suffer it as we ought, he will never fail to
make it serve for his greater glory, and our greater good.

SECOND SECTION. Practice of Meditation or mental prayer Made by way of
Discourse.
IN this kind of Prayer of Discourse and reasoning commonly caled meditation,
each faculty of our soul has its proper office and Employment. The memory
proposes the subject, and ostentimes to fix the agility and livelyness of our
imagination we give it its own task, obliging it to make us a lively
representation of the subject when it can bear it. Our understanding
considers, meditats and reasons upon it, strives to fram so clear notions and
distinct conceptions upon the matter, from which may naturally flow so
strong and practieall conclusions, that by them the will is enabled, and set
to work, to dravv out of these conclusions, affections and resolutions conform
to the subject proposed to it by the understanding.

The ordinary subject of mental prayer is either some mystery, a Sentance out
of scripture or some truth proposed to us by faith.

Before the time comes that you are to employ in this manner of praying, you
must read with attention, the matter and prepare the different points you are
to meditate upon.

The first thing you do beginning your meditation is, after you have put your
self in the presence of god, to make a profound act of humility and adoration,
after which only in general and confusedly you represent to your self the
subject you pretend to meditate on; and to the end your endeavors may prove
successful, beg of the holy ghost the assistance of his grace, imploring also
to the same effect the intercession of our blessed Lady.

This don you make on every point of your meditation particular considerations.
Many solid reflections able to make your will produce affections and
resolutions conform to your subject.

1. If you have for the subject of your meditation any mystery, you must
consider attentively all the particulars and circomstances of it, that you may
the better be instructed and with more force be convinced of what you ought
to avoid, do, or suffer. If you meditate upon a sentance of scripture or any
article of faith, you must do your endeavor to dive into the sense of it, out
of which you must dravv moral conclusions for your own conduct; and in all
the discoursing and reasoning you have upon the matter, you must chiefly and
perticularly rely upon faith, which must serve for the bassis or groundvvork
on which must be settled all the acts of both will and understanding that you
produce in your Prayer.

2. The affections take their rise from the considerations and that according
to the nature of the subject you meditate upon. The principal affections are of
admiration thanksgiveing, confidence, of abondoning perfectly our selves into
the hands of god, of love, desire, joy complacency, of compassion, fear,
hatred, horror confusion, etc.

3. When one makes a serious reflection, and casts an eye back on what he has
already past of his life with relation to the present subject in hand
discovering the disorders of his former life and behavior, he cannot but find
his soul covered with a holy confusion, which povverfully disposes it to an
humble contrition and to the sincerest sentiments of love and charity toward
god who has all this while so patiently expected the Return of this prodigal
child.

4. searching in prayer and examining the sentiments of ones own heart in its
present situation; we must do our endeavors to put and settle our selves in
the best disposition possible according to the subject of our meditation and
the light we receive from god,

5. If you cast your Eyes upon the future, and what is te come; we ought to
make strong resolutions both for the practizing of Good or avoiding Evil and
forseing the occasions we are to be in, to encourage our selves; so offering up
to god our good, pious and fervent desires, make him a thousand protestations
of an inviolable fidelity. Its after this manner we finish our prayer by a
hearty and most affectionate adresse to god which from the latin we term
colloquium, in which our soul Directs its prayer now to god, now to some of
the three persons of the Blesed Trinity now to the Blessed Virgin, to the
Angels or the Saints who's help assistance and intercession we go about to
implore.

THIRD SECTION. Different sorts and Vvayes of Praying, to make this holy
Exercise more Easy for Beginners.
THe first manner I here set down of praying is that of holy saint Teresa, of
which by her own testimony she first made use of when she began by This holy
Exercise to converse with god. Its very Easy and little different from a simple
lecture or reading; one takes a spiritual book, as the new testament, or
following of Christ, or any such; you read a chapter or some fevv lines by
intervalls, then you consider and meditate for some time upon what you have
read, striving to penetrate into the sense of it and to imprint it deeply in
your mind; then dravv from it some holy affection, as of love of god, of
penance, contrition or of some other virtue which you must make a good
purpose to put in practice when occasion shall occur.

You have only two extremities to avoid, the one of reading too much, the
other of meditating too much, so that your mind begins to wander, and its
attention and vigor rather to decay then to be encouraged and stirred up to
practice the good you have proposed to be don. But you must keep within the
bounds of a just moderation stopping as long at every paragraph as your
understanding shall find in it where upon to give it self a gratfull and
profitable entertainment.

The second manner is almost the same with the precedent. You take for subject
a text of Scripture or some vocal prayer as the Pater noster, the Ave or the
Creed, you pronounce the words outwardly or inwardly in your heart, you make
a stop at every word out of which you dravv several pious sentimens, which
make as long the application of your soul as you can find you can relish them;
at the end you make an humble address to god, begging of his bounty some
grace, or some virtue according to the subject of your meditation. In the
practice of this prayer three things are to be observed; not to insist too long
with teadiousness, and disgust upon one word, but when nothing more occurrs
capable of keeping your mind employed, pass softly and gently to an other. 2.
When you find your heart moved by some good sentiment, there, be sure to fix as
long as it lasts, without putting your self in pain to proceed further. 3. It
is not needful alvvaies to make new acts, yea its often sufficient to keep
your self there in the presence of god; ruminating in silence upon the words
of your meditation, and endeavoring to relish the sentiments they have already
produced in your heart.

The third manner may be used when the subject you have prepared does not
furnish you with thoughts enough, then you may take as a very profitable
employment that of produceing acts of faith, adoration, thanksgiving, hope,
love, etc. For example I believe o my god! that I am here in your sight and
that you are incessantly applied to govern and conduct me, etc.

I adore your souvrain power and do heartily make you homage for my being,
and for all the power I have as a good belonging to you and which I hold of
you, etc.

I render you a milion of thanks for having loved me from all eternity, etc.

I hope your divine Providence will never Abondon me in my necessity and want,
and that it will conduct me happyly to the accomplishment of your designs by
that way, it will point out to me, etc.

I love you o Eternal beauty! o infinite goodness! I love you above all things
and with all my soul, etc.

I am heartily sorry for having served you so ill hitherto, and for having
offended you so often, etc.

I Wish from my heart that you might receive indeed and in effect, all the
honor your creaturs are capable to render you, etc.

These acts are only by way of example, and as it were a mould of such as you
may produce, you may give them as much extent as you think fitting, make a stop
at every one, giveing your self the time to feel at leisure, to relish and
savor, the good sentiments that have made the most impresion upon your soul.

The forth manner of prayer may be made use of when on is in such a
disposition that he neither can meditate nor produce any affections upon the
points of the prayer you have prepared. In that incapacity and sterility of
mind, it is very good to make in the presence of god; a sincere protestation
that your intention and desire is to make as many acts of virtue, as for
example, of contrition as you shall by times dravv your breath or as you shall
run over your beads or pronounce exteriourly some short prayer: you must renew
from time to time the same protestation; and if god of his bounty gives you any
other good sentiments, receive it with humility and make it your interior
occupation.

Te fifth manner is for souls in trouble and tormented with a certain stupidity
of mind and insensibility of heart, Provided they have courage enough to
persevere and so much of fidelity as not to let themselves be overcome, by
distractions, and that they be vvilling to suffer something for the love of god.
The best prayer that such souls can make whilst they are stupid and
insensible, surrounded with darkness and born down by the weight of their
own miseries, is to abondon themselves generously to suffering, without being
in the least disheartened or disquieted, yea without endeavoring to get out of
so sad a condition or produceing any other acts but those of abandoning
themselves entirely into the hands of god to undergo that trial or any other it
shall please his mercy or justice to put them to. They may also unite their
sufferings, and present pain with the Agony of our savior in his prayer in the
garden, or with that unspeakable resignation he felt upon the cross striving
to persuade ourselves by his example, there to remain and to suffer constantly
even till death.

The sixth manner of praying consists in a revievv of our own interior. You
must by a serious consideration enter into your own heart, and endeavor to
make a perfect discovery of the present state and condition of your soul; set
before your eyes your defects, your passions, your infirmities, your
weaknesses, your evil inclinations, for none but has more or less something of
corupt nature in them, examine your heart how ever inscrutable it be; dive into
the bottom, lay open your own miseries and your nothing. Adore the judgments
of god in regard to the present state you are in, bovv and submit to his holy
will and bliss him equaly for the punishment and chastisement of his justice,
and for the favors you have received from his infinite Mercy; humble your foul
in presence of his souvraigne majesty, make a sincere Confession of your sins
and infidelitys, beg a thousand pardons, there retract your falls and erroneous
judgments, when blinded by passion you so often prefered temporal to eternal
honnour, richess, pleasurs, to contempt, pauverty, and suffering. Abhor and
detest all the evil you have ever committed by thought, word deed, or omission;
and make a sted fast purpose of amendment for the future.

This manner of prayer is without constraint, and all kind of affections may
find place in it, you may make it at all times but chiefly after some suddan
and unexpected accident for to dispose ons soul to the merciful chastisement
of gods justice; or after having bin in any exterior dissipating concern for
to recover again your wonted interior peace and recolection of mind.

The seventh manner of praying consists in a lively representation of the 4.
last things that are to befall man. That excelent Master of a spiritual life
father John d'Avila, recommends it much. I imagine says he in a letter to one of
his disciples that you are already buried; reduced into ashes, forgott by your
parents and friends, and that your soul is already in its state of separation,
etc.

You may then to perform this kind of prayer represent to your self that you
are effectualy reduced to your last agony and ready to give up your soul; put
your self in spirit betwixt time and eternity, betwixt your life past and the
judgment of god where you are going to appear, there you must endeavor to
conceive and feel before hand the sentiments you will have when you come to
that extremity! what you would vvish then to have don, how you would vvish
to have lived, etc. You must not only foresee, but even also strive to have an
anticipated feeling of the pain, trouble and fear you will then certainly be
in; recall to your mind your sins, the disorders of your life, the frequent
abuse you have made of gods grace. how at that moment you would wish to have
behaved your self in such and such occasions, etc. Infine you must make some
strong and solid purposes to apply some efficacious remedy to all that you have
any ground to fear, at the sight of that state and of its Terrible
consequences. You may also imagine that you are already before the Tribunal of
Christ Jesus, or in Purgatory, or in hell, the more the representation is livly
the more profitable will be your prayer.

It Is in this state that god often puts in spirit many souls, for to dravv them
perfectly out of this world, and divest them of their bodies, causing them to
make an entire divorce from flesh and blood and all that has been the dearest
to them upon earth. for it is an order, and an indispensable law of divine
Providence, that we must absolutely die by that mistical death; for to partake
of the first resurrection, which consists in being delivered, and made free
from all corruption of sin, and that we must of necessity pass through this
Purgatory before we can perfectly enjoy god almighty, and attain to that
possession which is the perfectest Manner we can posess him upon earth.

The eight Manner of praying may be called an application of our mind to
Jesus Christ in the blessed Sacrement, which is performed after this manner.
1. After you have adored our savior in this mystery with all the respect that
his real presence requires. You must unite your self to him and all his divine
operations in the Eucharist, where he never ceases from adoring praising, and
loueing god his father in the name of all mankind, and that after the
perfectest manner, imaginable; that is to say in the form and state of a
victime. You must then meditate and strive to conceive something of his
retirement and recollection, of his solitude, his hidden life, his obedience,
his humility and of all other virtues according to the model and example he
gives of them in this Sacramental state. you must stir up your soul to the
imitation of his virtues, and make good purposes not to fail to put them in
practice, as often as you shall have occasion.

2. Offer up to god the father his son Christ Jesus, as the only victime worthy
of him, and by which alone we are able to render due hommage to his supreme
Dominion; acknowledge his benefits, satisfy his justice, and oblige his mercy
to help and assist us.

3. Offer up your self to god, make a sacrifice to him of your being, your
life, your employments, and in particular make a good purpose to perform some
act of virtue, some mortification that you relolue to undergo, to Overcome
your self, and that for the same end for which our savior in the blessed
Sacrement offers himself up in sacrifice; and you must make this oblation with
an earnest desire to increace as far as lies in your power the glory he
renders to his father in this sacred Mystery.

Finish your prayer by a spiritual Communion, this way of prayer is excelent,
and your study must be, to make the practice of it, so much the more familiar,
that our happiness in this life depends on our union with Christ Jesus in the
blessed Sacrement, and I advise you to make use of it as often as you can and
particularly toward evening.

The ninth manner of prayer we make in the name of our savior, and as taking
his place in the addresses we make to god; which may help us wonderfully to
breed in our souls a perfect confidence in god almighty and make us enter in
Spirit into the sentiments of our savior. It is grounded on this truth, to
wit that we have contracted a true alliance with the son of god. We are his
brothers, the members of his mystical body, he has granted, and made over to us
all his merits, he leaves us by his testament legatarys of the recompenses and
rewards due to, all his works for all the pains and troubles he has been at,
death it self that he suffered to glorify his father: by this we are enabled to
honor and worship god as god, that is with a worship not inferior to what
his excellency requires and by the same way we enter in right to converse
with god and can in some sort exact his favors by some kind of justice, we
have not that right as creaturs, and as yet much less as sinners because of
that infinite disproportion that is betwixt god and a creature, and that
infinite oposition which is betwixt him and a sinner; but as being allied to
the son of god in man's flesh, as being his brethern and his members, we may
apear with confidence in the presence of god, converse with him familiarly
and engage him to hear us favorably to listen to our requests, to grant us
graces and favors because of the union we have with his son.

It Is in this manner you may apeare at prayer in the presence of god; now to
adore and praise him through Jesus Christ, vvorking in you as the head in his
members, and raising and elevating you by this operation of his spirit to a
state wholy Divine; now to beg some favor of him in virtue of the merits of
his son; and for that effect you represent unto him the services his well
beloved son has rendered him, his life, his death, his sufferings, the reward of
which you may lavvfully clame right to by virtue of a grant and of a true
cession by which he has made them over to us. This way of prayer is
excellently performed in a supernatural state and it is properly in that spirit
that those who are obliged to say the Divine office ought to say it. It Is after
this manner the church prays and for that reason she concludes all her prayers
in these words. Per Dominum nostrum, etc.

The tenth manner of praying is a Mixture partly of a simple attention to the
presence of god and partly of meditation, it may be practiced after this
fashion.

Before you apply your self to meditate upon the subject you have prepared, put
your self in the presence of god, without taking any distinct thought or
stirring up in your soul any other sentiment but that of a dutiful respect and
tender love toward him, with which gods very presence cannot but inspire
you. Be satisfied to stand thus silent in the sight of god and remain as long
in that peace and quietness of mind as you can have any interior delight or
relish in it so that your soul be kept by it in that constant respect. But this
coming to fail lay presently hold on the points of the meditation you have
prepared, upon which you make your considerations as you wont to do with your
reflections, resolutions, and affections, according to the ordinary method; it
would not be amiss to begin thus all your meditations keeping your self in
silence as long in the presence of god as that interior respect and affection
of your soul toward him can keep your imagination free from wandering and
your thoughts so composed that they put no opposition to your inioying his
divine presence in peace and quietness, and in the course of your meditation
after every point your mind being wearied by produceing frequent acts it will
prove very profitable and advantageous to make a stop and repose a little in
this simple attention to god; by so doing you settle your self in an interior
recollection, and being thus accustomed to fix your mind on god, you may
dispose your self by little and little to contemplation which is nothing but a
simple view of god accompanied with respect and love; but it is a perfect
illusion to remain so, out of a mere lasinesse and unvvillingness to take
pains to consider and Meditate.

When one has gained so much by the mortification of his own passions and a
frequent and habitual communication with god, as to be able to remain in that
interior tranquillity of spirit in his Divine presence a good space of time
without being much troubled with distractions nor diverted by the inconstancy
and instability of the facultys of his soul, it is a certain mark he is not far
from what we call a passive state.


