A SERMON Preached December. 16. 1654. AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr ANDREW PERN,
Preacher of the Word of God at Wilby in Northamptonshire.

BY SAMVEL AINSWORTH Rector of Kelmarsh.

LONDON, Printed for William Gilbertson, and are to be sold by Thomas Collins
near Alhallows Church in Northampton. 1655.

To the Religious, and my much honored Aunt, Mrs Mary Pern, Grace and peace be
multiplied.
Dear Aunt,
WE read in the first Chapter of Ruth, how Naomi, a very gracious Matron, lost
first her Husband, and not long after her two Sons: Your condition is not much,
though somewhat, unlike hers. Your loss, in respect of your Husband, is not a
jot inferior to hers; her loss, in respect of her children was greater than
yours; she lost two Sons, you a Daughter only; what difference soever there
has been between your losses, I suppose, there is none between your griefs.
When you enjoyed both Husband and Child you might well be called Naomi,
pleasant, but since the wise God has deprived you of them both, the name
Marah, bitter, has been more suitable to your condition, for it has been sad
and bitter.

To tell you what a Husband you have lost were but to increase your sorrow,
which I fear needs stopping rather than venting; I shall therefore observe
that course which was used by the Jews, who when their dear friends, or
neighbors, had lost either Husband or Wife, Father or Child, they brought them
a cup of consolation for to comfort them, Jer. 16.7. The Prophet David tells us,
Psalm. 119.50. That the word of God was his comfort in his affliction; and the
Apostle Paul labors to support the Thessalonians for the loss of their
Christian friends by setting the word of God before them, 1 These. 4.18. These
following Scriptures therefore are the cup of consolation with which I shall
present you to mitigate your too much abounding sorrow, Prove. 3.12. Whom the
Lord loves he corrects, even as a father the son in whom he delights. Romans
8.28. We know all things work together for good to them that love God, to them
who are the called according to his purpose. Isa. 27.9. By this therefore shall
the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his
sin, Heb. 12.10, 11. For they verily for a few days chastened us after their
own pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness. Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous but grievous:
nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby, Isa. 54.5. Thy maker is thy husband, Psalm.
146.9. The Lord preserves the strangers, he releeveth the fatherless and
widow. Now if God has taken away your dear husband and child out of love to
your soul; if their natural deaths shall promote your spiritual life; if
their taking up to heaven shall prepare and make you fitter for heaven; if
their loss shall be your gain, the purging away of your dross, and the
making of you a more refined vessel for your Masters use, the weakening of your
corruptions, and the strengthening of your graces; if God will be a husband to
you, whose love is more pure, strong, ravishing, satisfying, and durable than
the love of the best husband that ever breathed upon earth; if God will be
present with you, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and take care of you,
to protect and counsel, to help and releeve you, be your enemies and dangers
what they will; Have you not more cause to rejoice in these spiritual
privileges than to mourn for your temporal losses? Take therefore the
counsel of the Apostle, 1 These. 4.18. Comfort your self in the meditation of
these Scriptures. Do as David did when he had lost all at Ziglag, encourage
your self in the Lord your God, 1 Samuel 30.6. Although Cisterns fail, yet God
is a fountain that cannot be drawn dry; when the Creature neither is nor can
be the same to us, yet God is the same, yesterday, and to day, and for ever,
Heb. 13.8. Now that the God of all grace and consolation would make up your
losses by the abundant supplies of his blessed Spirit, sanctify his correcting
hand unto you, support you under your heavy burden, and fit you with all joy
and peace in believing, is the prayer of

Your sympathizing and much obliged kinsman, SAMUEL AINSVVORTH.

A SERMON.
2 Kings 13.14. Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died,
and Joash the King of Israel came down unto him and wept over his face, and
said, O my father, my father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof.


IN these words we may take notice of these two general parts:

First, Elisha's sickness, wherein we may consider,

1. Who this Elisha was, he was not only a holy man, but a holy Prophet.

2. The event of his sickness, sick he was, and that unto death, and died of
this his sickness.

Secondly, Joash's visiting of him in this his sickness.

1. Who this Joash was who came to visit him, no mean person, no plain country
man, no poor neighbor, but a man of eminent place and dignity, he was no
less than a King, and King of Israel.

2. The pains he took to visit him; he did not take a step or two to see the
Prophet. Elisha was now no near neighbor, he was either at Jericho, or at
Bethel, or in some other place remote from Samaria, the usual seat of the
Kings of Israel, and from whence Joash came down to visit him. It had been no
small favor for so great a Prince to have sent one of his choice favorites
upon this errand, and to have stayed at home himself, but he thought it not
sufficient to dispatch his servant with a How do you: but waits upon the poor
Prophet in his own person; he questions it not whether it would not be too
great a condescension for his excellent Majesty to see how so mean a subject
did; he made no scruple whether his disease might not be noisome, or
infectious, he waved these things, stood not upon his magnificency, but makes a
journey himself.

3. The motive that prevailed with him to visit this man of God, which makes
the action more commendable, it was nothing else but that respect which he did
bear unto him. Elisha had been a great friend to the State, secured it again
and again against the incursions of the Syrians, procured water for the Armies
of Israel when they were in danger to perish for want of it; assured them of
the great victory that they should obtain against the Ammonites; helped them
also when they were at a dead lift by his prayers; these worthy acts were
remembered by this King, who honored the Prophet for them, and expressed what
high thoughts he had of him by giving of him such a friendly and honorable
visit. Ahab, the Predecessor of Joash, though not immediately, would never have
showed such kindness to Elijah the predecessor of Elisha; he would rather have
been glad of, then visited him in his sickness. David complains of some who
came to him in the day of his calamity, when he was under some grievous
disease, not to comfort him, but to see whether there was any hope of his
death; but Joash, though a wicked man, visited not the Prophet upon such an
account, he desired his life, and feared his death; he came not out of hatred,
but out of love; not to entrap him, but to comfort him; not to observe whether
there were any hopes of his death, but whether there were any hopes of his
life; not as a malicious spy, to watch whether any words dropped from his lips
which he might spread abroad to his reproach, but as a friend to condole and
sympathize with him, and to bemoane so great a loss; for when he perceived
that he was drawing nigh unto his end, and ere long would bid that Kingdom and
the world farewell, he wept over his face.

4. The honorable titles which he gave unto the Prophet not in a false and
flattering complement (the common sin of this Age, wherein men profess that
with their lips which is far from their hearts,) but from a just and a real
sense and apprehension that he had of the Prophets merits and deserts, to be
honored with the title of Father, and to be accounted and esteemed the Chariot
of Israel, and the horsemen thereof: And he said, O my father, my father, etc.
The parts thus opened, we come to the Doctrines which arise out of the words.
The person that was sick and died, we told you was both a good man, and a holy
Prophet, from whence we may observe in the first place:

Psalm. 89.48. What man is he that lives and shall not see death? The wise as
well as the foolish, the pious as well as the impious, the strict as well as
the loose must lie down in the grave. Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum
tabernas regumque turres. Abraham, eminent for faith; Moses, for meekness;
David, for zeal; Jehosaphat, for liveliness and holy fervor in the ways of
God; Nehemiah, for spiritual valor and courage: yet they all shut their eyes
upon the world, and bad it farewell. Look upon those worthies made mention of,
Heb. 11. men of whom the world was not worthy, what became of them? The Text
tells us, ver. 13. All these died in the faith.

men many times have weaker bodies than bad men. Gaius who had a thriving
soul, had a weak and sickly body; the best are but earthen vessels at the
best, 2 Cor. 4.7.
which will not last always, but lie open to a thousand casualties, and a
little knock breaks them in pieces.

Secondly, Ioh. 16.2, 3.
Christ has prepared a better place for them, to which they must pass through
the gates of death; this the Apostle Paul knew full well, Phil. 1.23.
and therefore he desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ. He tells us, 2
Cor. 5.4. that he was willing that mortality might be swallowed up of life;
loath he was to be uncloathed, but yet he chose to be stripped by death of his
old rags, rather than not to be clothed with those robes which he expected
from heaven.

Thirdly, Ioh. 17.24.
Christ has prayed that they might be where he is, therefore they must not
live here always. We read, Acts 3.2. that the heavens must receive Christ till
the times of restitution of all things. Though Christ, as God, is every where,
yet as he is Mediator he sits at the right hand of his Father. Now there is no
being where Christ is without tasting of the cup of death, whereof Christ
himself tasted before he was taken up into glory. Christ's members must be
conformable unto him in suffering death here, before they can be made
conformable unto him in glory hereafter.

Fourthly, God loves them so well, that he will have them come home unto him;
here gracious souls are said to be absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. as
children long to see their beloved Parents, so loving Parents long to have the
full enjoyment of their Children. Christ can no more endure that his Children
should be always from him, than his Children can endure to be always from
Christ. Now the ordinary messenger which Christ imploies to bring home his
Children unto him is death. Uses.

difference between your deaths and theirs, as there has been between your
lives and theirs; they are taken away from the evil to come, but your evil is
to come when you are taken away; they are taken away from their enemies, but go
to their friends; you are taken away from your friends, but must go to your
enemies; they are taken away in mercy, you shall be taken away in judgment;
when they dye, they go to heaven; when you dye, you must go to hell; when they
dye, they go to enjoy sweet and uninterrupted communion with Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; when you dye, you must go to converse with devils and damned
spirits; when they dye, their worst is past, their best is to come, when you
dye, your best is past, your worst is to come; when they dye, they shall suffer
no more, you never suffer to any purpose till you come to dye: Now, now you
shall be snatched from your cups of pleasure to drink of cups of gall and
wormwood; Psalm. 75.^.
from your stately houses to a loathsome dungeon; from your carnal ease and
contentments to endless and extreme tortures and howlings. Woe, woe unto you
wicked ones, weep and howl for the miseries which are likely to come upon you,
you are not so high now but you will be as low then, you are not so honorable
now but you will be as contemptible then, you are not so joviall and merry now
but you will be as sad and heavy then; would you dye as the righteous dye, then
live as the righteous live; if you would have your latter end like unto his,
let your conversation for the present be like unto his.

to his children, a religious master to his servant, and a gracious neighbor
to his neighbors, much spiritual advantage may be, and is, reaped by their
prayers, counsels, experiences, and examples; how often have our dead hearts
been quickened, our doubts resolved, our fears scattered, our sorrows
mitigated, and our graces excited by conversing and discoursing with pious and
holy men; they carry about them very choice and precious liquor, but it is
contained in earthen vessels which must and will break; the time will come when
the godly Husband, when the pious Master, when the gracious Parent must tarry
with us no longer, when we shall have no more of their counsel to instruct us,
no more of their encouragements to provoke us, no more of their prayers to help
us, those cisternes must be broken, and let this consideration put us upon the
securing of the fountain, that when those earthen vessels are snapt in pieces,
when those pipes, through which God conveyed much sweetness and benefit to thy
soul, are taken away, thou may have this to comfort thee, that the
fountain, that can never be drawn dry, is still with thee; if God be thine
thou art well, though others can no more be enjoyed in the land of the living;
God is a husband that cannot dye, a father that cannot dye, a shepherd that
cannot dye, a friend that cannot dye; all other can do nothing without him, he
can do any thing without others; he can comfort, he can quicken, he can
support, he can strengthen, he can uphold us though we had not one friend in
the world left us; he is God alsufficient, and can make up the loss of a
husband to the wife, of a father to the child, of a pastor to his people: Oh
then make sure of God for your God, you cannot so make sure of any creature,
friends, or comforters, as to keep and enjoy them always, they will be gone
from you, but you may make sure of God; get God, and you want nothing, want
God, and you have nothing.

3. Must the best dye? then let us prepare for their death; we seldom think
of crosses till they come, and then we are to seek for patience for to bear
them: what hear we? little did I think that I should have seen this day, that
I should have been bereaved of my husband, says the wife; little did I think
that I should have lost so precious a father, says the child; and why did you
not think so? Job looked for adversity in the midst of prosperity, for losses in
the midst of enjoyments; he looked upon his children as mortal, Job 3.25.
his goods as uncertain, he feared, and forethought of those troubles which
he met withal; and hence it was he bore them with so much patience; God has
not given us a lease of his childrens lives, it is a mercy, and a great one,
that he will trust us with the sight or presence of those his jewels, Mal. 3.17.
though but for a season; wives look upon your precious husbands, children look
upon your gracious parents as bubbles that swim up and down in the water for a
while, but ere long will vanish.

4. Must godly men dye? let us improve them whilst we have them: if we have
but a book lent us, which we account very profitable, and know it may be called
for at an hours warning, we will make the best use we can of it whilst we
have it; our christian friends are but lent us, how soon our heavenly Father
may send for them we know not, let us therefore make the best advantage that
may be of their graces and virtues during their abode with us; Chap. 3.16
the Prophet Malachy tells us, they that feared the Lord spoke often one to
another; God betrusts us with his dear servants that we might promote our
spiritual warfare by their society, and will call us to an account one day how
we have thrived by such helps; Let a Lawyer come to our houses, we will ask
him question after question about our temporal estate, what, have we no
questions to propound in reference to our spiritual estate? Surely then we are
ignorant or insensible. Have thou a gracious husband? Let no day pass over thy
head without reaping some spiritual good by him. Have thou a gracious
neighbor? Improve his company for thy souls benefit. How rich might
Christians be in grace, had they but skill and will to improve one another? Now
you may have the benefit of their prayers, counsels, gifts, experiences, but
they can do nothing for you in the grave. Our woeful negligence to improve our
Christian friends makes God many times to deprive us of them, we might have
enjoyed them longer had we been careful to make better use of them; when
servants rather play with, then work by the light, it is time to put it out.
Let us therefore take the counsel of our Savior, Joh. 12.35.

5. Let all holy and gracious persons be active for God whilst they live, let
slip no opportunity of doing God service, we have received much from, and shall
we not do much for God? God thinks nothing too great for us, let not us think
any thing too great for God; work we as hard as we can, our wages will
infinitely surpass our work. Let no man be idle in his Masters Vineyard, for
our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. when we cast our
eyes upon our Wives, Children, Neighbors, Servants, or Friends, think we may
be taken from them ere long, and let this provoke us to do our best to leave
their souls full of grace, though we may have little else to leave them.

6. Must our best friends dye? Will God gather up his Jewels, and deck his own
glorious palace with them? Take we heed of murmuring or repining, possess we
our souls in patience, bless God that he has trust us with them so long,
complain not that he has taken them away so soon; they are dear to God as
well as unto us, and ought we not to be content that God should enjoy them as
well as we? When we see Gods will fulfilled, it is not for us sinfully to
quarrel, but quietly and patiently to submit. Thus did Aaron, Lev. 10.3. Thus
did Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. Thus did Job, Chap. 1. Thus did David, Psalm. 39.9. True,
we are losers, 14.28.
but our godly friends are gainers, love to our selves may make us mourn, but
love to them should make us rejoice: Ought we not to be, and are we not glad
when our friends who have been full of pain enjoy svveet ease? who have
been in prison are set at liberty? who have been encompassed and oppressed by
cruel, potent, and malicious enemies, are delivered from them? And is not this
the condition of all our gracious friends when they dye? Are they not now at
ease who were once in pain? Are they not now at liberty who were once in
prison? For this world is a prison to a pious soul. Are they not now freed
from all their enemies, who could have no rest night or day from one enemy or
other? Rejoice therefore that their warfare is accomplished, and bless God
that he has not taken away himself from us, though he has deprived us of
such who were our dear friends, we have no cause to grudge at the loss of
these Cisternes so long as we have the fountain. What though these bottles be
dry, we cannot want the refreshing waters of comfort so long as the spring
is with us; when God takes away our outvvard helps, he takes away such as
may better be spared than himself; let our losses be what they will, they may
very well be borne so long as we enjoy God, who is alsufficient. Have thou
lost a loving husband, yet bless God that Christ who loves thee, and will
live with thee, is not lost; thy natural Father is dead, but thou have a
Father in heaven who wants no vvisdome to counsel thee, no love to comfort
thee, no power to help thee, no supplies to relieve thee, who is not ignorant
or unsensible of thy condition, and will be with thee continually. Thou have
lost a precious Pastor, yet thou have a better shepherd to take care of thee,
the Lord Jesus blessed for ever.

But why say I, we have lost our friends when they dye? We rather part with
them for a season than lose them: they are gone a little before us to that
place where we shall be ere long, and enjoy them more refined, more pure,
more lovely and amiable, never to part with them more. Besides, we have cause
to rejoice, though not in the death of our Christian friends, yet in the
spiritual benefits that we shall reap by their deaths; God has said, Romans
8.28.
All things shall work together for good to those who love him, and are the
called according to his purpose. True, we cannot see how the loss of
gracious friends shall turn to our advantage, but we must shut the eyes of
sense, and live by faith in the promise, it is ground sufficient for us to
believe that we shall be gainers by our losses, because God has said so, who
cannot lie.

7. Must godly men dye? Then let godly men take heed of setting their hearts
inordinately upon these outward blessings and comforts, from which they must
part; the more the world is in our affections, the less pleasing and welcome
will the thoughts of death be unto us. Why are we loath to dye? Because we are
not prepared; and why are we not prepared? But because we have minded earth too
much, and heaven too little. Oh the world, the world! how has it got too much
hold of the hearts of too many good Christians; never was there more need to
preach upon that Text, Take heed and beware of covetousness; Or upon those
words of Paul, Set your affections upon things above, not on things below. What
hear we from the men of the world? For ought we see, these who pretend so much
to heaven are as greedy after the earth as others, and it were well if their
tongues were no flander in this particular; if the world be our treasure, why
make we a profession of Christ? And if Christ be our treasure, why do we
embrace the world? It is no wonder to see earnall men, who have not God for
their Father, who have no promise for a necessary supply of those outward
things, who have no spiritual stock to comfort their hearts, no heaven but
what may be found in the confluence of temporal enjoyments, to be violent in
their desires and endeavors after the world; but you that are Christians
indeed, and not in name only, have no cause to be over-carefull, or to cumber
your selves with too many things. Gods power and faithfulness are engaged that
you shall want no good thing, Psalm. 84.11. Mat. 6.33. Romans 8.32. Grant you have
wife and children to provide for, yet take heed of wounding your own souls and
consciences by excessive thoughtfulness for their bodies; the Apostles rule
must be obeyed, or else we shall be found guilty; but what is that you will
say? read 1 Cor. 7.29.30, 31. the best way we can take to provide for wife and
children is, to do what God commands, and not to practice what God forbids,
Psalm. 112.1, 2, 3. As I would not have you to neglect your particular callings,
so I would not have you to forget your general callings: think not only that
you are men, and stand in need of earthly supplies, but remember also you are
Christians, and are called to have your conversation in heaven, be you
thoughtfull to honor God, and God will be thoughtfull to maintain and provide
for you and yours. Walk therefore closely with God, keep up and maintain the
power of Godliness, improve all opportunities put into your hands to do, or to
get good, balke no duty commanded. Be more mindful to make thy friends and
children good than great, and to leave them in the arms of Christ, than to
leave them millions of gold and silver. An estate raised by sinful neglects or
commissions will do thy children more hurt than good, and it is more than an
even lay, that that will be spent loosely by them, which has been gotten
covetously by thee.

8. Must the godly dye? Then let those who are godly prepare for death; do
nothing now which may move God to conceal his love in that last hour. True it
is, no sooner shall your breath be stopped here, but your souls shall be carried
into heaven; yet you may so order the matter, that your departure may be
clouded. Ah! how sweet will it be for God to smile upon us when we come to dye,
to say unto us, Well done thou good and faithful servant, enter now into thy
Masters joy. Give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; keep
your evidences clear, blot them not by any loose or scandalous practice, take
heed of grieving that spirit which has at any time sealed you to the day of
redemption.

9. Must the godly dye? Let this be matter of support and consolation unto all
godly ones in the midst of those troubles and temptations which they meet
withal in the world; Art thou buffeted by satan's temptations, wearied with
that body of death which thou carriest about thee? Do thou groan under the
burden of a vile and cursed heart? Art thou followed with variety of
afflictions? Do thy enemies scorn and persecute thee? Be of good comfort,
death will come, death will come ere long, and set thee free from all thine
enemies. Job, speaking of the grave, tells us, There the wicked cease from
troubling, there the weary are at rest. Job 3.17. Thus we have done with the
first Doctrine; in the next place we shall look upon Elisha as a holy Prophet,
and from hence give you this observation,

Elisha a most gracious Prophet, furnished with a double portion of that spirit
which acted in his Master Elijah, a most useful man; the Chariot and the
horsemen of Israel must not live always, but give up the Ghost. For proof of
the Doctrine consult with these Scriptures though we have had many sad
experiences, and that of late to confirm it, Zach. 1.5. 1 Samuel 25 1. What is
become of all the Apostles who served God in their generation, were spiritual
Fathers to beget souls unto God, who both planted and builded up the Church of
God, who were choice and precious men, one was crucified, another headed,
another boiled in a Cauldron, and all died? Where is our Preston, our Tailor,
our Sibs, our Hill, our Whitaker, and many more? The grave has swallowed them
up. The reasons which we gave you to prove the precedent Doctrine might serve
for the confirmation of this, but we will add one or two more.

First, Because people will not make that use of their Ministry as they should;
God sends them to negotiate a peace between his glorious Majesty and peoples
precious souls: Now when they have made many overtures from their great Lord
and Master, and all are slighted, none will be accepted, God thinks it fit to
send for them home; when Princes see that Ambassadors cannot obtain with
Foreign States what they expected, they call them home again; there are not
more useful instruments in a State, or Church, than faithful and holy
Ministers, God sets them up as lights to enlighten the minds of men, as guides
to direct men, as watchmen to warn them, as saviors to deliver them out of
the hands of their enemies, Sin, Satan, and the World: Now, if no body will
make use of their light, follow their directions, regard their warnings, or be
willing to be resened out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, it is but
just with God to take them away: Who has believed our report, says the
Prophet, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

2. God will not suffer his Ministers always to live in the world, because the
world is not worthy of them, they are so far from improving their doctrine and
life, that they are rather filled with rage against them both; the Scripture
speaks much of the worlds unkind and perverse carriage toward the Messengers
of God; read these places, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Ier. 15.16. Chap. 20.7, 8. Micah
2.6. Mat. 23.37. by abusing mercies we justly forfeit them. The world is weary
of Gods Ministers, and Gods Ministers are weary of the world; now God will ease
the world of his Ministers, and when he does this, it is in wrath to the world;
and he will ease his Ministers of the world, but when he does this, it is in
mercy to his Ministers; God is very tender of his Messengers, takes the scorns
and affronts cast upon them as offered unto himself, he cannot endure to see
them wronged, and hence it is that he will remove them.

3. Should the Ministers of God live here always, none would be so miserable
as they are, did not their future hopes support them their present condition
would be very sad; though all that live godly in Christ suffer persecution, yet
none so persecuted as the godly Ministers, 1 Cor. 15.19 other Christians may
drink of bitter cups, but the dregs usually are poured on the Lords
Ambassadors, if others endure a storm, yet the fiercest part lights upon them.

4. Die they must, that they may receive that Crown of righteousness which God
has laid up for them in heaven; the Crown of life will not be set upon their
heads, till they have passed through the straights of death, Rev. 2.10. 1 Pet.
5.2, 3. Uses.

First, It should teach us that are Gods Ministers, to do what we can for God
whilst we have time and strength; How active was the Apostle Paul, when he
perceived a door was opened to promote the interest of the Lord Jesus? He knew
not how long that door might stand open, nor how soon he might be taken away,
and this made him to bestirre himself the more; when he perceived that his
departure drew nigh, he sends for the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.
and bestows his counsels and prayers upon them. The Apostle Peter also,
understanding that he had not long to live, was the more careful to stir up
the minds of the dispersed Jews to keep the faith that had been delivered unto
them, and to grow in grace and in the knowledge of Christ, and to take heed
that they were not carried away with the error of the wicked, and so fall from
their own steadfastness, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14. Chap. 3.17, 18. Take we therefore the
counsel of Solomon, Eccl. 9.10. Let our thoughts and our studies, our prayers,
and our counsels, our time and our strength be laid out for our Lord and
Master. Let that which a godly Minister wrote upon his Study door be deeply
engraven in our memories, and thought upon every day by us, Minister verbi es,
hoc age. Let us be more mindful of our work than of our wages, how to increase
Christ's Kingdom, than to advance our own secular interests, how to make our
people good, than how to render our selves great, how to enrich the souls of
others, rather than to be enriched by others; we have a good Master that will
pay us well, 1 Pet. 52, 3.4.
and though we should have little encouragement from the ungrateful world, yet
we shall want no encouragement from our gracious God. Oh that the same mind
were in us which was in Jesus Christ, who sought not his own honor, but the
honor of him that sent him. We know not how soon we may be laid aside, let us
work, the harder whilst we have time.

Secondly, Must Gods faithful Ministers die, yet do you take heed of having
any hand in their deaths; precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints, but the death of no Saints is more precious in Gods sight than the
death of his Ministers; Were you not afraid, says God to Aaron and Miriam, to
speak against my servant Moses? one who was so near unto God; much more cause
have we to fear to act against them; if God was so angry with those who did
strike them with their tongues, how angry will he be with those who strike
them with their hands? That counsel which Pilates Wife gave him, in
reference to the Lord Jesus, will not be amiss for any to take in reference to
his Ministers and servants, you may read it, Mat. 27.19. Have no physical hand
in their death, have no moral hand in their death, provoke not God by your
sins to deprive you of their labors, the lengthning out of their lives may be
the lengthning out of yours, and their deaths may make way for yours, you will
be the greatest losers, they undoubtedly will be gainers, Phil. 1.23, 24. They
are your watchmen, if they be removed, spoylers may quickly break in upon you;
they are your guides, if they die, you may soon step into bypath; they stand
between God and you that judgment might be kept off, that mercies might be
continued; if they fall to the earth, it will not be long ere wrath will fall
upon you. Be so kind and loving to your selves, as not to be unkind or cruel
toward them, lest you hasten their deaths whose prayers and tears preserve
your lives. Slight not that counsel which they deliver you from God; oppose
not those truths which they bring stamped with divine authority, turn not your
backs upon their Ministry, or that Ministry which they have received from the
Lord; set not up, nor abet, nor countenance any factions against them; let
there be no divisions, no separations, which have not Gods allowance and
approbation; let not your lives be loose and scandalous, give them not cause to
say, we have labored in vain, we have spent our strength in vain, these
things will pierce the hearts of gracious Ministers, and bring them with sorrow
to their graves, Phil. 3.18. Jer 9.1. as your close walking will be their joy,
so your carnal walking will be their grief; what faithful servant will not
mourn to see his Masters errant slighted and contemned? As it is a dreadful
thing for Ministers to be guilty of the blood of their peoples souls by any
cursed neglect, so it is a dreadful thing for people to be guilty of the blood
of their Ministers by their ungodly and unwarrantable practices.

Thirdly, Must godly Ministers dye? make use then of them whilst you have
them; let a physician come to your house, but for an hour or two, and you will
ask him all that you can think of which may be conducible to your bodily
health; Do the Prophets live for ever? Here they have no abiding place, they
are every day upon removing, suffer them not to go to heaven without receiving
some spiritual good from them, get some benefit by that precious liquor which
is in them, before the earthen vessels that carry it be broken in pieces; they
are given you to make you better, all their gifts, all their graces, all their
abilities are yours, 1 Cor. 3.23. when Elisha understood that his master Elijah
would ere long be taken from his head, he would not leave him one moment, but
was careful to improve him to the utmost; how gladly would we be instruments
of your conversion, helpers of your faith, furtherers of your joy, every way
promoters of your spiritual welfare? How willingly would we spend our selves,
and be spent for you? Oh that you were but as desirous to receive good from us,
as we are desirous to do good to you; God knows how earnest we are that Christ
may be formed in you before we go hence and be no more seen; take the counsel
which our Savior Christ gave his hearers, Ioh. 12.35. improve Gods Ministers
in public, be constant and diligent hearers of them, receive the Law at their
mouths; let not their counsels be as water spilt upon the ground which cannot
be gathered up; let them not have cause to complain as Simon Peter did, Luke
5.4. that they have cast the net Sabbath after Sabbath but have caught nothing:
Improve them in private, confer often with them, how glad would we be of your
company, we are willing to give you our counsel without the expectation of a
fee, improve their experiences; our temptations, our consolations, 2 Cor. 1.4.
our buffetings, our trials, in a word, all our experiences are for your
advantage: we are exercised with doubts, fears, desertions, assaults, that we
may be the better able to speak a word in season unto you: God has lent you a
pious and a painful Minister for 27 years, he has preached the word amongst
you, in season and out of season; oh turn your eyes inward, and examine your
selves how you have improved him, for God will examine you one day; if any of
you after so much plowing, dressing, dunging, still remain barren, let me tell
you you are near unto cursing; if those multiplied shoures of divine truths,
which have fallen amongst you, have not bettered you, Mat. 10.14, 15.
your condemnation at that great day will be greater than the condemnation of
Sodom and Gomorrah.

Fourthly, Must useful and godly Ministers die? Yet let us keep them as long
as we can; we will do what we can to preserve the lives of those who are
instruments of much good unto us, we have more cause to seek the safety and
continuance of our soule-friends than of the friends of our bodies; spiritual
welfare is better than corporal, and a thriving soul than a prosperous
estate; God has lessened the number of able and gracious Ministers very much
of late; many burning and shining Lights have been extinguished: call we upon
God to stay his hand, lest we be overspread with darkness, let them not dye
for want of our prayers and tears to keep them alive. Peter was nigh unto
death, the Church prays for him, and God gave her Peter's life as an answer to
her prayers, Act. 12.12, 13. Take heed also of slighting, scorning, and abusing
of the Ministers of God, nothing provokes God more to deprive us of his
blessings, than our wretched undervaluing and abusing of them, Mat. 23.37.
Jesuiticall designs are on foot, to lay aside and root out Gods faithful
Messengers; never was there greater cause of fear, that what has often been
attempted shall now be put into execution; those revilings and contempts which
have been, and still are cast upon the Ministry with too much countenance from
some, and without any check from others, may incense God to put out those
lights that are as yet shining, and to give way to the cursed enterprises and
machinations of men of corrupt minds and malicious and profane hearts. Again,
would we have God to continue our Teachers unto us? would we see their faces
still? and not have them driven into corners? let us be fruitful under their
Ministry, answer the pains and cost they are at with us; God will not grudge
any kindness to a soulethriving people, the barrenness of hearers will cause
a dearth and scarcity of Preachers, Isa. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. You will not suffer
your servants to spend their time always in ploughing, dressing, and sowing
that ground, which notwithstanding all your labor brings forth nothing but
briars and thorns; God will call away his Ministers from those places where
they have bestowed much pains, but cannot prevail with their people to be a
jot better. Again, would you see the faces of your Teachers still? Bless God
for them; unthankfulness deprives us of many choice favors; we live in sad
times, Gods Messengers are looked upon as the burdens of the Nation, but had the
Nation no worse burdens, they would have no cause to groan or complain; some
there are who once thought themselves happy in the enjoyment of a faithful
Pastor, who now would think themselves happy in the want and loss of him; God
may let such men have their supposed happiness, take away such a Minister from
them, but it will prove a real misery; who would not exclaim against that
child who should be weary of a most gracious and loving Father? and yet how
many, who look upon themselves as converted, who are weary of their spiritual
Fathers, are so far from blessing God for them, that they would rather bless
God should they be rid of them? Well, God may ease you of them soon enough,
though you care not for their company, he does, though you slight them, yet God
highly esteems of them: Are there not those who are ready to say of the
Ministers of Christ as they did, Psalm. 83.4. of the Jews, Let us cut them off
from the Nation, that the name of Ministers may be had no more in remembrance;
God may grant such men what they would have, not in mercy, but in wrath, as he
gave the Israelites quails, and a King, Psalm. 78.31. Hos. 13 11. Would we
enjoy Gods Messengers amongst us: let us be thankful for them, not fretfull
against them; let us esteem them very highly in love, and not prosecute and
persecute them with extreme malice and hatred.

Fifthly, Must godly and painful Ministers die? Then let us prepare for their
death; make sure of that Prophet who cannot die but lives for ever, the Lord
Jesus Christ; should all the Ministers in a Country be taken away from thee, or
you shut up in some prison from them, Christ can abundantly supply their
absence and loss. John told the people, he baptized them with water, but
Christ would baptize them with the Holy Ghost; Alas we can but speak to your
ears, it is Christ who must speak to your hearts: It were a dreadful sin for
any man to turn his back upon the Ministry of the word when he has liberty to
attend upon it; but if God shall be pleased to remove his Candlestick, and to
take away his Ministers, we may hope (Christ being ours) that he will supply
the absence of his servants. Christ does not make use of Ministers out of an
absolute necessity, as if he could not teach or comfort without them, but out
of choice. Again, get the spirit of the Lord Jesus: Other lights may and must
be put out, but this will be lasting and permanent, when other guides are gone,
this will continue and abide with us, Joh. 14.16, 17, 18. Chap. 16.7, 13. he
who has the fountain of all light and comfort may be the better able to want
the streams; thus we have done with the first part of the Text, Elisha's
sickness and death, we now come to the second part, concerning Joash his
visiting of him, and lamenting over him. Here we have a King visiting a
Prophet; a great King, a mean Prophet; a wicked King, a religious Prophet; and
we have the Holy Ghost justifying and commending this action; from whence we
may observe:

Psalm. 41. that God will make the bed of a gracious and merciful man: Now if
the glorious God thinks it not too much to be a good man's bed-maker, the
highest of men should not think it too much to visit a good man. Reasons.

First, it is a duty which Christ requires to be performed to all his members,
and therefore ought not to be neglected toward his Messengers; Is any man too
great to do what God commands? Though there is no reason why Gods will should
stoop to ours: yet there is all reason why our wills should stoop to Gods; he
is our Creator, we his Creatures; he our Lord, we his Servants; he our King, we
his Subjects. Now that visiting the sick is a duty enjoined by Christ, and
incumbent upon us, is clear from that Text, Mat. 25.42. Men usually find fault
where there is none, but there is ever a fault where Christ finds one.

Secondly, The faithful Messengers of Christ are no despicable persons, low
they are indeed in the opinions of carnal men, but the holy God has high
thoughts of them; they are his Ambassadors, his Stewards, his Treasurers, his
Friends, yea, he calls them co-workers with himself; to them has Christ
committed the power of the keys; they are called guides, rulers, the lights of
the world, saviors? Why did Joash visit Elisha? He looked upon him as one who
had been an instrument once and again to save them out of the hands of the
Syrians; Ministers are Instruments appointed by God to save, not the bodies
only, but the souls of people out of the hands, not of flesh and blood, but of
principalities, and powers, and spiritual wickednesses.

Thirdly, Much advantage may be gotten by visiting Gods faithful Ministers in
the time of their sickness; as they have taught us by their Doctrine and
example to do what God commands, so they may teach us to bear what God
inflicts, as to live well, so to dye well: We may get more from them when they
are upon their deathbeds, than we could get from them when they were in the
Pulpit; as the words of dying men come from the heart, so they go to the heart;
we may remember their dying speeches, though we have been ready to forget what
formerly has been spoken; we may be instructed by their counsels, warmed by
their prayers, quickened by their exhortations, freed from the fears of death
by seeing their boldness, and courage, and learn faith, and patience from
their practice. King Joash lost nothing by visiting the Prophet Elisha, as you
may read ver. 15, 16. and Elisha lost nothing by attending upon Elijahs
removal from earth to heaven, as you may read 2 Kin. 2.10. A Prince may be a
great gainer by vifiting of a Prophet.

Fourthly, It is a very great and soule-ruining sin for any man, let him be
never so great, in case he has liberty and opportunity not to visit the
members of Christ, and therefore they cannot wash themselves from guilt who
neglect (wanting neither time, nor strength, nor health) to visit his
Ministers; What think we, was Christ in jest or in earnest when he spoke those
words, Mat. 25.41, 42, 43.

Fifthly, Christ takes what is done unto his Messengers as done unto himself,
He that receives you (says our Savior) receives me; were it possible for
the Lord Jesus to be sick, we would profess our willingness to visit him in
such an afflicted condition, and would exclaim against them as most notorious
wretches, and unworthy to live, who should not take a step or two to wait upon
Christ. Now read Mat. 25.40. was no man too great to attend upon Christ
personal in the day of his distress, neither is any too great to visit Christ
mystical.

Sixthly, We may do much good to the messengers of Christ by visiting of them
in their distress; as we may receive good from them, so they may receive good
from us. Onesimus was no small comfort and support to Paul, when he was in
trouble. Junius reaped much spiritual advantage from the discourse of a plain
country man; thus inferior members of the body may be serviceable to the
superior. Uses.

First, This may reprove those, who as they never cared for any converse with
godly Ministers in their health, but always kept at a distance from them, so
they care not for coming near them in their sickness, not for fear of any
bodily infection, but for want of sincere and spiritual affection; let such
men know, they who love not the servants of Christ are without love to Christ
himself, and Christ will one day flight those who have slighted him in his
servants. It is to be feared, that they never got any good by the Ministers of
God who are disrespectfull unto them; now a sad doom hangs over the heads of
all barren Christians, who have enjoyed the choice mercy of a painful and
faithful Ministry; they are near unto cursing, and may expect to hear that
sentence, Cut them down, why cumber they the ground?

Secondly, This may reprove those, who though they are not altogether so
profane as to neglect the giving of a visit to Gods messengers lying upon their
sick-beds, yet come to see them, not out of obedience to Gods command, nor out
of love to their persons or office, nor out of any affection they bear to
their doctrine, nor out of any desire they have to comfort them, or to receive
counsel or comfort from them, but merely out of custom, or in complement, or
to stop the mouths of some who would cry shame upon those who should neglect so
necessary, so charitable an Office.

Thirdly, Let us be humbled for the neglect of this duty; should God be
extreme to mark our failings in this one particular, what would become of us?
Jobs friends took a long and a tedious journey to see him when they heard how
the hand of God was upon him, but how often are we backward to take a journey
of two or three hours riding, nay, to step a bows-shoot out of doors to visit
an afflicted member of Christ, to communicate with him in his sorrows, to
comfort him in his griefs, to refresh and revive him with our presence, and
spiritual and pertinent discourse? How should we shame our selves for this our
want of love to the command of Christ to the members of Christ, yea, to Christ
himself? Well, let us cry peccavi, beg our pardon, and look upon it as a
matter of duty, to visit those with our personal presence, whom Christ will
vouchsafe to visit with his gracious presence. The Apostle James excludes all
those from being truly religious, who make no conscience of the performance of
this work of love, Jam. 1.27. Are there any of Gods friends and our
acquaintance, any of Gods Messengers and our Pastors, any of Christ's Members
and our Brethren, cast upon the bed of sickness? Let us imitate Christ, who
when he heard Lazarus was sick, went down to see him. Let not this example of
Joash rise up in judgment against us and condemn us; would we not have others
to express such a kindness to us? Let us not deny that to others which we
expect from others, Mat. 7.12. But let us not give complementall visits only,
the sin of the times we live in; but so discharge what God calls for in this
business, that God may have Glory, the person visited comfort, and we our
selves benefit and advantage.

First, Visit, whether Pastor, or Neighbor, out of obedience to Gods command;
let Gods command, not base, and by respects, carry thee on to this work; no
action of ours, though enjoined by God, will be accepted of, unless it be done
out of obedience to that God who enjoynes it, Zach. 7.5, 6, 7.

Secondly, Do this that Christ calls for out of love to Christ, then will Christ
take it as done unto himself.

Thirdly, Do this duty with an honest heart, and sincerely; the Prophet David
tells us of some that came to see him in his sickness, but not out of any
cordial affection they did bear unto him, but for base ends, to see whether
there were any hopes that he would dye, or to gather something or other from
him that might prejudice him in his credit and esteem, and render him odious.

Fourthly, Since God must make every office performed unto others comfortable
unto them, and profitable unto us, let us, upon such occasions, and at such
times, lift up a secret prayer unto God, that such a meeting or visitation
might be blessed with the fruits of mutual joy, quickening, and edification.
Having dispatched this Doctrine, we now come to the effects that Jo^sh his
visiting of our Prophet did produce, and they are two: First, He wept over his
face. Secondly, He gave him honorable titles. 1. He cass him his Father. 2. He
styles him the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof; from his weeping
over the Prophet now ready to expire, we may observe,



First, The Church in general, the whole company of believers, who know and
hear of it, have cause to mourn; Ministers are given to the Church for her
gain, and cannot be taken away without her loss, Ephesians. 4.12. They are not only
members of her body, but such members which are very useful and necessary;
they are called the lights, guides, watchmen of the Church; yea, they are
called her rulers; let a man lose any one member it would trouble him, but the
more useful any member is, the greater will be his trouble.

Secondly, The wicked have cause to mourn when God takes away his faithful
Ministers; Joash was of this mind, otherwise he would not have done what he
did; good reason there is why graceless men should lay to heart the death of
gracious Ministers.

1. God is never more angry with wicked men, than when he removes his
Messengers from them; true, bad men are never more merry than when good
Ministers are laid in the dust, but they have more cause to sigh than to sing,
to cry than to laugh. If to be let alone in sin without check or reproof be a
judgment, then certainly it is a judgment to wicked men when godly Ministers
are taken away, who by their reproves and counsels did what they could to keep
them from sin.

2. They have lost one who did both earnestly desire, and constantly endeavor
their spiritual and eternal good, and therefore they have cause to mourn; if
the loss of a bodily friend be matter of grief, what matter of grief is the
loss of a soul friend?

3. They have lost one that stood in the gap to keep off judgments from
breaking in upon them: had it not been for the prayers and tears of their
faithful Pastor, divine vengeance might have ceased upon them long before now;
how many times has God been ready to draw his sword to cut them off, to lay
his axe to the root of them, and to chop them down, when their watchful and
compassionate overseer has interceded for them, and held Gods hands from
destroying them. Jeremies prayers for the Jews did prevail with God for a
season to spare them, and when God was fully determined to ruin them, he bids
Jeremy not to pray for them, Chap. 14.11. Psalm. 106.23. Ezekiel. 22.30, 31. Luke
13.5, 6, 7.

Thirdly, The godly where such a Minister did live have cause to mourn when he
is taken away; for,

1. As God is angry with the wicked, so he is angry with his own people when he
deprives them of their Pastor; it is promised as a singular testimony of Gods
love to his children, to let them have the liberty of seeing the faces, and
enjoying the labors of their Teachers, Isa. 30.20.

2. They have lost one who was watchful over them, careful to prevent their
falling into sin, and ready to raise them up with all possible speed when
fallen.

3. Some of them have lost a spiritual father, and ought not the child to
lament the loss of his father? Besides, all of them have lost a diligent
instructor.

4. They have lost one who through Gods blessing has kept them out of many a
snare, carried on the work of grace in their hearts, awakened their drouzy
souls, quickened their dead hearts, strengthened their feeble hands and knees,
revived their almost expiring graces, reduced them when they have been
wandering, encouraged them in the ways of God when they met with strong
opposition, comforted them when they have been sad, answered their doubts,
scattered their fears, and filled them with joy and peace through believing,
Ephesians. 4.12.

5. They have lost one who was acquainted with their condition, knew in some
measure the state of their souls, and so was the better able to speak
seasonably to them, and to their necessities. A stranger may preach wholesome
truths to a people, but he knows not so well to apply his doctrine to them as
their own Pastor. Another may give a child meat to eat, but he cannot tell
what that food is which is most convenient for it so well as the mother; that
Physician who has been longest acquainted with our bodies knows what Physic
is most proper for us; thus you see all sorts have cause to lament the fall of
a faithful Minister; the reasons are these:

First, God commands us to mourn when he afflicts us with the loss of godly
and painful Ministers; when God was pleased to take away Nadab and Abihu,
none of the best Priests, and such who died in their sin, yet even then did God
call upon the people to bewail the burning which he had made, Lev. 10.8* Must
the death of wicked ones be lamented? then certainly we must lament the death
of the righteous. Must not Nadab and Abihu go to their graves without tears?
What tears should we pour out when a Samuel, and Elisha, or a Stephen go to
their graves?

Secondly, It has been the practice of the godly bitterly to bewail the loss
of pious and faithful Ministers; what is written in this particular is written
for our learning; we must be followers of those who are good, so far as they
are followers of that which is good, 1 Samuel 25.1. Micah 7.1. Acts 20.37, 38. it
went to their very hearts to think that they should lose one who had been such
a notable instrument to promote Gods glory and his Churches good. Paulinus
writing of the life of Ambrose, reports thus much of him, Quod flebat
amarissime quotiescunque forte annunciatum illi fuerat de cujuscunque sancti
obitu Sacerdotis; that he wept most bitterly whenever any one told him of the
death of any godly Minister. It is also reported of Philo, that when he heard
where he came of the death of any holy, man he would weep very bitterly,
because the Town and the Church had no small prejudice by such a loss.

Thirdly, Such as have had no grace have lamented the death of the Prophets and
Messengers of God; we have Joash for an example, who will rise up in judgment
against, and condemn those who can let godly Ministers go to their graves
without sighs in their hearts, or tears in their eyes; when the old Prophet,
who seduced the Prophet sent to Jeroboam, saw that he was slain by the Lion,
he brought his carcass into the City, laid it in his own grave, and they
mourned over him with the Text, saying, Alas my brother, 1 Kings 13.30.

Fourthly, God complains of those who neglected to lay to heart the death of
the righteous, Isa. 57.1. God never finds fault where there is none, were it
not a duty to lament the loss of Gods servants none should have met with a
check for the neglect of it.

Fifthly, Peoples sins are the cause of Gods taking away their faithful
Pastors; the unthankfulness and unfruitfulnesse of hears provoke God to
remove their preachers, and ought we not to lay to heart those sins which
deprive us of very choice mercies?

Sixthly, The death of Gods faithful Ministers is the forerunner of some
approaching judgment: what but darkness can be expected when the Sun is set?
Have we not cause to fear an inundation of waters when the banks that kept
them from overflowing are cut down? If the pillars of a house be taken away,
can the house stand? If the watchmen be killed, the City is in danger to be
surprised, Isa. 57.1. History tells us, that so soon as Saint Austin was dead
and gone, the Goths and Vandals broke into Hippo, the City where he lived, and
spoiled it. The Smakaldicke war began in Germany not long after Luther was laid
in the grave. Spinola took Heilderberg not long after God had taken away that
precious servant of his Pareus. You see then there is no small cause of
mourning, when God takes away his faithful Messengers and Ministers. Uses.

First, This serves to reprove those who are not affected with the loss of
Gods faithful Ministers, those righteous men perish, and how few lay it to
heart? They go to their long home, but where are the mourners about the
streets? God has been pleased of late to put out many shining and burning
lights, as Dr Hill, Mr Whitaker, Mr Gataker, Doctor Bolton, and many others,
men famous in their generations, useful and precious, men of whom the world
was not worthy; we hear of the fall of those Cedars, but tremble not, of the
removal of those pillars, but are not afraid; we regard the loss of those
blessed instruments no more than the loss of a horse or hog; no more say I?
nay, not so much; Gadaren-like, we can better part with the Messengers of
Christ than with our swine, spend more sighs and complaints upon the deaths of
brute creatures, than upon the deaths of Gods Ambassadors, and our
instructors. Oh the wonderful stupidity and hardness of heart that are too
common in all places; God was very angry with the Jews because they regarded
not the operation of his hands, Isa. 5.12. Insensibility under present
judgments makes way for future; How can we think God should betrust us any
more with his Messengers and Ministers, when we can part with them without any
considerable grief and sorrow? Too many care not what become either of State,
or Church, or their own precious souls, so they may enjoy their estates, their
liberties, their carnal profits and pleasures; let God take away one pious
Minister after another, or godly man after another, they are ready to say as
the Pharisees to Judas, What is that to us? What is this to you? Do you think
it is nothing to you that godly Ministers are taken away? Is it nothing to you
that God is angry? Is it nothing to you that you lie naked to the indignation
of the Almighty? Is it nothing to you that your souls are in danger to
miscarry? Is it nothing to you that you are exposed to temptations, snares, and
sin, and that you have lost one that was wont to watch over you, pity and pray
for you? Is it nothing to you that the wall or fence is taken away that kept
the little Foxes and Wolves from breaking in upon you to devour your precious
fowls? Is it nothing to you that you have lost one that stood in the gap to
keep off Gods wrath and vengeance from falling upon you that live in these
times wherein knowledge abounds? read you the Scriptures; have you any
acquaintance with the mind and will of God? And is it nothing to you Elishas,
Stevens, Samuels, Paul's are taken away? You will find it something one day.

Secondly, It serves to reproove those who are so far from laying to heart the
death of Gods faithful Ministers, that they rather are glad of it, and rejoice
in it, some secretly, some openly; the Prophet David speaks of some who came
to visit him in his sickness, and seemed to be troubled at it in outward
appearance, but were glad at the very heart that there was some likelihood of
his ^^ath; some there are who would not have the world think them so profane
as to rejoice at the fall of precious and godly Ministers, who are secretly
glad of it, and say with their hearts, though not with their tongues, as they
did, Aha, Aha, so would we have it; but shall not God find such out? Is not he
who searches the heart, and tries the reins privy to this their diabolical
joy? How can, how dare such call God father, or think themselves Gods
children, who are glad to behold the funerals of their brethren? Natural
brethren may rejoice at the death one of another, hoping to reap some
disadvantage thereby: But certainly spiritual brethren, who cannot be rent one
from another without disadvantage to the survivers, will be otherwise affected;
they are false brethren, as the Apostle speaks, and cursed hypocrites, who
make the death of any godly Minister the matter of their rejoicing. Again,
others there are who proclaim their sin as Sodom, and stick not to profess
that they are glad at the very heart that such and such godly Ministers are
taken away, like those spoken of, Rev. 10.10. who made merry, and sent gifts
one to another when the two witnesses were slain. Now they think they may
enjoy their sins more freely, and shall not meet with such sharp reproves for
them, that their consciences will not trouble them so much as they were wont to
do; but can any solid ground of joy be drawn from hence? It is all one as if a
man should rejoice that such a Physician is dead, who whilst he lived did what
he could to keep him from feeding upon such meats as would hasten death. It is
as if a man should rejoice that he is taken away who did what he could to
preserve him from destroying himself. I tell thee whoever thou art who
please thy self with the loss of Gods faithful Ministers thou have no
cause to rejoice at this; their deaths will be so far from bettering thy
condition, that thy condition is likely to be worse for their deaths. Satan
will now take fuller possession of thee, thy sins will now have more power over
thee, thy iniquities will the sooner be ripe, and thou will the sooner be cut
down; and is this any matter of joy? Gods hands were ever and anon ready to
destroy thee whilst they lived, their prayers and tears kept his sword from
being sheathed in thee: and do thou think thou art ever awhit the safer from
danger and ruin? Is the house and those who are in it ever a jot the safer
because the pillars that kept it up are removed? Thy conscience when thou
satest under a godly Ministry did ever and anon check thee, grant it now proves
speechless and says nothing; can there be a more dreadful judgment than a
silent and dumb conscience? Before there was some struggling in thee against
temptations to sin, and now thou can commit sin without any reluctance, with
all greediness, this is matter of lamentation, not of joy: Are Gods Ministers
gone? They are gone to give an account how thou have carried thy self toward
God and them, and God upon their complaint may hasten the execution of his
judgments upon thee and thine; thou have more cause to tremble at their deaths
than to hug thy self, to sigh than to sing. Do not dream that God has taken
them away to show thee any kindness, that they are removed out of favor to
thee, who have been a bitter enemy, as to them, so unto God. No, no, it is in
wrath, not in mercy toward thee that God has sent for them home; their lives
were not more burdensome unto thee, than their deaths will prove prejudicial
and banefull; now will the devil triumph more over thee, and carry thee
captive at his will and pleasure.

Thirdly, Let us mourn when God takes away any of his faithful Messengers
from us; Let not God complain of us as he did of those, Isa. 57.1. Let not
Joash rise up in judgment against us and condemn us; make we a difference
between an Elisha and a Jehojachin, Jer. 22 18. Do we love the Lord? let us
mourn that one who was zealous for his glory is gone from amongst us; do we
love Christ? let us mourn that one of the friends of the Bridegroom is taken
away; do we love the Church? let us mourn that she is deprived of one of her
choice members; do we love the State? let us mourn that one of her pillars are
removed; do we love the truth? let us mourn that one who was valiant for it is
departed; do we love our souls? let us mourn that one who was careful for
them, watchful over them, merciful to them, is gone; gone, gone, never to be
seen in this place, nor in any of your houses or families again; do we love
our neighbors and brethren? let us mourn that they as well as we have lost at
one clap a faithful friend, a faithful counselor, a faithful instructor, a
faithful reprover, a faithful comforter, in a word, a faithful Preacher; Let
every one of us mourn together, and yet mourn apart; let the wife mourn that
she has lost so pious a yoke fellow; let his children mourn that they have
lost so careful a father; let the servants mourn that they have lost so
religious a master; let the people mourn that they have lost so painful a
Pastor; and let us Ministers mourn that we have lost such a fellow laborer,
one that did join with us, and help us to oppose those grand enemies, Sin,
Satan, and the World. True it is, none have cause to mourn, in reference to
his present condition, but rather to rejoice; he has fought a good fight,
finished his course, and kept the faith, and now is wearing that crown of
righteousness which has been prepared for him. Could he speak unto us, he
would say as Christ to the women who be wailed and lamented him, Luke 23.28.
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves. Let us search our hearts and
lives, and find out the causes of this our loss, why God has given us such a
cup of gall and wormwood for to drink: And is there not a cause? Yes
certainly. Our unthankfulness, our unfruitfulnesse, our pride, our
worldliness, our deadness, our coldness, our lukewarmness, our hypocrisy, our
contempt and undervaluing of such a blessing have provoked God to deprive us of
him. The loss of our first love has made God to scourge us with this loss, a
loss with a witness, a loss to many at once, a loss to the State, a loss to the
Church, a loss to the Country, a loss to his Parish, a loss to his Neighbors,
a loss to his Yokefellow, a loss to his Children, a loss to his Brethren, we
have lost we know not what; this loss may be more felt hereafter than it is for
the present. I wish you may never have cause to say, where is the spirit of
Elijah? Where is he now whose zeal was wont to inflame our hearts, whose
forwardness for God was wont to put us forward, whose tears were wont to set
us on mourning, whose spiritual fervor was wont to heat and warm us, whose
elevated heart in the ways of God has helped to lift up our hearts in Gods
ways, the prevalency of whose prayers we were wont to feel in the increasing
and quickening of our graces, whose powerful Sermons were wont to leave most
sweet and refreshing influences upon our souls? Where is he? Where is he? God
grant that the spirit of Elijah may be doubled upon his successor, that you
may not pine and languish away in such sad complaints. I make no question, were
it in the power of prayers and tears, of fasting and mourning to fetch him
back again, you would not be long without him. But now it is too late;
thankfulness, fruitfulness, and a close walking with God might have kept him
still amongst you, who cannot be recalled by any tears or supplications. Thus
having finished the first thing that Joash did after he came to see Elisha, we
come now to speak of the second effect or fruit of his visitation, expressed
in the honorable titles which he gave unto him; First, he calls him his Father;
from whence we may observe:

That honor and respect ought to be showed from all sorts of men to the
faithful Messengers and Ministers of God. Joash did no more than his duty; the
spirit of God would not have left it upon record for his commendation had it
not been a thing that God liked and approved. All Sexes, whether men or women,
all relations, whether Prince or people, husband or wife, or all degrees,
whether high or low, rich or poor, all conditions, whether good or bad,
righteous, or unrighteous, learned or unlearned, are bound to honor and
respect the Messengers and Ministers of Christ; there is an inward honor
belongs unto them, we are highly to esteem of them, to love them; there is an
outward honor belongs to them, we are to honor them in our words, by speaking
well of them, and respectfully to them, we are to honor them in our gestures
and carriages toward them; the Babylonians were charged with this fault, that
they respected not the persons of the Priests, Lam. 4.16. Mat. 13.57. It seems
then nothing was more common and ordinary than to show respect and honor to
the Prophets of God, 1 These 5.11. 1 Timothy 5.17. Reasons.

First, God honors them, and therefore men should not neglect to honor them;
it is ground enough for us to love a man because God loves him, and to respect
men because God respects them; Christ would have us to be merciful that we
might be like unto our heavenly Father who is merciful, Mat. 5. So we must
honor those whom God honors, that we might express our conformity unto God;
What shall be done unto the man whom the King will honor? says Ahasuerus to
Haman, Est. 6.6. Haman thought no honor too great for, and none too great to
honor such a man; what shall then be done unto the men whom the King of Kings
will honor? Surely, mortal men should not think much to honor those whom
the immortal God thinks not much to honor. Now there is no faithful
Minister whom God does not, has not, will not highly honor, 1 Samuel 2.30. they
honor God, and God will honor them.

Secondly, Their Office is an honorable office, their calling an honorable
calling, Heb. 5.4. to be a Steward to another man is a place of honor; Yearly
Stewards, if I mistake not, are Esquires by their places, as Knights eldest
Sons are by their birth. To be Lord High Steward to a Prince is a place of
greater honor: Now all Gods Ministers are Stewards to that God who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Cor. 4.1. Again, the Office of an Ambassador, who
represents the person of the King, is a place of great honor: Ministers are
Gods Ambassadors, they negotiate for God, and they are employed to treat about
a peace between God and man, about a marriage between Christ and the souls of
people, 2 Cor. 5.20. Again, they are said to be co-workers, and fellow
laborers with God himself in the salvation of sinners, 1 Cor. 3 9.

Thirdly, Good men have been ready and careful to honor the Messengers and
Ministers of God; such who have slighted them before their Conversion have much
respect and reverence unto them after conversion. Those, who mocked at Peter and
the Apostles when they were in the state of nature, did very much honor them
after they were wrought upon by Peter's Sermon, Acts 2.37. Cornelius a good man
was ready to go beyond his bounds in showing honor to Peter, he was ready to
give him too much respect rather than too little. Acts. 10.25. How much favor
and kindness did the Shunamite and her husband manifest to the Prophet Elisha?
2 King. 4.8. the Galatians esteemed Paul as an Angel of God, and received him
as Christ Jesus, Gal. 4.14.

Fourthly, Wicked men have been ready to reverence and to respect the faithful
Messengers and Ministers of God; How highly did Nebuchadnezzar honor the
Prophet Daniel? Chap. 2.46, 47. Darius also did not a little respect and prize
him. Naaman the Syrian showed much reverence to the Prophet Elisha; Herod
reverenced John Baptist, Mar. 6.20. and the Barbarians bestowed upon Paul and
his company many honors; we see then that both by the confession of God and
man there is an honor due from all sorts of people to Gods faithful
Messengers and Ministers. Uses.

First, It serves to reprove those who make it their work and trade to revile
and reproach the faithful Messengers and Ministers of God, look upon them
with scorn and contempt, count them as the offscouring of all things, and
rakehell it self for base terms and names to cast upon them; persons truly
religious in former times were known by their love to, and esteem of godly and
conscientious Ministers: but now scorn and contempt of godly and conscientious
Ministers is the practice of those who would be thought, and style themselves
to be the Saints and religious ones; what the Apostle spoke concerning that
wisdom which was attended with envy, and strife, that it was earthly,
sensual, and devilish, so we may say of that Religion which puts men upon
railing against, and reproving the Messengers and servants of the Lord, that it
is earthly, sensual, and devilish; a Religion of the devils setting up, and
not of Gods appointing. Michael disputing with the devil about the body of
Moses, dared not to bring a railing accusation against him; you know men full
of fierceness and bitterness against dignities, whether in State or Church,
whatever forms they may have are called clouds without water, raging waves of
the sea, foaming out their own shame, wandering stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever. Never were Gods Ambassadors more slighted and
despised than in these days, but let such despisers know, that God takes the
scorns and contempts cast upon them as cast upon himself; and though he is
patient and long-suffering, yet will find a time to be avenged of all such
Rabshekahs, Luke 10.16. No sin hastens the execution of Gods judgments upon a
State sooner than this sin, 2 Cron. 36.16. we read of some who never prospered
after they set themselves to oppose Gods Messengers and Ministers, 2 Chronicles.
16.12. Chap. 24.25. Chap. 25.16. Chap. 26.18.

Secondly, Is there an honor due from all sorts of people to Gods faithful
Messengers and Ministers? let us not rob Gods Messengers and Ministers of that
honor which is their due; they are worthy of double honor says the Apostle,
the honor of reverence, and the honor of maintenance, let us not be so
unworthy as to deny it them; in honoring of them we honor God, as in
despising of them we despise God; though Israel play the harlot, yet let not
Judah offend; though the vile ones of the world slight and scorn faithful
Preachers and Pastors, yet let not those who profess the Gospel tread in
their steps, but walk according to what the Gospel injoynes in this
particular, 1 These. 5.11. by slighting of us you hurt your selves more than you
wrong us; our salvation is furthered, not hindered by your scorns, these light
afflictions work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, but
your salvation is much hindered by slighting and contemning of us, that
doctrine and message will be the less regarded by you which we bring from our
Lord and Master to you: call we upon you to render us that honor which is our
due, and your duty in reference to our selves, only or for our own comfort and
encouragement? No certainly, but for your benefit and advantage also; you will
get but little good by your Ministers labors, so long as you have low and
despicable conceits of their persons; take heed therefore of this sin of the
times, slight not those whom God commands you to honor, hate not those whom
God would have you love. Be not worse than Joash. If any shall say, Joash had
good reason to observe and honor Elisha, for he was a Prophet; were our
Ministers Prophets and able to do as Elisha did, we were to blame should we not
express all warrantable reverence unto them: As for those who make this
objection, let them hear what our Savior spoke, Mat. 11.11.

Fourthly, Let me speak a word or two to you my brethren and my self; Let us
do nothing that may deprive us of that honor which belongs unto us; so let us
walk, so humbly, so inoffensively, so holily, so exemplarily in every good
word and work, that we may keep up the tottering honor both of our Office and
Persons; Let us make it our business to honor God, by laying out our selves
to increase his Kingdom by a faithful performance of those duties which God
calls for at our hands in our places, by being patterns of faith and patience,
meekness and self denial, contempt of the world, and heavenly mindedness,
and God will honor us, good men will honor us, yea God can make our worst
enemies to honor us. We now come to the last doctrine which may be gathered
from the second title of honor which this King gave unto Elisha, he calls him
the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof; he acknowledged that all
Israel were as much (if not more) beholden to the Prophet for their defense and
safety as to their Chariots and horsemen; from hence we may observe thus much:

Joash said concerning Elisha, the same did Elisha speak concerning Elijah, so
that we have not this testimony only from the mouth or a wicked Prince, but
also from the mouth of a holy Prophet. 2 Kings 2.12. 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 17. Chap.
13.9, 10. Chap. 31.21. Reasons.

First, Because they make it their work to suppress and beat down sin which
makes a nation naked and weak, and exposes it to all manner of judgments.
God is the defense of every nation, whilst he is with a people, they need not
fear, but sin will drive God away, it will deprive a people of their defense,
Numb. 14.9. Now Ministers by preaching against, and opposing of sin take a
course to keep God present still amongst a people.

Secondly. The prayers of Gods faithful Ministers are very prevalent with God,
both for the continuance of mercies, and the keeping off of judgments. Moses
his prayer did as much good as Joshuahs sword when the people of Israel
encountered with Amaleck. The house of Abimelech was in great danger of ruin,
but upon Abraham's prayer God spared it, Genesis 20.7. How often was God ready to
cut off the people of Israel, but Moses by his earnest cries and supplications
stayed Gods hand. If Jeremy will pray for the people of the Jews, Gods knows
not how to deny his request, and therefore when God was resolved to destroy
them, he commands Jeremy to pray no more for them, Jer. 14.10.

Thirdly, Because Gods faithful Ministers do what they can to advance the true
Religion, to set up the sincere worship and service of God in the places where
they live; their study is to draw people unto Christ, and to promote and
increase the kingdom of the Lord Jesus. Now God has been very favorable to a
people and nation where his worship and service has been set up and
maintained, 2 Chronicles. 11.17. How did they strengthen the kingdom of Judah by
offering sacrifices to the Lord according to the manner God had prescribed? See
also, Chap. 15.11, 12, 13, 14.

Fourthly, God many times for his Ministers sake is pleased to spare a nation,
and will not destroy it till he has secured them; the old world fared the
better for Noah that preacher of righteousness; had he been housed sooner, they
might have been ruined sooner. The Angel told Lot that he could nothing against
Sodom till he was gone out of it, and therefore he bids him make haste. That
fearful rout which the Philistines gave Saul, when he and his Sons were
slain, fell not upon him till after Samuels death. Uses.

First, Let God and the world judge whether they are a Nations friends, who are
bitter enemies to the Ministers of God, who say of them as those did, Come, let
us cut them off from being in the nation, that their name may be had no more in
remembrance; were the Philistines the Israelites friends when they took away
all their military weapons, and would not allow them either swords or spears
to defend themselves: no better friends are they to a State who endeavor to
deprive it of Gods faithful Messengers, who are no less necessary for the
defense and safety of a State than Chariots and horsemen; if such be lovers of
Christ or Christians, I do not know who may be accounted haters.

Secondly, Then the way to secure a nation against all adverse power, and to
make it happy and glorious, is to plant, set up, and maintain a godly and
painful Ministry in every place, 2 Chronicles. 11.17. Hezekiah was of this mind,
and therefore he took care that the Levites might be encouraged in their work,
and surely they are far from the holiness and zeal of Hezekiah who do what
they can to discourage the Messengers of the Lord in the work of the Ministry,
2 Chronicles. 31.4.

Thirdly, Have nothing to do with those men whose design it is to pull down
the public Ministry, to burn up those Chariots, to unhorse those horsemen, to
demolish those bulwarks, and to break down those fences, that so foxes, and
wolves, and ravenous beasts may break in upon us; say not a confederacy to
whom this people shall say a confederacy, Isa. 8.12. but rather say as good
Jacob said, Genesis 49.6. Oh my soul come not thou into their secret, unto their
Assembly mine honor be not thou united.

Fourthly, Have we not then great cause to mourn and be humbled, when God
takes away those Chariots and horsemen, his faithful Messengers and Ministers,
from our heads? Would not England be in a sad condition, were she deprived of
her weapons of defense, when the Nations round about would be glad if they were
able to make an inrode upon us; when a people lose their Ministers, when those
chariots and horsemen are removed, the place and nation where they once lived
lie more naked and open to all manner of judgments. I cannot blame you that I
see so many sad faces, some weeping eyes amongst you. Rachel wept because she
had lost her children, and you have cause to weep because you have lost a
spiritual father; and we have all cause to mourn if we consider what a one he
was whom we have lost: He was a painful Preacher, laid out himself in the
Lords vineyard, and was careful to fulfill the Ministry which he had received
in the Lord. He was no less faithful than painful, he was one who would not
keep back any of Gods counsels, but was ready to reveal unto his people the
whole truth, Acts 20. He studied to divide the word of truth aright, and to
give every one that portion which did of right belong unto him: as he would
tell the righteous it should be well with them, so he would tell the wicked it
should be ill with them. He was one who would not daube with untempered mortar,
neither was he afraid to reprove the greatest of sinners to their faces, he
wrought in the work of the Ministry very willingly, and not out of constraint;
it was not filthy lucre, nor popular applause, nor any such corrupt end that
drew him forth to preach the Gospel love to Christ, an earnest desire to
increase his kingdom, pity and compassion toward poor souls, a violent
thirst after their salvation, and a burning zeal for the honor and glory of
God were the motives that put him upon this work, nothing grieved him more
than when God denied him the liberty of preaching, and he was never better than
when in the Pulpit. I have heard him often say, that he had rather be sick two
days of the six than upon the Sabbath day. In the time of this his last
sickness he would often say, When shall I be able to preach again? And when he
felt but a little reviving and strength he was very glad, upon this account,
because he hoped ere long he should declare Gods will again to his people in
the public Congregation; what was the longing of David's soul, was also the
longing of his, sighing out those words, When shall I come and appear before
God? Psalm. 42.2. No burden lay heavier upon his spirit than his present
inability to be serviceable unto God in his Ministerial Office; he was none of
those, who are glad of any excuse to justify their sitting still and not
preaching to their Flock. He pre^^ no doctrine upon his people but what he
would venture his own salvation upon, and upon his deathbed desired his people
to cleave fast to those truths which he had taught them, for he durst pawn his
soul upon them. He was most careful of, and loving to his people; when he was
called to be a Member of the Assembly, he was forced to leave them, but it was
cum animo revertendi, with a purpose to return again unto them. He had a very
great living in London, but this could not keep him from coming back to his
old place so soon as he had liberty and opportunity. I have heard him often
say, he would not exchange Wilby for the greatest Living in the Land Great
Livings have several times been laid down at hi feet, but he would not accept
of them. When he thought he should dye, he called his people together, blessed
them in the name of the Lord, prayed earnestly with them, and for them, and
entreated them to keep close to God, to wait upon the public Ordinances, not
to forsake (as the manner of some is) the public Ministry, to take heed of
being carried away with the errors of the wicked, and that they fell not from
their steadfastness. Oh let those and such like counsels of his be precious to
you who heard them, think much of them, walk according to them, let these
words of your dying Pastor never be forgotten: Be perfect, be of good comfort,
be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.
He was a successful Preacher, God went along with his Ministry; he did not
labor in vain, neither did he spend his strength in vain; he was a
spiritual father to many children. I must confess (admiring and adoring God
for the freeness of his grace, and the riches of his mercy) that the first
breathings of spiritual life which ever I felt were under his Ministry. Others
no question have been no less laborious in their Masters vineyard than this
blessed servant of God, but all, nay, few in these parts of late have been so
fruitful in begetting of children unto God. It may be said of him as it was
said of Octavius, that when he came to Rome he found the walls made of common
and ordinary stone, but left them walls of marble: When he came to Wilby he
found a company of Atheists, but has left a company of Believers, he found a
company of Blasphemers, but has left a company blessing and glorifying of God,
he found a company of drunkards, but has left a company of sober men, he found
a company of profane ones, but has let a company of holy ones, he found them
enemies unto God, but has left them Gods friends, so that he could say to his
people as once the Apostle to the Romans, Chap. 6.16, 17. But God be thanked
that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form
of doctrine which was delivered unto you; Being then made free from sin, ye
became the servants of righteousness. Now give me leave to press the subsequent
words upon you his people by way of exhortation. As you have yielded your
members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity, even so now
yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness: Again, as God
used this blessed servant of his to be an instrument to increase his kingdom,
and to bring souls home unto him, so he made him an instrument to keep those
whom he had converted from being drawn a way with the error of the wicked. How
many Ministers may say of some of their most hopeful people as Paul of the
Galatians, that they are removed from those truths and ordinances which they
once seemed to embrace, that they are enemies to that Ministry which they once
seemed to respect and honor, some being turned Seekers, some Quakers, some
Arminians, some Antinomians, some Antisabbatarians, some Anabaptists, and what
not? But God has been pleased to keep his people from falling into the snares
of seducing spirits; the foxes and the wolves have not made a prey of them they
turned not their backs upon his Ministry, they forsook not the public
ordinances; and let it not O ye people of Wilby be said, ye did run well, who
did drive you back that you should not obey the truth? Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not entangled with any of
those soule-ruining snares wherein many are caught.

Lastly, He was a zealous Preacher, full of spiritual heat, filled with a holy
indignation against sin, stirring and active for his God; he did not the work
of his Master negligently, but was willing to spend himself, and to be spent
in his Lords service. Now as his life was holy, so his death was sweet and
comfortable. He told me, that he blessed God he was not afraid to dye. God did
not let loose that accuser of the brethren upon him, but filled his heart with
joy and peace unspeakable and glorious; what cause, faith he, have we to
triumph? God is our glory, God is our joy. Being at one time full of pain, and
in his own apprehension too impatient, he asked his neighbors whether they
were not grieved at his impatience? who saying nothing, he spoke thus unto
them: Truly I am not impatient for want of inward comfort, for as I have not so
little as to conceal it, so I have so much that I am not able fully to
express it. He did earnestly long to be dissolved, that he might be with
Christ, often crying out, when will that hour come? It is but one knock more,
and then this earthen pitcher shall be broken, and I shall be with my God, and
see such glory which is unutterable; When his neighbors standing by, seeing
him so willing and desirous to dye, told him that God had no need of him in
heaven, but they had need of him on earth; he replied, True, says he, God nath
no need of me, but I have need of him, and he will glorify me. He would often
speak with much admiration and affection of Gods goodness to him in dealing so
graciously and favorably with him in the time of his sickness, and professed
that he thought that God laid him as softly in the grave as ever he laid any
man. Oh said he to the standers by, Walk close with God, he can do you a good
turn when you come to dye. Well, gone he is, God looks for improvement of
losses as well as of enjoyments; search out those sins which have made God to
take him away from your heads, be humbled for them, cast them away, that God
may look down graciously upon you, visit you in mercy, send you a Pastor after
his own heart, and that a double portion of that spirit which was upon your
never to be forgotten Father and instructor may rest upon his Successor.

FINIS

