A Dialogue or accidental discourse Betwixt Mr. Alderman Abell, and Richard
Kilvert, the two maine Projectors for Wine, and also Aldermans Abels wife, etc.

Containing their first manner of their acquaintance, how they began to
contrive the Patent it self, how they obtained it, and who drew the patent.

Also in what state they now stand in, and how they accuse and rail at each
other with invective speeches, etc.

With the manner and fashion how Projectors and Patentees have rod a Tilting in
a Parliament time, etc.

A Pattent for Wine
two men, one holding a scroll

Printed also in the same year of grace. 1641.

A Dialogue or accidental discourse betwixt Mr. Alderman Abel, and Mr. Richard
Kilvert, two maine Projectors, etc.
Kilvert. MAster Alderman Abell, as I take it.


Abel. And you Mr Richard K^lvert, or I much mistake my self; good morrow.


Kilv. The like to you: and I hope we may live to see many good days
hereafter, and though neither of us have need much to complain of the Time
that is past; yet who knows but the future may prove better then the former,
and that is a thing which I think both you and I, in our own particulars, most
aim at. O master Alderman, I have bin a great guest to your house, I remember
you kept then the Ship Tavern behind old Fish street.


Abel I did indeed, honest Mr. Kilvert, and I thank God I got a good estate
there by retailing of wine, and by chance in digging a vault near my seller, I
found some what which the world shall never know of, if I had not found some
hidden Treasure in that Cardinals seller, I had never come to wear this gold
chain, with my thumbs under my girdle: and why are men sparing in their youth,
but to get an estate there by to spend the more freely in their age? But I pray
Master Kilvert, what course do you now take? or what Calling do you profess
or use?


Kilv. Who I master Alderman, I do use no Calling, for money comes into me
without Calling or either bauling for: I tell you I study the seavenliberall
Arts, and am well verst in them all, but especially in Logic and Arethmetick,
I have them ad unguem, I will tell you, I will never be ashamed of it, I have
now got so much craft, that I excel in cunning. The Theory and Practicke are
both mine own, nay I am so well instructed in both, that I dare profess my
self a Teacher in either.


Abel. Why, were you ever of any University?


Kilv. What tell you me of an University? There are company of poor Scholars,
and suffer Ballads to be made of them, alas, the height of their ambition is to
be become some Schole-master, or else some Vshe in a School to teach children
to wright. I prosesse my self to be of the Vni^^n^, that is the World; and a
Discipline that the Accademy was never acquainted with all.


Abel. As how master Kilvert? I ever preferred the one Art of getting and
keeping, above all the seven liberal Sciences, for though prodigality be
sooner ^ave at ^en parsimony, yet it is no way so profitable in my opinion:
give me that Learning, which lines the bag, and that Rhetoric that makes a
rattling pocket.


Kilv. I sir, (and I speak in your ears while you have them) no matter by
what indirect means the purchase comes, so we may compass the possession,
that they say, is eleven points in Law: what care I who the Plaintiff be, so I
the Defendant can maintain the fu^te with his money: These are the rules that
guide me, and the principles in those Arts I profess. I am waited upon three
or four hours in a morning before I rise by diverse Gentlemen to solicit
their business; and will not moove a foot unless I have three or four
weighty pieces given me for a fee, Judge and Justice like, for I had ever
anitching palm, my Clients ever feed me largly, those pieces made me speak
Louder in the Justices ears, for I knew I should not be Justice long.


Abel. I should be glad to be your Scholar, and make no doubt but in small time
to prove a good proficient: But I pray master Kilvert what use make you of your
Logic?


Kilv. I le tell you master Alderman: By Logic I can wrangle with Worth,
entangle Truth, make a bad cause good, or a good cause bad: nay more, I can
prove Chalk to be Cheese.


Abel. As how, I pray you?


Kilv. As thus, that which is white is Cheese, now Chalk is white as Cheese is
white: Ergo Chalk is Cheese.


Abel. But was ever any so mad as to take Chalk for Cheese?


Kilv. O yes, I my self before I came to serve my first master, have come into
an Alehouse and called for Cheese to my break fast, and having then no money to
pay for it, my Hostess has bin forced to score it up, and so she has took
Chalk for Cheese.


Abel. You are pleasant M. Kilvert, but now to be more serious.


Kilv. Then thus, in steed of a Procurator, I am turned Promoter, and pry into
the Laws both Civil and Common, where no Delinquency of any note can escape me:
and whether the person that is questioned be a Peccant or no, if I be not
pleased, he cannot escape thence unpunisht, and by that means I have picked many
a simple Clients pocket: and in the Arches from being a Servant, I am now
become an Arch-Solicitor, and by that means have admittance into all the
Courts of justice, where I have subordinate intelligencers, which I allow a
groat a day throughout the year, that skrew themselves into other men's causes,
and afford me materials sufficient to work upon: now, when I have cast in my
conceits to pick an hole in another man's Coat, or to find the least flaw by
which I may overthrow him or his for tunes, then is my Spirits animated, my
peticranion is employed to purpose, for my brain upon such an occasion is in
the most able agitation: The very name of Kilvert makes men compound with my
Client, if they do but hear that I have a finger in it, or relish the Cause.


Abel. It Is true, you have told me the matter, but not the means you work by.


Kilv. To that I was coming, (had you not interrupted me:) Then do I find out
some one Judge that has bought his place at a dear rate, and he is easily
corrupted, for as I have heard some of them say, (who died with a jest in his
mouth) that if they buy dear, they must sell dear: For I always carry an
Elixar about me, by which (if not quite fatuate) yet I can effascinate his
senses.


Abel. As how I pray you Sir?


Kilv. As thus, I can whisper such a charm in his ear, as shall make him
dear, save only to my ears: cast such a filme over his eyes, as shall make him
blind, to my benefit: Lay such a tie upon his tongue, as to temper it to fit
mine own turn. The like power it has over his Smell, Touch, and Taste; but
folly it were in me to take away his feeling, for that is the principal verb,
the primum mobile, the main wheel which mooues the rest of the wheels.


Abel. And how?


Kilv. O, that by no means; for I must work upon that Subject, only to fool
the other four Senses, for if a cause (be such) be not before felt, it will
very difficultly after, be either heard or understood, and though opened as it
ought to be, yet will not judge as it should be: and you know master Alderman an
Ass laden with Gold may have admittance into the strongest Arcenal.


Abel. Master Kilvert, you are very witty, but proceed, I pray.


Kilv. First, you must put that into his hand, which may comfort his heart, or
lay that under his cushion, which shall never trouble his Conscience: you know
my mind. Justice was wont (when her statue was to be figured) to be cut out of
the whole stone, but in these days it must be made up from pieces. The
spectacles they look through are not made of glass, but gold: and that you
know is very soverain for the sight: and they can see better with golden eyes
then through the other brittle and more transparant mettle: did you never hear
Bribo declined after the first Conjugation?


Abel. Never.


Kilv. I either read it in a Pamphlet or heard it in a Play) and as I can best
remember my self, it was thus: Bribo, Bribe-asle (master Abel) Bribe-bravely,
Bribe-and-I, Bribe-and-do, Bribe-and-Dumbe, Bribe-ba-tum, Bribe-ba-tu, Bribans;
Bribe-at-your-house; you understand me sir.


Abel. Yes, very well, I was once a Grammar Scholar my self.


Kilv. Then but observe this course (I have it by mine own Knowledge) your
cause howsoever corrupt shall go on as current and your self appear to be as
innocuous: as a Martin mounted in the air, a Ducke dabling in the Water, or an
innocent Lamb of three score years and upwards.


Abel. I am much taken with your Discourse Mc. Kilvert, and I know you to be a
most politic Proiector, money is the matter we aim at, and profit the thing
that we only pursue: We know what may be done. Now me thinks it at that we
fix upon some Project to be done, and presently to have it put in practice:
Those Patents for Caske and for Tobaco, and for Cards, and Dice, with diverse
others, have already past the Seal, but what new reach have you now by which
to enrich us?


Kilv. Give me leave a little to recollect my self, hum, hum, -- let me see,
Mercers, Goldsmith, Drapers, Grocers, you are a Vintner, M. Alderman, what
think you of a Monopoly or Patent for Wines, and for dressing of meat.


Abel. I do approve of the project exceedingly. But first tell me one thing
Master Kilvert, are you a free man of our City?


Kilv. No indeed sir, but for some reasons best reserved to my self, I would I
were.


Abel. Let me alone to procure that.


Kilv. And then let me alone to extract money out of your City mines; and
drawit into our own purses.


Abel. And that is profitable proiection: but Master Kilvert, in some things I
would entreat you to take my vice (this cough does so trouble me) my advise I
should have said. Buy then your Freedom in the City, a small quantity of coin
shall compass it, and in it you shall have my best favor and surtherance.
Then, you have choice to be of what Company you most fancy: Which I could wish
to be of the Vintners; of of which Society I am none of the meanest members.
That done, I will bring you in to be one of our Livery, and in a short time to
be made one of the Asistance; only you must be sworn is secrecy, and not to
disclose any mystery belonging to our Trade, that may be talked on at the Table.


Kilv. To all these I shall subscribe unto freely. But what think you of my
former motion, concerning the patent for Wine.


Abel. Indeed you now come close to me, and talk with me in mine own element.


Kilv. I know you Mr. Alderman to be a man every way Abel, join but your purse
with my policy, and if I procure you not a Patent, think me to be a mere
paltry fellow, and not worth the name of a Proiector: I am nane of those
fellows which were borne in a Dul-age, nor do I dwell at Dul-age; I am
accounted wiser then ever my father was.


Abel Then now Master Kilvert acquaint me freely with the project upon which we
may ground the begging of this Patent.


Kilv. Marry thus we must first pretend both in the Merchant and Vintner some
gross abuses, and these no mean ones neither: for the reforming and
rectifying of which, we are Petitioners for this Patent. And that the Merchants
shall pay to the King forty shillings upon every Tun ere he shall vent it to
the Vintner: in lieu of which, that the Vintner may be no looser, he shall
rarse the price also of his Wines, upon all French Wines a penny in the quart,
upon all Spanish Wines two pence the quart: it is no matter how the Subject
s^ffer, so we get and gain by it: Now to cover this our Craft (I will not say
Consinage) because all things of the like nature carry a pretense for the Kings
profit: so we will allow him a competent proportion of forty thousand pound per
annum. When the power of the Patent being punctually executed, will yield
double at least, if not treble that sum, and return it into the Cofers of
the undertakers.


Abel. Let me hug thee my Kilvert; But who do you think to be the fittest
man to draw this Patent to the purpose for fear of over sight or mistake?


Kilv Who but Mr. Low that lives in Great S. Bartholmews, one mightily ^ried up
for his Chamber Counsel: Let him but have a sound feeling in the fist, and
then fortune for the French, and fico for the Spaniard.


Abel. My delicate and dainty Kilvert, thou shall ever hereafter be in my
Books: and no sooner shall this Patent be signed and sealed, but for thy pains
and advice, thou shall have seven hundred pound in hand, and two hundred
pieces per annum during the date of this Patent.


Kilv. Most sweet and well sounding Abel, every way able both in promise and
performance: if I fail in the prosecuting of this Patent, may I perish, and
suffer hereafter some exemplary punishment.


Abel But in all this, we never dreampt of a Parliament.


Kilv. Tush, fear not that, we must have some great men to have a feeling in
the cause; and by that means back us: but you see the stream roares
contrary: but say one were called, I am a man Parliament proof, and no
Mounparsons.


Abel. But think you the Commons will not mutter and repine at this?


Kilv. Let the monster multitude murmur, what need we to care? being possessed
of the Cash: Foxes and Crows fare best, when they be cursed: and so I hope
shall We: for when We shall sit in Commission, and have our Refferrees,
Advisers, Sharers, Complotters and Contractors about us, with full power and
authority to countenance them, whom need we fear, or be afraid of.


Abel. Mr. Kilvert, I honor thee before all the Feasts in our Hall, nay we are
free Vintners, and brothers of the Quill, and are for the most part true
Trojans, and know where to find the best Buts of Wine in the Seller, and will
pierce them for thee, it shall be pure Wine from the Grape, not mixed and
compounded, but real and brisk: you think there is no Brewers but such as ^ew
Ale and Beer, I tell you we do brew and cunger in our Sellers, as much as any
Brewer of them all, yea and without fire too, but so much for that. Me thinks
I see my self in Cheap side upon an Horse richly caparison'd, and my two
Shrieves to attend me: and me thinks thee in thy Ca^och drawn by four
horses, and shall call to thee, and say friend Kilvert, give me thine hand, etc.


Kilv. To which I shall answer, God bless your Honor my good Lord Mayor, etc.

This and the like discourse at meeting, and complement at parting, past
betwixt them. What effect their Project took, is known to all, and with what
power (without pity) they executed the fore of their Patent, what charge and
trouble diverse of the best Vintners about the Town were put too both by fines
and commitments: The misery they suffered by the Medium Wines and the like: But
now (God be praised) the Tide is turned: And since that Edict concerning the
price of wines was published in print, bearing date, the twenty sixth day of May
last past: wherein the aforesaid Alderman Abel, and Richard Kilvert were by
name brought within the compass of exemplary punishment, for which act of
theirs, as they made their poor brother Vintners purses and hearts ache, so now
I fear this news will make their heads ache, if not their necks crack.

Since which time they had an other accidental interview, at which some
language, but differing in phrase from the former, past betwixt them to this
purpose. Now imagine they are met, and their first salutation was by M. Abel.


Abel. Kilvert, Thou art a Knave. I say sirrah thou art a cunning Knave.


Klv. Setting your Worshipaside, you are but a plain Pattentee, and all such
are called by a Word that begins with the first letter of my name.

Mris.


Abel. Sirrah rascal, I say so as my husbands says you are a Knave, and a
whore-master Knave, and a very slye crafty Knave.


Kilv. And I tell you Mistress Abel, your husband has made me a brother of his
Company; and you Mr. Abel, promisest when you met in Cheap side, to take me by
the hand.


Abel. Of all men living I am bound to curse thee.


Kilv. I confess you to be A-bel, but you cannot curse me in the true kind,
without a Book and a candle.


Abel. I hope to see thee hanged.


Kilv. Indeed a Bell cannot be rung in tune till it be so. Mris.


Abel. Sir do you know to whom you speak.


Abel. You are Parliament proof with a pox.


Kilv. But who the pox would have thought of a Parliament so soon?


Abel. I would I had kept my Tavern still in old Fish-street, for then I was
counted an honest man.


Kilv. Yea, to have took a way the sign of the Ship, and to have had a Bell
hanged in the room of it.


Abel. Thou have bin mine undoing.


Kilv. And you mine: for as our faults are alike, so I am afraid our fates will
be equal.


Abel. All this was by thy proiects and policy.


Kilv. True M. Alderman, but countenanced by your purse and authority.


Abel. Kilvert, thou have bin called kill-Vertue, kill-B^nnet, kill-Bishop, and
kil-Fart, and now kill Abell, and I hope thou will Kil-thy self.


Kilv. Take heed to your self, that you do not go to the Devil quick.


Abel. If I do? it is of thy driving. I tell thee Kilvert thou art worse then
Caine.


Kilv. Indeed, we read that in-old time Caine Killed Abel, but now Abell Kills
Caine; and I am afraid there is a young Gregory born to make an end of us both.

By this a great Company of people were gathered about them, which made them
part for the present: their next meeting is to be expected either at the Bar
where they are to be arraigned, or the place appointed for their punishment.

The manner and form how Projectors and Patentees have rode a Tylting in a
Parliament time.


FINIS.
Tar-ar-ra-ra-

man seated backwards on horse


