The last DISCOURSE Betwixt Master Abel and Master Richard Kilvert, interrupted
at the first by an ancient and angry Gentlewoman, who being her self unknown
unto the observer of this Conference, it was conceived by him afterward to be
a certain friend of Mr Abels.

woodcut

Printed in the year 1641.

A discourse betwixt Mr. ABELL and Mr. RICHARD KILVERT.
Abel IT cannot be helped now, Master Kilvert.


Gentlewo. It cannot be helped, marry'eene beshrew your hearts for it, (I have
vverheard your conference) it is a fine pass I am brought too, is it not?
Shall I who was companion for the best City Ladies, who had my coach and my
horses to carry me when and where I pleased, be contented now to sit at the
lower end of the table, as if I was little better forsooth then one of the
scullery: must I in my old age carry this weary body now on my own feet, if I
mean to have it carried at all; must I endure that my velvet and my damask
Gowns should be diswardrob'd into some red Petticoate or Wastecoate, or some
worse Polony Jumpe; I marry! what will the people say? here is a fine jumpe
indeed, from honor to infamy, from wealth to want, from bravery to rags; from
--


Abel Nay, prithee be quiet sweetheart, prithee Lady be not so intemperate!


Gentlewo. Sweetheart me no sweet-hearts, Lady me no Ladies, I must forget all
ceremonies and titles of honor, I, it is your ungoverned thoughts that have
distracted me to an ungoverned tongue, you are a very, very honest man, are you
not M^ster Abel? (she claps her hands at him.)


Kilvert. What strange inventions do these women use to satisfy the malice of
their spleen when their tongues begin to be weary, they will borrow new
encouragement from their hands, and do what they can to make them scold too?


Gentlewo. And safer too I wis, then to make their tongues the undoing of whole
families by begging unjust Monopolies and Oinopolies, and I know not what
inventions of infamy and ruin.


Kilvert. Sure this Gentlewomans brains begins to unsettle, advise her to go
in and to feed on warm things.


Gentlewo. Marry and I receive nothing but cold comfort from you, it would make
a woman frantic indeed, to be served as I am served: but what is now become
my Masters of your so deep, so subtle understandings? you that were two of the
most cunning contrivers, of the most contriving Projectors, of the most
projecting oppressors, what is now become of all your plots, of all your
reach? if I had not rather choose two hogsheads for my Counselors, and safer,
let me never be trusted more.


Abel. She had always an high and perilous spirit, I pray bear with her
Master Kilvert.


Gentlewo. A perilous spirit indeed, to be fooled by your wisdoms, you are a
pair of a perilous I know what; you dare not go into the Vintners cellars,
for fear the hogsheads themselves in disdain of that musty liquor which your
tyrannies do inforc^ them to contain, and sensible of the injury, working
altogether and framing to a revenge, should split their angry ribs against your
guilty heads, and make you the examples of their justice before justice
herself has fully censured you.


Exit Gentlewoman. Kilvert. Alas, poor Gentlewoman I am very sorry for her! and
in troth cannot much blame her passions.


Abel. She has not that reason to grow so violent as she herself conceives,
but I have the greatest afflictions that mankind can be capable of, I am
exposed to the hatred of all men, my estate quite lost, my friends and old
acquaintance accusing me, my conscience tormenting me, and my self daily
expecting when justce shall proceed against me.


Kilvert. And I am even Master Abel in the same pickle my self, but the people
as I understand entertain a great fear and a grief for me, but marry what is
it? their fear is that my punishment shall not be so great as my offenses, and
that is the reason of their grief; whatsoever they wish to you it seems they
have a care of me I thank them.


Abel. I never sought after nor conspired against the life of any of them.


Kilver. But you have against the estates of many of them, and that is their
livelihood, and so by consequence have wrought their ruin, and what is that,
but whiles you bring them into penuty and want by a lingering and a more truell
execution, you are many years in killing them.


Abell. It is true indeed, too true Mr. Kilvert, but why did you not tell me
this before?


Kilver. A more discerning eye then mine might be deceived in the foreseeing of
the event of things especially in the Labyrinths and perplexed Mazes of State
affairs, was I of intelligence with the Destinies to foresee the unanimity and
intentions of this present Parliament, their strict resolves for the
reformation of all abuses, the rise of Lincoln, and the fall of Canterbury,
had not the Drums of Scotland beat up their alarums in the Northern Marches,
had not their Trumpets sounded in the English ears, for any thing that I know
there had been neither so many Parlyes with them, nor a Parliament amongst our
selves; but you and I might have lived secure enough, for who then in the hurry
and confusion of those distracted times would have taken off our veil of
greatness to look upon our vices: it is hard believe me, when the errors of
private men are countenanced by the authority of great and reverend personages,
to discern the errors, as indeed they are, and to distinguish betwixt Virtue
and Fortune.


Abell But have we no redress, no hope of redress at all (Mr. Kilvert) the
Parliament I understand is merciful and noble, what if we petitioned unto them?


Kilver. It Is right, but they are as just as they are merciful, are you able to
restore and make good whatsoever wrongs you have done to those who have accused
you, for my own part, I know my own inabilities.


Abell. Not I, not I, Mr. Kilvert, I am altogether unable to make them
satisfaction, neither indeed am I very willing: besides, the small estate that
I was master of, I have made over to my Heirs.


Kilver. It is like to continue with them long, I have read (...), and the
experience of all Ages has justified the Proverb.


Abell. Master Kilvert you have a head that is well exercised in the Law, and
have laid many projects to draw others into danger, cannot your wit find one
now to deliver your self endangered.


Kilver. What project mean you Mr. Abell, I will tell you, and do you
remember it in your day of trial, who dare wilfully, and with a prepared
resolution transgress the Law, dares undergo any punishments that the Law can
afflict; I have no other counsel to relieve you with at this present.


Abell. Will there no pity be extended to my aged head?


Kilver. Gray haird iniquity is the most odious, to abuse the goodness of so
gracious a Prince, to impoverish, to oppress his subjects, and that under the
umbrage of Justice and Authority are no easy crimes, Master Abell, what did
you tell me of devices, and I know not what projects, which you were always
more ready to entertain, then I to fancy, I would have you know, Mr. Abell. I
defy the scandal and the imputation of the word.


Abell. Excuse me Sir, I did not think to have so much moved your patience, I
see then that I must altogether rely on the mercy of God, and of the
Parliament. I perceive you are to me like one of Jobs friends, but a miserable
comforter.


Kilver. We must arm our selves with Jobs patience, though we cannot with his
innocence, and make our sufferings examples unto times to come, that they dare
no more with such close pretenses as were ours, like so many pioners, seek to
undermine the courses and the force of Justice; who repents him of his offense
(they say) is almost innocent. As he was speaking this, there came in one unto
them, and told them that there was a company of ancient Gentlemen who desired
with speed to have conference with them; who they were it is yet unknown, but
it appeared they were some Citizens who had been abettors and complotters with
them in the inhancement and sophistication of the Wines; they whispered softly
amongst themselves, but because they were altogether unknown, having a desire
to do nothing more then to inform the Reader with certainety and truth, both
the persons and their counsels are adjourned to a more clear and a more full
relation.


FINIS.

