CHRISTIAN QUERIES TO Quaking-Christians: Containing ^^irteen QUERIES modestly
propounded to those who are commonly known by the Name of Quakers.

^y J.B. a Lover of Truth.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1663,

To the Reader.
GO little Book, improve thy Scripture-skill,
Advance the Truth, and throw down all self-will:
When Will's subdued, then all and every thought
unto the Law and Will of God is brought:
When thus it is, the Soul with love will say,
lord I do yield, thy Truth will I obey:
^o walk with God my Soul does more desire
^hen purest Gold refined in the fire.
^et Scripture be our Rule, our Guard and Guide,
^at to strange ways we may not turn aside.
(...) any preach (whatever they pretend)
^^sides the Rule, God never did them send.
^^rst is that man that other Doctrines preaches
^^ntrary unto what Gods Word us teacheht.
^et Light without, be Guide to Light within,
^^at we on Truth (not Man) our faith may pin.
^ead over this Book, and in it you will find
^he Author often to have a sober mind.
Thus leaving you to what this Book does say,
I shall my Name to it subscribe, J. A.
Christian-Queries to Quaking-Christians, etc.
Qu. 1. HOw, and by what means may Salvation be attained? Whether by adhering
to a Light within us, or by Faith in a Christ without us? (1.) If the latter be
not the best way, why is it that the Scrip^ures do so often bid us to believe
in Jesus Christ, and that by so doing we may be sa^ed? 3 John 15; 16. Acts
16.30, 31. (2.) Or ^s the former the better way? If so, I would ^hen ask
further,

Q. 2. Whether the Light within us be sufficient Guide to direct us unto true
Hap^iness? And what this Light is? Whether (...) every man? or how to be
attained? 1. If his Light be sufficient to Salvation, of what ^se are the
Scriptures? and why are we at all ^xhorted to Faith, which implies something ^t
a distance, and not yet enjoyed? Heb. 11.1.

Q. 2. Whether is this Light the Conscience of every man? Or (3.) is it Christ
in every man? If so, why then are not all men saved? For if he that has not
this Light, be out of Christ, (as you say) then all that have this Light must
of necessity be in Christ, and consequently saved? 2 Cor. 13.5. 2 Cor. 5.17.

Q. 3. Whether that Way which you teach, and the Doctrines you maintain and
propagate, be consonant to, and may be defended by the Word of God contained in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament? 1. Whether it be not necessary to
have some Rule of Trial by which we may try the Spirits whether they be of God
or no? 1 John 4.1, 2, 3. And, (2.) Whether the Scriptures be not sufficient
hereunto? Or is there any better way to be propounded for such a Trial? And,
(3.) If there be any better way, why are we directed by the Prophet Esaias, To
the Law, and to the Testimony and if any man speak otherwise, it is because
there is no Light in him, Isa. 8.20. And (4.^ Why were the Bereans commended
for searching the Scriptures daily, whether thos^ things were so, Acts 17.11.
Lastly, If the ^criptures are not to be the Rule of Trial ^^r all Doctrines,
why is it that the Apostle ^oth so severely, and that over and over a^^in,
pronounce a curse against all such as ^ould preach any other Gospel than what
^e had already preached? which is only to ^e found in the Scriptures, Gal. 1.7,
8, 9.

Q. 4. Whether all men do or may attain ^erfection in this life? And whether
any that ^ome short of this Perfection, may be saved? ^r, (1.) Whether those
Texts of Scripture ^^at exhort us to be perfect, may not imply ^ertain degrees
of Perfection, rather than ^erfection it self, as to the height of it? and,
(2.) Whether there be not a Perfection (...) Sincerity, as well as of degrees?
And, ^^.) Whether Believers may not be perfect ^y imputation of his
Righteousness, who know^^g no sin, yet was made sin for us, that we ^ight be
made the Righteousness of God in ^im? 2 Cor 5.21.

Q. 5. Whether Jesus Christ did not institute and appoint certain Ordinances
under the Gospel for his Churches to observe and keep until his coming? 1. Did
he not institute that Ordinance of his Supper, and enjoin his Disciples to
observe it in remembrance of him? Luke 22.19, 20. And, (2.) Is it not recorded
of the Primitive Church, how they continued this Ordinance? Acts 2.46. 3. Why
does the Apostle Paul commend the practice of it to the Church of Corinth, and
tells them whence he had it? For (says he) I have received of the Lord that
which I delivered unto you: And so repeats the manner how it was first
instituted, 1 Cor. 11.23, 26. Or, (4.) Are these Ordinances ceased, and now out
of date? If so, Pray tell us when they first expired? Has not himself told us,
that they should last until his coming? Or is he already come, and we knew it
not? If he be, it must be only by his spiritual presence, and so he was with
the Primitive Church, and that in a greater measure than nowadays, yet did
they continue in all the Ordinances of the Gospel. Or, (5.) May we not rather
understand his coming to be meant of his second coming, spoken of by the Angel
at his Ascension, when he shall come in like manner as he was seen to go into
Heaven? Acts 1.10, 11.

Q. 6. Whether Christians are not bound ^o the performance of such Religious
du^ies as were practiced by the People of God under the Law, and not abrogated
by the Gospel? 1. Whether Christians ought not ^o pray morning and evening? as
David very ^requently did; Evening and morning, and ^^t noon, will I pray and
cry aloud, and he shall ^ear my voice, Psalm. 55.17. Or, (2.) Is it not ^awful
for Christians to appoint and set a^art a convenient time and season for the
^erformance of Religious Exercises, as did Daniel? who notwithstanding the
Kings Command, thought himself obliged not ^o omit his duty once, but prayed
three ^^mes a day, Dan. 6.10, 13. Or, (3.) Are ^re only to pray when our own
Spirits move ^s, and not at the motion of Gods Spirit, which bids us to pray
continually, or to be always in a frame, and frequent in the Duty of Prayer, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Or, (4.) Whether it be not a duty incumbent upon all Christians to
exercise Family Duties, as the People of God in former times did? Whether
Parents ought not to instruct their Children, and Masters their Servants, for
which God so much commended Abraham, because he would command his Children and
his Household after him, Genesis 18.17, 18.19.5. Whether it be the duty of all
Christians frequently to read over, and confer about the holy Scriptures both
in their Families, and with others? as the Lord commanded the children of
Israel, Thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of
them when thou sit in thy House, and when thou walk by the way, and when
thou lie down, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Nay, (6,) Whether is it not necessary for all
Christians to beg Gods blessing with, and return him thanks for every Mercy
they receive? according to the practice of our blessed Savior, who when he fed
so many thousands, would first look up to Heaven for a blessing upon what they
enjoyed on earth, Mar. 6.41, ^^d after his Resurrection he practiced the ^^me
thing among his Disciples, Luke 24.30 Whose blessed Example the Apostle
follow^d, taking bread, and giving thanks in the ^resence of them all, Acts
27.35. further ^ecommending it to the practice of others, ^^at in every thing
they would give thanks, as ^he will of God in Christ Jesus concerning them,
(...) These. 5.18.

Q. 7. Whether it be not lawful for Christians ^o give a Civil Respect to the
several degrees and relations in which persons may stand? As, (1.) Whether the
younger ought not to ^everence the elder? as says the Scripture, Thou shall
rise up before the hoary head, and ^onor the face of the old man, Lev. 19.32.
And, (2.) Whether a Christian may not evidence ^is respect by some outward
action or gesture of his body, according to the custom of the Country he lives
in? as Abraham bowed to the Sons of Heth, Genesis 23.12. so did Nathan a Prophet
to King David, 1 King. ^1.23. And, (3.) Is it not lawful for Christians to
express their respects by giving to every man the titles belonging to him, in
reference to the several Dignities or Places they may be advanced to? As Luke
does Theophilus, calling him Most Excellent, Luke 1.3. so^ Paul to Foelix, Most
noble Foelix, Acts 26.25. and John to the elect Lady, 2. John 1.

Q. 8. Whether Christians may not make use of, and take delight in those
creatures God affords us, either for Food or Clothing? And, (1.) Whether at
sometimes it be not lawful to feast and enjoy the creatures afforded for our
use in a lawful mirth? provided it be done in its proper season, and with
moderation, Eccles. 3.12, 13. And, (2) Whether it be lawful for Christians to
wear what Apparel they shall think best in their own Christian Prudence to be
apparrell'd in, if without excess? Did not God command the children of Israel,
that they should borrow Jewels of Silver, and Jewels of Gold of the Egyptians,
Exodus 11.2. And Abraham's Servant gave unto Rebecca Bracelets for her hands,
which she also wore. Genesis 24.22.30.

Q. 9. Whether when Christians are met ^^gether for the Worship and Service of
God, ^^ey may then be silent, and depart without ^^ything don for the
edification of one ano^^er? Or, (1.) Whether they ought not rather (...) stir
up and exhort one another to continue in the ^aith and practice of the Gospel?
As the Apo^^les of old did, who when they met toge^^^er, spent the time in
praying with, and ex^orting of one another, Acts 1.13, 14. Acts ^2.12. 2.
Whether to speak in a strange Tongue, or to be wholly silent when the People
(...) God are met together, be not one and the ^^me thing? the former of which
the Apo^^le forbids, as no way tending to edificati^n, 1 Cor. 14.4, to the 20.

Q. 10. Whether Christians that do not pal^ably contradict the practice of
Godliness, may not live with, and have charity toward ^ne another, though
different in judgments? And, (1.) Whether this has not rendered ^he
Popish-Religion more odious, because they have so little charity for any that
differ from them, who style all to be Heretics that are not of their way? Or,
(2.) Whether any of the Apostles, or our Savior himself, did ever condemn
others upon this account only, but on the contrary, when the Apostle told our
Savior they had seen one casting out Devils in his Name, yet followed no^ him,
Christ bids them not forbid him, alleging, that he which is not against us, is
with us, Luke 9.49, 50. And so the Apostle would have every man persuaded in
his own mind, Romans 14.5. And I know no reason why ye should condemn any man for
being in the dark, because he fees not by your Light?

Q. 11. Whether it be not the duty of Christians to observe and set apart one
day in seven for the more solemn Service of God? And, (1.) Whether God himself
did not appoint, and the People of God in all Ages keep such a day? Genesis
2.2, 3. Exodus 20.8. 2. Whether the Sabbath Day was ever abrogated by Jesus
Christ, or only changed and another kept in the room of the first? And 3.
Whether the first day of the Week be not the true Christian Sabbath? We read
that it was the custom of the Apostles chiefly to meet on this day, John 20.19.
Acts 20.7. and that they made collections for the poor on this Day, 1 Cor.
16.2. and John was in the Spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1.10.

Q. 12. Whether it be not lawful for Christians to Swear, if called thereunto,
for the attestation of some Truth? And, 1. Whether Abraham did sin in making
his Servant to swear unto him? Genesis 24.3. Or, (2.) Whether Swearing be not a
ready way to put an end to all controversies? as the Apostle says Heb. 6.16.

Q. 13. Whether it be not the great duty and concernment of every true
Christian to plead for, and vindicate all such Gospel Truths as he has
formerly received, and yet believes? And, (1.) Whether a Christian may not
earnestly contend for the Truth once delivered? Jude 3. And, (2.) Whether it be
not the duty of all Christians, with readiness to render an account of his
Faith to him that asks him? 1 Pet. 3.15. And, (3.) Whether it b^ not your
Concernment to return some satisfactory Answer to the Author of these QUERIES?

FINIS.

