THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND A true Church: PROVED In a Disputation held by JOHN
BASTWICK Doctor in Physic, AGAINST Mr. WALTER MONTAGUE in the TOWER.

Buy the truth, and sell it not, also wisdom, instruction, and understanding,

Prove. 23. v. 23. Where there is no vision the people perish, but he that
keeps the Law, happy is he.

Prove. 29. v. 16. Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for A. Crook and I. Rothwell, and are to be sold at their
shops in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
IF thou desire to know the occasion of the ensuing discourse between me and
Master Montague, (of whom I may say this, although he be an enemy, that he is
both generosus and doctus adversarius) thou shall not only be fully satisfied
of the necessity of the publishing of it, but may also find the true Church
by the essential and undeceivable notes of the same, the which wheresoever
they appear do abundantly prove and delucidate it to be a true Church: Now
when they are to be found in the Church of England, as in all the reformed
Churches, it may truly be concluded of them all, that they are true Churches,
from the which there is no just ground and cause of separation. As for the
Church of England, I may ever affirm this (as I have in the following Treatise
evinced) that since the Apostles times, the Gospel and the saving truths
thereof have never been more purely preached, and more cheerfully received,
embraced, and believed, and the Sacraments more duly administered, and the Name
of God more truly invocated and called upon, then now in the Church of England:
and that all those that live in it, owe their conversion to the Ministry of
the same: so that with all good reason we may infer, that, that Church that
teaches the knowledge of the only true God, and whom he has sent Jesus
Christ, John 17. and is able to build them up in their most holy faith, is a
true Church and where salvation may be found. And therefore not only those of
the Church of Rome, that do calumniate her, and all the reformed Churches for
heretical, are in a great error and blameworthy: but more especially those
that had the work of regeneration wrought in their hearts by her ministry,
and owe their conversion to her, and yet do asperse her with odious terms
absolutely denying her to be a true Church: all such, I say, are likewise to be
reproved, and have for this their temerity a great deal to answer for, before
God and all good men: for by these their expressions, they do not only
proclaim their own unthankefulnesse unto Almighty God, but their
undutifulnesse and ingratitude unto their mother, and their uncharitableness
toward their brethren, whom they account of as a company of Insidels denying
communion with them, in holy things, though every way as good and as holy as
themselves: by all which their proceedings, they do not only cast filth in
all their faces, and expose themselves to the ludibree of the world, and bring
an odium upon the whole Church, but are a cause of division and schism in the
seamlesse garment of Christ, and give a great scandal to the enemies of the
Gospel, and to all such as love the truth in sincerity without faction,
contrary to the Apostles rule, who exhorts all Christians to take heed that
they give no offense to the Jew nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God.
But that all men may see I charge none falsely, nor wrong them not in any thing,
I shall here recite some expressions of their principal leaders and teachers
(for to enumerate them all, would be an endless work) as I had them from
their own mouths in the presence of others, and as I find them in their
printed books. By word of mouth, they say, That the Church of England is an
arrant Whore, and Strumpet, and that she that was once a Whore can never be
presented unto Christ as a chaste Spouse: then the which what could be more
contumeliosly disgracefully and untruly spoken, especially when it is uttered
by such as had the work of grace and conversion wrought in their hearts, by
the ministry of the Church, (if they have any grace, or were ever truly
converted) though now they have disobediently deserted and forsaken her. In
print thus they declare themselves, concerning the Church of England, and all
believers and their fellow brethren in it. That the Church of England is a true
whorish mother, and that they that are of her, are base begotten, and bastardly
children, and that she neither is, nor never was truly married, joined, or
united unto Jesus Christ, in that espousall band, which his true Churches are,
and ought to be, but is one of Antichrists National whorish Churches and
Cities, spoken of Revel. 16.19. etc. That the Church of England is false and
Antichristian, and as she is a false and Antichristian Church, she can never
make true Officers and Ministers of Jesus Christ: and absolutely deny, that
conversion and confirmation, and building up in the ways of God are wrought by
the Ministry of the Church of England: for how (say they) can they build them
up in that, which they themselves are ignorant of, and enemies unto? For as
Jannes and Jambres with stood Moses, so do these men also resist the truth,
being men of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth, etc. This is their
Dialect and further they assert, That as they have taken pains by the Word of
God, and demonstrable arguments grounded thereupon to prove the Church of
England Antichristian; so they promise to all the world, that they will in the
strength of the Lord of Hosts, for ever separate from Cuurch Ministry, and
worship of England, and all and every one of them as Antichristian and false
And conclude, that all the Ministers of the Church of England are not true
Ministers of Christ, but false and Antichristian Ministers, and that our
Religion neither is the true Religion, nor that it leads men the true way to
salvation, and they affirm that they groundedly and absolutely deny that
either the Church of England is or ever was a true Church. And from many such
premises as these, they exhort all good people that are in the bosom of the
Church of England, as they love their own inward peace, and spiritual joy, to
withdraw their spiritual obedience and subjection from her. Others of them
esteem no better of their brethren then of Insidels, Unbelievers and Heathens,
and proclaim them in their writings published by authority, to be men who
deny, disclaim, and preach against Christ's Kingly government over his
Churches, men unconverted or at least converted but in part, wanting the maine
thing, to wit, Christ's Kingly Office: men visibly out of the Covenant of grace,
who have not so much as an outward profession of faith, who deny Christ to be
their King, to whose persons and infants, the very Sacraments and Seals of
grace with all Church Communion, may and ought to be denied. And this is the
language and opinion of many, as their Pulpits can witness, and their
Pamphlets declare, in the which they signify unto us likewise, that they have
not spoke all they can plead for themselves, and against us, but that they do
keep a reserve donee ad Triarios redierit res, until it come to a dead lift,
in case they shall be brought before Princes and Rulers to give an account of
what they do or desire. These are their formal words, and farther add, that
we put them upon too unreasonable a task to satisfy us in all that they do
and desire. Whereas Saint Peter in his first Epistle chap. 3. commands all
Christians to be ready to give a reason of their hope to every one that shall
demand it of them. And as by such expressions as these, it does evidently
appear they jugle, and deal not heartily with their brethren, and according
to the revealed Will of God, and the example of Paul, who delivered unto the
Ephesians the whole counsel of God, and kept no reserve, donee ad Triarios
redierit res, until it came to a dead lift, and that he was brought before
Kings and Rulers; but publicly and privately from house to house, night and
day, taught them the whole counsel and will of God, and withheld nothing that
concerned them to know or practice, nor never ketp any reserve, Act. 20. So
also they publish their uncharitableness and unchristian dealing toward their
brethren whiles they not only conceal from them, and keep a reserve of such
things as they pretend are conducible to bring them to salvation, and to a more
perfect knowledge of Jesus Christ and of the good will, pleasure, and ways of
God: but whiles they un-Church, un-Christian, and un-Minister them likewise,
and make them all no better then the offscouring of the earth, and a company
of cast-awaies, which they do in word and deed, as their daily practice does
testify, and manifest to all men, when they separate from our Congregations
and assemblies, and proclaim us all a false and an Antichristian Church, and
enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom. Now that I may manifest unto all the
World, that the Papists who accuse our Church to be heretical do most
impiously and malignantly abuse us, and that all other that deny the Church of
England to be a true Church, do also most maliciously, and falsely traduce us,
and belie the truth, and for the convincing of both their errors, and
maintenance of the truth, and in the just defense of the Church of England and
for the proving of her a true Church, and for the stopping also of the mouths
of all gainsayers, I have published the following discourse, which if thou
Christian Reader shall peruse without a prejudicate opinion, I doubt not but
thou will find arguments sufficient to prove the Church of England a true
Church, and firm reasons also, to continue constantly in the communion and
fellowship of the same, and to abhor those unwarrantable ways of separation,
howsoever in their mildest and sweetest discourses, they account of all such as
now stand up in the defense of the truth against the errors of the times, as
of a company of Wolves, Bears, Lions, and Tigers, (for this is the language
they give us, and that in such books as in which they profess meekness of
spirit) with whom they ought to have no fellowship and brotherly communion. And
if thou through the blessing of God upon the reading of it, shall reap any
benefit by it, I shall desire thee to give the glory to God, who has used me
as an instrument, and to esteem of him, who as he is, and ever shall be filius
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, so thy servant for our Masters sake,

JOHN BASTWICK.

THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND a true CHURCH.
By JOHN BASTWICK, Doctor in Physic.
Master MOUNTAGUE,
AS there is nothing in the World I more wish and earnestly pray for, than that
God may be glorified, his name and truth known amongst all men, that they may
be saved: so there is no man, that does more fervently desire, and shall more
diligently endeavor to the uttermost of his abilities, to bring men into the
right way, how they may come to the knowledge of God, and of themselves,
wherein consists their eternal happiness, than my self. And this I take to
be not only my duty, but the duty indeed of all those that call upon the name
of God in sincerity. And I am most assured that no ingenuous man will
misinterpret this my zeal, or blame my love, or condemn me, that I wish the
common salvation of mankind, and that they may both know, and constantly
persevere in that faith that was once delivered to the Saints of old, Jude
verse. 3. which all Christians are bound earnestly to contend for: especially if
they consider, that in all this my care, I seek not my self, or any private
emolument by it, but that men may live happily and comfortably in this world,
and be perennally blessed when mortality shall be swallowed up of life. And
this was the principal cause that made me so willing to seek your
acquaintance, and gratify your desire, which was, that I would come and
confer with you about points of Religion in controversy between the Church
of Rome and us. I confess there were many thousands in the Kingdom fitter for
that employment, and that might have given better satisfaction in those
questions than my self: yet because I heard you had been many months in
prison, and had earnestly wished to discourse with any of our religion, and
none came to you (as you signified to Master Lieutenant, and from whom you
received this answer, that he never had any notice of any such thing before
this time) and understanding withal, that you had a desire in particular to
dispute with me, it made me the more willing to embrace the occasion, and
chiefly because there went a great fame of you, to be a man both of candor,
learning, and ingenuity. Which worthy praise of yours shall never be impeached
by me, neither will any man endeavor in the least to diminish it, as I hope,
if you shall stand to your resolution and solemn promise, which was, that if
any man could prove unto you that the Protestant Church, or the Church of
England, was a true Church, that then you would come to our Church, and be of
our profession. All which you did in the presence of the Lieutenant and many
other Gentlemen, then and there again seriously protest. Now I say, if upon
evident demonstration and infallible arguments it shall appear to all men,
that the Church of England is a true Church, and where salvation may be found,
if you stand to your promise you must renounce the Church of Rome, and become a
son of the Church of England, a true Protestant; and in so doing you shall
bring glory to God, comfort to your soul, and have the praise of all men for
your integrity and faithfulness in your promise.

But that all things may be without confusion and perturbation, which cannot so
well be avoided in disputations and conferences, I shall orderly and
methodically set down what passed between us in our disputation, and I will
neither add nor detract from the substance in any thing, yea as near as I
can, I will keep the very expressions, so that the Gentlemen that were there
present, when they see it, may behold my fair dealing and faithfulness in
relating every thing. Which that I might the better do, I leaned not to my
own memory, but made use of their notes that took our discourse, and have
reduced the whole dispute into that order that will make it easy to be
understood, and as I hope, I shall dilucidatly prove the Church of England to
be a true Church, so also that the Scriptures of the old and new Testament
contain all things in them sufficient and necessary for our salvation, and
that they are the only and infallible rule to which all Christians are tied,
to the end of the world, and from which they are not to swerve or decline
either to the right hand or to the left, but are bound to make it, and it
only, the absolute rule for the regulating of their faith, and the ordering of
their manners. The which two last propositions were accidentally started,
partly in examining the proofs and by your evasions, and partly by reason of
the Gentlemen that were standers by, whom you Master Mountague and my self are
beholding to for their fair carriage toward us both, whom I could not but
with honor mention, not only for their civility, but indeed Christian
behavior.

But before I set down my arguments for the proof of the first question, I
shall crave leave to bring to your memory, wherein I declared my self before
them all, that I agreed with you, which was in this point, that the ordinary
way in Gods providence for the conversion and saving of men was the Church
where the Gospel is preached, which is the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.
ver. 14. according to that of Saint Paul, the first Epistle to Timothy, chap.
3. verse. 14, 15. These things I write unto thee, hoping to come unto thee
shortly; but if I tarry longer, that thou may know how thou ought to
behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God,
the pillar and ground of truth. In this verse the Apostle in an elegant
metaphor, compares Gods dealing in making known his will and pleasure unto his
people and children, to the customs of Kings and Princes, who in publishing
their minds and pleasures to their servants and subjects, cause their
Proclamations to be set up upon pillars in their houses, and before their
Palaces, and in the Cities and Towns through their Dominions, after they have
proclaimed them by their Officers appointed to that purpose, whether their
people may have recourse to know their Royal pleasure. And to this custom, I
say, of the Potentates and Monarchs of the earth does Paul allude in this his
expression, comparing the Church unto a pillar, because in the Church the Lord
Jesus the King of Saints, and King of Kings does declare his will and pleasure
to his people, what he would have them to do, and what he would have them
leave undone, what they should believe, and what they should practice; in the
performance of all which they may assure themselves of his protection here, and
of full deliverance from all their enemies, and of eternal felicity hereafter.
So that all those that desire to be saved, and to know the true way to Heaven,
they ought to address themselves to the true Church, which is the house of
God, the pillar and ground of truth. Now, that the Church of England is a true
Church, and the ground and pillar of truth, is that (Master Montague) you deny,
and which is my task to prove. Which, if I can evince, you are bound by your
promise to embrace it, and to relinquish the Church of Rome. But before I
begin, I thought good to mind you of this, that it was your desire I should
reduce all this discourse into order and send it to you, and you promised me
faithfully to answer it. You may remember also, that you left it arbitrary what
Translation I should use, either ours or the Rhemists, for it was all one to
me, as I told you, and you signified to me in the presence of them all, that it
was indifferent to you. I have therefore made use of our own, because the
Translation is best known to the people, and the other hard to come by; and
also because many of the learned^^ Papists that have read our last Translation
have confessed that it comes far nigher the original than any of the former.
But if you shall hereafter except against it, there shall be no difference
about that in the handling of the controversy between us, for I will then make
use of yours.

But now I come to my argument, which is this:

That Church that teaches the way, the truth, and the life, against which the
gates of hell can never prevail, that is a true Church, the house of God, the
Church of the living God, the ground and pillar of truth, in which salvation
may be found.

But the Church of England is a Church that teaches the way, the truth, and
the life, against which the gates of hell can never prevail.

Ergo, the Church of England is a true Church, the ground and pillar of truth,
in which salvation may be found.

For answer to which, you first made your apology, that if I meant to proceed
in a Syllogisticall way, that you were no Scholl^r. To which I replying told
you, that I knew very well, that you were a Scholar, and that this way of
disputing was the best means of finding out of truth, and that I would leave my
argument with you, and not only for you, but for whomsoever you pleased to
assist and help you. To which you answered, that it was fairly said, and that
it was a fair and syllogisticall way. Notwithstanding you would reject your
own capacity to answer in such a way, reiterating your former expression,
saying, that you were no Scholar, no Logitian, no Philosopher. But, said you,
to justify my self to these Gentlemen here, I am content to answer to your
syllogism. Then I told you that you must deny one of the propositions, the
major or the minor. To which you answered, I deny the minor; it stands you upon
to prove it. Here I cite the words verbatim, as I find them written by the
Scribes.

But Master Montague, before I come to the proof of my minor give me leave to
speak my opinion of you, for I desire to traduce no man, nor minorise the
worth of any man. I conceive that you are every way as learned and accomplished
for all knowledge in your religion, as any of that fraternity, as well for your
natural abilities and endowments of wit and understanding, as for your most
excellent education, as also in regard of the opportunities you have had at
home and abroad of attaining to erudition, you ever being in the society of
learned men, and in the Schools of wisdom and knowledge, in the which you
were never accounted a trewant, who always so improved your time, as you have
made as good a progress in all learning as any of your years. And in this
notion I consider you, and shall ever allow you the full weight of your
praises, earnestly entreating you, that you would employ that talent of
understanding and learning that God had bestowed upon you to the advancement of
his Glory and Kingdom, and that you would not make use of it to the wronging
of your own soul, and the damage of others. And especially I entreat you
that in this bright Sunshine of the Gospel and truth you would open your eyes
and not love darkness more than light. And now I come to prove my minor, the
truth of which I thus assert.

That Church which is built upon the foundation of Peter, that Church teaches
the way, the truth, and the life, against which the gates of hell shall never
prevail, etc.

But the Church of England is built upon the foundation of Peter.

Ergo, the Church of England teaches the way, the truth, and the life, against
which the gates of hell can never prevail, and is a true Church, the house of
God, the ground and pillar of truth, where salvation may be found.

You answered, that the Church of England was not built upon the foundation of
Peter, and therefore denied the minor. Which by Gods assistance in the sequel
I shall sufficiently prove. But as then, I desired favor, that I might for the
benefit of the standers by, and that the ensuing discourse might the better be
understood by all, interpret the terms of my Syllogism. First, what I meant
by the foundation of Peter. Secondly, what I understood by building upon that
foundation; and which but in part you then gave me liberty to express. So I
shall now by your good liking take leave more fully to set it down, because as
I said before, it does much conduce to the more clear understanding of the
following disputation.

By the foundation of Peter I understand Jesus Christ. And it is evident there
is no other foundation of Peter nor of the true Church. As we may see in the
16. of Matthew. ver. 13, 14. in that parley which was between Christ and his
Apostles, where our Savior asking his Disciples what men said of him, and they
replying answered, that some said he was John Baptist, some Elias, and others
Jeremias, or one of the Prophets. Then said Jesus, but whom say ye that I am?
And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God.
And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Iona, for
flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven. And I say unto thee, upon this rock I will build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Here Peter in the name of all the
Disciples acknowledges Jesus Christ to be the foundation of the Church. The
same he does John the 6. verse. 69. where again in the name of all the Apostles
he says, We believe and are sure that thou art Christ the Son of the living
God. And in the verse before he said, Lord to whom shall we go? thou have the
words of eternal life. There was no other rock known to Peter and the blessed
Apostles, no other foundation, no other to fly to for life eternal but Jesus
Christ. But in the 4 of the Acts verse. 11. in that glorious Sermon of his,
Peter in his own name thus speaks concerning Christ, This is the stone, which
was set at naught by you builders, which is become the head of the corner,
neither is there salvation in any other, for there is no other name under
Heaven given amongst men whereby we must be saved. No other foundation
therefore of the Church, but Christ. And in his first Epistle the second
Chapter the fourth and fifth verses he thus speaks, To whom coming as unto a
living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye
also as living stones are built up a spiritual house, etc. No other foundation
for all Christians to be built upon but Christ, according to that of Paul in
the first of Cor. chap. 3. ver. 11. For other foundation can no man lay than
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ the eternal Son of the eternal Father.
The same is confirmed in the second chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians,
verse. 19, 20. Now therefore ye are no more strangers, but fellow Citizens, etc.
and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone. So that the foundation of all the
Prophets and Apostles, and all that ever were saved was Jesus Christ, who is
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. Heb. 13. verse. 8. the only
Savior of his people, and the foundation of his Church, and the only way, and
the truth, and the life, as he declares himself in the 14 of John; and
therefore in his name only is salvation preached amongst the Gentiles, and to
all Nations. And this I thought fit to say concerning my meaning of the
foundation of Peter.

Now I will signify what I understand by the term of building, and to be
built upon the foundation of Peter. This is a metaphorical expression, taken
from Architects, and in Gods dialect it is nothing else but to believe in Jesus
Christ. For as in building the stones polished are by cement and mortar joined
to the foundation, so all believers, those lively stones are built upon Jesus
Christ, that living stone, by faith which joins them to their head and
foundation Christ Jesus; and that only as Peter himself interprets it in his
first Epistle chap. 2. verse. 6. Wherefore it is contained in the holy
Scripture. Behold I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious, and he
that believes on him shall not be confounded. Unto you therefore which believe,
he is precious. So that to be built upon the rock Christ Jesus, by Peter's own
interpretation, is to believe in Jesus Christ for salvation, which we cannot
do in any creature without blasphemy. The same doctrine is preached by Paul in
the second Chapter of his Epistle to the Colossians, verse. 5, 6, 7. For though
I be absent in the flesh, yet I am with you in the spirit, joying and beholding
your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ. As ye have therefore
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted and built upon him,
and established in the faith, etc. Here, to be rooted and built up in Christ,
is to believe in Jesus Christ, and by his alone merits to hope for salvation,
who was made for us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1
Cor. 1. ver. 3^. and who was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. and therefore, to
be built upon the foundation of Peter is to believe in Jesus Christ, and in him
only for salvation, for there is no other name whereby we may be saved. And
that this is the true meaning of that metaphorical expression, may be
evidenced by innumerable testimonies in holy Scripture, but for the present
these shall serve, the following discourse will afford us more. But this I
thought fit to set down because the terms of my syllogism being cleared the
ensuing discourse will be more intelligible. And I now come to prove my minor,
which was, that the Church of England was built upon the foundation of Peter.
Which you denied, but by me is thus proved.

That Church which acknowledges Jesus Christ to be the Son of the eternal
living God, and believes only in him for salvation, renouncing all merit,
will worship, humane inventions in Gods service, which continues steadfastly in
the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, and in the which Church the Gospel
of Jesus Christ is purely preached, repentance toward God, and faith toward
the Lord Jesus Christ, and where the Sacraments are rightly administered, and in
the which there is the true invocation of God; That Church is built upon the
foundation of Peter, and teaches the way, the truth, and the life, and is the
pillar and ground of truth.

But the Church of England acknowledges Jesus Christ to be the Son of the
eternal living God, and believes only in him for salvation, renouncing all
merit, will worship, humane inventions in Gods service, and continues steadfastly
in the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, in which Church the Gospel of
Jesus Christ is purely preached, repentance toward God, and faith toward the
Lord Jesus Christ, and where the Sacraments are rightly administered, and in the
which there is the true invocation of God.

Ergo, the Church of England is built upon the foundation of Peter, and
teaches the way, the truth and the life, against which the gates of hell can
never prevail, and is a true Church, the ground and pillar of truth.

To this syllogism you first showed your dislike, in regard of the length of
it, though in very deed considering the waightinesse of the business in hand,
it being about the way to salvation, and concerning the true Church, which
shows the path to Heaven, there cannot too much almost be said. Secondly, you
affirmed that there was not any one portion of those many parts of it, as you
expressed your self that you could not except against. And whereas I spoke of
merit and will worship, you affirmed, if you should stand upon the doctrine of
merit, the application of it would demand a week, but in fine you denied the
minor, asserting that we did not believe in Jesus Christ as we should and ought
to believe; that the Sacraments were not truly and rightly administered in the
Church of England, and then put me upon the proof of my minor. Which I shall
by Gods gracious assistance evidently evince and make good with every part and
portion of it, notwithstanding whatsoever you denied then, or shall hereafter
be able to gainsay. Using therefore the same liberty I did formerly, I will
first explain, and then confirm the several parts of my syllogism, and show
not only the necessity, but the truth of every one of them, and with so much
the more care and diligence, they being indeed the infallible notes and
characters of a true Church, and as I may rightly say, the everlasting marks
of the same, never deceiving, so that wheresoever they be found they are so
many evidences and charters to confirm the Church to be a true Church where
they are, yea any one of them, much more all together will abundantly testify
that Church to be the house of God, the Church of the living God, the ground
and pillar of truth. And that all these notes and marks are in the Church of
England I shall, Master Montague, by Gods assistance (as I said before)
elucidately prove, so that all your evasions, captions and exceptions, with all
your denials will speedily appear to be groundless and of no validity for the
enervating, much less overthrowing of so solid and grounded a truth.

The parts therefore of my minor are these. First, That the Church of England
does acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the Son of the living God. Secondly, that
it does believe in this Jesus Christ as it ought to believe, in that it does
renounce all merit, will worship, and humane inventions in Gods service. Which
is the qualification and very effigies of true and saving faith, and which is
requisite in any Church to make it a true Church, and without all which indeed
it cannot be a true Church. Thirdly, That it continues steadfastly in the
doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets. Fourthly and lastly, that the Gospel is
purely preached in the Church of England, repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and that the Sacraments are rightly there
administered. And that there is the true invocation of God in the Church of
England. These are the parts of my syllogism, which in order I will explain
and confirm, and show the verity of every one of them in the Church of
England. And although I should say no more after that, yet it would suffice to
show the vanity of your exceptions and negation, and confirm the full truth of
my whole syllogism.

Now to begin with the first, viz. That the Church of England does acknowledge
Jesus Christ to be the Son of the eternal living God: which is easily
evinced, in whatsoever signification the word acknowledge be taken. Which
manner of expression I rather made choice of than of any other, as conceiving
it subject to less exceptions among intelligible and ingenuous men. For to
acknowledge any thing is more than a bare knowledge, it being a recognition,
the thing being not unknown to him before: but now calling it to memory, or it
being brought to his hearing or sight, upon deliberation with certainty he does
avouch his knowledge of it. As when a man is charged with a Letter, or any
other thing, and it be presented to his view, and it be demanded of him,
whether he knows the Letter or the thing presented to him, or no? or whether
he will own it? He answers, I acknowledge it: that is, he declares to all men,
and confesses it to be his own: here is a knowledge with approbation. So that
take the word in whatsoever sense it is commonly used, either for approving,
allowing, confessing, avouching, owning, in all this diversity of expressions,
or if there be any other, the Church of England does acknowledge Jesus Christ,
of whom it has often heard in the holy Word of God, that he was the beloved
Son of God, in whom the Lord was well pleased; and as in him, so for his sake
and merits, with all that shall believe in him. And in this notion they
acknowledge him, as he is revealed in the holy Scriptures, and set forth to be
the Savior of his people from their sins, Matthew. 1. verse. ^1. to be that
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, John 1. verse. 29.
Amongst many examples, for the more full illustration of the whole matter,
these few following may suffice; as that in the story of Joseph, Genesis 37:
where the messengers brought Joseph's coat to Jacob his father, verse. 32.33. See
now (say they) whether it be thy sons coat, or no. Th^n he knew it to be the
very coat, and said, it is my sons coat. He knew it very well before, but
here he avoucheth his knowledge of it, that is, he did acknowledge it with
certainty. Another example we have of Thomas, John 20. verse. 25, 26, 27, 28,
29. who when the Disciples told him, that Christ was risen, and that they had
seen the Lord, be said unto them, Except I see his hands, and the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and put my hand into
his side, I will not believe it. And eight days after his Disciples were
again within, and Thomas with them, then came Jesus and stood in the midst,
and said, Peace be unto you. After said he to Thomas, put thy finger here, and
see my hands, etc. and be not faithless, but faithful. Then Thomas answered
and said unto him, My Lord and my God. Jesus says unto him, Thomas, because
thou have seen me thou beleivest: blessed are they that have not seen and have
believed. Thomas knew well that Christ was wounded, but when he saw the wounds,
then he acknowledged as well his own infidelity, as, that Christ was his Lord
and his God, and in express words avoucheth his knowledge with certainty. Here
the story of the Samaritans John 4. may have place, who believed before they
saw Christ, by the woman's relation of him, that he was the Messiah; but they
believed much more after they had both seen and heard him, and did publicly
acknowledge him to be the Christ the Savior of the World, verse. 41. This
Christ does the Church of England, though they have neither heard nor seen him,
believe in, and know, yea with certainty and approbation acknowledge him to be
their Lord and their God, and the Savior of the world: and therefore by
Christ's own mouth, are proclaimed blessed and need fear no man's curses. Yea
the Church of England does both know and acknowledge this Christ, in as ample a
manner as humane frailty can attain to, and publish and preach salvation only
in his name, according to the holy Scriptures, and will to the last drop of
their blood acknowledge him to be their Lord and only redeemer, in the which
they are most assured to find comfort in life and death; and by the power of
whose might, to be more than conquerours, through him that loved them. Romans 7.
verse. 37. and are sure of life eternal, which Christ himself has promised to
them that know him. John 17. ver. 3. This is life eternal, says he, that they
know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.
According to the Prophecy of Isaiah Chap. 53. ver. 11. By his knowledge shall
my righteous servant justify many: for he shall be are their iniquities. That
Church therefore in the which the knowledge of the only true God and of Jesus
Christ is diligently, fully, and sincerely taught unto the people, and where
Christ is received and acknowledged by them, to be the eternal Son of God,
and the redeemer of the world: that Church is a true Church, and is built upon
the foundation of Peter, and believes as it ought to believe. But in the Church
of England the knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ, is known, acknowledged,
taught, and published in as ample a manner as is above specified, as all men
can witness: Ergo, it is a true Church, and built upon the foundation of
Peter, etc. And thus much, Master Montague, shall serve to have spoken of the
first part of my syllogism, the truth of all which you cannot deny, without
wronging your own judgment, and the truth it self.

Now I come to the second part, viz That the Church of England does believe in
Jesus Christ, as it ought to believe, (which you denied) in that it does
renounce all selfe-merit in the work of redemption, and all will worship and
humane inventions in Gods service, which is the qualification and very effigies
of true and saving faith, and which is requisite in any Church, to make it a
true Church, and without which it cannot indeed be a true Church: which will
evidently appear, when I have described what is meant by believing in Jesus
Christ, and renouncing all selfe-merit in the matter of salvation, and all
will worship and humane inventions in Gods service. But now to begin with
believing. To believe in Jesus Christ is nothing else but to own and embrace
him, as he is revealed to us in the holy Word of God, for the alone, only, and
perfect Savior, and to place their whole affiance, confidence and trust in him
only for salvation; and to rely upon him as their only Redeemer and perfect
Savior, and that with a certain and solid persuasion, and invincible
assurance, according to that of Saint Peter, John 6. ver. 68. and 69. Lord to
whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. And we believe and are
sure, that thou art the Christ the Son of the living God. Here was a certain
and unmovable assurance in the Apostles, which did evidence the truth of their
faith. Such was Abraham's faith, Romans 4. ver. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Who
against hope believed in hope, etc. and being not weak in faith, etc. He
staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith,
giving glory to God. And being fully persuaded that what he had promised he was
able to perform. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now
it was not written for his sake alone, but for us also, to whom it shall be
imputed, if we believe on him who raised up Jesus from the dead. Who was
delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification. In
this place we may take notice of the Patriarch Abraham's faith, whose example
was set down for our imitation, that as he believed and gave glory to God by
his faith: so should we. Now consider, I pray, the variety of the holy Apostles
expression in setting down Abraham's faith. Who, says he, against hope
believed in hope. He was not weak in the faith. He staggered not at the
promise through unbelief: but was strong in the faith, and fully persuaded.
Here are very glorious praises of Abraham's faith, and indeed the praise of the
faith of the Saints of old was this, that they were certainly assured. So we
read Luke 1. verse. 1. Whereof we are fully persuaded, etc. and Heb. 10. verse.
34. And ye took the spoiling of your goods with joy, knowing in your selves
you had in Heaven a better and enduring substance. So in the first Epistle of
St. John chap. 3. verse. 2. Behold now are we the sons of God, and it does not
yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall
be like him: for we shall see him as he is. In all the Saints we find an
infallible assurance and an undaunted and unremoveable confidence in Jesus
Christ, who they believed was delivered for their offenses, and raised again
for their justification, knowing there was no other name under Heaven, given
amongst men, whereby we must be saved. Acts 4 ver. 11. And this faith in Jesus
Christ, is that, that will support us in all tribulations, and finally save us,
according to that in St. John chap. 3. ver. 14, 15, 16. As Moses lifted up the
Serpent in the wilderness; even so must the Son of man be lifted up: that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life. For God
so loved the world, that be gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And verse. 18. He
that believes on him is not condemned, but^^ that believes not is condemned
already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son
of God. And in Chap. 5. ver. 24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
believes my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life,
and shall not come into condemnation: but is passed from death to life.
Numberless testimonies might be accumulated out of the holy Scripture, to
prove, that only to be the true faith and knowledge of Christ, when we do
conceive him in such sort as he is offered of the Father, that is to say,
clothed with the Gospel; for faith has a mutual relation to the word, and
the word to faith, because the word is the fountain of faith, and the ground
of faith, and the mirror in which faith beholds God, as Christ says here,
He that believes my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life: and shall not come into condemnation: but is passed from death to life.
This that I have now said, Mr. Montague, will I hope give satisfaction to any
rational man, if not to your self, that the Church of England believes as it
ought to believe, because it regulates the faith of all Christians according to
the word of God, and Christ their only Prophet: and therefore it is an
unanswerable argument, that the Church of England is a true Church, and built
upon the foundation of Peter, when it joyneth the knowledge of God in Jesus
Christ, and faith in him alone, together; Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, that he
might be just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus. Romans 3. v.
25, 26. When therefore, I say, the Church of England joyneth the knowledge of
God and Christ, and faith in them both inseparably together, and makes daily
publication of this same doctrine, it is evident that it is a true Church, and
built upon the foundation of Peter, the ground and pillar of truth, and where
salvation may be attained unto: for that Church which shall confess with the
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in their heart, that God has raised
him from the dead, shall be saved: for with the heart men believe unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Romans 10.
But the Church of England does all this. Ergo, it believes as it should
believe, and is a Church where salvation may be found. And had the Church of
England, Mr. Montague, but this mark alone, it were enough for ever to stop
the mouths of all gainsayers, and prove that it is a true Church, and built
upon the foundation of Peter, and believes as it ought to believe.

And now I come to the qualification, viz. That the Church of England does
renounce all self-merit in matter of salvation, and all will worship and humane
inventions in Gods service, which are requisites in any Church to make it a
true Church, and without which it cannot be a true Church. You may remember,
Mr. Montague, when you heard the name of merit and will worship you began to
bestir your self, as if it had something troubled you: and it does indeed
highly concern you to look about you, lest falling upon the rock of your
own merits, you dash your self in pieces, and destroy your own soul. And
you affirmed, that if you should speak of the doctrine of merits; it would
last you a week. Truly, Mr. Montague, if you should speak a month, or a
year together of Christ's merits, and what he has done and suffered for the
redemption of mankind, I should willingly be your anditor, and think that
nothing sufficient enough could be uttered or expressed to magnify Gods and
Christ's love, and to stir up thankfulness, obedience, and love to God and
Christ again, for their infinite mercy toward us, such miserable creatures as
we poor men are. But, Mr. Montague, if you shall speak but one minute of an
hour to extol man's merit, or to preach that men by their good works can or
may merit Heaven; or if you go about to establish that blasphemous doctrine
(for it is no better) you shall have just cause to repent all the days of your
life, for your so doing: for this doctrine tends to overthrow the glorious
Gospel, and the whole work of our redemption and Christ's sufferings, and
opens an other way to Heaven, than any of the Saints of old knew of, who ever
taught that Christ only was the way, the truth, and the life, and not men's
merits and works of supererogation. Therefore Mr. Montague, that Church that
teaches the free grace and eternal love of God in Jesus Christ unto the
people, when we were dead in our sins and trespasses, and that inculcates
self-denial upon all men, and urges them in matter of salvation to rely only
upon Christ and his obedience and passion, with all his merits, and to follow
the guidance of his word, for the manner of his service; and teaches them to
reject all will worship and humane inventions in honoring God: that Church
believes as it ought to believe, and teaches the true way to Heaven, and is
built upon the foundation of Peter: for all these things are the necessary
requisites for the making of a true Church, as I shall (God willing) speedily
show. But if I shall be more large upon this point, I desire your pardon: for
in my opinion it is a doctrine of as great concernment as any in Religion, and
where it is taught, it is a sure evidence of a true Church. In the handling of
the which, I will prove all I shall say out of the holy Scripture, which I make
the rule of faith.

All therefore that will believe in Jesus Christ aright, and as he himself
would have them, and be his Disciples, they must deny themselves and renounce
all selfe-merits; for that is the first lesson he teaches them, Mat. the 16
verse. 24. If any man, says he, will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross and follow me: and Luke the 9. verse. 23. If any man will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily and follow
me. This lesson is taught both in the Law and Gospel, as in the places now
cited, and also in the 55 of Isaiah ver. 6.7. Seek ye the Lord while he may
be found, call upon him while he is nigh; let the wicked forsake his ways, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. By
these testimonies of holy Scripture, we learn, that the first step to Heaven,
is self-denial and renouncing our own merits. This self-denial consists of
three parts. The first, a mean esteem of our selves. The second, a daily
taking up of the cross. The third, a following of Christ's example and
foote-steps, in patient doing and suffering, what God would have us. And this
Master Mountague is not an easy lesson to learn. But now to leave the two
latter parts, I will only insist upon the first, which is to deny our selves;
and in self-denial, three things are requisite. First, for the magnifying of
the free grace of God, we ought to be humble, mean and nothing in our own
eyes: for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, James 4. and
the first of Peter 5. and this was ever the practice of all the Saints. Abraham
counts himself dust and ashes, when he has to deal with God. And Christ,
Mat. 11. says, Learn of me, for I am humble and meek. So that all those that
have rightly learned this lesson, have no high and overtowring thoughts and
conceits of their own worth or merits, but lie low and prostrate before God,
acknowledging themselves miserable sinners and unprofitable servants when they
have done that was commanded them, and in a word are weary and heavy laden.
Secondly, we must renounce our own wills and reason, and bring them in
subjection to the will and pleasure of God; not our own wills and reason
therefore, but the will of Christ must suffice us, his wisdom must be our
reason. Thirdly, we must count all things as dung in comparison of Christ, and
for the excellency of the knowledge of him, and ought to esteem all things but
loss, willingly and cheerfully relinquishing and forsaking, friends, riches,
honors, yea, if necessity require, for the cause of Christ and keeping of a
good conscience, we must abandon our own lives, and whatsoever is dearest unto
us, all which cannot consist with the thought of selfe-merit; for this lesson
teaches us humility, and just cause indeed have all men seriously and
unfainedly to be humble, for if we look upon all men since the fall of Adam,
as they are in their natural condition, we shall find nothing in them but
sin and corruption, and that they are wicked in all their ways, and
unrighteous in all their thoughts, and therefore they ought to be humble and to
forsake and deny themselves, and to return unto the Lord and come unto Christ,
and be lowly under the mighty hand of God, if they will obtain mercy, find
pardon and be exalted; this is the first lesson, I say we must learn. Yea, the
very regenerate themselves and the dearest Saints and Servants of God, whiles
they remain in this Tabernacle of clay, and till their souls be unbodyed,
find themselves so laden with iniquity, transgression and sin, as they have
always matter of humiliation, never of glorying, never of vanting of their own
merits, never of boasting of their own righteousness, but rather of seeking
another righteousness, the righteousness of Heaven, the righteousness of
Faith, which is Christ's righteousness, by which they may appear before God,
and this they can never obtain to, without self-denial and renouncing all
their own merits.

But it will not be amiss, Master Mountague, briefly to take notice of all
men in their natural condition, and after their Regeneration, and that both
before the Law, and under the Law, and under the Gospel, and see Gods own
Testimony of them all, and the witness and testimony the holiest men, that
ever were, and lived, gave of themselves, and then it will be clearly
evidenced they renounced all selfe-nesse and all their own merits, and looked
only for salvation by the merits of Jesus Christ. And first let us hear, what
God says of all the seed of Adam before their Regeneration, Genesies the 6
verse. 5. and God saw that the wickedness of man was great upon the Earth, and
that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was only evil
continually. Note here the spirit of God does not say, that man has some evil
thoughts, or that his thoughts are evil sometimes: but he asserts, First, that
every imagination, or the whole immagination, purpose or desire of the heart
are evil: Secondly, that they are evil continually, or every day, always
evil, and in the 8. Chap. verse. 21. he affirms the same, saying, The
imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. The corruption therefore of
all men begins with them from their Cradle, and if God does not regenerate us
it continues and accompanies us to our grave; and this is the condition of all
men before Regeneration, and that before the Law and under the Law, and under
the Gospel. And it could be no otherwise by the Testimony of Job. 14. verse. 4.
Who can bring, says he, a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. All came
of a corrupt seed.

David witnesses the same, Psalm. 51. verse. 5. Behold, I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me: such a generation of men
without self-denial, and returning from their wicked ways, and forsaking
their unrighteous thoughts and imaginations cannot be Christ's Disciples. This
miserable condition of mankind, is every where published through the Scripture,
to being men to a more deep humiliation and abhorring of themselves, Psalm. the
14. verse. 2. The Lord looked down from Heaven, says the Psalmist, upon the
children of men, to see if there were any, that did understand and seek God.
They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there is none that
does good, no not one. By this testimony, we see the corruption so general,
that the Lord exempteth no man from it. The same doctrine is confirmed in the
53 Psalm. and in this condition, do all men continue, till they are regenerated,
and begot anew: for so long as they are in their natural estate, and till they
are in Christ, they can do nothing pleasing unto God, nor bring forth any
acceptable fruit, Joh. the 15. verse. 5. Without me, says Christ, ye can do
nothing. For the wisdom of the flesh, says the Apostle, or the minding of the
flesh, Romans 8. verse. 6. is enmity against God: for it is not subject unto the
Law of God, neither indeed can be. The Apostle says not only, that the wisdom
of the flesh, is not subject, unto the Law of God but that it cannot be. And in
the first of the Cor. chap. the second the Apostle says, the natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him,
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Now, if the
unregenerate man, in his sensual and natural condition, cannot know and so
much as discern the things of the Spirit, the things of God, how much less
can he do the things, that God commands? Therefore before Regeneration, he is
dead in sins and trespasses, following the desires of the flesh, and of the
mind, and is by nature the child of wrath, Ephesians. 2. verse. 1.2.3. and this is
the condition of all men before Regeneration. Now, if they be dead in sins
and trespasses, and follow the lusts of the flesh, there is no life in them, to
that which is good, before they be raised from the grave of sin, which will
never be, before they forsake their own ways, and their own thoughts, and deny
themselves.

This is a known truth, ratified by the Apostle, Heb. 11. verse. 6. and
confirmed by the Testimony of all orthodox Writers, that without faith it is
impossible to please God. Now, all men in their natural condition, are without
faith, they are without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
and strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in
the World. Ephesians. 2. verse. 12. and therefore in a sad, deplorable, and
desperate condition, so long as they continue and abide in their corrupt
nature, and are not sanctified by grace, for without faith they cannot please
God, or do any good works: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.
verse. 23. And this is the natural condition of all mankind, before the Law,
and under the Law, and under the Gospel, as by all these, and innumerable more
witnesses might be evinced. And therefore all natural men must deny themselves
and renounce all, if they will be Christ's Disciples.

Yea the very regenerate must learn this Lesson of self-denial, and renounce
all their own merits and all their own works, or they cannot be Christ's
Disciples. The Saints of old knew that Lesson very well, and therefore they
never boasted of their own righteousness, or of their own merits, or good
works; that was Pharisaicall, who trusted in themselves, that they were
righteous, and despised others, as Christ speaks of them Luke the 17. verse. 9.
and 11.12. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God I thank thee,
that I am not as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as
this Publican. I fast twice in the week, and give Tithes of all that I
possess. They were also frequent in Almsdeeds, so that if works either of
the ceremonial, judicial, and moral Law could have justified any, or brought
them to Heaven, the Pharisees might as well by their merits have challenged
Heaven, as any justiciaries in this Age, who come far short of their
righteousness. And yet our Savior Christ says of them, Mat. the 5. verse. 20.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. I say
therefore, the Saints and Servants of God in all ages, were so far from
presuming of their own merits, or challenging of Heaven by their good works,
that we find them all by their own testimonies and witness, disclayming
them, and pouring out their prayers and supplications for pardon of sin, and
removal of judgments deserved by them; and all of them, condemning and
accusing themselves for sinful men, even after, I say, their regeneration. And
if any, by their good works or by their own merits, might have challenged
favor from God, or acceptance from him: then Moses or Job, or Noah, or Samuel,
or Daniel, or Abraham, or David, or some of all the glorious and holy Prophets,
or some of the blessed Apostles, might have done it, better than any Justiciary
of this age, concerning many of the which God himself gives an honorable
testimony, and yet we find the whole Scripture full of their complaints, that
they have made against themselves for their iniquities, transgressions, and
sins, and ever desiring pardon, and craving mercy for themselves, and for
their people, and never vanting of their own merits. But let us take notice,
what God speaks of some of them, and how honorably, Jer. 15. verse. 1. Thus
says the Lord, though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not
be toward this people; cast them out of my sight. And in Ezekiel the 14. verse.
20. Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as I live says the Lord God, they
shall deliver neither son nor daughter, they shall deliver but their own
souls, by their righteousness. These were men, all of them, in high favor
with God, who gives them here a glorious testimony, as in many other places in
holy Scripture, of righteousness, as in Numb. the 12. and Heb. the 3. he
commends Moses for his faithfulness in his house, and of Job he says Job 1.
verse. 8. Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in
the Earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth
evil? and Ezekiel the 28 verse. 3. he commends Daniel for his wisdom, and in
the first of the Kings the 13. verse. 14. of David he says, that he was a man
according to his own heart. And yet, if we look upon all these men, we shall
find them confessing and bewayling their own sins, and the sins of the
people, and never presuming of their own righteousness, nor vanting of their
own merits, but ever denying themselves, as in the 90 Psalm. verse. 8. Moses
there says, thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the
sight of thy Countnance, and verse. 13. return O Lord, how long? Here, we find
confession of sin and deprecation of judgment, even in Moses. Daniel also
confesses his sins and the sins of the people, and deprecates Gods
judgments, Daniel, the 9. verse. 20. and David in the 19 Psalm. ver. 13. says,
Who can understand his errors? Cleanse me from my secret sins. So that it is
evident, that besides the sins the Saints know of themselves, there are many
they take no notice of, and therefore ought with David ever to make this
prayer, Cleanse me from my secret sins; so that there can never be matter of
merit, where there are secret sins. And Job 9. ver. 20. If I justify my
self, says he, my own mouth shall condemn me. If I say, I am perfect, it
shall also prove me perverse. We see nothing of merit in all the Saints. Here I
might bring in the prayers of all the Patriarchs, of all the Prophets, of all
the Apostles and Saints of old, of the which the holy Scripture is full, and in
all of them they confess their own sins, and the sins of the people, and
ever deprecate Gods judgments, never pretending or presuming of their own
worth or merits, or challenging favor for them, from God; but prostrating and
humbly denying themselves: yea, in plain words and express terms they
proclaim themselves and all men, even the most regenerate, wicked and
abominable, and disavow their own righteousness, confessing that it is an
unclean thing, and look for mercy at Gods hand, only through Jesus Christ,
their righteousness. But let us hear the testimonies now, that both the
Prophets and Apostles gave of themselves, and of all the family of the
faithful; and what Christ himself taught us, who knew best what was in man
after regeneration. In the first of Kings and the 8. Solomon says there, There
is no man that sins not. And in Eccles. 7. ver. 20. he says, There is not a
just man upon the earth, that does good, and sins not. And Prove. 20. ver. 9.
Who can say, I have made my heart clean from my sin? Not the most righteous
man, and most holy. Hear what Job also witnesses concerning th business, Job
9. ver. 2, 3. How shall a man be just with God? if he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand. And of all the sins that come against
us, there is not the least, that deserves not eternal damnation, being
committed against an eternal Majesty. How far then, in Jobs esteem, are men
from complete and perfect righteousness? Yea how far then are they from
meriting? and in chap. 15. v. 14, 15, 16. What is man, says Job, that he
should be clean? and he that is borne of woman, that he should be righteous?
behold, he has no trust in his Saints; yea the Heavens are not clear in his
sight: how much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like
water? From all these places and many more, it may well be concluded, that the
very regenerate have sin still remaining in them, and through the corruption
of their nature that ever abides and continues in them, are inclined always to
that which is evil, and are unapt to all that is good, and can never attain
to complete and perfect righteousness, but have continual need with David, to
pray, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight no flesh
shall be justified. Psalm. 143. ver. 2. There are two sorts of justification or
righteousness: the one before men, and that is manifested by our works: and
the other is before God, and that cannot by any works of ours be attained to:
as by a cloud of witnesses might be proved. See therefore what David says
again, Psalm. 130. ver. 3. If thou, O Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord who
should stand? but there is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared;
Here is no presumption of merit, but confidence of mercy. Therefore the Prophet
Isaiah, chap. 64. ver. 6. in the name of all the faithful and regenerate,
disavowes all merits, and disclaimes all their own righteousness, in these
words, But we, says he, are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousness as filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our
iniquities like the wind have taken us away. The Prophet does not say here,
that all our unrighteousness, but all our righteousness; teaching all men
thereby, that the eyes of the Lord behold faults, failings, and blemishes, in
the very best, most perfect, and holiest actions, and in the which we most
earnestly desire to please God. And this is the doctrine the holy Prophet
teaches all men, to humble them the more, and to bring them to a loathing and
abominating of themselves, and to manifest unto them that there is no
perfection or absolute righteousness in the Saints themselves, and in the most
holy men, such as may justify them before God, but that there is always
matter of humiliation, and of self-denial in them: for as long as they are but
in the race, and as long as they remain in the flesh they cannot do the good
they would. So says St. Paul, Gal. 5. verse. 7. For the flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to
the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. This inward combat
continues as long as we live, and that, in all the Saints: and therefore they
can never attain unto perfection in this life, and therefore can never merit.
Yea, the holy Apostles continually acknowledge it, confessing their own
sinfulness, and failings, teaching all the faithful to do the same. So St.
John the beloved Disciple, in his first Epistle chap. 1. verse. 8. If we say, we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. St. James
also chap. 3. ver. 2. says, In many things we sin all. Here he excepts no
mortal man; all have their sins, and have need of self-denial. Paul also
that elect vessel groans under the burden of sin, and with grief and sorrow
acknowledges his continual combat with the remainders of his corruption, Romans
7. ver. 22, 23, 24. I delight, says he, in the Law of God, after the inward
man: but I see another law in my members warring against the law of my mind,
and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I
thank God, through Jesus Christ my Lord, etc. Paul had learned this lesson of
self-denial, acknowledging his sins, and making his recourse unto Christ,
for pardon and deliverance from it, knowing there was no other name under
Heaven to be saved by, and so he becomes Christ's Disciple, as all other sinners
if they will be saved must do: and that we are sinners, and can never in this
world attain unto an absolute perfection, and to a full and entire keeping and
fulfilling of the Law, the places I have now quoted, and the several witnesses
of all the Saints, and the very prayer our Savior himself has taught us, do
sufficiently testify, where we are instructed daily to say, forgive us our
sins. Luke 11. ver. 4. Now where there is no offense, there is no need of
pardon: but all the Saints as long as they live have need of pardon; therefore
as long as they live they are sinful, and have need of self-denial and of
true humility, and a mean esteem of themselves, and a renouncing of all their
own righteousness, if they will be Christ's disciples, and if they expect
salvation by him: for they must have it upon his own conditions: for he will
be savior to none, to whom he is not their Lord; he will be obeyed, and have
his pleasure submitted to, or else we cannot be his disciples, nor obtain life
eternal. So that inevitably, and most necessarily it follows, that we must
renounce our own merits, and justification by our own works, if we will
believe in Christ as we ought to believe. All which when the Church of England
teaches, it is built upon the foundation of Peter: and therefore is a true
Church.

But that I may conclude this point, and clearly evidence the truth of it to
you Mr. Montague, and all men, and by other testimonies confirm it, and in so
doing, prove the Church of England a true Church, (which you stiffly deny) I
will briefly declare, wherein our justification before God consists, and what
it is that makes us acceptable with him, and to believe aright, which is not to
rely upon our own righteousness, but upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ
apprehended by faith. And this doctrine we learn out of the holy Scriptures,
which teach us a twofold righteousness, Romans 10. v. 3. a righteousness of
God, and a righteousness of our own, which the Jews relying upon, as all
Justiciaries do, did not submit themselves to the righteousness of God, and
therefore did not deny themselves and come unto Christ, and rely upon him, Who
was the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one that believes, verse.
4. For, Moses, says the Apostle, describes the righteousness which is of the
Law, that the man that does those things shall live by them. But the
righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise, that if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God
has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to
salvation. Here faith alone is the hand that reaches forth the righteousness of
Christ unto us, and by which apprehending Christ we stand justified before God.
So that, out of the words of the Apostle this twofold righteousness appears;
the righteousness of the Gospel and the righteousness of the Law, which the
Apostle so describes, as no mortal man ever living, besides Christ only,
since the fall of Adam, was righteous or just, or indeed could be, as is
sufficiently by the places above mentioned, proved. But, the righteousness of
the Gospel is, that whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish, but have
everlasting life. John 3. For the just shall live by his faith. Romans 1. Gal. 3.
Now then, when the righteousness of the Law, consists in the absolute and
perfect observation, obedience, and fulfilling of the whole Law; and no man can
perfectly keep, observe and obey it, it of necessity follows, that we cannot
attain unto righteousness by the Law, but we must seek another
righteousness, which is only to be found in the Gospel, and that
righteousness is the remission of all our sins, and our reconciliation with
God, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness freely bestowed upon us of
God, for Christ's sake, who is our only Savior and redeemer. And this is to be
built upon the foundation of Peter. And this is the righteousness by which we
must be saved and justified before God. For we are justified freely by grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. As Paul says to the Romans chap.
3. ver. 24. and in verse. 28. farther expresses himself, saying, We conclude
therefore, that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law. The
sense and meaning of the which words, if we do duly consider them, will so
clear unto all men this Evangelicall and everlasting truth, that there will be
no doubting of it to any rational creature. For the finding out therefore of
the true sense of these words, three things offer themselves to be deliberated
on. First, what is meant here by being justified. Secondly, what is meant, to
be justified by faith. Thirdly, what are those works and deeds which are
excluded from justification.

As concerning the first, we are to observe three distinct actions of God in
it. First, the freedom and absolution of a sinner from the guilt of his sins
and iniquities for the merits of Jesus Christ. Acts 13. v. 38, 39. Be it known
unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto
you forgiveness of sins. And by him all that believe are justified from all
things, from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses. That is, by
Jesus Christ they are freed and absolved from the guilt of those sins which
the Law could not free them from. And in this sense does the Apostle oppose
justification to condemnation, in Romans 8. v. 33. which is nothing else, but a
binding over a man to undergo the due and deserved punishment. The second
action of God, is imputation, or the esteeming, or the accounting of a sinner
as just, for the merits of Jesus Christ. Woe be to him that justifies the
wicked, Esaias 5. ver. 22. that is, that does not make him just, but accounts,
esteems, and declares him as just. So in the Gospel wisdom is said to be
justified of her children: that is approved of, and acknowledged. The third
action of God, is the acceptance or receiving of a sinner to life eternal in
Christ. For after God has freed and absolved a sinner, and imputed
righteousness unto him, this receiving of him after that, to life eternal,
does necessarily follow, which is therefore called justification of life, Romans 5.
ver. 18. where the reason of it is likewise rendered: for as Adams sin and
offense, was imputed to all, or came upon all, and by it death entered into the
world and reigned: so the obedience of Christ being imputed to all believers,
they are made righteous and obtain justification of life. From the
consideration of all which, this definition of justification is easily
gathered: That it is an action of God the Father, absolving and freeing a
sinner from all his offenses and transgressions, for the merits of Jesus
Christ, and imputing righteousness unto him, and receiving of him to life
eternal.

And now I come to the second thing, viz. What is meant, to be justified by
faith. The sense and meaning of the which, as it is a matter of great moment
and consequence, and concerns no less than our eternal happiness: so it
calls for and requires at our hands all care and diligence for the right
understanding of it, which the great Rabbis of the Church of Rome are ignorant
of; and that it may the more easily be delucidated and understood, I will
declare first, what that thing is, for which a sinner is justified, and
accounted just. And that is the obedience of Jesus Christ our mediator and
redeemer, and that both his active and passive; (for those are not to be
separated that God has joined together) the last of which does consist in
Christ's suffering of the first death, in respect of his body; and the enduring
of the dolours, pangs, and sorrows of the second death, in respect of his
soul: the first of which does consist in his perfect fulfilling of the law for
us. The truth of which does evidently appear. For after the fall of our first
parents, all mankind stood bound in a double debt; we had violated and broken
the law, and therefore were all tied and bound first to make satisfaction for
that. Secondly, as we are creatures we were still bound to keep and fulfill
the whole Law, even to the rigor of it, and to do whatsoever that commanded:
of the which double debt, when we were not able to pay the least portion (being
now become bankrupts of that primordiall and original righteousness, and
wholly corrupted) we must necessarily have recourse and fly to our surety and
mediator, who has discharged both those debts for us. The first he paid for us
being dead in our sins and trespasses, when he was made a curse for us, and
so redeemed us from the curse and malediction of the law, though not from the
obedience of it. Gal. 3. ver. 13. Romans 3. ver. 24, 25. and in 2 Cor. 5. ver.
21. The last he performed by his perfect obedience to the whole law, so that in
Jesus Christ we fulfill the law. The second thing to be here considered, for
the better understanding of this business of so great concernment, is, seeing
that the obedience of Jesus Christ is the matter of our justification, and that
is without us, and none of ours; how that comes to be made ours, which being
once declared, the truth then will be perspicuous. That the righteousness of
Jesus Christ therefore may be made ours, it must first be given to us of God.
Secondly, we must receive and embrace this righteousness. Now, God gives us
this righteousness when he gives Christ unto us, for with Christ this
righteousness is bestowed upon us, and it is then made ours when God out of
his infinite mercy accounts it, and judges it ours: and it is made ours only
by imputation, as it is evident and manifest by these reasons: First, as Christ
was made sin for us, so we are made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor.
5. ver. 21. and in 1 Cor. 1. v. 30. Now Christ was made sin for us only by
imputation, therefore the inherent righteousness of Jesus Christ is made ours
only by imputation. Secondly, as the disobedience of Adam was made ours, so
the obedience of Christ the second Adam is made ours, as it is largely
discoursed by the Apostle, Romans 5. ver. 17.18. but the offense and disobedience
of Adam was made ours by imputation: therefore after the same manner Christ's
obedience is made ours. Secondly, that Christ's obedience may be made ours, we
must receive it and apply it to our selves, and put it on, which is only done
by faith the hand of the soul, for the receiving of those things which are
given us of God. Whereby the way, Mr. Montague, I desire you to take notice,
that a sinner is not justified for the dignity of faith, but as it is an
instrument by which the obedience of Christ is applied to the soul.

And now I come to the third thing, viz. What works and deeds are excluded from
justification? And for answer, I affirm, all the works of the ceremonial and
moral law: and all the works of nature and grace; which is thus proved, Romans
3. ver. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the law, there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin. Here all
deeds of the law, both ceremonial and moral, are excluded from justification,
and that by an excellent and unanswerable argument of the Apostle. That which
discovers the knowledge of sin, and accuses us for it, that cannot justify
us before God. And for farther proof of it, in the 28 verse, the place I first
cited, is plain, Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith,
without the works or deeds of the law. And Gal. 2. ver. 15, 16. We who are
Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we
have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no
flesh be justified. Here, by the works of the law we cannot understand, the
works that men do in the state of nature and corruption, and before
regeneration: seeing, the Apostle writes unto the Church of the Galatians, that
had received the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and were believers, the Apostle also
includes him himself amongst them, saying, We also, etc. and in the 21. verse,
I do not (says he) frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousness came by
the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. So that if men can be justified by the
Law, it follows that they have no need of salvation by Jesus Christ; but they
have need of Jesus Christ: therefore all the works of the Law are excluded
from justification, even in the regenerate. But for more full proof, chap. 3.
ver. 10. For as many as are under the works of the Law are under the curse:
for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that
are written in the book of the law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Here by the Law,
is understood the whole Law of God, for it comprehends all that is written in
the book of the Law, as in express words the Apostle shows; but principally
the moral Law, as is evident by that passage cited by the Apostle out of the
Law; so that it is clear and apparent, that all those that pretend or presume
to be justified by the works of the Law are under this fearful malediction
and curse; and in the 11. verse, by an invincible reason he confirms the
former truth, in these words, But that no man is justified by the Law, in the
sight of God, is evident: for the just shall live by faith. Hab. 2. Romans 1. The
argument of the Apostle is this, That by which we have life, justifies us
before God; but by faith we have life: ergo, by faith alone, we are justified
before God. And in the 12. verse, And the Law, says the Apostle, is not of
faith, but the man that does them shall live in them. Here it does appear,
there are two ways of attaining eternal life, or two ways of justification;
the one by the exact accomplishing, keeping, and fulfilling of the whole Law,
which no mortal man has yet ever done, Christ excepted; the other by faith
embracing the righteousness of Jesus Christ, Who was delivered for our
offenses, and raised up for our justification. Romans 4. ver. 25. and in the 13.
verse, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse
for us, etc. and in chap. 5. ver. 4. Christ is become of no effect unto you,
says Paul, whosoever of you are justified by the Law; ye are fallen from
grace. All those therefore that will be justified by the works of the Law,
deprive themselves of the grace of God in Jesus Christ: but the Church of Rome
does this, Mr. Montague: ergo. But for the Church of England it follows the
Apostles example, Phil. 3. ver. 8, and 9. Counting all things loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and that it may be found in him,
not having its own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. By
the which righteousness of Christ all the works of the Law are excluded from
justification.

But I will yet more fully prove, that the works of grace are also excluded
from justification. Ephesians. 2. ver. 8, 9. For by grace are ye saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Not of works, lest
any man should boast. Here again all works are removed; withal, we may
observe, that the holy Apostle in this place a firming, that we are not saved
by works, speaks not of those works before grace and regeneration, according
to the ordinary evasion of the Church of Rome, but he speaks of all the works
men do in the state of grace, and after conversion, and which shall accompany
us as we press to the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus, as we may see in the 10. verse. For we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that
we should walk in them. So that good works are not the meritorious cause, of
the Kingdom of Heaven, but only the way which God has prepared and appointed
for us to walk in to Heaven. And in the 11. to the Romans ver. 6, 7. he says,
And if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more
grace. He speaks here of the regenerate Romans, and of the works dond by them
after their conversion, which he excludes from justification: and therefore it
is a poor evasion or quillet of the Church of Rome to excuse their pride, when
they say, that God has given us the grace of meriting, which is a flat
contradiction: for grace does ever exclude merit, as the words of Paul infer,
who says, If it be by grace, then not of works; and if of works, then it is
no more grace, otherwise work is no more work. And in his Epistle to Titus
chapter 3. ver. 4, 5. But after, says he, that the kindness and love of God our
Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us. Here the Apostle includes
himself in the number of the regenerate, as in all the other places, and
disavowes all works, and excludes them from justification: for the mercy and
grace of God cannot stand with men's merits, as has been sufficiently already
proved. And in that verse he further adds, that being justified by grace, we
should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. From which words
we learn, that we have life eternal as heirs of God, and not in the way and
quality of mercenaries. So that by all these proofs it is evident that all
works are excluded from justification, as by many reasons also may be evinced.
For sinners are and ought so to be justified before God, that all occasion of
gloriation and boasting may be taken away, as we see, Romans 3. ver. 27. Where is
boasting then? it is taken away. By what Law? of works? Nay, but by the law of
faith. Now if a man by the works of grace might be justified, he should then
have something whereof to glory, notwithstanding he acknowledged he received
those works from God, as we may see in the example of the Pharisee in the 18.
of Luke, and should also have more to glory of than Abraham, Romans 4. ver. 3, 4.
where it is said, that if Abraham be justified by works, he has whereof to
glory, but not before God. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God,
and it was counted to him for righteousness. Again, if a man be justified by
works, then the justification of the Law should stand, and be of force; but
that stands not, as by all the testimonies before mentioned is evident, and
from the 14. verse of this chapter, For if they which are of the Law be heirs,
faith is made void, and the promise made of no effect. And not only this
verse, but the tenor of the whole chapter proves that Abraham, though he
abounded in good works, yet was justified before God, without the works of
the Law; howsoever before men, according to that of St. James chap. 2. He
declared by his works, the liveliness of his faith, for St. James himself
says, verse. 23. That Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness: and he was called the friend of God. And that was long before
he offered his Son Isaac. And when the Apostle Paul says, that Abraham was
not justified before God by his works, it cannot be understood of the works of
the ceremonial Law, which was not given till four hundred years after the
justification of Abraham. But the principal things we may gather out of this
whole fourth chapter to the Romans, are these. First, that the works of grace,
and after regeneration, are excluded from justificaton. Secondly, that the
justification of Abraham the father of the faithful, is the model and
pattern of the justification of all believers, and sons of Abraham, as
appears from the 22. and 23. verses, And therefore it was imputed to him for
righteousness. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed
to him, but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him who
raised up Jesus from the dead. And therefore as Abraham was justified before
God by faith, without the works of the law, so all believers are justified,
which the Apostle in his Epistle to the Galatians, chap. 3. ver. 8. does again
clearly prove. And the Scripture, says he, foreseeing that God would justify
the heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In
thee shall all Nations be blessed: so that they which be of faith are blessed
with faithful Abraham. And from this very place it is manifest, that Abraham
then believed, when the Apostle affirms that he was not justified before God
by his works, to confirm unto us likewise, that we are not justified before
God by our works, after that God has given unto us faith. Yea Paul evidences
the same by his own example, and by the example of the faithful, that the
works of grace also are excluded from justification, for in 1 Cor. chap. 4.
ver. 4. I know nothing, says the Apostle, by my self, yet am I not hereby
justified. Here the Apostle declares two things concerning himself: The first,
his good conscience. The second, that he was not thereby justified. By which,
all the works of grace are excluded from justification. Yea, it is most
evident, that a man must be justified before he can do any good works, or any
thing pleasing unto God: so that those works that follow justification, can no
way effect it, or be the cause of it. And as all works are excluded, so all
virtues, faith only excepted: for as he that receives a gift, puts forth his
hand only, but after he has received it, not only his hand, but his tongue,
and his feet, and his other members, which conferred nothing in the receiving,
testify their thankfulness. After the same manner, we receive the matter of
justification, by faith only, the hand of the soul, not by hope or charity.
But after Christ is received and embraced, these graces likewise manifest
themselves, with all the rest, which spring from faith, the fountain that
sanctifies, cleanses, and purifies the heart, sprinkling it with the blood of
Jesus Christ, from which fountain arise all the streams of all other saving
graces that appear in our lives. And this, Mr. Montague, is the saving doctrine
of justification, which when the Church of England so firmly holds forth,
declares, and preaches, it believes in Jesus Christ as it ought to believe,
and is built upon the foundation of Peter, when it excludes all merits and
works from justification, and looks for salvation in Christ by faith alone;
for which its believing it has very good reason; for if the children of Israel
did not by their own righteousness merit the Land of Canaan, which is by God
himself there excluded, Deuteronomy. 9. which was but the type, how much less can
any man by his merits merit Heaven it self, which is the thing typified.

But that I may neither leave you, Mr. Montague, nor any Romanist any ground of
cavil, I shall by your patience say something here severally and by it self,
to a poor objection that is often made by the Papists against our doctrine of
free justification by faith alone, who often contest, that in the whole
Scripture, it is no where said, that man is justified by faith alone; that
particle alone, say they, is no where inserted in the holy Scripture, but is
only put in by us. But for answer, I desire you to take notice, that howsoever
that particle in so many letters be not in express terms specified, there is
in many places of the Scripture that set down, that that is equivalent to it,
as will by and by appear. And however, I say, that word alone be not in the
Scriptures, notwithstanding the Apostle Paul does clearly confirm our opinion
of free justification by faith alone, so that no man can doubt of it, that has
not resigned his reason, and so evidently declares it, as if he had in express
words said, by faith alone. For faith beholds and looks upon something without
us, that is the mercy and favor of God promised in a mediator, which are the
sure mercies of David, and this mercy alone does justify us; and this mercy
does faith alone apprehend; wherefore the name of faith taken by it self,
denotes as much as faith alone, and by it self. Besides, Paul in this
business and work of justification joins nothing with faith, and therefore
he teaches that faith alone does suffice: for if it has nothing joined and
coupled with it, in justifying or absolving of us, then it is plain and
evident that faith alone does justify us. For whatsoever could add or
confer any thing to our justification, all that is removed and excluded from
faith in our justification. For what is it Mr. Montague, I pray, think you,
that in this cause or business should be joined with faith? I presume you will
say works. Now then, if works be removed, severed, and disjoined from faith,
and that in express words, it follows then necessarily, that we are justified
by faith alone. Hear then I pray, what Paul says, Romans 3. verse. 28. We
therefore conclude, that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the
Law. And in the same chapter, verse. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law,
there shall no flesh be justified. And verse. 24. Being justified freely by
grace, through the redemption of Jesus Christ. And in chap. 4. ver. 5, 6. But
to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is imputed for righteousness, even as David also describes the
blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works. And
in his epistle to the Gala. cap. the 2.16. knowing that a man is not justified
by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, etc. I beseech you
Mr. Montague, tell me ingenuously, what could be spoke or cited more clearly
for the confirming of our opinion and doctrine? For if we be not justified by
the works of the Law; and if we be not justified, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ; and if all works of the Law be so often by the Apostle excluded from
justification, and twice in express terms, removed from justification, in
this verse, and that with an irrisistible reason added by the Apostle, showing
the impossibility of justification by works, saving that by the works of the
Law shall no flesh be justified, I say in all these regards, it necessarily
follows, that we are justified by faith alone. And we may add to all this,
what the Apostle often speaks, that we are justified freely, it is the gift
of God, which excludes all reason of merit, Ephesians. 2. verse. 8, 9. for by grace
are ye saved, through faith: and that not of your selves, it is the gift of
God. Not of works, lest any man should boast. Mr. Montague, if all that I have
spoke, cannot yet satisfy you, I hope it will satisfy all rational men; and it
does abundantly confirm me in this truth: and also prove, that that Church
which teaches the free grace of God, and the doctrine of justification by faith
alone in Jesus Christ, is a true Church, and believes as it ought to believe.
But before I draw to an end, and couclude this point, I shall at your best
leisure desire you to answer this Argument. If we be not justified by the
works of the Law; if to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed for righteousness: if by the
works of the Law no flesh shall be justified: if Righteousness without works
be imputed: if freely; if by grace; if it be the gift of God: and to conclude,
if we be not justified, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ: Then we are justified
by Faith alone. But the antecedent is true, therefore the consequent. Wherefore
then should any man cavil against our Doctrine of free justification by faith
alone, because the particle alone is not in express terms set down, when
there are diverse expressions of as full efficacy and as prevalent to declare
the truth of that tenent, as if indeed that word had been expressed?
Notwithstanding all that I have now said, to prove the doctrine of free
justification by faith alone, to be grounded upon the Scripture, and that
according to the holy Word of God, the Church of England preaches it: and by
that proves it self a true Church: yet the Church of England does not teach,
that, that faith by which we are justified, is alone or solitary without the
company and fellowship of good works, and other virtues and graces which are
the fruits of faith: but urges likewise and teaches all holy duties to be
joined with Faith (as we shall see afterward) and that we should be
abounding in good works which God has before ordained, that we should walk
in for the glorifying of his name, and to justify unto the world the
liveliness of our faith, as all the Saints of old have done.

But now Mr. Mountague, that you may see the error of your ways, and that all
men may behold the impiety and vanity of the doctrine of selfe-merits, and of
the works of supererogation, and that we may all be humble under the mighty
hand of God, and learn this lesson of selfe-denyall, I shall for a corollary,
add a few things, and then conclude this point. Our Savior Christ says Luke
the 17. When you shall have done all those things that are commanded you, say,
we are unprofitable servants: we have done that, which was our duty to do. Is
not this an extreme arrogance, think you Master Montague, in any man, when our
Savior Christ himself teaches us to say we are unprofitable servants, when
we have done whatsoever is commanded us both in the law and the Gospel, to
say, and affirm that we are meriting and deserving servants? yea, is it not an
impious ridiculosity to affirm it, when notwithstanding we do transgress the
Commandments of our Master a thousand ways? For these two conclusions do
necessarily result out of our Saviors words. First, that when we have done
all that God commands, we are yet but unprofitable servants. The second, that
we have done but that was our duty to do. Out of the which words I thus argue.

He, that when he has done all that he is commanded to do, is yet but an
unprofitable servant, he cannot merit, much less do works of supererogation:
But every man, when he has done all that is commanded him to do, is yet but
an unprofitable servant: Ergo, he cannot merit, much less do works of
supererogation. All this is confirmed by our Saviors own words, who cannot
err, we must leave the works of merit to Christ alone, and say we are
unprofitable, and deny our selves if we will be his Disciples. Out of the same
words I gather this argument also. They which have done but that which was
their duty to do, when they have done all that was commanded them, they cannot
merit, much less do works of supererogation. But when they have done all that
was commanded them both in the Law and Gospel, they have done but that which
was their duty to do. Ergo, they cannot merit, much less do works of
supererogation. You must needs understand, Mr. Montague, the Doctrine of
merits, who are able to discourse a week together of them, and therefore you
know very well, that in your Roman Dialect merits and works of supererogation
are such things and performances as are done above that that is commanded them,
and when men do more than they are enjoined by God, and exceed in their duty
to a superplus. This I say is your language. But if no man can attain to such
perfection of obedience as the Romanists speak of, then by their own
confession the Doctrine of merits is a false doctrine and ought by all men to be
abominated: and so much the rather we ought to abhor it, because it is a
Doctrine of blasphemy, and is as much in effect as to give the Lord of Life,
truth it self, the lie: for Christ says, When you have done all things that
are commanded you, say, you are unprofitable servants, for you have done that
which was your duty. Notwithstanding, the Papists say they can merit. But
Christ who is the Master and Doctor of his Church, and whom we are commanded to
hear, Mat. 3. Mat. 17. has taught us otherwise, affirming we cannot merit,
much less do works of supererogation: which will plainly appear if we
examine a few instances and go through some particulars. We are commanded to
love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our mind, and with all our
might, and to love our Neighbor as our self. I now demand of you Mr.
Mountague whether either your self, or any man can attain unto this
perfection of love, the Lord requires at your hands, and so fulfill the Law? If
it be acknowledged that no man can attain to this perfection of love, then he
is a transgressor of the Law, and is so far from meriting favor at Gods hand,
as he merits eternal death by it: for the soul that sins shall die, Ezekiel
18. for the wages of sin is death. Numb. 6. But if you answer, that you can
keep this Law, notwithstanding you cannot yet merit by it by Christ's own
words, who proclaims you an unprofitable servant, affirming that you have
done but your duty. Again in the fifth of Matthew. 4. verse. 8. our Savior
says, Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.
Here the Lord Jesus Christ, for the ordering of our obedience and regulating of
our lives, sets before us as a model, rule and example, which we must ever
follow, the perfection that is in God himself our Heavenly father, and
commands all men to be perfect as he himself is perfect. I demand of you Mr.
Montague, can you or any man attain unto this perfection that is in God, which
nevertheless we are commanded to do? If you do acknowledge that no man can
attain to it, as no man can indeed, then you are a transgressor of this
command, and failing in your duty, you deserve condemnation, and therefore are
far from meriting. But if you shall affirm that you can attain to this
perfection and should really do that you are commanded: yet you are still an
unprofitable servant and have done but your duty, and therefore have not yet
merited any thing. We are commanded both in the old Testament and in the new to
be holy, and for the pattern of our holiness, as of our perfection, the
holiness of God is set down before us for our imitation, As he that has
called you, says St. Peter, is holy, so be you holy in all manner of
conversation, because it is written, Be ye holy as I am holy, Levit. 11. ver.
24. and 19.2. and the 20.7. I desire you to tell me whether you or any man, can
attain to that perfection of holiness, through the whole course of your life,
that is in God? if not, you have transgressed this Commandment, and by it are
liable to an eternal punishment, having sinned against a most holy and
eternal Majesty. But if you say you can, you are yet but an unprofitable
servant and have done but your duty as the Lord affirms, and have not yet
merited. Christ says, Luke 6. verse. 31.32, 33, 34, 35, 36. And as you would
that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. For if you love them
which love you, what thanks have you? for sinners also love those that love
them. And if you do good to them which do good to you, what thanks have you?
for sinners also do the same. And if ye lend to them, of whom you hope to
receive, what thanks have you? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as
much again. But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for
nothing again: and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children
of the Highest, for he is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil, and be
ye also merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful. I demand of you Mr.
Montague whether ever you or any mortal man ever did fully keep these
Precepts and Commandments, and were as merciful as God our Heavenly Father is
merciful; if not, you are a transgressor, and far from merit or works of
superrogation; and if you have kept these holy Commandments, you are yet but
an unprofitable servant and have done but your duty. Saint Paul says to the
Philippians chap. 4. verse. 8. Finally my brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsover things are
pure, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things. Those things, which ye have both
learned and received, and heard, and seen in me, do: and the God of Peace
shall be with you. What duty Mr. Montague in the whole course of a man's life,
is there, either of love, and obedience toward God, or toward our Neighbor
that any man can perform, that is not included in this precept, and which by
it, he is not bound to do? and the which if he performs not makes him a
transgressor? and yet if he should perfectly fulfill this command, he is but an
unprofitable servant, and has done but his duty, and therefore cannot merit,
much less do a work of supererogation. So that, the impiety of the doctrine
of merits is sufficiently evinced by that I have now said: I might yet instance
in a thousand things, but I will insist but upon one or two more, which is the
lesson in hand of self-denial If any man, says Christ, will be my disciple,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily and follow me. I ask you
Mr. Montague, whether you think your self or any man, did ever perfectly yet
learn this lesson, and did wholly deny himself, and with willingness, and
without any murmuring or resisting, take up his cross and to the last hour of
his life follow Christ both in cheerful doing and suffering, without which his
service will not be acceptable: for God loves only cheerful sufferers, as
cheerful givers? If you shall answer that none can perfectly keep this
precept, you shall answer truly, and by that acknowledge a transgression, which
makes you liable to punishment: and therefore unable to merit by it. But if you
shall be so temerarious as to affirm you can keep this Commandment,
notwithstanding, you are yet but an unprofitable servant in Christ's esteem,
and you have done but your duty, because you do no more then God commands you.
And truly Mr. Montague, I will grant you thus much, if any thing we can do or
perform could merit at Gods hands, suffering and dying for his cause, and
renouncing all honors, pleasures, and profits and abandoning life it self, for
the love of him and his truth, might have the first place in our obedience for
to challenge merit, yet I say, doing all this we are but unprofitable servants,
and have done but our duty and therefore cannot merit, much less do a work
of supererogation by it, if Christ's words be true. Yea Paul in Romans 8. verse. 8.
excludes merits even from our sufferings, saying, I account the afflictions of
this present time are not worthy the glory that shall be showed unto us. The
glory therefore we expect does a thousand fold surpass the misery of our
afflictions, therefore our pressures and sufferings themselves are excluded:
for if the very martyrs merit not, then ordinary Christians cannot merit. And
in 2 Cor. 4.17. there he says, Our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, etc.
Now Master Montague, I entreat you to declare unto me how any man by their
sufferings can merit not only life eternal, but an augmentation and degree of
glory in Heaven, seeing by the express word of the Apostle, there is no more
proportion between that which is most excellent, and glorious in this world,
and the glory and felicity of the Kingdom of Heaven, than is between a moment
of time and eternity: for all men will easily conclude, that a temporary and
momentany suffering of affliction cannot merit eternal and never ending glory,
and that by the light of reason, though the Scripture should say nothing to the
contrary, which doctrine of merit, notwithstanding, it does in many places
confute. For however the Lord has made many gracious promises in his holy
Word, of rewarding his suffering servants, as Romans 8. ver. 17. saying, If so be
that we suffer with him, we may also be glorified together. As also in the
second Epistle to Timothy, chap. 2. ver. 12. If we suffer, we shall also reign
with him. And innumerable places more might be cited for our encouragement in
suffering, as that in Romans 2. ver. 6, 7. Who will render to every man according
to his deeds. To them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for
glory, and honor, and immortility, eternal life. All which declare, that God
out of his infinite favor will reward his servants for the practice of those
very gifts and graces he has bestowed upon them: according to that in Revel.
2. verse. 10. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of
life. But ever take notice, this reward, and this Crown of life is not
bestowed upon sufferers as wages or reward and merit, but as a gift of mercy
and grace, as will afterward appear. And if you look, Mr. Montague, into the
7. of the Revelation, verse. 13, 14, 15. there you may, if you shut not your
eyes, behold the truth of this doctrine, that the very martyrs come not to
Heaven for their sufferings. And one of the Elders answered, and said unto me,
What are these which are arrayed in white Robes? and whence come they? and he
said unto me, These are they which came out of great tribulations, and have
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb: therefore
they are before the Throne of God, etc. Here you evidently see, that the
blessed martyrs which are now in Heaven, have not attained unto that felicity
and eternal glory by the merit of their sufferings, but for that they were
washed in the blood of the Lamb, the Lord Jesus Christ. And as it is not the
suffering, Mr. Montague, but the cause that makes a martyr; so it is not for
that they pass through many tribulations that they enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but that they are washed in the blood of the Lamb, and by that only
are made worthy to be Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem: for when we have
suffered all, we are but unprofitable servants, and have done but our duty, for
our Savior says, If any will be my Disciple, let him take up his cross and
follow me. I will add but one instance more, out of Matthew. 11. Learn of me,
says our Savior, for I am humble and meek. Do you believe, Mr. Montague,
that you can keep, or ever observe this commandment of Christ the Lord? But
if you could attain unto the greatest degree of humility and meekness, you
were but an unprofitable servant, and had done but your duty. But how much
more, Mr. Montague, have you and your Roman kindred to answer for your
loftiness and high opinions of your selves, who stand upon your justification
by your good works, and pretend, yea and presume of your selfe-merits, and of
your works of desert, and that before God? If this be not a transgression, and
a very rebellion against the Commandment, I know not what prevarication and
rebellion is. Yea, Mr. Montague, if we could observe the whole Law, and keep
all the Commandments for doing and suffering that ever God gave, if we will be
Christ's Disciples, we must ever say we are unprofitable servants, and daily
pray, forgive us our sins, and with the leper cry out, We are unclean, we
are unclean, and have continual cause of deep humiliation, and
self-denial. If they, Mr. Montague, which love God most, and most diligently
keep his Commandments, and yield the greatest obedience unto them, have need
yet of mercy, how can any mortal man then merit before God, who daily and
hourly transgresses all his glorious Commandments? yet see what the Lord
says, Exodus 20. ver. 6. Showing mercy to thousands, of them that love me and
keep my Commandments. Learn this lesson of Christ, M. Montague, to be humble,
and labor for self-denial, and a lowly spirit, and meek heart, and with the
Church of England, and all the blessed Saints, disavow your own
righteousness, knowing that Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance, and such as are weary and heavy laden, which only find rest
unto their souls; and think not with the Romanists, and justiciaries, by your
merits, or good works to scale Heaven, but I entreat you to endeavor with us
of the Church of England, to enter into the most holy by the blood of Jesus, by
that new and living way which he has consecrated for us through the veil,
that is to say, his flesh, Heb. 10.19, 20. If you enter not by this way, M.
Montague, you will never come thither. But now to conclude this point: That
Church which does believe in Jesus Christ, renouncing all selfe-merit, and
teaches the way to Heaven by the blood of Jesus, and by that new and living
way, that Church believes aright, as it ought to believe, and is built upon the
foundation of Peter, against which the gates of hell can never prevail: but
the Church of England does all this, Ergo, it is a true Church, where salvation
may be had. And this note alone is an infallible and never deceiving mark of a
true Church. As for antiquity, universality, unity, succession, multitude,
visibility, etc. if they have not this doctrine joined with them, of the free
grace of God, and justification by faith in Christ alone, they are but marks
of error and abomination, which will seduce you from the right way, and
misleade you into bypath where you will never find rest for your soul. And
thus much I thought fit to speak of this point, it being a fundamental one,
and such an one as where it is not preached and published, there can be no true
Church.

And now I come to the other clause of this proposition, viz. renouncing all
will worship and humane inventions in Gods service. An eminent mark also of a
true Church, which when the Church of England does, it is manifest that it is a
true Church: For all men know, that mixtures in Gods worship annihilates a true
Church. But following my former custom, I will first signify, what I mean by
will worship and humane inventions in Gods service: and then show where they
are entertained in Gods service and admitted, they so adulterate his worship,
as he himself disavoweth it, and affirms they serve in vain. By will worship
therefore and humane inventions, I understand, whatsoever, either for Doctrine,
Service, Discipline, Ceremonies, men out of vain devotion, doting or
superfluous fear, or unbridled error, or out of humane reason or hypocrisy,
or whatsoever other pretense they have out of their own brain excogitated and
brought into the service and worship of God, or whatsoever they have added to
his worship, either of images or representations, or traditions, against his
revealed will, or without his express command, and imposed upon the people as
the worship and service of God, and proclaim these their ordinances to be Gods
service and worship, and place holiness and religion in the observation of
them, and account the neglect of them irreligion and profaneness, and worthy
of punishment; and the submission to them piety, religion, and obedience, which
God notwithstanding proclaims an abomination to him. For piety and true
religion proceeds from the right knowledge of God, the first of the which is
the reverence of God, joined with love, which arises from the knowledge and
contemplation of Gods manifold favors, mercy and goodness toward mankind;
the second which is pure and true religion, is faith joined with a serious and
earnest fear of God, the which fear contains in it a voluntary and willing
reverence, and always brings with it, the right and exact form of worshipping
him, which is only that way of serving him which he has prescribed in his
holy Word, which Word of God alone must be the rule of his worship, and of all
our obedience; so that what he prescribes and enjoyneth, it is our duty both
to know and perform, and the neglect of which is sin: and whatsoever is
contrary to this is either open idolatry, or superstition: because it is supra
quod statutum est; and therefore hateful to God, and abominable in his sight,
as his whole Word declares. And as it is the glory, honor, and very note of a
true Church, to follow the rule of Gods Word in serving him: so it is the
evident mark of a false Church, where either open idolatry, or notorious
superstition, or men's traditions and devices domineere, and are set up and
countenanced for Gods service, by what authority soever it be: all which I
understand by will worship, and humane inventions in Gods service, so that,
that Church is reputed the true Church that serves God according to his will
revealed in his Word, and continues in its native purity and primitive
simplicity, and whose ears are not hanged with the Jewels of Jewish, Paganish,
or Popish ceremonies, and humane inventions, for true religion does not consist
in the observation of the traditions of men, and their pompous ceremonies, but
in the obeying of Gods Commandments, that is, in righteousness, peace, and
joy of the holy Ghost, proceeding all from a pure heart and conscience purged
from dead works, and faith unfeigned. And thus much shall suffice to have
spoken concerning my meaning of will worship and humane inventions in Gods
service, all which are against his express word, and adulterate his worship,
and annihilate a Church, which things I will prove in order. Moses the servant
of the Lord, as we read in Exodus 25. verse. 40. had an express command when he
was to make the Tabernacle, that he should do all according to the pattern he
had seen in the mount. So that if Moses, that saw God face to face might not
add or put so much as a Law to the Tabernacle that God had not commanded him,
what boldness and impudence then is it in any man, to dare to introduce any
thing in Religion, either for Doctrine, Service, Discipline or Ceremony, that
neither Christ nor his Apostles have taught or commanded, especially when God
in his holy Word has commanded the contrary? For in Deuteronomy. 4. ver 2. the Lord
says, Ye shall not add to the word which I command you, neither shall ye
diminish from it, that you may keep the commandments of God which I command
you. Now if the Church of the Jews ought not to join or add any thing to
that which God commanded by Moses, how much less ought the Christian Church to
add any thing to that which Christ and his Apostles and Evangelists have
taught in the Gospel, when they have so fully declared the will of God
therein? and in the fist chapter of the same book, verse 32. the Lord says,
Ye shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord your God has commanded you: ye
shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left. Here observe, that God
forbids not only to turn unto the left hand, which is to say, to doctrines
manifestly wicked and abominable: but he forbids them also to turn to the
right hand, which is of purpose spoke, to prevent all men's inventions, under
what pretense or appearance soever of devotion or religion, as of more cleanly,
neatly, or decently serving God. And in the 12. chapter, verse. 32. as if the
Lord could never sufficiently enough have inculcated this precept upon them, he
says, Whatsoever I command you observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto,
nor diminish from it. How then dare any either receive or admit the traditions
and ordinances of men, and join them with the Commandments of God, when
notwithstanding God enjoynes us only to observe and do what he commands,
without adding thereto or detracting from it. And Prove. 24. ver. 21. My son,
says Solomon, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that
are given to change; for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows
the ruin of them both? In these words, there is a command, and in it a
direction to all Israel, teaching them what they should do, and what they
should not do in Gods matters, a precept both imperative and prohibitive, and
every word of it deserving due consideration and serious thoughts. For
howsoever this command was peculiarly given to the Israelites, and especially
concerned that government; yet in the general equity of obedience it concerns
all Christians, and bridleth them likewise from making any alteration or
innovation in Gods ordinances, and in his government, established in his
Church, and prohibits all Christians, to meddle with, or have any communion
with such as are given to change. The principal observables in these words,
not accurately to handle them, are briefly these:

First, a duty enjoined, fear; and that twofold: toward God, and toward the
King; and in the word fear synecdochically we are to understand all reverence
toward God, and indeed his whole worship, which is to give him his due honor,
as in the same word is included all civil obedience and honor to those that
are set over us in authority, and that specified in express terms, Fear God
and the King.

The second observable, implicitly set down, is the rule by which they should
regulate their fear and obedience, both toward God and the King, and that was
the whole Law, both moral, judicial, and ceremonial, and all that settled
government, as it was then by God himself established in the days of David,
and Solomon, by Gods own commandment, according unto the pattern the Lord
delivered to David in writing, and David to his son Solomon, both for the
place, and manner of Gods worship, and the ordering of the Kingdom, which was
to be perpetuated and continued without alteration or innovation, till the
coming of the Messiah, without a special command and warrant from God
himself: and this Law and Word of God is that rule implicitly here set down,
from which they were not to vary or make any change, but to observe that in
ordering their fear and obedience both to God and the King. For that fear and
reverence only is pleasing unto God, that is according to his own command, not
that which we out of our own brain imagine, or what men conceive: for the
Lord abhors all such fear as is taught by the precepts of men, Isaiah 29. ver.
13. saying, The fear toward me, is taught by the Precepts of men. And in the
15. of Matthew. 9. our Savior says of such fear, In vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrine the commandments of men. So that all that fear,
reverence, and obedience that we desire or endeavor to honor God by, if it
have not a warrant our of his word, it is displeasing unto him being
will worship. And as our fear toward God, must be warranted by his word, so
all our obedience to civil authority, must be in the Lord: for Magistrates and
Governors in Israel, and all Christian Governors at this day, are commanded
to rule, and order their Kingdoms, according to Gods Word, as we may see Deuteronomy.
17. verse. 18, 19, 20. and Joshua 1. And those Kings and Princes that rule not
by Gods Word, use not nor manage not a Kingdom, but a robbery, when they
reign not to this end, that God may be glorified, and his name honored in
their dominions. Neither may they think them selves exempted for their
greatness: for St Paul says, Romans 3. ver. 19. Now we know, that whatsoever
things the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world become subject to the judgment of God. So
that all Magistrates as well as subjects, that are under the law, whether
moral or Evangelicall, they are all to be subject to the Law of God, without
exception, and to be guided by it, and to rule and command according to that
rule, and they have their bounds set them, how far they may go in
commanding, and that is according to the Will of God, and no farther. And the
subjects likewise, have their limits prescribed unto them, how far they may
obey, and that is in the Lord, and no farther. And so long as the Magistrates
keep themselves within the compass of Gods Commandments, and command
according to his Word and Will, the subjects in conscience are bound to obey.
But if rulers will transgress and go beyond their confines, the subjects have
a dispensation from their obedience, Knowing that they ought to obey God,
rather than men, Acts 5. ver. 29. Yea, Christ himself has taught us this
lesson, Mark 8. ver. 15. Saying, take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod. Here is a doubling, as it were of the
caution, Take heed and beware. Of what? of all the doctrines and traditions of
all sorts of men, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil in Gods service; for by
leven our Savior understands the traditions and doctrines of the Pharisees and
Sadduces, as is evident in Matthew. 16. v. 12. and many other places; so that
under what authority soever they come ratified, be it from Kings and Princes
themselves, as here by Herod, we have a dispensation from our obedience. And
there are many prendents in Gods Word of such as have detracted their obedience
to unlawful commands with Gods good liking, as the Midwives in Exodus 1. the
three children in Daniel, and Mordecai in Ester, and the Apostles Act. 5. to
omit many other. And in express words in the 13. of Deuteronomy. God absolves very
children from their duty of obedience to their parents, which he strictly
commands in the 20. of Exodus if they command against Gods Word. So that the
common rule for all both in commanding and obeying, is Gods Word, according to
which our fear and obedience toward all must be regulated, as is here
manifest. And this rule did Solomon tie and bind all Israel to, and all
Christians to the end of the World.

The third observable, is a caveat or dehortation, to decline the society and
company of such as would bring in any alteration or innovation either in
religion, or the government then established, in these words, And meddle not
with them that are given to change. In which caution, two things are denoted,
the one in express terms, the other tacitly; that which is expressed, is,
that we should have no communion or familiarity with such as are innovators, or
go about, or endeavor either to change the worship of God, or to alter any
thing in matters of religion. That which is tacitly set down, is, that every
man, in his own person, should have a special care, that he himself make no
change in religion, or bring in any alteration in the government of the Church,
which Christ the Lord has in his holy Word established and ordained, knowing
that it is to be perpetuated and continued as was lest by Christ and the holy
Apostles to the end of the world, 1 Timothy 1.5. verse. 21. and chap. 6. ver. 13,
14. I charge thee, says St. Paul, in the sight of God, who quickneth all
things, and before Jesus Christ, which under Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession: that thou keep this commandment without spot, and unblameable,
until the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. That government therefore, that
was established and settled by the Apostles, is without any alteration by all
Christians to be preserved as much as in them lies, they must make no change in
it; and this charge is given to every soul in particular tacitly (as I said):
for if we must not keep company or meddle with such as are given to change,
then we our selves may make no alteration or change.

The fourth observable is the reason of this dehortation, why they should not
meddle with such as are given to change, and that is in regard of the danger
and misery that will ensue upon it: For their calamity, says the Prophet,
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? here is ruin
threatened, and that both sudden and inevitable. A forcible reason therefore to
dehort any man from keeping company with wicked and ungodly men, and such
especially as innovate or change any thing in religion: for by so doing they
make themselves liable to the same punishment, and are equally guilty,
according to that of David, Psalm. 50. ver. 18. When thou saw a thief, thou
consentedst with him, etc. So that the very consenting to evil, brings a
guilt, and with it a punishment as well as the acting of it, and this truth by
the very light of nature was taught by the heathen, and professed through the
world, who make accomplices and consenters to any treason or conspiracy, as
guilty as the contrivers and actors; and the holy Word of God is full of
presidents of this nature. It is said of Jezabell that she killed the Prophets.
But when Elias puts up his bill of information into the Court of Heaven, he
speaks there in the number of multitude, saying, Lord they have killed thy
Prophets, 1 King. 19. verse. 14. Here the Officers and the people, as well as
Jezabell, are guilty and liable to punishment, and that because they did help
her and assent unto all her wickedness. So Paul in his information against all
the Gentiles, in the first chapter and last verse, he makes them all equally
guilty, as if they had been all actors of those villainies, and liable to the
wrath of God, which was revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness, and
ungodliness, ver. 18. as well for consenting unto them in their wicked ways,
as acting; his words are these, Who knowing the judgment of God (that they
that do such things are worthy of death) not only do the same, but consent
with them that do them, or have pleasure in them that do them. Consenters and
actors in Gods account are equally guilty. Herod is said to have killed John
Baptist: but when our Savior Christ upon an occasion speaks of St. John
Baptist, They, says he, have done to him whatsoever they pleased. Here our
Savior makes all the people guilty, the Nobles that sat at Table with Herod,
and did not dissuade him from that tyranny, nor speak in the behalf of the
Baptist, the Officers that forwarded and furthered the bloody design, and all
the people that assented unto Herod's wickedness, and cruelty. And Paul
speaking of the death of the blessed martyr Stephen, makes himself as equally
guilty of persecution, and of his death, as if he had been an actor and had
flung stones at him with the rest, saying, When thy holy martyr Stephen was
slain, I stood by, and assented unto it. And in Jeremy 5. ver. 30, 31. A
wonderful and horrible thing, says the Prophet, is committed in the Land. The
Prophets prophecy fasly, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so, etc. Here the people assenting and allowing of these
evils, made themselves equally guilty, and liable to the same punishment. And
therefore it is a very dangerous thing to have any familiarity with notorious
wicked men, or to meddle with such especially as are given to change, and
therefore by Solomon expressly forbidden, and that in regard of the danger that
necessarily follows upon it, which is sudden calamity and ruin to them both,
to both actors, and abettors, or consenters. And all this ruin and calamity
came both upon Jeroboam that made a change in Religion, and in that government,
against this command, and all that joined with him, and assented to him, as the
story of the Kings and Chronicles do sufficiently declare; and by that teach
us to take heed we make no change or alteration in religion and Gods matters,
lest we partake of the same plague, knowing that all those things were written
for our example, upon whom the ends of the world are come. And therefore, Mr.
Montague, that Church that renounceth all will worship, and humane inventions
in Gods service, in so doing manifests her obedience to the Commandments of
God, and hears his voice, by which she declares herself to be a true Church,
and founded upon the foundation of Peter: all which the Church of England does,
and is by Gods grace resolved to do, and never to admit of any humane
inventions in Gods worship and service, being so often taught to the contrary,
both by precept and by example. Paul in his Epistle to the Colossians, chap. 2.
verse. 18. in condemning and rejecting the worship and adoration of Angels, and
all will worship, contents himself, and thinks it sufficient to say, that it
was a humane invention: to teach all Christians for ever, to banish out of
their religion, whatsoever men devise or invent of their own brains, and
innovate in Gods worship, under what pretense of humility and devotion soever
it be. His words are these, Let no man beguile you of your reward in a
voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which
he has not seen, vainly puffed of by his flesh, and in the 20. verse,
Wherefore, says he, if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
World, why as though living in the World, are ye subject to Ordinances, after
the Commandments and Doctrine of men? Here he rejects and renounces all
willworship and serving of God by humane traditions, not only in regard of the
danger of it, because it separated them from their Head Christ Jesus, verse. 19.
but because it was an humane invention, and blames the Colossians for suffering
and subjecting themselves to them. And in his Epistle to Titus chap. the 1. v.
13.14. Wherefore, says the Apostle, rebuke them sharply, that they may be
sound in the faith, Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men
which turn from the truth. Here is a general prohibition to all Christians,
not to give heed to the Commandments and traditions of men in Religion, with a
Reason of the same annexed to the prohibition, for, such Commandments, says
the Apostle, turn men from the truth, and lead them into by-ways, and
corrupt, and adulterate Religion, and overthrow the Church which should be the
ground and pillar of truth, and so rob it of happiness and of enjoying the
Head, which is Christ Jesus. And the truth of this Doctrine of St. Paul is
confirmed by innumerable presidents in all ages; for humane inventions corrupt
Gods service. As ye may see in 32 of Exodus; when they set up the Calfe, and
built an Altar before it, and proclaimed a feast unto it, and were very merry
and highly pleased themselves in their own inventions. But hear what the Lord
says to Moses, verse. the 7. Go, get thee down: for thy people which thou
broughtest out of the Land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves, they have
turned aside quickly out of the way, etc. Here innovation in Religion and
humane inventions corrupted the people, and turned them aside quickly out of
the way to Heaven. The same is evident in Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who
caused all Israel to sin, and the ten Tribes to fall from God, who followed
him in his changing of Religion, contrary unto the precept of Solomon in the
place above specified: for setting up his Calves at Dan and Bethel (as it is to
be seen at large in the first of the Kings the 12.) and ordaining a feast unto
them, and setting up an Altar and sacrificing on it, and changing both the time
and place of Gods Worship, and making Priests of the mean people, which were
not of the sons of Laevi, and causing the people to go up before them; This,
says the Lord, became a sin unto them, so that the Lord in many places says
they sacrificed unto Devils: and therefore by these their inventions and by
this their will worship they so provoked the Lord as they brought sudden
calamity, and ruin upon themselves, which the Lord by Solomon had foretold
them, and the Lord cast them off and gave them into captivity, and delivered
them over to their enemies hand, and gave them a bill of divorce, to teach all
people to fear and tremble how by their own inventions and will worship, they
provoke the Lord lest he cast them off as he did the Israelites. Here we may
bring in also the Tribe of Judah and all Jerusalem, who by their inventions and
imitating of Israel and other idolatrous Nations corrupted all their ways, and
adulterated their Religion, and provoked the Lord to wrath, who gave them
likewise, for their idolatry and will worship and their other abominations,
that ever follow the profaning of Religion, into captivity, and exposed the
whole Kingdoms to desolation. But the example of the Samaritans is not to be
passed by, who boasted much of antiquity and their Father Jacob, though there
was but little kindred between them and less affienity in the true Religion;
yet there are many things spoke of them worthy to be taken notice of, for it is
said in the second of the Kings the 17. that they were taught how they should
fear the Lord, and they feared the Lord, etc. and they observed Moses his
Rites, Ceremonies and Discipline, and they looked for the Messiah to come, as
we see in John the 4. and they had great agreement and harmony in many
Articles and points of Religion with the Jews, the only then true worshipers
of God, so that to the outward appearance they differed but little, yet by
their own inventions, superstitions, idolatry and traditions they had so
corrupted the whole worship of God, that the Scripture denies that they feared
the Lord, verse. 34. because they did after their former manners, and did not
according to the Statutes and Ordinances and after the Law and Commandments,
which the Lord commanded to the children of Jacob, whom he named Israel, and
therefore our Savior Christ pronounces them void of salvation, affirming they
worshipped they knew not what, and the Jews knowing what they did worship, that
salvation was of the Jews, Ioh. 4. So that the truth of what I asserted is
manifest, that humane inventions in Gods service and will worship adulterates a
true Church and overthrowes Religion, for God will endure no mixtures. Now Mr.
Montague if one should in every particular compare the Church of Rome, with
either the children of Jsrael in all their idolatries, or with the Church of
Samaria in all her superstitious and fained inventions, and fee what ruin and
calamity came upon them by it, and how by their idolatries they deprived
themselves of Gods favor and of salvation, we shall find that the Church of
Rome does as far exceed either of them in idolatry, superstition and all
manner of profaneness and will worship as a giant in greatness does a pygme,
and therefore Mr. Montague if the Church of Rome does not repent and renounce
all her will worship and her humane inventions as the Church of England has
done, she will partake of the same plagues that the people of Israel and
Samaria did in this world, and finally be deprived of life eternal; and all
those that do partake with her in her sins, must partake with her in her
plagues: therefore Mr. Montague follow Christ's counsel, come out of Babylon,
lest you partake with her in her punishment, if you will continue in her
sins. Imitate in this the Church of England, who obeying the voice of Christ
her head and husband, and coming out of Babylon, and flying all Idolatry and
will worship, proves her self to be a true Church and built upon the
foundation of Peter, and to be the pillar of truth, and where salvation may be
had. And this might suffice to have spoke of will worship; but in way of a
corollary, and for direction to all Christans what order to take, or what
means to use for the trial of all Doctrines, Disciplines, Service or
Ceremonies, I shall add a word or two more and so conclude this point. Our
Savior in the 11 of Mat. verse. 30. gives unto men a Rule of direction, which
if they follow, it will preserve them from all error, and keep them in the
right way of serving of God. The Baptism of John, was it from Heaven, or of
men? Answer me, says he, inferring, if it were of men, that then it ought not
to be entertained in Gods worship, and that the Jews knew very well. In the
same manner, ought all Christians to examine and try every doctrine, either of
service, ceremony or discipline, whether it be of God, or of men, according to
this Rule of Christ, and that of Saint Paul in the first of the These. chap.
the 5. v. the 21. Try all things, and keep that which is good: Now then Mr.
Montague, if we examine whose image and superscription every Ordinance bears
and carries with it, whether Cesars or Gods, that is, whether it be prescribed
by human or Divine authority, all the controversy then would speedily be ended,
for if it be of God and warranted by his Word, then all ready obedience is to
be yielded unto it without reluctation, when under that notion, it is
prescribed and ordered by the Magistrate. But if it be a mere humane
invention, and has no warrant from God our Father, we ought to reject it. So
says St. Paul the first of the Cor. chap. 7. v. 24. Brethren, ye are bought
with a price: be not servants of men. And in the first Chap. of the Epistle to
the Gal. v. 8.9. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach unto you
otherwise, than that we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As I said
before, so I say now again, if any man Preach unto you otherwise, than that
ye have received, let him be accursed: Here the Apostle doubles the curse upon
all such as shall teach otherwise, for Doctrine, Service, Discipline, or
Ceremonies, than they were taught by him and the other Disciples. And by his
own example in the verse following he teaches us plainly, that if we go
about to please men in receiving their Doctrines, we cannot be the servants of
God: for we cannot serve two masters: his words are these, verse 10. For do I
now persuade or preach man's doctrine, or Gods? or do I seek to please men? for
if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ: all therefore,
that intertaine and admit of humane inventions in Gods service and worship, are
proclaimed by the Apostle, the servants of men, and not of God. A business of
great concernment and worthy of due consideration. And truly Mr. Montague, if a
man should run through all the new Doctrines for Service, Discipline and
Ceremonies in the Church of Rome, and inquire whether they were from Heaven or
of men, we shall not in all Gods Word find any warrant for them; for they are
all the inventions of crafty men, who employed their wisdom and abilities of
understanding to amuse the people with these outward performances, and kept
them from the glorious light of the Gospel, that by this means, having put
out that shining and burning Candle of Truth, they might better vent their
Romish ware in the dark, and lead the people into errors and by-ways to the
distraction and ruin of their poor souls: for, imposing upon them, all their
traditions and will worship as the service of God, and punishing the least
neglect of their Ordinances with greater severity, than the breach of all Gods
Commandments, it is manifest to all men, that they are not only the servants
of men, but liable to the curse the Apostle here pronounces against all those
that teach otherwise, than they have received from him: and make the poor
people also subject to the same condemnation. And therefore, the Church of
England in consideration of the great danger she was in by reason of the
prodigious idolatry and will worship of the Church of Rome, has timely
renounced all these inventions of men, and serves God now in spirit and truth,
as all those that worship aright do, John 4. and cleaves only to Jesus Christ,
and his teaching, disavowing all humane inventions in Gods service, and
therefore is built upon the foundation of Peter, and believes as it ought to
believe. And thus much I thought fit to speak, concerning Will Worship.

And now I am come to the third part of my proposition, viz. that the Church of
England continues steadfastly in the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets. An
infallible mark of a true Church. By steadfastly continuing, I understand such
an adhering and cleaving to the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, as they
find it in the written word of the old and new Testament, as they make that,
and that only the Rule of their faith and obedience, and no unwritten word, or
Traditions, Counsels or Fathers, no farther than they are grounded upon the
written word contained in the holy Bible. And this the Church of England has
good warrant to do from Christ's both precept and example, and from both the
Prophets and Apostles practice. John the 5. v. the 39. Search the Scriptures
says Christ, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they
which testify of me. And v. 46.47. for, had ye believed Moses, you would have
believed me; for he wrote of me; but if ye believe not his writings, how shall
you believe my words? Here our Savior Christ ratifyes Moses his writings to be
of Divine authority, and equalizes them with, if not prefers them before his
own words, saying, if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my
words? And in the sixteenth of Luke in the person of Abraham, Christ sends
all men that desire salvation, to the writings of Moses, saying, v. 29, 30, 31.
they have Moses and the Prophets: let them hear them, if they would escape
damnation, and have eternal life. And Dives said, Nay Father Abraham, but if
one come unto them from the dead, they will amend their lives, and repent. And
he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. Here our Savior ties them
precisely to the Scriptures, and affirms they are more prevalent to bring men
unto Repentance and to save their souls, than any miracles whatsoever, and
therefore that they are only to be cleaved unto by all the sons of Abraham.
And as he commanded all men to have recourse to Moses and the Prophets, so all
the time of his life, and after his resurrection he taught all his auditors
out of the holy Scriptures, Luke the 24. verse. 27. and after that our Savior
Christ had upbrayded his Disciples for their unbelief, He began, says the
Evangelist, at Moses, and all the Prophets, and expounded to them through all
the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. And verse. 44. he said unto
them, These are the words which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you,
that all things must be fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses, and
in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning me. Here our Savior Christ
instructs and teaches his Disciples only out of the written Word, and in them
all Christians, and sends them only to the Scriptures of Moses, and the
Prophets, and the Psalmist, and affirms that they were the voice of God, which
the Lord spoke and uttered by them. All the Prophets likewise sent the people
to the written word, as Deuteronomy. 30. and Isaiah 8. ver. 20. To the Law, and to the
Testimonies, says the Prophet, if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them. Here the Lord by his Prophet sends all
men to the written Word, in which he declared his pleasure and will unto them,
and affirms that they that speak not according to that Word, they have no
light in them, that is, they are in error and darkness; according to that of
our Savior, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 22. ever sending them
to the Scripture for knowledge. And Malac. 4. the Lord there, verse. 4.
Remember, says he, the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in
Horeb, for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments. Here all the Church of
the Jews were sent unto the written Word, and manded ever to remember that
that was left by Gods appointment for the rule of their faith and obedience,
and to that only they were steadfastly to cleave. And Paul in Acts 24. verse.
14. in his own defense before Felix speaks thus, This I confess unto thee,
that after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers,
believing all things in the Law and the Prophets. The written word was the
ground of his faith, he continued steadfastly in the doctrine of the Prophets,
and taught all men so to do, proving and confirming his doctrine out of the
holy Sciptures of the Prophets, and convincing the Jews out of them from
morning to evening, Acts 28. ver. 23. And in Acts 26. ver. 22. Witnessing,
says the Apostle, both to small and great, saying no other things than those
which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. Nothing but Scripture, and
the doctrine contained in them, was the foundation of both the true Jewish and
Christian Church. And Apollos a man eloquent and mighty in the Scripture, used
the same way of teaching, Acts 18. verse. 28. who showed by the Scriptures that
Jesus was that Christ. And Paul to the Thessalonians in the first Epistle,
chap. 5. verse. 19, 20. Quench not the spirit, says he, despise not the
Prophesies: a thing worthy the noting; after he had exhorted them to nourish in
themselves the sparks of the Spirit of God kindled in them, that they might not
be deluded by any false spirit, or conceive they had the Spirit, when they had
it not, he ties them to the rule by which they should try the Spirits, whether
they be of God or not; and that rule was the Prophesies of the old Testament,
and the studying of them. As much as if he had said to the Thessalonians,
nourish daily within you all the graces of knowledge and wisdom, the Spirit of
God has bestowed upon you, and increase more and more in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus, saying, Quench not the Spirit; and that you may the better increase
in knowledge and abound in all gifts and graces, and the truth, and that ye may
not be led away with any deceiving spirit, and vain delusion, instead of true
illumination, after the manner of many enthusiasts, who dream of new
inspirations, new lights, regulate your whole illumination and your spirit and
knowledge according unto the written prophesies of the old Testament, follow
them and you cannot err, therefore, says he, despise not the prophesies, but
by them try all things, and keep that which is good and agreeable to them, and
whatsoever is not agreeable to them is a mere delusion, and not the true
Spirit, who is ever like it self, and therefore he ties them to the prophesies
of the old Testament, as well as to the Scriptures of the new. So Saint Peter
in his second Epistle, chap. 1. verse. 19. We have also a more sure word of the
Prophets, says he, to the which ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light
that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise
in our hearts. Here the holy Apostle Peter ties all Christians as well to the
written Word of the old as to the Scriptures of the new. This written Word was
the foundation of the Church of the Jews, and is of all Christians. It was the
praise of all the Christians of the Primitive Church, that they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and
prayer, Acts 2. ver. 42. and that they searched the Scriptures, as the Bereans.
And Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians, chap. 2. verse. 19, 20. for their
comfort tells them, that they were not strangers and forainers, but Citizens
with the Saints and of the h^ushold of God; and confirms it unto them with a
strong reason that they were the people of God, and a true Church, because
says he, Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner Stone. So that to continue constantly
in the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, is an irresistible argument and
proof of a true Church, and that it is built upon the foundation of Peter.
Which when the Church of England continues in, swarving in nothing from that
rule, but always hearing the voice of Christ, it is manifest they are his
sheep, and are of God, for so says Christ, John 8. ver. 7. He that is of God
hears Gods Words, ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God,
speaking there to the unbelieving Jews. And chap. 10. My sheep, says he, he
are my voice, ver. 27. And in Chap. 18. ver. 17. Every one, says Christ, that
is of the truth hears my voice. And St. John in his first Epistle, chap. 4.
ver. 6. says, We are of God, he that knows God hears us: he that is not of
God hears us not. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of
error. In these words St. John confirms that his own doctrine, and the
doctrine of all the Apostles was the assured Word of God, and that they that
were of God did hear it; and that they that did not hear it, that is, obey
it, were not of God; and that by this doctrine alone all men might distinguish
truth from error, they that hear this doctrine are of the truth, they that
hear it not are led by the spirit of error, and are in darkness. Now then,
Mr. Montague, when the Church of England in all things hears the voice of
Christ, and cleaves only to the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and
the Church of Rome is not grounded upon the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, but upon their vain traditions, doctrines of men, and will not suffer
the Word of God to be read amongst the people, nor permit the voice of Christ
to be heard amongst them, this necessarily follows from thence: that the
Church of England is a true Church, and built upon the foundation of Peter, and
the Church of Rome is a false Church, and founded upon error and delusion. And
therefore, Mr. Montague, if you desire salvation, come out of that confused
Babylon, into the bosom of the Church of England, that teaches the way, the
truth, and the life, and you will find rest unto your soul. And this shall
satisfy to have spoken of this third part of my proposition.

Now I come to the fourth part, viz. that in the Church of England the Gospel
is purely preached, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Sacraments rightly administered, and in which there is the true
invocation of God. Another infallible and never deceiving note of a true
Church, which were it single and alone, were sufficient to evince to the whole
world, that the Church of England is a true Church, and built upon the
foundation of Peter: and therefore believes as it ought to believe. By the pure
preaching of the Gospel, and right administration of the Sacraments, and the
true invocation of God, I understand, when all things are done in the ministry
and preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the Sacraments, and
invocation of the name of God and prayer, according to Christ's institution, and
according to the commission delivered unto the Apostles, without addition of
any thing, or diminution, but observing all things according unto the rule
prescribed in all punctual manner by such as God has fitted for wisdom,
learning, and all divine knowledge for that holy employment, and who do
accordingly in all uprightness, sincerity, and godly simplicity, following the
example of Paul, 2 Cor. 2. verse. 17. We, says he, are not as many, which make
merchandise of the Word of God: but of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight
of God speak we in Christ. The Apostles did nothing in the ministry craftily,
or coveteously, or less sincerely than they ought, as more fully is expressed
in chap. 4. ver. 2. where he says, We have cast from us the cloak of shame,
and walk not in crafrinesse, neither handle we the Word of God deceitfully:
but in declaration of the truth, we approve our selves to every man's
conscience, in the sight of God. The Apostles preached the Gospel without
subtilty and deceit, seeking no lurking-holes to cover their shameless
dealing, they preached not with excellency of words (as Paul in 1 Cor. 2.
declares) or of wisdom in showing the testimony of God, which was the Gospel;
neither was their word and preaching in the enticing speech of man's wisdom,
but in plain evidence of the Spirit, and of power, and not for self ends.
After this example of the blessed Apostle is the Gospel preached by the
Ministers of the Church of England, who dispense the Ordinances according to
their Commission, neither adding nor detracting from it in any thing, but
withal care, sedulity, and watchfulness, without base ends, and
self-respects, attend upon the Ministry in their particular places, and as they
are made Watchmen unto their flocks by God himself, so they receive the word
from his mouth, and give warning to the people, Ezekiel. 3. ver. 17. and they
swerve not from the rule: which will the better appear, if we examine the
Commission the Lord Jesus gave to the Apostles, Matthew. 28. ver. 19. Go
therefore, says Christ, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, until the
end of the world. Their commission was limited, that they should speak nothing
but what Christ commanded them, nothing of their own heads and brains, and
keeping themselves within their limits they were ever sure of Gods presence and
assistance who had promised them and all their successors in so doing, to be
with them to the end of the world: they were bound therefore to teach nothing
but Gods commands, and that the holy Apostles observed, and commanded all men,
though an Angel from Heaven should teach otherwise than they had taught them,
not to hear them, under a fearful curse, Galat. 1. Now when the Church of
England diligently keeps it self to the Commission given by Christ unto his
Apostles, and preaches the Gospel in all purity, without any mixture of their
own inventions and doctrines, and that with all simplicity and godly
integrity, and administers the holy Sacraments without any addition, diminution
or detraction, according as Christ appointed, and calls upon the name of God
according as he has taught, it is clear to all men that the Church of England
is a true Church, and built upon the foundation of Peter. All which will more
perspicuously be evidenced if we examine the several commissions of the
Apostles, and consider what they preached unto the people, whose example for
preaching and doctrine the Church of England in all things follows, and swarves
not from. Saint Peter in Acts 2. ver. 37. When the people were pricked in their
hearts at his Sermon, and said unto the Apostles, Men and brethren what shall
we do? in Verse 38. according to his commission, Repent, says he, and be
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost: for the promise is to
you and your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call. To preach faith and repentance unto the people was their
commission. And in chap. 3. ver. 23. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted out, etc. and Saint Paul sets down his commission
in the places following, in Chap. 13. ver. 23. Be it known unto you therefore
men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you forgiveness of
sins. And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which
they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. And in Acts 26. the Apostle
Paul shows his commission to King Agrippa, and what by that he was to do in
Gods service and employments. His words are these, I have, says the Lord
Jesus, appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a Minister and a
witness, both of these things which thou have seen, and of those things I will
appear unto thee, in delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles,
unto whom now I send thee. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith
that is in me. Here is the Apostles Commission. Now let us take notice how he
executes it. Whereupon, O King Agrippa, says he, I was not disobedient unto
the heavenly vision, but showed first unto them of Damascus and at Jerusalem,
and through all the coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should
repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance. So that in the
execution of his commission in opening their eyes, and turning men from
darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God, for the receiving
of remission of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified, he
preaches unto them only, that they should repent and turn to God, and do
works meet for repentance, and believe in Jesus Christ. And in this consisted
all the preaching of all the Apostles and Prophets, and this is all the work
that the true Ministers of Jesus Christ have to do, unto the end of the world.
Which Commission when the Church of England fully and punctually observes,
teaching them to repent, and turn from sin, and idols, unto the living God,
and to change their minds and purposes, and to come out of themselves, and fly
unto God for mercy and pardon, putting off their old mind, and putting on a new;
in a word, when the Church of England teaches all men that true repentance
consists in the universal change of the mind, and of the whole life, and
turning unto God by unfeigned sorrow, which proceeds from an earnest,
serious, and real fear of God, which continues unto the last hour of man's
life, in the mortifying of the old man, and crucifying of the flesh, and in the
quickuing of the new man, and vivifying of the Spirit, and labors by all
means to humble men for their sins, by which they have offended God, that so
they may obtain mercy, and become new creatures, and manifest this change
wrought in them, by the amendment of their whole lives, and returning into the
ways of Gods Commandments, and exhorts them to the practicing of all those
virtues and graces God has adorned them with, and bestowed upon them, and as
they are a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
people, that they should show forth the praises of him who has called them out
of darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. verse. 9. Again, when the
Church of England instructs the people fully in the doctrine of saving faith,
teaching that it is a certain, settled, and assured knowledge of the free
grace, mercy, and love of God toward mankind, in Jesus Christ, and grounded
upon the truth of the gracious and free promise of God in Christ, and is both
revealed unto their minds and souls, and sealed in their hearts by the holy
Ghost, so that as the Spirit of God does illuminate their understanding, and
works faith in their hearts, withal he does witness unto them their
adoption, and assures them of their salvation in Jesus Christ, and of life
eternal, according unto the Commission delivered unto the Apostles, and which
likewise they in their own particulars preached unto their auditors, as the
whole Scriptures witness, now when the Church of England, I say, not only
instructs the people rightly to believe and repent, but also calls upon
them that they should join practice with theory, and show forth their faith by
all good works and a godly life, and holy conversation, and that they should
daily increase and abound in all knowledge, and labor for particular faith,
and certain assurance of Gods love, and that they may the better attain unto
this special assurance, by which they may be supported in all temptations and
trials, they exhort them diligently and carefully to read the Word of God which
was written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15. ver. 4. and call upon them likewise to be
diligent in the hearing of the holy Word, and frequenting of the holy
assemblies, and encourage them to the real practice of all those instructions
and wholesome doctrines that they learn by the ministry of the Gospel, that
they may not only be Saints in the Church, and in public, but at home in
their houses, yea and in their private closets, and be holy in all manner of
conversation, both public and private, ever instructing their family, ever
showing them good example, and going before them in a godly and unblameable
life, walking before God in uprightness, and inall sincerity, and before men
unreproveable. Again, when the Church of England administers the Sacraments of
Baptism and the Lords Supper according to Christ institution, without addition
and diminution; but as they have received them from the Lord: as baptism in
pure water, without mixtures: and the Lords Supper in both elements in Bread
and Wine, with the very words of institution according to Christ's appointment
and command: And withal continually instructs and teaches the people the end
for which they were ordained, and the right use of them, with the true nature
and meaning of those mysteries, as that they are outward and visible signs,
wherewith the Lord seals and confirms to our consciences the sweet promises
of his good will and pleasure toward us, for the sustaining and supporting of
the feebleness and weakness of our faith: and by the which we again on our
own behalfes do testify our piety, duty, and love toward him, as well
before him and the blessed Angels, as before men: and declare unto the people,
that they are testimonies of Gods favor and good will toward us, confirmed by
outward signs, and are visible forms of invisible grace. And the Ministers of
the Church of England also prepare the people by wholesome instructions what
duties are required at their hands, and what requisits are necessarily expected
for the making of them capable, and worthy partakers of these holy Ordinances,
and so to communicate in them, as they may thereby bring glory to God, and
edification to others, and receive the comfort of the right celebrating the
holy Sacraments in their own particular, all which things, I say, when the
Church of England conscientiously performs, according unto the rule
prescribed in the holy Word, and the example of Christ and the holy Apostles,
it is manifest that the Church of England declares it self to be a true
Church, and built upon the foundation of Peter, and believes as it ought to
believe. Again, when the Church of England teaches the people to put up all
their prayers and supplications to God only, in the name and mediation of
Jesus Christ, by the assistance of the holy Spirit, with an assured faith of
being heard according to Christ's direction, saying, When ye pray say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc. Matthew. 6. ver. 6. and 9. and Matthew. 21. ver.
22. Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, if ye believe, ye shall receive it. And
John 15. ver. 7. and 1 John 5. ver. 14. and John 14. verse. 13, 14. Whatsoever
ye ask in my name, I will do it. And John 16. ver. 23. I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. And John
14. ver. 6. I am the way, the truth, and the life. No man comes unto the
Father, but by me. This way of praying unto God does the Church of England
teach unto the people, and instruct them, to whom in all calamities to make
their addresses, according to the doctrine of holy Scripture, and that is to
God alone. Psalm. 50. Call upon me in the time of trouble, etc. And St. Paul in
his first Epistle to Timothy, chapter 2. exhorting all Christians to make prayers
and supplications with thanksgiving for all men, for Kings, and such as are in
authority; and giving the reason of it, because, says the Apostle, God will
that all men shall be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth that is
to say, all sorts of men, without any difference of nation, kind, age, or
order. And then he gives them a direction in whose name they shall put up their
supplications, that they may be accepted, and that is in the name of Jesus
Christ, No man comes unto the father, but by Christ. And therefore the
Apostle, as he did impose upon all Christians that duty of praying for all
sorts of men, Kings, Emperors, and Rulers, so in that very place, verse. 5. he
bids them put up their prayers in the sole name of Jesus Christ, for says he,
there is but one God, to whom we must pray, and there is but one Mediator
betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus, in whose name we must put up all our
prayers, supplications, and thanksgivings. For as there is but one God of all
Nations, Kings, Princes, and Potentates, so there is but one Mediator of all
Nations, Kings, Princes, and Potentates, who only has given a ransom for
them, and whose blood speaks better things than the blood of Abel, for Abels
calls for revenge, but Christ's blood calls for mercy, and atonement, and that
continually: for he is a perfect Mediator both for satisfaction and
intercession, and has not resigned that office of intercession and
mediatorship to either Saints or Angels; and therefore it is great impiety and
horrid sacrilege, and blasphemy in any, to rob Christ of his honor and glory,
and to ascribe it to the creatures, especially when in express words the
Apostle in the Romans 8. ver. 34. affirms, that Christ being at the right hand
of God makes requests for us. And Saint John in his first Epistle, chap. 2. v.
1, 2. says, My little children, these things write I unto you, that you sin
not: and if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the just, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole world. Here Christ is assigned by Saint
John to be the Mediator of all sorts of men, of all ages, and in all places,
and in that he nominates Jesus Christ to be the Mediator, he excludes all other
advocates: for reconciliation and intercession go inseparably together, to give
us to understand that he only is our advocate, who is our high Priest. The
same doctrine the author to the Hebrews teaches all Christians in Chap. 5. v.
23, 24, 25. And they truly were many Priests, etc. by reason of death but this
man, because he continues ever, has an everlasting Priesthood. Wherefore also
he is able to save them to the utmost, that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives, and makes intercession for them. From all which places we see,
that the Priestly Office has them ediation and intercession so annexed unto
it, that the one cannot be severed or taken from the other without detestable
sacrilege and blasphemy: and therefore it must needs be a greater impiety in
all such as give the glory of the mediation and intercession, to Saints and
Angels: when notwithstanding in express words the Apostle in his Epistle to
the Colossians, chap. 2. v. 18. has not only condemned it as detestable, but
shows likewise the reason of it, that it is pernicious and destructive to the
souls of men, and separates them from their head Christ Jesus; his words are
these, Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels, etc. and not holding the head. Here we see the reward of
such men's impiety, for as they rob Christ of his honor, and thrust him from
his mediatorship, so they by this are thrust out of Heaven not holding the
head. And in John 10. ver. 9. Christ says, I am the door, by me if any man
enter in he shall be saved, etc. in the which words there are two things
observable, the first, that Christ only is the door of Heaven, no entrance
but by him, according to that of Saint Peter, Acts 4. ver. 12. Neither is there
salvation in any other, for among men there is given no other name under
Heaven, whereby we must be saved. The second thing out of these words
observable is this, that they that enter in by this door shall be saved, and
by no other means, for John 14. ver. 6. Christ says, I am the way, the truth,
and the life, no man comes unto the Father but by me. In which words Christ
does not only teach us, that he is the way, but asserts, that there is no
other way to come unto God but by him, if we will be saved: therefore
whatsoever ways to salvation either men do devise and invent, or the devil
suggests, to abuse the world, God has appointed no other way to Heaven, and to
be saved by, but Jesus Christ alone, he only is the Mediator both of Jews and
Gentiles, Ephesians. 2. verse. 18. For through him we both have an access by one
spirit unto the Father, And in chap. 3. v. 12. In whom we have boldness and
access with confidence by the faith of him; what need then, have men of any
other Mediator, seeing that the Son Jesus Christ makes the Father propitious
and favorable unto us, and seeing that entering in by the door we attain unto
salvation, which is the end of our hope? 1 Pet. 1. When Christ ascended into
Heaven, he promised his Apostles to send them his holy Spirit the Comforter,
which should lead them into all truth, and solace them and help them in all
their tribulations, and S Paul in the 8 of the Romans v. 26. says, Likewise also
the Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as
we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings
which cannot be uttered, and he that searches the heart, knows what is the
mind of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according
to the Will of God. Now let us take notice, how the Spirit of God teaches all
men to pray, who knows best what is the Will of God. Ye have not, says the
Apostle, verse 15. received the Spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have
received the Spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry Abba, Father, that is, with
earnestness to cry Father, Father. Those then that call upon Saints and
Angels, have not as yet received the spirit of adoption, who teaches them
always to direct their Prayers unto God, and to cry Father, Father; but the
Spirit of error and delusion. And in Gal. 4. v. 6. Because ye are Sons,
says the Apostle, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba Father. From the which words as from the former, it is easy
to conclude, that they that teach men to call upon Saints and Angels are not
guided and moved by the Spirit of God and Christ: for all the Prayers that the
Spirit of God and Christ frame in our hearts, are addressed and directed unto
God alone. Withal, we may observe in both the places cited, that the Spirit
teaches us, not only to say, but makes us cry Abba Father, thereby
instructing us to cast away all vain fears, and to come unto God with
confidence and all assurance, according to that in the. Heb. 4. v. 15, 16. For
we have not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let
us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy,
and find grace to help in time of need. Here again we are directed to come
unto God only and to our Mediator when we approach to the Throne of grace,
neither can we address ourselves to any other, better than unto Christ, in
regard that he best knows our necessities; before whom there is not any
creature that is not manifest, and in whose sight with whom we have to do, all
things are naked and open: neither is there any that has more compassion, and
is more touched with a feeling of our infirmities, than he who was in all
points tempted like as we; neither is there any that has more ability, and
all sufficiency to succor, help, or save us than Christ, who has all power in
Heaven and Earth given him for the good of his people, and relief of his
Church. And in regard likewise that all our Prayers, Supplications, and
Thanksgivings, are spiritual Sacrifices, and all Sacrifices ought only to be
offered to God alone, and that in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ. As
Judges 13. v. 16. If thou will offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it to
God alone. Psalm. 50. v. 14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto
the most High, and call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee:
here we see that all Thanksgivings and praises must be given to him only, to
whom we put up our Prayers, and according to this rule, have all the holy
Prophets: Apostles and all the Saints powered out their Prayers and Praises to
God alone in the name of Jesus Christ, and have directed others so to do, as
Ephesians. 5. v. 20. Giving thanks always for all things unto God even the Father,
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: and says Peter in his first Epistle
Chap. 2. v. 5. Ye also, as lively stones, be made a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. And therefore they will not be acceptable, except they be offered up in
the name of Jesus Christ. And Heb. 13. v. 15. Let us therefore by him offer the
sacrifice of praise always to God, that is the fruit of the lips, giving
thanks to his name. So that if we will follow the direction of God the Father,
Son and holy Ghost, and be taught by God as all believers are, John 6. v. 45.
then all our prayers, Supplications and Thanksgivings are to be put up to God
alone, in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ, and by the assistance of the
holy Spirit. And this is the Doctrine that all true Christians are bound to
persevere and continue in, to the last drop of their blood, and if an Angel
from Heaven should teach us any other doctrine, as invocation of Saints and
Angels, he is to be accursed, Gal. 1. v. 8. The Apostle in that place, alluding
unto that which is spoken in the first of the Kings chap. 13. where the Prophet
sent by the Lord to cry against the Altar of Jeroboam, was commanded not to
eat bread, or drink water, nor to return the same way; and so he answered
the King, inviting him to go to his house, that if he would give him half his
house, that he would not go with him, and gave him a reason of his so doing,
because he had a command to the contrary by God himself. But when an old
Prophet that dwelt in Bethel, had heard what happened there, and what had been
done to the Altar and Jeroboam, and being desirous to give him entertainment,
and for that end following the Prophet at last he overtook him, and earnestly
entreated him to return and eat Bread, who replying unto him said, I may not
return with thee, nor eat bread, for it was said unto me by the Word of the
Lord to the contrary; to whom the old Prophet answered, I am a Prophet as well
as thou, and an Angel spoke unto me by the Word of the Lord, saying, Bring him
back with thee into the house that he may eat Bread, and drink Water, but he
lied. And by this lie, he deluded the poor Prophet to his ruin, as the story
tells, and to this story, I say, the Apostle alluding, forbids all
Christians to take heed of all other Doctrines whatsoever that they have not
received from Christ and his Disciples, and that they intertaine none contrary
to that they have been taught by him, though he himself should teach contrary
to that he formerly taught, or any of the other Apostles, yea though an Angel
from Heaven should teach them otherwise, the Apostle ties all Christians here
as in other places, to the rule written in the Word of God. And in Chap. 6. in
the first Epistle to Tim. v. 3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not
unto wholesome words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine
which is according to godliness: from such withdraw thy self. Now to teach
invocations of Saints and Angels is to teach otherwise, than Christ taught, and
it is not to consent unto wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus,
who said, when ye pray say, Our Father which art in Heaven. But we cannot say
to any Saint or Angel, our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy name thy
Kingdom come, thy will be done, and forgive us our sins, etc. And therefore
by Christ's Doctrine we are in our Prayers to pray only unto him, to whom all
these Petitions belong, and this is to consent unto the wholesome words of
Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to godliness, so that all
Praying to Saints and Angels is unwholesome doctrine, yea impious and
blasphemous, and by the command of the Apostle we are to shun such as bring
such Doctrine; according to that of S. John's Epistle the 2. verse. 9.10, 11.
Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ has not God.
He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he bath both the Father and the
Son. If there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine) that is to say,
the Doctrine of Christ) receive him not into your House, neither bid him
God-speed. For he that bids him God-speede, is partaker of his evil deeds.
They that teach therefore the Doctrine of the invocation of Saints and Angels
teach not the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; and they that entertain and embrace
that Doctrine, they all transgress the command and have not God; but they that
teach the Doctrine of Jesus Christ which is in all our necessities to call upon
God the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, they have both the Father
and the Son, and by that, salvation; for they that call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved. Acts 4. Romans 10. But the Church of England does this,
Ergo. Innumerable reasons, Mr. Montague, might be given against this Doctrine
of invocating of Saints and Angels, as that it is a mere will worship, without
both president and precept, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin, but much
more whatsoever is contrary to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and contrary unto Faith: for how shall they call on him, says the Apostle, in
whom they have not believed? so that faith and invocation go together, and we
must call upon none in whom we believe not: but to believe in Saints and
Angels is both blasphemous and impious, for it is to give the honor due to
the Creator, who is blessed for ever, to the creature, Romans 1. than the which
there cannot be a greater sacrilege; and it is also to expect salvation from
them, which belongs to God alone, who only can save: for whosoever shall call
upon the name of the Lordshall be saved, Romans 10. v. 13. Joel 2. v. 32. Now if
by our Prayer unto God, we can be saved, what need we take then any other
course as to go either to Saints or Angels, if it were neither forbidden, nor
sinful? but seeing it is a doctrine against the Will of God, and every way so
abominable, it ought of all Christians to be detested: and so much the rather,
because they that make Saints and Angels Mediators of the new Testament,
saying, that Christ is Mediator of satisfaction and redemption, but that the
Saints and Angels are mediators of intercession, by this blasphemous Doctrine,
they make Christ but a partial, momentany and temporary Mediator, and his
Mediatorship but for a time: and give unto the Saints and Angels, that never
dying and everlasting Mediatorship, than the which there is nothing more
impious against God, or injurious to men, when notwithstanding the holy
Scriptures, proclaim Christ's Mediatorship to consist as well in intercession
as redemption, and that they cannot be separated or divided, and also that
Christ now at the right hand of God is Mediator of both, who is the appointed
advocate and high priest for this purpose in Heaven, and that by God himself
who is Judge there, and to which Office none can be admitted but by God alone,
Heb. 5. v. 4. and 5. And withal the holy Word of God in express terms
delivers unto all Christians for their comfort, that Christ does now make
intercession for them at the right hand of God, Romans 8. v. 31. and 1 Timothy chap.
2. Heb. 9.24, 25. and the 1 of John chap. 2. v. 1, 2. Now then I say al these
things considered, when in the Church of England the Gospel is purely and
sincerely preached, the Sacraments duly and rightly administered in all respects
and the Name of God truly called upon, according as God himself has
appointed: it follows that the Church of England is a true Church, and when
in the Church of Rome, the Gospel is neither purely and sincerely preached,
but error, superstition and open Idolatry, and the Sacraments are adulterated
by additions and detractions, mingling with their Sacrament of Baptism,
Spitle, Oil and Salt, making it rather a plaster than a Baptism, and mangling
the Lords Supper most sacrilegiously; first taking away the Cup from the
People, and then changing the Sacrament into a sacrifice, that abominable Idol
of the Mass, to the which they give the worship of Latriae, which in their
Dialect is only due to God alone: and when they have to all this brought into
the Church the invocation of Saints and Angels, and by this means robbed
Christ and God of their honor, and set up a false worship, and persecute all
those that Preach the Gospel, and hinder men from the faith, it necessarily
follows, that the Church of Rome is not the true Church, the ground and
pillar of Truth, but the foundation of all error and abomination, and by that
means have made themselves liable to the curse S. Paul in the first Chapter to
the Galatians denounces against all such as Preach otherwise than he has
taught: and that curse also he pronounces against Bar-Jesus the Sorcerer in the
13 of the Act. who withstood Paul and Barnabas, seeking to turn away the
Deputy from the faith, verse. 9. To whom Paul, filled with the Holy Ghost said,
O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy
of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the ways of the Lord? So
that you see, Mr. Montague, by Paul's own words those that hinder the Preaching
of the Gospel, pervert the ways of God: and for so doing, are by the holy
Apostle proclaimed children of the Devil and enemies of all Righteousness.
And in the first of These. chapter 2. Hear what the Apostle there speaks of the
Jews, and consider diligently whether that which he there declares does not
belong unto the Church of Rome, his words are these, verse. 23. Who both killed
the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets; and have persecuted us: and they please
not God and are contrary to all men: forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles,
that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always, for the wrath is
come upon them to the uttermost. Those that persecute the true Ministers of the
Gospel and all true believers under the name of Heretics and Schismatics,
and hinder and forbid the peaching of the Gospel, they neither please God, and
are contrary to all men, and fill up their sins always: for the wrath of God
is come upon them to the uttermost, and therefore they are not the Church of
God but enemies to him, and contrary to all men; and all this the Church of
Rome daily practices: but the Church of England when it does not pervert the
ways of the Lord, and hinders not nor forbids the Preaching of the Gospel,
but sincerely and purely preaches it, that all men may be saved and come to
the knowledge of the truth, and prompteth and furthereth the preaching of it,
all it can possibly, and rightly administreth the sacraments, and in the which
there is the true invocation of God, it is manifest that it is a true Church,
the ground and pillar of Truth, and where salvation may be had. And thus much
Mr. Montague, I thought fit to speak of all the several parts of that
Syllogism, which you excepted against, and I am most assured, that whosoever
shall seriously weigh the things handled in it, will think nothing superfluous
in all I have said: and with all will find every parcel of it so confirmed and
corroborated, as it will give him good satisfaction and illucidate that every
Branch of that argument is true. But because, Mr. Montague, after your
exception you denied the whole minor in a bulk all together, I will now make
that good also in the gross. And that the order of our disputation may the
better be observed, which by reason of this large discourse has been
something obscured and interrupted, I will briefly repeat the sum of the
argument and what you denied in it, and so go on. The argument was this: That
Church that teaches the Way, the Truth and the Life, against which the gates
of Hell can never prevail, is a true Church, the ground and pillar of Truth.
But the Church of England teaches the Way, the Truth, and the Life, Ergo. Here
you deny the Minor, which I thus prove. That Church which is built upon the
foundation of Peter, teaches the Way, the Truth and the Life, etc. But the
Church of England is built upon the foundation of Peter, Ergo. Here also you
denied the Minor, which I thus proved. That Church which acknowledges Jesus
Christ to be the Son of the Eternal living God, and believes only in Him
for salvation, renouncing all merit, will worship, bumane inventions in Gods
Service, and continues steadfastly in the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles,
and in the which the Gospel is purely Preached, repentance toward God, and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Sacraments are rightly
administered, and in the which there is the true invocation of God, that Church
is built upon the foundation of Peter, and teaches the Way, the Truth and the
Life, and is a true Church, the ground and pillar of Truth. But the Church of
England does acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the Son of the Eternal living
God, and believes only on Him for salvation, renouncing all Merits,
Will Worship, Humane inventions in Gods Service, and continues steadfastly in
the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and in the which the Gospel is
purely Preached, Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Sacraments are rightly administered, and in the which also there
is the true invocation of God. Ergo, It is built upon the foundation of Peter,
etc.

This Minor you also peremptorely denied, which I then proved, and will now by
Gods assistance make good, and answer to all your evasions in order, and then
prove the Scripture to contain all things necessary to salvation, and to be
the only rule of our faith and manners. That Church which acknowledges both
the natures of Jesus Christ, and all his Offices, and so believes in him, as he
is qualified and made known in the Gospel, renouncing all merits and
will worship, and relies only upon Christ for salvation, and observes all the
other requisites specified in my Minor, that Church is built upon the
foundation of Peter, and believes as it ought to believe. But the Church of
England does acknowledge both the natures of Jesus Christ, and all his Offices,
and so believes in him, as he is qualified and made known in the Gospel,
renouncing all Merits, Will Worship, and relies only upon Christ for
salvation, and observes all the other requisites specified in my Minor. Ergo,
The Church of England is built upon the foundation of Peter, and believes as it
ought to believe, and is a true Church, the ground and pillar of Truth, etc.

They, Mr. Montague, that were standers by, admired you should deny such
apparent truths, as you then did in your answers to my former Syllogismes, the
verity of the which, as they said, was so evident and well known to very
children. But they much more wondered to hear your expressions in this your
last answer to my last Syllogism. And to speak the truth, Master Montague,
and no way to wrong you, your answer was not only very confused, but
exceedingly erroneous in all respects, to speak no more. I say it was confused
not only in that you neither denied major nor minor, nor any part of it
directly, as you had done in your former replies, and answers; for that indeed
you could not now do, the truth was so clear: but in regard also of the
obscurity of your expressions, and your often affirming and denying the same
thing, of which you could give no reason to those Gentlemen that were present,
although they often desired it. I will therefore first set down as well as I
can the sum of your answer, and bring that into order that was confusedly by
you delivered: and then relate the several arguments and reasons I then made
to your evasions.

Your first evasion was, That to acknowledge both the natures of Jesus Christ
and all his Offices, and to believe in him as he was set forth and qualified in
the holy Scripture, was not sufficient enough to make a Church to be built upon
the foundation of Peter. And your reason, as you said, was, because to believe
in Jesus Christ effectually and sufficiently to salvation, consisted, in that
we conformed our selves to a belief which is speculative, and to a religion
that is practical; in that the Church of Christ was determined in these two
points, to believe what was rightly delivered to us for speculative, and then
the external practice of religion. I have set down your answer, as I find it
taken by those that writ it verbatim, not trusting wholly to my own memory.
But before I relate the answer I then gave you, I will first discover the
danger and obscurity, yea confusion that is in your language and words, by
which you thought to evade the dint of my argument: the truth of which, all the
force and wit of man can never prevail against. You first affirmed, that it
was not enough to be built upon the foundation of Peter, to acknowledge both
the natures of Jesus Christ, and all his Offices, and to believe in him as he
was set forth and qualified in holy Scripture: for otherwise, to what end were
these your words uttered to evade the force and dint of my argument? And this
is as much as to overthrow all Christian religion, and to deny the holy
Scripture, which offers salvation upon the terms of believing Jesus Christ, as
he is declared and made known in the Gospel: for Paul in his first Epistle to
the Corinthians, chap. 2. v. 2. I determined not, says he, to know any thing
among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. A sublimer knowledge, and a
more excellent learning Paul aspired not unto, than to the knowledge of Christ
and him crucified, and that indeed is a knowledge surpassing all knowledge,
having both the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, and brings
a man to eternal happiness: For this is life eternal, says Christ, John 17.
to know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.
Now, Mr. Montague, tell me I beseech you, wherein does the knowledge of Christ
consist, but in understanding this, that when he was in the form of God, and
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, he made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of
men, Phil. 2. ver. 6, 7. So that being both God and man, he became our
Mediator, and has visited and redeemed his people, and is the horn of our
salvation, as he is described in the first of Luke v. 68, 69. that has
overcome and vanquished all our enemies by his power, as he was our King, and
has made our atonement with God, as he was our Priest, being our Mediator both
of satisfaction and intercession: and in that as our Prophet, the wisdom of
the Father, he has fully declared the will of his heavenly Father in his holy
Word, according to the which we ought to square and order our lives: in the
distinct knowledge of all which things, and believing and practicing what is
declared in the holy Scripture, is the whole work of a Christian, and the
only cause of building any upon the foundation of Peter. And yet in your
dialect, Mr. Montague, there is more required in a Christian to make him
believe aright, than to acknowledge both the natures of Jesus Christ, and all
his Offices, and to believe in him as he is set forth unto us, and declared in
his holy Word, which is indeed to overthrow all Christian religion, though
perhaps you intended no such thing. But they, Master Montague, that will oppose
the truth many times expose themselves to great danger, running into many
errors. But let us hear the reason of that your assertion, Because, say you,
to believe in Jesus Christ effectually and sufficiently to salvation, consists
in this, that we conform our selves to a belief which is speculative, and to
a religion that is practical, in regard that the Church of Christ was
determined in these two points, to believe what is rightly delivered to us for
speculative, and then the external practice of Religion. By all which if you
had understood, that in true Religion theory and practice must always go
together, and that they were inseparable, there had been no controversy
between you and me: but the very truth is, there is a mystery of iniquity in
your expressions. For what can any man understand by your words, when you say,
to believe in Christ Jesus effectually and sufficiently to salvation, consists
in that we conform our selves to a belief which is speculative, and to a
religion which is practical, if you mean not by your belief speculative, and
your religion practical, the knowledge of both the natures of Jesus Christ,
and all his Offices, and to believe in him, as he is qualified and set down to
us in his holy Word, and the ordering of our lives according to the rule and
direction of the same; which is all that true religion consists in? Now, I say,
if you make your belief speculative, and your religion practical, a thing
diverse and different from the knowledge of both the natures of Jesus Christ,
and all his Offices, and relying only upon him for salvation, and believing in
him as he is qualified and declared to us in the Gospel, and living according
to the rule of his holy Word, then of necessity you bring in a new religion of
your own, altogether unknown to the Christian world; a speculative belief,
and a practical religion, which does not consist in the knowledge of God in
Jesus Christ, and the knowledge of our selves, in which only consists life
eternal. So that, to speak the truth, you are in Babylon and confusion it
self. And now, Mr. Montague, I come to the answers I then made, and gave to
your evasions: but by the way, I cannot but put you in mind of a promise you
made me upon my demand, which was this, if I should clearly and evidently
prove unto you, that the Church of England taught all those things for
speculation and practice that made us believe effectually and sufficiently to
salvation, whether or no it would then satisfy you and persuade you that the
Church of England was built upon the foundation of Peter, and was a true
Church? And if my memory fail not, you told me that then the work was done.
Whereupon, I thus argued:

That Church that declares, preaches, and teaches, unto the people, all that
Jesus Christ both taught, did, and suffered for the salvation of mankind, after
he had taken humane nature upon him, as he was our King, Priest, and Prophet,
which is all that we are to believe for the speculative part: and declares
likewise, and preaches plainly and distinctly, whatsoever concerns the peoples
duty of love and obedience to God again, for his infinite love to mankind:
and instructs them in like manner of their duty of love and charity one toward
another, all which belongs unto the practical part of religion: that Church
teaches all things both for theory and practice necessary for salvation, and
building them upon the foundation of Peter. But the Church of England does all
this: ergo. Here, Mr. Montague, you denied my minor; then many of the Gentlemen
that were standers by, Sir Francis Wortly, Sir John Gothericke, Sir Will.
Morton, Sir Edw. Bishop, and others whose names I know not, demanded of you,
seeing you denied my minor, that you would declare and specify wherein the
Church of England failed, either in the speculative or practical part of
Divinity, and wherein she was silent in any thing that was necessary to
salvation, either for theory or practice. And you were not then able, as they
can all witness, to show any particular, where the Church of England failed in
her duty, or concealed any thing from the people, either for speculation or
practice. Notwithstanding, Master Montague, you yet persisted in the denial of
my minor, and put me upon my proof. Whereupon I thus argued. That Church that
teaches the whole counsel of God, the knowledge of the only true God, and
whom he has sent Jesus Christ, which is life eternal, John 17. and testifies
unto the people repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, Acts 20. v. 21. and instructs them in all things how to believe aright,
and how to obey aright: that Church teaches all things for theory and practice
that are requisite for the making of a true Church, and for the building of it
upon the foundation of Peter. But the Church of England teaches all these
things: ergo. You again denied my minor, whereupon the Gentlemen as before,
desired you to instance in any particular, where the Church of England was
defective or failed in declaring the full counsel of God, or in preaching the
knowledge of God, or of faith and obedience, to the people. And however, Mr.
Montague, you were not able in any particular to make it appear where the
Church of England was deficient, yet you continued in denial of my minor, and
urged me to prove it: when nevertheless, the truth of it is so evident, as
very children are able to discern it. All men know, that faith and obedience
is the whole duty of man. Jehosaphat was well instructed in this doctrine, and
taught it to all his people, 2 Chronicles. chap. 20. v. 20. where he says, Hear ye
me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord your God, so
shall ye be established, believe his holy Prophets, so shall ye prosper. And
whosoever believes on him, shall not be confounded, Esaias 28.16. Romans 9. verse.
33. Faith and obedience was the theme of all the Sermons of all the holy
Prophets and Apostles, and of Christ himself, as the whole Scriptures
witness, Esaias 1. v. 19. the Prophet says, If ye be willing and obedient, ye
shall eat the good of the Land: but if ye refuse and rebel, you shall be
destroyed with the Sword: all which proofs clear the truth of my argument.
But to satisfy your then desire, I prove my minor thus: That Church that
teaches the people their whole duty, both toward God, and one toward another,
and instructs them both what they should do, and what they should leave
undone, by the observing of the which they may live happily here, and come to
life eternal hereafter: that Church teaches the whole counsel of God, all
for theory and practice, that is necessary for the making of it a true Church,
and the building of it up upon the foundation of Peter. But the Church of
England does all this: Ergo. And for proof of my minor I cited that of Paul in
his Epistle to Titus, chap. 2. v. 11. For the grace of God that brings
salvation has appeared unto all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and holily in this
present world: looking for that blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works. Many places more may be cited to confirm the
truth of my argument, as Eccles. 12. verse. 13, 14. where Solomon says, Let us
hear the conclusion of the whole matter, fear God and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. So in like manner, in 1 Samuel
12. ver. 13, 14, 15. God forbid, says he, that I should sin against the
Lord, in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the right
way. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your heart: for
consider how great things he has done for you. But if you still do wickedly,
ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King. The truth of my minor is so
clear, that there is not a man in whom there is but one eye of reason, but can
easily perceive and discern it: for the Church of England teaches and
publishes the whole Law, and the whole Gospel, and all that is contained in
the whole written Word of God both in the old and new Testament, and therefore
all the counsel of God, and all both for theory and practice, and whatsoever
is necessary for the building of men up upon the foundation of Peter, and
proving it self a true Church. But when you were by argument thus urged, you
at last, after many windings and turnings, betook your self to the common
refuge of all those of your profession, to wit, to an unwritten word, your
traditions, and affirmed that the Scriptures contained not all things that were
to be learned and practiced by the people, and that the people ought to be as
well acquainted with that, as with the written Word: whereupon Sir John
Gotherick a learned Gentleman, to assert and maintain the alsufficiency of the
Scripture, without the addition of men's traditions, cited that of St. Paul to
Timothy, the second Epistle, chap. 3. v. 16. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, and for instruction, etc. The force of which argument, you had
thought by a gloss and flourish to have evaded, but all the cunning of man
cannot do it, as in its due place will appear. But after you had once got
your head into this fort and refuge, you uttered many things very erroneous,
equalizing your traditions, yea preferring them before the written Word,
accusing the Scripture of imperfection, and denying them that due honor, which
is to be the rule of our faith and manners, and the square by which we must
order our lives: affirming further more, that they were accidentally written,
and not on purpose, to be the rule of our doctrine and manners; and that for
the making of the Scripture a complete and absolute rule, the unwritten word
received and entertained in all ages by tradition, ought to be added to it,
which when the Church of England did not observe and admit of, it did not
believe as Christ ordained, and as it ought to believe for the speculative and
practical parts of Divinity; for to believe in Christ effectually and
sufficiently to salvation, as you said, was not enough to believe both the
natures of Jesus Christ, and all his Offices, but it consisted in this, that we
conform our selves to a belief speculative, and to a religion that is
practical: for the Church was determined in these two points: that is to say,
without the Church of England would embrace and entertain your traditions, and
believe your unwritten verities, as they are commonly termed, it could not be a
true Church. Hereupon, I then undertook to maintain and prove, first, that
the written Word in it self without any unwritten verities or traditions,
contained all things necessary to salvation. Secondly, that all Christians were
tied to make that, and that only, the rule of their faith and manners, which
you said, if I could prove, you would be a Protestant; and after some debate of
these businesses, and that Sir John Gotherick had said unto you, (magnifying
your unwritten verities,) that if you could make it appear that you had as
good warrant for your traditions as we could show for the Scriptures, that then
he would receive and embrace them; to whom you replied, that you could prove
them by better authority than he could prove the Scriptures to be the Word of
God. But I perceiving at that time, that you grew something weary, and seeing
withal for want of a moderator, that things began something disorderly to be
handled, I told you that I would by writing reduce all those things that were
then agitated and bring them into good order, and set down such other
arguments as should sufficiently prove the Church of England to be a true
Church, and send you them all in writing; which you not only liked well of,
but earnestly also desired me so to do: and I promised likewise, in the same
writing evidently to prove, that the Scriptures of the old and new Testament,
without any traditions, contained all things in them necessary to salvation;
and that they are the only rule and square which we are tied unto for the
ordering of our faith, lives and manners, which is now my task that in the
following discourse I have taken upon me: and I doubt not, by Gods assistance,
but to make good and maintain what I have undertaken. But before I come to
that, that all men may see the Church of England fails in nothing necessary
to salvation, either in respect of theory or practice, although I have formerly
proved it, yet I thought fit briefly again to run over, and to declare what
she teaches for her belief speculative, and her religion practical (that I
may make use of some of your expressions) and wherein she differs from the
Church of Rome; that the Church of Englands tenent, being set down on the one
side, and the errors and idolatry of the Church of Rome on the other, all men
may learn to love and embrace the Church of England, and to abhor and
abandon the Church of Rome, that mother of abomination: and that you, Mr.
Montague, that have formerly undutifully deserted and forsaken her, may with
the Prodigal return, and yield unto her your mother, Christian and wonted
duty and obedience. Which I am confident will be more to your true comfort and
honor, than ever any thing done by you in all your life. And now to begin, I
affirm for belief speculative, and religion practical, it is orthodoxly and
and clearly taught in the Church of England in all points; and to begin with
the speculative part.

Whatsoever, I say, is required of us to be known, concerning God, is
perspicuously taught in the Church of England, both in respect of the divine
essence and nature of God, as also of the persons in the blessed Trinity, as
likewise of their names and works, and of all their glorious attributes. As
that there is but one only true God, distinguished into the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, the all-sufficient Jehovah, Creator and governor of all things:
which only living God the Church of England with an unanimous consent does
honor, serve, and worship, in spirit and truth, as he himself commands, John
4. verse. 24. and as he has in all ages been worshipped by all the family of
the faithful, that call upon his name in sincerity, since the glorious
ascension of Christ into Heaven, and teaches the people so to worship him. The
Church of England does fully likewise instruct the people, in what a happy and
blessed condition man was created, being made after Gods own Image and
likeness, Genes. 1. v. 27. and into what misery he afterward plunged himself
and all his posterity, by reason of his transgression, disobedience, and
infidelity, in listening unto the suggestion of the di^^ll, as it is at large
described in Genes. chap. 3. And as it does daily acquaint them with the nature
of sin, the danger of it, and the evil consequences that ensue upon it: as
all manner of miseries here, and eternal damnation hereafter, if by timely
repentance they break not off the course of them; which duty they daily exhort
them unto. In like manner, it teaches the people that next to the eternal
love of God, who in Christ Jesus made choice of them, before the foundation of
the world, Ephesians. 1. v. 3, 4, 5. that they owe the whole work of their
redemption unto Jesus Christ alone, who taking humane nature upon him, was made
sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him, 2 Cor. 5. verse. 21. So that if we consider the whole sum of our
salvation, and all the parts of it, they are contained and comprehended in
Christ, to whom alone all the honor, glory and praise of all our blessedness
both present and future is to be ascribed, and not any parcel of it to be
attributed to any creature in Heaven or earth. So that if any desires to be
saved, and to be eternally blessed, the Church of England instructs them there
is no other means to be saved by, but by the Name of Jesus, Acts 4. v. 12. and
that Salvation is only in him. And therefore, if they seek and desire all
such gifts and graces of the holy Spirit, without which they can neither know
God, nor believe in him as they ought, the Church of England teaches them, that
they are only to be found in Christ's unction, of whose fullness we have
received grace for grace, John 1. And if they want strength and power to subdue
their corruptions, and to support them in temptation: the Church of England
teaches, that they may find them in Christ's Dominion and Sovereignty, to whom
all power in Heaven and Earth is given, Matthew. 28. ver. 18. If they desire
purity and innocence, they have it in his conception. If they desire mercy,
compassion and commiseration, they have it in his birth, Who was made like unto
us, that he might have compassion on us, and make our reconciliation with God,
Heb. 3. v. 17. If we desire redemption, we have it in his death and passion. If
we desire absolution and freedom from guilt, we have it in Christ's
condemnation. If we seek a discharge or delivery from malediction and the
curse, we have it in his cross, Gal. 3. v. 13. If we seek for satisfaction
and a full payment unto the wrath and justice of God, we have it in his
sacrifice. If we desire to be purged and cleansed from all our sins and
iniquities, we have it in his blood, 1 John chap. 1. v. 7. If we seek for
reconciliation, we have it in his bitter agony and sufferings, 2 Cor. chap. 5.
v. 18, 19, 21. If we seek the mortification of the flesh, and crucifying of
the old man, we have it in his grave. And if we desire and seek for newness
of life, and vivifying of the Spirit, and immortality, we have them all in his
resurrection, Romans 6. v. 4, 5. And if we seek for the Kingdom of Heaven, we
have it in his ascension. And if we look for aid and help in time of need,
and in all our distresses: or if we desire plenty, sufficiency, and the
affluency of all good things to supply all our wants and necessities, we shall
find them in his Sovereignty and Kingdom. And if we wait for a joyful and
dreadlesse expectation of the last judgment, we have it in Christ, who we know
is our Mediator that shall be the Judge both of quick and dead, and therefore
we do with joy lift up our heads, knowing that our salvation and redemption
draws nigh. In a word, the Church of England teaches all these things to the
people, and that all the riches and treasures of all good things are to be
found in Christ Jesus, Colos. 2. verse. 3. and that to him alone they ought to
have recourse, if they would be replenished, and have their wants at any time
supplied. And whither indeed upon all occasions, should we fly, but unto
Christ? for as S. Peter says, John 6. verse. 68. Lord to whom shall we go?
thou have the words of eternal like. Therefore the Church of England teaches
all men to make their addresses to Christ only, for to him only is to be
ascribed all the honor and praise of our Redemption. And the Church of England
has very good reason and warrant out of Gods Word, ever to maintain the truth
of this Doctrine, that the whole sum of our salvation, and all the parts of it
are only to be found in Christ. For otherwise, they cannot yield unto God that
honor that is due to him, and is to be kept and preserved inviolably for him
without any diminution: neither can they find^ that peace and comfort in their
consciences, if they rely upon any ability or forces of their own, or rest in
any of their own performances, in the which they know there is so much
imperfection and so many failings. And this were but to forsake the fountain
of living waters, and to dig themselves broken cisternes which cannot hold a
drop of true comfort; besides all this there is great danger in so doing in all
respects: for to ascribe or attribute any thing unto themselves in the work of
redemption, is mere blasphemy, in that they take away that honor that is
wholly and entirely belonging to the Mediator, God blessed for ever, and
ascribe it to a mere creature, which is indeed an horrid impiety. For, the
Prophet Isa. 53. v. 4. and 6. says, that the Father has laid the iniquities
of us all upon his Son, that by his stripes we should be healed. Which very
thing S. Peter in other words expresses, 1 Epist. chap. 2. ver. 24. saying,
that Christ did in his body hear our sins upon the Tree. And S. Paul in the
8 of the Romans v. 2, 3. affirms, that sin was condemned in his flesh, when He
was made sin for us, and redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us, 2 Cor. 5. v. 24. Gal. 3. v. 13. That is to say, the power, force
and curse of sin was killed and slain in his flesh, when he was offered up
and given to be a Sacrifice for us, upon whom the whole heap and mass of our
sins, with all the curse and malediction, with the dreadful judgment of God
and condemnation of death was laid. So that I say, the Church of England
ascribes all the honor of our redemption to Christ alone, and teaches all men,
that if in the least thing they should rob Christ of his due honor, as it is
an insufferable sin and indignity in any to do, so by it they c^^ ^ind no
peace in their souls and consciences, for being justified by Faith, we have
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. verse. 1. who we know
has fully satisfied God for us: but if any rely upon their own performances
or any works done by them, such is the imperfection of them, and so many
failings there be always in them, that they can never find any real and true
peace or solid comfort, but there will be ever doubtings, whether in all things
they have done their duty completely and as they ought. And therefore the
Church of England, according to the holy Scriptures attributes the whole work
of our redemption to Christ alone, and teaches the people that by his stripes
they are made whole, and so in this speculative belief it fails not.

The Church of England likewise diligently instructs the people, how they may
be made partakers of Christ and all his benefits, and shows them the way
directly of attaining this felicity, and that is by teaching them
self-denial, and (...) humble themselves for their Iniquities, Transgressions
and (...) under God mighty hand, and to come out of themselves, and exhorts
them to ^y unto Christ and by faith alone to lay hold upon him and ^pply him
with all his benefits and merits unto themselves (...) which they may stand
justified before God and sanctified^ and then it teaches them also, that the
ordinary way and means of attaining this faith, by which they may save their
souls, is the preaching and hearing of the Word; and as this faith is attained
to by hearing, so it is daily increased by the same, as also by the right use
and administration of the holy Sacraments and Prayers: to all which duties they
stir up the people with all sedulity and godly care; And that they may the more
deter them from sin and all manner of evil, they do not only declare unto
them the horror of sin and the present danger of it, as that it is the cause
of all miseries and calamities here, but that it will also bring endless and
eternal misery upon them hereafter, and that they must all appear at the last
day, before a dreadful Judge, there to give an account of whatsoever they have
done in the body, whether good or evil, 2 Cor. chap. 5. verse. 10. And that
they should not deceive themselves: for God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap: for he that sows unto the flesh, shall of
the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows unto the spirit, shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting. Gal. 6. v. 7, 8. So that if we run through all
the Theoricall part of Divinity you shall not find the Church of England
failing or defective in any point of belief speculative, that is required and
necessary for salvation, when it teaches every thing that Christ himself
requires at men's hands, that they should know to make them blessed. Now all the
knowledge that makes men blessed and that Christ injoynes them, is the
knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ, and self-denial. This is life eternal,
says Christ, John 17. to know thee to be the only true God and whom thou have
sent Jesus Christ. And Mat. 16. If any will be my Disciple, let him deny
himself and come after me. Now I say when the Church of England teaches the
people the knowledge of God, in Jesus Christ, and the knowledge of themselves,
it teaches all things for belief speculative, for all speculative Divinity is
contained in these two points. And this shall suffice to have spoke of the
Theoricall part of Divinity, wherein the Church of England does her duty.

And now Mr. Montague, I will as briefly as I can declare and prove that the
Church of England fails nothing in teaching all things for Religion
practical: for in that she teaches us our whole duty, both toward God and
toward our Neighbor, what we should do and what we should not do, in the
whole course of our lives, for the pleasing of God and avoiding of sin and
misery, she does her duty also in the practical part of Divinity perfectly and
fully; For as all speculative Divinity consists, as I said before, in the
knowledge of God and of our selves: so all practical Religion consists in the
performance of our duty toward God, in giving him his due honor, and such a
worship and service as he requires of us in his Word, and that is spiritual,
as we see John 4. verse. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must
worship him in Spirit and Truth. And in performing all offices of love and
charity to our Neighbor, and carrying our selves unblamably in this present
World, Jam. 1. verse. 27. Pure Religion and undefiled, says S. James, before
God and the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and the Widow in their
affliction, and to keep themselves unspotted from the World: and in observing
and fulfilling that royal Law, chap. 2. verse. 8. in loving our Neighbor as
our selves. In these two points consists all practical Religion, which is
nothing else but a framing of our whole lives according to the Law of God
considering that we are not at our own disposing, nor at our own liberty, but
consecrated and dedicated unto God: and therefore we must deny our selves, and
forsake our own reason, and resign our selves up, to be guided and governed
by the Word and Spirit of the Lord in all things belonging unto his worship.
And that we ought not to seek after those things that are our own, but those
things that are according to the Will of God, and tend to the advancement of
his glory and Kingdom, and in this does our practical Religion concerning God
consist: and our love and duty toward our Neighbor is contained in these two
things, in being kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly love, in
honor preferring one another, Romans 12. v. 10. In doing nothing through strife
and vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, each esteeming others better than
themselves. Phil. 2. verse. 3. And then in employing our selves to the uttermost
of our abilities, with all sincerity and truth of affection and unfeigned love,
to procure their good and emolument in all things. And under these two heads,
the love of God, and of our Neighbor, is comprised all the practical Divinity
or Religion, the Word of God makes known unto men, and requires at our hand.
Which when the Church of England does daily publish unto the people, and
teaches all things concerning them fully, it is abundantly evident to any
unpartiall man, that she teachteh all things both for Theory and practice
necessary for salvation, and for the proving of her self to to be a true
Church, the ground and pillar of truth, and to be built upon the foundation of
Peter. And as this conclusion does necessarily issue upon the premises, for the
proof of the truth of the Church of England: so on the contrary, this likewise
will of necessity follow, that, that Church, that neither teaches those things
that belong unto the belief speculative, nor to the Religion practical,
cannot be a true Church; And I am confident Mr. Montague, that you your self
upon deliberation will not deny it. And then also, any man may infer, that
the Church of Rome cannot be a true Church, nor the ground and pillar of Truth,
when she neither teaches the people the true knowledge of God and of Jesus
Christ, nor the knowledge of themselves, nor makes known unto them, the
spiritual way of worshipping him which he requires, nor teaches them their
love and duty toward God, and toward their Neighbor, which God commands, but
with far greater reason they may conclude that the Church of Rome is not a true
Church, if they consider also, that the Church of Rome not only neglects her
duty in not teaching the people the true knowledge of God and of themselves:
but also in that she takes away the Key of knowledge from them, snatching the
Word of God out of their hands, and hindering the pure preaching of both Law
and Gospel, by which men might be saved, and setting up an idolatricall
worship, and bringing in a new service of their own devising: and in that
also, that the Church of Rome does not teach the people love toward their
Neighbors, the true servants of God, but hatred, and animates them to
persecute them with fire and faggot, and all rabid cruelty and unheard of
inhumanity; and in that also, the Church of Rome corrupts, yea annihilateth
all the offices of Jesus Christ, retayning only his name, but adulterating all
true christian Religion, and by consequence destroying the very humane nature
of Jesus Christ, making it present in many places at one and the same time, and
yet not visible, a body and no body. I say in all these respects, a man may
without any wrong done to the Church of Rome conclude that she is no true
Church, nor the ground and pillar of Truth. But to the end Mr. Montague, that
neither you, or any other may think, I do too highly praise the Church of
England for the purity of her Doctrine and worship, and honoring of Christ, or
calumniate the Church of Rome, when I charge her with all these things, of
adulterating all the true Christian Religion and annihilating all the offices
of Jesus Christ, etc. I thought it very necessary here to parallel the
Doctrine of the Church of England, and that of the Church of Rome together,
that it may the more evidently appear unto all men under one view as it were
in a Table, which of the two Churches believes best concerning Christ his
natures and offices, and whether of these Religions is most sound, and Orthodox
touching all things necessary to be known and practiced by all such as desire
salvation by Jesus Christ. And to begin with Christ's Kingly office.

The Church of England believes, that Jesus Christ is the only and sole King
and governor of the whole Universe, to whom all power in Heaven and Earth is
given, Mat. 28. but more especially of his Church, who by God himself was set
King over his holy mountain, Psalm. 2. v. 6. And that he is the King of
Righteousness, Heb. 7. The King eternal, Jsa. 9. The King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, Apoc. 17. and that he does by his mighty power and wisdom uphold and
govern all things, but with a more peculiar care, and in a more special
manner preserve and defend his Church, 1 Timothy 4. v. 10. as that which he has
purchased with his precious blood, and by his power redeemed out of the
captivity and slavery of Satan, and that he is the head of his Church, which is
his body who infuseth life into it, Righteousness, Peace, Joy, Happiness, and
all the graces of Wisdom and knowledge of God, with certainty and assurance of
his love; and that his Kingdom and Empire is a spiritual and heavenly
Kingdom, no terrene and fading Monarchy, John 18. verse. 38. Luke 1. v. 33. And
is uphold and governed only by the scepter of his spirit and word, and not by
the authority, virtue or wisdom of any humane power. She also believes, that
they are the impious and blasphemous inventions of frothy and windy ambition,
to affirm that Christ appointed any one to be a Vicar and Governor under him,
over his Church, who by an infallible and unerring spirit should moderate and
rule it to the end of the World: and to assert that Peter was this monarch and
Vicar general, and that the Pope is his successor, the head, and foundation of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, all these assertions and blasphemous titles the
Church of England abominateth as derogatory to the honor and dignity of their
Lord and King Jesus Christ, and injurious and hurtful to the salvation of
mankind. She also believes that the Church of Christ, which is his Spouse is
only to be governed and ordered by Christ her head and husbands command, Will,
Word and Laws, as they are set down in his holy Word, and not by the decrees,
determinations, authority and traditions either of Councels or Fathers, no
farther than they are consonant to his Laws and blessed Word, as they are
written and set down in the Books of the old and new Testament. She
believes also that the pure Preaching of the Gospel, and the right
administration of the holy Sacraments, and the true invocation of God are the
infallible ensigns of a true Church, and the never deceiving marks and notes
of the same. Withal, she believes, that such is the condition of the Church
militant, that by reason of persecutions and bloody Tyranny, and the cruelty of
the enemies of it, she may be brought to so low a condition and be so obscure,
that she may be without any visible form splendour and outward government, and
lie hid not only from public view, or the eyes of the common people, but even
from the sight of the dearest servants of God themselves, as it happened not
only in Elias his time, but in many ages besides, as the holy Scripture
abundantly declares: and that the Church does not always come with
observation, as our Savior said of the Kingdom of God in his time, that it
came not with appearance and magnificence. And therefore the Church of England
does not believe that pomp, state, and outward worldly dignity, and riches,
miracles, multitude, and grandeur are the marks and notes of a true Church,
but rather the very characters of the whore of Babylon, who sits as Queen.
And this is the belief of the Church of England concerning the Kingly Office
of Christ and his Kingdom the Church.

Now, Mr. Montague, let us see what the Church of Rome believes concerning
Christ's Kingly Office and Kingdom, that both our tenants and beliefes being
set down together, it may the better appear which of our faiths is most
orthodox, and which of our Churches does most glorify and honor Christ their
King and magnify his Kingly dignity and absolute sovereignty.

The Church of Rome does in words acknowledge that Christ is the King of his
Church, but in their works and deeds they deny it: For they make him a terrene
Monarch, and his Kingdom to be of this world, neither do they admit and allow
him to be the sole, alone and only King of his Church, but they join a Vicar
with him, and divide the care of governing his Kingdom between him and his
Vicar-generall the Pope, who they assert to be of an infallible and un-erring
spirit, and proclaim him to be King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the foundation
and head of the Church, and Lord of all the Kingdoms of the earth, that he may
dispose of them as he pleases, and give them to whom he lusts, and take them
from any that has not a desire to humor him, all which are titles of
blasphemy and unsufferable indignity to the King of Saints, and King of Kings,
the Lord Jesus Christ. The Church of Rome believes and holds also that the
Kingdom of Christ, which is his Church, ought to be governed not only by the
Laws and Word of Christ, but by the determinations and decrees of Fathers,
Councels, and Synods, and by the Popes Canons, and the vain and impious
traditions of men, which they do not only equalize but prefer before the
holy Scriptures. They also affirm that the marks and notes of Christ's
Kingdom are multitudes, succession, miracles, pomp, state, and magnificence,
antiquity, unity, etc. and that it is, and always has been in a perspicuous
and glorious form and visible appearance: and the Church of Rome also
affirms that the pure preaching of the Gospel, the right administration of
the Sacraments, and the true invocation of God are not the notes of a true
Church, which is most impious to think. All this which I have now spoke, is
the belief and faith of the Church of Rome concerning the Kingly Office of
Christ, and his Kingdom the Church, as you well know Master Montague. Now I
entreat you and all men a little to consider, whether the faith of the Church
of England, or the belief of the Church of Rome touching Christ's Kingly Office
and his Kingdom, be more orthodox, and which of them most honors Christ the
King: And whether the Church of Rome does any more but in word only,
acknowledge Christ to be King, and his Church to be his Kingdom, but in works
deny them; and whether the Church of England does not both in word and deeds
truly honor him for their King, and venerate his Church and Kingdom as his
Spouse. The Church of England gives unto Christ his due honor, prerogatives
and privileges, and all his glory and dignity, as their only Lawgiver, and
to the utmost of their power and abilities endeavor that his Sovereignty and
Royalty may suffer no diminution, nor may in the least thing be impeached or
damnified: and therefore they do believe, that the honor of governing and
moderating of his Church is Christ's peculiar privilege and right, and so
annexed to his Crown and Royalty, and so peculiarly belonging unto the Lord of
life, as it is blasphemy in any to assume that honor of governing upon
themselves, or any of his glorious titles, as that of Lord of Lords and
foundation of the Church, which are his Prerogatives: and she believes also
that it is a great sin and wickedness in any Christian to allow and approve of
such derogation from their King and master Jesus Christ.

The Church of Rome on the contrary ascribes and gives that honor and glory,
and those titles of dignity which belong unto Christ only, and are his
peculiar Prerogatives, unto a mortal Pope, Christ and his Kingdoms immortal
enemy, and divides the government of the Church, his Kingdom, between Christ
and the Pope: yea they do ascribe and give unto their Pope a greater power and
authority than Christ assumed unto himself, or that they give unto Christ. For
their Pope may both dispense with the Law of God and Christ, and break it when
he pleases, and decree against it, as you know very well Mr. Montague, which
Christ never did or assumed to himself; and the Church of Rome in all things
gives more honor and obedience to the Pope than to Christ: For, where Christ
forbids, if the Pope commands, they will obey the Pope, and neglect Christ's
command, and make nothing of it: and where Christ commands and the Pope
forbids, they listen unto the Pope and obey him, and trample Christ's command
under their polluted feet. But for the more clear evidencing of this truth,
and that neither you Mr. Montague, nor any other may say I falsely charge the
Church of Rome, consider I pray these few following particulars, to omit many
more. Christ in Matthew. 20. ver. 25. condemns all worldly Dominion and
princely government in his Church, and in express words forbids his Apostles,
and in them all their successors to affect Sovereignty one over another, or
over the Church of God, in these words, The Kings of the Nations bear rule
over them, but it shall not be so among you. Contrary unto this command, or
rather prohibition of Christ, the Church of Rome sets up a most tyrannical
worldly Monarchy and Dominion, ruling over both the souls, bodies, and estates
of all sorts, ranks, and degrees of men, and such a Sovereignty as advances
it self above all that is called God: and establishes a government in Christ's
Kingdom, most like to the government of the Kings of the Nations, whereas
Christ would have the government and rule of his Church most unlike to that
kind of government: and therefore in this particular, it is manifest they
prefer the Popes command before Christ's the King of his Church. Christ in
John 5. says, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life. The Church of Rome on the contrary not only takes away the Scriptures
out of the hands of the people, but prohibits the searching and the reading of
them, yea punishes the reading of them, or but the having of them in their
houses in the vulgar tongue with fire and faggot, and most blasphemously
accuses them to be the cause of all errors, schisms and heresies, and of all
factions in Kingdoms and States. And in this point also you may see how they
listen more unto the Pope than unto Christ himself. Christ, Luke 11.
instructs all Christians how to pray, saying, When ye pray, say, Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc. And in Matthew. 11. Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, etc. The Church of Rome on the contrary, commands the
people to pray unto Saints and Angels, and sends them on pilgrimages to their
shrines, there of them to demand health in the time of their needs and
necessities. In this particular in like manner they listen more to the Pope,
and slight Christ's direction and command. Christ in the 24. of Matthew. verse.
26. says, If they shall say unto you, that Christ is in the Desert, go not
forth: behold, he is in the secret places, believe it not. The Church of Rome
on the contrary teaches and believes that Christ is really present in all
their Masses, and that he is there in the hands of their Priests, on their
Altars, and in their Pixes, and where they please, and that they ought there to
give him Divine worship, and punish the neglect of such worship with fire and
sword, and the not believing of that doctrine, which is contrary unto Christ's
command, with most cruel deaths, and most exquisite tortures. You see how in
this point also the Church of Rome yields more obedience to the Popes command
than Christ's. The Lord Jesus in the institution of his holy Supper, Matthew. 26.
verse. 27. took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to his
Disciples, saying, Drink ye all of it. The same doctrine was taught by Paul,
as received by Christ himself, with a command that it should be continued
until his coming, that all that were worthily prepared, should take the cup
as well as the bread, 1 Cor. 11. Notwithstanding this double command of Christ
the King, the Church of Rome obeyes the Pope, and practices the contrary, and
wholly takes away the cup from the people, and will not so much as let them
touch it, much less taste of it: a most abominable sacrilege, and intolerable
disobedience and rebellion. Innumerable more instances, Mr. Montague, might be
produced, where Christ the King of his Church commands, and the Pope
prohibits; and where Christ prohibits and forbids, and the Pope commands the
contrary; and where the Church of Rome in all things obeyes the Pope, and
disobeyes Christ, by all which it may now easily appear, whether of the two
Churches, the Church of England, or the Church of Rome, is more orthodox in
their doctrine, and whether of them gives most honor to Christ. But let me
entreat you Master Montague, ingenuously to answer me, whether that Church that
does all that her Lord and King commands her, and declineth all he forbids
her, and gives her King all that due reverence and dignity that belongs unto
him, does not honor Christ more than that Church that regards neither his
commands nor prohibitions, but neglects them both, and trampleth all his
Laws under her contaminated feet. I am most confident, Mr. Montague, that upon
your mature deliberation, you will grant unto the Church of England that
preeminency, that she is more obedient to Christ her King, and more honors his
Kingly Office than the Church of Rome, and that Christ is King unto the Church
of Rome in word only, but in works and deeds they neither regard either what
he commands or what he forbids.

But now I come to the Priestly Office of Christ, concerning which, Mr.
Montague, I shall desire you seriously to weigh and examine, the faith and
belief of each Church concerning that, and which of them believes most
orthodoxly, and honors Christ's Priestly Office most, whether the Church of
Rome, or the Church of England. Upon trial, I believe it will appear, in this
point also that the Church of Rome makes the Priesthood of Christ a matter of
nothing, howsoever in words they acknowledge it.

The Church of England believes that Christ Jesus was appointed and sealed by
God himself, to be the alone and only mediator between God and man, and that
he only has completed, and in all things fulfilled the whole Law of God, and
satisfied his justice and wrath by paying the ransom due for our
transgressions, when he offered himself a sacrifice propitiatory upon the
cross for our sins. She believes also that Christ alone does now make request
for us with God, in whose Name all the faithful with confidence and boldness
have continually access unto the Throne of grace, with full assurance to be
heard. She believes likewise that Christ alone is Mediator both of redemption
and intercession: and that we are not to put up our petitions and supplications
either to Saints or Angels, as being a thing derogatory to the dignity and
glory of our Mediator the Lord Jesus Christ, and a mere robbing him of his due
honor. She believes in like manner, that Christ is the only Priest of the
new Testament, and that there are no other real Priests on earth appointed by
God to offer up Christ daily to God the Father, a propitiatory Sacrifice for
the living and for the dead, and that it is blasphemy against the eternal
Priesthood of Christ, so to affirm. She believes also, that the Sacrifice of
Christ being of an infinite virtue and efficacy, is to be applied to all
believers, by such means only as God himself has appointed, as by the
virtue and power of the holy Ghost and faith, by the preaching of the Gospel
and the right administration of the holy Sacraments and Prayer, and that this
Sacrifice offered upon the cross, was most perfect and absolute, and ought not
to be reiterated and renewed by any man upon the earth, and that the
reiteration of it is both derogatory to the al-sufficiency of the Sacrifice of
Jesus Christ, and pernicious to the souls of men, and indeed a mere
blasphemy. She believes further, that we being clothed with the
righteousness of Jesus Christ our high Priest and Mediator, and appearing
before God in it, that we are freed by virtue of that, both from the guilt and
punishment of all our sins, and are accounted righteous before God. She
believes also that the blood of Jesus Christ, and that only, purges us from
all our sins, and that there is no other Purgatory by which the souls of men
are purified and cleansed from their impurities and pollutions: and that there
is no man living, that can either by doing or suffering satisfy the justice of
God, much less merit or do works of supererogation: and that the preachers
of the Gospel have only power delegative, ministerial and conditional to
forgive sins, as Ambassadors, and not as absolute Judges: and that this
Office is peculiar to God and Christ alone as our high Priest and Mediator of
the everlasting covenant. And this is the faith of the Church of England,
concerning Christ's Priestly Office.

The belief of the Church of Rome is this, that Christ is the Mediator of
satisfaction and redemption, but they assign the other part of his mediation
and intercession to Saints and Angels, and the prime place of that employment
they give unto the blessed Virgin, who they call the Queen of Heaven, and the
door of Paradise, and they put up their prayers and requests to her and other
Saints and Angels, hoping to be heard: which is nothing else but to allow
Christ a momentany or temporary and partial mediation, and to give unto the
Saints and Angels that everlasting and never dying intercession, then the which
there cannot be a greater contumely and indignity offered to the eternal
Priest our Mediator Jesus Christ, it taking away so great a portion of honor
from him; and to speak in plain English, it is an unsufferable blasphemy. The
Church of Rome appoints other Priests also, after the order of Melchisedech,
to offer up Christ himself daily (as they say) to God the father a
propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead, which is nothing else but
blasphemously to insimulate and accuse Christ's Sacrifice of imperfection. The
Church of Rome also asserteth and believes that the righteousness of Christ
our Mediator is not imputed unto us: and affirms, that by Christ's merits and
passion we are only freed from the guilt of our sins, but not from the
punishment of them, and that we our selves must satisfy the punishment. She
believes also, that we are able in this life, if we will our selves, not only
to satisfy the justice of God, and keep the Law, but also to merit and do
works of supererogation. She farther believes, that if any man depart out of
this life before he has fully satisfied God for his sins, that then he is to
remain in a place called Purgatory, there to be tormented and purged from all
his pollutions and defilements, and that there is no entrance into Heaven or
redemption out of that place, without an especial indulgence from the Pope, or
innumerable Prayers and Masses for their souls, before they by torment are
cleansed from the remainder of all their sins. She believes also, that life
eternal is of debt due unto us, as wages is to a hireling and daily labourer:
and that their Priests can forgive sins as Judges by their own authority.
This, Master Montague, you know is the doctrine and faith of the Church of
Rome, and a great deal more such stuff. Now I entreat you, heartily to tell
me, whether in your opinion the faith of the Church of Rome, or the belief of
the Church of England concerning Christ's Priestly Office be more orthodox, and
which of them gives most honor to their Mediator, she that ascribes the
whole work of her redemption to him alone, or she that robs him of all his
Priestly honor and Mediatorship? Truly, Master Montague, if you will but duly
consider this business, and weigh it as it ought to be weighed, you will
quickly perceive, that the Church of Rome does in word only acknowledge Christ
to be a Priest and Mediator, but in deeds and works overthrowes the right and
power of his Priesthood. And to speak the verity, there can be nothing more
blasphemously thought, imagined, or practiced against the honor and dignity of
the Lord of life, the only and sole Mediator, and high Priest of the
everlasting covenant, then that the Church of Rome does against him, robbing
him of his due glory, and overthrowing indeed the whole work of our
redemption, making our selves and others our own saviors and mediators, and
not Christ alone, to whom all the honor and praise of our redemption of due
belongs. I could be very large, Mr. Montague, in aggravating of the impiety
and blasphemies of the Church of Rome concerning this point, but I will say no
more of it for the present, but this, that it is a doctrine that overthrows
all Christian religion, and destroys the very foundation of our faith. And
now I come to the Prophetical Office of Christ, where we will briefly take
notice, whether the Church of England or the Church of Rome be most orthodox in
their faith concerning Christ's Prophetical Office, and which of them more
venerably believes touching that, or gives most honor to Christ the only
Prophet of his Church.

The Church of England believes that Jesus Christ was appointed by God
himself, to be the only and sole Prophet, Pastor, and Teacher of his Church,
and that he has fully and perfectly revealed the whole counsel and will of
God concerning the redemption of mankind, and preached the Gospel and glad
tidings of peace unto the World, the which Gospel he does daily vegetate and
quicken in the souls of his people by his holy Spirit, and corroborate and
confirm by the holy Sacraments. And she believes that he has delivered all
things unto the Church, that God the Father commanded him, necessary for our
salvation, and that we are only to hear him in all things whatsoever he shall
say unto us, and that every soul that shall not hear that Prophet shall be
destroyed from among the people, Deuteronomy. 18. v. 18. Matthew. 3. v. 17. Matthew. 17.
v. 5. Acts 3. v. 22, 23. And the Church of England believes also, that Jesus
Christ did not only declare and preach the whole and perfect Will of God unto
the Church, but also that whatsoever was necessary to salvation was written and
penned by his appointment and direction, and especial assistance, and is all
contained in the writings of the old and new Testament, and that not in obscure
and ambiguous words, but in plain and evident expressions, as far as is
necessary to salvation: all which in the sequel of this discourse will be made
evident. She also believes that all the people ought according to Christ's
command read them, and that the holy Scriptures are the only Judge of all
controversies, and have no need of any humane traditions. And she farther
believes, that we are to serve and worship God only, as he has appointed in
his holy Word, and in the divine Scriptures, and as Christ the Prophet of his
Church has commanded in them: and that whatsoever doctrines not expressed and
contained in the Scriptures and written Word, or grounded upon it, or evidently
deduced from it, are not to be entertained, received, or obeyed, but to be cast
out of the Church as abominable things, such as are prejudicial not only to
our salvation and comfort, but injurious also and derogatory to the honor of
our great Prophet Jesus Christ, whom we are commanded only to hear and listen
unto. And therefore the Church of England does reject all those doctrins, of
Will Worship, Image and Crucifix worship, Bead worship, Bread worship, Place
worship, and all Saint and Angel worship: and all those doctrines of Service,
Letanies, Ceremonies, and indulgencies, and those of Fast-daies and
Feast-daies, all doctrines of Masses and Sacrifices for souls in Purgatory,
and prayers for the dead, with all their doctrines of Pilgrimages and Monkery,
with their doctrines of devils, prohibiting meats and marriage, and all those
doctrines of the real and corporal presence of Christ in their blasphemous
sacrifices destructive to the humane nature of Jesus Christ, making it present
in numberless places at once, and enervating and overthrowing the
al-sufficiency of Christ's sacrifice. And all their doctrins of
transubstantiation, self-merit, and works of supererogation; and all the other
doctrins they teach in the Church of Rome which would both endless and
needless to recount, the observing of the which is the only employment of the
Church of Rome, the Church of England does detest as execrable abominations,
because our Prophet Christ Jesus has no where taught them in his holy word
which must be the only rule of our faith and worship to the end of the world.
But now let us hear what the Church of Rome believes concerning the
Prophetical office of Christ, that we may see how honorably she esteems of
it.

The Church of Rome in word acknowledges, that Christ was by God appointed to
be the Prophet of his Church, notwithstanding in deeds they deny that Christ
did reveal the whole will of God unto the Church in the holy Scriptures, and
affirms that the Scriptures were accidentally written, and not purposely to be
the rule of faith, which by its clarity and brightness should determine the
controversies in Religion: they affirm also that the holy Scriptures are dark
and obscure, and very dangerous for laymen, and therefore that they are to be
taken from them; and that the Church has need of the authority of Fathers and
Councels, and the help of Traditions for the completing of the holy
Scriptures, and the making of them a perfect and absolute rule both of our
faith and worship, whereupon they bring in all those abominable doctrins, and
traditions, I even now made mention of, and many more, and thrust them upon the
people as the worship and service of God, and by the observation of the which
they may merit Heaven, as they say, when nevertheless, there is not one word
in all the book of God concerning any one of them, or any thing delivered by
our Prophet Christ Jesus touching them, all which things are as I said before,
not only injurious and hurtful to the souls of men, but full of blasphemy
and derogatory to the honor of Christ, our great and only Prophet. For what,
I pray, Mr. Montague, can be spoke more impiously of the holy Scripturs then to
affirm, they were accidentally written, and not of set purpose, and by the
command of God, and to the end that they should be the rule of faith, when in
the holy Scripture it is evidently clear, that they were written by divine
providence for this very end and purpose, that by them we should order both our
faith, lives and manners. And what can be spoke more contumeliously against the
holy Word of God, then to accuse it of obscurity and darkness, when the Holy
Ghost affirms the contrary? and to take it out of the hands of the people,
and forbid them to read it, when notwithstanding Christ commands it in
express words? Truly, Master Montague, these are most blasphemous assertions,
and such as you of the Church of Rome must earnestly and seriously repent of,
if ever you will find favor at Gods hands, and the very naming of these your
erroneous opinions were enough for any man to abhor them. But that you your
self and all men may see the wickedness of them, I shall before I pass on to
the other matters in hand briefly prove that the Scriptures were not
accidentally written, but of set purpose, and by Gods appointment; and that
they are not obscure and dark in things pertaining to salvation, and that they
ought to be read by all the people, and that they ought to examine all
doctrines by them, as they be recorded. And then I will prove the
al-sufficiency of the holy Scripture, and that it is the rule which all men
unto the end of the World are tied to for the regulating of their faith and
manners, which is my task, and then I will conclude. But first, as I said, I
will prove that the holy Scriptures were not accidentally written, but of set
purpose, and by special command, and that they are not obscure and dark in
matters concerning salvation, and that they are to be read to the people. And
first that they were not accidentally written, I thus evince.

Those books that were written by Divine inspiration, and by the counsel of
God, for the salvation of mankind and for the benefit of the Church of God in
all ages, and for this very end, that men might learn, and know the mind and
will of God fully and clearly, and have the certain truth of the things they
had heard, that they might be preserved and kept from all errors and upheld and
comforted in every condition, they were not accidentally and occasionally
written, and out of the peculiar mation and pleasure of the Penmen thereof, and
by the will of man, but by the Spirit of God. But the holy Scriptures were
written by Divine inspiration, and by the counsel of God for the very ends
specified. Ergo, they were not accidentally and occasionally written, and out
of the peculiar motion and pleasure of the Penmen thereof, and by the will of
man, but by the Spirit of God. And for proof of all these particulars the holy
Scripture it self is clearly on our side, 2 Timothy chap. 3. v. 16. The whole
Scripture, says the Apostle, is given by divine inspiration, or inspiration of
God. Now Mr. Montague Gods inspiration is Gods dictate, and command, as all
that know any thing in Divinity can tell you, if ye be ignorant, and it is as
much as to say, they were written by Gods own appointment; for what God
inspires men to do, that he appoints and commands them to do, so that it was
not arbitrary in them to do it or not to do it, but they were inspired to it,
and put upon that employment to write the holy Scriptures, and therefore the
holy Scriptures through the whole Bible are called the Voice of God and the
mouth of the Lord, and the lively Oracles which were uttered and spoke by God
himself first, and afterward delivered in writing unto the people by Moses
and the other Prophets and holy Penmen, according to Gods command, Acts 7. v.
38. and therefore the Scriptures were not accidentally written and by the
peculiar motion and pleasure of men, as the Church of Rome most blasphemously
affirms. S. Peter also is clear in this point, his words are these in his
second Epistle chap. 1. verse. 19, 20, 21. We have, says he, a more sure word
of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, etc. Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the
Scripture is of any private interpretation: for the prophecy came not in old
time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost. Take notice first, Mr. Montague, of the occasion of these words,
and then consider the expressions duly and you will easily from thence conclude
that the Scripture was not accidentally written and by the will of man, but by
command from God himself and of set purpose, and that the written word is the
rule we are to be guided by, and more sure then the Tradition of the very
Apostles themselves, although they were both eye and ear witnesses of that
they spoke and told unto the people. For the Apostle Peter in this Epistle,
confirms all those Christians that he writes unto, of the truth and certainty
of the things that he declared unto them, saying that the holy Apostles had
not followed cunningly devised fables, when they made known unto them the
power and coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, but were Eyewitnesses of his
Majesty; for he received from God the Father, honor and glory, when there
came such a Voice unto him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved son
in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from Heaven we heard,
when we were with him in the holy mount. Here we see the Apostle Peter with
James and John, as it is in Mat. 17. were both Eye and Ear witnesses of
Christ's transfiguration and glory, and heard the voice and the people by
tradition and the relation of the Apostles that had seen those things, admired
and believed them, and yet the Apostle Peter in this very place, signifies
unto them, that the written Word of God the holy Scriptures, the written
Prophecies of the old Testament were a more sure Word than any Tradition, yea
even of the Apostles themselves, though they were both ear and eye witnesses
of that they related and preached unto others, and commends the people that
they did take heed unto the written Word as a light that shines in a dark
place (no obscure things then Mr. Montague:) and he gives them a reason why
the Prophecies of the Scripture were a more sure Word than any traditions of
men; because, says he, we know, that the Scriptures are not of any private
interpretation, or from the peculiar or particular motions of men, or by the
will of man: but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost,
that is, we know and are most assured whatsoever they declared either viva voce
and by word, or whatsoever they spoke by writing, for God speaks unto his
people by his Prophets both by voice and writing, as is apparent through the
whole Scripture, Isaia 45.19. All that says he we known was by Divine
inspiration, and by the counsel, command and dictate of the holy Ghost, and
therefore must be more sure then all Traditions, because they are Gods
commands, and writ of purpose for the direction of the people and not
accidentally; which will yet more clearly appear if we consider some other
places of holy writ, Deuteronomy. 30 Where Moses exhorting the people if they would
avoid all Gods curses and procure his blessings and provide for their own
eternal good and happiness, that they should obey the voice of the Lord, and
do all his Commandments, which are written in the book of the Law, verse. 10.
Here first he sets down, what voice of God they should hear and what
Commandments they should yield obedience unto, and that was to the written
voice of God and the written Commandments, which are written, says he, in the
Book of the Law, not to the Traditions of men, and affirms that they were
written for this purpose, that they might not run wandering about from place to
place as men uncertain, what was the will, pleasure and commands of God, for
they were written to this end that they might always have them by them, and in
their sight for the guide and direction of their obedience both toward God and
toward their Neighbor: for this Commandment, says he, which I command thee
this day, is not hid from thee, neither is it far off, it is not in Heaven,
that thou should say, Who shall go up for us to Heaven, and bring it us, and
cause us to hear it, that we may do it? neither is it beyond the Sea, that
thou should say, Who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it us, and
cause us to hear it, that we may do it? But the Word is very near unto thee,
even in thy mouth and in thy heart, for to do it, verse. 11, 12, 13. It is
written, says he, and it was written to this end, that they might not be
seduced by erroneous opinions and carried about to the worshipping of other
Gods and serving of them: as this Chapter shows and all the other holy
Scriptures, and therefore was written not accidentally and by occasion, but by
Gods own command and inspiration. And Paul in Romans 10. confirms the same,
verse. 6.7. and in the fourth Chapter of the same Epistle, verse. 21.22. showing the
end and reason why the holy Scriptures were written, he says, it was not
written for Abraham's sake alone, that it was imputed, but for us also, etc. for
the comfort of all the sons and daughters of Abraham: signifying unto all
believers and the dear servants of God, that God had as great a care that they
should be taught aright how to please him, as Abaham the father of all the
faithful was, and withal, that he was the same God now he was then, not
changeable for his service and spiritual worship, but if that they would obey
him and believe in him without staggering and doubting as Abraham did and
follow his commands, they should be blessed with Father Abraham: and for this
very end, says the Apostle, was the Scripture written by Gods own
appointment: and not accidentally. As in the 15 chapter and the fourth verse.
Where he declares, whatsoever things were written before time, were written for
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope. In these words is set down both the reason and the end why they were
penned, viz. That through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures we might have
hope, that is, that we might by them learn patience in all sufferings, and be
comforted in our greatest calamities, in seeing and reading what God has done
to his suffering servants in all ages, and how he was with them in all their
tribulations, and was afflicted in all their afflictions and how the Angel, of
his presence saved them, and how in his love and in his piety he redeemed them,
and bare them and carried them all their days. Isa. 63. verse. 9. The Saints,
by seeing what God had done, and by reading how that he carried his people
through and over all difficulties, and that his Angels have ever been their
guard, and knowing that God is still the same in all loving kindness to them
that fear him, they are comforted, and attain to more hope and confidence in
God, and for this end was the Scripture written by Gods appointment, and by the
inspiration of his holy Spirit, and not accidentally and by the will of men,
but as they were moved by God himself and received the Word from his mouth, as
all the Prophets did, Ezekiel. 3. verse. 17. And in the tenth of the first of the
Cor. verse. 11. speaking of the judgments of God that fell upon evil doers and
wicked and ungodly men, and such as provoke God by their sinful courses, he
says; Now all these things happened unto them for examples: and they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come. Here we
see God had an end why they should be written, which was upon counsel and
deliberation in God himself, for the admonition of his people, and for the
instructing and teaching of them to take heed of all evil courses and wicked
ways, if they would avoid his displeasure and enjoy his favor and protection,
and therefore the holy Scriptures now pend by Divine inspiration and Heavenly
command for this very end, and not by the will of man accidentally. Innumerable
more proofs to this purpose might be produced, to prove that the Scriptures
were not accidentally but of purpose written, for the good of all men, and for
the preserving of them from error, and that they might not be carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, and the vain traditions of men and be led by
uncertainties. But I will content my self with one proof more and so conclude
this my first argument to prove that the Scripture was not accidentally written
and by the will of man, Luke 1. verse. 3.4. It seemed good to me also, says S.
Luke, having had perfect understanding of all things from the first, to write
unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, that thou may know the
certainty of those things, wherein thou have been instructed. Here are three
things worthy of observation, the first that he had a perfect understanding and
true information of the things he wrote, as having received them from
eyewitnesses, and such as were without exception, being Christ's Ministers and
such as would not lie or relate untruths; the second thing observable is, that
he has set down all the things, distinctly, plainly, and orderly, that there
may be no difficulty in reading of them; the third thing observable is, the
reason why they were written and not left to Tradition, because, says the
Evangelist, thou may know the certainty of those things wherein thou have
been instructed. So that the Lord declares by these words that the Penmen of
the holy Scripture did not write accidentally and upon any slight occasion, and
of their own wills and peculiar motion, but that they were moved unto it by God
himself, and that all Scripture was given by Gods inspiration and command, and
for this end, that they may know the certainty of the things wherein they have
been instructed, which otherwise they could not have known, by reason of the
great variety and difference that would have been in them, if they had been
delivered by Tradition: for every one would have added and detracted, as had
seemed best unto him, unto the story, as we see it daily in all matters and
occurrences out of a man's own sight, and beholding with what variety these
things many times are related, so that no man can tell the truth of them, till
the eyewitnesses or standers by give the true relation of them by writing to
the World, which men ordinarily use to believe, especially if these men be of
credit and reputation that pen them. So for the very same end, that the
certainty of these things might be known, that Christ both taught, did, and
suffered for the Redemption of mankind, and for the good of the Church to the
end of the World, the Lord moved holy men to both speak and write what was
spoke and written in the old and new Testament, for the learning of his people
and the teaching of them, Patience, Comfort, Hope, Faith, and all other graces,
and that they might indeed have the certainty of his will and pleasure what to
cleave and stick to, and from which they may not be moved, though they should
be taught otherwise by an Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1. verse. 8. And this I say
was the end of the writing of the holy Word of God, and that by Gods
inspiration, dictate and command, and not accidentally, as the Church of Rome
blasphemously affirms for the enervating of the authority of the holy
Scriptures, and indeed for the overthrowing of the honor and dignity of our
great Prophet Christ Jesus, who otherwise should not be as faithful as Moses in
the house of God, if he had not commanded all things to be writ that he would
have taught to his people, which is blasphemy to think. And thus much shall
suffice to have spoke for proof of my first argument that the holy Scriptures
were written by Divine inspiration and Gods command and of set purpose, and not
accidentally, and by the Will of men.

My second Argument is this. That which was written for the safety of the
people, and for the preserving of them in the true Religion, that was not
accidentally written, or by the will of man, but by Gods appointment and of set
purpose and for the good of all the Church: but the holy Scriptures were
written for the safety of the people, and for the preserving of them in the
true Religion, Ergo, they were not accidentally written, or by the will of man,
but by Gods appointment and of set purpose. For proof of this, hear what Paul
says, Phil. 3. verse. 1. Finally my Brethren, says he, rejoice in the Lord. To
write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is
safe: Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, etc. He had preached unto them
and taught them the Truth formerly, and given them also caveats, to take heed
of and beware of dogs, and of evil workers, that is, of false Teachers, but
he did not think that sufficent for their safety and for the preserving of
them in the Truth, unless he did set down in writing the sum of what he had
taught, and send it unto them, with a command also, that they should walk and
order their faith and manners, their lives, and conversations according to that
they were instructed in by him, both in word and example, verse. 16. Saying, let
us walk by the same rule, I then gave you, and now in writing send unto you,
and see ye swarve not from it and from our example, for it is safe for you so
to do, and by that you shall be preserved from the errors of false Teachers.
But take notice, I pray, of the Apostles expression, he does not say only, that
it was for their safety that he wrote unto them, but that it was for their
safety that he wrote the same things he had taught them before, to show unto
all men their weakness how soon they are ready to forget the things that are
taught them of God, and how frail they are and ready to be seduced from the
true Religion, if they had not the Scripture to guide and direct them; and if
the Christians in the Apostles time had need of the written word for their
safety, and that they might be preserved from the errors of the times, and they
were then tied to be ruled and governed by them, how much more need have we of
the holy Scriptures now, when we have not the holy Apostles amongst us, and
with how much care and diligence ought we constantly to read and cleave unto
the holy Scriptures, seeing that they were by Gods appointment and inspiration
and not accidentally written for this very purpose that they might be a rule of
direction to us for the preserving of us in the true Religion? S. Peter
likewise in his second Epistle, chap. 1. confirms the same truth in these
words, verse. 12. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things, though ye know them and be established in the
present truth. 13. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle,
to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance, verse. 15. Moreover, I will
endeavor, that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always
in remembrance. In these words, we may take notice of these particulars, first,
that those S. Peter wrote unto were not ignorant people, but knowing and
understanding people and such as were grounded and established in the Truth:
the second particular, that S. Peter nevertheless thought it meet to stir
them up, and put them in remembrance whiles he lived, and that they might also
be able after his decease to have these things always in remembrance, and that
the Scriptures might be the everlasting rule to all sorts and degrees of
people, yea the most learned and knowing men, and the most established in the
Truth have need of the Scriptures for their still direction, and that not for a
time but always, and this was the end for which the holy Scriptures were pend
and that by Gods own appointment, who inspired the holy Prophets and Apostles,
and all the other Penmen of the Sacred writ, and dictated unto them what they
should write, and all for the establishing of the people more and more in the
Truth, and that they might not be carried about with every wind of Doctrine,
Ephesians. 4. v. 14. And therefore it does of necessity follow, that the Word of God
was not accidentally written, or by the will of man, but by Gods appointment,
and by his holy Spirit, and of set purpose. And this shall suffice to have
spoken of my second Argument. My third Argument is this.

That of which there was a necessity of writing, for the common salvation and
for the encouragement of all Christians, earnestly to contend for the faith
which was once delivered to the Saints, that was not penned accidentally and
occasionally by the peculiar motion and will of man, but by the inspiration and
moving of the Holy Ghost, and of set purpose. But the sacred Scriptures were
written of necessity for the common salvation, and for the animating and
encouragement of all Christians, earnestly to contend for the faith which was
once delivered unto the Saints. Ergo, they were not accidentally and
occasionally penned, and by the peculiar instigation of man, but by the
inspiration and moving of the Holy Ghost, and of set purpose. And for proof of
this, see what Saint Jude says, ver. 3. Beloved, says he, when I gave all
diligence to write unto you of the common salvation: it was needful for me to
write unto you, and exhort you that you should earnestly contend for the faith
which was once delivered unto the Saints. And Saint John in his first Epistle,
chap. 2. v. 21. I have not written, says he, unto you, because ye know not the
truth: but because ye know it, etc. and in the 14, 15, 16. verse. Let that
therefore abide in you, says he, which ye have heard from the beginning: if
that which ye have heard from the beginning remain in you, ye shall also
continue in the Son, and in the Father. And that is the promise that he has
promised, even eternal life. These things have I writ unto you concerning them
that seduce you. Here the Apostle Saint John writes unto knowing and
understanding Christians, and sets before their eyes the examples of some that
were fallen away and gone from them, to the end to make them more watchful and
diligent in taking heed unto themselves, that they be not led away by the
error of the world, but, says he, they were not of us, for then they would
have continued with us: but they went out that they might be made manifest that
they were not of us. And withal he forewarnes them of false Teachers, and
gives them rules of direction in writing, and directs them to all sorts of
people, fathers, young men, and very little children, to the end they should
all read them, and have them continually by them, and observe them diligently,
if they would be preserved from all errors, according to that of St. Paul, 1
Cor. 10. verse. 12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall;
and that they might not fall away from the truth, he exhorts them in the place
above cited to abide in the truth, which they had heard from the beginning,
that was in the faith once delivered unto the Saints, and for their comfort he
assures them, if that truth they have heard from the beginning shall remain
in them, they shall also continue in the Son, and in the Father, that is,
they shall have eternal life, and not only be freed here from all the errors
of the times, and of Antichrist, but be everlastingly blessed, as the express
words declare; and therefore he tieth them all to the written Word which was of
purpose penned by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, and by the appointment of
God, and his peculiar motion, and not accidentally and by the will of man, and
for this very end that they might not by vain Traditions and erroneous
opinions of any Antichrists, be seduced and fall away, as others had done. And
thus much shall serve to have spoke for the confirmation of my third Argument.
The fourth and last follows.

That which God himself writ with his own hand, and that which was penned by
special command from himself, for the salvation and edification of the whole
Church, that was not accidentally and occasionally written, and by the peculiar
motion of the Penmen, or by the will of man, but by the special appointment
of God, and by the inspiration of his holy Spirit, and of set purpose: but the
holy Scriptures were all of them either written by God himself and with his
own hand, or by his special command and appointment and by the inspiration of
his holy Spirit, and of set purpose, for the salvation and edification of the
whole Church: Ergo, they were not accidentally or occasionally written and by
the peculiar motion of the Penmen, or by the will of man. For proof of all
which, let us see what the holy Scripture says of these things, Exodus 31. ver.
18. Thus (when the Lord had made an end of communing with Moses upon Mount
Sinai) he gave him two Tables of the Testimony, Tables of Stone, written with
the finger of God. And chap. 32. v. 16. Deuteronomy. 9. v. 10. The Lord had spoke all
these words out of the Mount, and there fully declared his will unto them, with
thunderings, and lightnings, as is at large described in Exodus 20. yet such was
his infinite mercy and love to his people, and so gracious he was toward them,
and so desirous that they might not forget this Law, and by that fall into
error, and fail in their duty of thankfulness and obedience to him, in their
duty of love and charity toward their brethren, as he recorded it, and writ it
with his own hand, that they might have a more venerable esteem of it, and
that not in Paper or Parchment, but in more durable materials, in two Tables of
Stone distinctly and orderly set down, to teach them that it was a perpetual
Law ever binding, and to continue to the end of the world. And when the Tables
were by Moses out of zeal broke, the Lord again of his unspeakeable goodness
commanded others to be made, and he wrote on the Tables according unto the
first writing, the ten Commandments, etc. Deuteronomy. 10. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. Now that
which was written by God himself for the salvation of his people, and for the
preserving of them from all error, that was writ of set purpose, and not
accidentally and occasionally, and by the peculiar motion of man: as all men
that have not abjured their reason will easily perceive. But that is not all,
Mr. Montague, that is to be taken notice of here, but we are to consider
likewise, that what the Lord writ in the two Tables, was sufficient to the
salvation of his people, if we had had no more written, so that none could have
complained, that God had not revealed himself fully unto them; for our Savior
Christ the Messiah, of whom the woman in John 4. ver. 25. said, that when he
was come he would tell us all things, told the Ruler, asking him what he should
do, that he might have eternal life, that if he would enter into life, he
should keep the Commandments, Matthew. 19. ver. 16, 17. if then the
Commandments alone contain all things necessary to salvation, as is evident
by Gods own testimony and by Christ's witness, how prodigiously blasphemous
are they that affirm that all the holy Scriptures contain not all things
necessary to salvation? but of this point in his due place. For the present the
place cited before proves that the Scripture was not written accidentally, as
the Church of Rome impiously assert. But now I will go on to prove that the
holy Word of God was penned by special command, Exodus 17. v. 14. The Lord said
there unto Moses, Write this for a remembrance in the book, and rehearse it to
Josua, etc. And Exodus 34. ver. 27. And the Lord said unto Moses, write thou
these words, etc. And in Deuteronomy. 31.19. Now therefore, says the Lord, write this
song for you, and teach it the children of Israel, and put in their mouths,
etc. Yea, the people were commanded to write the Commandments of the Lord upon
the posts of the houses, and upon their gates, and to teach them diligently
unto their children, and to talk of them to them, when they sat in their
houses, and when they walked by the way, and at their lying down, and at their
rising up, Deuteronomy. 6. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. and the same reiterated again Deuteronomy. 11.
v. 18, 19, 20, 21. So that the whole law was written by the command of God
himself, and was appointed by him to be the rule by which his people should
serve him, and by the keeping and observing of the which Law, they should
procure his favor and protection, and enter into life eternal, if they could
perfectly keep and observe it, as is manifest by all the forementioned places:
and in the 30. of Deuteronomy, they are all tied to the written Law, as a
complete rule, and witten by God himself, and by his command penned by Moses
for that purpose, as a complete rule. And therefore, Master Montague, how
dangerous a thing is it in any to slight the holy Scriptures, and to vilify
them, and to deny them their due honor, and to accuse them of imperfection,
and to prefer their own Traditions before those lively Oracles? Is not this,
Mr. Montague, to despise the holy Scriptures? The Author to the Hebrews, chap.
10. v. 28. faith, He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or
three witnesses. What then will become of those, that not only despise Moses,
and his writings, but the writings of all the holy Prophets, and blessed
Apostles, and Evangelists, and accuse them all of imperfection, and obscurity,
and make them the cause of all errors, schisms, and heresies, and of all
confusion, and that in the sight of a thousand witnesses? Is not this enough to
provoke the Lord who is a consuming fire, to wrath and indignation? Mr.
Montague, as you love your salvation, take heed of such expressions. I am the
more large in this business, because you spoke very contumeliously of the Holy
Scriptures, as all can remember that were present, as that they were
accidentally writ, and not of purpose to be the rule of faith and manners, and
not a perfect rule. But now to go on, the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 8. verse. 1.
had a special command to write, Moreover, the Lord said unto me, Take thee a
great Roll, and write in it with a man's Pen, etc. And in the 30 chapter and
verse. 8. the Lord says, Go write it before them, and note it in a Table, and
write it in a book, that it may be for time to come, and for ever and ever.
And in Jerem 36. ver. 2. the Lord says there, Take thee a Roll of a book and
write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee, against Israel and
against Judah, and against all the Nations, from the day I spoke unto thee,
from the days of Josiah even unto this day. And Habakkuk 2. ver. 6. the Lord
commands the Prophet saying, Write the vision, and make it plain upon Tables,
that he may run that reads it. And St. John likewise had an express and
particular command to write the Apocalypse, chap. 1. ver. 19. Write the things,
says Christ, which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the things
which shall be hereafter. And this Commandment of writing is reiterated seven
times in the second and third chapters of the same books. And the Prophet David
speaking of all that he had both writ and taught the people in the second book
of Sam. chap. 23. ver. 2. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his Word was
in my mouth. The same may be said of all the holy Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, and of all the Penmen of holy Scripture, according to that of
Saint Paul to Timothy, the second Epistle, chap. 3. ver. 3. All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, etc. and that of Peter in the second Epistle,
chap. 2. ver. 20, 21. Knowing, says Saint Peter, that no Prophecy of the
Scripture, is of any private interpretation: for the Prophecy came not in old
time, by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the
holy Ghost. I will conclude this point with that of Saint Paul in the first of
Cor. chap. 14. ver. 37, 38. If any man thinks himself to be a Prophet, or
spiritual, says he, let him acknowledge, that the things I write unto you,
are the Commandments of the Lord. But if any man be ignorant, let him be
ignorant still. As much as if he should say, if any man will not acknowledge
and take notice that I write nothing but what God has given me in command to
write, and which I pen by his special inspiration, and as he has moved me,
but will still persevere in his ignorance, and think that I write out of my
own particular and peculiar motion, and accidentally and occasionally, let him
still continue in his ignorance, I will not dispute with him, nor bring any
argument for the further convincing of him, but if any man will be ignorant,
let him be ignorant still. So say I unto you, Mr. Montague, if you will not,
notwithstanding all I have now said, believe that the holy Scriptures were
written by the special command of God, and by his holy Spirit, and not
occasionally and accidentally (as you and the Church of Rome affirm) and by
the will of man, then you may continue in your ignorance and be ignorant still;
but for the Church of England she does verily believe that the whole written
Word was given by divine inspiration, and by the special command of God, to the
end that it should be a rule of our faith and manners, and that it is the very
Word of God, and his lively Oracles, as having the testimony of Christ
himself, Luke 24 Luke 16. John 5. and many other places, and Saint Paul, Romans
3. and Saint Peter in his second Epistle, chap. 3. v. 15, 16. confirms the
authenticality of St. Paul's Epistles, and of all the holy Scriptures, and
affirms that they were written for the comfort and benefit of all the
faithful, and commands them to make them the rule and guide of their faith and
manners which if they do, he promises them that they shall not be led away by
the error of the wicked, and from their own stedfa^^nesse, but that they
shall grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, which is his
prayer that they might do, and it is and shall be my earnest prayer for you
also, Mr. Montague, that the Lord would open your eyes, and that you may see
your errors and renounce them, and at last believe that the holy Scriptures
are Gods very Word, and were writ by his special command, and are to be the
rule of our fath and manners, and by the which we shall be judged at the last
day. And this shall suffice to have spoke concerning this point.

Now I come to prove that the holy Scriptures are not obscure and dark, but
clear and perspicuous in all things that concern salvation. David in the 19.
Psalm. ver. 7, 8. The Law of the Lord, says he, is perfect, converting the
soul, The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The Statutes
of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart, the Commandment of the Lord is
pure, enlightening the eyes. Here are two things, Master Montague, confirmed by
David, who wrote by the Spirit of God, which cannot err; the first is, that
the Law of the Lord is perfect and converting the soul, and making wise the
simple: the second, that it is clear illuminating the eyes. What Blasphemy
then is it in the Church of Rome, to accuse the whole Scripture, not only of
imperfection, but of darkness and obscurity? Yea, what else is it but to give
the Holy Ghost the lie, who says, that the holy Scripture is not only
perfect, but illuminating, and enlightening the eyes? And in Psalm. 119. v. 103.
Thy Word, says he, is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light to my ways. And in
the 130 verse, The entrance of thy Word, says he, gives light, it gives
understanding to the simple. So that there are none, Master Montague, that will
not turn their back upon this Lamp, but may see the light of it. And in
Proverb. 1. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. among the praises of the holy Word he says, That
it gives subtilty to the simple, and to the young man knowledge and
discretion. And in the 6. chap. ver. 23. he says, That the Commandment is a
Lamp, and the Law is light. And in chap. 8. ver. 8, 9. All the words of my
mouth, says he, are in righteousness, etc. they are all plain to him that
understands, and right to them that find knowledge. Infinite places to this
purpose might be cited, but I will content my self only with two more out of
the New Testament, 2 Cor. 4. v. 3, 4. If our Gospel, says the Apostle, be
hid, it is hid to them that are lost: to whom the God of this world has
blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ who is the image of God, should shine into them. Take notice,
Mr. Montague, that as the Sun, though it shines forth never so gloriously,
and in all its greatest brightness, yet the blind see never the more; in like
manner, though the holy Scripture be never so clear and perspicuous in all
things necessary to salvation, yet the unbelievers and incredulous, whose eyes
the God of this world has blinded, they can neither see nor comprehend the
light of them. St. Peter in his second Epistle, chap. 1. v. 19. We have also,
says he, a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well that ye take
heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne and
the Day Star arise in your hearts. If the holy Apostle Peter compares the
writings of the Old Testament to a light, and the Scripture of the New
Testament unto the Day Star, what wickedness then is it, Mr. Montague, in
the Church of Rome to accuse all the holy Scriptures of obscurity and
darkness, and to make them the cause of all errors and heresies, and of all
confusions?

I will now, Mr. Montague, briefly prove that the people ought to read the holy
Scriptures, and that it is their duty to study them diligently, and that it is
a great and insufferable injury and wrong done to them by the Church of Rome to
take the Scriptures out of their hands, and to prohibit the reading of them,
for in that, they like the Scribes, Pharisees, and Lawyers, take away from them
the Key of knowledge, and the means of their salvation, Luke 11. v. 52.
contrary to the command of God, and Christ's precept, who was the only Prophet
of his Church, whom we are bound to hear and obey in all things, Matthew. 3.
Matthew. 17. This, Master Montague, I will first do, and then come to the point.
The Lord, after that he had proclaimed his Law unto the people, and writ it
with his own hand, commanded all the people carefully to observe, to do
according to that he had taught them, and that they might the better remember
it, he enjoynes them to keep it in their hearts, and to write it upon the
Posts of their houses, and on their gates: the words are these, Deuteronomy. 6. ver.
6, 7, 8, 9, All these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine
heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk
of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall bind them for a
sign upon thy hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. And
thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house, and on the gates. And in
the 11. chapter of the same book he reiterates the same command, verse. 18, 19,
20. Therefore, says the Lord, shall ye lay up these my words in your heart,
and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be
as frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them your children, speaking
of them, when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way,
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, and thou shall write them upon
the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates. Here is precept upon
precept, as if the Lord could never have spoke enough unto the people, to stir
them up to the diligent learning and studying of his holy Laws, and all for
their own good, that their days might be multiplied, and the days of their
children, as the days of Heaven upon the earth, verse. 21. So that it had been
a prodigious thing in Israel, to forbid the people the reading of Moses his
writings and books, when God commanded all the people, without exception, to
write his Laws upon the posts of their doors, and upon their gates, to the end
that all men of what rank or quality soever they were, might read them, and
square their lives according to them, and yet the Church of Rome contrary unto
Gods command forbids the people either to read, or have the Scripture in their
houses. And in the 34. of Isaiah, ver. 16. Seek ye out of the book of the
Lord, and read, etc. The Prophet here addresseth his speech to all the people
of the earth, as is evident by the beginning of the chapter. And in Malachi 4.
verse. 4. Remember ye, says the Prophet, the Law of Moses my servant, which I
commanded unto him in Horeb, for all Israel, with the Statutes and judgments.
Here likewise all the people are commanded and enjoined to the reading and
remembering of Moses Law. Yea Kings themselves and Governors are commanded to
read the Law, and to govern themselves, and the people committed to their
charge, according to the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 18, 19. And it shall be
when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a copy
of this Law in a book, out of that which is before the Priests, and the
Levites. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of
his life: that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the
words of his Law, and these statutes to do them: that his heart be not lifted
up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the Commandment to the
right hand or to the left: to the end he may prolong his days in his Kingdom;
he and his children in the midst of Jsrael. H^re we see the Kings themselves
are as strictly commanded to keep the Law of God, as the meanest of the
people. And Josua 1. v. 7, 8. Only be thou strong and very courageous: that
thou may observe to do according to all the Law, which Moses my servant
commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou
may prosper whithersoever thou go^st. This book of the Law shall not depart
out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou
may observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou
shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have good success. Josua
was the General of their Army, and yet he is by an express command enjoined
to read, and meditate in the holy Scriptures night and day, and commanded not
to turn to the right hand or to the left, but to order his life and govern
the people according to the same, all the days of his life. And Josua in the
23 Chap. verse. 6. exhorts the people saying, Be ye of a valiant courrage to
observe, and do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye
turn not therefrom, to the right hand or to the left. He ties all the people
to the written Law, and commands universal and constant obedience unto it, and
promises them blessings from God if they shall obey, and pronounces judgments
from God against them, if they shall rebel and be disobedient; and for the
more animating of them to the duty of obedience, he sets his own example before
them, Chap. 24. v. 15. with his resolution, that he and his house would serve
the Lord, if others would not, and by that, he teaches every one their duty,
that if all the world would go from God, yet every one of us is particularly
bound to cleave unto him, and the way to cleave unto the Lord, is, to follow
the direction of his Law, and continually to have it before our eyes and in our
hearts, according to Solomon's counsel frequently set down. My son, says he,
Pro. 3. verse. 1. Forget not my Law, but let thy heart keep my Commandments:
for length of days and years of life, and peace shall they add unto thee.
Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck, write them
upon the Table of thy heart. So shall thou find favor, and good understanding
in the sight of God and man. Solomon contents not himself only to teach all
men their duty, but withal, shows them the benefit that redoundeth and
arises from it, viz. All manner of blessing according to that of S. Paul the
first of Timoth. chap. 4. verse. 8. Godliness is profitable unto all things,
having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. And in
the sixth Chap. verse. 20. My son, says he, keep thy fathers commandment,
and forsake not the Law of thy mother. That Law says Solomon, that God gave
unto thy Father, and to thy Mother, and enjoined them in the sixth of Deuteronomy. and
the 11. to teach unto their children, that Law and Commandment keep thou and
forsake it not, yea bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about
thy neck. When thou go, it shall lead thee; when thou sleep, it shall
keep thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee; for the
Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is light, and reproves of instruction are
the way of life. Infinite places more might be alleged out of all the holy
Scriptures of the old Testament, where all the holy Prophets exhort the people
to the studying, meditating, and reading of the Law, and where they pronounce
them blessed that delight and meditate in the Law night and day, Psalm. 1. But
now let us see what Christ and his Apostles taught us in the new Testament, and
what the practice of all the Saints and holy men of God was in those days.
Christ, in John 5. v. 38. says, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think
to have eternal life, and they are they that testify of me. And in Luke 16.
verse. 29.30. in the person of Abraham, he sends all that de^^re salvation and
to be freed from the torments of Di^e^, to Moses and the Prophets, and bids
them hear them. And tells them farther, (...) if ^^y will not hear Moses and
the Prophets, though one should arise from the dead they would not be
persuaded, no miracles will be so prevalent and available either to instruct
them or deter them from their sinful courses as Moses and the Prophets, and
therefore the Lord Jesus the Prophet of his Church ties them to the written
Word. And in both these places our Savior speaks unto all the people, and
not unto the Doctors and Teachers only. And S. Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles
writing to the Colossians, and in them to all Christians as S. Peter in his
second Epistle confirms, Chap. 3. verse. 16.17, says, Let the Word of God
dwell in you richly, in all Wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, in
Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to
the Lord. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him; words, Mr. Montague,
worthy of serious consideration. The Apostle says not, let the Word of God be
received into your Families and be sure, you have it among your Books, that
you may now and then read it; but says he, let it dwell in you: let it be in
your hearts and reside there, and let it dwell richly in your hearts, not in a
poor and beggarly manner, content not your selves only with the knowledge of
some parts of it, and stories of it, but be furnished with the full knowledge
of all the holy Scriptures, that like the good Scribe, you may be ever able and
ready to bring out of the old and new Treasury, that is, out of all the old and
new Testament, the sweet and comfortable promises and gracious instructions,
by which you may always be able in all conditions to support and comfort your
selves, and teach and instruct others, and let it be your rule and direction,
for the ordering of your thoughts, words and actions, that whatsoever you do,
in word or deed, you may do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, all according
to his will, that you may with rejoicing call upon his name for his special
assistance and blessing upon what you either do or go about, which you with
boldness and assurance of being heard may do, if you do that which is good
and according to his will and word: and therefore be sure you do nothing,
neither secretly nor openly, that you have not a warrant for, out of Gods Word,
and in the doing of the which you may never be ashamed, though all the World
did see you, which you shall never be, if you follow the direction of the Word
of God, and continually set the rule of his Law before your eyes, and have it
written in your heart, which will ever teach you, that we being delivered out
of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our lives, Lu. 1. verse. 74.75.
These are the employments of Christians holiness and righteousness before
him, in Gods presence, not for a time, but all the days of our lives,
universal and constant obedience, to be holy in all manner of conversation is
required of Christians by the Law of God, 1 Pet. 1. and that ye may be always
thus employed and taken up, and teach and admonish others concerning their duty
and speak the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4. verse. 11. Let the Word of God, says
he, dwell in you richly, let it always cohabit with you, and reside in your
soul, that you may live by faith, and die with comfort, and therefore do
nothing contrary unto this blessed Word, and grieve not the holy Spirit of God
by whom you are sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. verse. 30. Mr.
Montague, I shall now entreat you a little to consider with your self, and
examine, how the Church of Rome obeyes these-precepts and commands of God and
of the great Prophet, and of the blessed Apostle, and whether or no by her
disobedience and Rebellion she deservedly has not lost the Title of a true
Church, which by S. Paul, first of Tim. 3. is called the ground and Pillar of
truth, in that every true Church puts not the Candle and light of the Word
under a Bushel, but sets it up and holds it forth, maintains and
defends it, and offers it to the view and hearing of every one. But does
the Church of Rome this Mr. Montague? Nay, does she not take the Word of God,
the everlasting Gospel out of the hands of the people and deprive them of that
Key of knowledge, and punish the reading of it with severest cruelty, and the
but having of it in their houses in the vulgar Tongue, with the Inquisition and
death? Christ our Prophet says, Search the Scriptures. S. Paul the Teacher of
the Gentiles says, Let the Word of God dwell in you richly, etc. And the
Church of Rome prohibiteth the reading of the Scripture, and is so far from
letting the Word of God dwell in the hearts of the people, that she will not
permit them to have it in their houses. How then is she I pray you the ground
and pillar of Truth, when she is the mother of error and confusion? for our
Savior in the 22 of Matthew says, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures. That
Church then, that takes away the Scriptures from the People, is no true
Church, but an erroneous and false Church. Consider I pray, what I say, and
suffer not your self to be deluded. But I will go on a little farther, to show
the wickedness and sacrilegious dealing of the Church of Rome in this point,
and how far she is gone from both the precepts of God, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of all the holy Apostles, and from the example and practice of all
the Primitive Christians, whose examples in all well-doing we are bound to
follow: Christ in Luke 11. verse. 28. says, Blessed are they which hear the
Word of God and keep it. If they be blessed that hear the Word of God and
keep it; then they also are no less blessed, that read the Word of God and
keep it. So says S. John, Revel. 1. chap. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and
they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things that are
written therein: for the time is at hand. If our Savior Christ and his blessed
Apostles were upon the earth, men and women would desire to hear their
Sermons. What a wickedness and sacrilege th^n is it in the Church of Rome to
hinder the people of blessedness, and to keep them from happiness and life
eternal, when they will not let them read the Sermons Christ and his Apostles
preached unto the people? What will they be able to answer to the righteous
Judge of the whole World at the last day, for their unrighteous and un^ust
dealing in robbing the poor people of the Word of Life? S. Peter says, 2
Epi^t. chap. 1. verse. 19. We have a more sure Word of prophesy, to which you
d^e well to take heed as to a light in a dark place. Here S. Peter praises and
commends those that read the holy prophets, and his pretended successor the
Pope, he blames those that read the Gospel, and punishes with fire and
faggot, those that have either Law or Gospel in their houses. What think you
Mr. Montague, of this business? Tell me ingenuously the next time I see you,
what you think of your father the Pope, whether he be not as honest a
Genleman as ever went over a house. Now I pray look upon the practice of the
primitive Christians, it is said of that noble Eunuch, Acts 8. verse. 27.28. to
his eternal praise, that came to Jerusalem to worship, that as he returned
sitting in his Chariot he read Esaias the Prophet. Without doubt if he read
him before he was a Christian, he read him much more and more frequently after
he was a Christian: and if he read the Prophets before he understood them,
it is very like that he was a more diligent Reader of them, when he understood
them; and yet notwithstanding Mr. Montague, this was no Churchman, that I may
speak in your dialect, but a secular Lord, the Treasurer of the Queen of
Ethiopia. It was his greatest honor that he was a reader of the holy
Scripture, and in the Church of Rome it is an infamy and heinous crime that is
expiated with death, for any secular men to read the Prophecies and
Scriptures, or to have them in their houses. What think you I pray Mr.
Montague of this dealing of the Church of Rome toward her sons and children?
Is she not a very cruel stepmother, that thus murthereth her poor childrens
souls and bodies, that snatcheth the Paps and Breasts by which they should be
nourished out of, their mouths, and keeps away the Milk of the word from
them? It is said of the Bereans, Act. 17. verse. 11. to their everlasting
honor, that they were more noble than they which were at Thessalonica, and
wherefore were they more honorable? because says S. Luke, they received the
Word with all readiness, searching the Scriptures daily, whether those things
were so. And this was a thing very laudable in them, and left for our
imitation, and to be a Lesson for all men, that they should examine whatsoever
is taught them, and by whomsoever, by the holy Scripture, which to do in the
Church of Rome, would be punished with all severity as you know very well Mr.
Montague. It was Timothies praise, 2 Timothy 3. v. 15. That he knew the Scriptures
from his childhood, and that in those tender years he read the Word of God.
Here we have the example of a youth to his ever honor, who was acquainted with
the holy Scriptures, and the very reading of them would be punished in old men
in Italy or under the Popes Dominions. What a desperate height of sacrilegious
wickedness is the Church of Rome now arrived to, that dares against the
command of God, and against all justice and honesty take the Word of God and
the holy Scriptures out of the hands of the people, for whose cause principally
they were writ? For the Apostles writ most of their Epistles not to the
Presbyters and Bishops, but to the Churches in general. To the Churches of
God, to the sanctified in Jesus Christ, and to all those that call upon the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. So Paul to the Corinthians the 1. Chap. 1. verse.
2. and 2 Cor. 2. verse. 1. Galat. 1. verse. 2. Ephesians. 1. verse. 1, etc. And that
he might clearly demonstrate, that he writes as well to the people as to the
Ministers and Pastors, he discriminateth and distinguishes them, Phil. 1. v.
1. Paul and Timothy servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints in Jesus Christ
which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deanes. And S. James addresseth his
Epistle to the twelve Tribes that are scattered abroad, James 1. verse. 1. And
S. Peter writes his first Epistle to the strangers scattered through Pontus,
Galatia, Cappad^cia, Asia and Bithynia, verse. 1. And his second Epistle is yet
more general, To them that have obtained like precious faith with us, through
the Righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ, verse. 1. What unjustice
therefore is it Mr. Montague in the Church of Rome, to take these Epistles out
of the hands of Christians and Believers to whom they are sent and dedicated?
S. John in his first Epistle and second Chap. says, that he writes to
Fathers, to young men, and to little children, to this end, to oblige and tie
all people of what age, quality or degree soever they be, to read his Epistle.
He writes his second to an honorable Lady, who without doubt made no scruple
to read it in her Family. But in the Church of Rome this is not permitted to
the people to read the holy Scriptures, or to hear them read in the vulgar
Tongue without eminent danger and severe punishment, if it be known. Although
the Apostle in express and formal words has commanded that his Epistles
should be read by all the people, as we may see in his Letters to the
Colossians, Cha. 4. v. 16. and to the Thessalonians, When ye have read this
Epistle, says he, cause that it be read also in Laodicea, etc. And in the
first of These. 5. verse. 27. I charge you by the Lord, says the Apostle, that
this Epistle be read to all the holy Brethren. But in the Church of Rome, such
a miserable and degenerating age we live in, the holy Scriptures are snatched
and taken out of the hands of the people, and impious Legends and scurrilous
Pamphlets are put into their hands. But to conclude this point, S. John in 1
Revelation, verse. 3. Blessed are they, says, S. John, that read, and they
that hear the words of this Prophesy, and keep those things which are written
therein. If the Spirit of God Mr. Mountague calls and pronounces those blessed,
that read the Book of the Revelation that is the difficultest of all the
Scriptures, how much more blessed ought we to think those, that read the holy
Gospells and all the Epistles of the holy Apostles, and the other Scriptures,
which contain many things in them, yea all things necessary to salvation, very
familiar and easy to be understood? Therefore needs must that people be
unhappy, yea cursed, that are deprived not only of so great felicity, but of
all true comfort. By all this that I have now said, to prove that the sacred
Scriptures were not accidentally written but by command, and that to be a rule
of direction to all, and that they are not dark and obscure, and that the
people ought to read them and study them all which our great Prophet the Lord
Jesus has both taught and confirmed, and his blessed Apostles after him, whom
he has commanded us to hear, saying, He that hears you hears me, and he
that despises you despises me, and him that sent me, Luke 10. verse. 16. It
is very evident that the Church of Rome does only in word acknowledge Christ
to be the King, Priest and Prophet of his Church, but in works overthrow all
his offices and annihilate as much as in them lies the whole work of our
Redemption, and the whole worship of God, by bringing in a worship and service
of their own, which neither the King, Priest and Prophet of his Church, nor any
of his blessed Apostles has ever taught us. But it will yet more clearly be
elucidated by that that insueth, when I shall manifestly prove that the holy
Scriptures contain all things necessary to salvation, and that perspicuously
and clearly; and that they are to be the only rule of our faith and manners,
and that all Christians are tied only to them to the end of the world, and
that they are not to swarve in any thing from them, though an Angel from
Heaven should teach them otherwise, Gal. 1. both which the Church of Rome does
deny, and in that manifestly declare that she makes Christ a Prophet no
farther than pleases her self, when she adds her own Councels, Fathers,
Canons, and Traditions, and unwritten verities (as they call them) and makes
them not only of equal authority with the written Word of God, but prefers
them far before the holy Scriptures, when she affirms that without them the
Scriptures cannot be a complete and perfect rule for the ordering of our faith,
lives, and manners, which is not only a point of high blasphemy, but indeed an
utter overthrowing of the Prophetical Office of Christ, as I said before, and
a bringing in of a new Religion. And now, Master Montague, I am come to prove
these two last points, viz. that the holy Scriptures contain all things
necessary to salvation; and that they only are to be the rule of our faith,
lives, and manners, to the end of the world; and this, you know, was the task
I took upon me to make good, and had your promise, if I performed it, that you
would be a Protestant. To begin therefore with the first, that the holy
Scriptures contain all things necessary and sufficient to salvation; I thus
prove it.

That which is able to make us wise unto salvation, contains all things in it
necessary and sufficient to eternal life and happiness (or else we should be
wise but in part.) But the holy Scriptures are able to make us wise to
salvation: 2 Timothy 3. v. 15, 16, 17. Ergo, they contain all things necessary
and sufficient to eternal life and happiness. And by consequence, we ought in
matters of faith and religion, to content our selves only with the holy
Scriptures: which is manifest from the nature of the wisdom and perfection the
Scripture speaks of; for if the Scriptures be able to make us wise to
salvation, and the very man of God perfect to every good work, as after we
shall see, what need then have we of unwritten Traditions? For the wisdom that
Saint Paul speaks of in this place, contains all perfection of knowledge in
it, and comprehends all manner of Learning, and divine Science that may make a
man happy here, and blessed hereafter. What imperfection then, Mr. Montague,
can any man charge the holy Scriptures with, when they are able to furnish a
man with all accomplished abilities, sufficiency and knowledge for living
virtuously and piously here in this world, and for the saving of his soul
eternally? for if the Scriptures of themselves be of such virtue and efficacy,
the Spirit of God working with them, that in the matter of salvation, that
great work, they are able to bring men to perfection, yea happiness it self,
and that eternal, then we ought only to cleave unto them, and content our
selves with their perfection, and not listen unto the vain and lying oracles
of the Pope. But now to the words themselves in order, which are the proof of
my Minor, with the occasion of them, in the examining of the which I shall also
answer to your evasions made at our disputation. From a child, says the
Apostle to Timothy, thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation, etc. So that my minor is by this sufficiently
proved, and much more clearly it will appear by and by: when we consider both
the occasion of these words, and the other expressions of the Apostle in the
following verses, and what our Savior Jesus Christ himself says of the holy
Scriptures. The Apostle exhorts Timothy in the verse going before, which is the
14. saying, Continue thou in the things which thou has learned and have been
assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them. In these words, the Apostle
exhorts Timothy, and in him all Ministers and Christians to persevere and
continue in the things and doctrines taught by him: with a reason why both
Timothy and all Ministers and Christians should continue and remain steadfast
in that they had learned, Knowing, says he, of whom thou have learned them:
for he had learned them of Paul the Doctor and Preacher of the Gentiles, that
elect vessel, that was by Christ himself appointed to preach and carry his
name among the Gentiles, Acts 9. and who was guided in all that he taught and
writ by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 14. v. 37, 38. and who had preached unto them
the whole counsel of God, Acts 20. and confirmed whatsoever he taught them out
of the holy Scriptures, by which he convinced his enemies, as all his Epistles
and Sermons prove, and as Paul himself witnessed before Felix, Acts 24. ver.
14. and chap. 28. and as Saint Luke testifies of him, Acts 28. ver. 23. saying,
that Paul expounded and testified the Kingdom of God, persuading them
concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets, from
morning till evening. Paul in all his teaching, to manifest that he was guided
by the unerring Spirit of God, confirms all his doctrines and preaching by
the holy Scriptures, which were written by his inspiration, and therefore ever
like it self: and with this manner of teaching was Timothy instructed, who
having been not only Paul's Scholar, but his own son in the faith, 1 Timothy
1. v. 2. for he had converted him by his preaching, proving every thing he had
taught unto him out of the holy Scriptures: and therefore he exhorts him to
continue and persevere in what he had learnt of him, and formerly been assured
of, knowing that he proved all by the holy Scriptures, which thou, says he,
art very well verst in, having known them from thy childhood: and by all this
he proved the soundness of his doctrine, that it was true and sure, being
grounded upon the written Scriptures, and had not only them for a witness of
what he writ, but he appeals unto Timothy also to be his witness in this
behalf; as if he should have said, Thou Timothy know well the Scriptures,
and that I taught nothing but out of the Scriptures; thou art my scholar, yea
my son, and can ever witness for me, that the doctrine that I have taught
is of God, for it is agreeable in all things to the inspiration of his holy
Spirit as he has declared himself in the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee and all men wise to salvation; and in this St. Paul is an example to
all Ministers to confirm all by Scripture, and this I thought fit to speak of
the occasion of these words; and now I come to the more full handling of them,
and by them to prove the truth of my Minor; after that I have given an answer
to your cavil and evasions, which was this, that Saint Paul in this place
spoke only of the Scriptures of the old Testament, because said you, Paul
writes only of those Scriptures which Timothy had learned from his youth, and
they were only the Scriptures of the old Testament that Timothy was instructed
in. This, Mr. Montague, was your evasion, which if it be true, will
notwithstanding add force and strength unto my argument, as I then proved, and
shall by and by more clearly and fully evince. But, Mr. Montague, that Saint
Paul in this place joins the Scriptures of the new Testament with those of the
old, is most manifest by the addition following, saying, Which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Jesus Christ, which words
perspicuously evince, that to the knowledge of the old Testament, he joyneth
likewise the doctrine of the Gospel and the Scriptures of the new Testament.
But you then replied, that the doctrine of the new Testament was not at that
time written and committed to Pen, but only delivered viva voce, and received
by Tradition. But all this you spoke without either ground or any good reason,
and against all light of right understanding. For it is well known, that this
very Epistle to Timothy was either the last, or one of the last Saint Paul ever
writ, it being a little before his death, as appears by the six and seventh
verses of the fourth chapter, where he says, I am now ready to be offered, and
the time of my departure is at hand, I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith: hence forth there is laid up for me
a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at
that day, and not to me only, but to all them that love his appearing. So that
it is evident, that most of all Paul's Epistles were written before this time;
neither will you deny Master Montague, but his first Epistle to Timothy was
written before this, and in that he had given to Timothy, and in him to all the
Ministers of the Gospel a perpetual and sufficient rule, how to order and
govern the Church unto the worlds end; so that all men may perceive that the
Apostle joins the Scriptures of the new Testament with them of the old, when
he adds through faith which is in Jesus Christ. And for further evidence of
this, consider what Saint Peter writes in his second Epistle, chap. 3. ver. 15,
16. in these words, Even as our beloved brother Paul, according unto the
wisdom given unto him, has written unto you, as also in all his Epistles,
speaking in them of these things, etc. This, Mr. Montague, as all men of
ordinary wit, and all Historians acknowledge, was writ some good time and space
before this last Epistle, and a good time before his death, so that the Epistle
that Paul writ to the Hebrews his Countrymen, to whom Peter also at that time
in their dispersion writes, and most of his other Epistles, if not all, were
written when Peter writ this Epistle, which by all probability, was long before
Saint Paul wrote his last Epistle to Timothy, so that if you please to take an
accurate account of the times, it will be evident, that all the Apostolical
writings, and the whole Scriptures of the New Testament, or almost all were
then written when Paul writ his last Epistle to Timothy; so that not only the
most of Paul's Epistles, as Peter witnesses, but Peter's first and second
Epistle also were then written. So that your cavil, Mr. Montague, and evasion
was but a demonstration of the weakness of your cause, and in nothing
impeaches or enervates the dint and force of the argument, but rather adds
strength and vigor unto it: for if I should grant you, which I cannot with any
reason, that the holy Scriptures of the new Testament were not then written
when Paul writ his last Epistle to Timothy, it would be nothing to the purpose,
or a matter of any moment, seeing that afterward all the doctrine of the new
Testament was written and commended by the Pens of the Apostles and Evangelists
to future ages, and to this end, that they should order their faith and
regulate all their doctrines and manners according to them, with an especial
command from St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4. verse. 6. That they should not be wise above
that which was written. Saint John also denouncing a fearful woe and curse to
all those that shall add unto the holy Scriptures or detract from them, Revel.
22. ver. 18, 19. which all they do, Mr. Montague, that accuse the holy
Scriptures of imperfection, which is a great taking away from their perfection,
and from the honor that belongs unto them, and when they not only join
their own Traditions to the holy Scriptures, but prefer them before them,
which is not only to be wise above that which is written, but prodigiously to
add unto the holy Scriptures, which makes you all liable to that curse
denounced by Saint John: So that if you, Master Montague, repent not of this so
great a sin, The Lord will take away your part out of the book of life, and
out of the holy City, and from the things that are written in the Scriptures.
But now, Master Montague, I will make it evident that the argument will be of
more force and more convince your erroneous opinion of the insufficiency of the
holy Scriptures, and prove the authority and al-sufficiency of them, if the
Apostle Paul should there speak only of the Scriptures of the old Testament,
as you and your brethren would have him and not of the new also. And thus I
prove it. If the Scriptures of the old Testament are able to make men wise unto
salvation, much more then are all the holy Scriptures both of the old and new
joined together, when those of the new Testament fully and clearly interpret
the old, and (with open face, the veil being taken away) set forth Christ unto
us; I say much more then are they being all joined with the old Testament, able
to make men wise to salvation: But the antecedent is true, ergo the consequent.
The truth is, Master Montague, they that say the holy Scriptures contain not
all things in them necessary to salvation, and that they are not, without the
Traditions of men, able to make us wise to salvation, blaspheme, and give the
lie unto the Spirit of God, which affirms the contrary saying, that they are
able to make a man wise to salvation. And whosoever, Mr. Montague, shall deny
this golden sentence of Paul, that all Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and profitable, etc. verse. 26. to belong unto the the Scriptures of the
new Testament, would be thought worthy not only to be spewed out of the
Schools of all learned Divines, but indeed out of the number of all
Christians, and adjudged unfit for all godly men's society. But that you may yet
further be convinced, Mr. Montague, that the Scriptures of the old Testament
contained all things in them sufficient for the salvation of the people of God
under the Law, before the coming of Christ, I thus argue. That which was able
to keep men out of the place of the damned, and to bring them into the bosom
of Abraham, and eternally to save them, that contains all things in it
necessary to salvation: But Moses and the Prophets, the Scriptures of the old
Testament, were able to keep men out of the place of the damned, and to bring
them into the bosom of Abraham, and eternally to save them: Ergo, the
Scriptures of the old Testament contained all things in them necessary for the
salvation of all those that were under the Law, and the Jews then had no need
of any humane Traditions; and much less have we having the Gospel joined unto
the Law. But for proof of my Minor, hear what Christ says in the person of
Abraham, if men desire, to escape hell, and to be eternally saved, let them
hear Moses and the Prophets, says Christ, let them believe and obey and do
what Moses and the Prophets command them, and they shall never be damned; and I
tell you more, says Christ, if men will not believe Moses and the Prophets, no
traditions will prevail with such men to move them to repentance, and turn
them from their evil ways, no not miracles. For if they will not hear Moses
and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the
dead, Luke 16. ver. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Therefore the Scriptures of the old
Testament were not only sufficient to save those that were under the Law, but
they were tied only unto them. But for further proof of the sufficiency of
the Scriptures of the old Testament, and that they contained all things in them
necessary to the salvation of those that were under the Law, I shall add some
other arguments, and proofs out of the holy Scriptures to evince it. Our
blessed Savior in the 5 of John ver. 32. Search the Scripture, says he, for
in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of
me. Here is an exhortation, yea a command, and that from the King of his
Church, to search the Scriptures, which were enough to put all Christians upon
that employment, although he had given no reason of it, but laid down his bare
simple command only, but he gives them a reason of this his injunction, and
that was from the emolument and benefit that would accrue unto themselves by
searching of the Scriptures, and that was life eternal: if you will search the
Scriptures, says Christ, they will make you happy and save your souls, for
they contain all things in them necessary to salvation, and have eternal life
in them; and that is manifest by two witnesses, and you know, says he, what
the Law speaks, By the mouth of two or three witnesses every thing shall be
confirmed; Now, says Christ, you your selves give witness unto this truth,
that the Scriptures have life eternal in them, and your witness is true: and
I join with you in your testimony, and I assert and witness the same also,
that they contain all things in them necessary to life eternal. Therefore, if
you will not upon my command search and study the holy Scriptures, yet if ye
tender your own eternal good, and the saving of your souls, which is better
to you than the gaining of the whole world, then search the scriptures: For in
them ye have eternal life. But it will not be amiss a little more fully to
consider and weigh the words of our blessed Savior: for as there is an
irrefragable argument and a pregnant proof in them to evince the
al-sufficiency of the Scriptures of the old Testament to those that were under
the Law, so there will from hence be deduced an infallible demonstration for
the confirming of the al-sufficiency of the whole Scriptures, those of the new
Testament being joined to those of the old. Search the Scriptures, says our
Savior, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which
testify of me. In these words there is a twofold reason or a double argument
to prove the al-sufficiency of the Scripture of the old Testament, that they
contained all things necessary to salvation, and in that a greater engagement
to the Jews, and stronger motive to put them upon the diligent searching of
them. The first is the testimony of the Jews, their own witness, Ye your
selves think in them (says our Savior) to have eternal life, that is, ye
acknowledge and verily believe that they contain all things in them necessary
to the salvation of your souls, and your belief is good, and your witness is
true and according to the holy Scripture: for all error and sin arise from
the nescience and ignorance of the Scriptures, Ye do err not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God, says Christ, Matthew. 22. ver. 29. Now error
and sin brings men to perdition and eternal misery, and by the knowledge of
the Scriptures you come to the knowledge of God, and of his power, and what a
just, righteous, and holy God he is, and a consuming fire, and how he hates all
sin, iniquity and abomination, and by that ye learn to hate sin, shun
and avoid it, and are taught all the right way of pleasing him, and how to
walk in his Commandments, Statutes, Ordinances, and Judgments, by which you
shall save your souls and be eternally blessed: and because you know not the
Scriptures, you walk in the by-waies of sin and vanity, to your own
eternal ruin and perdition: according to that of Solomon in the 29 of the
Prove. v. 18. Where there is no vision the people perish: but he that keeps
the Law happy is he. Happy here, and eternally happy hereafter, for ignorance
of the Law is the cause of all miseries here, and hereafter, but the knowledge
and the keeping of the Law makes them forever happy and saves their souls.
The same doctrine our Savior taught, Matthew. 19. ver. 16, 17. the Ruler that
came to him, demanding of him what he should do that he might have eternal
life: If thou will enter into life, says Christ, keep the Commandments. For
God had made that gracious promise unto his people of life upon their perfect
obedience, Levit. 18. v. 5. Ye shall therefore keep my Statutes and my
judgments, says the Lord, which if a man do, he shall live in them: I am the
Lord. And the same promise again often renewed in many places, and amongst
others in the 20. of Ezekiel verse. 11. And I gave them my Statutes, and showed
them my judgments, which if a man do he shall even live in them. So that all
the people of God, and the whole Nation of the Jews were sufficiently
convinced of this truth, that the Scriptures contained all things in them
necessary to salvation, and this was their common and general faith even in
our Saviors time, though they were then much degenerated from their ancient
purity in the service and worship of God, and had brought in their own
Traditions, which our Savior so often reproved them for, Matthew. 15. and Mark
7. and by that also showed the al-sufficiency of the Scriptures of the old
Testament, for the Salvation of them that were under the Law, without any
traditions of men: so that the witness the Jews gave of the sufficiency of
the Scriptures, that they had in them eternal life, was as a cloud of
witnesses, a whole Nation testifying the same thing, and Christ himself
approving of their evidence, and allowing of their testimony: and adds his
own witness for the confirming of the same doctrine, and backs it with an
unanswerable reason. You believe, says he, that the Scriptures contain all
things necessary to salvation, and in that you believe well, and rightly, for
so they do; I will give you also my reason of it, another argument to prove
the truth of your witness, and of the sufficiency of the Scriptures without
traditions, and to move you to read them, for they testify of me, says
Christ, for they speak of me, and preach me, and bring you to me, who am the
Messiah, the Savior of the world, and they are the Schoolmasters God has
appointed for that purpose to teach you to believe that I am he, Galat. 3.24.
Romans 10. ver. 4. for all the Law sets me forth, all those washings and
purifications of the Law, and all those Ceremonies and Sacrifices have me for
their end, they are but shadows, and not the body, nor the truth it self;
Yea, and the Moral law also, and all the Commandments that are the ways God
would have you walk in, bring ye unto me, who am the door of Heaven, the
door of the sheep, John 10. v. 9. Who am the way, the truth, and the life:
and no man comes unto the Father but by me. Now then when all the Scriptures
testify of me, and teach you how ye may come unto me, where ye may find rest
unto your souls, Matthew. 11.28. and bring ye to the knowledge of God in Jesus
Christ, which is life eternal, John 17. v. 3. they contain all things
necessary to salvation. So that, Master Montague, if there were no other
argument in all the holy Scripture but this very place in the 5. of St John for
the proving of the al-sufficiency of the Scriptures of the old Testament for
the saving of those that were under the Law, without any humane Traditions,
this alone were sufficient to prove it: For that which has the testimony both
of God and men, that it contains all things in it necessary to salvation,
that is by the knowledge and faith, of which they might have eternal life, and
be blessed for ever, that comprehends all things in it sufficient for the
attaining to life eternal, and for saving of men's souls: But the holy
Scriptures of the old Testament have this testimony from God himself, and from
the Lord Jesus Christ, and from the whole Nation of the Jews, which is an
Iliad and cloud of witnesses, that they have life eternal in them, that is by
the knowledge and faith of which they might have eternal life, and be blessed
for ever. Ergo, they contain all things in them necessary to salvation. And if
the Scriptures of the old Testament contain all things sufficient to
salvation, then the whole Scriptures, when they also of the new Testament are
joined unto them of the old, must of necessity be most absolutely complete, and
have in them eternal life, and need no Traditions of men for the perfecting
of them and making of them an absolute Rule, which is a high point of Blasphemy
to affirm. So that Mr. Montague he that shall dispute against the
Al-sufficiency of the Scriptures, shall dispute against Christ himself, and
call the very witness of God himself into question, who cannot lie. You will
find it a hard thing to kick against pricks as Christ said unto Saul
persecuting him, Acts 9. And this shall serve to have spoke concerning this
place in S. John, for the proof of the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures
under the Law. And I will prove it by other places also of the old Testament,
before I come to those of the new. Deuteronomy 4. verse 2. Ye shall not add,
says the Lord, unto the Word which I command you, neither shall you diminish
ought from it, that you may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God which I
command you. That to which nothing was to be added, nor from which nothing was
to be detracted or taken away, by the command of God himself, that was
absolutely perfect: But to the written Word of God, nothing was to be added,
nor nothing to be detracted or taken away, and that by Gods own Commandment:
Ergo, the written Word and the Law of God was absolutely perfect. For the Major
Mr. Montague no man will as I suppose deny it, and for the Minor the place
above cited proves it. David also in Psalm. 19. verse. 77. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, says he, converting the soul: the Testimony of the Lord is sure,
making wise the simple; from the which words I thus argue, That which is
perfect in it self, converting souls, and gives wisdom unto the simple, and
furnishes them with all saving knowledge, that contains all things in it
necessary to salvation, and is a perfect and absolute Rule, and has no need of
humane Traditions for the making of it complete. But the Law of the Lord is
perfect in it self, converting souls, and gives wisdom unto the simple, and
furnishes them with all saving knowledge: Ergo, it contains all things in it
necessary to salvation, and is a perfect and absolute Rule, and has no need of
humane Traditions for the making of it complete. For the proof of my whole
Syllogism, the words themselves of the Text are sufficient, I might here Mr.
Montague accumulate proof upon proof out of the old Testament to evince the
sufficiency of the Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets, for the salvation of
those that were under the Law, without the help of any Traditions of men; but
because I have been very large in my former discourse I shall produce no more
out of the old Testament at this time: only let me say thus much, that our
Savior and all the Apostles for the confirmation of the absoluteness and
perfection of the holy Scriptures of the old Testament, comfirmed all their
Doctrines of faith from them only, and send the people ever to the written word
as a sufficient and complete rule of Direction. Yea, all the Prophets of the
old Testament likewise did the same, as we see from Moses in Deuteronomy. 30. to
Malachy the last Prophet, who in Chap. 4. v. 4. sends all Israel to the Laws
of Moses, and so also the Prophet Isaiah in the 8 Chap. To the Law and to the
Testimony, says he, speaking to all the people. And if we run through all the
new Testament, Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms are the grounds of all
their doctrines, and thither they send the people, upon whom the ends of the
World are come, and tie us always to the Scriptures of the old Testament and
the writings of the Apostles under the new, with this express command, that we
should cleave only to them, and not to be wise above that which is written,
which shows the absolute perfection both of the old and new Testament, and
that they need no Traditions of men, for the making of them a complete rule.
And so now I return again to the new Testament, and will from thence produce
some more arguments for the proving of the Al-sufficiency of the holy
Scriptures in themselves, and then conclude that point. And for the better
proceeding in my discourse I will go on with the place of S. Paul in the 2
Epist. to Timothy chap. 3. verse. 15.16. where I began; All Scripture, says he,
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works; from the which words I thus
argue. That which has all things in it sufficient for the begetting of Faith
and Repentance, and for the guiding, ordering and regulating of our obedience
and manners, and for the supporting of us in every condition, that contains
all things in it necessary to salvation. But the holy Scriptures of the old and
new Testament, have all things in them sufficient for the begetting of Faith
and Repentance, and for the guiding, ordering and regulating of our obedience
and manners, and for the supporting of us in every condition: Ergo, the holy
Scriptures of the old and new Testament contain all things in them necessary
to salvation. For the Major, Mr. Montague, there is no man that either can or
will deny it: for the Minor, it has sufficiently by all the former discourse
bin proved, yet for the further confirmation of it, the very enumeration of the
benefits that redound unto us by the holy Scriptures, set down by the Apostle,
in these words, that they are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works, do abundantly prove it: for
that which teaches the truth, convinces error, corrects vice, frames us to
all virtue, and comforts us in every condition, and is able to make the very
man of God accomplished and thoroughly furnished to all good works, must needs
contain all things in it necessary to salvation: but the holy Scriptures does
all this, as is apparent from this very place, and that in Romans 15. verse. 4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
were through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Ergo, the
holy Scriptures contain all things in them necessary to salvation. And by
consequence have no need of any humane Traditions for the making of them a
complete rule. But for further illustration of this truth I will produce some
other Testaimonies of the holy Scriptures of the new Testament. Luke 1. verse.
1.2, 3, 4. For as much, says S. Luke, as many have taken in hand to set forth
in order, a declaration of those things which are most surely believed among
us. Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were
eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word: it seemed good to me also, having had
perfect understanding of all things from the very first, to write unto thee in
order, most excellent Theophilus: that thou might know the certainty of
those things wherein thou have been instructed. Here Mr. Montague, before I
come to frame my argument out of these words, I shall desire you well to
consider and to take notice of S. Lukes Testimony, which is this, that before
he wrote his Gospel, many had set forth in order a declaration of those
things which were most surely believed among them, and such men as were
eyewitnesses of the things they related and Ministers of the Word, and
therefore men without exception, and even these men had orderly declared and
delivered in writing all things of which they were eyewitnesses. So that by
this, it is manifest, that a great part of the Scriptures of the new Testament
were already pend, when S. Luke wrote his Gospel, which was long before Paul
wrote his second Epistle to Timothy, as all that are any thing verst in the
holy Scriptures and in the history of those times do very well know, contrary
unto your assertion Mr. Montague, that the holy Scriptures and Doctrines of the
new testament were not then pend, but only delivered viva voce and received by
Tradition when Paul wrote to Timothy. And now I come to my argument, which out
of the words of S. Luke I thus frame, Those writings that comprehend in them a
perfect declaration of all things, that were most surely believed conterning
Christ's doings, preachings and sufferings, and have in them a certain and
orderly narration of them all from the very first, and that set down by them,
that had a perfect understanding of them from the beginning as being
Eyewitnesses of them, and Ministers of the Word, and were also pend to this
very end, that the truth and certainty of those things wherein they had been
instructed and taught, might be known to all future ages, that all men might
be kept from error and be established and confirmed for ever in the truth: they
contain all things in them necessary to salvation. But the Scriptures of the
new Testament comprehend in them a perfect declaration of all things that were
most surely believed concerning Christ's both doings, preachings, and
sufferings, the knowledge and believing of the which is sufficient to
salvation, and have in them a certain and orderly narration of them all, from
the very first, and that set down by them that had a perfect understanding of
them from the beginning, as being Eyewitnesses of them and Ministers of the
Word, and were also pend to this very end, that the Truth and certainty of
those things, wherein they had bin instructed and taught, might be known to all
future Ages, that all men might be kept from error, and be established and
confirmed forever in the Truth: Ergo, the holy Scriptures contain all things
in them necessary to salvation. For the Major Mr. Montague I presume you will
not deny it: and for the Minor it is apparent from S. Lukes own words, and
therefore these two consectaries do from thence necessarily follow, the first,
that the holy Scriptures have no need of any humane Traditions for the making
of them a complete rule; the second is, that the Scripture is the certain
rule all Christians are tied unto, to the end of the World, and that they are
the only means to inform us of the truth, and certainty of all that Christ
both did and spak, in the knowledge, and believing of the which consists our
Eternal happiness and salvation. And this Mr. Montague might suffice to have
spoke to prove the al-sufficiency of the Scriptures, without Traditions, but I
will yet add a few more arguments to establish this Truth more fully, and so
much the more willingly I do it, because it is a point of so great concernment,
and that about which there has been and is the greatest contestation between
us true Catholics, and you Papists. S. Luke affords us an other evident
testimony to prove the al-sufficiency of the holy Scriptures, Acts 1. verse. 1.
The former Treatise, says he, have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus
began both to do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up, etc.

From which words I thus argue. Those Books and writings that contain in them
all things that Jesus Christ both did, taught and suffered for the redemption
and salvation of mankind, by the knowledge and faith of the which men may be
saved, they contain all things in them necessary to salvation, and have no
need of any humane Traditions to be joined unto them for the making of them a
perfect Rule. But the Scriptures of the new Testament comprehend in them all
things that Jesus Christ both did, taught and suffered for the redemption and
salvation of mankind, by the knowledge and faith of which men may be saved.
Ergo, the Scriptures contain all things in them necessary to salvation. The
evidence of the truth of this argument is so manifest that besides Lukes own
Testimony, which is enough for ever to stop the mouth of all gainesayers, the
very Rhemists themselves your own witnesses do acknowledge it, whose notes
upon this place you may at your best leisure look on, their words are these.
Not all particularly (for the other Evangelists wrote diverse things not touched
by him) but all the principal and most necessary things. These Mr. Montague,
are the expressions of your own men, in which observe these two concessions.
The first, that they do acknowledge, that at that time that S. Luke writ his
Gospel; The other Evangelists had writ diverse things not touched by him. And
this overthrowes your opinion, that when S. Paul writ unto Timothy, that the
Scriptures of the new Testament were not then pend, but delivered only viva
voce, and by Tradition, and this was long before that time, that S. Paul writ
to Timothy. The second thing that they grant (which is as much as I desired) is
this, that S. Luke himself had writ all the principal and most necessary
things, so that if the principal and most necessary things to salvation were
written by Luke alone, and the other things of less necessity were written by
the other Evangelists, then by your own witnesses it follows, Mr. Montague,
that all things necessary to salvation, are comprised and contained in the
Scriptures of the new Testament completely and fully, and therefore they are
absolutely in themselves perfect, and have no need of any humane Traditions
for the making of them an entire and perfect rule. And truly Mr. Montague, I
dare at any time undertake this task against all the Papists in the would, to
prove, that if we had nothing but the very writings of S. Luke, I mean the
Gospel written by him, and the Acts of the Apostles, that there were enough
pend for the salvation of men, and that there were no just cause of complaining
of the in-sufficiency of the Scripture; seeing that the knowledge and believing
of those principal and most necessary things are able to save our souls, as
most certain it is the knowing and believing of what he writ is sufficient to
salvation. But when God of his infinite favor, and goodness to mankind, has
by so many of his blessed Servants, Apostles and Evangelists, in so many
several Gospells and Epistles besides the revelation of S. John, so abundantly
declared his heavenly good will and pleasure, it is not only an intolerable
ingratitude in any, not to acknowledge it, but also an insufferable blasphemy
to accuse all the Scriptures of imperfection, yea, it is indeed an overthrowing
of the Lord Christ's prophetical office, and to give the Spirit of God and his
holy Apostles and Evangelists the lie, when they affirm the contrary saying in
express words, that they have writ all things necessary to salvation: as by
the Testimonies following will appear. See what S. John says concerning this
business of so great consequence, Chap. 20. verse. 30.31. And many other signs
truly did Jesus, in the presence of his Disciples, which are not written in
this Book: But these are written that you might believe that Jesus is the
Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his
Name: than the which, there cannot be a more pregnant proof to show the
sufficiency of what was written to salvation. The argument from these words is
this, That which teaches and declares unto us the sovereign and chiefest
good, and the means of attaining unto this good, that contains all things in
it necessary to salvation: But the holy Scriptures do teach and declare unto
us the Sovereign and chiefest good; to wit, life eternal, and the means of
attaining this life eternal, to wit, faith in Jesus Christ. Ergo, The
Scriptures contain all things in them necessary to salvation. If Mr. Montague
you have a mind to confute this Argument, you must then dispute against the
Gospel of S. John which confirms it. But hear, Mr. Montague, what he says
in his first Epistle, verse. 1. and 3.4. That which was from the beginning,
which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life. That which we have seen
and heard declare we unto you, that ye may also have fellowship with us; and
truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. And
these things write we unto you that your joy may be full. The Argument from
these words I thus frame. The holy Apostles did hear and see whatsoever was
necessary to salvation: but the Apostles did declare, set down, pen and record
in their writings whatsoever they thought useful, requisite and sufficient for
the attaining of eternal life: Ergo, the Apostles have declared and set down
in their Books and writings whatsoever is necessary to salvation; and to
affirm the contrary, is to give the Spirit of God and the holy Apostle the
lie, who in express terms assert it. For the Minor, it is also manifest out
of the same words. For that which unites us with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ, and makes our joy complete, that undeniably contains all things
necessary to salvation: but the holy Scriptures unite us with the Father and
with his Son Jesus Christ, and make our joy complete: Ergo, they contain
all things necessary to salvation. And the same Apostle in the 17 Chapter of
his holy Gospel, verse. 3. has these words. This is life eternal, to know thee
to be the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ; Out of the
which place I thus reason. That which teaches us the knowledge of the only
true God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ which is life eternal, that
contains all things in it necessary to salvation; but the holy Scriptures
teach us the knowledge of the only true God, and whom he has sent Jesus
Christ, which is life eternal: Ergo, The holy Scriptures contain in them all
things necessary to salvation. The Major is the Text, the Minor you dare not
deny, but if you or any shall, it has been sufficiently confirmed by the
former discourse. And these Arguments may satisfy any rational creature for
the proof of the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures, without the additions of
any humane Traditions for the making of them complete; but by way of a
corollary I shall yet add a few proofs more, Heb. chap. 1. verse. 1.2. God,
says the Author of that Epistle, Who at sundry times and in diverse manners,
spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days
spoken unto us by his Son, etc. From the which words I thus argue. If the
Word of God necessary to the salvation of the Church, was first delivered by
the Prophets, and afterward by Christ and his Apostles, and the Word of God
delivered by the Prophets, is only at this day to be sought in the writings of
the Prophets; then certainly, the Word of God delivered unto us by Christ and
his Apostles, is at this day only to be sought in the writings of the
Apostles, unless there can be some reason given of the dissimilitude. But the
antecedent is true, Ergo, The consequent. Wherefore, the Word of God delivered
unto us by Christ and his Apostles is at this day to be sought, or found only
in the writings of the Apostles. And therefore the whole Word of God necessary
to the salvation of the Church is contained, and at this day only to be found
in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and not in the vain Traditions
of men. The hypothesis or hypotheticall connection of this argument Mr. Montague
is manifest by the very light of nature, quae dictat de iisdem idem esse
statuendum. Now if ye look into the substance of the word of God you will
find it to be the same both in the old and new Testament, according to that of
Paul, Acts 26. verse. 22. Who professes there, that he said, none other things
than those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. And in Chap. 24.
verse. 14. he confessed before Felix the Governor, that after the way they called
Heresy he worshipped the God of his Fathers, believing all things that were
written in the Law and the Prophets. So that for the substance of the word of
God it is the same both in the old and new Testament: only the difference is
this, that the exhibition or manifestation of the Word was far more glorious
and perspicuous in the new Testament, than in the old, for there the truth was
set forth under diverse shadows and representations, but in the new it was
clearly without any Types and Figures declared unto the World; So that S. Paul
in his 2 Epistle to the Cor. chap. 3. comparing them together in their glory,
affirms in express words, that the administration of the Gospel was far more
glorious than that of the old Testament* calling the Ministration of the Law,
Death, and the exhibition of the Gospel, the Ministration of the Spirit, and
the Ministration of Righteousness, and says that it did exceed in glory, and
in the 18 verse, We, says he, all with open face behold as in a glass the
glory of the Lord; Whereas under the Law they beheld all things through
Figures, and had always a veil before their Eyes. And S. Peter in this point
agrees with Paul, for he in his 2 Epistle, chap. 1. verse. 19. compares the old
Testament to a light or Candle shining in a dark place, and the Gospel unto
the Day Star. And there is a greater difference between the light, clarity and
brightness of the new Testament and that of the old, than between a little
sucking Candle and a great Cathedral one, or between a small rush Candle, or
a little Lamp, and a mighty Torch: for although a man by the help of a little
slender light may be conducted through a dark place, and may by it be guided
to keep the right way, yet all men know, that a Torch or a great light will do
that office far more excellently; so although the law was a light sufficient
for the guiding of the people, and keeping them out of the by-waies of sin
and error, yet the Gospel does that office far more illustriously, and
there is as great a difference between them in Saint Peter's judgment, as is
between an ordinary light, and the Day Star, for they are his own words. All
which things, Master Montague, makes greatly for the strengthening of my
argument, and the confirming of the truth in hand, and to prove, that if the
Word of God necessary to the salvation of the Church, under the old Testament,
was all to be found in the writings of the Prophets, much more is the Word of
God sufficient to salvation to be found in the writings of the Apostles and
Evangelists: which will yet more evidently appear, if we consider and weigh
the comparison between the old Testament and the new, and the Word of God
exhibited in them both. For if God spoke by the Prophets in the old Testament,
he spoke also by the Apostles in the new. If the Prophets preached the Word of
God, so did the Apostles. If the Prophets did commit the Word of God to
writing, and penned it, so did the Apostles. And if the Prophets did comprehend
and comprise the whole doctrine of the old Testament in their writings, as they
themselves affirm, and as I have evidently in this discourse, and sufficiently
proved, the Apostles and Evangelists have also comprised the whole doctrine of
the Gospel in their writings, as they also testify, and as I have abundantly
showed. And therefore with very good reason I may urge this place now in hand,
and thus argue, If the Word of God which was delivered in diverse manners and
sundry ways in time past, be notwithstanding all of it to be found in the
writings of the Prophets, then the Word of God, which under the Gospel was not
delivered in diverse manners and sundry ways, but after one way, is to be found
in the writings of the Apostles. For otherwise, who sees not but the force of
the Apostles comparison would fall to the ground? And if the opinion and
doctrine of the Church of Rome be true, the Apostle should say or conclude
thus. As God spoke in times past in diverse manners and sundry ways unto the
Church under the old Testament: so now under the new Testament he has spoke
unto us sundry ways, viz. by the writings of the Apostles, by their Traditions
not written, and does daily speak unto us by Ecclesiastical Injunctions, and
Canons, by Councels and Fathers, and by the decrees of the Church: all which
how contrary they are to the meaning and doctrine of St. Paul, every man can
easily discern. Yea the very Papists themselves cannot deny it. And thus much
I thought fit to speak of the hypothesis or hypotheticall connection of my
argument. Now for the Assumption, it contains these three assertions. The
first, that the Word of God necessary to the salvation of the Church was first
delivered by the Prophets and afterward by Christ and his Apostles, which is
manifest by the place alleged. In time past God spoke unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, but in these last days he spoke unto us by his Son. Which is also
to be extended unto the Apostles by whom Christ spoke, as is manifest out of
the second chapter of this Epistle, penned by the same Apostle, verse. 3. How
shall we escape, says he, if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first
began to be spoke by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us that heard him? And in
the 20. of Saint John ver. 21. As my Father sent me, so I send you. And Luke
10. ver. 16. He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you,
despises me, etc. Neither can you, Mr. Montague, or any deny but that the
doctrine of the Gospel was penned and written by the Apostles. The second
assertion of my Assumption was this, that the Word of God delivered by the
Prophets is only to be found in their writings. And that is evident from the
frequent use of speaking in the holy Scripture, which by the Prophets
understand the writings of the holy Prophets. As in the Epistle to the Romans
chap. 1. v. 1, 2. The Gospel of God promised by the Prophets in the holy
Scriptures. And Luke 16. They have Moses and the Prophets. And John 6. verse.
45. It is written in the Prophets. And Acts 26. verse. 27. King Agrippa,
believe thou the Prophets? Luke 24. v. 27. And beginning at Moses, and all
the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things
concerning himself, and the same verse. 44. And St. Peter in his second Epistle
chap. 1. verse. 19. By the word of Prophecy understands the writings of the
Prophets, as by the words following is evident, For the Prophecy came not in
old time by the will of man, says he, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. And many more places to this purpose might be
produced, which I omit, the truth being so well known. Neither can any Papist
produce an instance or president to the contrary. The third assertion in my
Assumption is this, that there can no reason be given by the Papists, why the
same should not be determined and ordered concerning the word of God delivered
by Christ and his Apostles, that is concluded or determined concerning the Word
of God delivered by the Prophets, viz. That the whole Word of God, as much as
concerned the knowledge, faith and salvation of the Church, and as much as was
requisite for their good, is delivered and set down in the writings of the
Apostles. Therefore, Mr. Montague, when the Papists do affirm that there is a
dissimilitude in this part or matter, till they can show a reason, and that a
theological reason, and grounded upon the Word of God, they say nothing, and
the argument will for ever hold, and the conclusion remain unmovable, that
all things necessary to salvation are to be found in the writings of the holy
Prophets and Apostles, and that we have no need of any Traditions for the
making of the Scriptures a complete rule, as the Church of Rome does impiously
and malignantly conclude. I confess, Master Montague, that I have been very
large in this theme, but I formerly gave you a reason of it, and if I yet say
a little more to confirm the truth, and for the farther convincing of error,
and to undeceive the poor deluded people, I hope you will excuse me. I
therefore shall add a few more reasons and proofs for the confirmation of the
al-sufficiency of the holy Scriptures, and that they have no need of any humane
Traditions for the making of them a complete rule. Saint Paul in the third of
the Galatians, verse. 15. Brethren, says he, I speak after the manner of men,
though it be but a man's covenant or testament, yet if it be confirmed, no man
disanulleth or adds thereto. Out of which words I thus argue. If the
Scripture of the new Testament be a Covenant, and it be not lawful to add
unto a Covenant, then it is not lawful to add any thing to the Scriptures of
the new Testament. But the antecedent is true: ergo, the consequent; and by
virtue of the consequent, no Traditions not written by the Apostles, nor no
unwritten verities, as you term them, are to be received or entertained by the
Church of God, as to be a rule of their faith, to be joined to the Scriptures.
The connection is clear. The assumption has two parts. The first is manifest
from the very inscription, and has no need of any other proof. The latter is
proved out of the words of the Apostle, when he says, it is not lawful to
add, no not to a man's covenant or testament, and then this conclusion with
far greater reason will ensue and follow, that it is much less lawful to
add unto Gods own Covenant and Testament. And they that do add their
traditions unto the holy Scriptures of the new Testament, do that which is
unlawful, unjust and impious, and bring that curse and plague upon themselves,
that is pronounced, Revel. 22. v. 18, 19. If any man shall add unto these
things, says Christ, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in
this book. And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of
the holy City, and from the things which are written in this book. That, Mr.
Montague, that is spoke of this Prophecy, is spoke of the whole Scriptures,
and therefore they that accuse the holy Scriptures of imperfection, and add
their impious and vain Traditions unto them, are guilty both of addition and
detraction to them, and make themselves obnoxious to that fearful curse: but
the Church of England dares neither add or take from either the old or new
Testament, but acknowledge them both to be a most complete rule, and to
contain all things in them necessary to the salvation of the Church, and to
have no need of unwritten verities. But that I may farther confirm the truth,
and convince the erroneous opinion of the Church of Rome, I thus argue. If the
holy Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets contain all things in them that
pertain unto the old Testament, and in express words call it a Covenant or
Testament, and the books of the new Testament do not comprehend all those
things that belong unto the new Testament, which is also called a Covenant in
those Divine writings, then the Scripture of the old Testament is perfecter
than the Scripture of the new Testament, or neither of them both answer to
their inscription: but the consequent is most false, impious and blasphemous;
false likewise and impious must the antecedent needs be. For the consequence,
Mr. Montague, of this hypotheticall connection, it is manifest from the very
inscriptions of both the old and new Testament, who are called Covenants or
Testaments. For Saint Paul in the second of Corinth. chap. 3. ver. 14. speaking
there of the Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets calls them a Covenant or
Testament, in these words, For, says he, until this day remains the same
veil untaken away, in the reading of the old Testament: which veil is done
away in Christ. And Moses in the 29. of Deuteronomy. v. 21. According, says he, to
all the curses of the covenant, that are written in this book of the Law. And
in the second of the Kings, chap. 23. ver. 21. it is called the book of the
Covenant. The holy Scriptures of the new Testament also are in many places
called a Covenant or Testament; as in that place, Gal. 3. v. 15. Heb. 12. ver.
20. And it is most certain, that the Scriptures both of the old and new
Testament answer unto their inscription and title: neither can there any thing
be produced that is not contained in the writings of the holy Prophets, that
can truly be said to belong unto the old Testament, and the knowledge and faith
of which thought necessary to the salvation of those that lived under the old
Testament. Now if the same be not concluded or granted, concerning the new
Testament, who will not easily from thence infer, that the Scripture of the
old Testament is perfecter then that of the new, and that the Scriptures of the
holy Apostles and Evangelists do not answer to their inscription and title,
and this title or inscription the new Testament should be interpreted something
belonging unto the new Testament? which how absurd it is, Master Montague, you
your self will easily perceive, and therefore that has no need of any farther
proof. But for any man to think or say, that the Scripture of the new
Testament is less perfect than that of the old, is to give the Spirit of God
the lie, and to overthrow all the doctrine of the holy Apostles, and to deny
their express words, as those of Paul in the second of the Corinth. chap. 3.
ver. 8. and ver. 18. and them of 2. Peter, chap. 1. ver. 19. where the Apostle
Peter comparing the Scriptures of the old Testament and the new together, he
compares the old to a candle, and the new to a Daystarre; Neither yet Master
Montague, have I ever seen that Christian that durst affirm the Scriptures of
the old Testament to be more perfect than them of the new; so that this may
suffice to have spoke for proof of my Assumption, and from the proof of it I
conclude, that the Scriptures of the old and new Testament, as they answer to
their title and inscription, so no man ought under pain and danger of
execration to add unto them, or detract from them, therefore they have all
things in them necessary for the salvation of the Church, without the
Traditions of men, or their unwritten verities. Much more, Master Montague,
could I speak for proof of this truth, and to the which you should never be
able to answer, but that I would not weary you, or trouble your patience; but
less than this I could not speak. And all that I have here set down does
evidently declare unto you these two things: First, that the Church of Rome
does only in word acknowledge Christ's Prophetical Office, and allow him to be
a Prophet, but in deeds and works deny it, when they hear him in nothing, and
not only take away the Scriptures out of the hands of the people, for whose
cause they were written, with a special command also that they should read
them, with a blessing added unto the command, but affirm that they were
accidentally written, and not by the command of God, and that they are obscure
and dark, and that they are not perfect and complete in themselves without the
Traditions of the Church, Councels, Fathers, and the decrees of Synods be
joined to them: all which are not only impious and blasphemous tenants, but,
as I said before, overthrow the whole Prophetical Office of Christ, and all
Christian Religion, and bring in other Prophets, and another Law, and Religion
for the serving of God, which they themselves have devised; by all which they
prove themselves to be no true Church, and not to be the pillar and ground of
truth, but the very basis of all error and abomination, and this is the first
thing that resulteth from the conclusion of this discourse. The second is this,
that when the Church of England holds and believes all these things, viz.
that Christ is the only Prophet of his Church, and only to be heard, and that
he has fully revealed the will of God to his Church, and that the Scriptures
were written by the command of God himself, and that they are not obscure, but
clear and perspicuous, and that they ought to be read of the people, and that
they contain all things in them necessary to salvation, without the addition
of any Traditions of men, it follows that she thinks and believes far
more honorably of the Prophetical Office of Christ, than the Church of Rome,
and that she believes as she ought to believe, and is built upon the
foundation of Peter, and is the ground and pillar of truth, and only depends
upon the Word and voice of Christ her true, sole, and alone Prophet. And now,
Mr. Montague, I am come to the last thing I undertook to prove, viz. that all
Christians are tied to the written Word of God, to the end of the world, as we
find it penned in the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament, and that
the written Word of God, and that only, is to be the rule of our faith and
manners, and that we are not to swarve or to depart from it, or to listen to
any doctrines whatsoever that are not either grounded upon the express words
of the Scripture, or necessarily and infallibly deduced from them, or to admit
in matters of faith of any Traditions, Councels, or Fathers, no farther than
they are consentany and agreeable to the holy Scriptures, yea that we ought
not to listen to any doctrines whatsoever are contrary to the revealed Will of
God in the Scriptures, though the Apostles themselves should rise from the dead
to teach us otherways than we have been taught, or a very Angel from Heaven;
and all this, Master Montague, I shall prove by the following testimonies of
holy Scripture, and then I will conclude expecting the performance of your
promise, and your return to your mother the Church of England, whom you have
without any due reason formerly deserted. I shall therefore gather up all the
proofs that have here and there been occasionally set down in the foregoing
Treatise, and add some other to them, and that in good order, that so you may
have them all presented to your view at once, for the confirming of this truth,
that the holy Scriptures are the only rule of our faith, obedience and
manners, and that we ought only to cleave unto them. And I will begin with the
old Testament first, out of the which hear what Moses says, Deuteronomy. 4. v. 2. Ye
shall not add, says the Lord, unto the Word, which I command you, neither
shall you diminish ought from it, that you may keep the Commandment of the
Lord your God which I command you. And in chap. 5. ver. 32. Ye shall observe
to do therefore, as the Lord your God has commanded you: you shall not turn
aside to the right hand, or to the left. And Chap. 12. ver. 32. What thing
soever I command you, observe to do it. Thou shall not add thereto nor
diminish from it. And Proverb. 30. ver. 6. Add not thou to his words, lest he
reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. Out of all which words these two
conclusions necessarily follow, the first that the holy Scriptures were the
only rule that the people of God in Moses his time were tied unto, and from
the which they ought not to decline or swarve either to the right hand or to
the left. The second thing, that the Scriptures then had no need of the
Traditions of men for the making of them a complete rule, for all men were
forbidden either to add unto them or diminish from them. And if the holy
Scriptures in Moses his time were the rule of direction unto all Israel, and
unto the which they were precisely tied in regard of its perfection, then,
after the writings of the Prophets, and the writings of the Apostles have been
joined and annexed to the books of Moses, we may truly conclude that the
Scriptures now containing all those things in them, the knowledge and faith of
which is necessary to salvation, are not only a perfect rule, but that likewise
we are still under the same command, bound and tied to make the written Word of
the old and new Testament the rule of our faith and manners, and that only.
For the hypotheticall connection, it is manifest and clear not only from the
identity of the Word of God, but from the multitude of the books that were
afterward penned and written, both as well by the holy Prophets, as the blessed
Apostles, as has abundantly been proved in the precedent discourse: for the
Assumption, it is sufficiently proved by the places above quoted. Now, Master
Montague, if the Papists shall affirm, that these places cited by Moses are
not to be restrained to the Word of God written by him, they shall not only
oppose the truth it self, but fight against the very light of reason, and deny
innumerable other express Texts of Scripture all which do manifestly preclude
and hinder them from all ways of evasion: For in Exodus 24. ver. 4. it is said,
that Moses wrote all the words of the Lord. And Deuteronomy. 31. ver. 9. Moses wrote
this Law. And Deuteronomy. 28. ver. 58. If thou will not observe to do all the words
of this Law, that are written in this book, that thou may fear this
glorious and fearful Name the Lord thy God. And Paul in Acts 24. I believe,
says he, all things that are written in the Law and in the Prophets. And in
Deuteronomy. 29. v. 19. And it come to pass, when he hears the words of this curse,
that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I
walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, the
Lord shall not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy
shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book
shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under Heaven. And
in the 30 chap. ver. 10. If thou shall hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy
God to keep his Commandments and his Statutes, which are written in this
book of the Law. From all which places, and many more that might be produced,
it is manifest that the Word of God, of which Moses speak^th, is to be
understood of the writings of Moses, and that it is not to be expounded or
drawn to any unwritten Traditions delivered by Moses, viva voce, and therefore
that the written word by Moses was only to be the rule which all Israel were
tied to for the ordering of their faith, lives and manners, and that all
Christians at this day are much more tied and bound to cleave only to the
written Word of God in the old and new Testament. Which will yet be far more
evident, from Deuteronomy. 4. ver. 18, 19, 20. and from Joshua 1. ver. 7, 8. In both
which places we see that the Kings and Rulers themselves are tied to the
written Word, and are enjoined to make that the rule of their lives and
actions, and are commanded to meditate in it night and day, and to rule and
govern according to the same, without declining from it either to the right
hand or to the left. And Joshua also in Chap. 23. ver. 6. sends the people to
the written Word, saying, Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and do all
that is written in the book of the Law of Moses, that ye turn not aside
therefrom, to the right hand or to the left. This written Word was to be the
rule of direction unto all the people, no humane Traditions Master Montague.
David likewise sent all the people and his son Solomon to the Law of the
Lord, and commanded that they should both seek and keep all the Commandments
of the Lord their God, the 1 of Chron. 28. v. 8, 9. and in Psalm. 19. v. 9.
Wherewith, says he, shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy Word. We see here David directs all men to the Word of God,
to the written Law, affirming if they will observe that, that they shall
preserve themselves from error, and all manner of pollutions. And in verse. 19.
I am a stranger in the earth, says he, hide not thy Commandments from me. If
those therefore that are strangers and pilgrims on the earth, desire to find
the right way to Heaven, and to be kept from by-waies, then let them follow
David's example, and pray unto God that he would not hide his Commandments from
them: for the Commandments are able to direct them thither, for they are the
ways that God has appointed men to walk in, for the attaining unto eternal
happiness, they are the rule that all men are to be guided by, and therefore
he proclaims him blessed that delights in the Law of the Lord, and does
meditate in it night and day, Psalm. 1. Solomon likewise in Prove. 3. v. 1, 2, 3.
and in Prove. 6. v. 20, 21, 22, 23. and in many other places, sends his son,
and all the people, to the Law of the Lord, for the rule of their lives and
manners, saying, My son, keep thy fathers commandment, and forsake not the
law of thy mother. Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about
thy neck; when thou go it shall lead thee, and when thou sleep it shall
keep thee, and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee. For the
Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is light, and reproves of instruction are
the way of life. And in Eccles. 12. v. 13. Let us hear, says he, the
conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for
this is the whole duty of man. By all which places it appears, that the holy
Prophets made the written Word of God, and that only, the rule of their lives
and manners, and commanded all people to have ever recourse unto that, and that
only, for the square to order their lives by. And the Prophet Isaiah in the 8.
v. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, says he; if they spoke not according
to this word, it is because there is no light in them. There was no other rule,
Mr. Montague, known to the Prophets, for the directing of the people how to
serve God, and to which they were tied, but the Law and Testimonies, the
written Word; and if under the Law, they were ever to have recourse unto the
Scripture, and nothing in matter of faith was to be received, which was not
contained in the Scripture, it was then a perfect rule, and the only rule by
which they were to be guided; and much more now Mr. Montague, ought we to
content our selves with the Word of God, and to make that the only rule of our
faith and manners and of all our doctrines, when the doctrine of the Gospel
also written by the Apostles and Evangelists is joined unto the Law, the which
has also fully explained the meaning of all those hidden mysteries, and
shadows, and brought us into the clear sunshine of all truths, and has
indeed taught us the way, the truth, and the life. The Prophet Jeremiah also in
the 6 chap. verse. 16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways and see, and
ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye
shall find rest unto your souls. Here the Prophet sends them to the Law and
the Testimony, that old way, and tells them the benefit that will accrue unto
them by following his counsel, viz. That by it they shall find rest unto
their souls. And the Prophet Malachi 4. verse. 4. Remember ye, says he, the
Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded him in Horeb for all Jsrael, with
the statutes and judgments. The Law of Moses and the Prophets was the rule, Mr.
Montague, that all Israel was tied unto, as that which was an absolute and
perfect rule of direction, from which they were bound not to swarve, and which
had no need of any Traditions for the completing of it: much more now is it a
perfect rule, when the Gospel is annexed to it; and therefore all Christians
ought to make the old and new Testament the sole rule of their faith and
manners, and by all these precepts they are commanded, and many more, to cleave
only unto it. But now Master Montague, let us see what precepts and directions
we find laid down unto us in the New Testament, that by the mouth of both
these Witnesses the Truth of God may yet more fully be confirmed. In Matthew
17. verse. 51. And behold a voice out of the clouds, which said, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear you him. And Acts 3. verse. 22,
23. For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God
raise unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear in all
things whatsoever he shall say unto you: and it shall come to pass, that
every soul that will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from the
people. Here are two things, Mr. Montague, observable: first, a command, viz.
that we should hear Christ that Prophet the Lord our God should raise up.
Secondly, the danger that would ensue if we heard him not, viz. destruction,
for that is pronounced against those that do not hear him. Now let us take
notice how he teaches us, John 5. verse. 39. Search the Scriptures, says he.
Here our great Prophet, Mr. Montague, sends us only to the Scriptures, he
makes them the only rule which we are to follow. And in Luke 16. in the
person of Abraham he sends all men to Moses and the Prophets, verse. 29. they
have Moses and the Prophets, says he, let them hear them. This Mr. Montague
was the old way to salvation, where men might find rest for their souls,
Moses and the Prophets, and thither does Christ the only Prophet of his Church
send all men, to the holy Scriptures and to the Doctrines contained in them as
the absolute and complete rule that all the Christians are for ever tied to;
and out of the Scriptures, and them only, did Christ confirm all his
preaching, as is evident out of Luke 24. and many other places, averring that
the people erred, not knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22. The Apostles likewise in
all their Sermons and Writings did the same, and inoyned all Christians to
cleave unto the holy Scriptures, and to make them only the rule of their faith
and manners, as by the places following do most clearly appear. Paul in the 16
of the Romans v. 17.18. Now I beseech you brethren, says he, mark them which
cause division and offenses, contrary unto the doctrine ye have received, and
avoid them, for they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple. Here the holy Apostle ties the Romans unto the doctrine they had
received, and which he writ unto them, and forbids them to have any
communication with any members of that Church that should teach contrary unto
that Doctrine they had received: for they that are such, says he, serve not
our Lord Jesus Christ. All therefore, Mr. Montague, that teach any Doctrine
contrary unto the written word swarve from the truth and are not by the
Apostles command to be communicated with, and therefore the written Word must
be the only rule of our direction. And in the 4 of the 1 of Cor. verse. 6. He
commands them not to be wise above that that is written, tying them ever to the
doctrine that is set down in the written Word, and in that, forbidding them to
listen unto any Traditions of men, or unwritten verities. For if we must not be
wise above that which is written, and the opinions and doctrines of faith
belong unto true wisdom, then we ought in matters of faith to be contented
solely with the Scriptures and only to cleave and stick unto that rule: But
the antecedent is true: Ergo, The consequent. The connection is manifest, and
for the assumption the place cited proves it. But if this place, Mr. Montague,
be understood, as it is expounded by many learned men, that Paul has reference
here, to the things which himself had writ to the Corinthians and others, and
that he binds the Corinthians here, to the things pend by himself and that
which he had writ, and injoynes them not to be wise above that, then by how
much more are all the whole Scriptures sufficient, and with how much the more
care, ought we to take heed, that we be not wise above that which is written
both in the old and new Testament? for that must needs be a complete rule to
which, with greater reason all men are for evertied unto, if the very writings
of the Apostle Paul are so perfect, that no man ought to be wise or learned
above that which he has written. From the which I thus argue, Whosoever
propounds or establishes any doctrines or opinions of Faith from unwritten
Traditions, is wise above that which is written. But no Christian truly
obedient to the Apostolical doctrine, is wise above that which is written:
Ergo, no Christian truly obedient to the Apostolical Doctrine, does propound
or establish any Doctrines or opinions of Faith from unwritten Traditions. But
to go on. Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians, chap. 1. verse. 8, 9. Though
we, says he, or an Angel from Heaven preach unto you otherwise, then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed, as we said before, so
say J now again, if any men preach unto you otherwise, then that ye have
received, let him be accursed. The Apostle here doubles the execration, as if
he could have used no argument sufficient enough to deter them from listening
unto any doctrines contrary to that which they had received, tying them only to
the written Word, the which they ought to make the only rule of their faith,
and from the which they might not swarve, though the Apostles themselves, or an
Angel from Heaven should teach them otherwise under a fearful curse and
execration. And as he sets down the danger that will follow to all such as
disobay these his injunctions, so in the conclusion of this his Epistle, he
pronounces a blessing upon all such as shall be conformable to the rule,
prescribed unto them for their farther encouragement, in these words, Chap. 6.
verse. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be unto them and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Mercy therefore and peace, is the reward of
all the faithful, and obedient to this rule, and to such as cleave only to
the Scriptures, and a curse to all those that are disobedient, and such as
listen unto unwritten Traditions. And in the fourth to the Ephesians exhorting
them all that with lowliness and meekness, etc. they would endeavor to keep
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, he gives them a reason of his
exhortation saying, that there is but one body, and one spirit, and one hope,
and one Lord, and one faith, and one Baptism, and one God and Father of all,
and therefore that they should employ that Talent of grace that God had given
them for the keeping of the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And that
they might the better do this, he tells them, that the Lord gave them
Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the Church, till they come
unto the unity of the Faith, etc. and declares unto them withal, that they
have fully discharged their duty, and revealed and taught the whole Will of God
unto them, and also writ it, to this very end, verse. 14. That we henceforth be
no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive. In the which words, he gives the reason why the Word of God
was written, viz. That they might have a certain rule to walk by, and to
which they were only to adhere and constantly to cleave unto, and not to be
removed from it, if they desired to keep the unity of the faith, and not be
carried about with every wind of Doctrine. So that by this very place, it is
manifest the written Word is to be the only rule, and not unwritten verities
or humane Traditions. And in Philip. 3. verse. 16. Nevertheless, says he,
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind
the same things. Here also he tieth them to the rule the written Word from
which they might not swarve. And to the Coloss. chap. 2. verse. 8. Beware, says
he, lest any may spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the
traditions of men, after the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ: for
in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete
in him, who is the head of all principality and power, and in verse. 18.19, 20,
21, 22. of the same chapter the Apostle reproves them, that they were subject
unto the ordinances after the Commandments, and Doctrines of men. So that in
this very chapter he proves that the Word of God is sufficiently perfect for
the bringing us unto Christ in whom we are complete, and forbids them to
listen unto the Traditions and Ordinances of men, with whatsoever seeming
arguments out of philosophy and humane wisdom they are propounded unto them,
and enjoins them only to cleave unto the written word, and to the revealed
will of God in the holy Scriptures, and not to serve God after the
Commandments and Traditions of men, showing them the danger of so doing; for,
says he, they separate us from the head Christ Jesus, and bring us to
perdition. And if we look through all the Epistles of the holy Apostles, we
shall find in them all special caveats to take heed of all Traditions of
men, and special charge given them, to cleave only to that Doctrine and those
instructions that they in their writings had set down unto them; for, for that
very end they writ their letters unto them, as they testify themselves, that
after their departure out of this life, they might have a certain rule to walk
by, by the following and observing of the which they might not only be
preserved from all the errors of the times, but be kept unblameable to the
appearing and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and be filled with all saving
knowledge. And truly, Mr. Montague, all reason dictates unto us, that if the
holy Apostles in their writings give precepts unto all the Pastors and Teachers
of the Church, how they shall teach, and instruct the people, and prescribe
unto them a rule which they are ever to follow, and from which they may not
swarve in their preaching, and injoyne them withal, to keep that rule
unblameable until the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ; and in those
instructions among other things, in special, charge them to take heed of all
the Traditions and Precepts of men in Gods service, and injoyne them also, to
reprove such as teach any other doctrine than that they have received from
them, and also command to shun and decline them that teach contrary to that
doctrine; I say, as the Ministers of the Gospel have a rule set them by which
they shall teach, and from which they may not vary, if they notwithstanding
will go beyond their commission and teach contrary, yet the people are not to
listen unto them or to hear, them in so doing: for they are bound and tied
likewise by the same rule and written word to the contrary, as by the places
above specified is manifest, and many more that follow. But now, Mr. Montague,
let us a little examine what Paul writes to Timothy and Titus, and in them to
all Ministers, and Teachers, and what rules he prescribes unto them in their
preaching; and what rules after in the following Epistles and Writings of the
Apostles, are given to all Christians. S. Paul in his 1 Epistle to Timothy
before he comes to any particular instructions gives him a reason why he left
him at Ephesus when he went into Macedonia, and that was, says he, verse. 3.4.
That thou might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine, neither give
heed to fables, etc. Here the Apostle ties all Ministers to the rule, the
Doctrine that they had received from him and the other Apostles. And accounts
all the Traditions of men fables and vanities, as in the third Chapter he more
fully declares, and in the 16 verse, he says, Take heed unto thy self, and
unto thy doctrine, continue in them, for in doing this, says he, thou shall
both save thy self, and them that hear thee. Here he ties Timothy to the
rule, and tells him withal of the benefit that will redound unto him and
others continuing in it, and that is the salvation both of him and his hearers.
So that the swarving from it, must needs be pernicious to both Teachers and
Hearers. And in the 5 chap. 21. J charge thee before God, says he, and the
Lord Jesus, and the elect Angels that thou observe these things, without
preferring one before an other. And in chap. 6. verse. 3. Jf, says he, any man
teach otherwise and consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, etc. from such withdraw
thy self. Here again, he ties him to the rule, to the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the doctrine taught by Christ, as it is set down in the several
Gospells, and commands Timothy to withdraw himself from all such as taught not
according to that doctrine, and in verse. 13.14. I give thee charge, says he,
in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, who
before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession; that thou keep this
Commandment without spot, until the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. Here
is a rule given to the end of the World, which all Teachers and Hearers are
bound to observe and keep. The Ministers and preachers by it, are to teach
nothing contrary unto the wholesome words and doctrine of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and what he taught, and the people, they are not to receive or hear
any thing contrary to that doctrine: but both Ministers and people are
commanded to shun such, and to withdraw themselves from them. And in his
second Epistle, as if the Apostle could never sufficiently enough have taught
all Ministers their duty, in Chap. 1. verse. 13. Hold fast, says he, the form
of sound words, which thou have heard of me, in faith and love which is in
Christ Jesus. Have a special care, thou variest not from that way of teaching
thou have learned from me, the two principal heads of the which doctrine, or
the sum of which is faith and charity, teach them the saving doctrine of faith
therefore as I taught it, according to the written Word, ground all thy
preaching concerning faith, upon the Scripture, not upon the vain Traditions
of men, and humane authority, but upon the written word. So likewise, when thou
teach them their duty of love, both toward God, and toward their
Neighbors, and one toward another, instruct them in that according to the
written Word, and not after the Precepts and commandments of men, and from
this way of preaching swarve thou not, but hold fast that form of sound Words,
for so I taught thee. And in Chap. 3. verse. 14. Continue thou, says he, in the
things which thou have learned and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou
have learned them. Here again, he injoynes him to preseverance in that
doctrine only, which he had taught him, who was guided by the Spirit of God,
and confirmed all that he taught out of the Scriptures, and therefore there
could be no doubt of the Truth of it, and that he commands Timothy and all
other Ministers to continue in their Teaching, and not to vary from it, or to
give ear or heed unto the Traditions of men. And in his Epistle to Titus,
chap. 1. verse. 13.14. Wherefore, says he, rebuke them sharply, that they my be
sound in the Faith; Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men,
which turn from the truth. What, Mr. Montague, can be spoke more evident,
against all Traditions of men, which teach, that the worship of God consists
in outward performances, as in the observation of days and ceremonies, and
abstaining from Meats and Marriage, all inventions of crafty men, and which
teach that we must worship God according to the commandments of men? when the
Apostle in express words in Chap. 3. of the 1 of Timothy verse. 12, 3.
affirms, that these are the doctrines of Devils, and in this place commands
Titus sharply, roughly, and plainly to reprove all such preachers, as teach
men by such performances to serve God, or instruct them to worship him after
the commandments and traditions of men, and gives him a reason why Titus
should sharply rebuke such teachers, because, says he, they that indoctrinate
the people in this manner to serve God, are so far from teaching the truth, as
they turn them from it, and lead them into errors and by-waies, to their
eternal perdition. Truly, Mr. Montague, if there were but this very Text in
all the new Testament for our direction, for the right serving of God, it were
enough for ever to deter us from the traditions of men, and to make us cleave
close to the written Word for our rule, when the Apostle pronounces all such
doctrines, either to be the doctrines of devils, or at least to lead and turn
us from the truth, which we ought to prefer before our lives. And in Chap. 3.
ver. 10. A man, says he, that is an heretic, after the first and second
admonition, reject. You know, Master Montague, that he is counted an heretic
among you, that continues obstinate, and perseveres in his own opinions,
against the doctrines of the Church of Rome, and their vain traditions, and
humane inventions; but in Gods Dialect, they are accounted orthodox; and they
only in the holy Scriptures are counted heretics that persevere and continue
in their own unsound opinions, contrary to the faith once delivered unto the
Saints, and to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, such only by S.
Paul are proclaimed heretics, with a command unto all Ministers and people,
after the first and second admonition to reject, and to cast them out of the
Church, as people with whom godly men, and the true Disciples of Christ ought
to have no fellowship, or commerce: and therefore Master Montague, the doctrine
of the holy Apostles, as it is set down in Scriptures, is the rule we are tied
to for the discerning between true and false doctrine, and that we are for
ever to have before our eyes, for the square we must regulate our faith and
manners by. And in Heb. 13. ver. 8, 9. Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to
day, and the same for ever, says the Apostle. Be not carried about with
strange doctrines, etc. here the Apostle forbids all men to listen unto the
vain Traditions of men, and to be carried about with any strange doctrines,
such as are not grounded upon the written Word, and conformable to the rule of
our faith, set down in it, and gives a reason why they should be stable and
unmovable in that doctrine; for, says he, Christ which is the object of our
faith, does not change his nature nor quality in his Person, Office, and
Doctrine; and therefore it beseemes you likewise to be solid, firm and stable,
and invariable in your faith in him, and that you should not be carried about
with strange doctrines, or give heed unto the Traditions of men, which turn
you from the truth; and in this you ought always to follow the rule prescribed
in the Word, and to set before your eyes the example of your godly teachers,
which have the government over you, who have preached unto you the Word of God,
whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation, verse. 7. and how
they continuing faithful to the end, are now dead in the Lord. If you
therefore desire to be eternally blessed, as they are, imitate and follow them
in their faith, for they were not carried about with strange doctrines; but as
they taught you the Word of God, and not the traditions and commandments of
men, so cleave you also to that written Word, and be not carried about with
strange doctrines, for it is a good thing that the heart be established with
grace, etc. As if he should have said, all the traditions of men do not
establish the heart with grace; for the heart is then only established with
grace, when the soul and conscience of a believer reposeth it self in the
true apprehension and feeling of the mercy, favor, and love of God in Christ
Jesus, apprehended by faith, and in the assurance of his eternal good will,
when by faith they lay hold on the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and find
the work of their spiritual regeneration wrought in their souls, which
brings forth the fruit of holiness in all manner of conversation, and this
only establishes the heart with grace, and in this consists the true
worship of God; all which the traditions and commandments of men are so far
from teaching, as they turn us from them, placing religion in outward
performances, and in observing of men's traditions, as worshipping of Images,
Crucifixes, and observing of days, and abstaining from meats, etc. All which
turn us from that spiritual worship of God, which God both commands and
delights in, For God is a Spirit, and they that will worship him (according
to his Will) must worship him in spirit and truth, John 4. ver. 24. His Will
therefore, Mr. Montague, must be the rule we ought ever to adhere and cleave
to, if we would not be carried about with strange doctrines, and if we desire
to have our hearts established with grace. I might enlarge my self exceedingly
in this point, and run through both the Epistles of Peter, and the first
Epistle of Saint John, but I will conclude with that of Saint John in his
second Epistle, verse. 9, 10. Whosoever transgresses, says Saint John, and
abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God; he that abides in the
doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son. If there come any
unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither
bid him God speed. For he that bids him God speed is partaker of his evil
deeds. Here, Mr. Montague, for a conclusion of this point, take notice, that we
are for ever tied to the doctrine of Christ, which he, the great and only
Prophet of his Church taught us, and which we find writ in the holy Scripture,
whom we are bound to hear in all things, and from the which doctrine we may
not swarve, nor so much as bid God speed to any that shall teach otherwise,
unless we will partake with them in their evil, and so make our selves liable
to the curse and punishment due unto our disobedience in so doing, Gal. 1.
verse. 8. which the Church of England, both out of conscience of her duty to the
command of her great Prophet Christ Jesus; and out of an awful reverence of
his glorious name; and out of fear also, of that curse that is denounced
against all such as transgress his holy Commandments, and are carried about
with strange doctrines, and abide not in the doctrine of Christ, does with all
obedience submit her self unto and continually cleaves unto the holy Word of
God, revealed in his written Word, and makes that only the rule of her faith
and manners, and by that proves her self to be built upon the foundation of
Peter, and to teach the way, the truth, and the life, and to honor Jesus
Christ, and to believe in him aright, and as she ought to do, when she owneth
him to be her only King, her sole Priest, and alone Prophet, and follows the
guidance of his Spirit, and approaches unto God in his name and mediation, and
is directed by his Word, and hears his voice in all things; by all which, I
say, she manifests to the whole world, that she is a true Church against
which the gates of hell can never prevail, and the pillar and ground of truth.
On the other side it must necessarily follow, that the Church of Rome is not a
true Church, nor the ground and pillar of truth, when she is not built upon the
foundation of Peter, nor teaches not the way of the truth and the life, nor
honors not Christ as her King, Priest, and Prophet, nor continues
constantly in the doctrines of the holy Prophets and Apostles, and in the which
the Gospel of Jesus Christ is neither purely preached, nor the Sacraments
rightly administered, and in the which there is not the true invocation of God,
nor the true religion that Christ the great Prophet of his Church has taught
us; All which, Mr. Montague, I have, as I hope, so sufficiently proved in this
discourse, as I am most confident that there is not any rational man but will
easily perceive, and you your self, Master Montague, if you have not resolved
to shut your eyes at noone day, will now clearly discern, which of the
Churches believes best, and which of their faiths and beliefes is most
orthodox concerning the Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical Office of Christ
Jesus, and which of them gives the Lord Jesus most honor, either she that
neither regards what Christ commands or forbids, or she that in all
things hears his voice, and follows the direction of his Word, as it is set
down in the holy Scriptures, which I have by Gods assistance proved to
contain all things in it necessary to salvation, and that we have no need of
humane traditions for the making of it a complete rule; and that this Word is
only the sole rule of our faith and manners, and that all Christians to the
end of the world are tied unto that to be the rule and square both of their
faith and manners, and that they ought not to swarve from it upon what terms
soever. And therefore now, Mr. Montague, I shall look for the performance of
your promise, viz. that if I could prove the Church of England to be a true
Church, and that the Word of God contained all things in it necessary to
salvation, and that it was the only rule of our faith, unto which all
Christians were tied to the end of the world, (all which I conceive I have
fully done) that then you would be of our Religion, and turn Protestant. This
was your promise, Master Montague, before all the Gentlemen, and the
performance of the which will be to the honor of God, and your own eternal
comfort, and will ever rejoice the heart of him that wishes you all happiness
here and hereafter. But, Master Montague, before I shut up this discourse, I
shall in way of a corollary desire you to ponder and seriously consider not
only the vanity but the impiety of all those tenants you hold in the Church of
Rome, more than we have warrant for in the Word of God, and that you would
deal ingenuously between God and your own conscience in the examination of a
few Queries that I shall now before I finish my discourse propound unto you.

I desire you, Master Montague, to answer me truly, what you think of the
condition of such a man, as shall believe, that Jesus Christ is the only and
sole King and head of his Church, and Savior of his body, that infuseth life
and spiritual motion into it, and all saving graces, and that guides it by
his holy Spirit and Word, and believes also that he and he only is to be
obeyed in whatsoever he commands or forbids, and that we are not in
matters of faith and doctrine to follow or hear any voice or word but what he
the King of his Church has made known unto us in his Laws and heavenly
Statutes, as they are recorded in the holy Scriptures, tell me I pray, Master
Montague, heartily, what you think of the condition of such a man living, and
dying in this faith? Can this belief any ways prejudice his salvation, though
he never hears of the Pope of Rome, whom you and the other Romanists
proclaim to be head of the Church, and to be King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
whose oracles, Laws and Ordinances, you affirm ought to be obeyed in all
things as the commands of Christ? I say if he never hears of so much as the
name of the Pope or of any such creature as he is, will not his faith in Jesus
Christ alone whom he believes to be the only King and head of the Church and
Savior of all such as trust in him, save him eternally? If you shall affirm
that his thus believing will not save him, you overthrow the Christian faith,
and destroy the true Christian religion, which teaches us thus to believe, and
assures us, that living and dying in so believing and in this faith we shall
be saved.

Again, Master Montague, I demand of you what you think of the condition of
that Christian that shall peremptorily believe that the Pope of Rome is not the
King and head of the Church militant, but that he is the enemy of Jesus
Christ, one guilty of blasphemy, as assuming unto himself those glorious
attributes and prerogatives that are peculiar to Christ alone, the King of
Saints, and King of Kings, and the only head and sole governor of his Church?
Can this, Master Montague, his so believing prejudice his salvation, or be any
sin against Almighty God? If you shall answer, that it may, then I shall
demand your reason, why you conceive that it may be any way prejudicial to his
eternal happiness; for where there is no transgression there is no sin; for
sin is the transgression of the Law: and what law, I beseech you, does that
Christian transgress, that believes that Christ only is the King and head of
his Church, and the Savior of his body, and that these incommunicable
prerogatives peculiarly belong unto Christ, and that they are not to be given
to any mortal man, and that it is a sin in any to assume these titles, or
for any to give them to the Pope. Master Montague, let me tell you that except
you will overthrow the faith of the Gospel, you can never make either the
ignorance or the contempt of your Romish doctrine concerning the Popes
Supremacy any sin, but that a man may live and die in the detestation of it,
and be eternally saved, if by a steadfast and lively faith and full persuasion
he cleaves unto Christ Jesus the only head and King of his Church, and
believes by his alone power to be delivered out of the hands of all his bodily
and spiritual enemies.

Again, Master Montague, I desire you to answer me ingenuously, what you
think of the condition of such a man as shall believe, that Christ Jesus is
the only and sole Prophet of his Church, and that he has fully revealed the
whole will and counsel of his Father concerning the redemption of mankind,
and that all things necessary to salvation are fully and completely set down
in his holy Word by his command in the writings of the old and new Testament,
and that the sacred Scriptures are a perfect rule of themselves for the
regulating of our Faith and manners, and ought to be the only square and rule
of all our thoughts, words, actions, and of our faith, and doctrines unto the
end of the world, and that there is no need of any humane traditions for the
completing of them, and making of them perfect and entire, and that all
doctrines that are not either grounded upon the express words of the
Scriptures, or evidently and by good consequence deduced from thence, ought to
be rejected, and to be abandoned. I pray, Master Montague, what think you of
the state and condition of such a man living and dying in this faith? Can this
his so believing any way prejudice his eternal salvation, though he never
hears of any of your traditions or unwritten verities, which you
notwithstanding affirm are to be entertained with equal belief, that the holy
Scriptures are by us received and embraced? I say, if he never hear so much as
of the name of your Traditions, and of your Councels, Canons, or In^unctions,
will not his faith in the holy Scriptures alone, embracing the doctrine
revealed in them, and believing that they contain all things in them necessary
to salvation, save him eternally? If you shall affirm the contrary, you will
not fight against me, but against God himself, and give the Spirit of God the
lie, who has so often declared that believing those things that are writ in
the holy Scriptures, it will save our souls.

Again, Master Montague, I demand of you, what you think of the condition of
that Christian, that shall peremptorily believe that all those Traditions, of
Purgatory, and humane satisfactions, of Will Worship and Image Worship, of
Self-merits, and works of Supererogation, of Indulgences and Pilgrimages, of
praying to Saints and Angels, and all the other bundles of your Traditions
thrust upon the poor people as the service of God, and the means by which
they may please God, are detestable abominations, as being things full of
blasphemy, placing our redemption in other means than in the bloodshed and
meritorious death and passion of Jesus Christ, and denying the perfection of
the holy Scriptures, and equalizing, or rather preferring the Traditions and
Inventions of the Pope, the enemy of the Lord Jesus, before the authority of
the written Word, which was dictated by the Spirit of Christ himself, the
only and sole Prophet of his Church, whom we are commanded only to hear and
obey in all things that he has declared in his blessed Word, which is for ever
to be the rule of our faith. Do you conceive, Master Montague, that any
Christian so believing, and persevering in this his belief unto the last hour
of his death, it can any way prejudice his salvation? If you say it may, give
me, I beseech you, your reason, for sin only excludes men out of Heaven;
show me therefore what Law of God any Christian transgresses in believing
Christ to be the only Prophet of his Church, and that he has fully revealed
the Will of God his Father concerning the redemption of mankind, and that this
his Will and good pleasure is as much as is necessary to the salvation of the
Church, is fully set down and contained in the holy Scriptures, and that the
written Word of God is complete in it self, without any humane Traditions, and
that we are bound to make that only the rule of our faith and manners, and to
reject all doctrines whatsoever are not grounded upon the written Word, and
much more all such doctrines as lead us from Christ, and teach us another way
to Heaven than he has taught us, who is our only Prophet, and another way of
serving God than he has appointed. I pray, Master Montague, is the obedience
of any man to Christ our Prophets command a sin or transgression of his holy
Law? If you say so, then you make that a sin, which God accounts of as a
virtue and obedience to his blessed Will and Word, and so by your traditions
break the Commandments of God, and our glorious Prophet Christ Jesus, and by
that as by all your other damnable doctrines proclaim your selves open
transgressors of his holy Laws, which without speedy and hearty repentance
will bring you to eternal perdition.

Again, Master Montague, I entreat you heartily to tell me, what you think of
the condition of such a man, as shall believe that Christ Jesus is the only
and sole Priest of the new Testament, and that he by his obedience, death and
passion, and by the Sacrifice of himself once offered upon the Cross, when he
was made sin for us, who knew no sin, has reconciled God the Father unto
us, and made for ever our atonement with him, and laid down a sufficient
ransom for our redemption, by the which we are freed from both the guilt and
punishment due to our sins and transgressions, and that the virtue of this
his sacrifice as it is ineffable and everlastingly able to save all such as
believe in him, so it is never to be reiterated, but to be applied unto the
soul, and hearts of men by such means only as God himself has appointed,
viz. by the virtue and powerful working and operation of the holy Ghost, by
the preaching of the Gospel, by the administration of the holy Sacraments, by
faith and prayer, and that he is our only high Priest and Mediator both of
satisfaction and intercession, by whom alone we have continually access to
the Throne of grace, and that in his Name only and through his mediation, we
are to put up all our prayers, supplications and thanksgivings unto God the
Father, and that there are now no real Priests on earth, for the offering up
of any propitiatory Sacrifice for the reconciling of God unto us, or any other
Mediators in Heaven between God and us, that can make God propitious unto us,
but the man Christ Jesus. Tell me, Master Montague, sincerely, what you think
of the state and condition of such a man living and dying in this faith? Can
this his belief any way prejudice his salvation, though he never hear of your
Romish Priests, whom you affirm to be real Priests after the order of
Melchisedeck, and assert that they offer up the body and blood of Jesus Christ
daily a propitiatory sacrifice for the living and the dead? Can this his faith,
I say, prejudice the salvation of any man, though he never hears such
doctrines as these be? or can this his faith prejudice his eternal happiness
though he never hears of any other Mediator of the new Testament but Jesus
Christ alone, or never prays to Saint or Angel, to entreat their mediation
for him with God the Father, but only puts up all his prayers and praises
in the Name of Christ alone? I beseech you, Master Montague, tell me, if he
never heard so much as the name of any real Priests besides Christ, or of any
other Mediator but of Jesus Christ, or of any other propitiatory Sacrifice, but
of that only which Christ offered to God the Father upon the Cross, will not
this his faith in Jesus Christ alone, his only high Priest and Mediator, and
the assurance he has of the virtue and al-sufficiency of that his Sacrifice
once offered to God, eternally save his scule, and bring him to life and
happiness? Take heed, Master Montague, what you say. For, if you affirm the
contrary, you blaspheme, and overthrow not only the whole work of our
redemption, but indeed deny the faith, and destroy all Christian Religion.

Again, Master Montague, I desire you further to resolve me, what you think
of the condition of such a Christian as shall peremptorily living and dying
believe, that there are no real Priests now upon earth after the order of
Melchisedeck appointed daily to offer up the body and blood of Jesus Christ to
God the Father a propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead: and that
there are no other Mediators in Heaven, in whose Name and by whose intercession
we may put up our prayers, supplications, and thanksgivings unto God the
Father, besides Jesus Christ, and shall not only constantly believe all this,
but shall also confidently affirm, that to bring into the Church of God any
other real Priests after the order of Melchisedeck, besides Jesus Christ, or
any other propitiatory Sacrifice besides the Sacrifice that he once offered to
God the Father upon the Cross, or to appoint any other Mediator in Heaven,
besides Jesus Christ, are all the doctrines of high blasphemy, as derogatory to
the honor and dignity of Christ Jesus, the only High Priest, and sole
Mediator of the everlasting covenant, and destructive and prejudicial to the
salvation of mankind, as teaching them another way to Heaven, then by the
meritorious death and passion of Jesus Christ, by whose precious blood alone,
and not by any fading things we have redemption and remission of our sins
Ephesians. 1. v. 7. Col. 1. v. 14. and 1 Peter chap. 1. v. 18. Heb. 1.3. and 13.12.
and 1 John chap. 1. ver. 7. Tell me, I say, Master Montague, if any Christian
shall peremptorily unto the last hour of his life persevere and continue in
this faith and belief, and will by no art of persuasion be induced to believe
any of those horrid and pernicious doctrines which you of the Church of Rome
suggest and impose upon the poor people, to their eternal destruction; will,
I pray you, this his so believing and living and dying in this faith deprive
him of happiness, or any ways hinder the eternal salvation of his soul? or
shall he by this his steadfast faith and resolution do any thing displeasing
unto God, or sin in so believing? If you shall affirm that it will, you must
show what Law of God he transgresses in so believing, for where there is no
transgression of a Law of God, there is no sin. Now what Law of God, I
beseech you, is there in all the holy Scripture that makes it a sin to
believe that there is no other real Priest of the new Testament, no other
Mediator of the everlasting covenant but Jesus Christ, no other propitiatory
Sacrifice, but that which he once offered upon the Cross, no other way of
redemption and of obtaining remission of our sins, but by the blood of Jesus
Christ? Until Master Montague, you can make it appear, that thus to believe
is a sin, you can never evince and prove any man guilty of transgression by
abhorring and rejecting all your impious doctrines of the Church of Rome
concerning your blasphemous Priests, and propitiatory Sacrifices and new found
out Mediators, and novell ways of obtaining remission of sins. Truly,
Master Montague, I dare undertake to make it appear to all men, that there is
never a tenent the Church of Rome holds more then we believe in the Church
of England, but it is either blasphemous, impious, or at least superfluous; so
that a man may die either in the ignorance or contempt of it, without any
prejudice to his eternal salvation, and that by the confession of the very
Romanists themselves that have not resigned their reason or abjured all
understanding. I writ once about this very thing, to one Siniones a Jesuit, a
fellow-prisoner with me in the Gatehouse, which you if you please may read in
my Flagello Pontificis of the last edition, which is yet unanswered. But now,
Master Montague, to return to the business in hand, and to speak yet a word
or two of your diabolical Sacrifice of the Mass, which you call a
Propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead, but in truth the most
abominable Idol that ever the world yet saw, being indeed that poisoned Wine
in a goulden Cup, that has made drunk the Nations of the Earth, that are under
the power and Dominion of the whore of Babylon, and that that brings in an
other way of salvation than by the death and sacrifice of Jesus Christ, by
which only we have redemption, the remission of our sins; the impieties of
the which, Mr. Montague, I shall desire you a little to consider, and then I
will conclude and leave you to your meditations and soliloquies. But it will
not be amiss to set down, what both the Church of England believes
concerning the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ; and what the Church of Rome teaches,
concerning that: That so our opinions on both sides being truly weighed, every
one may judge which of their beliefes is most sound, and withal may the better
perceive the detestable impiety of the sacrifice of the Mass. The Church of
England believes that Jesus Christ is the sole High Priest and only real
Priest of the new Testament, and that his sacrifice once offered upon the
cross, is that only, real and external sacrifice in the Christian Church,
and that that sacrifice is the only propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of
mankind, and that there is no other.

The Church of Rome believes that in that action they call the sacrifice of
the Mass, there is a true real and external sacrifice, in the which their
Priests whom they blasphemously term Priests after the order of Melchisedech,
do daily offer up unto God the Father, the very body and the very blood of
Jesus Christ under the species and forms of Bread and Wine, and affirm that
this is a propitiatory sacrifice for the living and for the dead, and that
Christ himself is here really present in the hands of their Priests and upon
their Altars, and offered up by them to God the Father and that it is the same
Sacrifice that Christ offered upon the cross; and injoyne all the people to
put their trust in it for salvation, and to give the same Divine worship unto
it under pain of death, that is to be given to Christ himself the Savior of
the World. This, Mr. Montague, you know to be the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, than the which nothing can be more blasphemously or idolatrically taught,
and believed, or be more fraught with impieties, or more contrary to all both
faith and reason, or more pernicious to the salvation of the sons of men. But
I will not now, Mr. Montague, discover all the errors and abominations of this
Idol, only I shall desire you to take notice of the great impiety and
absurdities of this your doctrine. The Church of Rome affirms, Mr. Montague,
that the sacrifice of this idol Mass, is the very same sacrifice that Christ
himself offered upon the cross. Against which I thus argue. That Sacrifice
which differs from the Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, both in the
efficient, material, formal and final cause, that is not the same sacrifice
that Christ offered upon the cross: but the sacrifice of the Mass differs
from the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, both in the efficient, material,
formal and final cause: Ergo, it is not the same sacrifice, but a detestable
Idol. For the Major, Mr. Montague, no man will deny it, for that that does re
and ratione dissentire from any thing, that is not the same, as all men know.
The Minor I will prove with its several parts. And thus I dispute. The
sacrifice of the cross, was offered up by that High Priest who is the eternal
Son of the eternal Father, who is holy, harmless, undifiled, separate from
sinners, and made higher than the Heavens, Heb. 7. verse. 28. Who through the
eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God. Heb. 9 verse. 14. But the
Sacrifice of the mass is not offered up by this Priest, nor through the
eternal Spirit: but by a most polluted Priest and through the Spirit of
Antichrist: Ergo, the sacrifice of the Mass is not the same sacrifice of Jesus
Christ, it differing from it in the efficient cause, but a most detestable
Idol. The Major of this Syllogism you cannot deny, Mr. Montague, neither will
any man gainsay or deny the Minor, and you know then, the conclusion
necessarily follows that the Sacrifice of Christ, and the sacrifice of the
Mass are not one and the same Sacrifice, and therefore to give that honor to
the Mass that is only due to Christ himself is the most abominable Idolatry
that the World ever heard of, for it gives the same honor to a creature of
man's making that is due to the Creator blessed for ever. And that shall suffice
to have spoke of the first difference, and now I come to speak of the second
discrepancy in respect of the matteriall cause. The matter of the sacrifice of
Jesus Christ was the humane nature, very man, that that was borne of the Virgin
Mary, that was of the seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Judah, that suffered
under Pontius Pilate, that was crucified, dead and buried, and is now at the
right Hand of God, and made higher than the Heavens. But the matter of the
sacrifice of the Mass is not the humane nature, very man, and that that was
borne of the Virgin Mary, that was of the seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of
Judah, that suffered under Pontius Pilate, that was crucified, dead and buried,
and is now at the right hand of God, and made higher than the Heavens. Ergo,
the sacrifice of the Mass is not the same sacrifice of Jesus Christ that was
offered upon the Cross; but a most prodigious Idol that ought of all men to
be abominated. For the Major, Mr. Montague, you cannot deny it, and for the
Minor, no man, unless he be bereaved of his senses will deny it, and unless
he be unable to distinguish a piece of Bread, from the humane nature, for
Christ retains his humane nature still, wheresoever he is, and he bade Thomas
for the confirmation of his weak faith to put his fingers into his side, and
to prove the reality of his Resurrection, and that he was not a Spirit, he
said unto his Disciples, Luke 24. verse. 39. Behold my hands and my Feet, for
it is I my self: handle me and see: for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as
ye see me have. So that, Mr. Montague, except a man have lost all his senses,
he will easily perceive the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Sacrifice of Jesus
Christ are two different things, for the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ had Flesh,
Blood and Bones, the Sacrifice of the Mass, is neither flesh, nor fish, nor
good read Herring, it is neither Man nor Beast; I pray, Mr. Montague, answer
me ingenuously, do you really and indeed believe that that Breaden Wafer the
Priest holds up in his hands, or that lies upon the Altar, that Dagon of
Ginger-bread is the very Christ, the Savior of the World, who is now at the
right Hand of God? do you believe a piece of Bread to be God-man, do you I
say believe, that which is between the Priests hands, ever to have been in
the womb of the Virgin, to be of the seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Judah,
and to have suffered under Pontius Pilate? I am confident your conscience
tells you the contrary, when you know that it is a mere piece of dow. How
then dare you, Master Montague, give that honor to a piece of bread that is
due to the Lord of life? Was there ever in the world a more unheard of
Idolatry? And yet this, Master Montague, is the daily service of the Church of
Rome, which is worse than the worshipping of Molecke, Rimmon, or the God of
Ekron, and exceeds all either heathenish or Jewish superstition. But now I
come to show the difference between them in respect of the formal cause. The
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ was the giving up of his Spirit into the hands of God
his Father, the laying down of his life, the separation of the humane soul
from his body, and the effusion of his blood, and the wounding and piercing of
his glorious Body; but in the sacrifice of the Mass there is none of all this,
you your selves calling it an unbloudy sacrifice, and by virtue of your
concomitancy as you term it, you join flesh and blood, soul and body
together and make that whole which on the Cross was in all respects separated:
Ergo, the Sacrifice of the Mass is not the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, but a
monster to be abominated of all men, as that that robs Christ the Lord of his
due honor, and all the adorers and worshippers of it, of eternal happiness,
who worship a piece of Bread for very God, and in that perpetrate the greatest
Idolatry that ever was committed: And so exclude themselves out of Heaven, for,
no Idolater shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Revel. 21. verse. 8. But
the Fearful and Unbelievers and Idolaters, shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire, and which is the second death. And therefore, M.
Montague, it highly concerns you to look about you, and to consider well
what you do when you go to Mass. But now I come to the last cause of
difference. The Sacrifice of Jesus Christ was of that virtue and efficacy, and
offered up to this very end that it might be a ransom for all believers, 1 Timothy chap. 2. verse. 6. And Heb. 10.14. For by once offering he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified. But the sacrifice of the Mass, is neither
of any power or efficacy, nor never yet perfected any, and by the confession of
the Papists themselves must many times be reiterated to bring one poor soul
out of their fained Purgatory, therefore in regard also of the end it is not
the same, but differs from the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and ought to be
cast out of the World, as a beastly Idol and an abomination and as a thing of
no efficacy and power to save any man from misery, but all-sufficient to damn
souls and send them to perdition, and to bring down the judgments of God
upon the Nations and Kingdoms, where it is set up, as all Idolatry does, for
the Lord will judge those Nations with all manner of plagues, that provoke him
by their Idolatries, and after cast them into the lake that burns with Fire
and Brimstone, which is the second death; Which that, Mr. Montague, you and all
men may shun, it deeply concerns you to consult what a fearful condition you
yet are in, and all those that are of the Faith and Religion of the Church of
Rome which is the Mother of all abomination: and duly also to weigh the
haynousnesse of your offense, who causlesly so separated your self from your
Mother the Church of England, whom I have as I conceive sufficiently in my
foregoing discourse proved to be a true Church, and built upon the foundation
of Peter the ground and Pillar of Truth Mr. Montague, That which I have now to
say unto you is this. God has given you excellent parts, and bestowed many
mercies and favors on you, and his long suffering, and patience toward you
has been great in all respects, who have hitherto employed your gifts to wrong
your own soul, and mislead others, let it be enough, that you have gone so
far, and have hither so abused Gods loving kindness toward you, knowing
that the goodness of God leads you to Repentance: and therefore take he^d
lest persevering in these erroneous and damnable Idolatries and sacrilegious
impious opinions, you treature not up unto your self wrath against the day of
wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God: which that you may
not do, it shall ever be the Prayer of him that wishes no less happiness to
your soul and body than to himself, and who shall always remain

Sir, Yours in the Lord, JOHN BASTVVICK.

FINIS.

