A LETTER Sent from General Monck.

Dated at Caldstreame Dec. 29. 1659.

SUPERSCRIBED To the Right honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker to the
Right honorable the Parliament of ENGLAND, To be Communicated to the rest of
the Members of Parliament at London.

Read in Parliament Jan. 6.

ORdered by the Parliament that this Letter be forthwith printed and published.

Thomas St Nicolas Clerk of the Parliament.



LONDON, Printed by John Streater and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament.
1659.

A LETTER Sent from General Monck to the Speaker, etc.
Right Honorable,
I Received yours of the 22d instant, and desire to return to our good God
hearty thanks, that he has bin pleas^d to own and appear for his people in
such glorious instances of mercy and deliverance. I bless the Lord, I never
doubted of his presence and success in this undertaking, being so righteous a
Cause; and had long since put into Gods determination, but upon advertisements
from friends in England, That if I could continue here without engaging till
the first of January, the work would be done without blood. I cannot but admire
upon what Intelligence you should be persuaded of a second Treaty: Indeed I was
enforced to make use of such an Overture, to remove the Commissioners from
London, whom I cannot but blame for receding from their Instructions; but I
hope they will give you a satisfactory account of their Proceedings. Yet I
acknowledge that I could not but resent their carriage, having secured one of
them for betraying the private instructions; of which I doubt not but you have
bin fully informed.

My last answer to the Lord Lambert, who sent several Messengers to invite me
to a second Treaty, was, T hat I could not treat without authority from the
Commissioners for the government of the Army, and to that end desired a Pass
for the same Messengers to go to Portsmouth to receive their Commands and
Instructions; who was returned back with this answer from Lambert and the
Council of Officers, That they could not consent thereunto: and since that, I
have not heard from them.

I have your Army (I bless God) upon the River Tweed, within three hours
ready to be drawn together, and they are very cheerful and unanimous, willing
to endure any hardship for your Service.

The last night Capt. Campbelt came express from Ireland, giving a full account
of their affection to the Parliament, and of the late Transactions there; That
they had seized Dublin Castle, and secured Jones and others, with a Declaration
to stand by and own your Authority: for which (on this instant) we kept a day
of Thanksgiving. They writ also to the Irish Brigade in England, which I
dispatched to them. Sir Hardresse Waller gives me an account, that all the
Forces and Garrisons in Ireland had declared for you.

This is such a mercy, that I hope the Lord will make us sensible of, and
careful to improve. They required my opinion, as to managing of the Affairs of
the Army, which in such an urgent necessity I presumed to give. I have disposed
of most of the vacant Commands in Scotland to very honest men, who are ready to
die for your Service, or to disband at your Command. And before your Letter
came to hand, I had disposed of Col. Saunders and Major Bartons Commands, the
Lord Lamb^rts Forces pressing upon me. I could not leave my vacant Places
unsupplied; but I know that (this Work prospering) you will have opportunities
enough to gratify them: Capt. Izods place is reserved for him according to
your pleasure. I humbly thank the Members of the Council for that Great Honor
that they were pleased to conferr upon me, and hope you never shall find but
such an absolute obedience from me to your Commands, that I shall be more
ready to return that Commission then receive it. I believe that you never
doubted of my persevering in those good Principles I declared for, and that I
should comfortably (if the Lord had pleased to frown upon us) have suffered in
this most Righteous undertaking. I have made ready to March, but am unwilling
to hazard your Justice and Authority upon a Fight, when it may be done with
more security. I shall attend your further Command, and desire the Lord to
bless your Forces and Counsels, and to restore you in your just Authority;
which is both the prayer and endeavor of

Sir, Your most humble and faithful Servant George Monck.
Caldstreame 29. December 1659. I thought fit to acquaint you, That my Lord
Warreston has endeavored to stir up the people of this Nation as much as he
could against your Interest. Col. Lyscot having been very faithful and active
for the Parliament in this Undertaking, I entreat your Lordships to be
mindful of him for a Regiment of Horse. I have given him the command of a
Foot-Regiment, but he was always of Horse, and is a very honest and stout
Gentleman, and fit to command a Regiment of Horse. I have sent your Lordships
the Copies of my late Letters, and of the Officers here, to my Lord Lambert,
and the Officers at Newcastle; and also to the Commissioners of Parliament at
Portsmouth, that you may be acquainted with out Transactions. Major Knight has
Col. Saunders Regiment, and Capt. Prime is Major.

I entreat you to communicate this to the rest of the worthy Members of
Parliament with you.

George Monck.




