A LETTER Of His Excellency The Lord General Monck, To the Speaker of the
Parl. From Guild Hall, London.
Right Honorable,
IN obedience to the Commands received from the Council last night, I marched
with your Forces into the City this morning, and have secured all the persons
except two, ordered to be secured, which two were not to be found: The Posts
and Chains I have given order to be taken away, but have hitherto forborne the
taking down of the Gates and Portcullises, because it will in all likelihood
exasperate the City; and I have good ground of hopes from them, that they will
Levy the Assess; They desiring only first to meet in Common Council, which
they intend to do to morrow morning. It seems probable to me, that they will
yield obedience to your Commands, and be brought to a friendly Compliance with
you; for which reason I have suspended the execution of your Commands touching
the Gates and Portcullises, till I know your further pleasure therein, which I
desire I may by this Bearer; I shall only desire, that (so your Commands may
be answered with due obedience) such tenderness may be used toward them, as
may gain their affections; They desired the Restoration of those Members of
their Common Council that are secured, which desires of theirs I shall only
commend to your grave Consideration, to do therein as you shall think most
expedient, and, in attendance upon your further Commands, Remain

Guildhall Feb 9. 1659. Your most Humble and Obedient Servant. George Monck.
To the Right Honorable William Lenthal, Speaker to the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England at Westminster. POSTSCRIPT.
I shall become an humble suitor to you, That You will be pleased to hasten
your Qualifications, that the Writs may be sent out; I can assure you it will
tend much to the Peace of the Country, and satisfy many honest Men.



Thursday Afternoon, January 9. 1659.
THis Letter from General George Monck from Guild Hall, London, of the 9th of
February, 1659, was read.

Resolved, Upon the Question by the Parliament, That the Answer to this Letter
be, to send General Monck the Resolve of the Parliament, That the Gates of the
City of London, and the Portcullises thereof be forthwith destroyed; And that
he be ordered to put the said Vote in Execution accordingly, and that M. Scot
and M. Pury do go to General Monck and acquaint him with these Votes.

Tho. St. Nicholas, Clerk to the Parliament.

Thursday, February 9. 1659.
REsolved upon the Question by the Parliament, That the Gates of the City of
London, and the Portcullises thereof be forthwith destroyed, and that the
Commissioners for the Army do take Order that the same be done accordingly.

Tho. St. Nicholas, Clerk to the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, in the Year 1659.


