ALL FOR LOVE, Or, The Happy Match Betwixt Jockey and Jenny.
Jockey and Jenny have struck up a bargain,
And Jockey took Jenny without e're a Farthing,
Jenny had nothing, and Jockey enough,
But Jockey be loved her, and this is the proof.
Tune of, Sawny and Jockey.






AS Jockey and Jenny one evening were walking,
A viewing their sheep and pleasantly talking,
Jockey told Jenny how dearly he loved her,
But little he thought how much it would move her;
She showed most clearly
Both late and early
Jockey's the man whom she loved most dearly:
Little thought Jockey
That he was so happy;
But Jenny she loved him, and that I Will relate to ye.
Jockey told Jenny that she was his Jewel,
And begged and entreated her not to be cruel;
Jenny she told him she feared his new passion
Had little of love, but more of the fashion,
If I believe ye,
And you deceive me,
Nothing but Death (...) insure can reprieve me;
Therefore excuse me,
If I do refuse ye,
But if you do love me you will not abuse me.
JOckey protested and swore by his Maker,
For better or worse he resolved for to take her,
For rich or for poor, still thou art the Creature.
In sickneis or health, then try my good, nature;
Thou art the fairest,
Ay, and the rarest
She of the world, that I love the dearest,
Then do not deny me,
But sit thee down by me,
For if you prove coy then you will destroy me.
For Oxen and Sheep (quoth Jockey) i have plenty,
And Jenny she wished where he done he had twenty;
Corn and old Hay, and choice of good Bedding,
A warm Country house, and all fit for a Wedding,
Then let us not tarry,
But go and marry,
And of my Wealth the Keys thou shall carry;
Nothing is wanting,
Then never be scanting
Of what is our own, nor spend it in ranting.
Jenny she told him she had little treasure,
But all that was hers should be at his pleasure,
Though I am but young (quoth she) I am wary,
And all my life long have been bred in a Dairy:
And it Jockey love me
He shall approve me
To be a Mate in all that behooves me,
No one shall never
More show her endeavor
To make Jockey love her for ever and ever.
So they shook hands and struck up a bargain,
And Jockey took Jenny without e're a farthing;
Jockey was pleased and so was his Jenny,
To buy her a Ring he gave her a Guinney,
And bid her wear it,
And never spare it,
For he had Gold enough for to bear it:
Jockey was kissing,
And Jenny was wishing:
The joys of their Hearts was beyond all expressing.
The next Holy Day this couple must marry,
But neither was pleased so long for to tarry:
Many a kiss and such pretty doing
Betwixt them did pass, but no more of wooeing:
Jenny was willing
To be a billing,
But nothing else for Forty good shilling:
^hen they were married,
(...) matters were carried,
^^^key was first that owned he was wearied.
(...) Brooksby in West Smith field.

