A SERMON, SHOWING The Means how we may Escape the Damnation of HELL.

To which end it was Preached and is Published by N.B.

LUKE 12. v. 5. I will forewarne you whom ye shall Fear: Fear Him, who after
He has killed, has power to cast into Hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear Him.

LONDON. Printed for Rich: Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane. M.DC.XL.XI.

MATTHEW. c. 23. v. 33. How can Ye escape the Damnation of Hell?


THe Verse begins thus: Ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers. A very strange
compellation in respect of Him, from whom it did proceed. For though they to
whom this was spoken, might justly deserve it; yet it may seem strange, that
such a speech should proceed out of our Saviors mouth: that He who bids us
learn of Him, to be, as He is, meek and lowely in heart, Mat. 11.29.
should utter this speech, which seems to savor of nothing less than
meekness. For, what more base than the Serpent, which crawles on the earth and
licks the dust? What more detestable than the Viper, which gnaweth out the
bowels of her that bred him? These were creatures, to which our Savior
resembles the Scribes and Pharisees: to the crafty Serpent and to the
ungrateful Viper: which as they are full of poison; so they are the lively
emblemes of deceit and wickedness.

But this speech was just and fitting, both in respect of Him that spoke it;
and of Them, to whom it was spoken.

1. There is not doubt but that they to whom this was spoken did justly
deserve, that it should be spoken to them. For, they were not only a sinful
nation, Isa. 1.4.
a people laden with iniquity; as they were in the days of the Prophet Isaiah:
But now they had even filled up the measure of their Fathers iniquities, in
killing the Prophets, and stoning those that were sent unto them: And therefore
this reprehension, how sharp soever, could not be too bitter for such venomous
Serpents, such ungrateful Vipers.

But of this there is little doubt, but this speech was most just in respect of
Them, to whom it was spoken.

2. The question is, How this could agree with our Saviors meekness; and how
far we may imitate Him herein? For the clearing whereof we must consider,
that Christ being both God and Man, did perfectly know not only what they
were, discerning the present thoughts and intentions of their hears: but also
by His all-seeing wisdom, as He was God, knew what they would be: that they
would not only not repent of what they had done; but moreover would fill up
the measure of their iniquities, by crucifying Him the Lord of life: knowing
their disease to be thus grievous, He applies this corrosive and smarting
plaster, to free them from that horrible torment of the damnation of Hell. It
did not proceed from any the least disturbance or passion of our Savior; but
only from a tender care of their recovery and welfare to whom He spoke.

As for those, who from this example of our Savior would take a liberty to
themselves to use the like sharp language to them, whom they reprove for their
sins, I would advise them to consider, Whether Christ, who is said to have
taught the people, ^lat. 7.29.
as one having authority, and not as their usual Doctors, be to be imitated in
this, which seems to be a thing extraordinary, grounded upon Christ's
all-seeing knowledge, as he was God as well as Man. And if they object, Cap.
3.7.
that John the Baptist used the like speech to these Pharisees and Sadduces; I
would have them to remember, that John the Baptist was a Prophet, Cap. 11.9.
yea and more than a Prophet. And therefore till they can assure themselves of
God's Spirit in such a plentiful measure, they shall do well, in my
judgment, to use such charitable and brotherly compellations, as the Apostles
and Primitive Fathers use to their hearers. As for my self, I shall not
presume to take to me this liberty, how lawful soever; especially to you, of
whose love to God and care of your own souls I am very well persuaded: But in
all Christian love and meekness ask of you only this necessary question: 4
How can ye 3 Escape the 2 Damnation of 1 Hell?

Which question, that we may fully understand and so be the better able to make
a satisfying answer to our own conscience: we will consider these four
things, as parts which do plainly arise from, and fully comprehend the whole
substance of the Text: 1. That there is a Hell. 2. That there is a Damnation of
Hell. 3. That we may Escape that damnation. 4. How we may escape it.


The two former of which are such manifest truths, so generally acknowledged of
all Christians: that it were needless to prove that there is a Hell, and a
Damnation of that hell; but only as the knowledge and consideration of these
may serve as a means How we may escape the damnation of Hell.

I. That there is a Hell, is a truth, which no Christian will deny, who
professes to believe (and I hope believes as he professes) that Christ for us
men and for our salvation descended into Hell. For, howsoever among the learned
there be some dissent in opinion concerning the manner of His descent, and also
concerning the cause why He descended thither: yet all agree about the thing it
self, that He descended into Hell. And that agreement of theirs, together with
the disagreement about the manner and cause of His descent prove plainly that
He descended into Hell. For, why should they contend about the manner how, and
the cause why He descended into Hell, if He did not descend thither? It is a
good and sound argument used by a holy and learned Father of our Church, to
prove, that the Feast of Easter was universally observed by all Christians;
because there was such a general contention about the-time of celebrating it:
Because that must Be, which must be contended for. And the same will hold in
this case very well. They that so earnestly contend about the cause and manner
of our Savior's descending into Hell, do by that their contention confess,
that they believe that He descended into Hell: and that necessarily supposes
that there is a Hell, into which He did descend. This is a thing which all
Christians believe.

And no mervaile if they do so: Seeing this is common to them, not only with
the Turks and other Mahometans; who as they believe a Paradise (though a most
foolish one) for those of their own superstition: so they believe that there
is a Hell, a place of unsufferable torments for those, who in their opinion do
either believe amiss, or spend their lives in much wickedness: But the very
Pagans themselves do acknowledge a place of torments allotted to the wicked
after this life. The writings of their Philosophers and Poets make often
mention of it. And though the description, which they make thereof be fabulous,
and disagreeing from each other: Yet we know that nothing is so fabulous, but
that it has it is foundation from some truth: And as for their disagreement in
the description of it, it is the less to be admired in them; seeing the
Christian Doctors are of sundry opinions concerning the place and other
circumstances thereof. But as for the thing it self, all, Jews, Christians,
Mahometans, Pagans, all agree in the maine point, that there is a Hell, a place
where wicked and ungodly men are punished for the sins, which they have
committed in this life. In this the Heathens writings and the Holy-Scriptures
do not disagree, that there is a place of torments, that there is a Hell. The
Heathen Philosopher Plato does not much disagree with Justine Martyr the
Christian Philosopher, and the other Fathers, in the description of Hell. But
that there is a place of unconceivable torments prepared for the wicked, in
this they all agree: That as there are joys in Heaven for those that have
lived well; so there is a Hell for the ungodly.

As many as do acknowledge that God is just, and that the soul is immortal,
must needs believe that there is a place of punishment after this life, for
those souls, which have lived wickedly in this life. I am persuaded that no
man who believes that there is a God, will deny that there is a Hell. A lewd
man indeed, who is guilty to himself of much wickedness, may wish that there
were neither God nor Hell to punish him for his wickedness: and such desires
often reiterated may multiply into a persuasion that so it is; that there is
neither God nor Hell. But the most wicked man that is, though he deny it by his
life; yet he cannot choose but believe in his heart, that there is a place where
his wicked deeds shall receive their just reward.

For their sakes therefore I hold it expedient, not to prove that there is a
Hell; but in a more compendious and profitable way to show you what this Hell
is, in such manner as the Ancients have described it unto us. That so the
serious consideration of the horror of that place may deter us from doing
that, which may bring us into it.

I have either heard or read of one, who beholding a picture, where the
torments of the damned were lively represented, the sight thereof caused him to
forsake his former evil courses; and to spend the rest of his life virtuously.
Of another, who seeing a picture, where Corah and his seditious company were
swallowed up alive by the earth, for rebelling against Moses and Aaron;
considering the horror of that punishment, desisted from some traiterous
enterprises, which he had conceived in his heart. Perhaps the consideration of
this dreadful place, occasioned by our discourse thereof, may so far work
upon some, that they desist from their accustomed sins; lest they also come
into this place of torment. For, certainly a sovereign means to prevent
coming into Hell both in body and soul, is, Often to descend thither in our
thoughts and meditations: that by often thinking of it, we may never feel it.

It is written of the Waldenses, that they would not so much as once name the
Devil: such detestation they pretended to have of him and all his works: Which
I do not blame in them; as supposing it to proceed from a sincere love of
piety. But sure it cannot but be a very profitable thing for a Christian, Often
to think upon Hell: That those whom Heaven cannot allure to the love of virtue,
the fear of Hell may deter from sin.

The learned among the Heathen, who have written of this subject, do describe
it in such manner, that they leave nothing unsaid, which the wit and malice of
a merciless Tyrant could invent to torture a miserable Offender. The
punishment of Aridaeus the Tyrant of Pamphilia, who besides many other
villainies, murdered his own Father and Brother, is very lively described by
Plato: The wit of man cannot invent more dreadful torments, than this wicked
Tyrant is feigned to have suffered in Hell.

But the Christian Doctors, grounding their opinion upon the last words of the
Prophet Isaiah, to which our Savior seems to allude, Mark 9.44. express the
pains of Hell by Fire; as that which of all other things does cause the
greatest pain. But this you must observe, that when they name Fire, they mean
not such as is common with us; but such a terrible fire, as this with us scarce
warm in comparison of that. That furnace which Nebuchadnezzer made so hot,
that the flame thereof is said to have ascended nine and forty cubits high,
was but as a hot-bath in respect of this. The pains of Hell are such, that we
may go about to shadow them out by some such things, as are most terrible to
us: but fully to conceive of them as they are indeed, is altogether impossible.
When we tell you of a stinking and dark Lake burning with brimstome, in which
nothing were to be heard, but only the furious raging of hellish Tormentors
and horrible lamentation of damned persons; this is only to express unto you
those torments, which cannot sufficiently be conceived as they are indeed. God
forbid that any of us should ever know what the pains of Hell are: which none
can know, but only they that suffer them. For when you have thought upon all
those hideous torments, which shall be inflicted on the wicked, both in their
bodies and all the senses and members thereof, and in their souls and all the
faculties thereof: yet this may seem tolerable in comparison of another kind of
torment, which shall befall the wicked; which the learned call the pain of
Loss: which is to be deprived for ever and ever of the blessed sight of God
and his holy Angels and Saints, and of those unspeakable joys, which they
partake with God. This is the Loss of all losses: So great a torment to the
damned, that it is not possible for any man to express by words the exceeding
greatness of this grief. So great it is, that Saint Chrysostom says, That if
a thousand fires of hell were joined together in one, they should never be so
great a pain to the soul, as it is for the soul to be separated in this wise
for ever from Almighty God. The final doom of the wicked is this, Luke 13.27.
Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. Only this, Depart from me:
presently follows, There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall
see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God,
and you your selves thrust out. Weeping, for what themselves suffer: Gnashing
of teeth, for indignation that others enjoy the happiness, which they have
lost, and might have obtained. This is it which torments them with unspeakable
grief.

Now if you add hereunto, that these unconceivable pains, both of sense and
loss, shall never have an end; that after many thousands of years are past, a
Sinner is no nearer to the end of his torments, than he was the very first
hour, that he entered into them: This cannot choose but strike the most hard
heart that is into horror: When he shall consider, that if all the lives of
all creatures, that have been from the beginning of the world, with all those
that shall be to the end of it, were (as I may say) spun into one life; it
would be as nothing in respect of Eternity. When you meditate (as I hope you
often do) upon the pains of Hell; do but seriously think upon this one word
Ever: and you need say no more to express the pains of Hell; that they are
endless; Mar. 9.44.
That their worm dies not, neither is their fire quenched. It is the property
of this fire, so to consume, that it does always preserve: And those that are
punished with it, do so die, that they do always live. As the least pain in
Hell is much more grievous, than all the torments, that can be suffered here on
earth: So the Eternity of those pains, and the continual remembrance of it,
is more terrible than all those pains, be they never so many and grievous.

I will not so much wrong this Christian audience, as to go about to prove this
truth unto you; that the pains of hell are Endless: That were to accuse you
as either not knowing or not believing that, which the very Heathen did
acknowledge. To signify this, they feigned one to be carried about continually
in a wheel; another to role a stone to the top of an hill, which still
returned back upon him; others to fill a bottomless tub with water; another to
have his liver devoured by a Vulture all the day long, and in the nightime to
grow again, that it might always be eaten, but never consumed. The Prophet
David seems to make the like allusion, Psalm. 49.14. They lie in hell like
sheep, death gnaweth on them. Signifying, that as the grass which is eaten by
the cattle; springs and grows again; because the root thereof, which is
the beginning of life, still lives: So the damned, being always fed upon by
the devouring fire, shall never die: because their soul, the principal fuel
of this fire, is immortal. Such as their soul is, such shall be their
torments, immortal and endless. The pasture of this field is immortal:
though it be always eaten, it always springs again.

If you demand how it can stand with God's justice to punish a finite sin
with an infinite punishment? Why he who has sinned a few years, should suffer
eternal torments? I answer, that this dealing of God with impenitent sinners
is most just: not only in respect of God, against whom they have sinned; whose
Person is infinite; and therefore the sin against Him deserves the like
punishment; an infinite justice to be satisfied by an infinite torment: But
even in respect of the Sinner himself, the punishment ought to be eternal.
For, the pains of Hell are proportioned not only to the act of a Sinner, which
he has done; but to his will, what he would have done, if he might have lived
for ever. And then what wonder is it, if he that would have sinned against God
everlastingly, if it had been in his power; be everlastingly punished by God,
who has power so to do? God does by him no otherwise, than he would do by
God: Neither are the torments of Hell more grievous to man; than the sins of
man are offensive to God. Sin is as much displeasing to the essence of God,
as torment is grievous to the nature of man. And therefore no mervaile it is,
if God punish that with infinite torment, which is infinitely displeasing to
Him? For, in Hell the condition of the sin and of the Sinner seem to be
somewhat alike, in this respect; that as the sin may always de punished, but
never cleansed: so neither shall the torments in their body ever be ended, nor
the body be extinguished. There the damned shall ever live to die, and ever die
to live. That as there are eternal joys prepared in heaven for those that
love and serve God: so there are everlasting torments ordained in Hell for
those that disobey Him. Which is the Damnation here spoken of: How can ye
Escape the Damnation of Hell?

II. Having showed you not only that there is a Hell, but what this Hell is; I
need not stand to prove that there is a Damnation of this Hell: that will
follow by a necessary consequence. No house is built, but for some Inhabitant;
no punishment is prepared, but for some Offender: If there neither were nor
would be Malefactors, it were needless to build any Prisons. God would never
have made Hell, but that in his infinite wisdom he foresaw that there would be
some, who would deserve it, how intolerable so ever it were. There have been,
and are some so malicious and obstinate in their sins, that Hell it self, if
it were not infinitely miserable, were not miserable enough to punish them for
their wickedness.

The Heathen who did acknowledge a Hell, did believe that there was a
Condemnation of all such, as had lived wickedly in this life. Those three
Kings, Aeacus, Minos, and Radamanthus, who were famous for their justice here
on earth, were therefore feigned to have been Judges in the other world; and to
have rewarded each man according to his deserts: the virtuous with fair
Elysian fields, and the wicked with burning and stinking rivers. For, seeing
many who had committed notorious wickedness, as murder, adultery, rapine, and
the like heinous offenses, not only to suffer no punishment in this life, but
even to enjoy great prosperity all their life long; they did conclude (as well
they might) that there was some time and place, when and where God would
execute upon them the effects of His justice, and reward them according to
their doings.

This opinion of theirs is very agreeable to the Christian doctrine, which
teaches that justice is as proper to God as mercy: that as by the one he does
reward the Godly with the joys of Heaven; so by the other, he does punish the
Wicked with the eternal torments of Hell and Damnation.

Paravit coelum, sed paravit and tartarum, etc. God, says Saint Cyprian, has
prepared heaven, but he has also prepared hell, (the one for the good, the
other for the bad.) He has prepared everlasting rest; but he has also
prepared everlasting torments: He has prepared unconceivable light; but he
has also prepared the unspeakable darkness of a perpetual night. As there
are good and bad; sheep and goats: so there is heaven and hell. Unto the
eternal joys of the one the good are mercifully Elected: unto the endless
miseries of the other the wicked are justly Condemned. The Catholic Faith
admits of a just Condemnation to the pains of hell, as well as of a merciful
Election to the joys of heaven. Whereof the one depends on Gods mercy, the
other on his justice: And they that deny either the one or the other of these
two estates, do rob God of one of his essential properties.

If you ask me, Who they are that shall suffer this Damnation of hell? I will
tell you in brief not only who they are, but also why they are Damned. Who they
are that shall suffer these pains of hell? the Prophet David tells us in
general terms, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the
people that forget God. All wicked and impenitent Sinners shall be Damned;
because they forget God, and neglect to serve Him, and fulfill his commands.
But to speak more particularly; The first that was cast into hell was Lucifer:
And the cause why, was his disobedience of God, arising from his abominable
pride. The Devil was the first Rebel; and for that rebellion lost his part in
the unconceiable joys of heaven; and suffered the eternal pains of hell: And
they that take part with him in that or any other sin, shall be sure to
suffer the same punishment, that he and his Angels do. Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: That is the
doom of the wicked pronounced by our Savior at the last judgment; as you may
see, Mat. 25.41. It was prepared for the Devil and his Angels: even all those
that disobey God's commands, and prefer their own will before His. For, The
whole and only cause of Damnation, says Tertullian, is (Perversa
administratio conditionis a conditis) the ill-managing of the Creation by the
Creatures: that they are the things of this world, not according to God's
commands, but according to their own will. Which gave just occasion to one of
the ancient Fathers to say, That nothing does burn in hell, so much as the
stuborne will of a Sinner.

And hence it is, that the sin of an obstinate and impenitent mind is
punished eternally, although committed in time, and that perhaps a short time;
because that which was short in acting, was long in respect of his stuborne
will. So that if such Sinners should never die, they would never leave off to
sin; yea, they would always live, that they might always sin. As in this
life they would not cease from sin; although God did exhort, threaten,
entreat, and use all means possible: So in the other life God will not leave
off to punish them, although they howl and lament grievously.

But that which makes the torments of the Damned to be endless, is a
continual hatred which they have of Almighty God, whose justice thus punishes
them. And as long as they continue to hate God, what mervaile is it, if God
persevere to punish them? As their sin is, so likewise is their punishment
without any end. Then shall that be truly fulfilled, which is written, Revel.
9.6. In those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall
desire to die, and death shall flee from them. Never was sleep so welcome to a
drowsy head, Jer. 51.57.
as death (such as the Prophet Jeremie calls, a perpetual sleep) would be to
those tormented souls. It would be, as Justine Martyr calls it, (...), an
unexpected gain. For, never did any condemned wretch at the hour of death so
much desire life, as the Damned amidst their everliving torments do desire
death; such a death, as might deprive them of all manner of being: They would
most willingly cease to Be, on condition that they might not be thus
miserable. Faction may drive men into strange opinions little less than
blasphemy: such as their's is who affirm, that it is better to be eternally
miserable, than not to be at all. But our Savior's doctrine will always be
true, Mat. 26.24.
that it had been good for such men, if they had never been borne: that they
never had any being at all.

It is in a case far more tolerable, only in respect of the miseries of this
life, that Job wishes, Job 3.16.
That he had been as an hidden untimely birth, that he had not been, as Infants
which never saw light: Accounting it much better not to have been at all, than
to suffer the miseries of this short and transitory life. How much more were it
to be desired by the Damned, that they had no being at all, than that they
should always suffer the unspeakable torments of endless burnings?

It is not more certain that I speak, or that you do hear; than it is sure
that there is such a Damnation of Hell; and that the pains thereof are more
dreadful, than any tongue is able to utter, or any heart to conceive. But the
greatest of all those torments is that which I have already told you, and do
willingly touch it once again, to the end that you may always remember it,
That after many thousand millions of ages the Damned are no nearer to the end
of their torments, than they were the very first minute, that they entered into
them. Once into Hell, and never out: Then we cannot, but now we may Escape this
Damnation of Hell.

III. For, unless there were a possibility for them, to whom Christ spoke, to
Escape this damnation of which He speaks; He would never have preached this
Doctrine to them. The end of Christ's preaching was the same which ought to be
of all ours: not to tell men that they are unavoidably damned; but to teach
them how they may be saved; to show them the means, how they may escape this
damnation.

The manner of speech which Christ here uses by way of question does not argue
an absolute impossibility, but only a a great difficulty to Escape this
damnation of hell. Although straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that
leads unto life, Mat. 7.14.
and few there be that find it: yet some there are that find it; and our fault
it is, and only ours, if we be not some of those few, who find that way to
heaven, and so escape this damnation of hell.

For, God would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth: They are Saint Paul's own words, 1 Timothy 2.4. Seeing his will is that all
men should be saved, questionless he has not absolutely decreed, that any man
should be peremptorily damned: These two imply no less than a mere
contradiction.

God forbid that Satan should so far possess the heart of any man, as to
persuade him, that it were impossible for him to Escape the damnation of hell;
this were to make him cast off all the means, which God in his word has
prescribed to that end. This were to make all the exhortations, admonitions,
promises and threatenings of God to be of none effect. For, why should God
propose unto men, or why should they use the means of obtaining salvation, if
it be not possible for them to Escape damnation.

God's promises are true, and his threatenings serious: As he is not mocked, so
neither does he mock any man, when he tells him, Ezekiel. 18.28.
that if he resent, and turn from all his transgressions, he shall surely
live, he shall not die. God does not will death, not the death of any man, not
the death of a wicked man. Those Infidels that will not believe God upon his
word, may hear him confirm this truth with an oath, Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live,
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live.

It is Gods will that all men should Escape this damnation: that some Escape it,
is his great mercy: but that many fall into it, Wisd. 1.13. Verse. 16.
is from their own hard and impenitent heart, which will not lay hold on
Christ, and use those means, which God mercifully affords unto them. God
made not death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the living. But
ungodly men with their works and words called it unto them. And as for Hell, it
was prepared, not for us men Primarily.
, but for the Devil and his Angels. It is the observation of one of the ancient
Fathers upon those words of Christ, Mat. 25.41. So general, that it is
contradicted by none of them all.

But I may seem to wrong this Christian auditory; in that I insist upon the
confirmation of that which I am persuaded none here will, because I am sure
none should deny. This I dare assure you confidently, that there is not any one
of you, to whom I speak, but may Escape this damnation; if he will use the
means requisite thereunto: And that is the next and last particular, of which
I am to treat: How we may Escape, etc.

IV. I doubt not but that this point of doctrine, will be glad tidings to every
Christian's heart: Every one that believes (as every Christian ought to
believe) that there is a Hell, would be very willing to escape the eternal
damnation of it.

And the first means to escape this damnation Hell is this:

1. Steadfastly to believe that there is such a place of torments, where all
wicked and impenitent Sinners shall be punished eternally.

Let it not seem strange to any, that I propose the belief of Hell as a
means to avoid it. For, certainly if men did steadfastly believe that there are
eternal torments prepared for the wicked, they would not live thus wickedly.
It was a just complaint of one of the Heathen, that in his time, when
wickedness did greatly abound, the opinion of Hell was accounted as a Fable
only to affright little Children. And it is to be doubted, that even among
them that profess the Name of Christ, there are too many, who would willingly
persuade themselves, that the torments of Hell are but a fiction, a thing
invented only to deter men from sin. For, can we imagine that a foul
Adulterer, a profane Swearer, a common Drunkard, a covetous Usurer, or any the
like wicked man, who perseveres in his known sins, would commit those
sins, if he did seriously believe that he should suffer such punishment?
Would he incur the eternal pains of Hell, for a moment of sinful pleasure?
Doubtless he would not commit the one, if he did believe the other.

2. Especially if he did Often and seriously Meditate upon it: Which is a
second and that a very sovereign means to Escape this damnation of Hell. For,
certainly (as I have told you already) a very effectual means to prevent our
descending into Hell in body and soul, is, Often to descend thither in our
thoughts and meditations. He that does steadfastly believe, that there is such a
place of torment prepared for the wicked, and also frequently meditate upon the
eternal horror of that place, can hardly commit that finne, which should bring
him into that place of intolerable and endless torment.

It was the just complaint of Saint Cyprian in his time, and it will fit ours
much better: Nemo futurorum metum cogitat, etc. No man does think upon the
fear of those things that are to come, the day of the Lord and the anger of
God: No man does consider the punishments, which shall be inflicted on the
wicked, and the eternal torments, which are appointed for Unbelievers. Which
our conscience would fear, if it did believe: Because it does not at all
believe it, it does not fear: But if it did believe it, it would beware of it:
if it would take heed of it, it would escape it. Where you see, that a good
means to escape Hell, is to believe, that there is such a place of horrible
torments, and often to think upon the horror thereof. This, if any thing will
prevail with us, is most likely to restrain us from sin, and consequently
preserve us from damnation. For, I am strongly of Saint Bernard's opinion; that
nothing does preserve us so free from sin, as does the Love of God and the
Fear of Hell. As one nail does drive out another: so the fire of Hell does
oftentimes expel the fire of lust; and suffers us not to commit that, which
would make us liable to eternal damnation.

If we would often call to mind and seriously ponder in our hearts that
question which is asked by some, Isa. 33.14. Who among us shall dwell with the
devouring sire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? It is very
likely that we would use all possible means to escape that devouring fire,
those everlasting burnings? And let no man think it an irksome thing to
meditate upon so dismal a subject. It is much better to be troubled with the
thought of it here, than to be stung with the torment of it hereafter. For, if
it be grievous to think on it only, how intolerable will be to suffer it for
ever? Think upon Hell often, and you will not so often commit sin. By
frequent and serious meditation upon Hell you are in a right way to avoid
sin, and by avoiding sin to escape damnation.

Often present unto your selves the dreadful countenance of that just and angry
Judge, who will condemn all impenitent Sinners to suffer eternal torments.
Think upon that countenance, at which the Angels themselves cannot choose but
tremble. Consider the unspeakable pains of that devouring fire, those
everlasting burnings: and above all consider that they are everlasting, that
shall never have an end: Meditate upon these things often, and consider them
seriously, and this meditation will prove a sovereign preservative against
sin and damnation.

3. But you must be careful to use your utmost endeavor to eschew all the
allurements of the Devil, whereby he labors to draw men into perdition:
Luke 13.24.
and strive you must to enter in at the straight gate, which leads into the
kingdom of heaven, how straight so ever it be. Let not the honors, wealth of
pleasures of this world divert you from that way, and draw you into that broad
way, which leads unto destruction. This is a most profitable and necessary
means to avoid the damnation of Hell; when we shun all those things which are
likely to bring us thither. He that will escape the eternal torments of the
life to come, must carefully avoid the unlawful pleasures of this present life.

I think it not unprofitable in this point to relate unto a discurse, which I
have read, between a Friar and a young Gallant: The young Man seeing the Friar
go barefoot and to look pale with fasting, asked him, why he did undergo all
this austerity, and deprive himself of the pleasures of this world? The Friar
answered him, that he did it to the end, that he might thereby appease God's
anger, and to escape the eternal torments of Hell. But, says the young Man,
what if there be no Hell: art not thou then a great fool, who do do and
suffer all this to no purpose? To which the Friar replies; But if there be, as
I verily believe there is a Hell, a place of unsufferable and endless
torments, is not your worship a greater Fool, who to enjoy the sinful
pleasures of this world for a short season, do hazard the eternal damnation
of your body and soul? And indeed what greater madness can there be, than to
refuse the short pains, which are to be undergone by those that will live
godly in this life, and choose the everlasting punishment prepared for the
Devil? Think upon the grievous pains of Hell; and you will think no pain
grievous, which is undergone for the love of God and a good conscience. The
assured hope which we have to escape that dreadful torment, will make all the
exercises of religion, how irksome soever to flesh and blood, to seem light
unto us.

4. A fourth means to escape the damnation of Hell, is To keep our selves in
the unity of God's Church: that Church which we believe to be the Holy and
Catholic. Holy, in the practice of all godliness; Catholic, in the
unanimous profession of the true faith: Whereof the one excludes all profane
and wicked Livers, the other all Schismatics and Mis-believers. In this Church
and the communion thereof if we preserve our selves, by living righteously and
believing aright, we need not fear but that we may and shall escape the
damnation of Hell.

Of this Church, not of the Church of Rome, or any particular Congregation
whatsoever, but of this Holy and Catholic Church is Saint Cyprian to be
understood; That he cannot have God for his Father, who has not the Church for
his Mother: and that other; That without the Church there is no salvation. As
at the first destruction of the world for sin, all that were found out of the
Arc perished by water: So at the last day all that shall be found out of the
Church (whereof the Arc was a type) shall be destroyed by everlasting fire.
But, as many as shall be found within the Church shall be free from the
damnation of Hell. Of this Holy and Catholic Church is that promise to be
understood, which our Savior made, Mat. 16.18. That the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it: neither against it, nor any member of it. Whosoever
does abide in the unity of this Church, shall never come into the condemnation
of eternal fire.

5. And all this by means of Faith in Christ and his merits: who for our sakes
descended into Hell, that we might never come there. For, by virtue of Christ's
death, and passion, and his glorious resurrection from death and hell, we are
made free from the one and the other; both from the power of death and the
torments of hell. If we be members of Christ, we shall together with Him
partake of eternal bliss and glory. Because, Wisd. 3.1.
the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment
touch them. No torment shall touch them, because they are the members of
Christ: who has satisfied for us, whatsoever we should have suffered: Who has
the keys of Hell and of death; Revel. 1.18.
that neither Death nor Hell should prevail over us.

Let us seriously consider these things in our hearts: That there are eternal
torments prepared for all those, that sin against God, and repent not of
those sins.

6. This very consideration is a sufficient motive to work is us a (1) Serious
and (2) Speedy Repentance.

1. Serious, considering we believe the torments of Hell to be, as they are
indeed endless and intolerable. If we steadfastly believe and seriously
consider this; we will not esteem any thing of this world, which may endanger
our estate of eternity. Let them take care of this present life, and of the
transitory goods of this world, who have no hope to enjoy the life to come, and
the everlasting pleasures thereof. Let them take their pleasure in this world,
who have no hope to escape the pains of the other.

2. So likewise will it work in us a Speedy Repentance; not suffering us to
delay the time; lest the damnation due to our sins should overtake us, before
we have repented of them. Considering, that we cannot begin too soon to
prevent that which shall never have an end. This should be our first and only
care, that we may escape this damnation: We should regard nothing in comparison
of this. We should be careful of falling into this fire; that we should beware
of every action that we do, every word that we speak, and every thought that
we think; lest it should prove unto us an occasion of falling into sin, and
so into hell.

If of all the posterity of Adam there should but one only man suffer these
horrible torments, of which we have spoken; yet ought we to be exceeding
careful, every one of us ought to beware, lest it might be his lot to suffer
them. How much more careful ought we to be, seeing the number of those that
perish is infinite, and few there be that shall be saved? Seeing scarce one of
ten thousand shall escape this damnation, what manner of men ought we to be in
all holy and virtuous conversation? 1 Pet. 4.18.
For, If the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and Sinners
appear? Ought not every one of us (us, who are guilty of many and grievous
sins, ought not we) to use all possible means to escape this damnation?
Ought we not earnestly to enquire with the young man, Mat. 19.16. What good
thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life? With the Jailer, Act. 16.30.
What must I do to be saved?

Suppose this question to be proposed to us, any of us in particular, as it was
to the Scribes and Pharisees: How can Ye? ye Adulterers, ye Drunkards, ye
Blasphemers, ye covetous, ye malicious, ye envious, ye Schismatics, ye
Traitors, ye Hypocrites, ye sacrilegious Robbers of God and his Church, ye that
are guilty of these many and grievous sins, or of any of them, or of any like
unto them. How can Ye Escape this Damnation of Hell? Impossible it is for you
to escape these torments, which I have described; unless ye use the means,
which I have prescribed unto you.

Now God of his infinite mercy assist us with his Holy Spirit, that we may use
those means, and so escape this damnation. Amen.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

The End.

