All worthy Commanders, Officers, Soldiers, Citizens and Inhabitants of
London, and the places adjoining, who have in any kind or measure assisted the
Parliament in the late or present War, and do still cordially desire the
Freedom and Peace of the Commonwealth, and therein, your own safety and
Prosperity.
YE are most earnestly desired to consider the violent and imperious
disposition of those whom ye have opposed, how extremely they despise you, how
exceedingly they are provoked against you, what bloody Plots they have
heretofore laid to murder and massacre you, your wives and Children.

Consider, what cruelty they used to prisoners, when they had hopes to prevail
against you. As those taken at Bramford, driving them like so many beasts
before them to Ox^ord; then at Wood house in the West, where, in cold blood
they hanged up 14. upon a Tree, then at Cissiter, from whence they drove
diverse, both Minuters and others bare-foote and bare-legg'd, in a most cruel
manner to Oxford, where, their and other honest men's usage in time of their
imprisonment was most barbarous; and how ye should have been used, if ye had
been overcome by them, as they have been by you and your adherents, ye may more
then guess by these and the like examples.

Ye see, all the favor they have found, works nothing with them, but they
still manifest upon-all occasions a most deally hatred against you, ye see,
they are ever plotting and contriving mischief what Treaty was there ever with
them, that was not accompanied with some treacherous Plot, as (if, you
remember* a Treaty went immediately before their uncexpected approach to
Bramford? Also 0529 V 3 a Treary ushered in the bloody Plot of Tomkins and
Challoner, and a Treaty at Vxbridge, some that then played buoty and persuaded
the King to a personal Treaty at Westmi^ster, as the only means to obtain his
ends, and which had been then effected, had things been ripe enough for the
purpose.

But of late, living amongst you, they have by their arts and policies brought
the Parliament into contempt, and the Army into hatred, and have gotten many of
their friends into Parliament, and other places of fruit, and raised jealousies
and discontents in all places, and wroughe the poorer and more ignorant sort of
people into an humor of rising, crying up the King, and cursing the
Parliament: now, they judge a personal Treaty would soon make them absolute
Masters over you, and if ye rightly, weign the temper of the times, ye will
find they are not mistsken: But by whose means have they endeavored the
procurement of the same? even by the means of seeming friends, viz. diverse
Aider. men, and Common-Councelmen, with some Officers of the Trained Bands.

By which it appears, there are many in all places that play booty, like decoy
Ducks, and have agreed to bring you in love with a personal Treaty, thereby to
lead you into the next prepared for your destruction, when themselves shall be
highly rewarded for their Treachery.

Therefore, as ye love the liberty of your Country, the cause ye have
maintained, your own, or your wives and Childrens lives and estaces, be speedy
and resolved for prevention, by letting your Officers of your Trained Bands,
your Common-Councelmen and Aldermen know, that ye apprehend both danger and
treachery therein, and that their importunate laboring for the same, is to
animate and give eneouragement to the tumumuous Risings and Revolting of Ships.
ye must therefore signify to them, that ye will seek out some other more ^ake
ways to compass the Peace and Prosperity of the Nation, and that in the mean
time, ye will make bold to decline their Councels, and adhere to and assist the
Army, under the Command of the Lord Fairfax, in subduing all forces lately
raised by Goring and others, to disturb the proceedings of Paliament, the
Peace of the Commonwealth, or to enfore a personal Treaty.

Do this speedily and prosper, defer it, and be for ever miserable.

Learn by Colchester, what it is to have bad Magistrates and Officers, and be
warned whom ye trust, by the mischief brought upon them.


