TWO LETTERS FROM The Fleet at Sea, Touching the late FIGHT:

The one Written by General MONCK to the Commissioners of the Admiralty
sitting at Whitehall.

The other by Capt BOVRN, Captain of the Resolution to his Wife.

In which Fight General DEANE is killed by a great shot, and a Dutch Admiral
blown up, and 3, or 4, of their ships sunk.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, dwelling in Thamestreet, over against
Baynards-Castle, MDCLIII.

TWO Letters from the Fleet at Sea, Touching the late Fight.
Gentlemen,
YEsterday morning being at Anchor some 10 miles without the South-head of the
Gober, early in the morning we discryed the Dutch Fleet, about two Leagues to
the Leeward. We made sail toward them, and between eleven and twelve at noon
we were engaged; and for three hours the dispute was very sharp on both sides;
which continued from three till six in the evening; at which time the enemy
bore away right before the wind, and little more was done; only the Frigates
gave chase so long as there was any light to distinguish one from another.

One of the Dutch Admirals was blown up, and three or four sunk, as we are
informed. We cannot hear that any of our own ships was lost in this engagement,
blessed be the Lord.

We are at this time again very fair by them, and shall endeavor our utmost to
engage them as soon as we can.

It has pleased the Lord to take away General Dean in the fight, an honest and
faithful servant of the Commonwealth. He was slain by a great shot.

In this Engagement we have spent the greatest part of our powder and shot; and
therefore I earnestly desire you will take care that a considerable proportion
may be suddenly provided for us and sent, with such Victuals and Waterships as
are yet behind

What ships are making ready in the River, may as soon as can be sent.

This is the best account can be given at present.

Your most affectionate Friend and Servant GEO. MONCKE.
From aboard the Resolution, 14 Leagues from the Northforeland bearing west of
us, June 3. 1653. at 6 in the morning.
Col: Bourns Letter to his wife.
Dear Heart,
OUr Engagement was Yesterday. about two of the clock in the Afternoon. This
time, at ten of the clock in the morning, we are in pursuit of Dutch, who, if
they will stay, I hope we shall by Gods Providence make an end of the War. And
I hope we shall Engage the Enemy within an hour and less.

From Aboard the Resolution, 14 Leagues off the Northforeland, the 3 of June,
1653. about East, and East by South. Our Master, and Lieutenant, and all the
other Officers are well, but General Dean was taken off by a great shot.

Your loving Husband John Bourn.



FINIS.

