A Letter sent by General MONCK To Vice Admiral GOODSON to be communicated to
the rest of the Officers of the Fleet, in Answer to a Letter with some
Proposals lately sent to Him from Them.
Dear Contrymen and Comrades,
I Am glad that you have not forgotten your old friend, and that by this
occasion, I have such advantage to hear of your hearty affections to me, and
kind remembrance of me, and that you have such a deep sense of the divisions
amongst us, and the miserable consequence thereof; but I am very much saded
that you have entertained such mistakes and misapprehensions of of our
proceedings. These enclosed Papers will fully certefie you, that we have just
grounds of dissatisfaction, and that we cannot comply with such violent and
unwarrantable undertakings, both against our reason as men, and against our
Consciences as Christians, that you and we should take our Commissions and pay
from the Parliament and yet to violate their Authority, after such solemn
assurances of obedience and faithfulness, contrary to the expressed word of
God, and our own late Addresses, I hope I am so well known to some of you, that
I am none of those that seek great things to my self, or delight in the sheding
the blood of English men, much less of Christian Brethren, but to preserve the
name of God from blasphemy and reproach, which our actings (I wish I could not
call them) treacherousness and perfidiousness have occasioned; whereby Jesus
Christ and his truth have been evil spoken of, which makes our very lives
bitter to us, and to assert the integrity and honor of this Army, which is
very dear to me, I have been forced with the Parliaments Army under my command,
(though with much grief of heart) to bear our Testimony against the late
violence of the Army; and the reasons thereof you will find in our printed
papers, and our endeavors to persuade them in England to remove that force
which they have put upon the Parliament. As to your Proposals, I beseech you
seriously to consider and lay to heart these following Answers.

1. To the first, you are pleased to intimate the joy of the Cavaliers that
they see us stand to our Declaration, but I believe, that this violent
interruption of the Parliament was the greatest courtesy to gratify that
Family and Interest that could be imagined in the World, (and I could wish it
were not designed). I should be very sad to strengthen and hands of of the
wicked, but let me assure you, this arises from the slanders and calumnies
which men cast upon us in England, as if we that assert the Authority of those
that brought the late King to the Block, are for introducing that Family, which
I take God to witness, we in our very thoughts abhor, and shall spend our
blood in opposition to any Single person whatsoever.

2. You are pleased to compaire our present differences to that of the
Israelites, with the two Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half the Tribe of Manasses)
and I earnestly pray that there may be the same issue, for if they will restore
these persons to their lawful Authority which have been established by many
successes, and for the difference of which they so lately hazarded to blood, we
shall quietly sit down and wait upon the providence of God in our places and
Stations, and to this end we have sent Commissioners into England, men
faithful and approved, what you are pleased to instance concerning my
satisfaction in the year 1653. When this Parliament was interrupted formerly, I
shall answer you to that, it was never in my Conscience to go out of Gods way
under the pretense of doing Gods work, and you know the variety of times does
much vary the nature of affairs, and what might then patiently be submitted
unto, we being engaged with a foreign Enemy in a bloody War cannot be drawn
into a president at this time; after our Repentance and assurance of Loyalty
and Constancy; you may be pleased to remember that the consequence of the
former Interruptions was the Introduction of a single person, and a manifest
breach of all our promises and engagements, so that if God blessed me with
success, then I do much more through mercy expect it now, when I put all to
hazard for the Glory of God and the good of his people.

3. I do acknowledge that the Army has been in the hand of God and instruments
of good to these Nations, yet if they shall apostate from the Cause of God and
his people in exposing them to Arbitrary Power, and the wills of men, in taking
upon them to Abollish Laws, raise money without consent of the people, destroy
Ministry and property, and force Parliaments, I cannot but witness against
such proceedings as unwarrantable not suited to any rule either from God or man.

4. I have taken care by Garrisons in this Country, and assurance from the
whole body of the Nation, that they will not own the interest of Charles
Stewart, and that they will preserve the peace of the Commonwealth in obedience
to the Parliament; So that if that part of the Army in England will set up a
distinct Interest in the Nation, in deserting that Cause that has been so
precious to us, and cost so much blood and treasure for to establish their own
interest and greatness. I do declare in the presence of the Great God I cannot
own you, nor join with them; Now having opened my heart to you, and as you
know my plainness and sincerety, that I am none of those that dare assert any
thing against my Conscience, from that experience ye have had of me, I heartily
beg your belief and credit, that I shall keep in the way of duty and endeavor
to do the Lords work in my Generation, and shall not own any corrupt interest
whatsoever, and do desire of God his blessing according to my Integrity in this
undertaking, having this good Testimony in my own Spirit, that I have nothing
but public and Righteous ends upon my heart, and by all these respects and
kindnesses that I have received from you, I desire you will join with us in
your desires that this Parliament may be restored to the execution of their
duties and trust, with freedom and honor; I have no more but my hearty Love
and service to you all, desiring God to bless you all, and make you happy
instruments for the good of these Nations in your several places which shall
be always the Prayer of dear Friends.

Edinburgh, November. 29. 1659. Your Humble Servant and fellow Soldier, G. M.

To the Right Honorable Vice Admiral Goodson, to be Communicated to the rest
of the Officers of the Fleet, in Answer to the Letter that was sent to me from
them.
London Printed by John Johnson.


