A LETTER FROM THE Lord Genesis Monck, TO Major General OVERTON: Together with
Mayor Genesis Overtons Answer thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by James Cottrel. 1660.

SIR,
BEing through the good providence of God, now at York taking care for the
Affairs of the Parliament in these parts; and the condition of the Garrison of
Hull being somewhat doubtfully respresented to me; seeing I can yet meet with
no person that can assure me, that you have yet declared for the Parliament now
sitting at Westminster: I have thought it meet to send this Messenger, that so
I might receive satisfaction in that point, and so all grounds of suspicion and
jealousy might be prevented; which will not be avoided otherwise then by a
full and free Declaration of your obedience to the Parliament in their present
constitution: in expectation of a satisfactory answer in this particular, I
remain

Your very loving Friend and Servant, George Monck.
York, 12 Jan. 1659.
Right Honorable,
YOurs of the 12 Current from York I have received, by the hands of my old
friend Adjutant Genesis Smith, and do perceive that Report renders Hull as
doubtful to you, as it did your design dangerous to us and others: but I am
very glad to hear that you adhere to this Parliament in their present
constitution, against the readmission of the secluded Members, a free
Parliament or single Person; one of which has continually been charged upon
you, as the common cry of your Army. For my own part, however any airy rumor
may have represented me, yet both my Actions and Words before and since the
Parliaments interruption, have so sufficiently declared my adherence to them in
opposition to that invasion made upon them; that for me to bring up the Rear of
verbal Testimonies by an ex post facto Declaration, when I have not concurred
with or countenanced any thing, that has in the least derogated from your
Authority or the Trust reposed in me, is very much below me, who have ever
opposed Faithfulness to Flattery, and endeavored to be found in practice
rather then profession. But I suppose the Parliament have by this time received
satisfaction from what I have signified of my continued adherence to them; and
besides, I have sent up my Major personally to represent to them the same, and
how difficult it was for us, to preserve this place by any other procedure then
what was our practice here: wherein upon the one hand I was very careful to
decline any thing which owned the Army in their force, so on the other hand
(their interest here overleaping me) I was necessitated to walk so warily (by
some circumstantial condescentions to them) that they might not have
opportunity to out me; which was designed, by an intention to secure both me
and my Major. I have enclosed to you a Copy of that Letter I sent to the
General Council of Officers in opposition to their Address for Genesis Officers:
which with my declining concurring with any of their proceeds, subscribing any
of their Papers, refusing their Commissions, withstanding their Commands,
forcing out two Companies (after my own came from Scotland, commanded by their
Creatures) turning back one of my Lord Lamberts Troops, which he sent for the
security of this place; and calling in Major Acklams, whom I could better
confide in; refusing to give my approbation to their Writs sent down for
electing Members, are my witnesses that my works have not denied, but all along
declared for the Parliament, in whose Cause I have been and am, as deeply
concerned as others, both by active and passive obedience; and shall not cease
further to testify my faithfulness to them therein, according to the tenor of
our Engagements, remaining

Right Honorable, Your assured and humble Servant, Rob. Overton.
Hull, Jan. 13. 1659.
FINIS.

