THE SPEECH AND DECLARATION OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE LORD GENERAL MONCK

Delivered at White Hall upon Tuesday the 21. of February 1659. To the Members
of Parliament at their meeting there, before the Readmission of the Formerly
Secluded Members into the Parliament House.

Ordered by his Excellency the Lord General that this Speech and Declaration
be forthwith printed and published.

Will: Clark Secretary.

Entered in the Stationers Hall according to Order.

London, Printed by S. Griffin, for John Playford at his shop in the Temple
near the Church. 1659.

THE SPEECH OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE LORD GENERAL MONCK,
Delivered to the Members of Parliament met at White Hall on Tuesday the 21. of
Febr. 1659. GENTLEMEN,
YOu are not I hope, ignorant, what Care and Endeavors have been used, and
Means essayed, for healing the breaches of our Divisions amongst our selves,
and that in order thereunto diverse Conferences have been procured between you,
though to small effect; yet having at length received fuller satisfaction from
these worthy Gentlemen that were secluded then formerly; I was bold to put you
all to the trouble of this meeting, that I might open my self to you all, even
with more freedom then formerly: but least I might be misapprehended or
mistaken, as of late it befell me, I have committed to writing the Heads of
what I intended to discourse to you, and desire it may be read openly to you
all.

THE DECLARATION OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE LORD GENERAL MONCK.
Delivered at White Hall, upon Tuesday the 21. of February 1659. Gentlemen
IT appears unto me, by what I have heard from you and the whole Nation, that
the Peace and happy Settlement of these bleeding Nations, next under God, lies
in your hands. And when I consider that Wisdom, Piety, and Self denial, which I
have reason to be confident, lodges in you, and how great a share of the
Nations sufferings will fall upon you, in case the Lord deny us now a
Settlement, I am in very good hopes there will be found in you all, such
melting bowels toward these poor Nations, and toward one another, that you
will become healers and makers up of all its woeful Breaches. And that such an
opportunity may clearly appear to be in your hands, I thought good to assure
you, and that in the presence of God, that I have nothing before my eyes but
Gods Glory, and the settlement of these Nations, upon Commonwealth
Foundations. In pursuit whereof I shall think nothing too dear; And for my own
particular I shall throw my self down at your feet to be any thing or nothing
in order to these great Ends. As to the way of future Settlement, far be it
from me to impose any thing, I desire you may be in perfect Freedom; Only give
me leave to mind you, that the old Foundations are by Gods Providence so
broken, that in the eye of Reason, they cannot be restored but upon the ruins
of the people of these Naons, that have engaged for their Rights, in defense of
the Parliament, and the great and main ends of the Covenant, for uniting and
making the Lords name One in the three Nations: And also the Liberty of the
peoples Representatives in Parliament will be certainly lost; For if the people
find, that after so long and bloody a War against the King for breaking in upon
their Liberties, yet at last he must be taken in again, it will be out of
question, and is most manifest, he may for the future govern by his Will,
dispose of Parliaments and Parliament Men as he pleases, and yet the people
will never more rise for their assistance.

And as to the interests of this famous City (which has been in all ages the
Bulwork of Parliaments, and unto whom I am for their great affection so deeply
engaged) Certainly it must lie in a Commonwealth; That Government only, being
capable to make them (through the Lords blessing) the Metropolis and Bank of
Trade for all Christendom, whereunto God and Nature has fitted them above all
others.

And as to a Government in the Church, the want whereof has been no small
cause of these Nations distractions; It is most manifest, that if it be
Monarchical in the State, the Church must follow, and Prelacy must be brought
in, which these Nations I know cannot bear, and against which they have so
solemnly Sworn.

And indeed moderate not rigid Presbyterian Government, with a sufficient
Liberty for Consciences truly tender, appears at present to be the most
indifferent and acceptable way to the Churches Settlement.

The main thing that seems to lie in the way, is the Interest of the Lords,
even of those Lords who have showed themselves noble indeed, by joining with
the people; and in defense of those just rights, have adventured their dearest
blood and large estates. To that I shall only say, that though the state of
these Nations be such, as cannot bear their sitting in a distinct House; yet
certainly, the wisdom of Parliament will find out such Hereditary marks of
honor for them, as may make them more Noble in after ages.

Gentlemen, upon the whole matter, the best result that I can make at present
for the peace of these Nations, will be in my opinion, that you forthwith go to
sit together in Parliament: In order,

1. To the settling the conduct of the Armies of the three Nations in that
manner, as they may be serviceable to the peace and safety of them, and not to
its own and the Nations ruin, by Faction and Division.

2. To the providing sufficient maintenance for them; That is, for the Forces
by Land, and for the Navy by Sea, and all their arrears of both, and other
contingencies of the government.

3. To the appointing a Council of State with Authority, to settle the Civil
Government and Judicatories in Scotland and Ireland, and to take care, for the
issuing of Writs, for the summoning a Parliament of these 3 Nations united, to
meet at Westminster the 20 day of April next, with such qualifications as may
secure secure the Public cause we are all engaged in, and according to such
Distributions, as were used in the year 1654. Which Parliament so called, may
meet and act in Freedom, for the more full establishing of this Commonwealth,
without a King, single Person, or House of Lords.

4. To a legal Dissolution of this Parliament to make way for succession of
Parliaments.

And in order to these good ends, the Guards will not only willingly admit you,
but faithfully both my self, and every the Officers under my command, and (I
believe) the Officers and Soldiers of the three Nations will spend their blood
for you and successive Parliaments.

If your Conjunction be directed to this end, you may part honorably, having
made a fair step to the settlement of these Nations, by making a way for
successive Parliaments.

But I must needs say, that if any different councels should be taken (which I
have no reason to fear;) these Nations would presently be thrown back into
force and violence, and all hopes of this much desired establishment buried in
disorder, which the Lord in his great mercy I hope will prevent. And so God
speed you well together, and unite your hearts for the preservation of Peace
and settlement of these Nations to his own Glory and yours and all our Comforts.

FINIS.

