A LETTER Sent to the Right Worshipful, William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker in
THE COMMONS House of Parliament, From the Major of Bristoll and others, whose
Names are hereunto subscribed.

Intimating the free Benevolence of the City of Bristoll, for the relief of the
Protestants in IRELAND.

Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
Printed and published.

Hen: Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the
middle Temple. May 5. 1643.

A Letter sent from the Major of Bristoll, to the Speaker of the House of
COMMONS.
SIR,
THe Provisions which by a free benevolence has been gathered in this city,
and brought in from part of Gloucecestershire and Somersetshire, is embarkd
upon two vessels, the one is the Meremaid of Bristoll, and the other is the
Sampson of this place also; the latter whereof is a ship of good defense, and
goes a Convoy unto what we send, and that from Mynhead; they will be ready to
set sail on Monday next; we thought good to render the Parliament an account of
the quantity and several sorts of which we have enclosed, sent in Invoice; we
hope it will come timely for their relief; It is consigned unto my Lo:
Enshaqueen, the Earl of Cork; and to Mr. Richard Ward Commissary, and have left
it to their wisdoms to proportion to each place what is fitting: Sir, having
this opportunity, we heartily defire you to present to the house of Commons our
thankful acknowledgement of their care of this City, in sending Colonel Fines
to command the Forces here: He is a Gentleman of unwearied pains and
watchfullnesse, not omitting any thing which may conduce to our safety; our
Fortifications are in a good forwardness, and has cost us very much moneys;
Mr. Fines is the sole directer thereof, who in person follows it daily, which
being perfected (we hope under God) may be the preservation of us and our
neighbor counties, whose assistance in this extraordinary charge (by the
favor of the Honorable Houses of Parliament we hope to obtain) craving your
furtherance and help when the House shall be moved thereunto; for present we
conclude, with tender of our humble service, and rest your assured friends and
servants

Bristoll, 29th of April. 1643. Richard Aldworth Major, John Coming. Humphrey
Hook. John Tomlinson. Joseph Jackson. Andrew Charlton. Richard Long. William
Jones. Hu: Brown. John Lock.


Invoice of several sorts of provisions, laden upon Shipp Meremaid, William
Lambert Master for the relief of the Protestants in Ireland, from the City of
Bristoll, 14. April, 1643.
IMprimis, 201. Bushells of white Peace. Item, ^05. Bushels of Gray-Peas. Item,
82. Bushells of Beans. Item, 3 Hogsheads, 15 Barrells, and 2 Kinterkins of
Beef. Item, 2 Hogsheads and one Butt of dry Fish. Item, 10 Bundells of dry
Fish. Item, 1 Hogshead, one Barrel, and 2 Kinterkins of Corn-Fish. Item, 20
couple of Bank-Fish. Item, 1 Hogshead, and 2 Barrells of Herrings. Item, 5 Tuns
of Cheese, being 1684. Cheeses in bulk. Item, 2. Hogsheads of Cheese. Item, one
Hogshead of Bacon. Item, 34. Flitches of Bacon. Item, one Barrel of Beef and
Bacon. Item, one Kinterkin of Porke. Item, 7. Kinterkins ^, 7. Ferkins, and one
half Firkin of D^^ter. Item, one Punchean of Pruans. Item, 3. Tuns, and 3
Hogsheads of Beer. Item, 47 hundred, 1 quartern, 19 pound weight of Bread.
Invoice of several sorts of provisions, laden upon Shipp Sampson, Thomas
Goodier, Master for the relief of the Protestants in Ireland, from the City of
Bristoll 27. April, 1643.
IMprimis, one Barrel of Beef. Item, one Barrel of Meal, Item, 1 Hogshead,
and 3 Barrells of Wet Fish. Item, one Barrel of dry Fish. Item, 2 Kinterkins
of Herrings. Item, 3 barrells of Bacon. Item, 20 Flitches of Bacon. Item, one
butt of Beef and bacon. Item, 23. Kinterkins, 17 Ferkins, 1 Tub, and 5. pots
of butter. Item, 80 bushells of white Peace. Item, 317 bushells of gray Peace.
Item, 543 bushells of Mangcorn. Item, 3 Tuns 15 hundred of Cheese, being 1369.
Cheeses. Item, one barrel of Cheese. Item, one bag of Hops, 102, 1 quartern,
and 2. pound weight. Item, 1 barrel, and 11 Kinterkins of Oatmeal. Item, one
butt of Malt. Item one Punchean of Pruans. Item, one dry Fatt of Shoes. Item,
50. hundred weight of bread. Item, 8 hundred of Cornfish.
Item, more in money, thirty pounds which will be laid out in provisions, and
sent upon this Shipp: And this day brought in about the Country, about five
Tuns of Corn, and other provisions.

FINIS.

