An Excellent LETTER FROM John Basire Doctor of Laws, To his Son ISAAC BASIRE.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1669.

A true Copy of an EXCELLENT LETTER From his Dear Father John Basire, Doctor of
Laws, and Advocate in the Parliament of Rouen in France, written to his Son,
(being the a Scholar of the Famous School of Erasmus at Rotterdam in Holland:)
dated the 8th of December 1623. (the Original whereof the Son keeps as a Jewel,
preserved by providence, above 45 years:) and at the earnest desire of some
godly and learned Friends, faithfully tradslated out of French Into English by
Isaac Basire (his unworth y Son) now D. D. and Archdeacon of Northumberland.
MY Son,
I have received your Letter of the 28th of October last, which has afforded
me no small Joy and Content; since by the reading of it, I have been duly
informed, as well concerning the prosperity of your first Voyage, as of your
own good health, and of the notable proof you have already given of your
advancement and progress in the knowledge of good Letters; seeing that, at your
first arrival, and upon your first Trial, you have been judged worthy of the
highest Form: God be praised for it, and give you grace to continue better and
better: I do very much commend your frugality, for Magnum est vectigal
Parsimonia, (Good Husbandry is a great Revenue,) but I would blame you
exceedingly if you should be too sparing to the Cost of your Reputation, or of
your Health; which you ought to prefer to the purchase of all Arts and
Sciences, since, by reason of your indisposition, they would become useless and
unfruitful. Therefore, fly all Excess of Labor of the Mind, and rather learn
in two years, what you might learn in one, if with the loss of your health;
being always mindful, That your Studies must be regulated by and proportionated
unto your Natural Strength; Studia enim Naturae Regula metienda sunt. Have a
due regard to your small Age Being then but fifteen years and ten Months, and
but tender (...) and sickly by Nature, though in process of time, by Labor and
Custom, through Gods blessing, hardened into a healthful Temper.
and to the weakness of your Natural Strength. Beware also of suffering extreme
Colds, which you must shake off sprightfully by exercise of Body; which will
render you supple, cheerful, and active, and capable of greater Labor:
purchasing thereby to your self a strong and able Constitution and habit of
Body: And seeing that God has put into your heart the resolution to choose, and
to follow so holy and so laudable a Vocation (of which notwithstanding you
ought not The Father being a Doctor of Law, did intend his Son for the same
Faculty; in which Study also, out of filial obedience, he spent some years,
till he propounded to his Father his inclination for the holy Ministry, but
still with submission to his consent, which he freely signified afterward by
his Letter to Dr. Morton, the late L. Bishop, then of Litchfield and after of
Durham; by whom the Son received Holy Orders.
to have made choice of your self) to the end you may become worthy and capable
of it, to discharge the same as becomes; you must wholly dispose your self to
live soberly Titus ii. 12.
righteously, and godly, endeavoring, by all possible means, to lead your life
answerable to your Profession; to this end be courteous unto all men, but
familiar to few: Do not frequent the company of those whom you will not
resemble; but if debauched persons should entice you to their evil Courses,
consent you not, lest by their Conversation, and bad Discourses, your good
Nature be perverted, corrupted, or altered for the worse. Corrumpunt enim Bonos
Mores Colloquia prava: 1 Cor. xv. 33.
Evil Communications corrupt good Manners. Be sincere and upright, fearing God,
and turn away from evil, as Ecclesiastes admonishes you in the last Chapter,
verse 15. Fear God and keep his Commandments, for that is the whole duty of
man: And since Prove. i. 7.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Prove. iii. 5.
Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and lean not to your own understanding:
By the practice of so serious an Admonition, you will more and more draw down
upon you, and your Labors and Studies the Blessing of God, when you still
refer them all to his Honor and Glory; for if (as you ought to do) you
acknowledge God in all your ways, Prove. iii. 6.
he will direct your paths. We will join our fervent and instant prayers with
yours, that as Phil ii. 13.
God has given you to will, so he will give you power to do, of his good
pleasure? to his Glory, your own Salvation, and our Comfort: Mean while,
recreate your self from time to time by seasonable Divertisements from your
Studies to Exercises commendable, virtuous, and no ways Childish 1 Cor. xiii.
2. Terent.
Siquidem alia aetas alios mores postulat: Change of Age requires change of
Manners. Give your self also, at your spare hours, to learn the Language of the
Country where you are, as also the Art of Music, and to write as good a hand
as you possibly can: It will not be one of the least perfections you may
purchase, to get a good hand, and very legible. But chiefly you must not study
so much to have your Head well filled, as to have a Head well fitted or
composed. Accustom your self also, as much as you canto speak treatably and
distinctly; even when you learn your Lessons: because Custom turns into an
Habit. Est enim Consuetudo altera Natura: For Custom is a second Nature. Be
sure of this, that by a kind of volubility, and an overhasty Tongue, or
precipitated Pronunciation, you will find your self put to it, when you are to
acquit your self well of the duty which belongs to your Office: That defect may
render your Function unpleasing, void of gracefulness, and without Edification.
Take heed of being any ways Vindicative, or given to Revenge, but reserve the
Vengeance to God. Romans xii. 19.
For Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, says the Lord. But on the
contrary, be charitable, meek, gentle, and gracious; and be always mindful that
Prove. xv. 1.
A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger. Never do
that to another, which you would be loath another should do to you; and be
sure, That Prove. x. 9^.
he that walks uprightly walks surely, but he that perverteth his ways
shall be known. Shun and detest therefore all manner of Pride and of
Hypocrisy: Because Luke i. 51.
God scatters the Proud, in the Imagination of their heart; and Prove. xi. 2.
whenever Pride comes, then comes shame: but with the Lowly is Wisdom. This
is it I do now exhort you to follow, and to put in practice: Adding to this
end, for your encouragement, what wise Solomon has delivered in the first
Chapter of the Proverbs, verses 8. and 9. My Son, hear the Instruction of thy
Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother: for they shall be an Ornament of
Grace unto thy Head, and Chains about thy Neck. Your good Propensions, and
natural Inclinations, put me in good hope that you will make good use of these
my Fatherly Instructions. The Plague continues still in this City, without
truce or abatement; God in mercy will assuage it, if it be his good pleasure,
when we shall turn, away from our own evil ways. Be mindful of us in all your
prayers, as we keep a continual remembrance of you in the prayers which we here
daily offer up unto God; you may be sure, that, in so doing, you shall not, by
the Grace of God, want our supply and assistance, so far as shall be requisite
and necessary for the Continuance, Progress, and Consummation, of your Studies;
if it shall please God to prolong our lives, till that time wherein you may
have accomplished them. Upon this ground, I shall beseech God, my dear Son, to
preserve you in his holy Tuition and Protection, and to fulfill you with his
Blessings Spiritual and Corporal. Farewell.

From Rouen this viij. of December, 1623. Your Father and best Friend, J. B.


