ALL THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE SESSIONS Of the Peace holden at Westminster, on the
20. day of June, 1651. against Thomas Tydford, Elizabeth Sorrel the Elder,
Margaret Dunlape, Anne Burley, Frances Bedwell, Elizabeth Sorrel the Younger,
and Thomas Kearby.

Together, with their several Examinations and Behaviors before the Justices,
and the Petition of six of them, as also their Recantation; with the sentence
and punishment of Thomas Kearby, for his blasphemous impiety, and wilful
obstinacy.

To which is added a Postscript, to deter all men to avoid such horrid
blasphemies.

This is perused (and thought fit to be published) by diverse of the Justices of
the Peace within the City and Liberty of Westminster, for satisfaction of the
Public.

July 22. 1651. E. H.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, 1651.

The Examination of Thomas Tydford Elizabeth Sorrel the elder, Margaret
Dunlape, Anne Burley, Frances Bedwell, Elizabeth Sorrel the younger, and Thomas
Kearby, etc.
THomas Tydford being asked where John Robins, alias Roberts dwells, he says
he knows not, nor what trade he is of, but he does believe that the said
Robins, alias Roberts, is the God and Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and says that the wife of the said Robins, alias Roberts, shall bring
forth a man child that shall be the Savior of all that shall be saved in this
world; he affirms further, that Caine who slew his brother Abell is the third
Person of the Trinity, and that those that deny it, deny their own salvation;
he says further, that the said John Robins, alias Roberts, has power to raise
the dead.

The mark of M Thomas Tydford.
All the above named Examinants agree with Thomas Tydford, and affirm the
same, and put thereto their hands at the same time.

The mark M of Margaret Dunlape. Anne Burley. Thomas Kearby. Elizabeth Sorrel
senior, her mark. Elizabeth Sorrel junior, her mark.



Frances Bedwell, she believes it by signs that she has seen done by him the
said Robins, alias Roberts, (viz.) by striking a woman dead, and raising her
again.

Frances + Bedwell her mark.


Exam. by Lawrence Whitaker.

Upon their Examination and Confession of those damnable errors and
blasphemies aforesaid, they were all committed to prison without bail or
mainprize until the next General Sessions of the Peace for the City and
Liberty of Westminster to be holden the 20. day of June, then next following,
and then to receive their trial for the said blasphemies: but in the mean
time they sent this ensuing petition to Mr. Whitaker, only Thomas Kearby
remained still obstinate in his blasphemous way, and would not join with the
Petitioners therein.

To the Right Worshipful, Lawrence Whitaker, Esquier, one of the Justices of
the Peace for the City, and Liberty of Westminster.
The humble Petition of Thomas Tydford, Anne Burley, Elizabeth Sorrel, and her
daughter Elizabeth Sorrel, Margaret Dunlape, and Frances Bedwell.
Shows:
THat your poor Petitioners having through their own folly and weakness
been wickedly and shrewdly seduced, and led aside into most dangerous and
damnable errors even to blaspheame against God himself through the wicked
craft, policy, and delusions of the Devil, and that wicked Wretch John Robins,
and the rest of his wicked Confederates; but the Lord our God who is rich in
grace and mercy to those his poor creatures who are seduced by Satan and his
wicked instruments, has showed great grace and mercy to the souls of your
Petitioners, convincing them by his own spirit, by his blessed word of truth,
2. These. 2.3.4.9. and 10. verses, that the said John Robins, alias Roberts, and
the rest of his wicked Confederates are such that are led aside by the spirit
of the Devil, and made use of by him to lead aside poor silly women and
others into most damnable errors and blasphemy against God, after the manner
and working of Satan, with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, whereby
we your poor Petitioners have been also seduced, for which they are much
grieved and repent from their very hearts for all their folly and wickedness,
humbly begging mercy and grace from our God, and desire to be thoroughly humbled
before him for our great wickedness herein.

And do humbly crave pardon for our offenses done against your Worship, and
the Laws of this Commonwealth by our folly and wickedness, and as the Lord
has now showed mercy to our souls by opening our eyes to see our sins and
errors herein; we believe and humbly beseech your Worship to show grace and
mercy to our poor bodies that lie in great misery and want, having given all
that we had to those vild wretches, out of conscience to God, and they having
now forsaken us, who were before all maintained from one common stock and
treasury.

Therefore your Petitioners humble request to your Worship, is, that we may be
set at liberty without bail, because we have no friends or acquaintance here
in the City, but are all in the Country, because our abode was formerly there,
and that we may be freed from paying fees to the Keeper of the Prison, we being
very poor, and want money to buy us bread.

And we shall ever pray, etc. Anne Burley. Thomas Tydford. Frances Bedwell.
Elizabeth Sorrel the elder. Elizabeth Sorrel the younger. Margaret Dunlape,


After the delivery of this Petition to the right Worshipful Lawrence
Whitaker, one of the Justices of the Peace for the City and Liberty aforesaid
(viz.) upon the 15. day of June, Anno Domini, 1651. the Petitioners being
brought, and before him they owned this foregoing Petition to be made by their
earnest desire, being convinced, declared their hearty sorrow for holding the
foresaid blasphemous and erroneous opinions, and their great offenses committed
against God, and the Laws of this Commonwealth, and in token thereof gave in
then this Recantation, as it follows verbatim.

The Recantation of Thomas Tydford, Frances Bedwell, Anne Burley, Elizabeth
Sorrel the elder, Elizabeth Sorrel the younger, and Margaret Dunlape, taken by
Lawrence Whitaker Esquire, on the 13. day of June, 1651.
WHereas we whose names are subscribed, did before the right Worshipful
Lawrence Whitaker Esquire, one of the Justices of Peace for the County of
Middlesex, and Liberty of Westminster, aver and maintain that one John
Robins, alias Roberts, is the God and Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and that the child that is now in the womb of the said Robins, alias
Roberts wife, is the Savior of all that shall be saved in this world, and
likewise that Cain who slew his brother Abell is the third Person of the
Trinity, and those that deny it deny their own salvation; and that the said
John Robins, alias Roberts, has power to raise the dead, all which abovesayd
opinions we do now through Gods infinite mercy to us, confess and acknowledge
to be erroneous, damnable, and blasphemous, and hereby do fully and
absolutely renounce and disclaim them: In testimony whereof we have heereunto
ser our hands this thirteenth day of June, 1651.

Thomas Tydford. Frances Bedwell. Anne Burley. Elizabeth Sorrel the elder.
Elizabeth Sorrel the younger. Margaret Dunlape.


Upon this Petition, Submission, and Recantation, Mr. Whitaker did take bail
for their appearance at the Sessions following, viz. the 20. of June laft,
where they appeared, and humbly prayed the mercy of the Court, acknowledged
their former tenants specified in the Examinations aforesaid, and their
Petition and Recantation to be made by their special direction, being convinced
as in their Petition is specified: The Court then demanded the grounds and
reasons for their former opinions, of which they said they could give no
reason, but only the persuasions and reports of Robins, which they believed,
and God having justly for their former wickedness left them to themselves,
were brought in, and seduced by the policy of the Devil, who will let slip no
opportunity to advance his Kingdom; upon this they were ordered to send for
good bail to appear at the next Sessions, and to be of the good behavior in
the mean time, and so putting in bail, and paying their fees were dismissed.

Then was Kearby called, who came before the Court like a mad man, reviled the
Court, and cursed them, but being afterward more temperate, acknowledged
himself to be a sober rational man, he was examined upon every particular
branch of his former Examination, which he refused to deny, whereupon the Court
made this ensuing Order.

At the General Sessions of the Public Peace holden for the City and Liberty
of Westminster upon Friday the 20. day of June, 1651. before Thomas Latham and
John Hooker Esquires, and others the Justices assigned to keep the public
Peace in the said City and Liberty, and also, etc.
FOrasmuch as Thomas Kearby has upon his Examination taken before Lawrence
Whitaker Esquire, confessed that he does believe that John Robins, alias
Roberts, is the God and Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the
said Kearby said that the wife of the said Robins, alias Roberts, shall bring
forth a man child that shall be the Savior of all that shall be saved in this
World; he affirmed further, that Caine who slew his brother Abell, is the
third Person of the Trinity, and that those that deny it, deny their own
salvation; he said further, that the said Robins, alias Roberts, has power to
raise the dead, all which is most blaspheamous, and against the honor of God,
and against an Act of this present Parliament in this case lately made and
provided. It is now therefore ordered that the said Thomas Kearby (who was
brought to the Bar and charged there with the offenses aforesaid, who refused
to deny the same, and carried himself uncivilly in the face of the Court, and
cursed and reviled the Justices in open Court) be removed from hence to the
Gatehouse prison, from whence he was brought, and shall be immediately
removed from thence to the house of Corection for the said City and Liberty,
there to remain for the space of six months without bayl or mainprize,
according to the direction of the said late Act: and the Keeper of the said
house of Correction is hereby strictly required to set the said Thomas Kearby
to hard labor, and to give him corporal punishment as occasion requires.

Examined by John Watson, Deputy to the Clarke of the Peace.

Postscript.
IT is a Maxim among Scholars, contra Principem non est disputandum; ergo,
there is no arguing with Robins by Scripture, since in acknowledging himself
to be God, he must needs deny the Author of the Scriptures; he is a God
he says, but shows no Miracles to confirm his Godhood, has none of
mankind, (but blasphemers) nor any of the creatures at his extraordinary
command, cannot open the Prison doors, procure his own liberty, or followers
from restraint, nor make so much as one poor silly Worm, or do any thing at
all extraordinary, more then blaspheme God in an unheard of manner.

Zeno the Philosopher observed much that Blasphemers and Athiests at their
deaths would then ask God and the World forgiveness, this he said confirmed
him more in the belief of a Deity, then the Disputes of all the Philosophers
in the World.

And I am confident, who ever sees Robins but at his death, will find his
mind altered, or whoever is in his company at any time, when the Lord of Host
shall thunder from Heaven, will soon perceive his Mortallity, which will not
consist with Divinity, and understand his fear as well as know his blasphemy:
Caius Caligula that wicked Emperor, who made acount no other to be God but
himself, yet when he heard the Almighty thunder, and saw the lightning, he
would cover his head, and hide himself under his bed for fear; whence should
this come, but out of a conscience and for fear of God, which he had
dishonored? nor did God suffer him to live long on earth unpunished for his
blasphemies, for shortly after he was slain by his own servants. Alexanders
usurping the name of a God was no pleasure to him at his death, he was then
forced to confess his mortallity, and so you may be sure will Roberts before
he depart this life, and his Disciples will find another manner of God then
he. I have read of one Hanno who taught Birds to sing Hanno is a God, and then
let them loose in the Air, and wherever they came they cried Hanno is a God;
as also Mahomet with his Pigeon which he made so tractable as to pick Wheat
out of his ear, and persuaded the people 'twas the Holy Ghost; here was some
show of a Miracle, but this fellow will outface us without a Card of ten, a
mere nothing.

What can be more derogatory to the alsufficiency of Christ's sufferings, then
to mainetaine there must another Savior come to fill up what he could not
perform? If any such had been to come, doubtless our Savior would have
foretold it, he would not among the other things he told us of, have left out
so material a matter; he tells us of false Prophets, but of no more Saviors:
But if Robins Heir, I say if his son prove a daughter, sure his few
Disciples will then leave him.

What can be more blasphemous, and more derogatory to the Holy Trinity, then
to affirm himself God the Father, his Brat (in posse) the Savior of all that
shall be saved in this World, and (his Brother) Caine (without Gods great
mercy) the third Person in the Holy Trinity? His conscience in all this must
needs give his tongue the lie, and except God give him a repenting heart, he
may be assured his sin is no less then that against the Holy Ghost, which
shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come: however it
cannot come far short of it; and let men take heed how they run into such
sins, for upon such offenses God is not easily appeased.

What a patcht Trinity does he produce? viz. Himself, his son, and Cain,
(brother Vagabonds) who in stead of reigning together as Gods in Heaven,
without God give him (I mean Roberts) unfeigned repentance, may enjoy one
another company in the black Abyss for evermore.

If he have power to raise the dead, there is work enough not far off to try
his skill; here are good store of Churches and Churchyards about the City, and
upon which he may make experiment; or of those that are going there to be
interd. But I have heard one of his Disciples lately say, that Robins is Moses,
and a Prophet sent from God to redeem and bring home the Jews, and all the
people of God that belong unto him, to the true worship of God: Whereunto I
shall say, we cannot believe matters of so great consequence, upon bare words;
for we must prove the spirits if they are of God. And Matt. 11.13. All the
Prophets prophesied until John, and after him we read of no more that are to
come, but false ones; except ye take the Orthodox Ministers of the Gospel for
Prophets, which if so, it will not be denied.

Besides, Christ nor his Apostles have in any place in sacred Writ foretold of
any extraordinary Prophet; Christ, Moses, and Elias are already come, and we
must look for them no more till they come in the Clouds to judge the Earth,
and to execute vengeance upon those that know not God, or deny him: I say we
cannot justify the receiving of thy opinions, unless thou bring clear
Scripture Texts to confirm them, the Disciples would not receive a Paul before
Barnabas had testified of him, Acts 9.26.27.

If thou art a Prophet, prove thy Authority as Moses to Israel and Pharoh, and
as our Savior did to John, when he sent to him to know of him, if it were he
that were come, or was he to look for another; Christ bad them tell John what
things they had heard and seen (viz.) the blind see, the lame go, the leapers
are cleansed, the deaf hear, and the poor receive the Gospel (are not taught
to blaspheme it.) Christ used these tokens to answer John, because we should
not hazard eternal happiness in believing every one that says he is God,
Christ, Elias, or a Prophet, for what ever was written before time was written
for our learning: And when Roberts can bring all these signs, we shall say
more to him. And we have an express command, that if an Angel from Heaven
teach us any thing dissonant to the word of God, believe him not: And let all
that can hear or read the Scriptures, judge of the vast contrarieties betwixt
Robins Tenants and them; it is as much difference as betwixt Heaven and Hell,
light and darkness, truth and falsehood.

I have heard also the said Disciple give out, that Robins either has, or
shall have power to divide the Sea as Moses, and pass over on dry Land: the
Thames is near, he may do well to try experiments there first.

FINIS.

