A FAIR IN Spittle Fields, where all the Knick Knacks of ASTROLOGY Are Exposed
to open sale, to all that will see for their Love, and buy for their Money.

WHERE, First Mr. WILLIAM LILLEY presents you with his pack, wherein he has to
sell. 1. The Introduction, 2. Nativities Calculated, 3. The great Ephimeredies,
4. Monarchy, or no Monarchy 5. The Caracture of K. Charles, 6. Annus Tenebrosus.
Second, NICHOLAS CULPEPER, brings under his Velvet Jacket. 1. His Chalinges
against the Docttors of Phuisick, 2. A Pocket Medicine, 3. An Almanac, and
Conjuring Circle,
Third Mr. Bowker unlocked his Pack, wherein is, 1. The 12. signs of the
Zodiac 2. The 12. Houses, 3. The 7. Planets, 4. The years predictions, and
the Starry Globe,



Written by J. B. Gent. And Printed by J. C. In the Year 1652

The Prologue,
IN greener Studdies, much I have admired
The Muses rare inventions; and desired
For recreation often; to play upon
The flwory banckes, of sugared Helicon
And vent'ring first, to tread the fatal stage
Of Love, had fancy for my Equipage.
Where having traverst, with but small success
The boundless bounds, of that vast wilderness.
I found my slagging wings, would soon betray
My judgment to a Nonplus: Since the prey
I aimed at; soared abave my reach, and then
Resolved to cease, I laid aside my pen:
Which for some years repose her drowsy head
In Silence lap; until awakned
By frinds entreaties, who would needs go try
To raise her, from this slumbring Mallady
Urged by persuasions and disturbed from rest;
Suddenly roused, obsequiously adrest
Her Morning wings, to slit the air, and soar
A higher pitch, then she had don before
And in even Numbers, then with equal care
She writ this New -- found Astrologicke fair:
To show, the hairbrain'd world, how mad they be
In courting, this Ambiguous foolery.
A FAIR in Spittle Fields, where the Astrologers Knavery, is exposed to the
view. and their Trinkets to all that will see for their Love, and buy for their
Money.
UPon a time, whose date has unaware
Slip't my remembrance; the Astrologers,
Began to prate, as if the world should see
Some sudden change, or great Catastrophy.
Each Libel spoke a great Eclips to come,
The Scourge of Europe, and the fall of Rome;
The amazement of spectators, great affright,
Terror of Mortals, and a day like night.
Yea, some presumed to say the Eclips would be
So wonderful as that obscurity
Which spread earth's superficies, and befell,
At the Jews slaughtering of Emanuel.
These and the like things being published
Abroad in Pamphlets, many minds were led
To strange conceits, thinking each day a year,
Till the long-look't for Monday should appear.
But he that makes the drooping spirits glad,
That frusterats Tokens, makes Diviners mad,
Whose mighty wisdom rules all things made
The Sun shine glorious, no Cimmerian shade,
Made dark our dwellings; their predictions failed;
Their Tales proved fables, and the People railed
Against these Jugglers, whose prevarications
Had filld their minds with such vain expectations;
The Astrologe^s, perceiving it would try,
In one poor day to vent their Foolery.
Wherefore resolve to constitute a Fair,
In Spittle-Fields, exposing each man's ware
To public view; and 'ere a full decay,
Having once sold their Trinkets, post away.
The time being now at hand, that hasty Sun
Which lately scorched their credit had begun,
His daily course; when lo, a Crier stands
Uttering with loud voice, and erected hands
(Indeed his hands were lifted up on High,
Because the matter much concerned the Sky.)
O yes, will will any buy,
The knick-knacks of Astrology.
Quircks and Quillets, such like things
Rare inventions, waxen wings,
To soar above let them repair.
And purchase what they want in Spittle Fair
No sooner had he thus divulged this Note,
Through the wide cranney of his hollow throat,
But every Peddler furnished his Stall,
With prity whimsies to be sold; though all,
Demuri'd a while, and fixed their eyes upon,
Their Captain General, who thus begun;
Good People,
Stand not amazed at this unusual Fair,
It Is our Preservative against Despair.
And which must secure us by and by
From the swift vengeance of a Hue and Cry.
Come then before the lowest of my fall,
And buy these writings Astrologicall.
Lo here is an Introduction, it is as rare,
A piece as ever breathed Celestial Air.
By it are Questions of all sizes stated
By it Nativeties are Calculated.
The Delphick God never did such tricks as these.
It is the worlds great Ephimerides.
Also, I have a Libel that will show
Whether we shall have Monarchy or no.
And at the end whereof there is prefixed
Rats, Dragons, Lions, with a thousand tricks.
To please men's fancys, news of peace and strife
Besides King Charles his Character and life.
He'rs Anus Teneborus; buy it will ye
It Is a rare piece Composed by Mr. Lilly.
These and some more I have, yet none will buy
The famous Gew-gawes of Astrollogy. Exit

Next to him entr'd one whose active shape,
Had some assimulation with an Ape.
On whom a Doctur (pleased with what he Spoke)
In courtesy, bestowed a velvet Cloak,
Which being metamorphes't to a Iacket
Under the threadbare skirrs he brought a Packet,
With Medicables fraught; though some deny
To couple Phuisick with Astrollogy.
This man indee's the Viccar of St. Fools,
Yet contradicts Physicians and the Schoolls,
And with a handful of conceited knowledge.
Dare challenge all the Doctors in the College:
Absurdly and presumptuously of late
Vsurp't the Pulpit, when intoxicate.
And now as Master of the Fair-place: this,
His worship uttered with an Emphasis,
What lack ye Gentlemen, come buy this Spell
Twill fetch grand Pluto from the nether Hell.
Buy this Conjuring Circle which of late
Preserved the Exorcist, Tapers consecrate
With Garments washed: bid money though but little,
For night coms on, and we must leave the Spittle.
Oh, fie upon it, how these dull markets plague us,
Happy were I to speak with Simon Magus.
How well my Portage, would fit him to carry,
And our brave Books repleate his Library.
There Is much more in my Pack which I Will not open,
Since my condition is so void of hope.
Here Is my last work, Catastrophe Magnatum,
And here is Receipts are sealed with Probatum.
Here Is a Fools Cap lined with a Knavish brain,
And Cripsies Riddles, but it is all in vain.
Wherefore I am resolved to smoke my Nose,
Then straight way to the Fuddling-School he goes.
Where you may find him sucking when he list,
The fuming Pipe, or play the Organist.
These two were chief, but yet annother came,
Of great esteem, whom I forbear to name,
A man well known, whose face would fright a Rasor
He much resembled stern-lookt Abbumaser.
Crowding into the midst of the throng
Cries out, who is it that has done us wrong.
Unluckey stars, that would not let us know,
The near approach of our sad overthrow.
But in revenge thereof I mean to sell,
The twelve fair Houses where the Plannets dwell.
I Will sell the whole reversion of my pack,
Who buys these twelve Signs of the Zodiak.
Besides each years Predictive Almanac.
My treasure far exceeds the Golden Feece,
And here is good Fortunes sold for pence a piece.
Nay more! I have the starry Globe! See here,
Will this not tempt you; a Celestial Sphere.
Methinks it is strange the spangles of the Sky,
Are to be sold, and yet there is none will buy.
This said: as all the rest had don before,
He trust his Pack, put up, and was seen no more.
Within the Fair-place, though to tell you plain,
The man I think, lives now in Creed-church Lane
Those were the Grandees, but a number more,
(Whom I forbear to mention) brought their store,
To this great Fair, and every man was glad,
To sell those simple whimsies which he had.
But none would buy, wherefore they left the fair
While peoples shouts, might seem to rent the air.
This the World's great Moon Calfe Di'd
Being in the hight of pride.
FINIS.

