A BRIEF NARRATION OF The truth of some particulars in Mr. THOMAS EDWARDS his
Book called GANGRAENA.

Concerning one NICHOLS an Anabaptist, some Opinions he maintained to Master
Greenhill, and a Discourse that passed between Master Greenhill and Master
Buroughs upon occasion of those Opinions.

By the Author THOMAS ALL.



LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible
in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1646.

A BRIEF Narration of the truth of some particulars in Mr THOMAS EDWARDS his
Book, called Gangraena, concerning one Nichols an Anabaptist.
SEeing the hand of providence, for so it is that has ordered it, and does
order all things, for I had no thought nor knowledge of my being brought upon
the Stage in Print, until I saw my name in Master Edwards his Book called
Gangraena; for what ends Master Edwards set my name there, or the Discourse I
spoke of openly to many, I know not, but himself can best make it out; But my
name being in his Book, has caused many of my friends to look big upon me,
and to harbor causeless jealousies against me, and many that formerly were
seeming friends have given me very scurrilous speeches and unchristian like
language, and would give me no reason of their so speaking, but said I was in
Master Edwards his Book, and seeing there are some things that are there that
never came from me: And so there are differences grown; therefore that there
may be a clear understanding of the truth, I shall impart what is and was my
Relation, and leave the rest.

The first particular wherein I am named in Master Edwards his Book, was about
a Petition that was brought unto my hand for the furtherance and promoting of
it; which I confess I had the handling of, and carried it up to the Dr H. his
house and it was read publikly, which was I conceive the best way, so that if
any had ought against it they might understand of it; and it being disliked and
opposed by Master Buroughs and Master Greenhill, in the public, I followed it
no further; this Petition was for the settling of the Government of the Church,
the want of which makes sad the hearts of such as are dear to God; if any say
that the Government understood in that Petition was not right, I say to such,
as they tender the honor of God, as they are Christians and tender the credit
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, let them bring in another that is more near the
Rule of the Word and we shall gladly receive it; and let us make good use of
the words of an enemy; Sir Jacob Ashly when he was taken, said, that he thought
the work was done, except God give us over in his judgment to fall out amongst
our selves, and so destroy one another; We may see the eyes of our enemies are
upon our great divisions, which grow for want of a Government, that may
restrain the great wantonness of spirit by the abuse of liberty, which in New
England brought forth monstrous Errors. Therefore M. Sheapheards letter of
New England (sent over here and in Print) called New-Englands lamentation for
old-Englands present Errors and feared future desolation if not timely
prevented; Which were worthy of our Noble Senators best and serious thoughts
upon it; for experienced counsel is not to be slighted.

2. Another thing in Master Edwards Book is about Mistress Chidly, who had
some dicourse with Master Greenhill, and he used arguments unto her, which is
true.

3. Another thing mentioned in Master Edwards his Book, is about one Nichols an
Anabaptist, that lived in Moore-Feilds, unto which Master John Goodwin in a
Pamphlet has made some overture, and that from a testimony from Master
Buroughs his hand, who said that I know no such man as Mr. Nichols, nor of no
meeting concluded of about him, or any of his opinions, either intended,
desired or resolved upon. Which testimony of Master Buroughs to Master
Goodwin, Gangraena, page 79.
for ought I know is true in his sense, viz. that he knows no such man as
Nichols, or that he never heard that there was such a man in the world, or that
there was any meeting concluded of about him. But here is no denial of what I
related, or what Master Edwards has printed, except in the circumstance, that
there was a meeting concluded of, at which Master Buroughs was present; for by
this ensuing relation it will appear, that what Master Edwards has related for
the substance of it is true also; for I do aver and say that there was such a
man as Nichols an Anabaptist in Moore-Feilds, and that the same Nichols did
come to Stepney to Master Greenhills, and did hold forth unto him these ensuing
damnable Errors.

1. That God was the Author of all sin. 2. That Children owe no obedience
unto Parents, except they be godly. 3. That all lies come out of the mouth of
God; and seemed to prove it out of the Kings, from the lying spirit, who asked
leave of God to be a lying spirit in the mouth of the Prophets, and God said,
go. 4. Further, the same Nichols said, That no man or woman went to hell for
any sin that they commit; he being asked why any went to hell, he answered,
it was the will of God.
All which particulars Master Greenhill did relate unto Master Buroughs on a
Sabbath day following, after the morning Sermon at Colonel Zacharies house,
where Master Buroughs usually goes in after his morning exercise. I being
there present with some others, heard Master Greenhill relate this sad Story,
with great grief of spirit, and said that it made his flesh tremble to hear
such horrid things uttered.

Master Buroughs replied, Brother, were it not a sad case if so be your wife,
and my servants, and children were drawn away to such damnable Errors, and
that we could have no other remedy for it, but say Lord have mercy upon us?
Master Greenhill said yes so it were.

M. Buroughs again said, Brother, there is a necessity of a Government and
power in the Magistrate, and power over Conscience.

Then Master Greenhill said, that whosoever should teach unto a people any
thing that raceth fundamentals, or any thing that strikes against the power of
godliness, or any thing that tends to the disturbance of the peace of the
Kingdom, ought to be suppressed. Unto whom I answered, Sir, hold forth this in
public, and I hope all the godly shall well agree, saying it was as much as I
desired.

Master Buroughs further said, that he in his house was Master, and that he
might keep out such a one out of his Family. Master Greenhill answered so he
might.

Again Master Buroughs said unto us, we four of six dwelling at the corner
of a street together, bewailing one to the other, how our servants and children
and wives are seduced, agree together to keep such a person out of our family.
Master Greenhill said, so they might.

Master Buroughs said, a whole street might join so together to keep such
persons out of their families. 'Twas granted so they might.

Again he said a whole Town might join together, and so a whole County, and
then a whole Kingdom might do the same; to which some standers by seemed not
to assent; but said Master Buroughs, it is as lawful in the last place as at
the first.

This is the naked truth, a near as I can remember of the discourse about these
Errors. And I hope in all this there is no just cause given by me of offense
to these two Worthies, Mr. Buroughs and Master Greenhill. But when I first
spoke it upon just occasion, I did it to their honor, and so I hope the
printing of it will be to show their soundness in judgment against such
Errors.

Now if Master John Goodwin do bundle up such horrid Errors as these to amount
to no more nor higher rate then the infirmities of the Saints, as in the
beginning of his Pamphlet does appear, for he says Satan has been this four
years sifting up; the Author might have taken in (with the same breath) the
old Serpent himself into the Catalogue of such Saints, as well as such that
held such damnable Errors, as are testified in this Relation. For the Serpent
was more moderate, and said unto the woman ye shall not surely dye; and did
not so impudently say as this Nichols did, who said all lies come out of the
mouth of God. But it may be the man upon second thoughts will see his mistake,
as that there is no such infirmities as these to be found in the Saints; not in
the whole Book of God.

Now for such a man of Learning and parts, to vent himself with such vain words
and jeers, and to make use of Scripture language to serve his own brain and
humor, is not as becomes the Gospel of Christ, as will appear if the Reader
well weighs his ensuing words, as follows. Wherein he says, the Author of
the said Treatise known by the mark of a Gangraena, or Cancer in the forehead
of it; being as it seems of Satan's counsel, and partaker of his intentions
against the Saints, has diligently swept his floor, and gathered together his
siftings, all that dross and beggary of weaknesses and infirmities, which
Satan (meaning Master Edwards) within the compass of four years by his own
confession, was able to sift out of them, and he to come to the knowledge of,
and has ground, kneaded and has baked it, and made shewbread of it, for such
of the Presbyterian sons of Levi, and their retinue to eat as are of his own
diet and constitution. Certainly, this language of Master John Goodwin, is not
becoming the Minister of the Gospel.

Having faithfully related the truth of some particulars in Master Edwards
Book, touching Nichols the Anabaptist; I thought good for a closure to speak
something of a Toleration, which is too much by Master Goodwin and others, in
Pulpit, and in printed Pamphlets pleaded for. I have heard some press it from
the example of Amsterdame, that it is so there; and I can help them to one
place more, which is at Constantinople, where the Turks have places for Mahomet
to be worshipped; and they allow the Jews their Synagouges for worship; And
also the Greeks have their public places for worship; so the French, Italians
and English, have all their liberty of Conscience. Now if the Turks follow the
Hollander in this particular, or the Hollander takes it from the Turks; In
them both, it is but for money and Trades sake, and not for the honor of God.
Which God forbid should ever be so in England: But rather let us follow the
best examples of the Saints out of the Word of God, where good Nehemiah would
not suffer the Sabbath to be violated, by selling of wares and commodities.
Which some in my hearing, and not dwelling far off from me, do plead for, and
practice, working on their callings on the Lords day; and do this out of
pretense of Conscience. I pray was it a good law or no in Nebuchadnezar, in
Daniel 3.29. where he made decree against any which spoke any thing against the
God of Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, should be cut in pieces. Much more it
would hold good against any that act against the known laws of God.

To come nearer the Gospel, you may find in that Evangelicall Prophet,
Zachariah, 13.3. It is said, thou shall not live, for thou speak lies
against the Name of the Lord. So that I do not find, that pretended Consciences
have any allowance in the Word of God; neither did the Apostles, and Holy men
of God when they suffered use this Argument; You Magistrates, have nothing to
do with our Consciences: But pleaded the justness of their cause, and
innocence of their persons. Yet not that I would have any man that is a Native
English one, though a Jew in opinion or a Papist, or any else, that now are, to
be banished, nor imprisoned, nor fined for his Conscience and opinion: But that
I would not have them to Congregate and draw others after them; but if it be
their Light, as they pretend, or their Faith, let them, as the Apostle says,
have it to themselves.

And that there may be a stop to these floods of Errors, that are cast out
against the Church and truth: I conceive this course might be taken, that no
man should take upon him, nor be suffered to Officiate in a Ministerial way,
as a Pastor over a people; but such as shall be approved on, and allowed by
Authority; as I conceive it is so in New England; And not a Toleration for
every man, to vent his own brain and Errors. For where then will the guilt of
the blood that has been shed lie? If Toleration might be suffered, the Papists
sure would never have gone in the feilds to have their bellies shot through
with bullets; nor our ignorant Country people in Counties and Shires, would
never have risen by thousands, if they might have had the Service Book, and
good old Prayers (as they call them) still continued unto them. So I conclude,
praying for a Reformation, and not a Toleration; and rest a well wisher to
Truth and Peace.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

James Cranford.
April 24. 1646.

