THE INDEPENDENTS CATECHISM.

OR Some Observations gathered out of Doctor BASTVVICKE his Religious and
Learned Treatise ENTITVLED INDEPENDENCY NOT GODS ORDINANCE.

For the use of all poor Ignorant, wavering, and seduced Independents.

BY JOHN BERNARD (...).

MAT. 22. 19. Ye do err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.

1 JOHN 4. 1. Believe not every Spirit but try the Spirits, whether they are of
God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

London, Printed by John Macock. 1645.

TO THE Wavering or Seduced INDEPENDENT READER.
Dear Brother,
THe Learned Doctor has presented a large Treatise to the view of the world,
which proves the Presbyterian Government DEPENDENT to be Gods Ordinance, and
not the Presbyterian Government INDEPENDENT, by strong Arguments drawn from
plain texts of Scripture. For three Reasons following I have prevailed with him
that some Observations gathered out of it, and digested into this short
Catechism, might be published for thy good.

First because thou may be persuaded thereby either not to waver, or to be
perfectly reformed from that dangerous error.

Secondly, because some have objected, The Doctors Treatise is redious, though
every particular in it be absolutely necessary to vindicate Truth from Error,
this Epitome may invite thee seriously and speedily to read it, thou may
happily find much satisfaction to thy unstable mind in it, if with the men of
Berea, Act. 17. 7. Thou search the Scriptures. If niceties delight thee I refer
thee to the Doctors Treatise, which is a garden full of such slowers.

Thirdly, because thy uncharitable Teachers, not able to justify their fond
opinion; yet have unworthily vilified the Doctors sound judgment calling him
Apostate, fool, that he is crazed in his brain, being not misled with their
New Lights, but has clearly discovered the mist of Error wherewith they have
blinded thine, and others eyes. Christian charity binds me to give him deserved
applause, for his Pious, Learned and Charitable work; that thou may be
reformed thereby, is the prayer of him who wishes thy souls good equally with
his own.

John Bernard.

The first part of the Independents Catechism, upon these 4. Positions.
1. That there were more particular Assemblies, and Congregations in the Church
of Jerusalem than one.

2. That all those several Congregations made but one Church.

3. That all those several Congregations were under one Presbytery.

4. That the Government of the Church of Jerusalem is to be a pattern of
Government to all succeeding Ages.

THE INDEPENDENTS CHATECHISME.
Quest.
WHat Government has Christ Ordained in the Church of Jerusalem, and in the
rest of the Primitive Churches, to be a patrern unto all Churches for
Government, Doctrine, and manners unto the end of the World?

Answ. A Presbyterian Government, that is, by a Common Council of Presbyters
(as in the Original) or more plainly of a Religious, grave, solid, learned,
and wise Council of divines and ministers, as was in the Assembly, Act. 1. 15.
unto whom Christ had given the power of the keys, Mat. 18. 16. 17. 18. That
this was the Government established in the Church, plainly appears by these
texts of Scripture, Act. 14. 23. Act. 20. 17. 28. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb.
13. 7. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3. Jam. 5. 14. Act. 15. 6. 22. Act. 16. 4. Act. 21.
17. The objections made by the Independent Brethren, concerning the
qualification of the Presbyters are punctually confuted in the Drs Treatise
page 19. to the 29. Showing that there is no expectation of miracles in our
times, though the Apostles and Primitive Presbyters were extraordinarily gifted
for the confirmation of the truth of the Gospel to all succeeding ages: Christ
himself proclaims those blessed that believe without seeing of miracles, John
20: 29. This qualification in the Apostles, and primitive Presbyters is
continued unto the end of the World in the Presbyters and Ministers of the
Gospel. Viz. the power of order, and preachings and the power of Jurisdiction,
or rulings: Because what soever is written, is for our instruction.

Quest. Were there many congregations, and Assemblies in the mother Church of
Jerusalem, which in our dialect are called Churches: or did the multitudes of
believers in Jerusalem make but one congregation, as the Independents suppose?
Answ. These plain texts of Scripture following do clearly prove that the
many ten thousands of believers, converted by John Baptist, by Christ, his
Apostles, the 70. disciples and the rest of the primitive Presbyters, could
never meet together in one, 10. or scarcely in 100. congregations to partake of
all acts of worship to aedification, as ^ppeares by the multitude of believers
mentioned, in Mat. 3. 1. 2. 5. 6. Mat. 7. 12. Luke 16. 16. Luke 7. 29. John 7.
31. 40. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. Acts 2. from the 37. to the end of the chapter.
Acts 4. 4. Act. 5. 14. Act. 6. 1. 2. 3. 7. Act. 21. 20. to suppose these
multitudes could meet in one congregation to be edifyed is not agreeable to
sense or reason. Because there were above one hundred preachers, and ministers
besides the Apostles, and all these continually taken up in praying and
preaching unto those many ten thousands of believers distributed into several
congregations, that possibly they might edify their preachers being all so
employed, they could not leave their ministry to serve tables, Acts 6. 2.
Therefore of necessity so many ministers must have several places to preach
in, and those multitudes of believers be distributed into several congregations
for them to preach to, and several places to baptize in, other-wise there
would have been great confusion.

For but one of them could speak at once to aedification. These plain
testimonies of Scripture above cited may convince the Independents error.

Because they clearly take away the Foundation of their New-Churches which are
built upon this mistake, that there were no more believers in the Church of
Jerusalem then could meet in one congregation.

Four we^ke objections to that purpose are punctually confuted by the Dr. from
page 42. unto the 53. page.

Quest. Were not all those hundred preachers and the many ten thousands of
believers so scattered abroad in the persecution we read of, Act. 8. 1. 2. 3.
That there was left no more believers in Jerusalem then could meet in one
congregation?
Answ. By that place is meant all the preachers, and ministers only, except
the Apostles, as it appears, Acts 8. 4. they that were scattered abroad, went
to and fro preaching the Word: As for the people, they were many of them cast
into prison, and it is most probable that the rest were in their own houses,
there is not any mention made of their being scattered abroad; if they had,
they had no Call to preach; now the text says they did preach that were
scattered abroad. But by their abiding in Jerusalem the Apostles had both
entertainment and safety, without them they could not have secured themselves
from the wolves: And the Apostles care was such of feeding the sheep of
Christ, that they continued in Jerusalem to comfort and support the Church; And
refresh the believers in this heat of persecution: when they wanted the help
of their faithful ministers, and Pastors.

Quest. Who Governed, ordered, and ruled this Church consisting of so many
congregations and assemblies?
Answ. The Apostles and Presbyters (as in the Original.) Act. 7. 19. 29. 30.
Act. 15. 2. 4. 6. 22. Act. 16. 4. 5. Act. 21. 17, 18, 25. And howsoever the
Apostles in the places above specified are differenced by that title from the
Presbyters, yet in all acts of Government performed by them in the Church of
Jerusalem, they were for the substance of them ordinary acts such as Presbyters
daily perform. And therefore the Apostles are in them to be considered as
Presbyters who received the power of Jurisdiction or ruling, and acting as
Presbyters were in their ordinary employment; Though at other times they used
Superlative authority as Christ's extraordinary Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5. 20. Some
Impertinent Cavills about the Apostles exercising the office of Presbyters made
by the Independents are clearly taken away by the Dr. from page 84, unto the
94. p. And least any should conceit the Apostles were not Presbyters, because
in those places above it is said the Apostles and Presbyters making a
distinction betwixt them. The Apostle Saint Peter resolves the doubt, 1 Pet. 5.
1. 2. 3. in which place, Peter styles himself a Presbyter or Elder; In the
second Epistle of John ver. 1. Saint John does style himself Presbyter, or
Elder, saying; The Presbyter to the Elect Lady.

Saint Paul likewise styles himself a Presbyter if you compare 1 Timothy 4. 14.
with 2 Timothy 1. 6. in which places it is evident that Saint Paul was one of the
Presbytery.

Quest. Why do the Independent Brethren conclude every of their congregations a
particular Church, depending upon no other Church; either for Government,
Doctrine, or Manners, when the whole current of the Scripture does so clearly
express the Presbyterian Government Ordained by Christ in the mother Church of
Jerusalem must be a pattern unto all daughter Churches until the end of the
World.
Now it has been plainly proved that the Church of Jerusalem consisted of
many congregations, which made but one Church, And that one Church distributed
into those particular assemblyes, was Governed by a Common Council or
Presbytery. The example of which Church the Independent Brethren pretend to
follow.

Answ. The Brethrens Answer is seconded with these reasons. First, because
their particular Churches have for their pattern no less then the whole
College of the Apostles and Presbyters, Act. 1. 15. Where they sat in
council to choose a disciple in the place of Judas, the number of the men, not
of men and women as in verse 14. being one hundred and twenty. The Independent
Brethren mistaking the members of the congregation, who were men, and Brethren,
verse 16. and not men Brethren and Sisters, do peremptorily conclude from
hence, there were no more believers in Jerusalem, then in this congregation;
notwithstanding the multitudes that believed, and were baptized, by John
Baptist, and this whole College of Apostles and Presbyters before the Passion
of Christ. Secondly, Because their Churches (though made up with a number of
women) by imitating the Assembly of Apostles and Presbyters, every particular
Church does thereby gain the same Authority which our Savior gave to the
whole College of Apostles, Mat. 18. 15. 16. 17. 18. which being extraordinary,
and exceeding the tenure of the Scripture to have so much power confered upon a
small congregation, does declare our Brethren the Independents to be wise above
that which is written, 1 Cor. 4. 6. and in knowledge to resemble the children
of this world, Mat. 16. 8.

The second part of the INDEPENDENTS Catechism, gathered out of the Treatise
upon these six following Queres, concerning the gathering of CHURCHES.
1. Quere. WHere it is commanded in the word of God that the Ministers of the
Gospel shall run about from their own places, and Charges to gather believing
Christians, from amongst believing Christians, into their own Independent
congregations, and debar them from all Church Fellowship, and communication
with other believers in Gods holy Ordinances and Sacraments. And proclaim, all
that are not molded up after this new-modell to be a people out of covenant, to
have no right to the seals of the New Covenant; neither they nor their
children, though believers, whether this way of gathering Churches was ever
heard of before these days whether this be to set up Christ as King upon his
throne, to make divisions and Scismes in Churches and among beleivers and
Brethren, and that upon groundless pretenses.

2. Quere. Whether for the making any man or woman a member of the Church, it
be necessary to the believeing, and being baptized, that they should walk some
days, weeks, months, or years with them that they may have experience of
their conversation before they can be admitted, and after that a confession of
their faith, should be publicly made before the congregation, and the
evidences of their conversion, as the time when, the place where, the occasion
how, they were converted: And if any, either men, or women, shall except
against their evidence that then they are not to be admitted.

3. Quere. Whether for making any man a member or an officer of a Church, the
consent of the whole congregation, or the greater part of them besides the
Presbyters and Ministers be requisite.

4. Quere. Whether for the admission of any one into Church Fellowship and
communion a private solemn Covenant be requisite or necessary for the making
any one a member, the neglect or refusal of the which makes them incapable of
their member-ship or admission.

5. Quere. Whether the women and people as well as the Presbyters and Ministers
have the power of the Keys. And whether the women have all their voices in the
Church, both for election and reprobation of members and officers as well as
the men, and whether the consent of all the women, or the greatest part of them
to be requisite, for the making any one a member or officer? So that if they
gainsay it, being the greater number, or allow of it, the most voices carry the
business.

6. Quere. Whether the practice and preaching of all these things, and the
gathering of Churches after this manner, be to set up Christ as King upon his
throne; and whether Churches and assemblyes thus congregated be the only true
Churches in the which only Christ rules and reigns as King, and all other that
are not molded up after this fashion, be no true congregated Churches, and in
the which Christ is not set up as King upon his throne?

Quest. Who were commanded by Christ to preach the Gospel, and to propound to
all Nations the conditions upon which they were to be admitted into his Church;
And who were to admit them?
Answ. The Apostles only and Presbyters, and Ministers of the Gospel; As
appears by Christ's Commission given unto them and his promise to be with them
until the end of the World: Mat. 28. 19. 20. Mark 16. 15. 16. Acts 26. 15. to
the 20. verse. Here the Commission was only delivered to the Apostles and the
Ministers of the Gospel that they should admit whosoever believed and were
baptized.

Quest. Did John Baptist or any of the primitive Apostles, and Ministers ever
call for a congregation to join with them in the admitting any member into the
Church of Christ, or did they demand such evidences and qualifications as the
Independents do in the foregoing Queres?
Answ. Their preaching, and practice in Baptizing, which is admitting members
into the Church of Christ, does show plainly they did it by virtue of their
Commission, no mention being made of a new Church, or congregation to have
voices with them, or any other conditions to be required, then Repent, believe,
and be baptized; which is plainly proved: Mat. 3. 2. 6. Luke 3. 7. Luke 7. 29.
John 3. 4. Act. 2. 37. 38. 4. Act. 8. 36. 37. 38.

Quest. Where did the Apostles and primitive Presbyters delight to gather
Churches?
Answ. Amongst the lost sheep of the house of Israel, to bring them into
Christ's fold; as appears by Saint Paul accompting it a dishonor to build upon
another man's Foundation. Romans 15. 20.

Quest. What command have women in the Church either for preaching, or giving
their voices, in the election or reprobation of members or officers?
Answ. No more command have they for any such practice, then by Saint Paul's
words is due unto them, 1 Cor. 14. 34. 35. 36. 1 Timothy 2. 11. 12. in both these
places it is the Apostles special care to prevent women's intermedlings in
matters of the Church, which may for ever silence the Independents weak
opinion who tolerate women's voicing it in their Churches contrary to the Word
of God.

Quest. May diversities of Religions be tolerated amongst Christians, or were
they ever tolerated in the Old or New Testament?
Answ. The practice of the holy men of God shows they may not, and their
practice is for our imitation; 1 Cor. 10. 6. 7. Romans 15. 14. Genesis 17. 1. 2. 3.
Genesis 18. 17. 18. 19. Jos. 24. 14. 15. 16. In these places it is clear that
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joshua suffered no Idolatry nor Sects in their
families, for this had been to tolerate all Religions, or to worship the true
God in a false manner, and not to do Justice and Judgment.

Quest. Are the examples of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, who
tolerated only the true Religion; or the examples of Poland, Transylvania and
Holland, to be followed, who tolerate all Religions?
Answ. Saint Paul will decide the controversy sufficiently for us, if we
delight not more in novelties then in the old way prescribed in the written
Word: Romans 12. 1, 2. Phil. 3. 17. Phil. 4. 8, 9. In which places Saint Paul
does declare that we must not fashion our selves according to this World, we
must not imitate the Saints of God in their failings, and we must walk so as
we have him and the rest of the Saints for an example, Our blessed Savior
blames the Angel of the Church of Pergamus Thyatira, Laodicea, Revel. 2. 12.
13, 14. to the 20. Revel. 3. 14, 15, 16. Because they tolerated Balaam and
Iezabell, showing his great displeasure against them for it; Now these that
labor for a toleration of all Religions must needs be Lukewarm, such as God
will spue out of his mouth.

Quest. What examples have we in Scripture for the suppressing of false
Teachers, when they are openly discovered?
Answ. The Prophets and Elders of Israel in all ages who had the sword of
justice in their hands to punish all seducers as appears, 1 Kings 18. 21.
Deutr. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Judges 6. 30, 31. and their practice is for our
Magistrates imitation, 1 Cor. 10. 6, 7. Romans 15. 14.

Quest. What esteem ought Christians to have of those Independent ministers
who instead of preaching the Word of God, in season and out of season to
convert souls, preach their own traditions and inventions, to destroy those
precious souls which other Godly Ministers have converted?
Answ. Saint Paul's sentence is of any such false teacher, Let him be accursed,
Gal. 1. 8, 9. And if we will believe our Saviors words; Such men's condition is
very dangerous whatsoever they may promise to themselves, Mat. 18. 6, 7. Woe be
unto that man by whom the offense comes. Now such offense is come by wandering
after the Independent Ministers New-lights, that all Godly Ministers may with
Saint Paul wish they were cut off, who trouble the Church, by such groundless
pretenses.

And whereas all Godly Presbyters and Ministers, who preach Christ out of good
will, open the eyes of the blind, turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, ought highly to be Honored for their works sake;
1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. Yea, that they deserve double Honor; 1 Timothy 5. 17. Yet the
same Apostle does on the contrary give unto all believers a special caution To
beware of false teachers Romans 16. 17, 18. (Coloss. 2. 8. 2 Epistle of Saint
John 9, 10, 7. verses) Concluding that they that are such serve not the Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and with fair speech, and flattering,
deceive the hearts of the simple.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Ja. Cranford.
July 3. 1645.

