THE Last joyful Intelligence FROM His Excellency HIS QUARTERS IN READING:
Wherein is contained, the Propositions of agreement, upon which the town was
delivered, with the manner of the delivery, how they marched away without their
Ordnance, and the true estate of his Excellencies Army at this present.

Faithfully related in two Letters sent from good hands in the Army, to a
person of good quality in the City, bearing date April 27. 1643.

LONDON, April 29. Printed for Thomas Watson. 1643.

The last Intelligence from his Excellency his Quarters at Reading, since the
surrendering up of the town.
SIR, To inform you of the whole proceedings since we came to this town, we
understand the state of it, knowing it to munition; the Welchmen have already
feasted with a horse or two, and those lean ones, in regard that horse-meat
has much failed of late, which occasioned an endeavor of the Horse to go away
on Saturday night; but but they were stopped by the Foot: so likewise for their
ammunition, they want powder, but bullets more, shooting very seldom, and very
strange shot, as stones, and such like. The Governor is by all sorts confessed
to be wounded; some say, shot in the neck, others, bruised by the fall of a
stone from a house, but he is so ill, that he executes not his place, which
causes much confusion and distraction among them. Some of the Town have come
out, and informed us to this purpose, and that they had an intent to leave the
town; which it is like enough they would have done, had it not been as hazardous
as their stay, in regard of our Quarters. We took prisoner on Sunday morning a
servant of Sir LEWIS DIVES, who was sent to give the Town notice of ammunition
coming to them; he swam over the river and back again, but was intercepted, and
the Supply was prevented by some Troops of horse of ours, and Colonel BARKLAYS
Regiment, and 200. of Colonel HOLBORNES, who lay in the way about Cavesham: We
likewise took a fellow equally guilty of folly and knavery; he was once of the
Lord ROBERTS his Regiment, and ran away to the enemy, and was now hired to blow
up our Magazine, as himself confesses, but knew no way, as he says, but to
throw a light match into a barrel, supposing he should have found one open; he
was to have had five pound for his pains; but now instead of that a halter.
Yesterday hearing that the King was advancing this way to the relief of the
Town with what Force he could make up, which is not much in the absence of his
Parties: We sent a strong Party of Horse and Dragooners, under the command of
Colonel MIDDLETON, who at a place called Dorchester, seven or eight miles from
Oxford, surprised the Kings Regiment of Foot, now again under the command of
Colonel WILL. VAVASOUR, that man of honor, by whose loss if we can gain so
much wisdom as to trust no more of them upon their lost reputation, we shall
make a good bargain; who, though he was not there present, his Captain and
Lieutenant were taken, the Standard again endangered, about 100. horse taken,
and sixty or thereabouts (some say more) slain, and about 50. prisoners; and
Captain WATSON the Kings Gentleman Harbinger was taken providing for the Kings
march that way.

On tuesday the town hung out a white flag, and sounded for a parley, which was
answered by the Lord General, then they sent hostages from the town and we did
the like, which done; a council of war was called, which met in Sir Francis
Knowles his House. where after consultation concerning the said Treaty, these
Propositions his Excellency eondiscended to, viz.

1. That the Forces in that town should surrender up the town to the King and
Parliament.

2. That they should march dirctly to Oxford, without doing any act of
hostility.

3. That they should leave behind them in the town ten pieces of Ordnance.

4. That the said Forces should free those which they had taken prisoners.

Which being fulfilled, his Excellency promised them a free passage to Oxford,
with Bag and Baggage, allowing them six hours time to march away in.

We had a skirmish with the Kings Forces during the Treaty, where we slew nere
200. of them, with the loss of 6. men, and they were forced to fly to save
themselves, not being able to hold us play.

SIR,

THis is to certify you of a truth, that the King came to Dorchester on
Tuesday last, and the town of Reading was yielded up on Thursday at 12. of the
clock, and they were to march with bag and baggage, with their Colors
displaying, with about three thousand soldiers, with four small Drakes and
ten Wagon, and the Earl of Essex about three of the clock entered the town,
with Colonel Hampden and Serjeant-Major Skippon, to view the town, and three
of their Commanders came to view our Army, and it is supposed that our Army
will advance after them, for our men were very eager to fall on them as they
marched out, but that my Lord General (to satisfy them) promised to give
every soldier twelve shillings a piece, and is to be paid on the first of May,
being Monday, but my Lord General is very unwilling to let many of his
soldiers enter the town, for fear the town should be undermined, till they
have made further search, for the safeguard of our men. Our Regiment is
quartered in the Outworks. I have no more to write to you at this time. The
next (I hope) shall be from Oxford. Farewell.

The King is returned to Oxford this day.

From our Camp at Reading, April 27 afternoon. 1643. Your loving Cousin, John
Alexander.


