bust of a man (...) 4^ (...)
Man's days are vain, and as a flower they fade,
Here Is one proclames, whereon man's life is stayed;
His sufferings, Changes, Comforts in strict thrall,
Shon's GOD alone, preserues, and Gouernes all.



THE Second part of that Book called INDEPENDENCY NOT GODS ORDINANCE: OR The
Postscript, discovering the uncharitable dealing of the Independents toward
their Christian brethren, with the jugglings of many of their Pastors and
Ministers, to the misleading of the poor people to the detriment of their own
souls, and the hurt both of Church and State, with the danger of Novelties in
Religion; proving that Independency, is one of the most dangerous Sects, that
ever appeared in the world, since Mortality inhabited the Earth.

In the which also there is a satisfactory Answer given to the principal
cavils of him that writ that railing Pamphlet, styled The falsehood of Mr Will.
Prynnes Triumphing in the Antiquity of Popish Princes and Parliaments. With
Doctor BASTVVICKS just Defense against some calumnies in way of Preface.

BY JOHN BASTVVICK, Dr in Physic.

1 THESSALONIANS. 5.21. Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for Michael Spark junior, and are to be sold
at the sign of the blue Bible in Green-Arbour. 1645.

Dr Bastwicks Defense against some calumnies with an Answer to certain cavills
for a Tolleration of all Religions in way of Preface to the ensuing Discourse.
WHen I was a prisoner in the Northern parts, and first heard of the miserable
distractions and great divisions that were amongst Christians in London, and in
all the Eastern, Western, and Southern, parts of the Kingdom, about Religion,
and the Government of the Church; and saw the great rejoicing of the common
Enemies at it, as who hoped by this means to facilitate their way of attaining
to their design, which was to make themselves our masters, and all the people
their slaves. I conceived that it was but a mere fiction, and that indeed there
had been good agreement amongst the brethren, as having all joined in a solemn
covenant which ought never to be forgotten, against all Popery and the
Prelaticall party, for the upholding of the true Protestant Religion; and that
they had been so really united together in love and affection one toward
another; and in so sweet an harmony amongst themselves, that all the enemies of
the truth and of our Country, could never have raised any discord, or made the
least jar or breach of friendship amongst them. But not many weeks after having
received certain Intelligence from good hands, that there was indeed a real
rent and division amongst those, that were and had formerly been best affected
to Reformation, it did not a little perplex me, knowing very well the danger of
divisions, and the evil consequences that would ensue, if they were not timely
prevented. And after that I had informed my self what the ground of the
difference was, viz. About Independency, I declared my self unto such as were
permitted to come to me, (as they can witness) that as I conceived that
opinion to be a mere novelty, so it tended to nothing but to distraction, and
making of a breach in Church and State; and thought withal that it was brought
about by the subtilty of the Prelaticall and Jesuiticall party for this very
purpose, howsoever the dissenting parties discerned not the craft of the
adversaries. And I promised then, if ever God gave me liberty, though for my
own particular I wholly dissented from the Independent brethren in their
Assertion, yet I would use my best diligence to moderate between them, that if
it were possible I might make up all breaches amongst brethren that they might
the better unite all their Forces for the common defense. But the Independent
brethren hearing that I was for the Presbytery against their tenants, after
they had used some arguments, which I have set down in the ensuing discourse, to
diswade me from writing about that subject, or at least that I would stand
Neuter; and perceiving that I would not be silenced; of friends they all became
my enemies, and fell into open hostility (at least in words) against me; so
that I could not enjoy the very Laws of civility in many of their Companies,
and abused me with such reviling language, as would be above belief to recite
them all; amongst other of their expressions, they affirmed that I was the
greatest Incendiary in the Kingdom, and that they would prove it, and that I
was an Apostate, and that now I had forgot my own sufferings, and the kindness
that had been showed unto me by the godly party; and of a sufferer was become a
persecuter of the Saints, and many words of contumely and disgrace they daily
utterd against me, and for no other cause but that I dissented from them in
opinion, and that I professed it was not for the safety of the Church and
Kingdom to tolerate all Religions: for I never wronged any of them in word or
deed. So that they gave me just occasion then to suspect, though I knew there
were many truly fearing God in that number, yet that the Religion of many of
their leaders was but a mere faction: and I had very good reason for this my
conceit, as the following discourse will more fully declare: for I never yet
thought that true Religion consisted in word and tongue, or in opinion; but in
rightly believing, and in conscionably and duly practicing what God in his holy
Word has taught unto his people, which is, to lead a godly, righteouus, and
sober life, and to live in charity and amity amongst the Brethren, and to show
love unto all for the better winning of them; and to follow Christ in doing and
suffering, to whose example all Christians must conform themselves if they
will be his Disciples and partake with him in his glory; and as they must set
Christ before them for imitation, so they must be obedient likewise to his
commands who has enjoined all his followers to love one another, telling them
that by this it will be known that they are his Disciples if they love one
another. Now although I heard often of the Independents New-lights, I saw none
of their new lives: for I well perceived they had no great regard to this
command of Christ of mutual loving their Brethren, which he had so often
inculcated upon all Christians, and that upon the least dissenting from them in
their new and fond opinions of Independency, they forthwith proclaimed us all
enemies of Christ and his kingdom, and disavowed all communion with the
Brethren in holy things, and would neither admit our children to baptism, nor
our selves to the Sacraments with them, but separated themselves from us; and
in most odious Pamphlets laid all disgrace upon their Brethren, dehorting their
followers from reading our books, or hearing of our godly Ministers, and
declining all communion with us, and rather joining with the common Enemy; all
which their proceeding made me think that their religion was but faction, and
that now there was no place left for a Moderator amongst them, and that All art
of persuasion would be thought but a flattery or cowardice; and hearing and
seeing also how slight opinions they had of indifferent men, and how they only
made use of a moderation for the strengthening of their party, I then gave my
self really to discover the frauds and juglings of many of their Ministers; and
all to see that if by this means when their falcaies were once discovered, the
truth might more oriently appear, which would the better make way for a
Moderator, if any thing may undeceive a poor deluded multitude. And so well
acquainted I was with the language of many of them, as I easily discerned that
if they could but once make a party strong enough, they would then give laws
to all men: and for the strengthening of their faction in the mean time, they
plead for a tolleration of all Religions; an opinion, though pleasing to the
flesh, yet so diabolical, as I wonder any Christian truly fearing God should
so much as open his mouth in defense of it; or that any Christian truly fearing
God can with patience hear such Beasts plead for a tolleration, it being a
thing so abominated by God himself, and so odious to all the holy Prophets and
Apostles. And yet notwithstanding this is the doctrine of all the Independents
for the strengthening of their party; and they abuse Scripture for this purpose,
and use many impious and vain cavils for this very end, to some of the which I
have answered in my former Book: and the chiefest of those that I ever yet saw
are in a railing Pamphlet set forth against M. William Prynne Esquire; called, The
falsehood of M. William Prynnes truth triumphing in the antiquity of Popish
Princes and Parliaments. In the which Treatise, amongst many things against all
authority and power of Parliaments, which I leave to the consideration of the
great Council of the kingdom, whom it most nighly concerns: he greatly
pleads for a toleration of all Religions, and to that end sets down six
Impossibilities (as he terms them) which do necessarily accompany persecution
for cause of conscience (for all opposition of error is persecution with these
men, though they oppose truth it self for the maintenance of their novelties)
the which his impossibilities I shall set down forthwith in order, and answer
them severally, after I have made my just defense against such of their
calumnies as are worthy the taking notice of: as for some of their scurrilous
reproaches, all men that are honest and know my conversation can testify the
contrary, and therefore I slight such things as savouring of nothing but
rancour and venom, which they accused me of before they had seen my book. But
whereas they calumniate me as the greatest Incendiary of the Kingdom, they
most shamefully abuse me, and I have been freed from that reproach by both
Houses of Parliament, who adjudged all my sufferings unjust, as against the law
and liberty of the Subject. And if it were a thing that could be any way
useful unto me. I could prove by the testimony of many of the brave Gentlemen
in the Kings Army, who in great assemblies did acknowledge, when I was a
prisoner amongst them, that I had great injury done me. Yea the Papists
themselves have often averred it, that never any Subject suffered more unjustly
then I did, in that I was cast in prison and fined, for maintaining the
Prerogative Royal of the King against the Pope; and for defending of that
Religion which was established by the Laws of the Land: and further added,
that had any Catholic writ as well in defense of their Religion, as I did for
the maintenance of the Protestant Profession, he should have been so far from
suffering for it, as they would not only greatly have honored him, but also
highly have rewarded him for his endeavor; and this that I now write I am able
to prove by a cloud of witnesses: and my unjust suffering in their opinion,
made me find more favor amongst all the Governors that were Papists (which I
do ever acknowledge for a singular courtesy from them) then ever I found from
Protestant Gaolers. And therefore, whereas the Independents do accuse me for
the greatest Incendiary of the kingdom, all men may see, they speak as
untruly, so most maliciously. For it is well known, till I declared my
dissenting opinion from them, I was much magnified by most of them, though now
they have other thoughts of me; and accuse me, not only to be an Incendiary,
and that my Book deserves to be burnt by the hand of the common Hangman, but
that I am a man crased in my brain. But whereas they reproach me that I am an
Apostate, this, all that know me will free me from: yea, the very Brownists and
Anabaptists will be my witnesses, besides my former writings, which have been
set forth to the view of the World: for all men know that an Apostate is one
that either diserteth his General or Captain, and falls to the Enemy; or
renounceth his Religion, and opposes that way he has formerly made profession
of; both which rather agrees to many of the Independents then to my self, as
the ensuing discourse (I am confident will sufficiently declare.) And now that
I may say something of my education, which many at this instant in the City,
and them men of emunency, can witness for me, that have known me from my
childe-hood. At sixteen years of age, after I had, following the customs of
youth, spent my tender days in the pleasures of Hawking and Hunting, I was
sent by my Christian Kindred to a Village in Essex called Wethersfield, under
the Ministry of that learned and reverend Preacher Mr. Richard Rogers, who
writ that divine Book called, The seven Treatises: by whose means, under God, I
came to the knowledge of the truth, and to that learning that God has given
me: for he out of his tender love unto me, took me into his Family, and in a
short time by the rare dexterity he had in educating of youth, being a brave
Scholar, and one of the best Latinists of the Kingdom, (through the blessing
of God upon his endeavor) made me fit for the University, in which space he
had an especial care to season me well in all the principles of the true
Protestant Religion. And as his whole life was a preaching, he so instructed
me, as before my departure from him, I was able to give an account and reason
of my hope, to any that asked me of my Belief. And in all his Ministry,
doctrine, and preaching, he swarved nothing from the doctrine received in all
the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, as those in France, Germany, and the
Low Countries, saving in the point of the Sabbath, and sanctifying of the Lords
day; of which (to his honor be it spoken) he was a diligent observer; ever
teaching and urging upon the people the holy and religious keeping of that day;
which to say the truth, is one of the excellentest means of upholding piety and
godliness: and as in his doctrine, so in his example he went before all the
people in a strict observing of that day, employing it only in the duties of
piety and charity, always either in praying, or preaching, or catichizing, or
repeating of his Sermons, or in meditation, or in visiting the sick, or
relieving the necessitated. And in this faith I was instructed, and in this,
through the grace of God I now stand firm; and in the which by Divine
assistance I shall ever persevere to the last period of my life; never as yet
having swarved from those principles, notwithstanding all opposition. And from
under this reverend man's ministry and preaching I went to Cambridge, where by
his means Dr. Chudderton the Master of Emanuel College (in which I was a
Studient) a man of fame for piety, in his generation, took me into his own
tutering, and pleased to make me his companion (an honor that many of my
betters enjoyed not) and he also had as great a care to further me in those
principles of Religion I had formerly been indoctrinated in, as any man living
could have. And from him I went into the Low Countries, where I lived four
years and a half in the Universities of Leiden and Franeker; and half that
time in the house of reverend Doctor Amise; who pleased so highly to honor me,
as he likewise made me his companion, and was a most painful Tutor unto me,
and added greatly by his learned Lectures, and private communication, to the
confirming and strengthening of me, in all those orthodox truths I had formerly
been instructed in. And from thence I went to Geneva, where there were as
learned and orthodox Ministers (save only in the point of the Sabbath, in which
I shall ever dissent from them) as any in the world. Now I never have deserted
my General, the King of Saints, and King of Kings, the Lord Jesus Christ, and
Julian-like apostated from my Captain, or from my Christian religion; nor
never have swarved from any opinion in doctrine, that is embraced or believed
in the Reformed Churches, or taught by the orthodox and learned Ministers of
the Church of England; or from any opinion that I made public profession of,
or ever pleaded for or persuaded others to embrace; the God of Heaven and my
conscience bearing me witness, and as all that know me can testify, as many
that are now Independents have done. And therefore they deal most injuriously
with me, and unchristianly, to call me an Apostate, and only because I oppose
their Independency. Now whereas they say, that I have forgot that I was a
sufferer, and remember not the former kindnesses showed unto me by the godly of
the Land, and that I am now turned a persecutor; they do me in this also a
great deal of wrong: for I have never forgotten any kindness showed me by
any, as the following discourse will sufficiently show: Neither have I forgot
that I was a sufferer, or am now a persecutor of the Saints (as they calumniate
me) though I shall ever oppose all Heresies and novelties in Religion in the
very Saints, as Paul opposed Petes error, Gal. 2. when he temporized, and did
not walk uprightly; and desire all Christian Magistrates, and Ministers, and
Parents, and Masters of families, and all good people to do the same, because I
have been a sufferer for the Truth. But it seems strange to me, that the
Independents should use such an Argument to me, That I should not oppose all
Heresies and novelties in Religion, and exhort all other good Christians to do
the same, because I have been a sufferer for the Truth. One would think that
this should rather be a motive and incitement to put me on to oppose all error,
because I have suffered for the Truth before: for if that be a good reason to
deter men from defending of the Truth against Errors and Innovations in
Religion, because they themselves have been sufferers for Religion, then Elias,
Esaiah, Jeremiah, and all the holy Prophets should have been deterred to oppose
all Errors, because they had been persecuted for the Truth, and suffered at
wicked and ungodly men's hands for it; and yet they notwithstanding were the
more encouraged to inveigh against all the false Prophets and Teachers of their
times, as all the Scripture of the Old Testament witnesses: and Christ also,
and John Baptist, and all the blessed Apostles who suffered grievous
persecutions; some of which were whipped in every good Town they came in, and
were stigmatized, and gloried that they carried the marks of the Lord Jesus
about them. And all these therefore, by this Argument of the Brethren, should
have been afraid and discouraged to oppose the Errors, Heresies, and novelties
in Religion in their days: whereas on the contrary we find that Christ and
John the Baptist, and all the Apostles, ever opposed the Errors, Schisms, and
Heresies of their times, with all the false Teachers; calling them A generation
of Vipers Wolves in Sheeps clothing, ravinous Wolves, Children of the Devil,
Enemies of the cross of Christ, Dogs, evil workers, them of the Concision,
Heretics, and wished that they were cut off; and give them such odious names,
as there can be no more reproachful uttered: The same did all the holy
Prophets; and yet all these were sufferers: The same did Luther, Calvin,
Zwinglius, Bullinger, against all the Sects of their times, and yet they were
all persecuted by the Papists. And therefore it is not a dishonor, but a
praise to all those that love the Truth and have suffered for it, ever to
oppose all Errors in Religion: yea, it would argue great cowardice and
baseness in any Christian, or at least, that he were now very cold in
Religion, that would not so much as open his mouth in defense of that Truth he
had formerly suffered for, for fear of offending men. And if this Argument be
of any power to dissuade any man from opposing errors in Religion because they
have been sufferers for it; then the Independents themselves should not so
bitterly inveigh against those Tenants they count Errors: for they brag much of
their sufferings also, and cry out daily of Persecution, when notwithstanding
no man troubles them; howsoever they with all reviling speeches daily persecute
their brethren under the name of Presbyterians: But, I say, if this Argument
will make any thing against me, to dissuade me from defending of the truth, and
exhorting all good Christians to oppose all Heresies and Innovations in
Religion: why then do the Independents in all their Pulpits, and in all their
scurrilous and blasphemous writings oppose the Truth it self: and why do they
for the setting up of their New-lights, and for the bringing in of their own
Traditions and Novelties, persecute their brethren with all injurious
languages, worse then ever Ishmael used toward Isaac, or Esau toward Jacob;
and proclaim them all enemies of Jesus Christ and his kingdom, and
persecutors; for they also have been sufferers, and that eminent ones, and have
undergone great persecution for Religigion, as they publish to the world in
their writings? If it be tolerable therefore, and praiseworthy in the
Independents to oppose the Truth, notwithstanding they have been sufferers?
will any rational man count it an intolerable thing in me, to oppose the
errors and novelties of the Independents, which they would impose upon the
people of God, as his laws, (when they are but their own inventions) and as
things necessary to salvation? And will any reasonable creature call this a
persecution in any, if in his own person, to the uttermost of his abilities he
labors to defend the truth, and convince error, and exhort all those that fear
God to do the same because he has been a sufferer? I conceive upon
deliberation he will have a more charitable opinion of such an one. And if this
be a crime in such as have suffered for Religion, to resist Error? the
Independents are guilty of the same as deeply as any other; for they also
should remember they have bin sufferers; and yet they maintain their Novelties
for truths, and exhort all their followers to do the same, and to oppose all
gainsayers, which they do to the uttermost of their power in words and deeds,
and count this their honor and a great virtue, yea valor, and yet blame it in
me and in all the Presbyterians; and I know no reason why I, or any
Presbyterian should not be as valiant for truth, as others should be for the
upholding of their errors and Innovations, especialiy when they fly so high in
their Expressions, as to make them the only way to heaven, and that whosoever
is not in that their way, they are in the broad street to perdition; and
exclaim against all such as oppose their opinions as persecutors of the ways
of God, for this is their usual dialect; yea, their ordinary language and
custom, to call all writing and preaching against the Errors and Heresies of
the time, Persecution, in all the faithful Ministers and people; which duty
notwithstanding they are bound unto by Christ, and all the holy Prophets and
Apostles, who are by them commanded to lift up their voices like a Trumpet, to
oppose and rebuke all gainesayers, and to contend for the faith once delivered
to the Saints. And this is the language of that Author, that writ the Arainment
of Persecution, and he that writ that malicious Pamphlet against M. Prynne; who
calls him, and all the Presbyterians, Persecutors; whose wicked and vain
Cavils, by which he labors to prove the necessity of a tolleration of all
Religions, are these following. His words are these. Six impossibilities which
do necessarily accompany Persecution for cause of conscience.

1. It is impossible that the Gospel should come to be preached unto all
Nations, if men may be questioned for matters of conscience. 2. It is
impossible that such as know but in part, should grow in knowledge, or from one
measure and degree of Faith unto another. 3. It is impossible that in a
rational way there should be a firm secure peace throughout the World, nay,
not in a Province, City, or Town, so long as men may make a point of
conscience to compel one another to their opinions. 4. It is impossible to
prescribe such a way for suppressing new and different opinions whatsoever,
which to any State or Church may seem Heretical, but there will still be left
a gap, a possibility of fighting against God, even when such State or Church
think they fight for him most of all. 5. It is impossible that either the weak
Believers, mis-believers, or unbelievers, can be won by our godly
conversation, as is required, 1 Pet. 2.12. and 3.1, 2. and 1 Cor. 7.12.16. so
long as we will not suffer them to live amongst us. 6. It is impossble for a
man to hold fast the truth, or be fully persuaded in his own heart of what he
does, of what Religion he makes choice of; unless after he has searched the
Scriptures, and tried the spirits whether they be of God or no, it be lawful
for him to reject that which shall appear to him as evil, and adhere to that
which seems good in his own judgment and apprehension.
These are the formal words of the Author that writ that Pamphlet, by which he
endeavors to maintain that hellish opinion, The tolleration of all Religions.
To the which I shall briefly answer, after I have set down some testimonies out
of holy Scripture concerning Persecution.

Yet before I go any further, I desire all men by the way to take notice, that
whiles I labor to show the vanity and invalidity of this Cavillers assertions,
I animate no man to persecute the truth: For I know that persecution of the
true Religion is the greatest sin in the world (one only excepted:) and
therefore that all men should ever be careful to offend in this kind, lest
they bring speedy destruction upon themselves by it: but they must also be as
diligent to take heed, lest whiles they would show a vice, they neglect not
their duty and decline a virtue; which is to oppose all errors and falsehood in
Religion: for that is as great a sin on the other side. But now I will produce
some testimonies out of holy Scripture, and reasons from thence; to show, that
to be questioned for matters of conscience or persecution (as they call it) for
cause of conscience, imposes not an impossibility (as they would infer) that
the Gospel by this means should be preached unto all Nations, nor hinders not
the growth of grace in Christians, nor the measure and degrees of faith in
them, which is the first and second of these Propositions; and the which, to
speak the truth, are the main and chiefest of all the Independents Arguments,
by which they labor to evince the necessity of a tolleration of all Religions
(that prodigious Tenent) lest forsooth, otherwise the course of the Gospel, and
the increase of grace in the Saints should be hindered if men should (as they
pretend) be persecuted for cause of conscience, which is no better, then whiles
they seem to dispute, to blaspheme, and to give Christ and the Spirit of God
the lie, who teach the contrary; and to fight against the holy Scripture and
truth it self, as will by and by appear. First therefore, I shall desire, that
Christ's own words may be heard; and then what the holy Apostles have spoken
concerning these points. Christ in Matthew. 10.17, 18, 19, etc. speaking to his
Disciples, says, Beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the Councels,
and will scourge you in their Synagogues, and ye shall be brought to the
Governors and Kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the
Gentiles; but when ye are delivered, take no thought how and what ye shall
speak, etc. For the Brother shall betray the Brother to death, and the Father
the Son, and the Children shall rise up against their Parents, and shall
cause them to dye: and ye shall be hated of all men for my Name sake, but he
that endures to the end, he shall be saved. And Luke 21.12, 13. our Savior
says there to his Disciples, Before all these they shall lay their hands on
you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the Assemblies, and into prisons;
and bring you before Kings and Rulers for my Name sake; and this shall turn to
you for a testimonial. And John 15.20. Christ speaking to his Disciples,
Remember (says he) the word I speak, to you, the Servant is not greater then
his Master; if they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also, etc. And
Chapter 16. verse. 1, 2. These things have I said unto you, that ye should not
be offended, they shall excommunicate you: yea, the time shall come, that
whosoever kills you, will think he does God service. So that the preachers of
the Gospel, must expect all manner of injuries, not only from open enemies, but
from such as seem to be of the same Family, and the very Pillars of the Church.
And in John 20.18. he foretells Peter, That howsoever when he was young he
went whether he would, yet when he was old he should be be led whether he would
not. And so in Mark 13. verse. 9. The doctrine of Persecution for the cause of
Christ is preached unto all the Apostles, where Christ says, They shall
deliver ye up to Councels, and to the Synagogues; and ye shall be beaten, and
be brought before Kings and Rulers for my sake for a testimony unto them. And
in Acts 9. verse. 15.16. The Lord said unto Ananias, go thy way, for he is a
chosen vessel unto me, (speaking of Paul) to bear my Name before the
Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of Israel; for I will show him how great
things he must suffer for my Names sake. And Saint Paul in his first Epistle to
the Thessalonians Chap. 3. verse. 2, 3. sending Timothy to comfort them
concerning the faith, that no man should be moved by their afflictions and
persecutions, gives them his reason why they should be of good courage, and
endure them patiently; For (says he) for your selves know that we are
appointed thereunto; so that every one that will be Christ's Disciple, must
deny himself, and take up his cross daily and follow him, Luke 9.23. he must
look for and expect persecution for it. And in 2 Timothy 3.11, 12. Thou have known
(says Saint Paul to Timothy) my persecutions and afflictions which I suffered,
but from them all, the Lord delivered me: yea, all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus (says he) shall suffer persecution. Innumerable places to this
purpose might be produced, out of all which, this truth may evidently be
gathered, for the comfort of all Gods people, and such as suffer persecution
for his names sake, That it is the will of God, that they should suffer for the
Gospel; and that they are called upon this condition, to endure affliction and
persecution, as being one of the means and ways God uses to bring them to
life eternal and endless glory; the knowledge and hope of which, supporteth
them in all their tribulations and persecutions: As is evident in 1 Pet. 5.10.
Heb. 10.34. and Heb. 11.26. And therefore from this apparent truth, and from
all the places above specified, I gather these two conclusions. The first, That
persecution or questioning any for conscience sake, imposes not an
impossibility, that by this means the Gospel should be preaced to all Nations.
The second, That the questioning of any for matters of conscience, inferres not
an impossibility, that such as know but in part, should grow in knowledge, or
from one measure and degree of faith unto another, as that Author in his first
assertions falsely affirms. And for proof of my first conclusion, and the
confutation of his first Position, the foregoing places abundantly declare it;
for the Apostles were to be haled before Kings and Rulers for this very end,
That they might give witness unto the Gospel; and by that very means that the
Gospel might come to be preached and published to all Nations, for so Christ
asserteth: and when he told Ananias in the ninth of the Acts, that he had
chosen Paul to be a vessel to carry his Name to the Gentiles, and before
Kings; in the words following he signifies by what means he should carry his
Name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and that was by his sufferings and
persecutions; for says Christ, I will show him how great things he must suffer
for my Names sake: for he being in all places wheresoever he came questioned
for his conscience, was committed to prison as an evil doer, and haled before
the Tribunals of the Rulers and Kings of the Earth; by which means he had an
opportunity to preach unto them the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, and the doctrine
of faith and repentance, which he did before Foelix, and King Agrippa, and
Festus; and after, before Caesar, to whom for justice he appealed as his
supreme Judge on earth; And to many mighty men, Princes, and Nobles besides,
and to many other people out of all countries that frequent Kings Palaces and
Courts of judicature, to learn knowledge and wisdom, and to get experience; so
that his persecution and questioning for matters of Religion and conscience,
were so far from hindering the course of the Gospel, as it greatly promoted
it, as afterward it will appear: for had not Paul and the other Apostles been
haled before Rulers and Governors for their conscience, they should never have
had an opportunity or any occasion to have come into their presence: and
therefore Christ that knew the best way of proclaiming the glad tidings of
peace to all the Nations of the Earth, made the cruel persecution of the
Adversaries, the very way of promulgating the Gospel to the whole World; and so
by his infinite wisdom brought good, the salvation of his people out of their
evil: And to speak nothing but what all Histories, both ancient and modern,
relate; this has ever been Gods method, by the persecution and scattering of
his people into all Nations, to make his Name known through the whole Earth.
And all men may know that have read the Histories of those times, that the
haling and citing of Luther before the Emperor of Germany, for matters of
conscience and Religion, was one of the chiefest means of propogating the
Protestant profession through all those Western Countries: for his stout
defending of the truth there against Ecchius, and his undaunted behavior in
the maintaining of the Gospel, made the World take notice of it; and by this
his public witnessing for the truth, it came to be divulged every where:
whereas, if he had never been questioned and called before the Emperor, there
is little probability that there would ever have been any notice taken of it by
the great men of the World. But when they perceived that the mighty Princes of
the Earth thought his Doctrine worthy the regarding, the Nobles and Peers of
Kingdoms also, then began to listen after it. The same may be said of all the
former Christians and Martyrs in Ages past; and of all our glorious Martyrs
here in England; some of which were haled before King Henry the eighth, and
others in Queen Mary's days, before all the Tribunals, before the Judges and
Rulers of the Land: by which means, as they gave evidence unto the truth, and
sealed it with their blood; so it was one of the principal causes of first
propagating the Protestant Religion through the Kingdom, and of afterward
establishing of it here: whereas, if they had never been questioned for their
consciences, by all likelihood, it would only have remained in some corners of
the Kingdom, and in some private Families; and never have been publicly
authorized. For the confirmation of all I have now said, the places above
cited, and Christ's own words, might sufficiently evince. But it will not be
amiss, to hear Paul's testimony concerning this point; whose witness I
conceive is more to be credited, then all the Independents put together, much
less then this Bablers. He in 2 Timothy chap. 2. verse. 9. speaking by the Spirit
of God concerning persecution, says, Wherein I suffer trouble (says he) as an
evil doer unto bands, but the Word of God is not bound: and in 2 Timothy chap. 4.
verse. 7. The Lord stood with me and strengthened me, that by me the preaching
might be fully known, that all the Gentiles might hear, etc. Out of the which
words we may observe two things. First, that the Apostle suffered for his
conscience, not for evil doing. Secondly, that his suffering notwithstanding,
hindered not the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations: for he himself
affirms the contrary, saying, That by his bonds the Word of God was not
bound; and by this his questioning and persecution, the preaching of the Gospel
was made fully known, that all the Gentiles might hear, etc. I refer it
therefore to the judgment of any learned and intelligible man, whether we
ought rather to believe the Spirit of God speaking in Paul, or this Chatter of
uncircumcised ears and lips? And Paul in Acts 20.22, 23. says, And now behold
I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem: not knwing the things that shall
befall me there, save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying,
that bonds and afflictions abide me. The same also was foretold unto him by
Agabus in Chap. 21. verse. 11. Yet Paul's bonds, neither in Jerusalem, nor in any
other City, and his being questioned for matters of conscience about the
Resurrection, before Foelix, King Agrippa, and Festus, hindered not the
propagation of the Gospel to all Nations, as this Jangler would infer: for
Paul himself testifying the contrary in his Epistle to the Philippians, chap.
1. verse. 12, 13. But I would ye should understand Brethren (says the Apostle)
that the things that happened unto me (speaking there of persecution) have fallen
out rather to the furtherance of the Gospel; so that my bonds for Christ are
manifest in Caesar's Court, and in all other places. By this testimony also of
Paul, it is evident that the persecution for cause of conscience, rather
furthereth the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, then hinders it; as is
yet more manifest through the whole story of the Acts; as for one instance,
chap. 8. verse. 4. where it is said, That they that were scattered abroad, went
every where preaching the Word. And all Ecclesiastical histories testify the
same: so that by this that I have now said, and many more evidences that might
be produced, it is clear, that persecution for cause of conscience imposes not
an impossibility, that by it, the Gospel should be preached to all Nations. For
persecution is the Bellows of the Gospel, driving every spark of truth into a
flame. So that all judicious men may see the vanity and invalidity of this
Cavillers first assertion. And this shall suffice to have been spoken of that.

Now I come to prove my second conclusion, viz. That persecution for cause of
conscience, hinders not the growth of grace and knowledge in the Saints: yea,
it is so far from hindering Christians from growing in knowledge, and from one
measure and degree of faith unto another, as this fond Babbler in his second
assertion would infer, as it every way improves their graces and knowledge;
as we may see in those in Heb. 11. concerning some of which the Lord gives
this testimony, verse. 34, 35, etc. Who through faith quenched the violence of
the fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong,
waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the Aliens. And others
were tortered, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better
resurrection. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings; yea,
moreover of bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawne asunder,
were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in Sheepskins and
Goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented: of whom the world was not
worthy: they wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of
the Earth; and all these having obtained a good report through faith, received
not the promise, etc. All these thrived rather by their afflictions, and
persecutions, and increased in grace, and out of weakness were made strong, if
we may believe the Scripture. The same is also affirmed concerning afflictions
and persecution for conscience sake, in Romans 8. where Paul says, Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword (as it is written,
for thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep to the
slaughter) nay, in all these things, we are more then conquerours, through him
that loved us. By this witness of the Apostle, persecution which has been the
lot of the Saints all the day long, that is to say, in all ages, is so far from
hindering the increase of grace, and the degrees of faith, that it makes them
more then conquerours, through him that loved us. And Peter writing to his
counntrey men, that by persecution were scattered and dispersed, through
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia, affirms the same; who in
chap. 1. verse. 5, 6, 7, etc. says, That they were kept by the power of God,
through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time; wherein
(meaning persecution) ye greatly rejoice, says he, though for a season (if
need be) ye are in heaviness, through many temptations; that the trial of
your faith being much more precious then that of gold that perishes, though it
be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ, who having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye
see him not; yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory,
receiving the end of your hope, even the salvation of your souls. And in chap.
3. verse. 14, 15. But if ye suffer for righteousness sake, says he, happy are
ye, and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled: but sanctify the
Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and
reverence. And Saint Paul, Phil. 1. verse. 27, 28, 29, 30. encouraging the
Philippians in their persecution, says, Let your conversation be as becomes
the Gospel of Christ: that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may
hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit with one mind,
striving together for the faith of the Gospel: and in nothing terrified by your
adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of
salvation, and that of God: for unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ,
not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake, having the same
conflict which ye saw in me, and now here to be in me. Here Paul animates the
Christians in those times to suffer cheerfully; telling them that it was a
great honor to them, and the gift of God to suffer for Christ's sake. That
therefore which is one of the eminentest means of the increase of the graces of
God, and the degrees of faith, and the gift of God, that cannot hinder the
growth of them: but to suffer persecution for Christ's sake, is one of the
eminentest means of the increase of the graces of God, and of the degrees of
faith, and is the special gift of God. Ergo, persecution cannot hinder the
growth of the graces of Gods Spirit in the Saints.

And for proof of this the testimony of S. Peter in chap. 5. verse. 10.
suffices. The God of all grace, says he, who has called us into his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, and settle you. So that by Peter's testimony, persecution
for conscience sake, and for Christ's cause, does perfect, stablish, strengthen,
and settle men: it is a means to increase all the graces of Gods Spirit, and
therefore hinders not their growth. And in the Chapter going before, verse. 12,
13, 14. Beloved (says he) think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, as
though some strange thing happened unto you; but rejoice, in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings: and if ye be reproached for the Name of
Christ, happy are ye: for the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you:
Here is a mighty increase of graces by reason of persecutions: for the Spirit
of glory and of God rests upon sufferers by them. And therefore in the
conclusion of his second Epist. speaking to his country men scattered here and
there through persecution; Grow (says he) in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Savior Jesus Christ, etc. Now if this Gentleman's second assertion be true,
That it is impossible that such as know but in part, should grow in knowledge,
or from one measure of degree of faith to another, if men should be questioned
for matters of conscience: which are his express terms. Then the exhortation
of Peter to those that were under persecution, that they should be always
ready to give an answer of their hope; and that they should grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of our Savior Jesus Christ, were to no purpose. And all that
he affirms in his Epistles, concerning their growth in all the graces of the
holy Spirit: and all that Paul testifies in 2 Cor. chap. 1. touching the
benefit of persecutions; and the good that redounds not only to those by them
that suffer, but to all the Saints; who were encouraged by their example, more
willingly to endure affliction: and were thereby the more strengthened, and got
the more increase of all graces by them: and whatsoever S. Paul writ in his
second Epistle to the Thessalonians, chap. 1. concerning the Christians growth
in patience and faith, through the persecutions and tribulations they then
endured for conscience sake; and whatsoever he has testified to the contrary
in his Epistle to the Philippians, and in all his other Epistles; and
whatsoever the whole Scripture has evidenced in this behalf, concerning the
growth and increase of all the graces of Gods Spirit, by reason of their
persecution, for conscience sake, and for Christ's cause; all these witnesses I
say should be nothing; yea, untrue, and mere falsehood, if this Cavillers
assertion be true: yea, all the Independents themselves should be notorious
liars if these Positions be veritable: for they brag exceedingly what increase
there is daily of the Independents, and of all their graces; and what abundance
of New-lights do daily appear by reason of their persecution (for so they
please to style every opposition of their errors) and glory in all companies
where they come, what multitudes have lately joined with the^ in their New
ways, by reason of the opposition of it; and for that some of their Leaders
have been questioned before the Committee about matters of conscience: and this
that I now say, can be proved by an Iliad of witnesses. So that I refer it to
all judicious men, whether we ought to believe Christ and the holy Ghost
speaking in all the Penmen of the Scriptures, who assert, that persecution for
religion and conscience, increase the graces of God in Christian sufferers, or
this wretched and temerarious Novice; who boldly and impudently dares give the
Spirit of God the lie, and contradict the whole Scripture; and which is much,
oppose all the Fraternity of the Independents: For this man affirms, that it
is impossible that men should grow in knowledge, or from one measure and degree
of faith to another, if they be persecuted or questioned for matters of
conscience. And yet the Spirit of God says the contrary, and the experience of
all the Saints confutes this assertion. And if the Independents themselves may
be believed, they also refell this Position, boasting daily, not only of the
increase of their graces by opposition and questioning, but of the increase of
the mighty multitudes of them by reason of that. So that every one of but
shallow capacity may see the vanity of this Juglers two first conclusions. For
the four other following, they are answered in this that I have now said. Yet a
word or two more, to show the nothingnesse and wickedness of them, will not be
amiss. For whereas he boldly affirms, That it is impossible that in a
rational way there should be a firm secure peace through the World, nay not
in a Province, City, or Town, so long as men make a point of conscience to
compel one another to their opinions. This I assert is, to confute Gods own
Word in Deuteronomy. 13. who has commanded there, that whosoever should teach a
contrary Doctrine to that that was taught by Moses, should be questioned, and
suffer death for it; and that by this means a firm peace would be settled
amongst Gods people, and through their borders: for as idolatry and errors is
a cause of Gods wrath, and by that a cause of all troubles; so the removing of
the cause is the way to settle the peace of Kingdoms. And if we read the
History of the Judges, and indeed all the Prophets, and holy Scriptures, we
shall find the not questioning and bringing of the Seducers and false Prophets
to condign punishment, was the cause of all their captivities, and of all the
wars and troubles the Israelites were continually imbroyled with. And
therefore they that are acquainted with the holy Scriptures, may easily see the
falsity and impiety of this assertion: to say nothing what all Ecclesiastical
Histories, and the Stories of all Ages relate, of the continuation of peace in
all those Nations and Kingdoms, as long as men were both questioned and
punished for bringing in of Heresies, and teaching of false doctrines; and as
long as they preserved the truth of Christian doctrine amongst them, which no
sooner begun to be corrupted, and errors set up, but immediately upon it, Gods
wrath was kindled against those Kingdoms and Countries: and if we will give
credit unto the Word of God, and to the Annals of times, the suffering and
tollerating of errors in religion amongst them, was the cause that the Lord was
angry with them, and removed at last their Candlesticks from them, as we may
see at this day in the seven Churches of Asia, and all the Eastern and
Western Churches: and if we will not shut our eyes, we may see also, it has
been the cause of all these miserable distractions and troubles that now these
three Kingdoms are involved in; which if they had established the Gospel in
its purity, and kept out Idolatry, and all Heresies, wickedness, and Schisms,
we should not have thus been afflicted on every side at home and abroad: for
the neglect of our duties in not keeping out of errors in religion, has
brought down all these judgments upon us: and therefore the tollerating of
them all would much more increase our misery, and disturb the peace both of
the Cities and country; and therefore all such as plead for a tolleration of
all religions, ought to be spued out of the Kingdom, as profane and impious
men. And this shall suffice to have been spoken of this third assertion, which
is indeed to make war against God himself, and not against us only. For the
fourth, where he says, That it is impossible to prescribe such a way for
suppressing new or different opinions whatsoever, which to any State or Church
may seem heretical, but there will still be left a gap, a possibility of
fighting against God, even when such State on Church think they fight for him
most of all. This Position also is not only contrary unto the Word of God, but
indeed overthrows all authority; and by this, no justice should be done
against any blasphemous Seducers, or against any impious offenders in points
of Religion, or against such as offend against the Laws of Kingdoms and
Nations; because for footh by doing of their duty, which God requires at
Magistrates hands, there will still be left a gap and a possibility of fighting
against God: as if to do good, and that which God enjoynes them, would leave
open a gap and a possibility of fighting against God. I have read, That we may
not do evil that good may come of it; I have also read, that God can create
good out of evil, and bring light out of darkness: but I have never read in
the Word of God, That Christian Magistrates and Rulers should be deterred from
doing their duty, and suppressing of Schisms, Errors, and Heresies; because
through the wickedness of men, and the craft and subtilty of Satan, there may
sometimes troubles immediately arise to any Nation by it: All good Magistrates
are to do their duty, and what God commands, and leave the success to God; and
to commend themselves and their endeavors to the Lord, who has a recompense
of reward in store for them for their well doing; and ought not to be deterred
from their duties by such poor cavils as these, which are both impious and
ridiculous. And whereas in the fifth assertion he affirms, That it is
impossible that either the weak believers, misbelievers or unbelievers, can be
won by our godly conversation, as is required, 1 Pet. 2.12. and 3.1, 2. and 1
Cor. 7.12, 16. So long as we will not suffer them to live amongst us. What is
this, but openly to fight against Gods Word, and God himself. Who Deuteronomy. 13.
and in many other places of Scripture, commands that Secucers should be put
to death, and exterminated and cast out from amongst Gods people, whose wicked
conversation would corrupt others; and be so far from winning weak Believers,
mis-believers, or unbelievers, as it would make them all worse and worse, and
utterly vitiate all the places they dwell in, as daily experience teaches us,
and as the Scripture affirms; which assert, that A little leaven leaveneth
the whole lump, 1 Cor. verse. 6. As for the places of Scripture, he there
cites, as they make nothing for his purpose, so they sufficiently show that he
is a mere stranger in Divinity; and in the Word of God, as I could evidently
make appear if I studied not brevity. And it might also be made evident, that
the banishments and persecutions of many of Gods people, as well as their
presence and co-habitations amongst the wicked, have been the cause of many
thousand men's conversions; who seeing men willingly to relinquish all earthly
things, and leaving their own countries and nighest relations for their
religion, made others the more to look into that doctrine, and to enquire after
that religion, that men for the love of, would lose all things; yea, liberty
and life it self; which, I say, has been the cause of the conversion of many
thousands: so that not only the presence but the absence of men is the cause of
many others conversion, by which the vanity of this assertion is also
sufficiently manifest.

But it seems strange to me that this wrangler should use this Argument to
prove a Tolleration of all Religions, when the practice of the Independents is
contrary, who cast all that are of a different opinion from them, out of their
Congregations: and where they have power in their hands, banish them from
amongst them; and yet here in England they would have all Religions tolerated
to do mischief, when Saint John notwithstanding in his 2 Epistle to the Elect
Lady, forbids her, and in her all Christians, to receive false teachers into
their houses, or so much as to bid them God speed, lest they that shall so do,
partake with them in their evils; by which doubtless he never gave a
tolleration of all Religions: but as I said before, it is well known that
people are converted many times, as well by the absence of men, as by their
presence, whether it be for error or for the Truth: for by enquiring after the
cause of it, and why they were banished, they come to the knowledge of the
truth and error, and so to shun the one and love the other.

And now I come to the sixth and last. It is impossible for a man (says he) to
hold fast truth, or be fully persuaded in his own heart of what he does, or
what Religion he makes choice of; unless after he has searched the
Scriptures, and tried the Spirits, whether they be of God or no, it be lawful
for him to reject that which shall appear to him as evil, and adhear to that
which seems good in his own judgment. In a word, by this man's Divinity,
without there be a tolleration of all Religions, and that it be left arbitrary
for every man to take and choose what Religion he pleases, it is impossible to
hold fast the truth; for this is his meaning: now if this be good doctrine,
then the devil is a good teacher, for this came from hell: but because this
his Position has the greatest appearance of reason of all the rest with the
simple people, who much conside in the strength of it; it will not be amiss to
say something to it, although with any rational men, if it be well considered
and weighed, it can never infer a necessity of a tolleration of all Religions,
an opinion so hetrogeniall to the holy Scripture, and so contrary to piety: for
the Word of God which must be the rule of our faith, in diverse places declares
Gods dislike of all strange opinions and doctrines, commanding all ministers
and people to cleave unto the Law and to the Testimony, Esa. 8. And that they
should teach no other doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.3. And that they should take heed of
fables, etc. verse. 4. That is, of men's inventions: And that they should hold
fast the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. And if any man teach otherwise, and
consent not to wholesome words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to
the doctrine which is according to godliness, that they should withdraw
themselves from such, 1 Timothy 6.3.5. And that they should hold fast the
faithful Word as they have been taught, Tit. 1.9. And that they should rebuke
men sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, not giving heed to Jewish
fables, and the Commandments of men, that turn from the truth, ver. 13.14. And
that they should not be wise above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. And that
whosoever teaches a contrary doctrine tending to seduction, should be put to
death, Deuteronomy. 13. All this the holy Scripture teaches in numberless places.
Now then when Christians know the good will and pleasure of God, and are
likewise taught out of the Word of God, as Deuteronomy. 6. and Deuteronomy. 11. And in diverse
other places, that it is their duty that they should bring up their children
and families in the nurture and fear of the Lord, and instruct them in the
knowledge of his Commandments, that is, that they should educate them
according to the Will of God, and in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, as
Timothies grandmother and mother did him from his childhood: I say, when all
Christian Parents bring up their children, and indoctrinate their families
after this rule and manner, they may hold fast the truth very well, and be
fully persuaded of it in their own hearts, although they never so much as hear
of any Heresy, or of any strange opinion. For as our Savior says, Matthew. 22.
Ye err not knowing the Scriptures, etc. So that the knowledge of the Scripture
it self, is able to keep all men from error, as teaching the way, the truth,
and the life, etc. And as all wilful ignorance of the Scripture is both
sinful and blameworthy amongst all good men, so there is a learned nescience,
which is as commendable, as the other is vituperable: and that is, when men
desire not to be wise above that which is written (for so they are commanded)
so that the understanding of that which is written in the Book of God, and to
know God to be the only true God, and him who he has sent, Jesus Christ, which
is life eternal, John 17. This is the only knowledge necessary to salvation:
and all this a man may learn and attain to, without a tolleration of all
Religions, which they call liberty of conscience, which is a most irreligious
opinion, and no way beseeming a Christian: for as Saint Paul says, Let every
one that names the Name of Christ depart from evil, 2 Timothy 2.19. Now
tolleration of all Religions is such an evil, as there cannot be a greater,
and more displeasing to God; for it is a very fighting against God. And for
that liberty of conscience the Scripture speaks of, it is no other, then that
all Christians are now freed from the yoke of all legal Ceremonies, and
traditions, and inventions of men, and from the curse and rigor of the Law:
but from that liberty to infer a tolleration of all Religions, is most impious
and absurd: and it is as wicked to conclude, that we are not tied to the
obedience of the Law, both Moral and Evangelicall; for this is against all the
tenure of the holy Scriptures, and against all sound reason, as will by and by
appear. And therefore all Christian parents ought to instruct their children
and households in the Law and Gospel, as they will answer it before God at his
dreadful Tribunal. And if their children will not by kindness be induced and
brought to that that is good, they are to be forced to it by the Rod and
correction: for Solomon so instructs all Parents in diverse places of the
Proverbs. And it was the sin of old Ely, in 1 Samuel 2. that he did not
chastize his children, and severely punish them for their wickedness, and
force them to obey the commands of God, and this was the cause of the Lords
displeasure against him, that he cast off his Family from being Priests, and
removed the place of his worship from Shilo, to teach all Christians to take
heed by his example; saying, I will honor them that honor me, and they that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed of. So that to see sin and errors in
children, and to connive at them, and not to punish them for it, is to despise
God. And therefore they ought to force them to obedience, unto that religion
God has appointed; and if they will yet persevere, and continue to be
rebellious against God and their Parents, they are to be cut off by the Law of
God. Conscience here must be forced, the Will of God must be obeyed (there is
no dispensation given to transgression, or to commit evil, though good might
come of it:) and that Will and good pleasure of God, we have set down clearly
and evidently in the holy Scriptures, Psalm. 19. The knowledge of which is
enjoined to all Christians, as necessary to salvation. But for all vain
opinions and new Doctrines, and traditions, and inventions of men, under the
name of New-lights, if a man never hears so much as the mention of them, he may
very well go to Heaven, and hold fast the truth, and be fully persuaded in is
heart of the truth of his religion: and this truth the Word of God holds out,
to all those the god of this World has not blinded their eyes, that they
should not see the glorious Light of it: so that there needs not a tolleration
of all Religions for their illumination to find out what Religion they will
make choice of, as this presumptuous gain-sayer infers, who peremptorily
concludes, That it is impossible for a man to hold fast the truth, or be fully
persuaded in his own heart of what he does, or of what religion he makes choice
of, unless it be left arbitrary to him to reject or choose what seems good to
him in his own judgment: which if it be not a piece of blasphemy, I never read
any, or any thing more tending to the overthrow of the authority of holy
Scripture; and to subject the Will and pleasure of God, to the will, pleasure,
and judgment of man, then the which there (...) be nothing more intolerable:
for God teaches us one thing, and this Doctor teaches the clean contrary: and
by his doctrine, leaves not only a gap, a possibility of sighting against God,
but it is a doctrine in it self, that fights against God, and gives the Spirit
of God the lie, which confirms the contrary. And if such doctrines as these
may be tolerated, and such Teachers as these go unpunished, they will in time
reject the whole Scripture, both Law and Gospel; as many of the Sectaries have
already attempted to do, to the unsufferable dishonor of God, and to the
provoking of his displeasure against the whole Nation. And such doctrine as
this is, is heretical, and so is a great deal more of the Independent
doctrine: which is one of the reasons which makes me so much oppose it. For as
the false Teacher Acts 15. verse. 1. and Gal. 5. taught the Brethren besides the
Gospel, that except they were circumcised after the manner of Moses, they
could not be saved, which was a Heresy: and that that Saint Paul, speaking by
the Spirit of God, told them, would exclude them out of Heaven, as is evident,
Gal. 5. verse. 2, 3, 4. So now the Independent Ministers impose their own
inventions and traditions upon the people, as things necessary to salvation,
which makes it a Heresy. And therefore when they preach up their own novelties
as necessary to life eternal, proclaiming unto the people that their way is
the straight way to Heaven, and that they that are out of it are in the broad
path to destruction (as can be proved by a cloud of witnesses, and indeed their
daily practice teaches it) and when they urge this doctrine upon the people as
necessary to happiness; I affirm it is an heretical doctrine, and ought of
all Gods people as much to be detested as any Popery: for it is Popery it self
in new clothes, which all the faithful in the Land have taken a covenant to
expel: and so much the more they ought to have a singular care that this
doctrine spread not too far, nor that this Faction get not a Head: For I heard
it not long since from the mouth of a very godly Gentlewoman of a good Family,
who affirmed it in the presence of an Independent Ministers Wife, That to her
knowledge there was an hundred pound at one time sent up to London, or at least
procured to be paid by some from Oxford, for the gratifying of some here, that
were very great Sticklers and Promooters of the Independent party, for their
farther encouragement; and animated them by any wise to uphold that faction,
for they conceived it would be one of the best means for the attaining of their
own ends and the common design, for the ruin of us all, and the enslaving of
the whole City and Kingdom. Now I say if this Independent Doctrine be so
prejudicial to us all for soul and body, and so dangerous in every respect, it
concerns not only the Parliament and great Council, but the whole City and
Kingdom to look about them, and take heed how they have their hands in
supporting of it, or any way how they soment it, as they tender either the
glory of God, or the present or future good of soul or body, of this Nation,
and the good of the Church and State. And truly if there were nothing to bring
a man into a detestation of their ways, but their uncharitableness unto their
brethren, it were enough to make any good christian dislike them, for they
never speak of them but with contumelious names, and with vilifying and
blasting language, such as is too low for any people of virtue, reputation, and
honor; using to call them all at every word, the enemies of Jesus Christ,
Presbyterian Persecutors, dehorting people from hearing our Godly Ministers, or
for reading any thing written by them or any other, against their opinions,
(after the manner of the Jesuits) slighting the most learned Preachers, and
their Orthodox writings as things of nothing, saying that every boy and silly
woman in their Congregations, can answer any thing any Presbyterian can write;
and then set one or other of their confounded widows, or some such creature,
upon that employment, who scrible nonsense as familiarly as a Jackanapes cracks
nuts; and this is admired amongst all the Independents, as an incomporable
piece; and their authorities are often cited in the Pamphlets of their learned
Ministers. Neither is it among themselves only that they count all the
Presbyterians the children of the Devil, but publicly also and that in
presence of Noblemen and Peers of the Kingdom, and in the hearing of many
Gentlemen of the Parliament and others, and in their very Companies they can
slight all the faithful of the Land besides themselves: for I being not many
days since at Westminster, where there was a Sagomore of the Independents
amongst some honorable company, I formerly mentioned; and I taking an occasion
to speak to him about Independency, and the Noble man also speaking to him
about it, and others, in the presence of them all he uttered these words, That
all the godly in the Kingdom, and all such as were well affected to Religion,
were of that way; and this I say he speaks in the hearing of them all, to which
the Nobleman and one of the Parliament men replied; Then it seems, say they,
that all that are not Independents, in your opinion, are neither godly nor well
affected to Religion: and so the Noble man departed the room, and left the
great Independent there. Now if this their opinion of themselves be not a most
Pharisaicall proud, and uncharitable one I leave it to the judgment of any
advised Christian, so that they cannot look upon their brethren with any love,
who they think ungodly and men not well-affected to Religion, and in their
writings call the professed enemies of Jesus Christ, and enemies of his kingdom;
and therefore if they do not change their opinions and alter their judgments,
all the poor Presbyterians may expect less friendship from them then from the
common enemy. And if due notice be taken of all their consultations and of
their buzings together and their juglings, they tend to no other end, but to
make their partee and Faction stronger, as within these few days, they in the
contriving of a Petition to the Parliament, would have made it one of their
requests to the Honorable House, That the Assembly of Divines might have been
dismissed, and sent every one of them to their particular charges; but that some
of more wisdom thought it unseasonable, and therefore put it out, and other
things of high nature are spoke of, that they would have inserted into their
supplication, all making for the corrobarating of their partee: for if the
Assembly were but once dissolved before there be any Government settled, and if
the lights were taken away, then what would not these men do in the dark,
amongst the simple people, who by their craft they make believe any thing? and
who labor by all their power and wit, out of the hatred they have to all the
Presbyterians, to make them odious, and their Government detestable to the
people, and persuade them that the Presbyterians way is worse then that of the
Pope, and the most tyrannical that ever was, and profess they will fight to
the last drop of their blood, before they will be subject to them.

And this that I now say, I speak upon very good ground, for I know their
indignation and cause-lesse malice against all the Presbyterians, and I have
heard great words from them, when they took me for one of their number, what
they would do if they were forced to it: and the truth is, among those they
think they may confide in, they affirm they will not be beholding to the
Parliament nor any body else for their liberty, for they will have it and ask
them no leave; they have the sword now in their hand and they think their
partee strong enough to encounter any adverse and opposing partee, and they
profess they care not how soon they come to cutting of throats, and speak of
nothing but the slaughtering and butchering of the Presbyterians: and therefore
there is just cause given us to think we may expect better quarter from the
very enemies, then from the Independents, who call us in their Pulpits
Brethren, but in their hearts hate us and our government, and always magnify
their own, and endeavor to establish it and their own Religion; which if it
were once tolerated, what safety would there then be for the Presbyterians;
yea, what comfort can any take in this world to live amongst such, who think
little better of their Brethren then of Infidels, and separate themselves from
us and our Assemblies, as from a company of Dogs and Swine, and so call us: and
profess that they are resolved all to dye for their Religion, meaning
Independency, before they will submit themselves to the Presbyterian
government: but they should call to mind it is not the punishment but the
cause that makes the Martyr; it must be such a death as seals Gods truth, and
not man's inventions and traditions that will be accepted; lest it be asked
another day, who required these things at your hands: let them therefore try
first how their religion is bottomed, for such as rush themselves upon
needless danger, under pretense of Religion, are commonly called the Devils
Martyrs: but sure I am they are none of Gods Martyrs that suffer for a Religion
of their own making: and such are all the Independent novelties: and amongst
other of their tenants, this of a toleration of all religions. But they should
also consider, that if they were in a good cause, as they are not, and should
offer to be burnt for the true Religion, yet if they have not love and charity
toward their Brethren, this sacrifice would do them no good; nor be no more
accepted of God, then that of Cain, if Saint Paul may be believed, 2 Cor. 13.
verse. 1.2. And therefore before they go to that Altar or any other, I would
wish the Independents to lay down their gift, and first to renounce their
heresies, novelties, and their blasphemous tenants, and all their
uncharitableness, and come and be reconciled to their Brethren, and to the
Church of England their Mother, from which they have made so shameful a
defection; and in which they have by their wantonness in opinions, caused so
fearful a rent, that they have cause to repent and mourn for it all the days
of their lives; and then they may have comfort if they be forced to sacrifice
themselves for religion, or otherwise they will have no comfort. And if no Art
of persuasion can prevail with them to bring them to unity; I shall desire
then, if there be any bowels of affection to their Wives, Children, and
Families, or if there by any love to their Country, or any desire to live in
love and unity, with those that are as dearly beloved and as truly the people
of God as themselves: that now all by-respects being laid aside, and all
prejudicate opinion cast away, they would again return into the bosom of the
Church and make up all breaches, and join both their prayers and their strength
with us, against the common enemies both of our religion and country. But if
our Brethren shall forget all the Laws of nature and humanity, and the law of
God, and will unreasonably persevere to trouble the Church and State. I know
not but the Magistrate may not only lay commands upon such to be silent, but
also severely punish them for their contumacy, if they refuse to obey. All
which I speak not to tolerate persecution as I said before; which I know is so
heinous a sin, as there is but one greater: but only to show the vanity of
these men's proceedings, who endeavor indeed to overthrow the authority of the
Christian Magistrates under pretense of liberty of conscience; as if it were
not lawful in them to punish busibodies and evil doers; when as the Apostle
Peter in his 1 Epist. chap. 4. verse. 15. bids all Christians take heed they
suffer not under that notion. And it is a vain thing in any men to pretend
conscience for religion, when under that color they have base and wicked
designs, as to make a faction, and to bring in a tumultuation both in Church
and State. And therefore as we are taught by the good will and pleasure of God,
Ier. 2. how greatly it displeased him, That his people left the fountains of
living waters, and dug themselves Sisternes that could hold no water. So out
of the same Word of God we are taught, that all Christian Magistrates who are
the Ministers of God for the good of his people, and who are no terror to good
works, but to the evil; have the sword committed unto them, as is evident
through the whole Gospel: and in the thirteenth of the Romans, and in both the
Epistles of Saint Peter, and that of Saint Jude, in all which such as speak
evil of dignities, and despise their authority, are reckoned amongst the worst
of men: and out of that Word of God we are also taught that Christian
Magistrates are Custodes utriusque tabulae: for God that gave the Law to
Fathers and Mothers, Masters of Families, and Magistrates, commands them all,
that they should take a care and see that all those under their several
charges should keep the commandments of the Lord, as is manifest Exodus 20. and
Deuteronomy. 6. and Deuteronomy. 11. and many other places of holy Scripture, might he
produce to that purpose, and that they should all see to bring up their
Children in the nurture and fear of the Lord, which they cannot do if they or
any of them give a tolleration of all Religions. And Christ himself the
Lawgiver says, Mat. 5.17, 18, 19. Think not, that I am come to destroy the
Law or the Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill: for verily I say
unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise
pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one
of the least of these Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called
the least in the Kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach them,
shall be called the greatest in the Kingdom of heaven. Now it is most evident
by all that Sermon, that Christ speaks of the Morrall Law, and ratifies it with
all its sanctions and punishments annexed to it against the violators of that
his Royal Will; and by the Law and Prophets and by the Gospel, he has
confirmed all Christian Magistrates in their Authority, and by all them has
taught all his people that the power of the Magistrates in all respects under
the Gospel, is as great and as ample if not more extensive then it was under
the Law. So that whatsoever by the Law of God or Nature, deserved death or was
worthy of punishment under the Law; the same deserves death and punishment
under the Gospel. And therefore as Atheism, Idolatry, Blasphemy, profanation
of the Sabbath, and all manner of impiety and tolleration of all Religions, and
all manner of wickedness was by the Law of God to be punished by the
Magistrates under the Law; the same ought by the Christian Magistrate to be
punished under the Gospel: and therefore all good and godly Christian
Magistrates, Parents, Ministers, Masters of Families, and indeed all such as
fear God, ought to join together, for the exterminating and rooting out all
false worship out of Gods service, and all manner of heresies and will worship,
with all manner of humane inventions, and whatsoever consent not to the
wholesome words of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. And this is the duty of all Christians in any
authority. And truly, if ever there were a time, that called for an
establishment of one religion and a settled government, with uniformity in a
Church and State, and a suppression of all Heresies, Sects, and Factions, now
it is: when by the sad effects already of divisions and variety of opinions, we
may well perceive what ruin will come upon the three Kingdoms, if there be a
toleration of all religions granted. For divisions and factions, especially in
religion, have been fatal to Kingdoms and Commonwealths in all Ages, as most
Histories relate. And if men will not learn their duties from Gods command, nor
from the example of all the holy Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles, that would
have but one religion, then let them learn it from the Independents; who whiles
they plead for a toleration of all religions in every Nation and Country,
will not give a toleration of them in their own Families and Churches, nor in
New England, nor of any other but their own: so that any man that is not
stupidity it self, may well perceive, they say one thing and mean another; and
what toleration of religion they would afford us if they were in authority. But
this we learn, that it is the Magistrates place to execute the will of God
against offenders, and against such as would bring in a toleration of all
religions. And it is the duty of all Ministers and people fearing God, and such
as desire the peace of Church and State, to assist the Magistrates, and to
oppose all Heresies and Innovations in Religion; and to study every way to
maintain love and amity amongst Brethren, which a confusion of all religions
can never do: and this I thought fit in way of Preface to premise in my own
just defense; and for conviction of the blaspemous Tenants of that Scribler,
that writ against learned Mr. Prynne.

The Postscript.
SAint Paul in 1 Cor. 10. setting before the Christians of his time the sins of
the Jews, and their often rebellion against God, and how frequently they had
provoked him; specifies also, the judgments that came upon them for their
disobedience and ingratitude; and tells the Corinthians (and in them all
Christians) that whatsoever happened unto the Jews, it was for our learning,
upon whom the ends of the world are come: so that if we take not heed by their
example, and shun not those sins that they provoked God by, we shall likewise
make our selves liable to the same punishments. And as no Nation had God so
nigh unto them as the Jews, nor no people upon the face of the Earth that God
had so freely loved and miraculously delivered out of the hands of their
enemies, when at any time under their great oppressions they cried unto him;
and continued still to be their Savior and Redeemer out of all their
captivities, and slaveries (with the ruin and overthrow many times of their
enemies) and sent his Prophets and Wise men early and late to instruct and
teach them his Statutes and Ordinances, commanding them to seek the old way and
the good way, that they might find rest unto their souls, Ier. 6. and had in
all respects been so abundantly gracious, that he himself says Isaiah 5. What
could I have done more to my Vineyard then that I have done? Yet
notwithstanding they left him, the fountain of living waters, and dug unto
themselves broken sisternes that could hold no water. Ier. 2. So that in Chap.
5. verse. 30, 31. the Lord says, A wonderful and a horrible thing is committed
in the land. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their
means, and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end
thereof? In the which words the great sin of rebellion and ungratitude in
that people is sufficiently set down, they listened unto the false Prophets, and
yielded obedience unto what they preached unto them (the same complaint Saint
Paul makes in 2 Cor. and in his other Epistles concerning the false Apostles of
his time) and cast off the Lord, and slighted his true and faithful Ministers,
and set up their own inventions for Gods worship, and service, and his ways;
by which they so provoked God against themselves; that howsoever they had been
the glory of all Nations, and the admiration of the world, through their often
rebellions and unthankfulness, they became the scorn of the Earth, and the
hissing of all Kingdoms round about them, and a byword among the Heathen: so
that the Prophet Jeremy in his Lamentations complaining of the miserable
condition in their captivity, says, That never any people groaned under
greater misery, and that most deservedly: for as our blessed Savior says, He
that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.
The people of Israel of all the families of the Earth, were most honored by
God; toward the which he had extended and showed his free and undeserved
favor, and betrusted them with the lively Oracles of his will: but they
rebelling against him, and not listening unto his voice, nor yiedling obedience
to his commands, but giving ear to false Prophets and vain delusions, and
ungratefully and undutifully behaving themselves toward him, and always
resisting his Spirit; the Lord did often more severely afflict them then any
other Nation, and at the last cast them off, as the dung and offscouring of the
world, so that they are at this day the most miserable people on the Earth, and
an object of pity and of the prayers of all such as truly wish their
conversion. And all this evil is come upon them for their rebellion and
ingratitude, as the whole Scripture relates; and to teach us, on whom the ends
of the world are come, to take heed by their example; lest provoking God as
they have done, we partake not of the same plagues. And truly, if we do compare
Nation with Nation, and take notice of Gods gracious dealing toward the Jews,
and of his fatherly and favorable dealing toward us, there is not a people
under Heaven, the Jews only excepted, that God has done more for, then this
our Nation. So that the Lord may say unto us, as he said unto his people the
Jews, What could I have done more to my Vineyard then that I have done? And
yet there is not a people under the Heavens more like the Jews in their
rebellions and ingratitude to a heavenly Father, then this Nation has been and
now is: so that we may cry out with the Prophet Jeremy with admiration, It is
thy mercy we are not consumed, but that thy compassions are renewed every day!
For what hitherto has God done for us that can please us? But we are ever
rebelling and repining as the Israelites were, both in Egypt, and in the
Wilderness, and in the very land of Canaan that flowed with Milk and Honey,
nothing could please them. In the very same manner it is with us, in what
condition and state soever we are in, we are never content, but always
repining. And even as they rebelled against Moses and Aaron their deliverers,
and told them to their face, they took too much upon them, and that they were
all a holy people, and murmured against Moses, and were soon weary of him; and
desired rather to be at their Onions and Fleshpots again in Egypt, then to be
fellow-commoners with Angels; and wished rather to be under the tyrannical
government of Pharaoh and his cruel Taskmasters, then under the sweet yoke of
God and the government of his servants Moses and Aaron, who they most
reproachfully abused and rebelled against; and were ever murmuring upon all
occasions against their deliverers, and only, because accidentally they met
with some difficulties, and groned under some pressures, notwithstanding they
were but temporary and for a time, as it happens in all alteration of
governments and reformations. After the same manner is our dealing at this day
generally toward God, and toward our Moseses and Deliverers, who rise early
and sit up late, and go through the heat of Summer and the cold of Winter, and
eat the bread of carfulness, and watch for our good that we may sleep in
quiet: and yet the wicked and ungodly out of covetousness and profaneness,
and others out of faction and study of novelties, most ungratefully reproach
and abuse them both in word and deed, as all their carriage does daily
manifest, and their scurrelous and railing Pamphlets declare; by which they
show their unthankfulness to their deliverours, and their ungratitude to God
himself, to the provoking of his wrath and jealousy against a Nation unworthy
to be beloved. Not seven years since, the whole Kingdom lay under such
intolerable pressures both for soul and body, and had to do with such
unreasonable Judges in all Courts, as no man could either serve God or the
Devil for them, but he was punished for it: so that there was not any through
the whole Dominion that could promise himself safety from oppression a moment,
or say any thing was his: For they made a man an offender for a word, and laid
a snare for him that reproved in the gate, and turned aside the just for a
thing of naught, Isay 29.21. And truth failed, and he that departed from evil
made himself a prey, Isay 59.15. So that this Nation was every way in as
miserable a condition as the Israelites were, under their tyrannical Judges:
so that the most faithful subjects were the chiefest objects of their greatest
cruelty, though none were free from it if they had any estates, that their
oppressors might enrich themselves by them: they were all tyrannized over both
for soul and body, as the whole Kingdom can witness. And then we cried unto
God and he raised us up deliverers from abroad and at home; and freed us by
their means from the unsupportable cruelty of our Taskmasters, both in Church
and State; and from the slavery and unjustice of all their tyrannical Courts,
and from the whole yoke of the Hierarchy; and set up the Ordinances of God in
such purity, and made such a blessed Reformation, as our forefathers would have
rejoiced to have seen but the half of it, and enjoined also the sanctifying of
the Lords day: neither did our Deliverers rest here and were now satisfied with
what they had done, but they endeavored also to set up such a
Church Government as Christ the King of his Church has appointed: so that if
we had but thankful hearts to God and our deliverances, and could discern what
God had done for us by them, we might be the happiest Nation under Heaven. But
on the contrary, and contrary to our Covenant and Protestation (I mean not the
Protestation protested) those that have deserved best from us, we think worst
of; and those that a few years since there was nothing thought too good for,
nor no entertainment too little for, nor no praises sufficient to extol them
with; as our Brethren in Scotland, the Parliament it self, our brave Generals
and Commanders, all the diligent and painful Ministers of the kingdom (as
they all deserved) they are all now murmured against as Moses and Aaron were by
those Bricklayers, as soon as they were delivered from their fiery furnaces;
and with them we desire to return into Egypt, and wish our old Masters again,
and think their tyranny a good government: and all this is done not by the
Malignants and the ordinary Protestants only, but by those that seem the
greatest promoters of reformation, and such as would be thought the only
Christians and Saints, as they term themselves, bidding all others depart from
them, as being more holy than they: and fly in the very face of one of those
men, who they had with singular encomiums a few years since magnified as one of
the worthies of the kingdom, and predicated as one of the witnesses spoke of
in the book of the Revelation, and whom they had received in his return from
banishment with their acclamations of joy; I mean that learned Gentleman Master
William Prynne Esquire, my brother in afffiction and fellow sufferer, who is
now the same that ever he was, and one that for the testimony of Jesus, I am
most confident, would dare to suffer more then many that now traduce him; dare
think. And if any fiery trial should indeed really come, he would, (I doubt
not) undauntedly stand in the defense of truth, when they would fly and take
their heels as formerly they have done; or squlke in holes, or play lest in
sight, or temporize, howsoever they now vapor when there is no danger: yet of
this very man whom they idolized before, they now speak of, as of one inspired
with the devil, and as of a man of no religion, and profess that they are
sorry they ever prayed for him; and wish that when he had lost his ears, he
had lost his head; and athousand such expressions they daily utter, and not
only against all those I have above specified do they vent their passion by
their railing lauguage, but they abuse any man whatsoever, that opposes their
Novelties, although they had never so honorable thoughts of him before, and
conceived never so well of him for his godly life, by which they declare their
unconstancy, and the ficklenes of their unstable minds; so that we have just
cause to remember that of David, Psalm. 146. Put not your trust in Princes, nor
in the son of man, in whom there is no help: his breath goes forth, he
returns to his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish: So unstable
creatures are men, won with an apple and lost with a nut, imitating the Jews,
one day crying Hosanna, and another day crucify him; one day with the foolish
Galathians, they would put out their eyes to do Paul good, and another they
counted him their enemy. But what I pray is the cause of this their so great
displeasure, against our brethren in Scotland, against the Parliament, against
our noble Generals, against all the godly, learned, and painful Ministers of
the Kingdom, and against Master Prynne, and indeed against all their faithful
brethren, for they rail and murmur against all, but those of their own faction,
as it is well known. It is because forsooth they would set up a Presbytery and
desire to establish that kind of Government in the Church, which is Gods
Ordinance (which they say to the precious Saints, for so they term themselves,
will be more unsupportable then the Prelaticall Government) and because they
would have the people enter into a public Covenant for the bringing in and
setting up a through reformation; and because they have appointed a set day of
fasting and humiliation through the Kingdom (which they in no sort allow of,
because, say they, there may be an occasion of rejoicing that very day: and so
there might have been a cause also of mourning amongst the Jews, at such very
times as they had their appointed seasons of rejoicing and feasting) but that
is not all, why they are offended with the Scots and with the Parliament, and
with the godly Ministers, and with all their brethren; but this displeases
them exceedingly, Because they have made a late Order, that none shall Preach
publicly but such as for their sufficiency and learning, and soundness of
Doctrine, are able rightly to instruct and teach the people the right way both
of serving God and obeying men, and how they may live comfortably here and be
useful and profitable to others, and be kept from heresies and schisms, and
ereonious doctrines, which tend to nothing but faction and destroying of their
own souls, and the disturbing of the Church and State, and for the bringing in
of a confusion of all Religions, and for the alienating of the affection of
brethren one from another, and for the overthrowing of all order in Families,
Villages, Towns, Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms: and for the bringing men in
time, that they shall neither know what to believe nor what to practice, as by
sad experience we already find to be frequent. Now because our brethren of
Scotland, and the Parliament, and the godly and faithful Ministers, and those
that as truly fear God as any of them, desire such a reformation and such a
Government, as by which Truth and Peace may be established amongst us; and
heresies, and schisms, and factions may be rootedout, the disturbers of Peace;
that we may all live happily here and gloriously hereafter: This kind of
government not suiting with their humor, nor with their opinion, therefore
they abhor it, and all such as endeavor to establish it, and desire and wish
rather that all the old trumpery were brought in again, and profess it, that
they had rather have the Government of the Prelates, then this kind of
Government; yea, some of them have not been ashamed to protest unto some
Malignant and Prelaticall Priests (with whom they can very well comply when
occasion serves) that before the Presbyters shall rule over them, they will cut
all their throats, and join with them for there-establishing of the Hierarchy:
and this the Priests themselves with great joy have related: And there must
needs be some great Mystery of Iniquity, that is not yet brought to light in
these new factions, for it is notoriously known to many thousands in the
Kingdom, that the Malignants at home and abroad, as their words and Letters do
declare, confide as much in these Sects, for the attaining unto their designs,
as they do in all the Cavaliers. So that it is high time for the great Council
of the Kingdom, and for all that love the true Religion, and wish the peace
and welfare of both Church and State to stand upon their guards at home as well
as abroad; and to show their vigilency and care for the preventing of the
intended evil against us all. And truly it might awaken any man, if he take
but notice, of the great distractions and of the sad effects these new opinions
have produced, not only in London and in the Counties round about it, but also
in Yorke-shire, Lincolnshire, and in all other places where they are embraced;
and how in a short time Christians minds are alienated one from the other, and
from the Parliament, by reason of the difference of their opinion, to the great
rejoicing of the common enemy, whose especial hatred is against all those they
call round heads, that is, the old Puritans of England, and all the towns
wherein they dwell, who are and ever were since the days of reformation, the
only upholders of the true reformed Religion, and are at this day the only
bulworks of it under God; and amongst those Towns that have kept out these new
Factions by their care and providence Leicester, Darby, and Chesterfield,
deserve high commendations, who through the prudence of their Ministers and
Magistrates, and through their own knowledge and the well-groundednesse of all
the good Christians there in their Religion, have hitherto kept out all manner
of Schisms and Factions, where the poor people (to their immortal honor be it
spoken) under all their sufferings by reason of the common calamity, serve
their God night and day with the twelve Tribes of Israel, and live in love and
amity amongst themselves without any variance, and in the midst of war; and in
these distracted times enjoy peace one with another, and submit themselves with
cheerfulnes and without repining at all Ordinances of Parliament, for the
Common good and safety of the Kingdom; and are most active and constant
friends to the uttermost of their power, yea above their abilities, unto the
Parliament. And because they are so unmovable in their Religion, and continue
in their ancient integrity, after the manner of the old Puritans of England,
they are more hated by the Cavaliers then any other towns, and by all the
Novelists: for all the old Puritans and them they call Presbyterians, are
equally hated by both: yea this is generally observed; That all Papists and
profane persons in general, and all Sects whatsoever, although they disagree
amongst themselves, and differ in their manners, opinions, and affections too,
one from another as Herod and Pilate did, yet to persecute Christ, as they did
then agree; so all these Sects can accord and join together in a common amity,
and with the Pontificians and Malignants, persecute the Presbytery which is
next unto the Word of God, an Argument to move me, to believe that it is Gods
Ordinance, because it is so hateful to all men; for as our Savior said of his
Disciples, That they should be hated of all men for his names sake, so
generally all Gods constitutions find little favor amongst all such as leave
the high way of Gods Commandments, and follow the by-way of errors and
Novelties, and continue in the paths of irregeneration or new-fanglenesse, the
sin of these times: when Heresy is Religion and Schism the best trade in the
Kingdom, and the only way of preferment. And truly the contemplation of the
change of all men's minds and manners, within these few years, and those rents
and divisions in the Church, makes me call to mind the old plot that the
Jesuits and their accomplices, and all the Popish crew have been long a laying,
and contriving for the undermining of the State and overthrowing of the true
Protestant Religion which was dividie and impera.

The Jesuits had nothing more common by heart and by book, then that, the way
for the alienating of these three flourishing Kingdoms to a forain
jurisdiction, and for the extirpating of the true Religion in them, and
reducing again of popery, and for the advancing of the Papal usurpation, was
first to make sects and divisions among our selves, and then to foment them by
some of their crafty companions, who want neither wit, learning, nor industry;
and know very well how to personate every man in saying, doing, counselling,
and complying with all sorts of Sects, as if they themselves were the most
zealous defenders of those conceived truths, and the greatest abettors of them,
when under that veil they hide themselves; and do not only maintain those that
are on foot, and such as they have already hatched, but daily bring forth new
ones, and every one more monstrous then other; and all this for the subversion
of the three Kingdoms, and the true Protestant Religion established in them,
and which is the cause of all the calamities that are now amongst us. But for
the effecting of all this they seem to pretend a singular holiness and more
then ordinary piety, and put themselves therefore in sheeps-clothing in all
their actions, and plead for a christian liberty: and therefore they especially
labor to hinder any settled government in the Church; but such an one as they
well know will bring confusion upon us all, and which no wise state can
tolerate, and yet none but this will please their humor: and therefore they
labor principally to make odious the Presbyterian government, which the
Ponteficians and all profane men, and all Sectaries and Heretics have ever
hated; and therefore have always endeavored to make it odious to all people,
as a government tending to inslave Kings and Princes and distructive to all
well ordered Common-weals and to the liberty of the subjects, and to the
destroying of the Nobility and Gentry in kingdoms, and for the making of a
parity amongst all men, and a community of all things; and by this means in a
short time to bring in a confusion in Church and State. And by such suggestions
as these, they have for many generations, as in these our times made the
Presbyterians hateful to all men. And it is the study at this day of all the
Malignants, and of all Libertines, and Malcontents and Sectaries, and of all
the Independents, to make divisions between people and people, and between
Nation and Nation; and to render those men despicable that they seemed but a
few years before highly to honor, love, and magnify, as now they do our
Brethren of Scotland, whom they seemed not long since greatly to esteem; and
who yet ought, and that deservedly, to be exceedingly honored for their love
to us; who exposed their own lives and welfare, yea, their whole country to
danger, for our aid, assistance, and defense; and yet these men now, with our
Novelists and all unstable creatures, those Reeds shaken and turned with every
wind of doctrine, and every stream of new opinions (as much as in them lies)
are made as hateful as any common enemies, to the dishonor of God and our
Nation, and shows great unthankfulness in us all, to the deterring of any
Nation to come to our succor or relief; and all this their malice and hatred
is, because they have set up the Presbyterian government amongst themselves;
and desire for the more uniting of the three Kingdoms to gather in a more nigh
affection, to establish it here; wherein they have done God and the Kingdom
good service, and will find a reward in Heaven for it, if they fail of it
here: and it will not be for the honor of our Nation to suffer any black
mouths to contaminate the reputation of those that have deserved so well from
us; and therefore all such as have neither a bridle for their tongues nor their
unruly passions, ought to have a bit put in their mouths to teach them better
manners, more humanity and gratitude. But this has ever bin the practice of all
the enemies of God, and his government in all ages, to make all his Servants,
the holy Prophets, yea Christ himself and his blessed Apostles, hateful to the
people, under that notion of disturbers of all Kingdoms, enemies of Caesar's
and of all government. And this made the Popish faction in Qu. Mary's days,
when they heard that those Ministers that fled out of England to Frankford in
Germany, and into other places, intended to set up the Presbyterian government
in England if the Lady Elizabeth ever came to the Crown, so to bestir
themselves and set their wits on work, to hinder and frustrate that their
intention: for they said among themselves, if that government were once
established in the Kingdom, their Catholic Religion could never get place or
take rooting here any more: and therefore seeing they could not take away the
life of that most excellent Lady, nor any way keep her from the Crown after her
Sisters decease; now all the policy would be to hinder that work. Whereupon
they suborned many of the most famous wits out of both Universities, that under
pretense of religion and zeal to the Protestant profession should fly over to
Frankfort, and to the other places where those Ministers were, as if they had
done it out of conscience and pure love to the Protestant religion; and seemed
in all points of doctrine to be as zealous as any of those that were there, and
the only desirers and advancers of the true Protestant Religion: but they
professed unto them, that for the manner of government the Hierarchicall way of
ruling the Church, in their opinion (the purity of religion being once
established) would most tend to the preservation of it, as being most powerful
for the suppressing of Sects and Schisms, and for the upholding also of the
Kingdom; and that the Presbytery would tend to nothing but the bringing in of
Anarchy: and what with their craft, subtilty, and wranglings (as the
Independents now do in the Assembly) they so interrupted their proceedings, as
they could not then bring their good design to perfection, and so hindered
that glorious work of Reformation for that time, and all under the pretext of
piety and good, to the peace of the Church and Kingdom. And as soon as Queen
Mary was dead, and that the Lady Elizabeth was preclaimed Queen of England,
then they all repaired home; and having a strong party in the Court, all
seeming zealous Protestants (though Papists in their hearts) they commended
these men as wise and moderate men, and such as were lovers of Monarchies, and
regal government to the Queen, and disgraced all those that stood for a
Presbytery, as such as were factious and affectors of innovation, and such as
were no way to be preferred to eminent places in the Church; but because as
they said, they had suffered for their conscience, they were willing they
should have good Parsonages and Benefices through the Towns and Villages where
they might preach to the people, but they were all set in the Black Bill, as
men not fit to preach in Courts, and as men incapable of great places and high
promotion in the Church, and were ever kept under as those that were seditious
and not fit for Ecclesiastical honors. And all the other that were either
Papists in their hearts, or ill affected to the Protestant Religion, though
seeming Protestants, were advanced to all Church-dignities, and made
Archbishops, Bishops, and Suffragates, Deans, Archdeacons, and the Queens and
Noblemens Chaplains. And in a very short time they established their High
Commission Court, under pretense of suppressing Popery; whereas they intended
nothing, but the rooting out in time of all true Religion; and the
re-establishing again of their old worm-eaten and rotten profession. And they
had in a good measure accomplished this their diabolical plot, and had really
effected it, had it not pleased our God to call this Parliament and Assembly,
who by their vigilance and care frustrated this their design. And all this
they then brought about by bringing the Presbytery into hatred and disgrace, as
the Papists themselves have often gloried and bragged among their Companions,
when they would show how they had ever outwitted the Puritans. And at this
instant of time, they have their accomplices that foment all these factions, by
whose means they labor to hinder the Presbyterian government, knowing very
well, that if it ever be establied, the Kingdom of Antichrist will never get
head again amongst us, nor none of their abominable Sects have rooting in
these Kingdoms, but that the truth by that means will flourish (maugre all the
maligners of it) and be propagated through the world; which is the only cause,
that not only the Devil but all ungodly men and straglers, are so enraged
against the Presbyterian-government, which they know is so prevalent for the
suppressing of all Heresies and eronious opinions; and for the curbing of all
vice, wickedness, and all profaneness, as that they will never be permitted
to roost in these dominations. And whereas they look upon all the
Presbyterians, as they tell us in their writings, as the enemies of JESUS
CHRIST and his Kingdom; I look upon all the Sticklers against the Parliament
and Presbytery (by what names and titles soever distinguished, and what seeming
piety soever they make show of) as on a company of Juglers. And truly as the
Juglers in Saint Paul's time bewitched the foolish Galathians, so these by their
cunning craftiness have infatuated too many well meaning and godly people;
who, howsoever they have learned to forget the very laws of civility and
common charity, and to condemn all those of a different opinion from
themselves, as enemies of Christ: yet I shall ever learn to distinguish
between the people that are mislead, and they that seduce them: for I conceive
of many of them, as such as desire to serve God with all sincerity, and in the
purest way of worshipping him: and because their Teachers persuade them that
these their new ways, are the ways of God, and they not being able to discern
truth from error, and to discover their hypocrisy are all deceived by them, as
the poor Widows were by the Scribes and Pharisees in Christ's time, who our
Savior said devoured their houses under pretense of long prayers: and as they
brought in the leven of their own doctrine and inventions into Gods worship and
service, so do the false teachers of these our times bring in their own
grolleries and Baggatellies, and prefer their own traditions before the
Commandments of God, and violate all the laws of love and charity for the
establishing of the same. And as ignorance in all people is the cause of error,
for so our blessed Savior says, Matthew. 22. Ye err not knowing the
Scriptures; so in these perilous and dangerous times, these deceivers creep
into houses and lead captive silly Women and ignorant Men, to the danger of
their own souls and the hurt of others. And lamentable it is, that such
multitudes of Men and Women should none of them take notice, how they are
deluded: for whiles their Pastors (as they call them) seem to give the
congregation and the Church such power and authothority, as if they could do
nothing without their consent and good liking; yet all this is to make
themselves Lords over them, and as very Popes in their Conclaves, who if they
be crafty and cunning, make their Conclaves say Amen to their own wills; and
do whatsoever they have a liking to, and a purpose to bring to pass.

For what man is there, that has any discerning spirit, or is but of any
ordinary capacity, that does not by daily experience find, that the Pastors of
their new gathered Churches, do whatsoever pleases them in their several
Congregations; so that howsoever to humor the people, they say, they can do
nothing without the consent of the whole Assembly, it is a mere juggling to my
own knowledge; for the poor people count all that their Ministers speak as an
Oracle, and take for truth whatever they say; and if they do at any time
dissent from them in their thoughts, they dare not declare it openly,
especially the poor members, for incurring their Ministers displeasure: for
they ordinarily have the chiefest hand in the distribution of all the
collections that are made for the releeving of the indigent, and can at any
time either pleasure or displeasure them: and therefore they endeavor to keep
in favor with them, to avoid their frowns, which they know may be very
prejudicial unto them: so that their teachers upon all occasions, do what they
themselves think fit, especially when it makes for their own advantage and
gain, which the most of them have always an eye unto (or else they are
extramely abused by some of their own fraternity.) And if at any time any in
their Churches seem unwilling to comply with them in their proceedings, yet
commonly they have such a party in their Congregations, as they carry all
before them; and if for some short season the greater part oppose them, if
their pastors be learned and cunning, what with their Policy, Rhetoric and
fine Art of persuasion and seeming reasons, they will soon turn the whole
Congregation which way they please: So that howsoever they amuse the people and
tell them of the great privilege the Church has, both in choosing of
Officers, and admitting of members, and in transacting all things; in fine, all
is as they will have it, and all the ignorant people follow their several
Pastors, as a company of silly Goslings do the old Goose. And the truth is,
they make their Congregation but a company of ninnies (as the false Apostles
used to do, as Paul affirms in 2 Cor. 11.) and all for their own base ends (as
will ere long be sufficiently proved) and exercise as great a domination,
lordship, and power, over them, in respect of ording things in their several
Churches, as Popes in their Conclave, and Kings and Princes in their several
Counsels; who if they be wise and Politic and be Masters indeed in their
Art, and King-craft, as they call it, they will turn their Counsels which way
they please; and make use of them no farther then stands with their own
designs, and use them only as a screen between them and the people, ever for
their own defense and safeguard, so that if at any time upon extraordinary
pressures and grievances their subjects grow into a heat or discontent, and
begin to murmur; then one or two of the Counselors, must for fashion-sake be
in disgrace and frowned on for some space, as if they had given bad council,
to satisfy the people: when in the mean time, there is nothing but collusion,
the King and they remaining very good friends, as who did nothing nor
councelled nothing, but what they knew the King himself would have done, and
used them only as his instruments for the effecting of it; and all this to
delude the people, and to regain their good opinion: for all wise Princes ever
show themselves favorably to the people upon any complaints, seeming to greeve
at nothing more that their subjects (who they look on as children) should in
the lest thing suffer under their Government, and especially by their own
servants, and this method of dealing gives great content to subjects in all
kingdoms, and that Princes know well. After the very same manner do the crafty
Independent Pastors deal with their Churches upon all occasions; and when they
desire to bring any plot of theirs to pass that may be advantageous and
profitable unto them, then they put the people upon it; so that if any disgrace
be like to come by it, then the congregations must have that lie upon them, as
who have the chief ordering of things in their several assemblies, for they
profess themselves all servants of the Church, and to be at their disposing,
and to go and come at their appointment, and to do nothing but by their good
liking, and Pope-like, they say they are Servi Servorum. And then for the
coloring of all their juglings, they tell them of the Church in Jerusalem and
that of Corinth, who had the power of Choosing their Officers, and casting out
of offenders, and doing whatsoever they pleased within themselves; and they
stand, they say, as single persons, and may not in the least infringe or
impeach the rights and privileges of the Church; when notwithstanding nothing
is done, but according to their own direction, and by their special
instigation, and so they ever preserve their own reputation, and seem to be
friends to such as they mortally hate, and lay all upon the Church of Jerusalem
whose example they affirm all Churches are to follow, and whose pattern they
must imitate: now that being but one Congregation and Assembly (for so they
persuade the ignorant people) ever having had plenary power within it self, as
all the other Churches; the several congregations through the world (as they
assert) have within themselves the same power and authority, of ordering and
transacting all things that concern the Church, as the Church of Jerusalem,
and those other several Churches had, and from the which there is no appeal;
and all this is but miserably to abuse the people, and cunningly to make
themselves Lords over them, whiles they seem highly to honor the professing to
be their servants: and for my part I shall ever pray, that all the Independent
Ministers through the world may be indeed the servants of the Churches and
States wherein they live, and never become their Masters; for all men may see
by the very beginning of their domination, how they would Lord it over all
congregations, if they were once established by authority, when they speak so
big in their childhood and infancy, and do those daring actions against the
great Council of the Kingdom they daily exercise: abusing all authority that
is not of their own moddell, in word and deed, in writing and preaching, to the
very scandal of Religion: all which they could not be suffered to do, if there
were once a learned Presby try set up as they well know and such a Church
government as was in Jerusalem and in all those Primative Churches, the which
were so many several corporations, every one of them consisting of several
Congregations, and all governed by the joint consent and common council of
their several Colleges of Presbyters, to the which every particular member,
and every several Congregation and Assembly in their particular Precincts and
Jurisdictions, had their appeals upon all occasions, and that by divine
institution, and stood to the arbitration of every several Presby try, or else
appealed upon non satisfaction or conceived wrong, to their several and more
general Classes, higher Presbyters or Synods, as we see in Mat. 18. and Acts
6. and 15. where we have both precept and presidents of so ordering and ruling
the Church to the end of the world; for Christ who is the Lawgiver of his
Church has so appointed it: and whatsoever the Apostles did in the ordinary
way of governing the Church, they did it for example to future ages as they in
their writing declare and invite all Ministers and people to their imitation.
And if Christians under the New Testament had not several places to appeal to,
and higher Courts of judicature then their particular Congregations and
Churches, they should be inferior to the Synagogues of the Jews, and to that
Nation in many respects: for it is well known to those that have ever read the
holy Scripture, that they had several Courts to appeal to, upon conceived
wrong and in all difficult businesses, and this was no ceremonial way of
Government, but a moral and permanent way of ordering things to the end of the
world: and our blessed Savior constituted the same manner of Government
Ecclesiastical (the Leviticall Priesthood and that Order being abolished with
all their Ceremonious services) that was in all the Cities of Judaea and
Isarel, and through all their Synagogues who were all Aristocratically and
Presbyterianly governed, who were moderated and Ordered by several Colleges
of Judges in their several Precincts called Rulers, of which there were some
inferior and some chief Rulers or Judges, as it is in all Courts of
judicature through the world: and this manner of government is that that was
established by Christ and his blessed Apostles, and was continued in the
Primitive Churches, till Antichrist that Man of Sin began to put up his
horns; and who advancing himself above all that is called God, not only pusht
down that Presbyterian government and manner of ruling, and trampled it under
his poluted feet; but most tyrannically inslaved all Kingdoms and Nations, and
brought them under his unsupportable yoke. And now through the goodness of
God, his power is abrogated and abolished, the Independent Ministers with
Diotrephes would usurp the same over every congregation; which ought to be
managed by the joint consent and common-counsell of every Presbytery, to which
every Member in every Church, and every particular congregation under their
several Presbyteries, ought to make their addresses, and to which they ought
to have their recourse upon all occasions. And if the Gentlemen the Independent
Ministers, had that knowledge in Divinity, History, or very politics, that
they would persuade the world they were so great Masters in, they would never
have spoke, preached, and writ that they have done against common reason, all
antiquity, and the express Word of God it self in defense of their fond
opinion. For what man of ordinary judgment ever read, what the word or a name
of a City meant, and what is understood by it, was so stupid, as to conceive
where Paul appointed Titus, cap. 1. That he should ordain Presbyters in every
City, that the Apostle there meant by City, one congregation or particular
assembly in every City; when if we take notice of that word, we shall find in
all Histories both Divine and Humane, that by City is meant not only the
compass of ground and houses and streets enclosed within the walls of any
place, and the inhabitants dwelling in it: but by City the whole country is to
be understood and comprehended, whose inhabitants are governed by the same law
that those within the City are. And this manner of speaking is so frequent in
all Histories both sacred and profane, as nothing is more common, as all
learned men know, and therefore I cite not authorities to prove it, with which
I might fill a Volume. So that when the Apostle Paul commanded Titus to ordain
Presbyters and Bishops in every City, he then established a Presbytery or
College of Ministers, that might with wisdom and in knowledge govern all
those several congregations and particular assemblies of Believers that then
were in these several Cities, and as many as in future time should be
converted to the faith by the preaching of the Gospel within these Cities, and
Villages about the City, as far as the jurisdiction and limits of the secular
government did stretch and extend it self: for the Secular government and the
Ecclesiastical went always together, as it does at this day through the world
in all well ordered Principalities and Common-weals: and therefore as far as
the Teritories of every City in those days extended it self, so far did the
Presbyters authority spread and extend it self: and therefore when the Apostle
enjoined Titus to ordain Presbyters in every City, he established there a
Council, Senate, Court, or College of Presbyters, and an Ecclesiastical
Magistracy, to the which he gave power to exercise their authority over all the
particular congregations and several assemblies that were then already
converted, and that should be converted afterward, both within the walls of the
City, and within the circumference and bounds of the whole jurisdiction to the
end of the world; and ordered that that Presbytery and College by joint
consent and common counsel should govern all those several congregations.
And this is Gods Ordinance. And as all the Cities in Judea and Israel under
their several Kings were notwithstanding governed by a secular Presbytery, as
all Corporations are here in England, so they were also by an Ecclesiasticlal,
and had their Rulers of their Synagogues and appeals from inferior Courts to
superior upon all just occasions, and that by Gods appointment, and by Christ's
own ratification, as the Scripture does frequently specify in many places. And
indeed if any man of mature judgment, and with deliberation would but consider
what all Histories relate concerning the original of Cities, and the cause of
their building, and how far their Territories and their Lines (if I may so
say) of communication extended, with their inhabitants which were always
counted Citizens, they could never be induced to believe that grollish opinion
of Independency. For when the Lord divided the whole Earth to the several
families of the same, he always reserved a portion for his own children, for
he is the preserver of all, especially of the Believers, as it is related Deuteronomy.
32. and Acts 17. and 1 Timothy 4. Now as the Families of the Earth multiplied and
increased, they extended their habitations further and further, from country
to country, till they had replenished all places according to Gods command and
blessing, Increase and multiply: and as they seated themselves in any new
Plantation, for their safety and more secure habitation, and to free themselves
from incursions of any enemies, they built themselves Cities and great walled
Towns (having learned that lesson of Cain, the fruits of sin, that made man
both naked and afraid of every thing) and that they might be furnished with all
provisions and necessaries, they allotted unto every City such a circuit and
compass of ground as out of the which they might have all their necessaries
supplied, and be accommodated with all things needful for food and raiment and
their bodily preservation, which required a large extent of ground, and of
which they might take at pleasure, there being enough, and for this very end
they stocked the grounds about their several Cities with cattle, and sent out
as their families increased, their Colonies and Semenaries, as Bees use yearly
to do their Swarms; and those they seated in the most convenient and fertilest
places, and fittest for habitation through the countries, who manured and
tilled the ground, and planted Vineyards, and built Villages and Towns; all the
which still were accounted Citizens: and as Merchants here in London that are
Citizens and that have houses and habitations in the country, lose not their
former denomination by their country habitation; no more did the people in
those days, but were always with all the inhabitants within the limits of
that country, reputed Citizens, and called by the name of such a City, because
they were governed by the same laws the City was, and were derived from it,
and were under the command of the chief of those families, who all lived as
Kings at first. And therefore into whose hands soever those Cities fell, either
by succession, donation, compact, marriage or victory, those that were the
owners or conquerours of them, still for the most part continued and preserved
the divisions formerly made, and kept all those Villages and Towns as far as
the jurisdiction of those Cities extended under their command, and all by the
name of such Cities as at first, and all the dwellers and inhabitants within
that circumference or circuit were still accounted as part of the City as all
Histories do relate both sacred and humane. So that they that were Masters of
those several Cities, were also Lords of all those Villages, which were under
the jurisdiction diction of those Cities, and as far as the secular power of
those several Cities did extend, so far did their Ecclesiastical. And as
those several cities we read of in the holy Scripture under the Kings of Juda
and Israel, had all their several civil Presbyters and Elders, or a Council
and Senate of Presbyters in them to govern them under their several Kings; so
they had their Ecclesiastical or Synagogicall Presbyters, or a College of
Elders also, whose authority extended over all their several congregations,
Synagogues, or assemblies, as well within the Cities as without, through all
the Villages and Towns that were within the compass and circumference of
their several jurisdictions, as all imperial Cities through the christian
world were in the Primitive times governed, and are at this day in many places.
And therefore we cannot conceive any other of the several Presbyters placed in
every City by Apostolical institution, as of those of Jerusalem, Ephesus,
Corinth, Galatia, etc. but as of so many corporations: for we read that both
in Jerusalem and Ephesus, they had both many Presbyters and many congregations
under every several Presbytery, and as men in those several Cities, Parishes,
Towns, and Villages were daily converted to the faith, so those several
Colleges of Presbyters ordained them more Presbyters by common consent, and
took them continually under their government; which congregations, though many,
as far as their jurisdiction extended, were all joined together under one
Presbytery, and made still in every several Precinct but one church, as that
of Jerusalem and Ephesus, and were all governed and ordered by the joint
consent and common-counsell of their several Colleges of Presbyters; the
mistaking of the which kind of government, and the misunderstanding of the
Scriptures, was the cause of all the confusions in the Christian world, and of
those sad differences here in England at this day, and the only occasion of
that vain opinion of Independency, for so I may call it for diverse reasons.
For the tenent of the Independents is this, That in the Church of Jerusalem and
in that of Ephesus, and in all the other Churches spoken of in the New
Testament, there were no more Believers in each of them, then could all meet in
one place, and in one congregation to partake in all acts of worship, and that
they were absolute within themselves, and from the which there was no appeals:
which I affirm is a vain and fond opinion, contrary to both Scripture and
reason, and all antiquity; and that it is both against Scripture and reason, I
have sufficiently as I conceive proved it in the foregoing discourse. But for a
further confirmation of it I shall here add some other arguments, that may if
it be possible undeceive those that have by the falacies and craft of their
Teachers been misled and seduced. I must confess, it has been a wonder often
to me, to see that such multitudes of godly people, and those that I had
thought had been so well grounded in Religion, should be so carried about with
every wind of new doctrine, under pretense of New-lights, when they have so
often been forewarned to take heed of deceivers, by Christ and his Apostles;
and that in such a violent manner, and with such exaspirated spirits against
their Brethren, that cannot assent unto those novelties. For if they had ever
read the holy Scriptures with understanding, or been but a little acquainted
with the Ecclesiastical Histories, they could never have been so suddenly
deluded. For if we but read the Acts of the Apostles with attention, or the
Epistles of Paul, and all the writings of the New Testament; we shall find in
them all, that by the powerful preaching of the Gospel and by the wonderful
working of miracles of the Apostles, whole cities and countries were converted
unto the faith; and that the Gospel was generally embraced, and whole Nations
converted and brought to the obedience of the faith by it, in a very short
time: and Saint Paul speaking of the Romans, chap. 1 ver. 8. says, that their
faith was spoken of through the whole world: and in chap. 10. verse. 18. he
says, That the sound of the Gospel went into all the earth, and their words
(meaning of the Apostles) unto the end of the world. And in the 15. chapter and
verse. 18, 19. he affirms, That Christ so wrought by him, as he made the
Gentiles obedient by word and deed, through mighty signs and wonders by the
prower of the Spirit of God, so that from Jerusalem and round about all
Illericum, he had fully Preached the Gospel, and that he had so strived to
Preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, least he should build upon
another man's foundation. And in his 1. Epistle to the Thessalonians verse. 8. He
teaches That from them the Word of the Lord sounded, not only in Macedonia
and Achaia, but also in every place, says he, your faith to Godward is spread
abroad, so that we need not to speak any thing. Here we see whole Cities and
Countries were converted and became Christians. And in the Acts of the Apostles
there is frequent mention of whole Cities and Countries converted by the
miracles and Preaching of the Apostles: who the people thought of and looked
upon, as gods come down from heaven; so that all Asia in a short time was
converted by the Apostles Ministry, for the people seeing the Apostles raise
the dead and cure all diseases, and that by their very shaddows, and by
touching but the garments and handcarchiefs, or any thing that came from the
sick; and observing that they were by and by restored unto their former health,
and beholding their godly life and holy conversation, and hearing them preach
nothing but those things that tended to make them eternally happy: they came
in, in mighty multitudes, through Cities and whole Countries, to believe the
Gospel, and were made Christians daily; so that by some one of their miracles
they converted more then could meet well in any one Congregation to partake in
all acts of worship and to edification; and there was still daily increase upon
increase of Christians through both Cities and Countries, as both the
Scriptures and all the Ecclesiastical histories relate: so that all reason
dictates unto any intelligible man, that in a short time there must of
necessity in every City, and through the several Countries be many
Congregations and Assemblies, and many Presbytors, ordained over them for the
ruling and governing and daily instructing of them and for the building of them
all up in the holy faith: for all these the Scripture speaks of, were such as
were really converted, or at least made profession of the says as Simon Magus,
and were therefore admitted into the bosom of the Church, and into the
fellowship of the Saints. And all good reason will teach men, that the Apostles
and those Primative Ministers, had a more excellent faculty of converting men,
then our Independent Pastors and teachers, by whose Ministry yet, I never heard
of any that were converted; for their Congregations al of them consist of such
as were converted to their hands: but if a few of them without miracles, have
been so powerful through City and Country to gather so many congregations and
several Churches here in London, and through all the Cities and Towns where
they have been preaching their Novelties, shall we be so blockish and stupid to
think that all the Apostles together, and so many other famous Ministers as
were for many years, always resident in Jerusalem, they could all convert no
more Christians then could meet in one place or congregation? and that at
Ephesus and in the other Cities and Countries where the Scripture relates that
there was such infinite multitudes daily converted, and additions of new
believers upon new believers added to the Church, that they might ever meet in
one Congregation and in one Assembly to communicate in all the Ordinances? no
reason will persuade this to any man, that has not promised to himself to
believe nothing but what he sees with his own eyes. But that I may again
return to the Church in Jerusalem, the pattern of all Churches for government;
I affirm that in that great and mighty city, there were more believers than
could meet in any one or a few places, to communicate in all acts of worship,
and that there were many Congregations of Christians there in the Apostles
times, and many years after. And besides the many reasons I have in the
foregoing Treatise specified, for a further demonstration of the truth of that
Assertion, I shall here add a few more. And amongst other that out of Paul in
the first of the Galathians, which I only touched in the foregoing Tractate;
where he signifies to the Galathians, that he received not the Gospel from
the Apostles, but from Jesus Christ himself, that they might the more
cheerfully embrace it, and give credit unto it: For, says he, I preached the
Gospel in Arabia, to the heathens before I saw the Apostles, and had continued
my Ministry three years before I went up to Jerusalem to them. Indeed after
three years, says he, I went up to Jerusalem, to see Peter, and aboade with
him fifteen days, but other of the Apostles saw I none save James the Lords
brother, (not that they were absent) and therefore I received not the Gospel
from them, but from Christ himself. In the which words we have not only a
singular Argument to confirm the Preaching and writing of the Apostle Paul to
be the Word of God against the Papists, but we have also an excellent reason
against the new opinion of the Independents, to prove many congregations in the
Church of Jerusalem for Paul was a diligent frequenter of the Synagogues and
Assemblies of the Jews and Christians wheresoever he came (as it is often
specified in the Scripture) where he Preached the Word and Gospel unto the
people: and it is also clear and evident by the same Scripture, as in the Acts
of the Apostles, and in the Epistle of Saint James, and many other places, that
Synagogue and Church were Sunonymaes, and are often taken one for another, as
Bishops and Presbyter are for the ordinary Ministers and Preachers of the Word.
Now by the very light of reason, all men that have not resined their
understanding, will gather, That if there had been but one meeting place or one
congregation of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, that Paul remaining there
fifteen days, in all that times he would have frequented the Assembly of
Believers, at lest if he had not preached unto them, who was so diligent both
in hearing and in preaching in all other places were he came: and if there had
then been but one meeting place in Jerusalem, and but one congregation, without
doubt the Apostles would daily have been at their employments, which were, to
pray with the people, and preach unto them, for they never were idle nor
deserted not their charge. Now when they were always employed in their
several ministeries, it is manifest that there were several assemblies or
congregations of Believers in Jerusalem, that hindered the Apostles from
visiting one another; for if there had been but one congregation, then of
necessity Paul and the other Apostles should have met there in so long a space:
and therefore it stands with all reason that there were many congregations of
Believers in Jerusalem, if we had no testimonies of holy Scripture for to prove
it.

For if any credit may be given to the Historians that write of these times,
there were above three of four hundred Synagogues in Jerusalem (I speak within
compass) and common understanding dictates that there were some hundreds of
assembling places, where there was so many hundred thousand people, and such
multitudes of Teachers. And in those Synagogues the people met together, to
hear the Law and Prophets both read and interpreted unto them: and the
Synagogues both in Jerusalem, and through all Judea and Palestine, were the
places of the moral worship, as the Temple was the principal place of the
cerimoniall service. And as here in London, Paul's was the place, where after
the Jewish, or rather Heathenish fashion and manner, they had their ceremonial
employments, which consisted in outward performances, as crouchings and
cringings, capings and kneeings, pipeing and tooting, in Popes, Surplices, and
their four square Cowturds and crotchets, windings and turnings, Altars,
Crosses and Crucifixes, and a thousand other such trumperies; the acting of all
which made the judicious Christian-beholders think themselves rather in the
school of Numa Pompilius, or in the College of the old Roman Priests then
conversant in the Church of God: so the other Churches through the City, were
the places where the Morrall worship was chiefly exercised; as the reading,
preaching, and hearing of the Word, chatechising, exhortation, admonition,
prayers, thanksgiving, etc. So after the same manner it was in Jerusalem. The
Temple was the principle place of the Ceremonial Worship, and the Synagogues
were the places of the Morrall Service; where Moses and the Prophets were read
and interpreted unto them, every Sabbath day. And it follows of necessity,
that there must needs be a very great number of Synagogues in Jerusalem, where
there were many hundred thousand people, and such multitudes of Rabbis and
Doctors and such a number of Priests, Levites, Scribes, Pharisees, and Lawyers,
all Interpreters of the Law, and such as sat in Moses his chair, who our
Savior commanded the people to hear.

Now, as in the days of King Edward and Queen Elizabeth, after their Latin
Service, and their Idolatrous Masses were cast out of all the Churches; and the
reformed Religion was set up in the several Congregation in place of that falls
Worship, and all the people repaired still, and more willingly and more
abundantly unto their several Parish Churches, and Chapels, to hear the Word
Preached; and as the meetings and meeting-places were still continued, whereas
they only heard Masses before, which they understood not, now they heard the
Gospel purely preached unto them in lieu of that; and the people came more
abundantly unto those assemblies. Even so whereas before the coming of John
the Baptist, and of our blessed Savior, they had the Law, Psalms, and
Prophets, read and Interpreted unto them in all their Synagogues, after the
Gospel began to be published; to the Law and the Prophets, the glad tidings of
Peace was Preached by Christ and his Apostles, and the other Primative
Christian Mininisters, and by many of the Priests that embraced the faith; and
that in all their Synagogues every Sabbath day, especially where the people
upon all occasions in great multitudes met together: for it is said, That the
Kingdom of heaven suffered violence, and the violent took it by force. Now to
any man that will not resolve to shut his eyes, and refuse to see the Sunshine
of the truth, it may appear that all the Synagogues in Jerusalem, as in all
other Cities, after the Christian Religion was so generally embraced, and the
Jews were turned Christians; were the places where they still continued to meet
in, to hear the Gospel as formerly they had done to hear the Law, and there is
many testimonies out of holy Scripture, to prove this Assertion: neither can we
in charity think that they being made Christians, were less zealous to hear
the Gospel, then they were to hear the Law; yea, their diligence in that good
work, is often mentioned in the holy Scripture to their praise and honor; as
that they met daily in the Temple and in every house, to hear the Word and to
partake in all the Ordinances. And it is well known, that Paul into what City
soever he came, was as diligent in preaching as the people in hearing. Now when
he remained in Jerusalem fifteen days, he would not be idle: and it is to be
believed that the other Apostles were as diligent in their several Ministries
as Paul was, as I said before; so that their much employment without doubt, was
the only cause that hindered the Apostles from coming unto him, and retarded
Paul from saluting of them: for we may not conceive, that so famous an Apostle
as Paul was, could lie hid in Jerusalem or be unknown so long from the other
Apostles; neither in charity may we think, that there was any love wanting
either in Paul toward them, or in the Apostles toward Paul; but we most
impute their not visiting of each other, to the multiplicity of their
employments, that so hindered them, that they could not find convenient time,
each to see other. So that by this I have now said, it is evident to any
rational man, that there were more Christians and believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, then either could or did meet together in one place for all Acts of
worship: for they met every Sabbath day together in their Synagogues to hear
Moses and the Prophets read and Interpreted, as the Scripture affirms, yea
from house to house daily: and therefore we may easily gather, that as many
Synagogues and meeting places as there were in Jerusalem, to say nothing of the
Temple, so many Churches and Congregations of believers there were in
Jerusalem; for Synagogue and Church are all one in Gods dialect, and they that
were Jews before the preaching of the Gospel, were now made Christians and
believers. Neither had the Christians and believing Jews any cause to separate
themselves from the congregations, for there was nothing in their Synagogues to
scruple them, without the law of Moses should offend them, and that the
Scripture testifies they were very zealous of; and many of them that were
converted, persuaded the Gentiles after their conversion and illumination, to
join the Ceremonial Law to the Gospel, which although it was not permitted
unto them, yet for a time it was connived at and tolerated in the weak Jews;
yea, in the tenth of the Hebrews the Christians are blamed for forsaking of the
assembling of themselves together, and it was counted a fault in them: and
therefore it may without any error be concluded, that there were as many, if
not more Assemblies and Synagogues of believers in Jerusalem after the
preaching of the Gospel and in the Apostles times, as were before of the Jews:
for they after they were Christians continued still to assemble themselves, if
not daily, every Sabbath day at least in their Synagogues, as they were wont to
do, where the Apostles were all so taken up in preaching, as they had no
leisure for reciprocal salutations: and therefore of necessity there were more
congregations in the Church of Jerusalem, and a greater multitude of Christians
them could all meet in any one or a few places: even as it was here in England
in King Edwards and Queen Elizabeth's days, as I specified before: there was no
fewer congregations and assemblies of Protestants in London, then was before of
Papists: for as many Parish Churches as there were in the city of London so
many several congregation of Protestants there were then through the city; and
they that professed Popery before, did now embrace the Protestant Religion, and
made so many congregations and several Churches of Protestants, as there were
congregations of Papists before: and as it would be accounted great absurdity,
yea a ridiculous thing in any man to affirm that there was but as many
Protestants in London, in King Edward his time, or in Queen Elizabeth's days,
as could all meet in one place or in one congregation; so to any understanding
and intelligible man, it is as absurd to conclude that there were no more
christians and believers in Jerusalem then could all meet in one place and
congregation, when the Scripture it self affirms that all Jerusalem was
turned Christians, and had their meetings and assemblies in the Temple, and in
every house; and that there was many assemblies there, and it stands with all
reason, that if there had been but one Congregation of believers in Jerusalem,
when Paul went to visit Peter, that then he of necessity should have seen some,
at least of the other Apostles besides Peter and James; for without doubt Paul
was daily among the Christians a preaching to them in their Synagogues or
meeting places; and the other Apostles also whose duty it was to be continually
taken up in praying and preaching amongst them, would not so long a time have
layen idle and private: but in that neither Paul saw them, not the Apostles
Paul, it is a sufficient Argument to prove there were many congregations and
assemblies of believers in Jerusalem, which so employed them all in their
several Ministeries as they had no time for mutual visits; and that was the
only cause that hindered them from saluting one another: so that I conceive by
that which I have now said, all understanding men will gather that there were
more congregations of believers in the Church of Jerusalem then one; and that
all these several assemblies made but one Church, and were all governed by the
joint consent and common council of one Presbytery; whatsoever the Independent
Ministers persuade the poor deluded people to the contrary, for the upholding
of their imaginary Presbyterian Government, which is against all Scripture,
Antiquity, Reason, and Ordinary sense.

And therefore I may boldly assert in their dealing with their several
Congregations, when they set before them their Churches of Jerusalem, Ephesus,
etc. as consisting of but one Congregation and Assembly a piece, they juggle
with them for no other end, but to make themselves Lords and masters of them,
and to get the Sovereignty in time over the people into their own hands, while
they would seem to be their servants.

And therefore it highly concerns all men that desire the peace and welfare of
Church and state, duly to weigh and seriously to consider the danger of Schisms
and rents in either, which ought to move them to study by all means how rather
they make up the breaches already made, and how now to unite themselves
together in love and unity, against the common enemies of them both; then to
follow such blind leaders and guides as by their factions and fractions will
bring us all into the pit of destruction, and expose us and our posterities to
as great misery and slavery, both for souls and bodies, as ever Nation groaned
under.

And as it is the duty of every private Christian in his particular family; to
teach and instruct his children and servants in the nurture and fear of the
Lord, and with all singular care to purge his house of all such as may misleade
them, and seduce and corrupt them that are in their tender years, and not well
grounded in the principalls of Religion, and to give them special charge to
haunt no such places and company, as by which they may be viciated in their
manners, or poisoned with falls and erroneous doctrines and opinions, as the
Word of God commands both in the Old and New Testament. So it is the duty of
all Magistrates and Ministers in their several places, who are the Pastors of
the people, the one for their bodily preservation and the common peace, and the
other for their spiritual good to join together for the setting up of Gods
true Worship, Government, and Service; in all Cities, Towns, and Parishes
through the Kingdom; the one by their power and authority, and the other by
lifting up their voice like a Trumpet (as all the holy Prophets and Apostles
did in all their generations against all false teachers) and to warn the people
under their several charges, to take heed of them and shun them as they either
desire Gods glory, their own eternal Salvation, or the public present good
and the prosperity and tranquillity of their offspring in succeeding ages; and
to be as sedulous and diligent in suppressing errors and schisms, as all the
godly Magistrates and faithful Ministers have been in their several times,
whose praises for this their good work is frequently recorded in holy writ, and
in all the Ecclesiastical Records to their eternal honor and renoune, and
for our instruction. And truly if the examples of the holy Prophets, blessed
Apostles, and godly Magistrates, and of all the deer servants of God whose
names and fames are glorious to all posterity in the holy Word of God; will not
move us; then at least let us learn of the very enemies, of the Papists,
Sectaries, and Heretics in all precedent and foregoing Generations; for they,
as all histories and daily experience teaches us, not only labor to remove
all such out of their families and Churches, as be of a contrary opinion to
them but study also to exterminate them out of their very territories, if they
have strength or policy so to do.

And if none of their examples may yet persuade us to our duty, then let the
example of all those that now differ from us in opinion, but in the matter of
government teach us what to do in this point: for they will not willingly
entertain any into their families that is not of their own mind and opinion,
nor suffer their children to be instructed in any other way then their own; and
shun, in as much as in them lies, the very company of such as they count
Presbyterians; and rarely, if ever, come at our assemblies. And in New England
it self it is well known, that they do not only cast those out of their
Churches that differ from them in opinion, but also expose them to banishment
and to greatest misery, and think all they do, to be their duty; and publish it
to the world for the imitation of all other their Churches and Congregations:
and I am most assured, had they the authority in their own hands here in
England, they would be as severe toward the Presbyterians, as ever the
Prelates were against the Puritans. And I am induced so to believe, both from
their words and writings: for what can be more bitterly uttered against them,
then that they daily speak upon the least occasion, if any but preach or write
the least thing in opposition to their opinions; professing that all such
Preachers ought to be hanged: and had they the power in their hands, they would
trusse them up, as many can testify and witness: and in their writings, how
prodigiously daily they abuse with all manner of calumnies and reproaches, and
with all reviling speeches, the Presbyterians, all that have patience to read
their blasphemous Pamphlets can tell: so that whiles in them they plead for a
tolleration of all Religions, they will not tolerate the Presbyterians to
defend their own; by which they sufficiently declare what favor they would
show them if they were in their hands, on whom they look as the professed enemies
of Christ's kingdom. Now I say, if neither the example of Gods dear Saints and
Servants, nor the Word of God can move us to our duty, nor the example of the
Papists and Heretics of all ages: then at least let us follow the example of
our Brethren both in New England and Old-England; for they as all men know
remove all from them that differ from them in their Church Way; and separate
themselves from us, and gather congregations by by themselves, Independent,
refusing to communicate with us as an unholy people, and not suffering or
permitting us to communicate amongst them in the Ordinances either of baptism
or the Lords Supper, but upon their own terms; and account us all as unclean
things, and to be separated from, which I affirm should move all solid
Christians, and such as truly and unfeinedly desire that God may be glorified,
and his truth every where set up, to oppose all their errors and novelties in
religion, under what pretenses soever they be brought in, and under whatsoever
seeming holiness they be set forth: and so much the more care is to be had,
and diligence used, both by the Magistrates, Ministers, and all the real godly
of the land; by how much they know the craft and subtilty of those that seduce
them: for there was never yet any Sect whatsoever, that came to any rise,
perfection, or name in the Church, of which the first venters and contrivers
had not some seeming show of godliness and holiness of life, and that more
then ordinary, to which they usually added the bravery of language, and fine
alluring speeches, and cunning craftiness; as they were many of them men of
singular elocution, and deep subtilty: as the Prophets and Apostles through the
whole Scripture signify. And Paul in the 16 chap. of his Epistle to the
Romans, speaking of those that made divisions contrary to the doctrine that he
had taught them, has this expression, Verse 18. For they that are such (says
he) serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words and
fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. Here we see the false Teachers
of his time, made use of good words, fair speeches, to deceive the hearts of
the simple. And in Gal. 4.14. the Apostle there exhorting them, says.
Henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive. In this place the Apostle gives all Christians a charge
to take heed of all erroneous doctrines; and withal sets down the manners and
ordinary carriage of all seducers, that they might be the more careful to
shun them: for such, says he, use in the deceiving of you, the flight of
men, and cunning craftiness. This has ever been the method of all false
teachers, as Saint Peter also in his 2 Epistle, chap. 2. verse. 1, 2, 3. etc.
witnesses: for speaking of the false teachers of those times he lived in, and
of those in future ages, that should bring in damnable doctrines, even denying
the Lord that bought them, and bringing upon themselves swift destruction: he
foretells also, that many should follow their pernicious ways, by reason of
whom the way of truth should be evilly spoken of. And then also he sets down
the manner and customs of those seducers; and amongst other things he says of
them, that through covetousness, and with their fair words they should make
merchandise of the people. So that we may see, all false teachers clothe their
craft with their rhetoric and fained words, for otherwise they would prevail
but little. Now by how much more the Christians in this our age have to deal
with a generation of cunning and crafty Juglers, who seem to equallize, if not
to transcend all others in holiness and godliness, in their outward carriage
at least; it concerns every one I say more diligently to take heed of them,
and of all their new-wayes, their new born truths, and their New-lights: for
God himself by his holy Prophets and blessed Apostles has commanded us, not to
decline from those ways we have learned of him, and those truths that he has
taught us in his holy Word, Neither to the right hand nor to the left, Dut.
4.5. Josh. 1. Prove. 4. Nay, if an Angel from Heaven should teach otherwise
then God has taught us by Christ and his Apostles, we are to account him
accursed, Gal. 1. And in the express words above specified, we are prohibited
to be carried about with every wind of doctrine. So that all those that vent
those new-truths and set up those new-lights, which are all indeed new-lights
of doctrins, be they never so seemingly holy, are all cunning deceivers and
fighters against God. And all those Christian Magistrates (for ought I know)
that tolerate such; and all those orthodox Ministers that connive at them, and
are so meal-mouthed, as they dare not preach against them, and forwarne the
people of them, neglect their duty; and are not faithful Watchmen over their
flocks committed to their charge, and are blameworthy for it. And all those
people that being so often taught by God himself in the holy Scriptures, to
take heed of all such as come to them in sheeps clothing, and with their fained
holiness, and with their fair speeches to deceive them, and make merchandise
of them, and yet will not take heed of these novelties; do as much as in them
lies resist the Spirit of God: for the Lord has again and again commanded all
his people to shun such men, as in Tim. 1. chap. 6. verse. 5. From such (says
Saint Paul to Timothy, and in him to all Ministers and people in all ages to
the end of the world) withdraw thy self. Now if an Evangelist, so learned a
man, so well grounded a preacher as Timothy was, to withdraw himselfo from all
such as taught otherwise than Paul, and Christ himself and the other Apostles
had taught: how much more now ought all Christians that come so far short and
are so inferior to Timothy, for all indowments and graces of knowledge, to
beware and take heed of all such as bring in their newborn truths, their
new-Lights, and all their new ways; when especially we are commanded to
enquire for the old and good way, which will indeed bring rest unto our souls?
Jer. 6. And to omit innumerable places to this purpose; that of Saint John in
his second Epistle to the Elect Lady, should ever be in our memory, where Saint
John in express words forbids that Lady and her family, and in them all other
Christians, To receive any that bring not the doctrine of Jesus Christ into
their houses, or bid them God-speed, and gives a reason of this his
prohibition; For, says he, he that bids him God-speed, is partaker of his
evil deeds. Now all these new doctrines are not the doctrines of Jesus Christ;
and therefore whosoever brings them, ought not to be received into our
families, nor their doctrines into our hearts, no more then stolen goods into
our houses and closets: for God has both forbid it, and set down the danger
that will ensue upon it: for by that means we make our selves equally guilty,
and partakers with them in their evil: and therefore all such as shall still
notwithstanding whatsoever God has spoke unto us by his holy Prophets and
Apostles, follow those new teachers and those new truths, by their so doing, in
conclusion they will be found fighters against God; and partake with them in
all those punishments the Lord has threatened against all such as will be led
about with every wind of Doctrine, which will be the ruin of themselves and
others: and if people will be disobedient and obstinately go on to make Schisms
and rents, slighting Gods threats and menaces, and cast his word behind their
backs, then it belongs unto all Magistrates, Ministers, Fathers, and Masters
of Families, that are Christians (for I speak not of such as are without the
pale of the Church) seeing what already these new Sects have with all their Art
and cunning, invented, contrived, and with unwearied pains and ungodly policy
brought forth into the world, that the Magistrates are counted intolerable to
the people; wives are taken from the bosoms of their husbands, or so alienated
from them as they repute the^ a burden unto them: the Husbands from the Wife,
Children from their Parents, and Patents from their children; and the Servants
from their Masters and Mistresses, and Friends from Friends; the Ministers from
the people, and the flocks from their Pastors; and that all the laws of God
and Nature by these means are violated; I say in all these regards it is high
time, if they will prevent those evils that are coming upon the Land by these
fractions and divisions, now to quit themselves like men, not caring for all
the reviling languages of Seducers who yet never spoke well of any but of their
own party: for it is against the nature of Sectaries to give any a good word
but their own accomplices; and therefore it concerns them all to go about the
work as men of courage and in the fear of God. And truly if men think it (as it
is indeed) an unsufferable thing to tolerate those Men-stealers, who they call
Spirits, or a new generation of Fayries, to seduce and carry away their
children and servants: then much more it is an unsufferable thing to tolerate
those that steal away not only the bodies of men and children, from
Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Masters and Mistresses, Friends, etc. but
their very hearts and affections; and are no better in so doing then a company
of spiritual Plunderers, and are to be looked on as so many enemies of the
Church and kingdom. Neither is there any breach of charity in speaking truth
with love and an unfeigned desire of their reformation: for if they be not
reformed, nor their New-lights extinguished and put out, they will in short
time dim and darken the truth it self, and provoke the Lord to give us all
over to error, because we embraced not the truth in the love of it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
But I must confess I look upon many of the Independent Ministers, as the most
dangerous Sect that ever yet the world produced, in respect of the consequences
of their doctrines, and the sad effects they have brought forth already,
wheresoever they have spread it. For they carry themselves more cunningly then
any other Schismatics or Heretics that ever yet appeared since mortality
inhabited the World. For all other Sectaries tenants are recorded in all the
several Councels, and in the Monuments of the ancient Writers, so that every
man knows their opinions and doctrines; but what these men hold besides their
whimsey of Independency, and the manner of their gathering of Churches (wherein
they do not all agree neither) no man knows nor never shall know, for they
intend to set up many other New-lights, but yet with a reserve, never to be
constant to any thing what they either say or write: for this I have received
from the mouths of their Disciples and followers, That if that which seems a
truth to them to day, do to morrow appear otherwise by some new light, (were it
any Article of the faith) and they be convinced by that light, that they were
in an error before, they are to relinquish their former tenent, whatsoever it
were, and to follow that new light that God has appeared to them in. And this
doctrine is taught by all the Independents I ever saw or heard of. Yea they
count it a great honor unto them to be thus uncertain in their opinions; as
we may see in a railing and rediculous Pamphlet, not only against Mr. Prynne,
but against the Parliament, lately set out by an Independent, called, The
falsehood of M. William Prynnes Truth Triumphing; where page 16. Sect. 2. in
these words, You accuse the Independents, says he, as believing most things
with a reserve, according to their present light; with a liberty of changing,
as new-lights shall be discovered unto them; but did ever man so overshoot
himself (says he) certainly this is so high a character of the Independents
compleatest posture ensuing or growing stature in the School of Christ, as
could be applied unto them; wherein they glory not a little, and place it as
the only ground work and foundation, without which they cannot grow in grace,
from one degree of faith to another, until they become perfect men, and
perfect Saints, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ,
Ephesians. 4.12, 13. These are his formal words, so that the Independents doctrine
is this: That there is no growth in grace from one degree of says to another,
until we become perfect men, and perfect Saints, unless they believe most
things with a reserve; which tenent of theirs, whether or no it be not to bring
a sceptisme into Religion, according as M. Prynne does from them conclude, I
refer it to the judgment of those that are more judicious Divines then the
Author of that Pamphlet. And this, as men may observe, is the professed doctrine
of all the Independents; and they account it their glory to be ever in
uncertainties; which is the only reason, as I conceive, that they could never
yet be induced to set down what form of government they would have, and to
what doctrine and discipline they would subscribe and stand to, with their
followers; by which all men may easily discern the dangerousnesse of these
men; and well perceive, that they that have to deal with them, will never
find an end: for they will ever be starting of some new doctrines. And to
speak the verity, all the Shismaticks that have troubled the Church in this
last age of the World, and hindered all reformation, are yet more can did then
many of the Independent Ministers through the Kingdom. For the Brownists, as
M. Ainsworth and M. Robinson, both learned men, and more orthodox in their
Tenants then many of them, yet they with all their several congregations agreed
in their principles; and have ingenuously in their Apologies and writings with
modesty (for in host virtus laudanda) declared unto the World, both what they
held, and what they desired, and wherein they would rest contented; if the
Magistrates would but gratify them in it. The Anabaptists in like manner,
though far more erroneous in their opinions then the Brownists, yet they
also, many times in word and print, have set down their Tenants, to which they
both stand; and in the which, if the Magistrates will but condescend unto them,
they will sit down and yield all cheerful obedience to their just commands.
The same may be said of all other Sects. But, as for our Brethren the
Independent Ministers, they are like a company of Rats among Joyne-stooles,
every one can see and hear them, but none can catch them. No man can tell
where to catch or lay hold certainly of any point or tenent they preach, or
what they either are in their opinion, or will be: for what they conceived to
be a truth to day, may be an error with them to morrow: for certainty in any
opinion, is as great a Heresy to them, as eating of flesh on a Good Friday, is
to a Papist: Neither will they bind themselves or their followers to any
Doctrine they hold to day; for it may be they will both preach and practice the
contrary to morrow, if it make for their gain and emolument. So that all men
may boldly conclude of them, that they are as the most uncertain; so in that,
the most dangerous Sect that ever came into the World, since the Sun and
Moon ruled over the Earth. And this will the better appear, if we consider
the multitudes and variety of Sectaries that have sprung from them in a short
space, since their coming over amongst us, with their underhand dealings, how
ever they themselves play least in sight, and act privately their juglings, and
make use of others, in venting their several poysenous opinions, and can say
and on-say, and affirm and deny any thing at pleasure, as can be proved.
Before their apparition on our horison, there were but three or four Sects
known among us, and they were few in number, and well conditioned, and such as
were full of charity and love one toward another, and carried themselves
humbly toward all men; as the Brownists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, and
Familists. But out of the Independents lungs are sprung above forty several
sorts of straglers, which before their coming over were never heard of amongst
us. And for proof of what I now say, I had it from a Brother of mine in
tribulation, and a fellow-sufferer; who though he differ from me in opinion,
yet I truly love him, and shall never decline any christian office to do him
good for soul and body; I mean M. John Lilburne, Lieutenant Colonel; who
himself relathed it unto me, and that in the presence of others; that returning
from the wars to London, he met forty new Sects, and many of them dangerous
ones; and some so pernicious, that howsoever, as he said, he was in his
judgment for tolleration of all Religions; yet he professed, he could scarce
keep his hands off them, and had no patience to hear them, so blasphemous
they were in their opinions. So that he gathered, that these were now the last
days, wherein so many Heresies abounded. And amongst other of the Tenants, one
of those wicked Sects held, They denied the Scriptures both of the Old and New
Testament, and accounted them things of naught; whereas by Gods command, They
that despised Moses his Law, by the mouth of two or three witnesses were to be
put to death: and these wicked and ungodly creatures despise both the Law and
Gospel, and that in the presence of a Cloud of witnesses. And innumerable
other diabolical Sects there are, and so prodigiously impious, that it is not
for a Christian to name their opinions. And most of them, if not all, were
first Independents, and such as separated from our Congregations, as from a
people unholy, and were of their new gathered Churches and followers of their
Ministry. And many of them have jangled so long about the Church, that at last
they quite have lost it, and go now under the name of Expectants and Seekers,
and do deny that there is any true Church, or any true Ministers, or any
Ordinances: and some of them affirm, that the Church is yet in the
Wilderness, and they are seeking for it there: others say, that the smoke is
yet in the Temple, and they are groping for it there, where I leave them:
praying God to open their eyes and give them repentance; that they may consider
from whence they are fallen, and return again into the bosom of that Church,
from which they have, to the great dishonor of God, and the scandalizing of
the Gospel, made so fearful a desection. But I can truly say, without wronging
the Independent Ministers, that they have been one of the principal causes of
all those new, hidious, and monstrous opinions, and of all the sad differences
amongst Brethren: for their doctrines give way to all such errors, and ever
will, as long as they give liberty for the finding out of new truths, and the
changing of their opinions according to their New-lights. But amongst all their
errors this is none of the least, that all Magistracy is by them despised, and
made nothing of, no further then it agrees with their tenants and humors. And
howsoever publicly they seem to say something in defense of it, yet privately,
and upon all occasions they slight it; yea, and bid defiance to it, as all
their railing Pamphlets, and words, and deeds proclaim; and make the power and
authority of the Magistrates when they exercise it for the suppressing of
novelties, a mere tyranny and persecution, as many could witness, if they
would take the office of Informers upon them; for they are not the men they
were in the beginning of the Parliament: for then they seemed highly to
magnify the authority and power of the Parliament, and appealed unto it, and
did very good service in promoting the public good: but now they say they are
afraid it will prove but an Arbitrary government, and be more tyrannical then
that of the Prelates, and all the other unjust Courts; professing that they had
thought they should by their means have enjoyed the liberty of their
consciences (this it seems they fought for, their own ends, which they so much
condemn in others) but now they well perceive, that they go about to establish
a Presbytery, which to the poor Saints (they are afraid) will prove more
tyrannical then the government of the Bishops: and therefore now many of the
Independents that were very zealous at the first in the quarrel of the
Parliament (as it was their duty to be) are very cold, and have not only cast
away their arms, and detract their obedience, but can at pleasure speak
against the pressing of men for that service; and profess, that is not lawful
to force men to fight, and that it is unlawful to fight for Religion (I
conceive they mean any Religion but their own: for they have been heard say;
yea they have frequently bragged of their party, and protested that they would
make hot work before the Presbyterians should have the day) and such like
stuff they vent in every corner, to the deterring of many from their duty,
which they are bound unto by the Law of God, Nature, and all Nations; and for
which there be many presidents in holy Scripture, and many fearful threats and
judgments denounced against such as deserted their Brethren in affliction: and
great and fearful punishments have been imposed upon those that came not out
to aid their Brethren when they went against the enemies of their country,
whether they were foreign or intestine: and all to teach us not to decline from
our duty upon the like occasions. But that any man that has but any ordinary
understanding should speak against the pressing of men, it is a wonder to me to
hear it: for if they ever had read the Scriptures with judgment and knowledge,
or were but acquainted with the Histories of all Ages, they may find it ever
has been the practice of the people of God, as well as of the Heathen, to
force men out of all their Tribes and Families to go to war against any enemy;
and that they that neglected their duty being summoned to it, were counted
enemies, and were severely punished for it, and made examples to others for
their disobedience; and there were none exempted from the war by Gods own
appointment, that had strength and abilities to fight, but new married people
and base Cowards: and indeed to all such, God gave a dispensation for a time,
as till the one for a year had rejoiced with his Wife, and till the other had
got the spirit of courage, and a more brave and valiant resolution: but all
others if they would not voluntarily come out, were forced to it or punished
for their neglect: and for ought I know, all Christian Magistrates have the
same authority still under the Gospel that they had under the Law. And truly
to my poor understanding, there is none that can go more comfortably to fight
for their country, then they that are pressed; and if I were to go upon any such
employment, I should with ten times more alacrity go into the war, being pressed
or called to it by the State, then if I were a mere Volunteere: though I have
ever though, Volunteeres brave and gallant men, and worthy of great honor for
their good service, and have counted such as would neither by force nor freely,
put themselves upon public employment on the one side or on the other;
especially if they had able bodies, the most basest cowardly fellows in the
world, and men unworthy the Protection of either King or Parliament; or to
enjoy the very benefit of the air they breath in. And without doubt they are
the veriest cowards upon the earth, howsoever they may vapor in a
drinking-school. Yet I say those that go out as pressed men, have in all respects
a more warrentable calling, and wherein if they keep themselves from the sins
and pollutions that are too frequent in Armies, they may both fight and dye
with all cheerfulness: for in so doing they are in their calling, and may
challenge pity and compassion from all; and maintenance also and support if
they be wounded, and by it made unable to get their livings for themselves and
for their families, as long as they live; for they have been the servants of
the State, and employed by their special command; and if they be taken
prisoners, the state ought to exchange or ransom them, or else it will be
their dishonor. Whereas, if they be merely Volunteers, though they do their
duty in so doing, and shall have the honor of it, if they be hurt, wounded, or
captivated; yet the world is wont to say, Who required these things at your
hands, what call had you to this employment? And all men generally will condemn
such: and it was not long since objected to a gentlewoman, whose husband was
taken prisoner in the war, and that in a very Lordly and imperious manner, by
an Independent Minister; What call, said he, had your husband to take Arms?
could not he have followed his own employment? Thus did this domineering
Independent vapor over men in distress; who himself was never guilty of
either learning or humanity, or fit for any thing but to make a faction, being
a mere cow-baby coward, and one that ran away, as being more afraid of the
bishops (when they were in power) then he was of God or the devil; and yet
this mounsier could superciliously demand of this Gentlewoman, what call her
husband had to take Arms? And as this Independent, so commonly all men for the
most part, slight Volunteers in their distresses, especially if they desire
their aid; which they do not only ordinarily refuse, but deter others from
doing them any good, saying, that such men put themselves out of Gods
protection, in as much as in them is, when they leave their callings; and thus
those grolls babble, as if a man had not a sufficient call, if he sees his
neighbors house on fire, to leave his shop to go out to help quench it I Such
kinds of Puffoysts as these, that abuse Volunteers, I leave them as a
generation of men, not worthy to give guts unto a Bear. But, I say, when men
are called to the war by the State, and pressed to that service, they can then
appear with joy before all men, and look death it self in the face with
courage; whether in the field, or in cold blood, in the hands of their enemies,
when they suffer as evil doers: for they can then comfort themselves with
their calling, knowing that they were employed by the State, and it is their
duty to obey; and that as they were borne under obedience, with cheerfulness
and alacrity they can dye. And therefore all such as the Independents, that go
about to disparage the Parliament, and the great Council of the Kingdom, for
pressing of men for the public service, do things derogatory to their
authority: and all such as are pressed and able to fight, and do either run away
from their Colors, or wilfully or rebelliously detract their obedience, ought
to be hanged. And as it is lawful in the Magistrate to press men to fight for
their country, so it is law full likewise for them to fight for their
religion; and to press men for that purpose: and he that will not fight for
his religion, if he be a Magistrate, certainly he has little religion in him:
and he that is a private man, that will not suffer for his religion, if he be
called to it; nor fight for it both voluntarily and when by authority he is put
upon it, but fly from either of the employments of doing or suffering, and
will not come out to help the Lord against the mighty, he deserves not only
the bitter curse against Merosh, Judge. 5. but to be hanged. What, do the
Brethren the Independents now hold it a thing unlawful to fight for religion
(for so they profess to their friends) when not long since they so animated
others to it? It seems they are very changeable in all their oopinions: I
believe they have found out some new-light of direction how to run away
again, as they did before, if the times change. But yet such as have learned
how to perform their duty, and have read the holy Scriptures; and amongst many
other places the two and twentieth of Joshua for one, have been taught, that
when the Israelites on the other side of Jordan had set up an Altar, though it
was not with a mind and intent to alter religion, yet if they had not given a
satisfactory answer for their so doing to Joshua and the Elders of Israel their
Brethren, they would speedily have made war upon them for it; as any State
for ought I know, or any christian Nation by their example may do, against
what enemy soever they be, whether foreign or domestical; that shall attempt to
alter the true religion, and Christ's government established in his Church
(which is his kingdom) and bring in an Idolatricall one, or an Independent
one, or any other that tends to the destruction of that, that God himself
has appointed his people to serve him with: and all such as shall refuse to
fight for their religion (if they have no bodily hindrances or some just
impediment) when the magistrate calls or presses them to it, ought to be
accounted as the enemies of religion, and rebels against both God and their
country. And all such as shall endeavor, either clandestinly or openly, to
speak words tending to deter men from going out to help the Lord against the
Mighty; or refuse, being Christians, to fight for the Gospel (except by their
bodily infirmities they be hindered from the duty) I know no reason but they
ought to be hanged as a company of Rebels against both God and men, and as such
as are unworthy the name of Christians, that will not fight for the honor of
the King of Saints and King of Kings, and for his royalty and dignity that has
redeemed them from the slavery, not only of Satan, but of Antichrist. For we
have read that Michael the Captain, and Commander of his Church and kingdom,
and his Angels, makes war against the Dragon and his Angels; which is not to
be understood only in a spiritual sense, but in an ordinary way, and
literally also; for Christ has his soldiers, that besides their weapons of
the right hand, their prayers, tears, and humiliations, have also their weapons
and arms of the left hand, as their swords and all warlike instruments, to
fight for the honor, dignity, and sovereignty of their King and anointed
Christ; who at his departure from his Disciples, bad them sell their coats, and
buy each of them a sword; by which he invested them with authority as well to
fight, if occasion required, for the honor of their King and Master, and for
their own safety; and although he condemned in Peter the temerarious and rash
use of his sword, and bad him put it up for that time, yet the left the use of
it to him and to the other Apostles, upon their just occasions. And who knows
not that there is a time for war and a time for peace, and God himself
professes, that he is the General of the Armies of his people, and the Lord
of their Hosts; and he taught his servants hands, in times past, to war and
their fingers to fight, as they with thanks acknowledged. And he is the same
God now to his people that ever he was, and will be nigh unto them, and a
present help to all those that fight his battles. And what, I pray, are so
properly his batrels, as those that are made against Antichrist and his
accomplices (by what names or titles so ever they be called) whether they be the
Kings or Emperors of the Earth, or any other Malignants that have given their
power to the Beast and make war against the Lamb? Neither shall I ever be of
an other mind, but that it is the greatest honor any Christian can be called
unto, to fight for his country and for the Gospel against what enemy of either
soever he be. And as I shall live and dye by Gods assistance in this opinion,
so I shall likewise ever believe, that all such as will neither fight for their
country, nor religion, but deter and dissuade others from it, are enemies of
both, and so ought to be esteemed, whatsoever pretenses of seeming love they
make to their country and religion: and that such as will not fight for the
protestant religion, deserve not the favor of protection from those States and
countries they live in, whose preservation or ruin is all to them, so they may
enjoy their own ends and become masters of those they causelessly hate, and
unchristianly and uncharitably think evil of; and whose destruction they not
only daily wish and pray for, but as much as in them lies, bid defiance to, and
proclaim open war against them; and use or rather abuse the holy Scriptures
for the maintenance of their authority, in their contending and fighting
against their christian Brethren, the Presbyterians, for their independency;
and to that end in the Frontispieces of their books set down Christ's words,
Matthew. 10 34.35, 36. where our Savior says, Think not that I came to send
peace on earth, I came not to send peace but a sword. For I am come to set a
man at variance against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother, and
the Daughter in law against her Mother in law, and a man's foes shall be those
of his own household. Out of the which words misunderstood, they would persuade
the people and make them believe, that they have good warrant and ground to
fight against their Christian Brethren for the maintenance of their own
whimsies; whereas, although they had been Wolves in times past, yet being now
Christians indeed, and really converted, and in whom there is a through change
wrought in their hearts, they would have laid aside their wolvish nature; so
that the Wolf and the Lamb would have peaceably dwelt together (according to
the prediction of the Prophet) they then would be loving and kind Brethren,
and would not come out to fight against them: for that Scripture speaks only
of such, as who living and continuing in their natural state, and in an
irregenerate and unconverted condition, and in whose souls the work of grace
was not yet wrought, should hate their very Parents, Brethren, and Sisters, and
nearest allies; that were truly converted to the faith and believed the
Gospel: as the seed of the Serpent will always hate the seed of the Woman, as
Cain did Abel; and that in regard of that enmity God has put between them; so
that the righteous is an abomination to the wicked, and the wicked to the
righteous; be their relations never so nigh together, in respect either of
consanguinity or affinity: and this all Gods people by their daily experience
find, according to Christ's prediction, That their foes and enemies are they of
their own household. But do these words of Christ give liberty to those that
are Believers, and children of the most High, the very sons and daughters of
God, to come out and make war against their Brethren; and to fight against
them, and that for their own inventions and traditions? I think not. And yet
the Independents from this place of holy Scripture, not the Novices, Yonkers,
and fresh water soldiers only, but grave men in their great white
basket-hilted beards, with their swords in their hands; come out to fight
against their Brethren, for their Independency; and justify this their
grollery from Christ's words: which if it be not to abuse the holy Word of God,
then nothing ever was an abuse of divine authority.

But they have a singular faculty in making every portion of Scripture serve
their purpose: as where Christ says, in Luke chap. 13. verse. 24. Strive to
enter in at the straight gate, from thence they conclude, That the
Independent-way is that straight way, and that all Presbyterians being out of
it, are in the broad way that tends to perdition. But I will not abuse the
patience of the Reader with relating their dotage, as they abuse the Scripture,
to maintain their faction, and to speak the truth it is no better: for they
boast of such a party in the kingdom (if their own words may be credited) as
they now think by the sword to be able to make their own Laws; and have been
frequently heard say, That they had many abettors in the Assembly, and in both
Houses of Parliament, and in many parts through the Kingdom, besides in all
the Armies; and they were all resolved to have the Liberty of their
Consciences, or else they would make use of their swords, which they have
already in their hands. So that most certain it is, that the Religion of too to
many of them, is a mere faction.

And now I will take a little liberty to speak something upon my own experience
about this business: for at my return from my last Imprisonment, I having
declared my different opinion from them in the point of Independency to many of
that fraternity; and professing that I looked upon many that went that way, as
upon people truly fearing God, and such as were his deer servants, (who I
pitied to see so misled) and yet for the way in which they went, I ingeniously
told them, that I saw no ground for it in Gods Word; and that I purposed (God
willing) to write something concerning that subject, and that I doubted not to
prove the Presbyterian way of Government to be Gods Ordinance, and not
Independency: notwithstanding some of the Independents reported about the City,
that I was of their judgment, and agreed with them in their opinion (which was
not fairly done of them) but all this was acted to strengthen their own party.

But for such of them as really believed that I intended to write something,
slighted it and made a mere push at it, exceedingly vilifying, and under
valuing, what I could either say or do against their Tenent; depending it
seems on their Champions strength in the Assembly, who they magnified for such
great Scholars, as if nothing could be set forth or written by me, that they
would not speedily confute, and gloried as if the field were already won, and
all the Presbyterians vanquished: and by such expressions as these the party
grew daily more powerful, and into that numerosity it now is. But in fine,
some of their worthies who had a more honorable opinion of me, professed unto
such as were ordinarily accustomed to slight me (for I had very good
information of their underhand dealings) that if I did write against them, they
were fully persuaded that it would be more prejudicial to their cause, than
any thing writ before: and they pleased to speak something in the praise of my
schollership, that howsoever two or three Doctors in the town made nothing of
me, yet they knew very well that if I undertook and business, I would manage
it with more learning than they that traduced me were able to judge of (and for
their praises I was beholding to them) but they said, the only course would be
for them, to take me off from that employment and put me upon some other
subject, or at least to persuade me to stand Neuter. All which was neither
Christianly nor heartily done of them. For if they had indeed had a desire that
the truth should come to light: and if they had any real opinion (as they
pretended) either of my integrity in my religion, or of that learning God had
given me, they would have came to me rather, and have importuned me to write
something of that Subject, that they might see what reasons I had to convince
them, or to persuade them, to have better thoughts of the Presbytry; for
hitherto they had not received satisfaction from any that had formerly writ
about it. But none of all this, but on the contrary, some of them very
churlishly and loftily demanded of me, what calling I had to meddle in
Divinity, and to put my self upon that employment? Which I must confess, was a
question that did not beseem them of all other men: for they think that any
gifted man, as they call them, may dispute, write, and preach, not only
privately, but in a public way; and glory that the very boys and women in the
Congregations can confute the learnedest of the Presbyterians; and many of
them, as it is well known, that were none of their Pastors, have set forth many
scurrilous and blasphemous pamphlets in defense of their Independency, which
have been allowed of by them with great applause; and that these men now should
demand of me, what calling I had to defend any truth in Religon against the
errors of the times, I say it may seem strange to any rational man. But for
answer in brief, though I am not solicitous to please them in all things; let
them take notice of this: That if it be lawful in any of their fraternities to
maintain their erroneous opinions, it is likewise lawful in any other
Christians to oppose them and to defend their truth: for they also must give an
account, how they have employed all those several talents of knowledge,
learning, or any other thing God has bestowed upon them: and this they also in
their Pamphlets frequently make mention of, to warrant their scribbling in
divinity. But Saint Paul in the fourth of the Colossians verse. 6. Says, Let
your speech be always with grace, scasoned with salt, that you may know how to
answer every man. And Saint Peter in his first Epistle chap. 3. v. 15. Says,
sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer
to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness
and fear. And Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Philip. chapt. the 1. ver. 27.
Only (says he) let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ: that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your
affairs; that ye stand fast in on spirit, with one mind, striving together
for the faith of the Gospel. And Saint Jude in his Epistle General ver. 3.
Exhorts all Christians, That they should earnestly contend for the faith
which was once delivered unto the Saints. And many other places to this purpose
might be produced which warrants Christians, that they may strive for the
faith, and earnestly contend for it against what enemies of it so ever; and in
special we are command, that we should be always ready to give an answer to
every man that asks us a reason of our hope, and that we should know how to
answer every man. Now then when many of the Independents came to me, and asked
a reason of my faith concerning the Presbytery, I demand of any well-grounded
Christian, whether or no I have not a very good calling to answer them; which
when they are so much displeased at me, and so highly magnify it in their own
party; I have very good reason to believe that they contend not for truth, but
for victory, and to make a faction and division in Church and State. And Saint
Paul in Phil. 3. verse. 2. speaking of the false Teachers of his time, that but
urged the ceremonial Law, Calls them Dogs, and bids them take heed of them,
Beware, says he, of Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision;
all such were to be taken heed of, as made divisions, and cut the Church into
little pieces, and sucking congregations, and therefore are called, them of the
concision: for they indeed made separations; and therefore Saint Paul bids them
beware of them, as of a company of dogs that are ever snarling or biting; and
as of evil workers, that spoiled the work of the Gospel; which was to unite
men first to God, and then one to another; that they might be of one spirit and
one mind; and these evil workers divided them all one from another and made
factions: and therefore they and all such as they are, are to be detested and
abhorred, that make strifes and divisions in all Churches and Countries where
they are, while they contend for their own novelties and new born truths: and
all those that oppose them have a call from God and his Word for their warrant,
in their so doing. But others of them carried themselves as more craftily, so
more gentily, and seemed to come to me in the way of love, pretending they
honored me; and they demanded of me, Whether or no I intended to practice
Physic again? and told me, that if I had such a purpose, they would yield me
their best furtherance for the procuring of me Patients; for which their love,
I returned them many thanks, telling them withal; that for practicing of
Physic, I had little hopes of doing any good that way in the City; for some
Independent Doctors of Physic and others, had so villified me amongst all good
people, and had made such a piece of ignorance or nothing of me, in that
faculty, as they had taken away my reputation, in as much as in them lay: so
that were my skill or knowledge in that Art, never so great, yet I might not in
this place ever expect to regain any esteem in it: (so powerful all
black-mouths are to darken any man's credit) though I bless God, I had known,
as well what belonged unto that faculty, as they that maligned me; and had
through his assistance, done as great cures as ever they did any; and added
farther, that I doubted not in time to make it appear, that those that had so
abused me, had neither honesty nor learning in them: whatsoever the world
esteemed of them for their seeming Religion, which they had ever made use of,
but for their base and covetous ends. And they demanding the names of those
men; I told them ingenuously, and that their calumnies were one of the chief
causes of the ruin of me and my poor family; as I could prove by a cloud of
witnesses, if that could do me any good: to which they replied, they were very
sorry, and confessed that those men were never heard speak well of any, and that
which makes me wonder, I never came in the company, nor never changed a word
with them that thus traduced me. But then they offered their service unto me,
and professed they should be very willing to do me any courtesy that lay in their
power, to get me some honorable employment by which I might comfortably
support my family, for they thought that my means was not great (and they
thought truly in that) and they knew that the charity of many was now waxed
cold, and that since my being at London there was a great change of men's
minds, and those that were formerly my friends went now another way; and they
heard that I was for the Presbytery, which they conceived would be worse then
the Prelaticall government; and if I should write any thing in the defense of
that cause, that then I would totally lose those that as yet were well affected
to me (as afterward they reported I was utterly lost) and they would persuade
me to employ my self any other way, then in writing about that subject, for it
would give great discontent unto Gods people. And if I intended any public
employment, such men, they told me, with one word of their mouths could
gratify me, and get me into some honorable way of advancement, that I might
comfortably support my family: withal they told me, that they were most
assured, that I should obtain any reasonable request of them, for they had
heard them speak exceeding well of me, and were sorry to see that as yet there
had been no recompense or satisfaction made me, for all my losses and
sufferings; for which their good respects toward me, I told them I was
exceedingly beholding unto them: Now all these they would have had me applied
my self unto, were Indedendents. And for that time I told them, that I never as
yet had hunted after promotion, and if any could do me any good, I conceived
that the Parliament it self was as likely to do it as any other; and although
I had not hitherto solicited the honorable House, neither of the Peers or
Commons, yet I would rather petition the house, then go by private ways, and
told them that as I saw opportunity, I should more willingly make my addresses
to the Parliament then to any particular persons, though I should count it a
great favor to enjoy any man's good opinion and furtherance, and for the which
I should ever be thankful. Notwithstanding they exceedingly urged me to make
use of those men they had nomitated to me, as men most powerful with the
Parliament. Now I perceived very well their drift in it: for if I had applied
my self to them (which I never did) and if they had done me any favor, and if
I had afterward writ against their fond opinion, then I should have been
counted the most ungrateful fellow in the world; and then also they would not
only have defamed me, but as they had the power to advance me, they would have
used the same to have cast me down again, which I very well foresaw. Again,
if I had entreated their assistance; and if they upon any false information had
refused it; if then I had writ against Independency, they would have accused
me, that it had been out of discontent, because I could not attain to my own
ends by them, and because they would not satisfy my humor; and that I did all
I did, out of ill will and malice, and then they would have laid a load of
calumnies upon me; in regard of all which reasons, I would no way be induced to
make any Independents a means and way of my preferment. But stood unmoveably
to my resolution, to write in defense of the truth, against the novelties of
the Independents, and told them so. Then they set upon me with fresh incounters
as often as they came to me, and wheresoever they met me, and importuned me
again and again, that I would not meddle, but that I would stand a neuter:
and that I should consider withal, that all those that went that way had been
my very good friends and contributed to my necessities, and stuck close to me
in all my distresses, and that they were the deer servants of God; and that if
I should now write in the defense of the Presbytery, which they so much hated,
that I would sad the hearts of the Saints; and therefore they did earnestly
desire me that I would not be seen in that cause. My answer to them in this
regard was this, that I would not with Esau sell my birthright for a mess of
Porrage: if any of them had done me any courtesy, they had my thanks for it,
and my prayers, and my readiness to gratify any of them again in what I
could: and if I could never requite them here, they were to have their reward
in Heaven for it, which would recompense all; but I further added, that when
they showed me all those favors, they were of my mind, and were in the very
way that now I am in, and relieved me under that notion. So that I saw no
reason why they should be so much displeased with me for my constancy, as I
might justly be offended with them for their instability and levity,
notwithstanding their courtesies: and withal I related unto them, that it was
an unreasonable thing in any man, and an unjust thing to go about to stop the
mouth of truth with a bribe; or to retard any man from doing his duty, with the
memory of former courtesies: for no ingenuous man will ever do any a courtesy,
to captivate him or make him a slave to him for ever for it: and if any should
be so base, as by any favor to go about to silence truth, yet it was the
honor of any man ever to preserve his christian liberty, which is more to be
prized then all worldly things: and therefore I desired them, that if they
tendered their own reputations, and the honor of their cause, that they would
never any more make mention of what favors I had received, as if that should
hinder me from my duty, or deprive me of my liberty, which I preferred before
my life: and I further related unto them, that many of the Independents already
had often cast in my teeth their former courtesies, and against all the laws of
civility had abused me and Mr. Prynne; telling me to my face, that neither he
nor I suffered for the cause of God, but for our own ends; and that we had
forgot all that the people of God had done for us; and were now turned
persecutors of the ways of God, and showed our selves very ungrateful to our
Benefactors; and a thousand such uncivil and injurious things they have told
me to my face in a violent and unchristian manner: so that the very upbraiding
of us with their former favors is a sufficient payment for them (though by the
way I will take liberty to speak it, and that in the presence of God) that
their favors, though more then ever I expected, were not a quarter of that
they were reported, nor never equalized my very losses: so that at this day (as
some of that society can tell, that knows my estate to five shillings) I have
not in the world by some hundreds of pounds, so much as my father left me, for
the support of me and mine, whatsoever men may speak: but this is one of the
greatest slaveries upon the earth, that these men would bring upon people, that
by their courtesies they think for ever to make them their Vassels, and that
they must neither speak nor write any thing in defense of any known truth,
that is displeasing unto them; and such a servitude as I will never be brought
unto, for the enjoying of whatsoever the world can afford me. I know many that
has forsaken the truth, and changed their religion for bread, and deserted
their friens for a thing of naught. But whereas they told me withal, that I
would sad the hearts of the Saints, if I write in defense of the Presbytery: I
replied, that I had thought that all the Independents had hated Impropriations,
and how now they were come to impropriate and to attribute unto themselves
only, the name of Saints, I saw no good ground or reason for it: yea, I told
them it was both unchristian and Pharisaicall; unchristian, in regard that the
Presbyterians were their Brethren, and redeemed with the same price, and were
believers as well as any Independents; and served their Lord and Master with as
much sincerity as any of them; and should be as willing to suffer for the
Gospel, or any truth of it, as any Independents, and stand to it when they
would run away; and therefore they did very unchristianly to un-Saint their
Brethren, and Pharisaically boast of their own Sanctity, magnifying themselves,
whilst they vilified others: but they might remember what our Savior told
them, that what was prized amongst men, was not esteemed of by God, and that
such as advanced themselves should be brought down, and those that justified
themselves before men, were not justified before God: and therefore I
counseled them to lay aside all high thoughts of themselves, and to think a
little better of their Brethren the Presbyterians, and to consider that they
were Saints also; and wished them to take heed that they did not by their
scurrilous and blasphemous writings in defense of their novelties and
Independency, sad the hearts of those that were Saints indeed: but for a
satisfactory answer I told them plainly, that if the defense of the Gospel or
any truth of it would sad the hearts of either Saints or Angels, I would not
desert it, for I was to please God and not men; for as Saint Paul says of
himself Gal. 1. verse. 1. So I may say in this cause, If I yet pleased men I
should not be the servant of Christ, and therefore in maintaining of truth, I
told them I would only aim at the glorifying of God, and how it might please
him. And notwithstanding my resolution, upon all occasions they solicited me
that I would stand a Neuter, and used some more reasons to move me to it;
telling me, that Mr. Prynne by meddling in that business, had lost the love of
all Gods people, and was now grown odious amongst them; insomuch that they
called all his former sufferings in question, and doubted of the reality of his
religion; and therefore they feared if I should intermeddle in that quarrel,
it would be very prejudicial unto me; and therefore they desired me as I
tendered mine own good, and the good of mine, I would not appear in that cause
but stand a Neuter. To all which I thus answered: that to stand as Neuter in
this business I should make my self hateful to God and man: for God himself
says, he will spew out of his mouth all those that are Lukewarm, that are
neither hot nor cold, in the number of which are all Neuters; and by this I
should make my self liable to Gods wrath, whiles I should gratify them:
withal I told them, that I had learned something of the brave Gentlemen in the
Kings Army (whilst I was a prisoner amongst them) who were wont ordinarily to
say, that of all men in the world they hated those that played the knaves on
both sides, as Chomley, Grinvile, and the Hothams did, who for their own
private ends would betray their countries and the trust committed to them, and
of all men they would have such hanged: and next unto them they would have all
those that now are or have been Neuters through the Kingdom, whosoever came
to get the day, proclaimed the veriest Rogues and base Villains in the world;
and all such men, as when they were amongst the Cavaliers, would be for the
King, and when they were amongst the Parliamenteers, would be for the
Parliament: all such men, I told them, amongst the most brave Gentlemen in the
Kings Army, and such as were worthy of honor, were proclaimed the very Vermin
of the world, and such as in their opinion they thought unworthy of any
conquerours favor, or to be esteemed any otherwise of, then of a company of
knaves and cowards to all posterity. And I told them, that I thought those
Gentlemen in their opinion erred not: for I shall ever believe, that all those
that are Neuters through the kingdom even in these civil broils, and that
are of no side, are the worst of men; and that by their neutrality of all
sides, they are the mundungos and garbige of mankind: and much more are they
detestable before God and the world, that are Neuters in Religion, or for base
ends either hold their peace, or make profession of any religion: and therefore
I was resolved sincerely to go to work, and to declare my mind in that way I
conceived to be the truth, and to live and dye in it, though I were exposed by
it to the greatest myserie that ever man underwent. And whereas they told me
that M. Prynne had so lost the favor of the people for declaring of his
opinion against Independency, that they called in question all his sufferings,
and could not give him so much as a good word: I said in that they showed their
levity and vanity, not knowing either wherefore they loved, or wherefore they
hated him; for he was still the same, that ever he was, and notwithstanding all
their malice and reproaches, for the good service he had done to his God, and
to his country, he has deserved an immortal name to all future ages; and is
as truly at this day beloved and honored by all such as know what to honor
and love men for, as ever he was; and in spite of all the calumnies of the
Independents, he will walk like a noble Lion, when they shall go like a company
of Moon-Calves, bleating out their own folly and vanity and changing their
opinions and affections every month. It is observed, and that ordinarily that
the generality of all the Independents, never love without doting; nor never
praise without admiring, but as they are won with an apple so they are lost
with a nut; no man knows were to find them in one mind for a months space,
for as the horns of any new light appears, either to the praise or dis-praise
of any, they must follow that light; such a generation of Moon-Calves, and such
an unstable Sect never appeared in the world before; and therefore I told them
I should never be terrified with what they had either spoke or writ against
Master Prynne, from my duty in defense of the truth, which I resolved never to
bauk, neither for hope of the favor nor fear of the anger of all the
Independents in the world: for whatsoever could be prejudicial to me for doing
any duty in regard of them, it must be either in respect of name or means: and
I told them that whatsoever should be prejudicial unto me undeservedly, it
should never trouble me, whether it were in regard of my reputation or of my
estate: as for infamy and reproach I said there was no fence against them in
the school of wit or Art, and that I had already had my share in all manner of
calumnies, and had been so often wounded with them by all sorts of people, as I
believed there was scarce a narrow left in the quiver of malice, that they
could now shoot at me, or scarce any reproach or contumely that ever was coined
in the mint of men's hatred, that had not past as current through the world
against me, so that now I was so used unto it that there was no lesson more
perfect unto me, and I had learned quietly to go through good report and bad
report: and I knew it had been the lot of all the Prophets, some of the which
confessed that their hearts were broke with reproaches: yea, the Lord of life
himself escaped not free from prodigious and blasphemous reproaches, who was
counted a wine-bibber and a friend of sinners, and one that had a devil, and
all the Apostles had tasted and drunk of that cup; and all the Primitive
Christians had been abused after the same manner, and that Luther and his
followers in that age of the world, had his Cocleus to rail of him; and Calvin
had a Bolsecus to abuse him: and all our holy Martyrs here in England, had
those that most impiously traduced them; and so had the poor Puritans and all
that stood up for Reformation in their several generations, those that both
maligned and reviled them, as all the precious and godly people at this day, by
the Independents and all Sectaries, and all manner of Malignants are causelessly
traduced; and therefore I must never look for better measure at their hands,
then all the godly that ever lived; who all went to heaven through many
afflictions: And all they (says Paul) that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
must go through many afflictions; and it is not the lest, but indeed one of the
greatest to be reproached and railed on; yea, it is worse then death it self:
for he that takes away a man's good name, is worse then Cain, for he in killing
his brother, made him live for ever and eternalized his name; but they that
take away men's reputations kill them alive; and ruin them and their posterity;
which as it is a fearful sin, so the frequentest in the world, every man
making it his occupation to reproach and vilify those they bear a malice to,
as all the Independents and Sectaries daily to the Presbyterians, and against
any that stand forth to oppose their Novelties, and I being in the number of
those that resolve to the last period of my life to maintain truth against
falsehood, expect and look for no less favor at all Malignants hands and
tongues then all the generations of the just have found before me: and
therefore I bless God, I have beforehand, sat down and counted with my self,
what my love to the truth will cost me, from all the enemies of it, in respect
of my reputation and name; and have learned of my King and Master, the Lord
Jesus Christ to rejoice and be exceeding glad; yea, to leap for joy, when I am
reviled and suffer reproach for his names sake, for so he has commanded me,
Mat. 5. Luke 6. And if I suffer in regard of my estate by this my diligence, I
know in whom I have ever trusted, and in whom now I believe, and that I came
naked into the world, and that naked I shall go out: and if my God gives me
food and raiment, I have learned to be content: for the riches of this world
are but like the Mannathat fell about the Tents of the Israelites, those that
gathered more of it had but enough to serve their turn, or if they gathered
more it was but a trouble and annoyance to them, and they that gathered less
had no want. And truly he that would but look upon the world at this time, and
behold with attention the instability of all these things under the sun, he
would have little cause to confide in uncertain riches; for they may daily see
many men rich in the morning, and all beggars at night, and they that were
beggars in the forenoon made rich in the evening, and within two days after,
they shall see the same men lie naked and dead upon the ground, and deprived of
all and life it self; so that there is no man can promise unto himself
prosperity or the stability or possession of any thing a day, neither by sea
nor land, and therefore he that is inamored with the world cannot be a friend
to God, For the friendship of the world is enmity with God, as Saint James
says, and therefore through Gods goodness I have learned Saint Paul's Lesson,
To be contented in every condition, for, I am crucified unto the world, and the
world to me: and will not for the love of that, desert my love to the truth or
fear to defend it, for fear of losing any thing in my estate, but will roll my
self upon Gods Providence, and commit my soul and my ways unto him who is the
Preserver of all, especially of those that believe in him, 1 Timothy 4. These and
many such passages did I relate unto many of those that would have deterred me
from writing in defense of the Presbytry against Independency, and yet they
still continued daily to sollicet me not to set forth my book against that way:
and although I told them again and again that I was resolved to publish my
opinion, they entreated me then that I would tarry but till the Reasons and
Grounds of their way were published, which they say would be in a short time:
and all this was contrived to strengthen their faction, and to anticipate the
people, and settle them in their Novelties against whatsoever should be
published against their doctrine of Independency. And when they heard that my
book was gone to the Press, it would exceed belief, if I should recite all the
passages of their underhand dealings in that business, and how diligent some
of them were about the Press, and how they went about reproaching me and it,
and all to make it hateful and odious to all, and to deter the people from
reading of it, or regarding of it: and wheresoever any of them met me they told
me it should be answered; yea, some of them reported that there was already an
answer prepared to come forth as soon as mine. It seems these men are resolved
with themselves be it right or wrong to maintain their Faction, and uphold
their party: yet I am confident through the strength and power of my God, that
I shall ever be able to reply to whatsoever they can say: but this I will say
for them, as the Jesuits in subtilty and cunning crastines, exceeded all the
other Monks and Friars that went before them; so the Independents in their
generations, are more cunning then ever any Sectaries in former ages, for they
have got into their hands the prime Lectures of the Kingdom, and run through
all the Towns and Cities through the Realm, and through all the Armies, to make
Proselites, and have so scattered their Independent fantasies, that now there
is scarce a Town or City, where their leavon has not sowred the whole lump of
true and sound doctrine: and they have got the start of all the Puritans in all
the foregoing Generations; for they were of such austere lives and men so
alineated from the world that you might know them by the hair of the heads and
faces, and by their habits from all other men, wheresoever you meet them, for
commonly they were ever out of fashion when others were in it, and they had all
their hairs clipped as close to their heads as a company of fighting cocks have
their feathers, and they usually went in a great Patriarchicall beards, and for
silks, and velvets, and plush, and satin, and brave aparrell, they thought
they were for Kings houses; and contented themselves with their rural weeds:
which austerity of theirs made them less esteemed by the great men of the
world, and their doctrine less regarded, and as it was in our Saviors time,
That the poor received the Gospel; so in our forefathers days, the Puritans
commonly were by the worldlings and profane, counted but a company of obscure
and beggarly fellows: but our Independent Ministers, as they say, they have
learned the lesson of their Christian liberty, and tell their Disciples that
the Saints are the right owners of all things beneath, and that it is for the
honor of Religion to go brave and gallant, and that this is a great grace to
the Gospel and for themselves, whereas the ancient Puritan Ministers went with
their hair as close clipped as cocks of the game, and their wives went in plain
and modest attire and both they and their wives very humble, and never came in
a rich coach: the Independent Ministers are very finicall and go in their hair
and in their habits, out of town like Cavaliers, so that none that meets them
would take them for ministers, but rather think them a company of ruffians:
and for their wives they ordinarily go as brave as the daintiest dames in the
Kingdom, and both they and their consorts are commonly as proud and
supercilious as any of the secular race: and for their company for the most
part, they are very great and honorable personages or at least very rich, and
they are all their familiars, for poor folk, they may in private accost them,
and perhaps they will grace them with a little communication, but this must be
accounted of, as a high favor. And if at any time these Independent Ministers
meet but with a poor aged Presbyter, riding to the Assembly but on a Horse
worth six shillings, they will salute him with, Good morrow my Lord Bishop;
whereas they can ride thither mounted upon stately Geldings; and ye shall
frequently see them amongst Lords and Ladies both they and their brave wives
carried about in Coaches with four Horses, in great state; whereas a
Wheele-barrow, such as they trundle White-wine-vinegar on, were a great deal
fitter for them, except they deserved better from Church and State. But it is a
wonderful thing to see the vanity and levity of the people how they run after
these men, and neglect their most faithfullest, laborious, and orthodox
Ministers, and by whose diligent pains they have been begotten to the faith,
and how now in comparison of the Independent Ministers they are slighted:
whereas there is not one of a hundred of them, but has more real and true
learning in them, then all the Independents put together; for, excepting Mr.
Grinehill and Mr. Carter, who I have ever honored, as grave, godly, learned
Ministers, and which is their honor, humble Gentlemen, I never so much as
heard of any fame of the other either at home or abroad for any learning of
eminency, or any thing but pride, that makes men famous; and if they had not
been accidentally Members of the Assembly, and Fautors of this new Faction,
they would all of them have gone out of the World in obscurity: and yet such is
the vanity and levity of the people, that they in mighty crowds run after
them, and flight their own pious and painful Preachers, from whom they might
ever: be sure to hear nothing but orthodox and true doctrine, and that that
tended to peace, not to faction. And I can truly say, though many of them now
are cast behind the door as broken Vessels, yet in all the time of the
Prelates domination, they continued constantly in their ministry, and many of
them suffered imprisonment and bonds, and most of them persecution, when these
ran all away. And I can say more; that if we examine their Sermons either as
they preach them or as they are in print, since the Apostles times there was
nothing more divinely preached or penned, whether for information of judgment
or reformation in men's lives and manners; and for the convincing of all
Heresies, Errors, or Schisms, and that more tended to sanctification then that
they both preach and print: and for instance, to omit many of their learned
works, let any man but with judgment read that Treatise of M. George Walker
Minister in Watlin street, entitled, The Doctrine of the Sabbath; and show me
such a piece of Divine Learning writ by any Independent Minister; nay, I dare
boldly say, if they were all put together they cannot make such a piece for
excellent learning; the same we may say of his orthodox preaching in his
ordinary Ministry: and the same may be said of Learned Mr. Jackson and Mr.
Fisher, both Ministers in Woodstreet, and of many hundred more through the City
and Country; who for their most godly, learned, profitable, and painful
ministry, equalize any almost since the Apostles time; yet all these men under
the name of Presbyterians, are slighted, neglected, and now made nothing of in
comparison of our Independent Novelists; who have got an art, not only to
disgrace all other Ministers under the name of Presbyterians, and Baals
Priests, Persecutors, etc. but also to strengthen their faction, as if
authority be not speedily careful to suppress their Independency and
novelties, they will make the whole Kingdom depend upon them, and be their
servants ere long. They have of all Ministers before them, got the way of
pleasing great personages, and especially the silly Women; for they preach unto
them liberty of conscience and liberty of the creature, in a most ample and
large manner; so that all bravely which amongst the Puritans in times past was
thought a scandal to religion, is now thought a grace and honor of the
Gospel; insomuch that all the gallant Ladies are all, or most of them
Independents; never were there any Ministers that pleased Ladies better: so
that whereas in Christ's time the poor received the Gospel, and the Pharisees
were wont to say, that none but the cursed people followed Christ, meaning the
poor; and Saint Paul says, not many mighty, but the poor and mean things has
God chosen; and the Protestants of France were usually called the poor men of
Lions, and the Puritans were all counted a company of poor fellows; now the
Independent Ministers they have got all the rich sheep from out of their fellow
Pastors folds, it seems they are the best Purvey ours for the kingdom of
Heaven; they have already got abundance of rich Saints in these latter days;
so that when the World grows poorest, the Independent-churches and
congregations and their Pastors, grow all richest; and I am afraid they will
make merchandise of a great many more simple Ewes, if their Watchmen and
Pastors be not the more careful and vigilant to look to their flocks; for they
have a singular faculty of plundering, and have their Emissaries for that
purpose in all the parts of the Kingdom, and yet the World is so blind they
cannot discern into the juglings of these men. They blame in the Papists, as
it is blameworthy indeed, that they not only Lord it over Gods heritage by
their own tyrannical traditions, but for that they most sacrilegiously
mutilate the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and take away the Cup from the
people, and they notwithstanding are guilty of both these crimes in a more deep
manner then the Papists: for they impose in a most Lordly manner their
traditions and novelties, as Gods own laws upon the people, and not as
traditions; and they take not away the cup only from the people, but take away
both the bread and wine from them also, and that from the deer servants of God,
and from such as against whom either for their knowledge or conversation they
have no just exception: and debar both men and women through believers and such
as are baptized from the Sacrament, and deny baptism the feal of the Covenant
to their Children; then the which, show me in the world either a greater and
more Lordly tyranny, or a more horrid sacrilege! And this and many more such
insolences of their Lording it over Gods heritage, might be instanced to the
dishonor of God and the Gospel, and yet the people have not eyes to see it,
nor hearts to consider, what a yoke of slavery they have voluntarily now put
themselves under, when by the exceeding kindness of God toward us, and
through the wisdom and help of this Parliament, we were freed from the
unsupportable yoke and tyranny of the Prelates. Truly when I read their
railing and blasphemous Pamphlets, and when I hear their bitter expressions,
both against the Parliament and Presbytery, and all their Christian brethren
whom they style Presbyterians and persecutors of the ways of God: and when I
consider their Lording of it over their brethren, and their underhand
practices, for the upholding of their Faction, and their unchristian dealing in
all respects; I have admired the patience of the great God, and the humanity of
the people: I say I have admired the patience of the great God, that has no
more severely punished this Nation, for their so great ungratitude toward him
for his longanimity and so many deliverances of us, both from our Enemies and
from our fears, and for those unheard of blasphemies both against his Divine
Majesty and all authority, they daily utter; besides their despising of his
Ministers and Ordinances: and I have also wondered to see the lenity and
courtesy of the people toward these men, that although both in their
preachings and in their writings they proclaim them all enemies of Jesus Christ
and his Kingdom, and thrust them all from the holy things, and count of them
all as a company of Infidels; they yet endure all their abuses with moderation,
neither do I think that the humanity of this Nation toward them, can be
paralleled by any other country under heaven; who, I am most assured, would
never have suffered half those insolences they daily exercise toward them.
And yet I dare say, for all the godly Presbyterians in England whom they count
such persecutors, there is not one of them that desires a hair of any of their
heads should fall to their detriment, or that would not be as sorry that any
evil should betide any of them as they would be glad and rejoice to see them
return again into the bosom of the Church, that they might live in love and
unity as they ought, and formerly they have done, and join all their prayers
and forces unanimously against the common enemies of Christ and his Gospel,
and so take away the scandal they have already given, and heal up all those
breaches, that by their wantonness in opinions have been made to the great
dishonor of God.

And if there were any spark of godly love, or any bowels of compassion in our
brethren toward their Christian brethren and toward their country, they
would easily be induced now to make up all breaches, and lay aside all those
novelties that have proved so pernicious already to us all. For what is it that
any thankful Christian can desire that God has not done for us? He has
delivered his people in this famous City, and in many other parts of the
Kingdom from the Antichristian yoke, and from all the ceremonies and what
soever was really offensive to tender consciences, and by his Divine providence
has put it into the hearts of the great Counsel to make such Ordinances as by
which the Ministers are enabled through the Kingdom to admit of none to the
Sacrament, but such as for their knowledge and godly life, shall be thought sit
communicants; so that now there is no just cause of separation from our
Assemblies, seeing all scandals are taken away, and the Gospel is preached in
such purity as it never was since the Apostles times; and that by as godly,
orthodox, painful, and able Ministers as any are in the World. Why therefore
should our Brethren so slight what God has done for us, and count all that
nothing without they may establish a bondage unto themselves more heavy, then
ever yet lay upon any man's shoulders as surely their Independency will prove?
For the people, of themselves I have that confidence in them, such is my
opinion of their moderation, that when they shall duly and upon deliberation
consider the sad effects these Novelists have already brought forth, they will
relinguish them and give God thanks that the danger of them was so timely
discovered, and they will again return into the bosom of the Church and
follow their own Ministers, and by whom they shall be built up in their holy
faith, and continually fed with the sincere milk of the Word, and with such
wholesome doctrine as tends both to the peace of their own souls, and the quiet
of Church and state. But that they may at last get their feet out of the snare,
and free themselves from their slavery and bondage; I shall desire them but to
consider a little the practices of the Independent Ministers both in former
times and in these our days, and how fair we offer them, and then I am most
assured they will see just cause of changing their opinions, and returning
again with love and amity into the fellowship and communion of that people who
are as truly fearers of God, and those that desire Christ may be set up as King
upon his Throne, and may for ever rule and reign in all men's hearts, as any of
those that make the greatest noise of it, as if they were the only men that
advanced Christ's kingdom; whereas on the contrary in as much as in them lies,
they have rent the seamlesse garment of the Church in pieces, and rejoice at
nothing more then to hear and see divisions amongst Brethren. For if we
consider their former practices, and the mutability of many of the Independent
Ministers (a very few of them excepted) they either ran away when they should
have stood to the cause, or else temporized, and that deeply; a crime they lay
upon their Brethren the Presbyterians: and so changeable they were in their
opinions, as they manifested unto the world, that they were unstable in all
their ways, and this many of their followers have themselves confessed, although
they now palliate it over, that whatsoever they have formerly done, was in
regard that the truth was obscured and darkened, through the cunning of the
Popish and Prelaticall faction, and that all men were kept hood winckt and
could not rightly discern it in its full glory and luster, till this sunshine
of liberty had now again returned and sent its rays amongst us, by means of
which they say they are so illuminated, as now they have got the spirit of
discerning; and by virtue of their New-lights they well perceive their former
errors and mistakes; and have found that the way of Independency is that way of
Church Government that God has appointed in his holy Word. This many of their
Disciples plead in defense of their Ministers, which to say the truth is
nothing: for the same may be alleged and pretended by all Heretics and
Sectaries whatsoever, who will never want the same or the like answer, and so
there will ever be a way for the broaching of all new doctrines, be they never
so pernicious to the truth, and never so distructive to all government. But
notwithstanding, what either they or their Disciples now can speak in their
behalf, it is very fit that their former practices in their several places in
respect of their religion should be considered by all judicious and godly men,
who know that constancy and perseverance in the faith is that that crowns
all; for he that persevereth unto the end, he shall be saved, says Christ; not
such as start back like a broken Bow and are never stable: and as for some of
them, it is well known they have been in one sit great conforming Protestants,
and in another mood great favorers of the Socinian tenants; and for their
factious spirits and opposition to the Puritanicall way, were highly favored
and countenanced by the Prelates; and then at another time they were Puritans,
and that trade growing out of date, and Independency beginning to be in vogue,
they are now of that occupation, and are as great sticklers in defense of it,
as the silver-Smiths of the godesse Diana in Ephesus, were for the upholding of
their craft, and what next they will be, the God of heaven only knows, for
they will ever be following their new lights. Others of them were very
Prelaticall, and as much aspired to Church-preferment, if the greatest men in
the Kingdom be not deceived, and some of their own party mistaken, as any
other; but failing of their expectation, and falling into discontent, turned
Puritans; and that weather-beaten Religion, being now with too too many grown
stale, they are at this instant great Independents, and amongst the supreme
Champions for that Faction: and there is scarce a man of them, but has been on
all sides (whatsoever they make the world now believe) according as their
occasions served, and have ever been attempting to bring in one Novelty or
other, or have labored to revive some heresy, or some miraculous ceremony,
and all to the disturbance of the Church, and for the hinderance of
Reformation. And therefore all judicious and godly Christians, ought duly to
weigh and consider with themselves, that such unstable men as these are, and
have been, are no guides to be followed: for as our Savior says, If the
blind lead the blind, they will both fall into the ditch. They should
therefore remember what Christ said to the people concerning John the Baptist:
what (says he) went ye out into the wilderness to see? a reed shaken with the
wind? Luke 7.24. intimating unto the people, that sollid, stable, and Orthodox
Ministers in their judgments, should be such as the people ought to follow,
and listen unto, and not those reeds and unstable men, that are turned about
with every new wind of Doctrine, and moved with every stream of opinion, and
such as follow every new light, and that many times for base and wordly ends.
So that when most of the Independent Ministers are, and have been such, they
ought not any longer by the people to be followed. They should also consider
their instability not only in Religion, but in the public affairs; they may
remember how zealous these men were for the Parliament not long since, and how
forward they were to promote the public good, and to advance the honor,
dignity, and privileges of the great Council, and what admirers and lovers
not many years since, they were of our brethren the Scots, and of our noble and
brave Generals: and yet now all that read the scurrilous Pamphlets, or are
but a little familiar with them, shall hear nothing but revilings against the
whole Nation of the Scots, and traducing of all our gallant Commanders, to whom
next under God, we owe most of that good we now enjoy, and hope hereafter to
enjoy. I lay nothing to their charge, but that every man that is acquainted
with them can witness. I know not any one Ordinance the Parliament makes that
pleases them; but for that pious Ordinance they lately set forth, concerning
the silencing of all such Preachers and teachers as were not for knowledge and
soundness of doctrine thought fit to instruct the people: wherein the prudent
Council showed the religious care they had of the peoples good, and for which
they ought ever to be had in veneration: this Ordinance I say so displeased the
generality of the Independents, as they brake out into contumelious speeches,
some of them affirming, that the High Court of Parliament was worse then that
of the High Commission, and those of the Bishops: others of them in discontent
said, that the recruting of the Army had stood the state in an hundred thousand
pounds; and by this new Ordinance, the whole Army would speedily be dissolved,
for now all the brave Commanders of the Independents would lay aside their
Arms, and leave the wars. It seems that all the Independent Officers, went
rather to preach than to sight, and to set up their new Lights and vent their
new doctrines, then to exercise their valor; by which it may evidently appear
that all the projects of the Independents, in getting prime places by Sea and
Land, and in the Armies and in the Towns, Cities, Forts, and Castles, and all
other places and in all Committees; is only for the advancement and fomenting
of their faction, and this I conceive to be the only cause of all the
liney-woley Committees through the Kingdom, by reason of which no heresy nor
novelty in opinion or religion can be suppressed, where they are joined in
Commission; nor no true heroical virtue be rewarded in any by their good
wills, but in those of their faction, who are generally well paid and grow
brave and rich suddenly, and are highly esteemed, when other noble Spirits and
brave men, are cashered and outed that have done excellent service. But the
Independents perceiving that that Ordinance of the Parliament would be some
hinderance to their design, they most temerariously and undutifully traduced
the great Council for it, as they always have done whatsoever has been
performed by our gallant Generals, either by Sea or Land that were not of
their faction, which was ever accounted as a thing of nothing amongst them: and
whatsoever the Scots have done, it is made but little and not worth the
speaking of; and they affirm that all the Scots have done, was for their own
ends: as if the Independents ever did any thing but for their own ends, or as
if ever any man did any thing of labor or danger, that among other brave
intentions that he might have, he aimed not also at his own ends; or as if the
Labourer took not pains for his hire, which was his own ends; or as if any
went to war, but for both honor and pay, as well as for the defense of himself
and Country; and as if the Saints themselves such as Moses was, had not the eye
of their faith, next unto Gods glory, to the recompense of reward; or as if any
brave men might not fight for their own ends, with the preservation of their
Country: and yet there is nothing more common in the Independents mouths
against the Scots, and against all our Heroical men, then that they have all
their own ends, and so have all the Independents, who undervalue all other men's
both abilities and actions, to advance their own ends and to strengthen their
party, as all men may easily gather by all their proceedings; for if at any
time God gives any victory, where in comparison of the rest there is but a very
handful of them in the Army, then they assume all the glory of this action to
themselves, that their Faction may be magnified amongst the people. And if
there happen any ill success unto any Army in which there is any companies of
the Independents, then all the fault must be laid upon all the other gallant
Generals and Commanders, to the very obscuring and darkning of their
reputation, and taking away of all the honor their former actions had justly
merited. And I have ever observed, that in all successful employments where
any of their Commanders have been, all the glory is ascribed to the
Independents, and is ever set forth with all manner of expressions of
Rhetoric, and that in every Pamphlet (for fear it should be forgot) as if the
safety of all the kingdom depended upon them, and as if they had done all; and
that all the other Commanders had done nothing, or not any thing worth the
thinking of or speaking of; and all this to bring their own faction into a high
esteem, and make all the other Officers and Commanders to be slighted, or not
valued in comparison of themselves. For my self, I shall ever give any
Commander of that faction his due praises, for any good he shall do unto his
country by his valor and skill; yet he must give me leave ever to render the
prime glory of any victory or deliverance to God, and to look upon the means in
the second place, whosoever they be that God makes the instruments of it. And
yet I must tell the Independents, it concerns them much to re-gaine their
reputation, and to do good service by their valor for their country; for the
gallant men in the Kings Army, before the battle in Yorkshire, had never any
esteem of the valor of the Independents, and would often say, that they were
beholding to them for Bristoll, Oxford, and Banbury, and many other places that
followed by reason of the losing of them: and it is thought by the judiciousest
men in both the Armies, that if those Towns had not been lost, the wars
would have been at an end before this time. Now whether all these places were
lost by the valor of the Independent party, or by their cowardice rather, I
leave that to the consideration of the Independents themselves, who may always
set those Towns before their eyes, to put them upon brave achievements, for
the recovering and redeeming of their reputation; and if it shall please God to
make them instruments of re-gaining all those fortified Cities and places into
the Parliaments hands, though it will never recompense the loss that is come
upon the whole Kingdom by it, yet all that wish well unto their country will
give them that honor and applause that such a noble action can challenge at
any grateful peoples hands and mouths: but I shall ever desire the
Independents not to sacrifice unto their own nets, and to ascribe the glory
unto themselves, as they have too often done to my knowledge: and therefore I
wish them rather frequently to read the 9. of Deuteronomy, where the Lord
gives a special charge unto his people, that they should not say it was for
their own righteousness that God had given them the victory over their enemies
at any time, and this caution was thrice reiterated in the same Chapter, to
teach them and in them all people to give God the glory of all victories, who
goes before his people as he is the General of their Armies as a consuming
fire; and that it is not their Bow, nor the Sword, that procures victory
without God go out before their Hoasts to conquer and destroy; let them not
therefore conceive that any victory was given to them for their own
righteousness, much less for their Independency, and that therefore they
should so puff up themselves and so clamor amongst the people, what service
they had done to the State, because some of the Independents stood to it in the
battle of York, when other of them ran away: for they ran as well as others,
and if they be not liars, all the other Independents had ran away too and left
the field if they had known what had happened in the other parts of the Army;
but they being ignorant of what was done, and presuming of a mighty party, came
on with the more animosity, and God gave them the victory, and to God in the
first place belongs the glory of that action: and our brethren the Independents
might have had a great deal more honor then they had, had they not so
vilified all the other Armies, and applauded themselves, to strengthen their
faction and make their party more great and powerful; that then they may in
time be masters of the Presbyterians and give laws to them all, who we know
they bear as mortal a hatred to, as the very Papists and Cavaliers; as all
their words, preachings, and Pamphlets witness; for their malice it is
notoriously known, and it is so exceeding great, as it is expressed every day
against any that but dissent from them in opinion; and their very looks show
it, for most of them carry envy and malice in their faces toward the
Presbyterians, so that I can speak by my own experience, I know not any
Independent in England (a Kinsman of mine and his Wife excepted that was
always a true Nathaniel, and through their hypocrisy mislead) that do not as
maliciously and implacably hate the Presbyterians as the mortallest enemies
they have in the world: and as for my own particular, I could not hitherto,
being in any of their companies (since they perfectly knew my resolution) enjoy
the very laws of civility amongst them; so that I have been both privately and
publicly reproached by them, without offending of them in thought, word, and
deed: by which I may boldly conclude it is a mere faction, and the most
Pharisaicall, proud, envious, and malicious Sect that ever sprung up: for they
hate all the Presbyterians for no other cause but that they differ from them in
opinion; which neither the old Brownists nor the ancient Anabaptists either did
or do: for they are the same to me that ever they were when we were fellow
prisoners, many of which were by the Prelates cast into the Gatehouse where I
lay, and they neither then nor now thought the worse of me for my differing
opinion from them, but at this day show me the same courtesy when I either go
to them or they come to me, that ever they did; and have defended me often
against the Independents, when they rayled of me that I was a Presbyterian: and
affirmed to their knowledge that I had ever been of that mind since they knew
me, and that was as they said twenty years; and they told them they saw no
reason, I should not be left to the liberty of my conscience as well as they
were to theirs, neither did they see any cause why the Independens should be
offended with any that differed from them; and all this the Anabaptists and the
Brownists have spoken in my behalf: so that a man may well perceive those
poor people do what they do out of a conscientious ignorance; and that the
Independents do all out of an arrogant faction, who are as cunning as Gypsies,
and all to make a party, by which they may attain to their own ends, which I
am afraid will tend to the ruin of us all if the Lord prevent it not. And I am
the more induced to believe it, because I see all their preaching tends to
faction: for at some times (so unstable they are) they would seem in their
Sermons to be as meek as Lambs, and they tell the people how glad they should
be of a good agreement and accommodation between us, and then they relate unto
them also that the difference is very little, and so small, that one would
wonder that there should be such a contention, and so great a feud about it,
and this they speak in great Assemblies. Now let all men consider the genious
of these Independents. They make the difference very little. What contentious
spirited men then are these that go about to make a faction through three
Kingdoms, yea through the world, for that which they proclaim themselves a
thing of nothing? And notwithstanding what they have preached but a Sermon
before in a moderate way, in another Sermon they are all fire and toe, speaking
nothing but Daggers and daring; and all their discourse tends to no other end
but to strengthen their faction and to set up Independency, and to exasperate
the people against the Presbyterians as so many Esaus and Persecutors. And for
ought I can understand, their private meetings tend to nothing else but to
strengthen their party, where they ordinarily pray for the of the
Presbyterians, of whom they usually say, if there be any children of the Devil
in the Kingdom, they are the Presbyterians; and one of their fat Pastors not
long since, in one of their Conventicles amongst his joined Members, being in
his prayer, brake out into this expression; We bless thy name, holy Father,
says he, that thou have kept us hither to out of the hands of our Brethren,
meaning the Presbyterians, who they look on like so many Persecutors and
Esau's, out of whose hands Jacob prayed God to deliver him: so that their
uncharitableness is seen in their very prayers. And nothing, as I said before,
pleases these men more then to hear of any breaches amongst the Presbyterians,
and of differences betwixt Nation and Nation, and of the multiplication of
their faction: for not long since in one of their private meetings where they
pray for the subversion of the Presbyterians, one of their society said unto an
Independent Minister, that was come to officiate amongst them, Sir, says he, I
will tell you some news; What is that, replied he? There were Letters
intercepted going into Scotland from some of the Committee of that Nation,
wherein they made a great complaint, that Independency daily increased in
England, and that there was mighty multitudes of them in London, and through
the kingdom. Oh brave (says he) oh brave. Nay, says the other, I will tell
you more. What is that? replied the Gentleman, The Scots and the English (says
he) are like to go together by the ears, about the shipping and coals of
Newcastle. Better and better, says he, now it begins to work. So that whereas
David said, What a joyful thing it is to see Brethren live together in unity,
these Independents rejoice and glory to see and hear when Brethren are like to
fall together by the ears. And therefore if such as these be men of God, or
Angels sent from Heaven, they are much unlike and different from that Ho^st
that appeared unto the Pastors in the second of Luke, who after they had
preached unto them the good tidings of great joy, in their Doxalogy and
praising of God, they said, Glory unto God in the highest, and on earth peace,
and good will toward men. But the Independents rejoice at ill will amongst
men, and at divisions and wars and that among christian-brethren.

And a great man of that fraternity, not many months since, in a Knights
Chamber, gloried to me, as of a matter of triumph, to think they had hindered
the work of Reformation thus long; Ye see (says he) that a little handful of
Independent Ministers in the Synod, have given three Kingdoms employment these
two years, so that they can do nothing: and boasted of this wicked act as a
matter of vantation and triumph. So that if men well consider the whole
negotiation of the Independents in the Reverend Assembly, it is to hinder the
work of reformation; then the which there cannot be a more diabolical design.
And then they spread it abroad among the people, that they have not liberty to
speak, when it is most notorious, that one of them speaks more than half a
dozen of the other Ministers. And they have published it also all over the
Town, that the Presbyterians durst not let their reasons be set out in Print,
to the view of the world, for they knew very well, that as they were
unanswerable, so that all the people would forthwith have been of their
judgment; and by this their babble it is incredible how they have strengthened
their Faction, and gained disciples, for their followers believe all they say
as Gospel. And truly, if there were nothing but these their underhand
dealings and malicious practices, and rejoicing at evil, it were enough to
make all men abhor their ways; but the truth is, they have no certainty in any
thing they believe to day, and by their practices they contradict all their
doctrine and tenants. And that all men may be yet a little better acquainted
with the Independent Ministers juglings, I thought good to insert here these
sixteen Observations, sent me by a learned and godly Gentleman, who is very
well verst in all their doctrines and manners: They are these.

1. THey hold themselves the principal Laborers and Pillars of faith, when as
they profess that their present judgments shall not bind themselves for the
future, but that they believe all things with a reserve, to alter their
thoughts, faith, and judgments, upon new or better Light. 2. They plead for
liberty of conscience, yet will impose a Covenant upon every man's conscience
they admit into their congregations, else exclude him. 3. They plead against
toleration of any corrupt members, etc. in a Church, and yet plead for a
toleration of all Religions in a State, under the notion of liberty of
Conscience. 4. They plead against the Magistrates Coarsive power in matters of
Religion, and yet banish men in New England, and expel all out of their
Congregations that are not of their way. 5. They plead against Synods, and yet
they profess themselves members of the present Synod. 6. They speak against
Parochial Congregations as against the Kingdom and Law of Christ, and yet
some of them accept of such, and yet will neither Baptize nor administer the
Lords Supper to their Parishoners, though they take their tithes. 7. They write
against Tithes, as Jewish, Popish, etc. yet some of them take them and sue for
them as greedily as any others. 8. They condemn all set forms of Prayer or
Preaching, and yet themselves plead for a set form of Church Government Jure
Divino, in all particular circumstances whatsoever. 9. They condemn
non-residency and pluralities, yet many of them have diverse Livings and
Lectures of good value, and yet are resident and keep hospitality at none of
them. 10. They call some Presbyterians Lord Bishops, because they ride now and
then on horseback by reason of age or infirmity to the Assembly, yet many of
them ride thither in Coaches; and some of them can ride 6. or 7. miles, on the
Lords day in a Coach and 4. horses to Preach an afternoon Sermon, which Christ
and his Apostles never did, and no Presbyterian practices. 11. They condemn
Presbyterians of harsh language, and bitterness in their writings against
them; yet none are so desperately Libellous, Satyricall, and scandalous in
their writings, as many of them against Presbyterians. 12. They profess
nothing but truth, and yet many of their writings savor with malicious
mis-informations, scandals, forgeries, untruths, invented by themselves, to
defame their innocent Christian brethren. 13. They pretend themselves the only
propugners of the Parliament Privileges and Jurisdiction; yet none more
oppugned them in the hight of opposition as they. 14. They profess themselves
more estranged from, and mortified to the world, yet none more covetous,
oppressive, ambitious of honors, preferments, and hunting after all manner of
gainful Offices and employments as they, nor none more unfaithful,
unconscionable, in them then some of them. 15. They pretend the Scripture to be
the only rule of their way and Discipline, and yet can produce no one Text or
Example of Scripture for any thing their Church warrants, or they hold, wherein
they differ from the Presbyterians. 16. They dare not undertake to bind
themselves for the future by any thing they held or concluded touching Church
government, much loss any of their party; therefore it is vain to dispute
with, or receive any thing from them in matter of government or discipline, who
will neither be bound by their own mother-judgements or practice, but hold and
practice all things only duranti been placito.
Out of all the which, as out of my former discourse, it is easy for any man
to gather, that of all the Seducers that have yet appeared in the world, these
are most to be taken heed of, whatsoever seeming holiness they may make show
of to the people. But that I may now draw to a conclusion of this my
Postscript, leaving the narration of many other passages of theirs till their
Answer comes out (which their followers say is ready for the Press) let me say
this to all such as desire the knowledge of the truth in sincerity, and that
love peace, that all men may see how fair we offer the Independents, and all
such as are affected to their novelties: whereas the Independent Ministers have
persuaded the people, that their Arguments by which they have labored to
prove, That in the Church of Jerusalem there were no more Believers then could
all meet in one congregation, to partake in all acts of worship, were
unanswerable; and have affirmed withal, that if it could be made evident or
proved unto them, That there were more Christians in the Church of Jerusalem
then could all meet in one Congregation, that then they would relinquish their
opinion of Independency. I, and Mr. William Prynne Esquire, my Brother in
affliction, who the Independents have causelessly maligned and reproached (not
to take the work out of any learned and godly Ministers hands, who we honor
for their singular erudition and worth, and far prefer before our selves, for
all sufficiency and accomplished learning) shall with all humility undertake to
maintain and make good these ensuing Propositions.

The first. That there were more particular Assemblies and Congregations of
Believers in the Church of Jerusalem then one. The second. That all those
several Congregations made but one Church. The third. That those several
congregations were all under one Presbytery. The fourth. That the government
of the Church of Jerusalem is to be a pattern of government to all succeeding
ages. The fifth. That the gathering of Churches after the Independent way,
together with their Church Covenant, and all other their proceedings, wherein
they differ from the Presbyterians, has neither precept nor president in the
whole Word of God.
All these positions we undertake to make good against all the Independents in
the Kingdom, not out of any contention for victory, but truth, and that in the
spirit of love, and not in our own strength? but and in the Name and in the
Power of the King eternal, immortal, the mighty Potentate the Lord of Hosts.
And if we shall not by the grace of God and his blessed assistance be able to
make good what we undertake; we shall not refuse to undergo the greatest
censure for this our temerity. But if we make good our tenants, and evince and
prove their Independency, and the manner of the gathering of their Churches to
be but their own inventions, and mere novelties; all the persecution that we
shall then wish may be exercised against our Brethren; for the great
distractions and breaches they have made among us, is this, that we shall
desire all the godly people of the City to be humble petitioners with us, unto
the great Council of the Kingdom; that as they lately made a pious and a
godly Ordinance for the silencing of all such as undertook the ministry
without sufficiency of abilities and a lawful call: so they would now silence
all these novelties, and command the Independent Ministers hereafter to preach
the Gospel purely and sincerely to the people without those mixtures of their
own traditions annexed to it: by which they shall bring a great deal of glory
to God, honor to themselves, and procure, if not peace to the whole Kingdom,
yet love, amity, and unanimity, amongst the people; which ought to be the
prayer of all those that wish the peace of Zion, and the salvation of their
Brethren, and the welfare of the Nation.

My request to the Independents in behalf of the Expectants and Seekers.
LIghts, Lights, Gentlemen-INDEPENDENTS, hang out your Lights, your New-lights
there; hang out your Newborn-lights there, That the poor Seekers may find a
Church amongst you.

Imprimatur, Ja. Cranford.

FINIS.

