A COPY OF A LETTER CONCERNING THE TRAITEROVS CONSPIRACY OF THE REBELLIOVS
PAPISTS in IRELAND:

Being a true Relation, written by a Gentleman of good worth, who has suffered
by them much damage and loss in his estate, and hardly escaped with his life.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1641.

The Copy of A Letter sent from Ireland.
Sir,

I am glad to hear of your health by your Letter of the second of this month.
And for the Conspiracy in Ireland it is so certain, that I can assure it unto
you by my own experience of the evils, for on Sunday was a sennight last,
when it was to have been executed generally throughout the whole kingdom, I
was then at my Country house some 26 miles from Dublin, and some murmerings
there was of an insurrection, but privately whispered, But at a place called
Kells a Market Town within a mile of my house, a mighty Concourse of Papists
were at Mass, which was said that day, for the good success of the Plot, and
a pardon to all that should go boldly on in the Adventure. I was at Church
that day in the Town, (and I praise GOD) served him without any such fear:
but yet recollecting some things from all these matters of suspicion, I set a
watch in my Town, and went to bed, and at midnight there was an allarum given,
as if the Rebels had been come to Kells, but it was my own neighbors of
Kells, that were the Rebels indeed. But that intimation needed not make me go,
for my wife and I in that extremity (having eight good geldings in the stable)
shaked on our clothes, and so many servants as we had horses for within the
doors, took our flight for our lives, and got (...), or 12 miles by break of
the day, when all the Townsmen of Kells came to my house, and thence drove
away some 13 hundred fair English sheep, two hundred Milch Cowes young and
old, some worth five pounds, and most worth four pounds a piece, some twenty
or two and twenty horses, Mares and Colts, that were abroad young and old,
twenty Swine, and as much household stuff, plate and Jewels, Linen and such
like goods, as was not so little worth within doors as Six hundred pounds. And
thus in two hours space I was made two thousand pound the worse in my estate.
But the safety of my wife, and childrens lives, and of my own, who was
especially designed to have my throat cut as a leading man, has so sweetened my
cross as (I thank my God) I suffer it with much patience and cheerfullnesse,
and so does my wife also, and God be praised we are all now gotten safely to
Chester, where I believe all the Ladies and Gentle-women of Dublin and near
thereabouts are come, that the Town is full. I mean to place my wife, and
children here, till we hear how things will go, and I purpose God willing to
be at London with you ere it be long, in the mean time if the party be come,
pray tell him I must not fail of my moneys for my own supply, for I protest
we escaped with the clothes on our backs and of 500 pound rents now due at all
Saints, I fear me, the Kingdom now stands in such a condition, as not a penny
will be gotten of it. For the plot it was this, that in one day the Castle of
Dublin and all the Kings forts in Ireland should have been taken, and all the
Protestants throats cut throughout all that Kingdom.

The Intelligence I received since I came away is thus written. viz. The news
certain is that there has been a design for the blowing up of Christ-Church
in Dublin, but by the mercy of God deafeated, and certain barrels of
Gunpouder found under the Church. Diverse Rogues have endeavored to fire the
Suburbs, but are taken and two Gibbets set up for their sudden execution.
Lieutenant Britteridge though outwardly a Protestant has Combined with the
Papists in both designs and is fuddenly to be hanged, I am surprised by the
Poast who is going or I had written more.

Chester the sixth of November, 1641.\

