All to Westminster: NEWS FROM ELYSIUM, OR, A Packet of wonders, brought over
in Charons Ferry-Boat last Spring Tide: Discovering many notable things worth
Observation, 1641.

woodcut portrait of a man in clerical dress

Printed in the Year, 1641.

All to Westminster.
IN the still hours of the gloomy night, when Morpheus was the secure Canopy
of most men's hearts, my troubled fancy kept me waking, and various whimsies did
suggest into my secret thoughts, whereby my wearied body could take no rest,
though in the still hours of the cloudy night; but after the passing over of
some sad meditations, the moon began to shine, which seemed to me delightful:
then I arose, for my cogitations invited me to walk abroad.

I went into the city, and walked from street to street, but the beating of the
city drums did almost break my brain: I went into the Country, and espying a
great house, I visited it, and when I approached, I cast my eyes upon it, and
walked about it, where at last I beheld the porch: I went into it, and there J
laid me down to sleep; but J was soon disturbed. The Country Swains came
thither, knocking at the door, with their long pike-staves in their hands, and
their pouches hanging by their side, they srighted me terribly: I know not what
to think of it, but I spoke boldly unto them, and asked them what place that
was: who answered me that a Judge dwelt there: I asked them again, does your
Judge (quoth I) hear Cases in the night? and they told me, that they were thus
often troubled and detracted from their rest, to come thither, else (quoth
they) we should go to law, but never meet with Gospellers; I asked them why
they carried such long staves in their hands, and such pouches by their sides,
and many such like questions, and they told me, that their staves were to
defend them from thieves, that lay lurking up and down the Country, and that
their bags were to put writings and their money in, both which they brought to
the Gentleman of the house, to defend their cause, and assist them against
their adversary, that would wrong them in their estates. But they told me such
a story, that J was almost mad, me thought the house began to sink, and J
poor timorous Cative, began to fly, and took sanctuary in the Church Porch:
there J laid me down again, thinking with my self, surely here I shall rest
quietly, but before I was web laid, and had contrived my place to lie to
sleep, I heard a clomping noise, as if some horse had come into the porch, and
looking what it was, I espied a Country fellow, I think it was the Sexton came
to toule the bell for some body that lay dying, and he told me that my Lords
grace of Canterbury, had sent a command, that none should put the consecrated
Temple to common uses, and therefore he told me that I must not sleep in the
Church Porch; for it is holy (quoth. he) what thought I, will not England afford
me a resting place: away I sailed into Ireland, to sea what entertainment I
could get there; but I was there troubled with so many Crosses, and heard so
many lamentations like forlorn Pilgrims amongst the people, that being
extreme weary, and discontented, I prayed for them and departed.

Then away J betook me into Scotland, and there I met with 3 or 4 bonny Scots,
In their blew caps, and I told them the story of my travels, and they made me
to drink of their Scottish Ale, and comforted me, and told me that my best way
to rest quietly, was to obtain a lodging in Westminster hall, they told me that
there were erected thousands of new quiet lodgings, pleasant and delightful,
where, though a man had no rest quietly this 20 or 30 years, he might yet there
sleep securely, and take sweet and comfortable rest, which made me very glad,
and I came amain to Westminster Hall, where I found the bonny Scottish-mans
words true, where I slept ever since, and took my rest so well, to my great
comfort, that I often think what cause I have to cry, God-amercy good Scot.
But yet in the midst of a deep sleep, me thought I saw a strange vision,
which J shall declare.

The Vision.
Near unto my bed (me thought) I did espy a door which I opened, and went
through, when I had passed the door, me thought I was by the Sea side, and
seeing people there, I demanded what place that was, and they answered that it
was the landing place for Carons Ferry-bote, when they said so, J looked over
the waves, and espied the boat, but far off, which they told me came from
Elysium: the Passengers they told me were Pluto his prisoners, Now on a
sudden the winds arose, and the waves did beat, and the boat came wafting
amain, one while they mounted to the top of the highest waves, and on a
sudden were out of sight; But such was their mishap, that on a sudden they
were drove upon a rock, which split their boat in pieces, Charon himsefle being
a good swimmer, returned home to carry the news of his mishap, the passengers
got upon plancks and boards, and shifted each man for himself as they could,
being all in danger of every wave to sinck into the deluge: now I shall tell
you what did afterward ensue to some of them.

Those that landed in France.
Me thought no Gold-sinch, not the swiftest bird was able to out fly the one,
who soon made franch his shore, a second also, fastening himself unto a great
planck, was by the rage of the furious winds blown with as much swiftness to
the banks bordering on the French Seas, others also of both Sects found
shelter there when they were drove to shore, and so have saved their lives.

Those that landed at the Ferry-place.
The first that approached to the shore, where we beheld this sight, came
ashore with help, extreme weary, and dropping wet, staggering like an Irish
Sea Crab, being almost spent with those turmoyling waves, through which he
lately past: Now whereas there was a great stacke of straw at a foord coming
from the Sea, through a Channel into the Land, he betakes himself thither,
and there he sits to rest himself a while, but being wet, and sitting in the
cold, found himself to be very ill, insomuch that rising up, he found it
difficult to go, and therefore called for help to assist him, who took the
next Inn, which chanced to be the Castle for his lodging, the extremity of his
sickness grew greater, who sent for diverse Doctors to come unto him, who came
and advised with him: there came to him a Dutch Doctor, and he told him that
his distempered brain had brought him into a frenzy, and that his body would
never be well, until his brains were taken away: There came to him a French
Doctor, and he told him that an Italian purge (which he would procure for him)
made of the best approved drugs in Rome, was the only physic for his malady,
acquainting him that his Disease was desperate, and therefore he must be
content to betake himself to a desperate potion; who told the Patient that he
would warrant his Medcin, either to amend him, or end him.

There came an Irish Doctor, who told him that he found that there was a
bladder of blood in his throat, growing in a dangerous place, and if that was
well cut off by Doctor Gregory, or some other such experienced Practitioner, no
doubt he would recover, and be at ease.

Then came the Scottish Doctor, and he told him plainly a my saul man (quoth. he)
there is nae way but death, and thersore advised him to prapare himself; for I
warrant thee (quoth he) thou'st dye, or I will dye for tee.

Last of all came the English Doctor, who prescribed him rich Cordials, and all
the means that could beto comfort him, but alas it was all to no purpose; for a
certain time came, when poor man he fell down upon the floor, but he had
such a fall that made his head and body part, and he never spoke word after.

The second that landed at the Ferry-place.
After him was driven to shore, an old man in a Canting gown, as black as a
berry; and well was it for him that he had a gown, or else he had bin drowned
before he came ashore, for the spreading of the skirts of his great gown kept
him. He was convei'd to a private man's lodging at Lambeth, who coming into the
Hall, sat by the fire side, intending to put off his clothes, and to dry
himself, but the Chamberlain came in, and told him, that the hall was
appointed for other companies, and therefore desired him to walk into the
lower Chamber, which he was loath to do, but being constrained, at the last he
went, where he caused a good fire to be made, the chamber to be aired, and his
bed to be warmed, and so he put off his clothes, and went to bed: but being
very ill, could not take his rest quietly, but slumbered and raved and muttered
in his sleep extremely, and when he awaked, one asked him how he did, who
answered, that he was very sick, and being asked what distur bed him, he said,
he was in a dream: I dreamed, viz.

The old man's dream in the black gown.
Me thought (quoth. he) J was a great man, and very ambitious of honor, and so
much, that I laid my hands upon a Princes Crown to take it by force, or at
least to overtop it: but I tumbled and knocked my head against it, and did
almost, if not altogether (by that means) knock out my brains: so that I was
feign to send for Surgeons to come and dress my wounds, which swelled extremely,
they appointed me a plaster to assuage the swelling, but it put me to such
extremity of pain, that I could not suffer it, and J required some other
course to be taken to cure me; for I told them (quoth. he) that death it self was
more supportable, then the ircksome plaster, so contrary to my Nature, and I
was me thought (quoth. he) so extremely humorsome with them, that they departed
and left me to my self, but I threatened them, that if they would not humor
me, I would be avenged on them, which swords prevailed so far, that I prevailed
with the most of them to please my fancy, who put pleasant Oils into my
wounds, and gave me Cordials to comfort me, which gave me pretty ease, though
my sore became the more difficult to cure, so after a while they departed,
leaving me to my self alone. Now when as J was so private, I thought it
fittest (in my meditation) to go to prayer. My thoughts drew nigh to my
cabinet, where amongst my other Relics, my affections led me to St. Patrick,
so I kneeled down to pray, and viewed the Image well, and having done prayer,
J called for my attendance, and commanded them to stand stiffly in my aid and be
true, and I would be as true to them, when I was exalted into my glory, which I
am very confident (quoth. he) will be attained unto? So that I expect my dignity
to be an admiration to the world. Is not Italy my aid, France my succor,
Spain my relief, Rome my Counsel, and these three Kingdoms my prey, do not
my projects thrive, and who dare outface my will, if the Puritans and Burton
cross my humor, or Bastwicke disturb me, if Laiton, Lilborne, or any such
fellows rise against me, i will prime their ears, whip them, i will gag them,
imprison and correct them severely for it, and they shall know who, and what I
am. But amongst the rest, me thought I lash't one Scottish man soundly, and
came near another life, he escaped, and he loves me since, as well as I loved
him then: but the old man being merry with talking, bad his servants and
attendance to withdraw a while: then me thought (quoth. he) I went to my Cabinet
again, at which time my fancy chose St. Gregory? I kneeled down and bowed
before it, and begun to pray, but after, quoth. he, when J looked seriously upon
it, it made me start, and spoiled my devotion; for St. Gregory was pictured
with a rope about his middle, laying his right hand upon it, as if he had
intended to take it off, which made me quake (what thought I, quoth he) does
the Image jeere me, but when I rose up from my disturbed praying, I cast mine
eyes behind me, and me thought there stood a young fellow by me with a new
Hempen halter in his hand which did so affright me, that I fell into a great
trance, and crying out, I awaked, and trembled a long time after; for I thought
verily that the three cornered cap't Rogue would have hanged me presently.

The 3. and 4. that landed there.
But to return to my story, there were driven to that ferry-place, two more
afterward, the one was an old man in a fur gown, just like Winter, in Russian
Robes; he was preserved then from drowning for another purpose now, and as the
other old man before gave laud to St. Gregory, and blessed himself before St.
Patrick: so this dropping wet, half drowned barley top't projector, gave
praise to Neptune, and would have plauded Fortune, but when he came ashore, he
selt him self ill, and his belly full of water, which constrained the people,
that as they told him to shore, so they tied him by the heels to disburden him
of his tympany, and after him came a Ratliffe Scrivener, who was swollen with
the water, as big as St. George his horse, whom the people ordered as they did
the other, that the water might run out of his belly, afterward being
disburdened of the water, as opportunity and means would permit, they took
their lodging at the Lantern, near Yeeld-Hall; these two were much taken
notice off, and certain debts were demanded of them, but they answered, that
they were so old, that by law they were lost, bonds were produced, which made
them cry peccavi, but yet they would not pay: but in the end came an honest
Messenger from Westminster, and told them that it did concern them to look
about them; for Gregory the Officer was sent for, and if he can but get a
warrant, they would be sure to be Arrested, and he is a terrible fellow, a man
were as good to be hanged, as to be in his custody.

There is more I should have written, but expect it in the second part; So at
this time farewell.

FINIS.

