His Holiness The Pope of Rome's DECLARATION AGAINST The French King. LOUIS the
14th.

Translated out of High Dutch into English as it now lies before the Diet in
Germany:

Giving an exact Account of the Particulars of the Pretensions of the Sea of
ROME against the Crown of France:

Written by a Person that is lately arrived from Germany. Never yet Published.

Lorrain he stole, by Fraud he got Burgundy,
Holland he Cheated, but will pay for it one day:
No force of Arms could ever Subdue,
What he by Treachery and's Gold did do.
Licensed, J. F. Jan. 6th. 1690.

1. THat the French King Surrender back to the Sea of Rome, not only Avignon,
but all the rest of the Frontiers of Italy, where the French have been possessed
of and made any Incursion with his Forces.

2. That the French King make Restitution of all the Contribution which has
been paid to him, and Satisfaction for all the Villages and Country that has
been demolished by his Army in any part of Italy.

3. That the French King abandon his Correspondance with the Ottoman Port, and
enter into League with the Christian Princes against the Turks.

4. That his Holiness does not Insist that the French King should Renounce his
Protection of the Duke of Savoy, in case that any Neighboring Prince, or
Foreign Force should make any Incursion into his Territories, But that the
Prince shall not be obliged to join with the Crown of France against the Sea of
Rome, or any of the Princes of Italy, But shall enter into a perpetual League
of Amity with them.

5. That the French King shall not Dispense with any Archbishopric, or
Suffragan, or any other Benefice within the Kingdom of France and Navarr, or
any of his Conquest or the Hereditary Countries, without leave of his Holiness
and See of Rome, upon pain of Excomunication.

6. That the French King be Accountable to his Holiness for the Profits of the
Church, within the Kingdom of France and Navarr, the Frontiers of Catalonia,
the Frontiers of the Rhine, Alsace, Burgundy, Waes-land, the Frontiers of
Flanders, and the rest of his Conquests which has not been paid to the Pope
since 1680.

7. That the French King for the future, shall Suffer and Permit those Revenues
to be remitted and returned to Rome, as his Holiness shall Order and Appoint.

8. That the French King desist from his Pretensions of putting in Cardinal
Furstenbergh into Cologne, as Bishop of that place.

9, But that the French King stand to the Decision of the Preceding Pope
Innocent the 11th. Who had Ordained and Confirmed Prince Clement of Bavaria,
Brother to the Duke of Bavaria to be Bishop of that See.

10. That the French King make Restitution to the Genowees, for Burning and
Demolishing that City with his Bombs it belonging to the Ecclesiastical
Territories of Italy.

12. That the French King make a Submission for putting in the Marquess de
Lavardin by Force of Arms into Rome, as his Ambassador.

13. That the French King do oblige the Parliament of France to disanul all
Acts and Decrees made against the Sea of Rome.

* There is now in the Press the Emperor of Germany 's, with the Princes of the
Empire, The King of Spain, and States General of Holland 's Pretensions against
the French King, will be published speedily.

LONDON, Printed for J. M. in Fleet Street, MDCLXXXIX.


