PLAIN TRVTHS OF DIVIVINITY.

Collected out of the sacred Scriptures, and set forth by way of question and
answer the best way conceived for the information of the judgment of the
Christian Reader.

Wherein is set forth many excellent things which are not commonly publshed.
Especially the destruction of Antichrist, and the year when it shall be: The
coming of the Lord Christ to judgment, and his reigning with his Saints for
ever upon this earth, at the restitution of all things.

Collossians 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another, etc.

2 Timothy 2.27. Consider what I say. and the Lord give thee understanding in
all things.

LONDON Printed for J. K. And are to be sold at the sign of the white horse in
Paul's Churchyard 1647.

To the Right Honorable and Religious Lady, Margaret Countess of Carlisle the
Author presents the ensuing book wishing grace and peace to be multiplied.
Right Honorable,
I Have presumed upon your favor to present this my poor labor to your
Honor not doubting of your favorable acceptance from him, who desires your
further increase in the knowledge of the truth of God, you have given many
testimonies of your love to Religion by your careful walking in piety to the
good example of others, which has rejoiced my heart, to hear from time to
time, I desire nothing more then that you might go on till you receive the
crown of glory. It is not in vain to know God and the Lord Jesus Christ, but
life eternal, I have endeavored in this ensuing book to set forth some
grounds and principles of the knowledge of God and of Christ by way of Question
and answer, the easiest way I conceive) to get knowledge, and it may be your
Honor may find it more plain and easy to be understood then other
Catechismes, I have labored herein to set forth, how and after what manner a
poor sinner comes to be justified, and how he walks being justified, both
toward God and man, as also something concerning the destruction of
antichrist, and the felicity of the Church for ever, with other things
necessary to be known of us in these times.

It may be you may find in the reading of it some things you never heard of
before, both profitable and comfortable if your Honor shall be pleased to
accept of this my poor labor, J shall take it as a great favor, and shall be
obliged to remain

Your humble Servant John Alcock.

To the truly Religious Christian that desires to know and yield obedience to
the will of God revealed in his word, Grace and peace be multiplied.
CHristian Reader I hear present thee with a few points of Divinity by way of
Question and Answer, The way which I have conceived to be best for the
Information of Judgment, The substance of it I writ about twenty six years
past. The reasons that moved me thereunto were. First to keep in my own
memory the truths God had taught me. Secondly that having gathered these heads
of divinity into order, I might the better teach my family, to whom I could
explain any thing therein contained, (knowing my own sense and meaning which
I could not so well do out of other men's works I have since the first writing
of it perused it and somewhat enlarged it, (and would have done more if
weakness of body had not seized upon me,) After which some judicious friends
of mine having read and considered it thought it worth their labor to write it
out, as also worthy the publishing in Print, and advised me thereunto
perceiving some things in it necessary to be made public, which are not in
other men's works, nor commonly taught I have therefore yielded to their
desires herein. And also it was my own desire to do good to the Church and
people of God, whose servant I am and the least of them, who am not worthy to
be accounted one of them, yet do I make bold to present this small talent of
mine unto thee entreating the to read and consider it, if it be the truth (as I
know it is) receive it with meeknes of heart.

It may be thou may find some truths in it which thou have not formerly
taken notice, of which may be profitable unto thee, And some Scriptures cleared
from the false expositions of some men which it may be they have led the into
some error and hindered from some comfort, that otherwise thou might have had
in the knowledge of the truth I hope thou will not repent thy cost nor thy
labor in reading it.

I wish unto thee Christian Reader all happiness, and thy profit by this poor
work of mine, If thou find good by it Bless God and remember me in thy
prayers, who will remember thee daily and desires thine and his own
furtherance in the truth, and remains.

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ. I.A.

A Catechism, or certain Principles of Christian Religion.
Question.

SEeing that Knowledge is so much desired and sought after of most men, what
knowledge is most necessary, and chiefly to be desired of all men?

Answer. The true knowledge of the true God Jeremy 9.24.

Quest. Wherefore is the knowledge of God most necessary and chiefly to be
desired?

Answ. Because it is eternal life to know God aright Jo. 17.3.

Qu. But God is invisible how can we therefore come to know him?

Ans. Although he be invisible yet he has revealed, and manifested himself,
and therefore it is possible to come to the true knowledge of him.

Qu. Where has he revealed, and manifested himself?

Answ. In his works, and in his word, Psalm 19.

Qu. Is it possible to know God by his Works?

Ans. Yes, it is possible his eternal power and Godhead are seen from the
Creation of the world, and his goodness and mercy in the wise governing, and
upholding all things in the same, Romans 1.20.

Quest. Which is that Word of God, wherein he has manifested himself?

Answ. The old and New Testament.

Quest. Has he therein more clearly manifested himself then in his works?

Answ. Yea, for besides the works of Creation, which we spoke of before, there
are also, many great works of God, recorded in his Word and many names he
has taken unto himself; And many Attributes, which show and declare unto us
what he is; as also the Testimonies of the Saints and holy men of God, which
have had experience of his Attributes, and have given unto him many excellent
Titles declaring what he is and Christ Jesus himself, has evidently declared
him unto us, all which is to be seen, and learned in the Scriptures, Genesis
17.1. Exodus 12.41, 42. Chap. 13.21, 22, 23. Exodus 34.6.7.

Quest. But God is infinite and we are but finite creatures how can we
therefore come to know him who is of such an excellent glory, dwelling in that
light unapprochable?

Ans. We may notwithstanding attain to so much knowledge of him even in this
life as will make us happy, and we must content our selves to know him, as he
has revealed himself in his works and Word and not curiously, besides the
Word to seek to find him out, and to comprehend him, who is incomprehensible,
Exodus 33.20.

Quest. What is God?

Answ. God is a Spirit, most wise most holy, Eternal, infinite etc. one in
Essence or being but yet made known unto us to be three, namely. Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, John 4.24. 1 Samuel 2.23. Ier. 23.24. Esaias 41.4. and 44.6.
Revel. 1.17. Levit. 11.44. 1 Io. 5.7.

Quest. Who made the World?

Answ. This only true God whom we have according to our measure set forth,
Genesis 1.

Quest. Whereof did he make it?

Answ. Of nothing.

Quest. How is it possible to make something of nothing?

Answ. With man it is impossible, but with God it was possible.

Quest. What means did he use to make it?

Answ. No other means, but his almighty Power and Word. Genesis 1.

Quest. Did he, when he had created all things, leave them to themselves?

Ans. No, for then all things must needs have perished but as he did Create all
things by his Word so he does continue to preserve, and uphold all things by
the same word, Acts 17.28.

Qu. Who made man?

Ans. God made him. Genesis 1.27.

Quest. Whereof did he make him?

Answ. Of the dust of the earth, Genesis 2.7.

Quest. What manner of creature, did God make man at the first.

Ans. A most glorious and excellent Creature.

Quest. Wherein consisted his glory and excellency?

Ans. Chiefly, in that he was made in the Image of God.

Qu. Wherein did that Image of God, wherewith Adam was endued chiefly consist?

Ans. In excellency of wisdom, knowledge, purity, and righteousness, and
freedom of will, and the like Graces that God bestowed on him, Genesis 1.27.
Chap. 2.20. Eccles. 7.29.

Qu. Was he not Created glorious in regard of his Body?

Answ. Yes, far more excellent, then any other creature whatsoever Genesis 1.

Qu. What are those Attributes that God did chiefly manifest in the Creation of
man?

Answ. His wisdom, and his love in making him the excellentest of all his
workmanship, and in making him Lord over all the Creatures, creating them all
for his use and benefit. Genesis 1.28.

Qu. Did man continue in this excellent and happy estate?

Ans. No, he fell from it, Genesis 3.6, 7.

Qu. Then it seems Man was made mutable and subject to change.

Ans. Yea, for to be immutable is proper only to God and it was not the purpose
of God to make him a God, but he endued him with freedom of will to the end
he might make choice either of Good or evil.

Qu. What was the cause of Adams Fall from that estate?

Ans. His disobeying the Commandment of God in eating the forbidden fruit,
Genesis 3.6, 7.

Quest. How came he to disobey the Commandment of God.

Answ. By hearkening to the temptation of Satan, and yiedling thereunto, Genesis 3.

Quest. Are all the Posterity of Adam guilty of that sin.

Ans. Yea, because all men proceed out of his loins, and therefore he having
fallen, all his posterity are fallen with him, and are polluted with corruption
of nature as well as he, and so liable to the same Curse threatened against
Adam.

Quest. Did God purpose to destroy all the posterity of Adam for that sin.

Answ. No, God had a purpose from all eternity to save some, and to make them
objects of his mercy; And to leave others to make them objects of his Justice,
Ephesians. 1.5. Romans 9.22.23.

Quest. Wherefore did God purpose to save some, and to leave others?

Answ. It was his good will and pleasure, that so he might manifest both his
Attributes of Justice and mercy and so might be glorified in the salvation of
some, and in the rejection of others, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.

Quest. Was there no power or abillity left in Adam to free himself from that
miserable estate whereinto he was fallen.

Answ. There was no power at all left in him, But God in his infinite wisdom
and love did find out a way, for to redeem sinful man out of that lost
condition whereinto he was fallen by breaking the Commandment of God.

Quest. What way or means is that which God did fore-ordain to work the
redemption of sinful Man?

Answ. The way and means appointed of God from all eternity was only by Jesus
Christ.

Quest. What is Jesus Christ?

Answ. The eternal and only begotten Son of God, the second in the undevided
Trinity, Luke. 3.22. Esaias 9. Heb. 1.2.3.6. 1 John. 5.7.

Quest. Then he was true God?

Answ. Yea, he was indeed very God equal with the Father and Holy Ghost, John.
1.1.

Quest. Was he not true man also?

Answ. Yes, he was true man also, for he took upon him the seed of Abraham,
John. 1.14. Heb. 2, 16.

Quest. Wherefore was it needful that our Redeemer should be God?

Answ. It was needful he should be God for these causes.

First that the satisfaction that was to be made might be of an Infinite value,
because an Infinite Justice was offended.

Secondly because he might be able to bear that wrath of God due for our
sins, and to over come him by suffering death that had the power of death
that is the Devil. Heb. 2.14.

Quest. Wherefore was it needful that he should be Man?

Answ. It was needful he should be man for these causes.

First it was man that had sinned therefore that nature that had sinned was to
make satisfaction.

Secondly if he had not been Man also, he could not have suffered death, for
the Godhead cannot possibly suffer, and therefore we say, that he was Man that
he might suffer, and he was also God that he might overcome by suffering, Heb.
2.14.

Quest. Seeing there was such a necessity that he should be Man also as well as
God, tell me by what means he came to be Man?

Answ. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost after a most wonderful and
unspeakeable manner and borne of a Virgin, Luke 1.35. Chap. 2.7.

Quest. Was he conceived and Borne as soon as Man had sinned?

Answ. No, but a long time after Man had sinned, even in that fulness of time
that God had appointed, Gal. 4.4.

Quest. How then were the Patriarks and foreFathers saved that lived before the
coming of Christ in the flesh?

Answ. They were all saved by the sacrifice of Christ that was to be offered up
and to be performed.

Quest. How could that be?

Answ. Because God did accept of it, as if it had been performed, for he was
that lamb slain from the beginning of the World, Revel. 13.8.

Quest. How could he be slain seeing at that time he had not assumed Man's
nature unto himself?

Answ. He is said to be slain in this respect, namely in the decree and
Council of God, who had decreed this way, and means to work Man's Redemption,
and Christ Jesus the second in Trinity did willingly undertake, this great
work, and thus it was done with God, and his Justice satisfied, for he calls
things that are not, as if they were, he so accounts of things not actually
done, as done, being decreed by him, Romans 4.17.

Quest. What great works did he after he had taken upon him the nature of Man?

Answ. He wrought many great miracles he raised the dead. he made the blind to
see, and healed all manner of diseases and taught his Fathers will Io.
11.43.44. Luke 7.15.22.4.40.43.

Quest. Was he obedient to the Law?

Answ. Yea he was obedient to the Law and did fulfill it in every thing that it
did command or require, Psalm. 40.7.8.

Quest. Then he was free from Sin?

Answ. He did no Sin at all, neither did guile ever enter into his mouth, 1
Peter 2.22.

Quest. Was it needful he should fulfill the Law?

Answ. Yes it was needful for us to have such a Redeemer as could perfectly
fulfill the Law for us, who could not fulfill it our selves, Gal. 4.4.5. Romans
8.3.4.

Quest. Then it seems that whatsoever Christ did do, was only for the
Redemption of the elect?

Answ. It was all for that end, for he was wholly given unto them as the
Prophet Esaias says, unto us a Child is borne Esaias. 9.

Quest. Was he not bound to fulfill the Law for himself?

Answ. The Law was never given unto him for to be a rule for him to walk by,
for he needed no Law, being free from that Corruption of nature which all the
posterity of Adam were tainted and corrupted with.

Quest. If he were free from Corruption of nature, wherefore was he Circumcised
and Baptized?

Answ. It was as himself says to fulfill all righteousness, not that there
was any need in him of the Circumcision of the heart, or that washing and
purging signified by Baptime; but he submitted himself to both to testify his
willing subjection to the will of his Father, and to teach us by his example to
do the like Matthew 3.15.

Quest. Had he any enemies, seeing he was so innocent and blameless?

Answ. Yes he had many enemies, especially the Scribes and Pharisees that did
persecute him, and when that time appointed was come, did also put him to
death, Math. 26.3.4. and Chap. 27.

Quest. Wherefore did they put him to death?

Answ. There was no cause worthy of death found in him as the Judge himself
confessed, Luke 23.14. Math. 27.24.

Quest. Could he not have delivered himself, nut of their hands, (seeing he
was God) and have confounded his enemies by his Almighty power and word?

Answ. Yea he could have prayed to his Father (as himself says) and he would
have sent him more then twelve legions of Angels, but he came into the World
to suffer and to fulfill, whatsoever was prefigured and prophened of him to be
fullfilled by him, Math. 26.53.56.

Quest. Was his death prefigured and foretold in the Scriptures?

Answ. His death was shadowed out in the Paschall Lamb, and in the sacrifices,
and foretold by the Prophets in very many places of Scripture and that in
express words Esaias 53. Daniell 9.26.

Quest. Was it needful that he should dye for to work the Redemption of Man?

Answ. It was needful, for he did nothing in vain, and God would have him to
suffer death to the end he might deliver man from death, And the Justice of
God, did require that he should dye, for God had threatened death to Adam upon
his disobedience, and therefore that God might manifest himself to be just,
and his wrath also against out sins, and yet also notwithstanding manifest
his mercy toward Man, God would have him to suffer a shameful death, who was
able (being God and Man) to bear that wrath, and satisfy the Justice of God
which could not have been satisfied unless that Christ himself had suffered
death.

Quest. What death did he suffer?

Answ. They did Crucify him upon the Cross between two thieves. Matthew 27.38.

Quest, Wherefore did they put him to so shameful a death?

Answ. It was so foretold that he should be so used by the Jews, for as his
death was foretold, so also the manner of his death, Esaias 55.12.

Quest. Then the Jews did nothing unto him, but that which God had decreed and
foretold by his Prophets?

Answ. Not any thing at all, Io. 19.24.28.29. Acts 2.23.

Quest. Wherefore did God decree to put his only Son to so shameful death?

Answ. To the end he might manifest his Justice and wrath against Sin, and
also his exceeding great mercy and love unto Man, that notwithstanding his
Justice did require, so shameful a death, yet did not spare his own Son but
gave him to death to redeem us, Io. 3.16.

Qu. Seeing that all men as well the Elect as others, are all borne the
children of wrath, and are liable to the curse of God, and Condemnation, what
is required of us, that we may be free from that Curse and escape condemnation?

Answ. A new Birth is required, as our Savior himself witnesses, except a
man be borne again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, Io. 3.3.5.

Quest. What is that new Birth.

Answ. It is a most admirable and also a supernatural work of Gods Spirit,
whereby all the Elect are made (of children of wrath) heirs of eternal Glory
and happiness, Titus 3.5, 6, 7.

Quest. Whereof does this new birth consist?

Answ. It consists of these two parts, namely of Water, and the Spirit that
is to say, of Repentance and of Faith, Jo. 3.5. Titus 3.5.

Quest. After what manner does the Lord effect, and work this new Birth in the
Elect?

Answ. The Lord does it two ways, inwardly by his Spirit, and outwardly by his
Word, opening their eyes to see their misery, and that there is mercy to be had
if they do repent, Ezekiel. 36.24, 25, 26, 27. Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 10.14. Ezekiel.
33.11.

Quest. What is the first peculiar work that God vouchsafes to work in them
whom he has apurpose to save?

Answ. The first special and peculiar work that God does work in them is
Repentance.

Quest. But is not Faith wrought in men before Repentance and does not
repentance proceed from Faith as a fruit and effect thereof?

Answ. No, not that faith which is peculiar to the Elect, that is never wrought
before Repentance, neither is Repentance a fruit or effect of Faith, but an
effect of the Spirit as faith also is.

Quest. What Faith is that which is wrought in men before Repentance.

Answ. It is commonly called historical faith, the object whereof is the truth
of the Scriptures, and it is a gift of the Spirit, common as well to those that
shall perish, as to those that shall be saved.

Quest. What Reasons have you to persuade you, that Repentance is the first
peculiar work that God does work in them whom he has a purpose to save?

Answ. I have very many Reasons to persuade me thereunto.

Quest. What is the first Reason?

Answ. My first Reason is, the constant and unchangeable order, that the holy
Ghost has observed throughout the Scriptures, in requiring Repentance and
Faith, always requiring Repentance in the first place, Mark. 1.15. Math. 3.2.
Luke 3.3. Acts 2.38. Acts 3.19.

Quest. But order in setting down things in Scripture proves nothing?

Answ. But this is more then order in setting it down in the first place, for,
I say, it is required in the first place, and the holy Ghost does not require
that first of us, which it pleases him to work last, but requires that first,
which he pleases first to work.

Quest. What is your next Reason?

Answ. Because, until we have true Repentance wrought in us, we have no right
unto any special promise, for the special promises of Grace and Mercy, are
made only to the Penitent and Brokenhearted, and therefore before Repentance,
they cannot have faith in any of those special promises, Esaias 61.1, 2, 3. Acts
3.19.

Quest. What is your next Reason?

Answ. Because no man, before he have Repentance truly wrought in him, can
receive the forgiveness of his sins, for Repentance is required, that men
may have their sins done away, and therefore forgiveness of sins does
follow Repentance, and so consequently Faith does follow Repentance, Acts 2.38.
and 3.19.

Quest. But does it follow that because Remission of Sins does follow
Repentance, that therefore Justifying Faith does follow Repentance?

Answ. Yes it does because whosoever is Justified by Faith his Sins are
forgiven at the same instant, but no man's Sins are forgiven, until he have
true Repentance wrought in him, therefore no Man is Justified by Faith, before
his heart be broken and true Repentance be wrought in him. Romans 5.1.

Quest. What other reason have you for to prove this point?

Answ. Because whosoever is Justified by Faith is at peace with God, Romans 5.1.
But no Man is at peace with God, until he have truly repented, therefore no
Man is Justified by Faith until he have truly repented.

Quest. But are not Men first at peace with God and assured of his love, and
afterward come to true Repentance for their former Sins?

Answ. No certainly it cannot be, for the special thing that the party
repenting does seek for is the pardon of Sins and peace with God, and to be
assured of his love, and therefore it cannot be, that he does enjoy peace,
seeing it is that which above all other things he so earnestly seeks and
desires, Luke 15.18.19.

Quest. Does not this seeking of peace with God and desire to be reconciled
unto him, argue that he does enjoy peace and that he is reconciled unto God?

Answ. No certainly, for the desire of a thing, does argue the want of the
thing desired, and not the having of it and so this desire of peace does
plainly show the want of it.

Quest. What is Repentance?

Answ. Repentance is a powerful work of Gods Spirit (wrought in the hearts of
such as shall be saved,) whereby the heart is broken and turned from the
pleasing delights of Sin, into a great fear and sorrow for them, and
Confession of them unto God, and into an exceeding desire of peace and
reconcilliation with God, Luke 15. Acts 11.18. 2 Timothy 2.25. Joel 2.12.13. Heb.
6.1. Proverbs 28.13.

Quest. Is this Repentance that you have here described of necessity to
salvation?

Answ. It is of absolute necessity as Christ himself testifies, where he
says except ye repent you shall all perish, Luke 13.5.

Quest. But is it of necessity, that all those parts described in the
definition of Repentance should be effected before a Man can be capable of the
promise.

Answ. This is that constant order, which God has and ever will keep in
effecting this great work of his, to humble them for their Sins, to cause
them to see, and to confess and acknowledge their misery, and also earnestly
to long and desire after peace and reconcilliation with God, which are indeed
the very substance and several parts of Repentance.

Quest. But is not leaving of all known evil, and doing of all known good
the parts of Repentance?

Answ. No it is not, these are indeed the efects of fruits, ever following
Faith and commonly called by the names of mortification, and vivification,
which is a dying unto Sin, and a rising to newness of life.

Quest. What reason can you give, to prove that this is not Repentance?

Answ. Because Repentance must of necessity always go before Justifying Faith
(as is formerly proved) but this leaving of all evil and doing of Good, ever
follows after Justifying Faith.

Quest. But it may seem, that if that be repentance, which you have described
then Judas had true repentance, for he was both sorrowful and also confessed
his Sin?

Answ. No, he never had that Repentance, for then he should have been received
to mercy, for although he was sorrowful, and confessed he had sinned, he never
attained that broken heart, nor he never sought or desired pardon, and
reconciliation with God, for he knew it was in vain, for he had sinned
against the holy Ghost.

Quest. But is not Repentance and Faith wrought both at one and the same
instant of time.

Answ. No, for Repentance is that work of the Spirit, which prepares the
heart, and makes it fit, to receive the assurance of grace and peace, which is
by faith, and therefore, that which is a preparation to a thing, must always
go before the thing, for which the preparation is made.

Quest. But is there any distance of time between Repentance and justifying
faith?

Answ. There is not any thing passes between Repentance and Faith, for they
do not cease repenting and bewailing their lost condition, nor seeking and
desiring after Grace and mercy, until such time as they be satisfied; But
where God does bestow this grace of faith, he does always find them Repentant
and repenting sinners.

Quest. What is Justifying faith?

Answ. It is a gracious work of Gods Spirit, wrought in the hearts of such as
are penitent, whereby they are assured of the free pardon, and remission of all
their sins, and of peace and reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ,
Romans 5.1.5.

Quest. Why do you in your definition of Faith add these words (wrought in
the hearts of such as are penitent) seeing they are not of the definition of
Faith?

Answ. I add those words to show forth the only objects in whom it pleases
the Lord to work this excellent work of Faith.

Quest. Does Justifying faith give assurance, to the Penitent and broken heart,
of peace with God?

Answ. Yes, it does, as St. Paul testifies Romans the fifth, and the first
verse, being Justified by Faith, we have peace with God through Jesus Christ?

Quest. But may not this Faith be lost at no time after the receiving of it?

An. It cannot be lost, but it may be greatly weakened through carelessness, by
falling into sin, as David did, Psalm. 51.

Quest. But may they not be deprived of the Assurance of Gods love for a time?

Answ. Yes, they may want the comfortable assurance thereof, but they have
then, a promise to rest upon, which is, That whom the Lord loves, he loves to
the end, and therefore David in his extremity said, he remembered the Lords
mercies of old.

Quest. But is not the believing of a man's sins to be pardonable justifying
faith?

Answ. No, it is not, for so all men may believe their sins to be pardonable,
except they have sinned the Sin against the holy Ghost and many have this
faith, that shall not be saved, but shall perish for ever.

Quest. But is this Justifying faith of necessity to be obtained of us in this
life?

Answ. It is of great necessity, for it does minister unto us the greatest
comfort that can be desired, assuring us of freedom from the greatest evil,
and giving unto us a lively hope of the greatest good, making all the special
promises to be ours, whereby we are upheld in the greatest afflictions that
can befall us in this life.

Quest. What are the special effects that do follow this faith?

Answ. There are these four inseparable companions, which are the effects of
faith, namely, Peace, patience, Hope and Love, a dying unto sin, and a rising
again to newness and holiness of life, Rem. 5, 1, 2, 3, 4 5. 1 John 4.19.

Quest. Wherein consists the death to sin or mortification?

Answ. In the exercise of the three first effects mentioned namely, Peace,
Patience and Hope.

Quest. That we may the better understand these things, describe unto me what
these three effects are somewhat distinctly, and first what that peace is?

Answ. The peace which here I mean, is peace with God through Jesus Christ, so
that whereas before, God had a controversy with them, now is reconciled unto
them, so that now they are at rest, fully persuaded, God being with them,
nothing may prevail against them, as it is written, If God justify, who may
condemn, Romans 8, 33.34.

Quest. What is the second effect, namely patience?

Answ. It is a virtue wherewith they are armed against all assaults of their
enemies to bear their injuries to suffer and endure their wrongs and though
they be compassed with a body of sin, and many lusts do assault them, yet
endure all in quietness sustained by the Word, which says, In patience
possess ye your souls, Luke 21.19.

Quest. What is Hope which is the third effect of Faith?

Answ. Hope is the Anchor of the Soul, whereby they are stayed and upheld
expecting those eternal good things to come, which God has promised to his
people, and which by faith they believe shall be performed, and this is that
hope that makes not ashamed, Romans 5.5.

Quest. Wherein consists that newness and holiness of life, which is called
vivification, and the new resurrection?

Answ. It consists in the fourth and last effect of Faith, namely love, which
is the light and perfection of a Christian, which is caused by the love of God
shed in their hearts, and does extend it self, first to God their Father, and
to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Redeemer, next to their Brethren, the begotten
children of God then to all men, even their enemies, doing good unto them for
evil, praying and mourning for them, Matthew 5.44. Acts 7.60. 1 Cor. 13. 1 John
4.19, 20 21.

Quest. What is the outward means, which the Lord has appointed for the
working of these graces in them whom he will save?

Answ. The outward means is the preaching of his Word, which is the
Isntrumental means that does beget the Lord adding thereunto the power of his
Spirit, and so it becomes powerful and effectual for the conversion of his
elect, being preached either by those that are allowed Preachers in public, or
by private Christians, exhorting in private.

Qu. May wicked and unregenerate Ministers convert souls unto God?

Answ. No, they cannot, for this is a work peculiar to such as are members of
Christ, who only have this power to work this great work of conversion, having
the ministry of reconciliation committed unto them. Ier. 1.23.24

Quest. Why cannot they convert souls, seeing they preach the same word of God
that others do?

Answ. They cannot for these Reasons; First, though they preach the same Word,
yet is it not by them, delivered in the power, and evidence of the Spirit.

Secondly, God has not promised his presence with them, to make his Word
powerful and effectual in their mouths, for the conversion of others, Jeremy
23.21, 22, 32.

Thirdly, none can be said to convert, but only such, as by the power of the
Spirit in themselves, do work upon the hearts and consciences of others, the
same grace that themselves are partakers of.

Fourthly, they that convert souls, shall shine as the stars for ever and
ever, Dan. 12.3. but no unregenerate man shall have that glory, therefore they
cannot convert souls unto God.

Quest. Does the law of the Decalogue or ten Commandments admit of Repentance?

Answ. No, it does not, but adjudgeth every transgressor to eternal
condemnation, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.

Quest. But the Apostle says, that the Law was our schoolmaster to bring us
unto Christ, Gal. 3.

Answ. The Apostle intends there the Ceremonial law, and not the law of the
ten Commandments, and indeed the Ceremonial law did preach and teach us, as a
Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, in every thing, and we may observe
also, that the Apostle says, that the Law was our Schoolmaster, so that it
appears plainly, the appostle intends there the Ceremonial law, and not the
moral.

Quest. But the Law sets forth our misery, whereby we come to know our wretched
condition?

Answ. Yes, indeed it does, but leaves us there without all hope or help of
cure, for it cannot afford us any help at all, even like a man that wounds
another, and leaves him for dead, but is not able to help him.

Quest. What part of the word of God does require and admit of repentance?

Answ. It is the Gospel that admits and requires Repentance Mark. 1.1 2, 3, 4.

Quest. What is the Gospel?

Answ. It is a free declaration of Gods grace, mercy and love for Christ's sake.

Quest. When was this Gospel first preached?

Answ. First, it was preached to Adam in these words, The seed of the woman
shall break the Serpents head, and afterward to the Fathers and Prophets, and
by our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Apostles in a wonderful great measure.

Quest. If the law do not admit of Repentance, to what end serves it?

Answ. There is a double use of the Law; It is set down first, for the
unregenerate man, that he may not deny the punishment denounced against him,
and also that it may take vengeance against him, justly for his sins.

Secondly, it is also set down for a holy and regenerate man both that as
often as he looks upon it (and always he ought to look into it) he may so
often bewail his wickedness, and quake at it; And as often as he calls it to
mind (and night and day he ought to call it to remembrance) so often he may
think of the riches of the mercy, and of the love of God, by giving him
thanks by Jesus Christ, his Lord and Intercessor, who so mercifully has set
him free from the wrath of this just and holy law.

Quest. Are all the Rites and Ceremonies (which God commanded the Jews to
observe) utterly abolished?

Answ. They are all abolished, which did any way tipe and shadow out Christ,
which was then to come in the flesh, Gal. 3.24, 25.

Quest. What use is there then to us of the Ceremonial law?

Answ. Yes, it is of some good use unto us, for thereby we may see how fitly
every Tipe did shadow forth in something Christ, and seeing it performed in and
by him, we may behold the wisdom and truth of God, and also the obedience of
Christ to the will of his Father, and we may also have the greater Assurance
against all Jews, and other opposers and enemies of Christ, that indeed he was
the Messiah promised, because he fully accomplished whatsoever was before
shadowed out to be performed by him, or to be fulfilled in him.

Quest. Are we not bound to abstain from those meats forbidden to the Jews,
and to observe those festival days commanded to be kept by them?

Answ. No, we are not, for those meats were forbidden to the Jews, to put a
difference between them and the Gentiles, but now the partition wall being
broken down by Christ's death, all meats wholesome and good for food, are
lawful to be eaten, and from those holy days, and other like Ceremonies, we
are set at liberty by Christ's deaths; Therefore whosoever does teach them to be
observed by us, do teach a divellish doctrine, to bring into bondage again the
Church and people of God, from which Christ has set us free, Levit. 20.23, 24,
25, 26. Ephesians. 2.14. Collo. 2.16.17.20.21. Gal. 5.1.

Quest. Did the Lord leave his people the Jews without sending any to teach
and instruct them?

Answ. No, the Lord did not leave them, but sent unto them his Prophets to
teach, and to instruct them in the Law and promises of God, and to bring them
to repentance.

Quest. Did they kindly entertain those Prophets?

Answ. No, for they being all of them, (except a small Remnant) uncircumcised
in heart, did persecute them, and put many of them to death, for speaking to
them in the name of the Lord, Math. 23.37. Acts 7.52.

Quest. Did not the Lord therefore take away his Prophets from them, and leave
them destitute, because of their contempt of them?

Answ. No, the Lord, for that small Remnants sake, did not long leave them
without some Prophet, or holy man to teach and instruct them, that they might
be saved.

Quest. What were the special Sacraments which the Lord vouchsafed unto the
Jews?

Answ. They were two, Circumcision, and the Passover Genesis 17.10.11. Exodus 12.

Quest. What did Circumcision teach them?

Answ. Circumcision did teach and preach unto them the Circumcision of the
heart, which Circumcision of the heart God did especially require and call for.
Ier. 4.4. Romans 2.28.

Quest. What was signified by the Passover?

Answ. Christ Jesus, who was indeed the true Paschall Lamb, the substance of
that Ceremony who was in fullness of time to be sacrificed for them, Gal. 44. 1
Cor. 57.

Quest. Then it seems that all those Rites and Ceremonies had a spiritual
intent and signification?

Answ. Yes, certainly they had, but yet many of the Jews remained blind and
ignorant thereof, and contented themselves with the performance of the outward
work, and never saw the spiritual intent and mystery of them, by which means
they might have become profitable unto them.

Quest. Why do we commonly distinguish the times, before the coming of
Christ, and the time since his coming, by these terms (of under the Law, and
under the Gospel) was not the Gospel preached before the coming of Christ in
the flesh?

Answ. Yes, it was preached to Adam, and to the Patriarchs, and also by the
Prophets, (as we said before) but yet to very few, but the Nation of the Jews
and but darkly unto them, under Tipes and shadows; But since his coming, it
has not only been published to them, but almost to all Nations in the world,
and therefore in regard of the abundant Revelation of the Gospel, the
accomplishing of the work of man's Redemption, and the powerful work of God,
causing so many to entertain and embrace it, therefore do we call this the
time of the Gospel, or the joyful time, wherein the glad tidings of salvation
is brought not only to Jews, but to Gentiles also.

Quest. When began this Gospel to be so plentifully preached?

Answ. It began first to be preached by John Baptist, and afterward by Christ,
and by the Disciples sent out by him but more abundantly by the Apostles, after
the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, Math. 28.20.

Quest. We have formerly spoken of the death of Christ, now tell me what became
of him after the Jews had put him to that shameful death?

Answ. He was Buried Io. 19.40, 41 42.

Quest. By whom was he buried?

Answ. By Joseph of Arimathea, who went to Pilate, and begged the body of
Jesus, and laid it in a new Sepulcher, which he had hewn out for himself John
19.38.

Quest. Did he continue long in the Grave?

Answ. He rose again the third day, Math. 28.6. 1 Cor. 15.4. Math. 16.21.

Quest. Wherefore did Christ rise again?

Answ. To show unto us that he had overcome all the powers of the Devil,
Hell, and Death, and the Grave, for our Justification, Romans 5.25.

Quest. To whom did he show himself after his Resurrection?

Answ. To Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, Mark. 16.9. and to two Disciples
as they went to Emmaus, Mark. 16.12. Luke 24.13. And to the eleven Apostles, as
they sat together, John 20.19. and to more then five hundred Brethren at once,
and also at sundry other times, when they were together, he showed himself
unto them alive after his passion, by many infallible proofs and testimonies,
Acts 1.

Quest. How long did he remain with them after his resurrection?

Answer. He was seen of them after his resurrection by the space of forty
days, Acts 1.3.

Quest. What did he with them all that time?

Ans. He spoke unto them of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, Acts
1.3.

Quest. What special promise did he make unto them before his departure?

Answ. That they should be baptized with the holy Ghost, Acts 1.5.

Quest. What became of him after that he had spoken unto them of those things?

Answ. He was taken up into heaven out of their sight, a cloud receiving him,
Acts 1.9.

Quest. What appeared unto them as they looked after him?

Answ. Two men appeared in white apparel, telling them that the same Jesus,
which was taken up from them should so come in like manner, as they had seen
him go into heaven, Acts 1.10, 11.

Quest. What became of the Disciples after his the Ascension into heaven?

Ans. They returned to Jerusalem, from the mount called Olivet, Acts 1.12.

Quest. What did they when they came to Jerusalem?

Answ. They continued together with one accord in supplication and prayer, and
did choose another Apostle Acts 1.14.

Quest. How did they choose him?

Answ. They appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Iustus and
Mathias and when they had prayed, they cast lots, and the sort fell upon
Mathias, and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles, Acts 1.23, 24 25, 26.

Quest. When did Christ perform that promise, which he made unto them namely
that they should be baptized with the holy Ghost?

Answ. At the feast of Pentecost, which was within few days after his
Ascension Acts 2.

Quest. In what manner was it performed?

Answ. They being all met together in one place there came a found from heaven
and filled all the house and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of
fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the holy
Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance, Acts 2.1, 2.3, 4.

Qu. What happened thereupon?

Answ. Many were amassed and wondered at this great work, and others mocking,
said they were full of new wine Acts 2.12.13.

Quest. How did the Apostles clear themselves, of that false accusation?

Answ. Peter stood up with the eleven, proving that they could not be drunk,
because it was but the third hour of the day, and also that this was, but the
fulfilling of a promise, which the Lord had made by the mouth of the Prophet
Joel, Acts 2.16. Joel 2.28, 29.

Quest. What did the Apostles after they had thus cleared themselves from that
false accusation?

Ans. Peter preached unto them the death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
telling them, that they had taken him, and by wicked hands, had crucified and
slain him, Acts 2.23.

Quest. What followed thereupon?

Answ. They were pricked in their hearts, and cried out to Peter, and the rest
of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Acts 2.37.

Qu. What counsel did they give them?

Answ. They exhorted them to repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins Acts 2.38.

Quest. What followed upon this exhortation?

Answ. They that gladly received the Word, were baptized and the same day there
were added to them about three thousand souls, and they continued in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship and in breaking of Bread and prayers Acts 2.41
42.

Quest. What followed upon this great work, wrought upon those men?

Answ. Fear came upon every soul and they that believed sold their
possessions and parted their goods to all men as every man had need, and they
had all things common Acts 2.44 45.

Quest. Were any great works done by the Apostles?

Answ. Yea many wonders signs, and miracles were done by them. Acts 5.12.

Quest. What was the principal end of those miracles?

Ans. God did thereby bear witness to their doctrine that it was his, which
they did preach, by giving them power to work such miracles, Heb. 2.4.

Quest. Were the people moved by those miracles to receive their doctrine?

Answ. Yea, very many were moved therewith, and wondering at the miracles,
believed their doctrine, and were baptized even as many as were ordained to
eternal life.

Quest. Were none moved by their preaching, to believe their doctrine, but such
as were ordained to eternal life.

Answ. Yes certainly such was the power of their ministry, that many others
believed the truth of their doctrine, and were baptized, as Simon Magus, and
doubtless diverse others, which never received the special benefit of the
Gospel which they preached, Acts 8.13. Math. 13.

Qu. May such outward Christians be suffered to partake with the faithful in
the holy things of God?

Answ. Yes they may be suffered to partake with them in the outward ordinances,
the Word and Sacraments until such time as they appear to be hipocrites, and
become offensive to the Church and people of God, and then they are to be cast
out of the Church by excommunication.

Qu. Do those outward Christians rest content with that common work of grace
in them?

Ans. Yes many of them do so long as they live and also conceive themselves to
be in a good estate, to be the children of the Freewoman, whereas indeed they
are children of the Bondwoman; others fall away, to an open and malicious
opposition of the truth of God formerly professed by them, Mat. 25. Io.
8.33.39.40. Math. 26.14, 15, 16.

Quest. Do not many of them go on very far in the profession of the truth?

Answ. Yes doubtless, many are greatly enlightened by it, and receive it with
joy, and go on joying, and rejoicing in it for a time, and do taste of the
heavenly gift, and of the powers of the world to come, and are made partakers
of the holy Ghost, and sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, Math. 13.20,
21. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6 Heb. 10.29.

Quest. Is it possible for such to fall away and perish?

Answ. Yes, it is possible for such to fall away, and to tread under foot, the
Son of God, and to account the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was
sanctified an unholy thing, and to despite the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29.

Quest. May they be truly said to be sanctified that fall away and perish?

Answ. Yes, they may be truly said so to be, and are so indeed, as the Apostle
shows, Heb. 10.29.

Quest. Does not the Apostle there speak of them, according as they made show
to be, and not as if indeed they were so?

Answ. No certainly for there the Apostle declares unto us what great effects
of the Spirit men may be partakers of and yet fall away, and perish for ever.

Quest. What is that Sanctification which men may have and yet perish?

Answ. It is an outward washing or cleansing caused by the holy Ghost
inlightening the understanding, causing them to see the benefit offered in the
Gospel, by which means they come to a liking of it, and do for a time
receive it with joy, and are in many things conformed to the obedience of the
same, forsaking many of their evil ways, wherein aforetime they had took
delight, Heb. 6.4, 5. Math, 13.20, 21. 2 Pet. 2.20.21.

Quest. Are these effects of the Spirit vouchsafed unto them, to the end they
might be saved?

Answ. No certainly, but God does it to gain glory unto his name, and to leave
them without excuse, who do quench that light in them, and willingly resist
and contemn that grace that is offered in the Gospel, 2 Peter 2.21.

Quest. What is their Sin which they commit called in the Scripture?

Answ. The sin against the holy Ghost, Math. 12.31, 32.

Q. Why is it called the sin against the holy Ghost?

Answ. Because it is committed directly against that light evidenced unto their
consciences by the holy Ghost Mat. 12.31, 32. Heb. 10.26.

Quest. I pray you give me a brief definition of that Sin?

Answ. It is a wilful opposition, and rejection of the Gospel of God, after
the holy Ghost has enlightened them and persuaded their hearts of the truth and
benefit of the same, Heb. 6.4. Heb. 10.26.29.

Quest. Is it possible to come to know any of them that commit this sin?

Answ. Yes, it is possible, else would not the Apostle have told us, that there
is a sin, which we should not pray for 1 John 5.16.

Quest. How do you know that the Apostle means this sin in that place,
which he would not have us pray for?

Answ. Because all other sins are pardonable, and therefore may be prayed
for, but this sin is unpardonable, and therefore not to be prayed for, Matthew
12.32.

Quest. How comes it to pass that this sin above all others should be
unpardonable?

Answ. Because the very way and means of salvation is despised and rejected,
after they have received the knowledge of the truth, and therefore it is
impossible to renew them again by Repentance, seeing they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame Heb. 6.6.

Quest. How do they crucify to themselves the Son of God?

Answ. Even like as the Jews did reject Christ, and crucify him when he was
with them upon earth, so these men do now reject him, and do crucify him, by
their wilful contempt of him, and his sacrifice; And as the Jews did, so do
they, put him to an open shame, and so rejecting that sacrifice, which was
ordained of God from all eternity to take away sins, it is impossible their
sins should be pardoned, for there remains no more sacrifice for sin,
Heb. 10.29.

Quest. Do men come on a sudden to commit this fearful sin.

Answ. No, but by degrees for first there is a light esteem of the Gospel and
of the grace offered therein.

Secondly, a looking back to their pleasures past with some liking of them.

Thirdly, a yielding consent of the will and affections to the flesh, for the
embracing of them again, and so by little and little, return like the dog to
his own vomit again, and like the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the
mire, 2 Pet. 2.22.

Quest. Do all the Reprobate commit this sin?

Answ. No, because many of them, are never so far enlightened by the holy
Ghost, to see and perceive those things, which those do that fall into that
sin.

Quest. Is not their estate more miserable that commit this sin then others
that do not commit that sin, and yet notwithstanding shall perish for ever?

Answ. Yes certainly, for although the estate of others be miserable, yet the
misery of these shall far exceed, for to whom much has bin committed, of him
much shall be required, and he that knows his masters will and does it not,
shall be beaten with many stripes, 2 Pet. 2.21.

Quest. Do not such as commit this sin, prove dangerous enemies to the
Church of God?

Answ. Yes assuredly, none greater enemies to the truth, and to the people of
God, then those that once have professed the truth, and afterward have turned
from the holy Commandment delivered unto them, and therefore they are
carefully to be taken heed of, and to be avoided, 2 Pet. 2.21.

Quest. What differing effects does the holy Ghost work in those that shall be
saved from those that commit this horrible sin?

Answ. The holy Ghost does work in them that shall be saved, a far more
excellent work, namely, that great work of regeneration, consisting of these
two principal effects of the Spirit, Repentance and Faith Io. 3.5.

Quest. Are none partakers of these two effects of the Holy Ghost but such as
shall be saved?

Answ. Not any one and none that are partakers of those effects of the Spirit,
can possibly commit that sin, but all others, that are only enlightened by
the holy Ghost, to see, and know the way of salvation, are in danger of falling
into that sin.

Quest. What is the best way for such to take, to be free from committing that
sin?

Answ. The best way is, not to content themselves with that common grace of
inlightning only, but to labor to find in themselves those two effects of the
Spirit, Repentance and Faith, and to be earnest with the Lord by prayer, that
he by his Spirit, would work effectually, for the breaking their hearts, and
humbling them, that so he may raise them up again according to his promise,
and never to give rest unto their souls, until the Lord by his Spirit assure
their hearts of peace and reconciliation with him.

Quest. But is not the prayer of all such as are unjustified abominable, how
can we therefore hope that God will hear us, or grant our requests?

Answ. The prayers of all those that are unjustified, are not abominable, but
only the prayers of such wicked as hate to be reformed, and cast the word of
God behind them, but the prayers of such as desire to be humbled for their
sins and to have their hearts broken, and brought in subjection to the will
of God, and earnestly desire to be reconciled, and to be at peace with God are
not abominable, but are pleasing unto God and are many times heard, and granted
by him.

Quest. But God hears and grants the requests of none but for Christ's sake,
and all unjustified men are out of Christ therefore how can it be that God
should hear them or that their prayer should be pleasing unto him.

Answ. True it is, that all unjustified persons are out of Christ (that is) are
not ingrafted into him by faith; And also God hears and grants no requests,
but for Christ's sake; But yet notwithstanding, God does hear the requests of
such as are not actually in Christ, for Christ's sake, for God is merciful to
all his Creatures only in Christ, and many thousands enjoy mercies from the
Lord for Christ's sake, that shall never enjoy salvation by him: And therefore
though men be not actually justified, yet they may pray for Christ's sake, for
the things they stand in need of, and be heard of the Lord, and their prayers
pleasing, and not sin else would not the Apostle have advised Simon Magus
being in the gall of bitterness, to pray that if it were possible the thought
of his heart might be forgiven him, Genesis 16.13. Chap. 21.16. Acts 8.22.

Quest. May any one of those that are made partakers of that new birth and
ingrafted into Christ, fall away and perish?

Answ. No, it is not possible, for God is unchangeable in his love, where he
once loves, with that special love he ever loves, for the gifts and calling
of God are without Repentance, Romans 11.20. Io. 12.1. Romans 5.10.

Quest. But they fall into many sins after regeneration, and therefore may
not God justly cast them off?

Answ. True it is they fall into sins after regeneration, and if we look
upon Gods Justice only we cannot say, but he might cast them often; But yet God
will be true in his promise, and as he did manifest his mercy, and love unto
them in their new birth so will be manifest his mercy in preserving them, so
that although they do sin daily, yet shall it not condemn them; For God
does justify them through Christ's death, and if God justify, who may condemn
Romans 8.33.34.

Quest. Then it seems that the steadfastness of man in Grace, consists not in
his own power and strength but in the unchangeable, Decree, and mercy of God?

Answ. No, assuredly it consists not in his own power and strength, but in the
unchangeablenesse of Gods love for they are kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation, wherein consists some part of man's happiness for now
by Grace he is set into a better estate and condition then Adam was by his
Creation, who was subject to change, 1 Peter 1.5.

Quest. Does not the knowledge of this Doctrine concerning man's steadfastness
in grace make men secure and careless in the committing of sin?

Answ. No certainly, it is not possible, that any of those that are regenerate
should make such an use of it, but rather they considering Gods rich mercy and
abundant grace, showed toward them, do labor to deny ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, and do endeavor to live soberly, righteously, and godly,
seeing the grace of God that brings salvation unto all men, has so
plentifully appeared unto them, Titus 2.11.12. Romans 12.1.

Quest. Do not many of the regenerate fall into great sins after their
regeneration!

Answ. Yes certainly, we have examples thereof, in Noah, David and Peter, who
did fall into great sins after they were regenerate, Genesis 9.21. 2 Samuel
11.4.13 14, 15. Chap. 12.9. Mat. 26.70.72.74.

Quest. What great damage does come unto them by their Falls seeing they
cannot fall away and perish for ever?

Answ. The damage is very great, for besides the dishonor of God (whose glory
ought to be dear unto them) they deprive themselves of their sweet peace, joy
and comfort, which they did enjoy, and do cast themselves into great trouble
of mind, sorrow, and fear, and many times cause the Lord, to punish them for
their sin with some temporal punishment, 2 Samuel 12. Psalm. 51.

Quest. What is required of men falling into Sin after Justification?

Answ. That they should repent of their Sins and seek earnestly at the hand of
God, for the pardon of them as David did Psalm. 51.

Quest. Is it in man's power to repent?

Answ. No it is not, it is the gift of God, 2 Timothy 2.15

Quest. Wherefore then does the Lord require of man to repent and believe
seeing he is unable to perform the same?

Answ. The Lord requires of us to repent and believe because they are works to
be performed by us, and that we seeing our selves unable to perform them might
be moved to seek for them at the hands of God, who is the only giver of them.

Quest. What need is there for them to repent who have formerly received pardon
of their Sin and cannot possibly perish because Christ's death was a full
satisfaction not only for their Sins past, but for all that ever they should
commit during this life?

Answ. Yes certainly Repentance is very needful for them, and therefore the
Apostle councelleth them, (amongst the rest of their spiritual armor
Ephesians 6. to have their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace, which is Repentance) for by their sin they having dishonored God and
greeved his Spirit, and having also deprived themselves of their sweet
Communion they had with God there is no other way to obtain their peace, joy,
comfort and sweet Communion with God again but by Repentance, as we may see by
the example of David Psalm. 51.

Quest. Then Repentance does not cease in men as soon as they are justified and
reconciled unto God?

Answ. No assuredly, for although they have attained the thing their souls so
much desired in the day of their trouble and their wounded souls be healed and
refreshed, yet do they still retain their soft and melting heart which does
daily mourn and lament for the body of Sin, and remnant of Corruption that is
left in them whereby they are led Captive to Sin and to offend their Lord and
Redeemer who has been so rich and abundant in mercy toward them, Romans 7.23.24.

Quest. Then it seems that the estate of a true Christian in this life is a
very sorrowful and mournful estate?

Answ. It is true indeed their life is full of sorrow, this is their time of
mourning and weeping, they of all others are subject to many persecutions
disgraces and reproaches, besides the corruption that is within them which
pursues their souls daily, so that if their hope were only in this life, they
were of all men the most miserable.

But yet notwithstanding in the midst of their afflictions and persecutions,
the Lord does give them inward joy and comfort by his Spirit, far exceeding
all worldly Joy that this world can afford, and none but they have any sound
Joy; but they only do possess that Joy, which is unspeakable and full of
glory, and which shall never be taken from them, Io. 16.22.

Quest. From whence proceeds that unspeakeable Joy which the faithful do
enjoy?

Answ. It proceeds from the apprehension of Gods love unto them, who has
remitted their Sins, and assured them of peace and reconciliation with him, 1
Io. 4.10.19.

Quest. What is the first and principal cause of man's salvation?

Answ. The first and principal cause is the Infinite love and mercy of God,
Io. 3.16. So God loved the world etc.

Quest. Was there no other moving cause to moove him, ^o pity man, but his
own love?

Answ. No certainly neither needed there any other, nor could possibly be a
greater cause, then his own love, goodness and mercy to moove him thereunto.

Quest. Was not Christ the principal cause of man salvation?

Answ. No assuredly, he was indeed the material cause, but not the efficient
or principal mooving cause, for howsoever it be true that every person in the
Godhead, did our of their infinite love decree from all eternity the salvation
of man, yet in the effecting, and accomplishing of the same, every person has
his distinct operation and work appropriated unto him, so that we cannot
without confusion attribute that to one person which is proper and peculiar to
another.

Quest. Declare unto me briefly the several work of every person in the
Godhead distinctly and severally in the working of the Redemption of man?

Answ. The work appropriated in Scriptures to the first person, namely the
Father is of his mere love to have sent his only Son; and the work of the
Son is to be sent and to take man's nature upon him, to suffer death, to
satisfy the Justice of God, and to effect and bring to pass that great work
of man's Redemption, and the work of the third person the Holy Ghost is to
inlighten the understanding of the elect in this great mystery, and to make
effectual unto them this Redemption, which Christ has wrought for them.

Quest. Might not the Lord have saved mankind out of his own love and
goodness without the sending of his Son to take upon him our nature and to
suffer death?

Answ. Whether he might or no, we will not dare to conclude, but that which may
be profitable for us we will affirm, that certain it is, that this way, which
the Lord has ordained, and also made known unto us, did best stand with his
Justice, and does serve the more to manifest his Attributes of wisdom, power,
goodness, love, and mercy, then if he had saved man without the giving his
Son to death for him.

Quest. Who are they that have the special benefit by the death of Christ?

Answ. All have benefit thereby, but the elect only have the special benefit
of Redemption and Justification by him, And all the rest of the Sons of Adam
have a common benefit enjoying for Christ's sake the continuance of the world
and the abundant blessings thereof.

Quest. What difference is there between Redemption and Justification?

Answ. There is this difference, Redemption is a work, which Christ has
wrought for all the Elect, even for them also which are yet unborne: and
Justification is the free declaration of Gods eternal love free grace and
mercy, which he works in his good time in the hearts of his Elect, making
known unto them, that the Redemption which Christ has wrought is for them,
and that they have part and portion therein.

Quest. Wherein consists man's Justification?

Answ. It consists in the free remission and taking away of the guilt and
punishment of Sin, and in the imputation of Christ's righteousness, Acts 10.43.
Psalm. 32.1. Romans 4.6,

Quest. By what means do they come to be thus freed from the guilt and
punishment of sin. and also to have the righteousness of Christ imputed unto
them?

Answ. By the mere grace and favor of God, for as there was nothing but his
own love to move him to elects them, so there was nothing but his own love to
move him to justify them Ephesians. 2.8.

Quest. How is this made known unto them?

Answ. It is revealed unto them by the holy Ghost, who assures them of peace
and reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ, and also works in them
faith to lay hold and to apply unto themselves the special and peculiar
promises of the Gospel. Romans 5.1. Ephesians. 8.

Quest. Are not all men set free, from the guilt and punishment of sin by the
death of Christ?

Answ. No certainly; none but those whom God did make choice of from all
eternity to be vessels of mercy.

Quest. Wherefore should God make choice of some and leave others, seeing all
had sinned alike in Adam and all alike corrupted?

Answ. There was nothing in man at all, in one more then in another, but it was
his good pleasure, nothing moving him thereunto but his own will. Romans 9.

Quest. Did the Lord then make some men of purpose to destroy them, and to
condemn them for ever?

Answ. The Lord did decree from all eternity, to save some, and to leave
others, but yet notwithstanding, he did not create them of purpose to destroy
them; For the end of man's Creation, was the glory of God, and in their Creation
he did not intend the destruction of the creature, but his own glory; and he
made man righteous, but he brought destruction upon himself by rebelling
against God, Hosea 13.9. Eccle. 7.29.

Quest. Then the Lord is not the Author of man's condemnation?

Answ. He is not the Author thereof, but man himself, for God at first did
make man righteous and holy, and gave him power to obey and serve him, but he
willingly of himself fell to disobey the command of God, and so made himself
liable to eternal wrath and condemnation. Hosea 13.9. Eccle. 7.29.

Quest. Why did not God make man so absolute perfect in himself, that he could
not possibly have fallen, but might have stood in his perfection of himself?

Answ. It could not possibly be, unless he should have been God, for it is
proper only unto God to be so absolute perfect and immutable, and cannot be in
any creature whatsoever.

Quest. Do not the good Angels stand in their state of perfection and glory by
themselves?

Answ. No verily, it is through the free grace and goodness of God, that they
stand and not of their own power, and that they and we also might see our own
weakness, and that we all stand through his grace, he suffered both Angels and
man to fall.

Quest. Why did not God as well punish all the Angels as some of them, seeing
he punished all mankind for Adam's sin?

Answ. The case is not alike, for we all sinned in Adam, being in his loins,
and are therefore polluted with corruption of nature, and do bring forth the
evil fruit of sin and rebellion against God. But it was not so with Angels,
they did not proceed from one another by natural generation, and therefore not
in the same manner corrupted, but were all created glorious creatures; And it
was but some of the Angels that sinned, and therefore none but them that sinned
were punished; And although he suffered all men to fall, yet he provided a
remedy to restore part of them again through Jesus Christ, and to make them
heirs of glory for ever.

Quest. Is not the remedy sufficient to redeem all mankind that had fallen
through Adams transgression?

Answ. It is sufficient doubtless, being a price of an infinite value, and all
men are thereby set in a possibility of salvation, and as we said before all
men enjoy good by Christ, yet notwithstanding, God did not purpose nor intend
to give his Son to death, to redeem all mankind, and so to save them for
ever, but only for those whom he had elected and made choice of, to be vessels
of mercy, in his wisdom from all eternity, the Lords works and doings are
unchangeable.

Quest. But the Lord exhorts all men to repent, and to turn to him, promising
to pardon their sins if they do repent; How then is it that God did not purpose
to save all mankind by Christ's death?

Answ. It is true indeed, that all men are exhorted to repent, and the promises
are made generally to all that do repent, but none do repent, but only the
elect and chosen of God, and therefore none but they enjoy the special
promises of grace and mercy.

Quest. But what is the reason that all do not repent, that so they might have
right unto those special promises of grace and mercy through Christ?

Answ. The fault is in man who through the corruption of his heart, resists
this grace and mercy offered, and so hardens his heart in sin, choosing
rather to enjoy his pleasure here then to humble himself to walk with God to
enjoy his grace and mercy for ever.

Quest. Have the Elect any more power in themselves, then others, to repent and
turn to the Lord?

Answ. No, none at all, but Repentance is the gift of God, (as we said before)
and it is he that by his Spirit does effect this great work in them, 2 Timothy
2.25.

Quest. Why does not God give repentance to all, and so save all by Christ,
that so all men might for ever glorify and praise his mercy?

Answ. It was his purpose from all eternity, as well to set forth the glory of
his Justice, as of his mercy, and therefore as he did not intend, nor purpose
to save them by Christ, so neither would he bestow upon them any special
benefit tending that way.

Quest. Wherefore does God call and exhort all men to repent, seeing all cannot
attain thereunto?

Answ. He does it for these Reasons;

First, because his elect are mingled amongst others, and therefore he does
send his Word, and call upon all men to repent.

Secondly, he does it to manifest to all the freeness of his grace, that he is
ready to receive all that come to him.

Thirdly, to leave all men without excuse, and that their condemnation might
more manifestly appear to be just, seeing that grace and mercy was offered
them and they willingly refused and rejected it, and at that great day of
Judgment, every mouth shall be stopped, and every one appear culpable before
God.

Quest. But seeing that God has elected son, and rejected others, is it not
therefore in vain to hear or read the word of God, to pray unto him, or to
use any means to come to the knowledge of the way of life and salvation?

Answ. No verily, for seeing these things are required of all men, all are
bound to take knowledge thereof, and to reject or refuse them, is to reject and
refuse God, who offers his grace therein, and does by them work grace in his
elect, now seeing some there are, that reap benefit by the use of them, and
that no man can conclude of himself, that God has not elected him, it is not
in vain to use the means, but it is mere madness and folly to refuse and
reject them.

Quest. But by this means men may come to such a measure of knowledge, and to
be so far enlightened that they may be in danger to commit the sin against
the holy Ghost, and so make their condemnation the greater?

Answ. This comes not by the careful use of the means, but by the abuse
thereof, and light esteem of the grace offered, and therefore they are to take
heed of those things that may be any occasion thereunto.

Quest. Is it necessary that this doctrine concerning Gods Predestination
should be made known, seeing that it may be hurtful to many, making some
secure and careless in using any means of salvation, and also causing others
to despair?

Answ. It is necessary to be known, and therefore has the Lord been pleased
to reveal it, and doubtless no hurt shall come thereby to any of the elect,
but exceeding much good, for it serves greatly to humble them, and to let them
see, that it is no defert of theirs, but the free grace of God, who might have
chosen others, and rejected them; And as for the rest, they will abuse every
truth, though it be never so good and profitable, and therefore seeing God has
been pleased to reveal it, the Elect are not to be deprived of this Benefit,
because of the abuse of them by the Reprobate.

Quest. Wherefore is it, that in Scripture our Justification is attributed unto
Faith?

Answ. We are said to be justified by Faith, not that Faith justifies of it
self, but because it is a gift of God, whereby man believes that which the
Spirit declares and evidenceth to the conscience, namely, the pardon of sin,
and assurance of grace through the blood of Christ.

Secondly because all our own works are excluded in the matter of
Justification before God, and there is no cause of boasting, for our salvation
is only of the Lord, Hosea 13.9.

Quest. If good works do not justify before God, to what end are they so
often required?

Answ. They are required for diverse ends.

First because by them we shall glorify God and adorn our holy profession,
Math. 5.16.

Secondly we shall by them be a means to win others to love our profession and
give good examples to others to do the like and to follow us. 1 Pet. 2.12.

Thirdly by this means we shall stop the mouths of the adversaries 1 Pet. 2.15.

Fourthly we shall have comfort, if we be brought to suffer, and be accused as
evil doers wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2.19.

Fifthly we shall by them make trial of the truth of our faith and of the
graces that are in us by the exercise of them as occasion is offered.

Quest. But do not good works deserve nothing at the hands of God?

Answ. No certainly, no works that we can do can possibly deserve any thing
at the hands of God; for when we have done all that we can, we may truly say we
are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10.

Quest. If good works deserve nothing wherefore is it that so many promises
are made in Scripture unto good works?

Answ. God has thereby set forth his bounty to stir us up; who are backward of
our selves, adding thereunto promises of reward, But such is our weakness and
great imperfections in our best works, that we have cause rather to be humbled
for our wants in the performance of them, then to challenge any thing at the
hands of God for the same, and yet certain it is, that the good works of Gods
Children shall be rewarded, though not for the worthiness of the work, yet
for the truth of the promiser, who has promised to reward the gift of a cup of
cold water to one of those that belong to him, so that we have no cause to be
backward in good works, but to be forward in the doing of them. Math. 10.42.

Quest. Are all men rewarded for their good works?

Answ. Yes certainly the righteous, God rewards all, either here in this life
or after this life; but he in a more especial manner rewards the good works
of his Children even those works of love and mercy extended toward the Saints
their Brethren, Math. 25.

Quest. Are there Saints now upon the earth?

Answ. Yes verily, there have been, are, and ever shall be Saints upon the
earth, Psalm. 16.3.

Quest. But seeing all men are corrupted and even after regeneration the
remnants of Sin still continue in them can the name of Saints be properly
given unto them?

Answ. Yes it may be well given unto them for God so accounts of them as being
without Sin, beholding no iniquity in them, Numbers 23.21. Canticles 4.7.
Ephesians. 5.27.

Quest. If God behold all things and nothing be hid from his all-seeing eye,
how can it be but that he should see those Sins which his elect do daily and
continually fall into?

Answ. It is true that God beholds all things and cannot be ignorant of those
Sins which they fall into, yet notwithstanding God does look upon them in
Christ and beholds them all righteous and holy in him, imputing the
rigteousnesse of Christ unto them, Romans 4.6.7. 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21.

Quest. What is that righteousness of Christ which is imputed unto the Saints,
and for which they are accounted holy?

Answ. All the righteousness of Christ whatsoever, his active obedience
performed to the law, his passive obedience in suffering whatsoever was due
unto them for Sin, and what the Justice of God could require at their hands;
yea all the holiness that is in Christ, either of his nature, as he was man,
or of his actions as he was Mediator between God and man is all imputed unto
them, 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 5.19. Esaias 9.6.

Quest. Then by imputation they are absolute, holy and righteous?

Answ. Yes verily, they are so, even absolute, pure righteous and holy, Numb.
23.21.

Quest. Have they no other holiness, but this which is imputed unto them?

Answ. Yes verily, for as God does impute holiness unto them, even the
holiness of Christ (in whom alone they are accepted as righteous) so also does
he work holiness in them, by his Spirit, making them in some measure
conformable to Christ, renewing and sanctifying, and making them holy, and
causing them also to work holiness and righteousness, which is one maine end
of their election, and of their Redemption by Jesus Christ Ephesians. 1.4 Luke 1.74
75.

Quest. Then it seems that this holiness is not attained by any power or
virtue that is in them?

Answ. No verily, it is the free gift of God, Ephesians. 28.

Quest. By all this that has been said, I gather that God did not elect any
unto salvation, upon the foresight of any works or holiness that was to be in
them?

Answ. It is very true, he did not, but it was his own love and free grace
that moved him, for they are elected and chosen of God, not for any foreseen
holiness, but to be holy, being his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, that they should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. So that good works
are no cause of their Election but their Election is the cause of their good
works, and good works are an evidence both to themselves, and to others also
of their election, but no cause thereof, 1 Pet, 1.2. Ephesians. 1.4.

Quest. Whereof does that Church of Christ consist, unto which all the special
promises are made?

Answ. It consists only of such as are regenerate, who are all Saints, the
members of Christ, who are honored with so many glorious Titles being called
the Church, and body of Christ, his Spouse his habitation, his Temple, Sion
Jerusalem, and many such like 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 5.23. Cant. 4.8.9.10. Psalm.
87. 1 Cor. 3.16.17. Gal. 4.26. Ephesians. 5.30. 1 Cor. 12.27.

Quest. What are those special promises that are made unto this Church?

Answ. All promises of this life, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Quest. What are those special promises that concern this life?

Answ. They are such as concern every one of them in particular, or all in
general assembling together.

Quest. What are those promises that concern every one of them in particular?

Answ. All good things, as protection, providence, peace, joy, comfort, the
assurance of his love, and the hope of eternal good things to come which does
comfort them in the midest of all their trials that befall them in this life,
Esaias 43.1, 2, 3. Esaias 54.7, 8, 9, 10. Ioh. 13, 1. Titus 2.13. 2 Cor. 4.17.18.

Quest. What are those promises that concern them all in general assembling
together?

Answ. They are such as pertain to the ruling, and governing, teaching,
instructing and comforting of this Church, being met together in the name of
Christ, and to the well ordering of the same for the benefit of the whole body
of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.8 11 12, 13.

Quest. But the members of this Church are dispersed, and cannot meet together,
how can some few members of the same, reap any benefit by any special promise
made unto the Church in general?

Answ. Yes doubtless they may, and the Saints do assuredly reap great
comfort and benefit thereby, yea every Congregation, and company of Saints
meeting together in the name of Christ, may expect and took for the
performance of the promises made by Christ to the whole Church, for that which
is made to the whole Church, is made also to every part thereof.

Quest. What are those special promises that concern the Saints being
gathered and met together in the name of Christ?

Answ. Unto them thus meeting together has Christ promised his presence to be
in the midst of them, and has given unto them the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, to bind and loose, promising them to confirm and ratify in heaven,
what they agree upon in earth, binding in heaven whom they bind on earth, and
loosing in heaven whom they loose on earth, promising them also perseverance
(notwithstanding the great malice of their Adversaries) the gates of hell shall
never prevail against it, Math. 16.18 19. Math. 18.20. Math. 18.18.19, 20.

Quest. Does not this power of binding and loosing, belong to any other but
only to the Saints?

Answ. No certainly, it belongs to none other but only to them, neither are
any fit for such a work, but only the Saints, neither is the promise of
binding in heaven, and loosing in heaven them who are bound on earth, and
loosed on earth, made to any other, but only to the Saints, the true members of
Jesus Christ, and therefore whosoever they be that lay claim or title to this
power, and are not Saints, do claim and challenge that unto which they have
no right, Math. 16.18, 19. Math. 18.19.20.

Quest. But is it not given to the Pastors and Ministers of the Church?

Answ. Yes, it is given chiefly unto them, if they be Saints yet not only to
them, but also (with them) to the rest of the Saints their Brethren.

Quest. But all the Saints are not fit to be employed in this great work?

Answ. It is true that all the Saints may not be fit for this work, and
therefore those are to be employed in the great affairs of the Church, who
have the greatest measure of Grace, bestowed on them, according to that saying
of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.10. as God has distributed to every man, so let him
minister etc. yet the least Saint is not to be despised or contemned who may be
helpful to the body whereof by Christ they are made members. 1 Cor. 12.21.

Quest. Is it possible for the Saints in this life to know one another?

Answ. Yes doubtless, God does declare and evidence them by his Spirit, even
to the consciences of his children, that so they, may rejoice in the fellowship
one of another, and perform the duties required of them one to another, to the
performance of which the reward is promised, which they cannot perform unless
they know one another, Math. 25. chap. 10.40, 41, 42.

Quest. But hipocrites may countterfeit true grace, and make a show of
holiness, and Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light?

Answ. All this is true, you say but yet the Saints having the Spirit of Christ
in them, and knowing the nature of true grace, are able to judge of and to
discern true grace from the counterfeit shows of hypocrites.

Quest. But hypocrisy is hid in the heart, and it is proper to God to know the
heart, and the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.11. That no man knows the things of a
man, but the spirit of man which is in him.

Answ. It is true also, but yet notwithstanding the hearts of others are
manifest unto them, when God shall reveal them unto his Saints, by making such
a clear evidence of his grace to appear, so that they may discern the same
work of grace in others, that is in themselves; For it is impossible that true
grace should always lie hid, but it will be manifested, at one time or other,
to the comfort and rejoicing of the rest of the Saints.

Quest. But by the parable of the Draw-net, in the thirteenth of Matthew it does
appear that there may be wicked men in the Church undiscovered, and not known
to be hypocrites, until the great day of the Lord?

Answ. It is true, there may be such, for I do not say, that all hypocrites
may be discerned and known, but that it is possible for the Saints to know one
another even in this life.

Quest. If all the Saints may be discerned and known, then those that are not
discerned to be Saints are to be judged hipocrites?

Answ. We cannot so conclude of them, for though they be nor, as yet discerned
and known, yet afterward they may be, or they may be Saints, and depart this
life undiscerned, through want of the fellowship of the Saints who only are
able to discern the truth of grace in the Saints.

Quest. But how may we discern and know others to be Saints?

Answ. It is very hard to set down any particular notes whereby they may be
known, because the graces that do demonstrate them to be Saints, are inward,
and therefore are better conceived, then can be expressed in word by us,
nevertheless, if we can upon good ground assure our selves that we are Saints
let us see and observe wherein we go beyond an hypocrite in the enjoying of any
special and peculiar grace and then let us expect and look for the same grace
in others, and wheresoever we find that blessed work of grace and fruit of the
good tree ingrafted into Christ by a lively faith we may certainly conclude he
is a good tree because he brings forth good fruit.

Quest. But the most holy and righteous do daily sin, and do that which is
evil, and hypocrites may also do many good things, even works which are very
good in outward appearance.

Answ. It is true indeed, but yet notwithstanding the evil which the Saints
do, is none of their fruit nor the good that hypocrites do is none of their
fruit. It cannot properly be called their fruit, for the fruit is that which
does discover the tree, either to be good or evil Matthew. 7.16.20. Romans 7.19.

Quest. What is then the fruit of the good tree that does discover it self, and
prove him to be a good tree.

Answ. The fruit of the good tree ingrafted into Christ is manifold, but
principally it is love, which has its first beginning from the apprehension of
Gods love to them, and is first returned to God again, and to the Lord Jesus
Christ next to their brethren the begotten of God, and to all men even to their
very enemies, doing good even to them that hate them. Mat. 5.44. 1 John 4.19.
Chap. 5.1.

Quest. What is the fruit of the evil tree?

Answ. It is also manifold, but principally it consists in the contrary to this
fruit of the good tree, as contempt of God and despising and hating of his
truth and children.

Quest But hipocrites may dissemble a love unto God, and to his truth and
children?

Answ. It is true, but yet they cannot so dissemble to make the children of God
believe and account them for Saints yet they will hope the best of them, until
their dissimulation be made manifest and they discovered to be evil trees.

Quest. But is it possible to know them to be Saints of a sudden as soon as they
come to converse with them?

Answ. No certainly, especially in these times wherein we live, for no doubt
corruption does bear great sway in many that no doubt are Saints, and the
power of Grace does not manifest it self in many, by reason of many
discouragements that they meet with, and for want of examples to go before them
to encourage them; and therefore it is very hard to discern them, and hence it
comes to pass that it is held an impossible thing to know them in this life.

Quest. How are the company of Saints called in the Scriptures?

Answ. They are called by many honorable names and titles, as the Church of
Christ, his body his spouse, his habitation, his Temple, Sion, Jerusalem the
pillar and ground of truth, and many such like. Ephesians. 5.30. 1 Cor. 12.27.
Cant. 4.8.9.10. 2 Cor. 6.16. Gal. 4.26.

Quest. When is this Church and company of Saints to be found?

Answ. This Church is dispersed over the whole world, even amongst the very
heathen.

Quest. How can it be that there should be any Saints in such places, seeing
they are ignorant of Christ, and there is no name under Heaven whereby we may
be saved but only by the name of Jesus Christ? Acts 4.12.

Answ. It is true, neither are they saved by any other name under heaven, but
by Christ alone.

Quest. How can they be saved by him, who never came to know him, either to
come, or come in the flesh?

Answ. It may well be notwithstanding, for there is left in man, even since his
fall, a certain knowledge of God, and that he is to be feared and served, and
there is also a law written in their hearts condemning of them for disobeying
the law of God, whereby they come to see themselves miserable, and to be liable
to the wrath of this just God, though they know not how they came to be so at
the first, and also they see the goodness of God extended toward them
manifested in his creatures God also working in them by his spirit, persuading
them, that if they will seek mercy at his hands, he will be merciful to their
souls as well as to their bodies and this mercy of God is extended unto them
for Christ his sake, though they know not by whose means and for whose sake
they receive it. Romans 2.14, 15.26. Acts 14.17. Romans 1.19, 20.

Qu. Is there not a communion and fellowship amongst the Saints although they
be thus dispersed

Answ. Yes verily they have a spiritual communion and fellowship, all
partaking of the same grace, all being begotten by one father, all born of
water and spirit all partakers of one precious faith, all ruled and governed by
one and the same holy spirit, who works in them a love to one another, though
they never beheld the faces one of another, and do joy and rejoice in the
happiness and prosperity one of another, and for that end are daily suitors to
God in prayer one for another. Ephesians. 2.14. Chap. 4.4.5.6.

Quest. What is the duty of the Saints being made known one to another?

Answ. Their duty is to assemble themselves together in the name of Christ, to
worship God, to pray unto him, and to praise him to exhort, comfort, and build
up one another, and to rejoice in the fellowship one of another, and to pray
with and for one another and to minister comfort one unto each other both in
spiritual and temporal things as they are able and the necessity of their
brethren require. Heb. 10.25. Mat. 18. Jude 19.20. Heb. 13.16.

Quest. What special promise is made unto them being thus assembled in the
name of Christ?

Answ. A most excellent and comfortable promise of Christ his gracious presence
to be in the midst of them to direct them, that whatsoever they agree on, on
earth as touching any thing that they shall ask him, shall be done for them of
his Father which is in heaven, Mat. 18.19.

Quest. Is not this promise belonging to general assemblies that meet in
public congregations and may not they expect this promise to be performed unto
them.

Answ. If that the Saints, in the public congregations do meet together after
this manner that we have declared then they may expect the fulfilling of this
promise of Christ, but none but only the Saints, have this promise made unto
them.

Quest. But we hope that there are Saints in every public assembly, does not
this promise of Christ therefore belong unto them.

Answ. It cannot be denied, but must be acknowledged, that Christ will be with
his people in the public assemblies where his true worship is performed, and
his word truly preached yea at all times, but this promise of Christ, his
presence is a peculiar promise made to the Saints when they assemble together
and agree upon any thing, to ask that may be for the glory of God, and the good
of their brethren, Math. 18.

Quest. Why will Christ be with this Church, and with no other?

Answ. Because there is a near union and conjunction between Christ and his
members, even as between the head and the members of our bodies; He having
redeemed them with his blood, and has taken upon him to provide for, and to
furnish this Church with all necessary graces, being unto them a Priest, a
Prophet, and a King, Heb. 4.14. Acts 3.22. Esaias 9.6.

Quest. How is Christ a Priest unto them?

Answ. By offering up himself once for them unto God, a living sacrifice for
to make reconciliation between God and them, and also by presenting of himself
before God for them, and by offering up and presenting their prayers, and
causing them to have acceptance at the hands of God, through his presentation,
Heb. 2.17. Romans 8.34. Heb. 9.14. Revel. 8.3, 4.

Quest. How is he a Prophet unto them?

Answ. By making known unto them his Fathers will, revealing unto them the way
of life and peace, making known unto them heavenly mysteries, teaching and
instructing them by his Word and Spirit, and also by sending his Ministers, and
enabling them for that great work, by all which they are built up and grow in
grace and knowledge, and all wisdom, and heavenly understanding in the will
and ways of God.

Quest. What are the continual ministers that Christ has left in his Church
to teach and instruct it until his second coming?

Answ. He did at first give unto them Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists whom
he vouchsafed to make the Penmen of the Scriptures, who were to be guides
unto all the rest, that were to succeed them, he also has ordained other
Ministers in his Church, as Pastors and Teachers to be Expositors of the
Scriptures and for the applying them to the consciences of the people; For the
gathering together of his Church, and the edifying of the body of Christ which
are known and distinguished, from the rest of the Church, not so much by any
outward calling by man, but by the excellency of gifts and graces bestowed on
them, and their faithful employing their gifts, and discharge of that office
that they are called unto by Christ, Ephesians. 4.11. Ephesians. 4.12.

Quest. How does Christ manifest himself to be a King unto his Church?

Answ. By giving unto them holy and just laws, precepts and ordinances, to be
observed of them, and also by ruling and governing them by the Scepter of his
Word and Spirit, subjecting their hearts, wills, and affections unto him, and
to his truth, to love, desire, and embrace the same, and to yield all
subjection unto him.

Qu. Wherein are the Saints chiefly to be exercised whilst they remain here,
for their mutual comfort, and increase of grace in them?

Answ. In the holy use of the word of God, Prayer, and the Sacraments.

Quest. Wherein is that word of God contained?

Answ. In those books of Scripture, which we commonly call the old and new
Testament, in which are contained many holy directions, and gracious promises,
and consolations, able to sustain them in the greatest miseries that can
befall them.

Quest. To whom is the word of God committed?

Answ. To all the whole Church of God for their instruction and comfort.

Quest. Who may dispense the word of God unto others?

Answ. All they whom God has given wisdom and understanding therein, and
has showed the mysteries thereof, they are to minister unto the rest of the
body according to their measure of grace received.

Quest. What is prayer?

Answ. It is a calling upon God with the heart in the name of Christ Jesus, for
all lawful things that we stand in need of. Psalm. 142.2. John 16.23.24.

Quest. What things are necessarily required in our prayer unto God?

Answ. There are these three things required in prayer,

First confession which is the acknowledgement of our sin and misery, and
unworthiness to receive Psalm. 32.5.

Secondly Petition, which is the asking of things needful. Mat. 7.7.

Thirdly thanksgiving which is the acknowledging of his power goodness and
mercy, and the returning him praise and thanks for his former mercies bestowed
on us.

Quest. Have we any example or pattern according to which we are to frame all
our prayers.

Ans. Yea a most absolute and perfect form given unto us by Christ Jesus
himself in the 6. of Matthew commonly called the Lords prayer.

Quest. Are we not bound therefore unto that prayer to use it and none but it.

Ans. For the matter contained in it we are, but not the form of words, and
although we may use the same words yet also we may by the example of the
Apostles, use another form of words, and yet offend not against that most
absolute rule, so long as we desire nothing, but what is therein contained.

Quest. May we join in prayers with those that read their prayers in a book?

Answ. Yes doubtless if their prayers be good for the matter, and performed
with reverence and affection, even as well as we may with those that use an
ordinary form although they do not read it in a book or with those that
conceive prayer, for therein are we stinted as well as in joining with them
that pray out of a book, and we may enlarge our desires in joining with one and
with the other.

Quest. When are we to use prayer?

Ans. At all times, upon all occasions, we are to lift up our hearts to God by
holy requests, even in every thing we take in hand, and also in the public
meetings of the Saints, but there are other special times, wherein every
Christian has liberty to make choice of the fittest time in his own wisdom
and discretion, as he has need.

Quest. What is a Sacrament?

Ans. A Sacrament is an outward visible sign appointed by God to teach unto
his people spiritual and heavenly mysteries.

Quest. Do the Sacraments teach any other thing then that which the word of God
does?

Ans. Not any other thing is taught thereby but the very same thing is visibly
preached and presented to our eyes by visible signs, which we hear with our
ears preached out of the word of God.

Quest. How many Sacraments are there now appointed by God continually to teach
and instruct his Church?

Answ. Only two, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Mat. 28.19. Chap.
26..27. etc.

Quest. What is Baptism?

Answ. It is a teaching sign, whereby is visibly preached unto us, by the
water and the outward washing, Regeneration, the new birth of water and the
Spirit that is Repentance and faith required of all that will enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Io. 3.

Quest. Is Baptism necessary to salvation?

Answ. The things signified by the outward signs of water and washing which
indeed is Baptism is of necessity to salvation, as our Lord testifies Io. 3.5.

Quest. Are not the outward signs of necessity to salvation?

Answ. No they are not of that necessity, for many no doubt may be partakers of
that new birth signified by the outward washing, which never heard of the
outward Baptism.

Quest. But what if any shall contemn and despise the outward Baptism?

Answ. It is not possible for any that know it to be an ordinance of God, and
despise it, and will not be baptized, it is impossible for such to be saved.

Quest. Are all the elect regenerate when they are outwardly baptized?

An. No certainly for many of them live many years before that work be wrought
in them, but God does work in them that great work of Regeneration at what time
it pleases him.

Quest. But does the Lord require of us to submit to his own ordinance and will
he not work that which is signified thereby?

Answ. The Lord will have us obedient to his ordinance, and it is his goodness
to afford unto us such an excellent help, to teach and instruct us, and to
confirm unto us the truth of his promise by such an outward visible sign or
seal, but he has not any where promised that he will work that work of grace
in them at that instant in their outward Baptism or by it.

Quest. But there are promises made unto Baptism of eternal life, and such
promises belong to none but the regenerate therefore they are also regenerate
in Baptism.

Answ. It is true that in Scripture there are made promises of eternal life
unto Baptism; but there are two Baptismes, spoken of in Scripture the one, men
may be partakers of and perish, which is the outward washing and the other
which is the inward washing, whosoever are partakers of shall assuredly have
eternal life, which is indeed the Baptism of the spirit, which whosoever are
partakers of have put on Christ and are buried with Christ, and are baptized
into his death, and so shall also live with Christ in eternal glory.

Quest. May Infants be baptized, seeing they cannot understand what is done or
meant by Baptism?

Answ. Yes doubtless they may as well as children might be circumcised, both
Sacrament signifying one and the same thing, and therefore they being as
capable of the thing signified now, as they were then, may be baptized for the
Lord would thereby show unto us that we are all born polluted and defiled, our
nature being corrupted, and that children have need of that inward washing of
the spirit signified by outward Baptism, and al so to teach us that Infants
may be saved as well as others seeing he would admit them to be partakers of
that his ordinance.

Quest. Whhat is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

Answ. It is also an outward sign whereby is represented unto us by the
breaking of the Bread, and the pouring out of the Wine the Lords death the
breaking of his body and the pouring out of his blood and by the receiving of
those signs of Bread and Wine is set forth unto us the participation and
communion of the faithful in his death and in whatsoever he has done for them
and it is their thankful remembrance thereof till he come, 1 Cor. 11.

Quest. Who are to partake of this Sacrament?

Answ. It was instituted only for the Saints, who are ingrafted into Jesus
Christ by a true and lively faith: and for their comfort a one.

Quest. May not others be admitted to this Sacrament?

Answ. They ought not to be admitted if they be known to be wicked, and
contemners of good things, and indeed they ought not to presume to eat thereof,
considering the danger and damage that comes by unworthy eating and drinking
thereof, 1 Cor. 11.28.29.

Quest. What is the danger in unworthy eating, and drinking thereof?

Answ. They provoke the Lord to lay judgments upon them, for abusing his
ordinance, which was ordained only for the help and comfort of the faithful,
and so eat and drink damnation to themselves, 1 Cor. 11.

Quest. What great things has the Scriptures foretold us, that are yet
unfulfilled the performance whereof we are to expect in these latter days?

Answ. The destruction of Antichrist, that man of Sin; The restoration of the
truth from those errors abroad in the world the coming down of the Turks
upon the Christians, and the coming of the Lord unto Judgment, 2 These. 2.8.
Revel. 21.11. chap. 1.17.16. chap. 18. Rev. 20.8, 9. Ezekiel. 38.2. and chapt.
39.1.

Quest. Is the time of the destruction of Antichrist laid down in the
Scriptures?

Answ. Yes certainly.

Quest. But is it possible to find out the time of his destruction?

Answ. Yes assuredly, for the Lord has caused it to be written for that end,
that the Church of God might know it, and might reap the greater comfort
thereby, in not only knowing, that he shall be destroyed, but also in knowing
the year of his destruction, they may have their minds settled and patiently
wait, and not doubt the fulfilling of that promise concerning his destruction.

Quest. But is not times and seasons, only known unto the Lord?

Answ. Times and seasons are known also to the Church, when it pleases God to
reveal them for the comfort of his people as we may see that the time of
deliverance of Israel out of the captivity in Babylon was revealed and made
known unto Daniel, which he found out by books that were written.

Quest. In what place of Scripture is the time of Antichrists destruction laid
down?

Answ. In the book of the Revelation and the eleventh chapter, where he is
limited to reign forty two months, which is months of years, which
amounts to 1260 years; The end of which time shall be in the year 1666. as
appears in the last verse of the thirteenth chapter, where the very period
and final determination of Antichrist is laid down, in which year the
destruction denounced against him shall fall on him.

Quest. Shall there not be a restoration of the truth till the destruction of
Antichrist?

Answ. The truth has begun to appear already, and still shall more and more;
but the full restoration thereof shall not be till all the darkness of
Antichrist be removed, and his destruction accomplished Revel. 11.11.

Quest. Is not the truth fully known published, preached, and professed now at
this time in those Kingdoms, where Antichrists power is abolished?

Answ. No certainly much darkness still remains even amongst them and great
confusion, which shall at that time be more fully discovered, and the truth
made known, and errors and Heresies abolished by such whom the Lord shall
raise up, in and about that time, and for that end.

Quest. Are we not to expect the truth to be more fully discovered, then now
it is, before the destruction of Antichrist.

Answ. Yes assuredly for it is the light of the truth maintained by the Saints,
which shall in a special manner abolish Antichrists darkness, and also shall
be the greatest means of his destruction: for the people of God shall by the
light of the truth more, fully discover his abominations, and cause the Princes
of the earth to see how grossly they have been deluded and abused by him, and
so they shall with one consent, set themselves against this great enemy of
Christ to root him out and to execute the judgment that the Lord has
denounced against him, Revel. 19.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Rev. 17.16.

Quest. Shall the Church of God enjoy any great prosperity after the
destruction of Antichrist?

Answ. Yes certainly, for then they shall be freed from their great and violent
oppressions, and have free liberty to profess and practice the whole will of
God, and enjoy the communion and fellowship one of another, their inward graces
shall be great, and excellent their love shall abound one toward another,
continually rejoicing in the hope of that crown of glory, which is laid up for
them in heaven, 4 Esdras 11.46. and chap. 12.34. 2 Timothy 4.8. Revel. 19.1.2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7.

Quest. Shall the whole Nation of the Jews be converted, and receive the
Gospel of Christ, before the coming of the Lord to judgment?

Answ. We hope many of them shall be called before that day; But that the whole
Nation shall be called and receive the Gospel, we have no ground in Scripture
so to think.

Quest. But the Apostle in the eleventh chapter to the Romans seems to intend
to prove that they shall all be called before the day of the Lord?

Answ. Whosoever do so collect and gather from that chapter do misunderstand
and misinterpret the Apostle, for his purpose is not to prove that all the
Nation of the Jews shall be called to Christ, in the latter end of the world;
but to show unto the Gentiles (lest they should wax proud against the Jews)
that God had a people amongst the Jews, and that he had not cast them all
away, but that he had a remnant according to the election of Grace, even
amongst Abraham's natural seed, whom he would call, when it pleased him; many
were called in Paul's time, and no doubt but many since that time, and we hope
that yet there are many of them that belong to the Lord, which shall be called
when the darkness of Antichrist is expelled, and the light of the truth
appears and shines by the Church, but we are not to expect any such
general calling of them.

Quest. Does not the Apostle say in the 26th verse of that thapter, that all
Israel shall be saved; Is not here therefore a sure ground to build upon, for
their conversion to Christ?

Ans. The Apostle there means by all Israel, all the elect of God, both Jews
and Gentiles, and not only the Nation of the Jews, as may be proved by these
Reasons;

First, because the Apostle says in the twenty fifth verse that in part
blindness, or hardness is happened unto Israel until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in which is even till the coming of the Lord to Judgment, as
appears, Luke 21.24. Therefore by all Israel is not meant the Jews only
but all the elect of the Jews, and of the Gentiles.

Secondly, because the Promise of the deliverer in the Testimony of Esaias
alleged, by the Apostle, was made to the Elect Gentiles, as well as to the
Elect Jews, and the elect Gentiles, reap the same benefit by the Deliverer;
And this promise also pertaines to none, but to the Elect of the Jews and
Gentiles, not to all the carnal Jews, but only to the elect, the Spiritual
seed of Abraham, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles; For the test do not
reap this benefit, namely, to have their ungodliness turned away, Esaias 59.20.
Romans 9.6.7.8. Romans 2.28.29, Gal. 3.29.

Thirdly, (by all Israel) cannot be meant, that in the latter days, all the
Nation of the Jews shall be converted; Because this great calling, which is
pretended to be, is not once mentioned in the book of the Revelation, and
therefore not showed unto John, and yet he was taken up, and was promised to
have shown unto him the things which should be hereafter, Revelation 4.1. But
this great conversion of the Jews; he saw not, and yet he saw all things to
the setting up of the new Jerusalem, in everlasting glory and beauty, therefore
certainly we are not to expect any such matter, neither in this place does the
holy Ghost intend any such thing.

Quest. But it may seem that this promise is made only to the Jews, because
is made to Jacob, and they only are the posterity and seed of Jacob?

Answ. It is not made only to the natural Jews, for we are to know, that when
any such special promise is made in Scripture, of turning away ungodliness,
and taking away of sins from Israel or Jacob, that promise is made and
intended, as well to the Elect Gentiles, as to the Elect Jews, even to all
Abraham's spiritual seed which are called by those names of Israel and Jacob
who although they be Gentiles in the flesh, yet indeed are Jews in Spirit and
truth, Romans 2.29. And Abraham's, seed and Heirs according to the promise; Gal.
3.29.

Quest. What then may be the mystery that the Apostle speaks of in the 25
verse of that eleventh chapter to the Romans?

Answ. The mystery is Gods giving some up to hardness and blindness, and his
giving Grace unto others, at the consideration whereof, the Apostle breaks
forth into admiration in the 33 verse, saying, O the depth of the riches, both
of the wisdom, and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and
his ways past finding out, Romans 11.33.34.35.36.

Quest. But all the Prophets have prophesied of the return of Israel, and of
his restouration, to such an excellent estate of glory and happiness and
freedom from evil, as they never yet enjoyed, are we not now therefore to
expect it in these latter days?

Answ. Whatsoever the Prophets have prophesied to be fulfilled, and is not yet
performed we are to expect; But we are to know that those special promises,
are made only to the Elect, and to all the Elect, when they shall all be
gathered together, and delivered from all their Captivities and sorrows, which
Restoration of Israel is not to be expected of us to be performed until the
coming of the Lord unto Judgment as appears, Acts 3.21.

Quest. But the Prophets do speak of bringing them into their own Land
again, even the promised land: therefore it must needs be in this life?

Answ. That does not follow, for they shall be brought into their own Land,
and enjoy it for ever and ever, even that Land which was promised to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and all their spiritual seed, and they shall possess it for
ever, not as it is now earthly and the curse remaining upon it, but after it
shall be purged, and the curse taken away and made a heavenly habitation, fit
for Abraham himself (to whom it was first promised, and never yet performed
unto him, but shall be then made good unto him) and for all his spiritual
seed to dwell in for evermore.

Quest. But where this restoration is promised, there is mention made of
Building of houses and planting of Vineyards, eating and drinking, etc. which
cannot be after this life? Esaias 65.

Answ. We know not what is intended by such like things, nor what shall be at
that day, nor what these things may add to our happiness; And therefore being
ignorant of these things, let not us wrest the Scripture out of the way, to
frame a meaning which the Lord never intended, because we imagine that these
things cannot be after this life; And we are also to consider that in many
places where this Restoration of Israel is promised there are also such things
spoken of, as cannot be expected in this life, as namely, that there shall be
no sorrow, no mourning, nor death, nor that any unclean thing shall enter
amongst them.

Quest. You said before that the Church of God after the destruction of the
great Antichrist, should enjoy much prosperity and peace, shall they then have
no enemies?

Answ. Yes assuredly, the true Church of God shall never want enemies to try
them, and to exercise their patience, but they shall be freed for a time, from
those great and violent persecutions, which they did suffer, during the long
and tedious Reign of the great Antichrist of Roma, who sought by all means,
to root out all the seed and generation of the Church.

Quest. Shall this their peace and prosperity long continue?

Answ. No verily, for the devil shall stir up other enemies, Gog and Magog,
the Kings of the East, even the Turk and his adherents, and they shall envy
the prosperity of the Church and shall come down upon the Christian Nations,
and compass about the Tents of the Saints, and the beloved City and to seek
to root out her name from off the earth Ezekiel. 38.10.11.12. Revel. 20.8.9.

Quest. What will be the effect of this his malice?

Amsw. He shall cause through his cruelty many to fall away from the profession
of the truth of Christ: to Mahometisme or heathenisme so that the Sun shall
be darkened even Christ himself and his truth shall be obscured and his glory
darkened.

And the Moon, that is the States and princes of the world shall not give their
light of help and comfort and protection of the church by their powers they
being beaten down by the power of these great adversaries,

And the stars etc. (that is the Ministers and preachers of Christ) shall sall
from heaven that is, from the Church, even to Mahometisme or heathenisme, all
which has been foretold us by the Lordhimself in Matthew 24. verse 29,

Quest. What shall follow thereupon?

Answ. God himself will tight for his people wonderfully, and will consume and
destroy all those enemies by fire from heaven, and deliver his Church from all
her enemies Revel. 20.19.

Quest. What are we further to expect to follow therepon?

Answ. The speedy coming of the Lord to judgment.

Quest. After what manner will be come?

Answ. He shall come in the cloud's with majesty power and great glory, even
with ten thousands of Angel; and Saints to the rejoicing and comfort of the
god^ and the confounding of the wicked. Jude ver. 14.

Quest. What is the end of his coming?

Answ. For the manifestation of his own glory in his Saints, and to deliver his
Church and people from all their miseries and captivities and to regain his own
Kingdom and to crown his Saints with eternal glory, and to execute his wrath
and vengeance upon all those that have not known him, nor obeyed his Gospel
Jude 15. ver. and this he will perform upon the general resurrection of all,
and ^er the n iting of their souls and bodies together again.

Quest. How will he effect this?

Answ. He will cause his Angels to gather his elect together before him on his
right hand to whom he will pronounce that comfortable sentence, saving come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the world, etc. Psalm. 50. Matt. 2.31. Matthew. 15.

Quest. What shall become of the wicked and ungodly?

Ans. They standing on his left hand, he will pronounce unto them a, heavy
sentence, even the sentence of condemnation, saying unto them Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels. Matthew.
25.41.

Quest. Shall the Reprobate blaspheme God after this life for the pains they
shall endure?

Answ. No assuredly they shall not, and far be it from us to have such a
conceit in our minds for althouh they have done it here in this life too
abundantly, yet then there shall be no man that shall open his mouth against
the Lord, but shall acknowledge the judgment passed against him to be just and
righteous, and so all shall be forced by pain to glorify the Lord God of
heaven and earth for evermore, for all povers shall be brought into subjection
to the Lord Christ, and none to resist him any more, 27. Psalm. 8.46. Psalm.
66.4. and 72.11. and 86.9. Dan. 7.27. 2 Esd. 9.12.13.14. Heb. 2.8.

Quest When Christ hash passed the sentence of judgment both to the Saints,
and to the ungodly, will he return again into heaven?

Answ. We never read in all the Scriptures of his return, for he comes thither
to possess his own Kiugdom, and to fit upon the throne of David for evermore,
reigning over his people in all majesty and glory in his own throne. Re. 3.21.

Quest. Shall then the happiness and glory of the Saints be upon this earth?

Answ. Yes certainly, but not as it is now corrupt but When all things that
came in by reason of the curse for man's sin, shall be removed and taken away
quite, and all things be made new, for nothing that came in with the curse can
abide there where Christ has his Kingdom and throne of glory.

Quest. But the Apostle Peter says 2 Pet. 3.10. that the Earth and the works
there shall be burnt up, and all things here below shall be dissolved?

Answ. True it is that whatsoever came in with the Curse shall be dissolved
and burnt up, and all taken away, and nothing thereof shall remain, but only
what was created before the curse, and all things shall be made new, as in the
first crearion of them and far more excellent and durable as the same Apostle
says we look for net heavers and a new earth, according to his promise wherein
dwells righteousness.

Quest. Where is this promise made that the Apostle speaks of?

Answ. In the 65. Chapter of Isaiah where the promise is made and set down in
plain words.

Quest. But shall not the happiness of the Saints be for ever in heaven for
the Apostle Peter says, that the inheritance of the Saints is reserved in
heaven and Paul says, we have an house not made with hands, but eternal in
the heavens. 1 Pet. 14. 2 Cor. 5.1.

Answ. True it is, that the inheritance of the Saints is reserved in heaven,
and it is eternal, but this that is reserved in heaven, shall come down from
heaven Christ himself will bring with him that new Jerusalem and cloth his
saints with that house which is from heaven which was so desired by the Apostle
Paul 2 Cor. 5.2. the beauty and glory of that estate is set forth in the 21
chapter of the Revelation which shall be so great that the heart of man can
desire no more, for there shall be a fullness of all things.

Quest. But what places of Scripture do prove that the Saints shall have their
glory and happiness upon this earth?

Answ. There are many places of Scripture to this purpose and I will instance
some of them; and first I will begin with the promise of God made unto Abraham
concerning the land of Canaan, it was promised to him and to his seed for ever.
Genesis 13.15. Chap. 15.17. But Abraham never yet enjoyed the fulfilling of that
promise, therefore at that great day of the Lord, it shall be made good unto
him and his seed for ever, for it was given unto him for an everlasting
possession. Genesis 7.18.

Quest. But Abraham seed after four hundred years did possess that land, was
not then the promise fulfilled to Abraham?

Answ. No assuredly there was a further extent in that promise then was
performed unto his natural seed, and that was but a type of the great
possession that should be given to him and his spiritual seed for ever. Genesis
17.8.

Quest. What is the next Scripture that proves the Saints eternal happiness to
be on this earth.

An. The next is Matthew. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the
earth, and Psalm. 37.11. But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight
themselves in the abundance of peace. Which promises must needs be understood
of the life to come and not of this life for they are promises for the time to
come, and not of the time present, for we know by experience that the meek do
not now in this life inherit the earth; but this promise shall be performed
unto them at that great day of the restoration of all things.

Quest. What is the next Scripture to prove this?

Answ. The next is Revelation the 5. and the 10. ver. the sweet song of
thanksgiving of the 24 Elders, the latter part whereof is their acknowledgement
in these words and have made unto us our God Kings and priests and we shall
reign on the earth; which is spoken of the time to come and not of the time
present, for now is not their time of reigning but of suffering.

Quest. What other Scripture is there to prove this point?

Answ. Out of the 11 chap. of the Revelation ver. the 15. where after the
sounding of the seventh trumpet there were great voices heard in heaven,
saying. The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, as also Dan. 7.14.27. So
that then Christ shall reign as King upon this earth, and all powers shall
serve and obey him for evermore.

Quest. But if the Saints glory and happiness shall be upon this earth it will
be conceived that it cannot be so great, glorious and excellent as is expected
to be, and as the Scripture sets it forth to be, and for the most part of our
preachers they do tell us that it shall be in the highest heavens?

Answ. For the happiness and felicity of the Saints which they enjoy, it shall
be so great so glorious, so excellent, although upon this earth as possible may
be no heart can desire more, nor no tongue can express it, for that place must
be very full of joy, comfort, blessedness, and happiness, where Christ
dwells, and is their King, what can be wanting unto them? there is fullness of
joy at his right hand, and pleasures for evermore. O what sweetness of comfort
shall they find in his presence. yea unspeakable; the Scriptures are plentiful
in expressing, these things for the comfort of the faithful, even whilst they
live here in this natural life, who do live by faith expecting those good
things to come, and whatsoever our Preachers do tell us of the happiness of the
saints to be for ever in the highest heavens; if they did well consider the
Scriptures they would speak according therereunto.

Quest. But what is the reason they conceive so, that the glory and happiness
of the Saints shall be in the highest heavens?

Answ. I know no Scripture that tends there unto, besides those I have already
answered or some such it may be like them, but their error and misunderstanding
of the Scripture lies in this, that they take and expound those places of
Scripture that intend and set forth the happiness of the Saints for ever, to
be intended and meant of a great conversion of the natural Jews to be brought
into the land of Canaan again before the coming of Christ to Judgment which
opinion turns them from the truth, and hereby the Saints are deprived of many
sweet promises that are made unto them for their comfort here in this life in
the expectation of that glory and happiness therein set forth, and promised
unto them then which a greater wrong cannot be done to the people of God.

Quest. You said the Scriptures are plentiful in expressing the happiness of
the Saints for ever upon this earth, I pray you give me those places of
Scriptures, and set down the several texts, that we may examine them and
rejoice in the expectation of them and so I shall conclude for this time and
cease from demanding any more questions of you.

Answ. I shall willingly do it according to my abi ity, but yet it is not
possible for me to find out all those sweet promises contained in the
Scriptures yet as many as I can call to mind for the present I will set down,
that hereafter we may read them and take comfort in them, and live by faith in
the hope and expectation of them, and the Lord inlighten our understandings in
the knowledge of his truth, and give us hearts to obey the truth made known
unto us, that God may be glorified by us, through Jesus Christ, by the
assistance of the Holy Ghost to whom be all praise, glory, and honor, for ever
Amen.

The places of Scripture are these following, But for your better understanding
of them, I pray you consider the words of the Holy Ghost by Saint Peter, in the
3 of the Acts verse 21. in these words, speaking there of Jesus Christ whom the
heaven must receive until the times of restitution of alll things which God
has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began, so
that you may observe hence that this restitution or restoration must not be
til the second coming of Christ and then it shall be and it is that which all
the Prophets have spoken of, and if these places of Scripture here following do
not intend this great restitution, then let them who are contrary minded show
us where it is spoken of in the Scriptures, if they will needs have us to
understand these Scriptures to intend the great conversion of the natural
Jews, now in the latter end of the world, and before the coming of Christ to
Judgment; a doctrine never intended or meant by the Holy Ghost for this
restitution is not to be till the second coming of Christ, Act, 3, 19.20, 21.
And so I may now leave you to the reading of the Scriptures here following, the
Lord give us wisdom to understand them aright, and to find and feel the
comfort of them, for they belong to all Abraham's spiritual seed, as well
Gentiles as Jews, and not to the natural Jew, except he be also a Jew inward.
Romans 2.28.29.

Genesis 13 Chapter 14, 15, 16. verses and Chapter 15.8. and Chap. 17.8. and Chap.
26.3.4. and Chap. 28.4.13.14.

2 Chronicles. 16.30.31, 32, 33. and Chapter 17.9.11, 12, 13, 14.27.

Psalm 8. compared with Heb. 2.

Psalm 14.7. and Psalm 15.1. and Psalm. 37.9.10, 11.29. Psalm. 45.6.16.

Psalm 48. Psalm 87.3. and Psalm. 89.3.4.15, 16.17. etc. Psalm. 96.9, 10, 11,
12.13. Psalm. 98. Psalm. 132.11, 12. etc. Esaias 11. compared with Romans the
8.19.20. Esaias 25.6, 7, 8, 9.

Esaias 27.13. and Esaias 55.12.13. and Chapter 60.14.15. etc. Esaias 61.4 5, 6, 7.
and Esaias 62.1.2, 3, 4.5, 7, 8. and chap. 65.9.10.14, 15. etc. Esa. 66.5.7, 8.
and so to the end of the Chapter.

Jeremy 3.16, 17, 18. and Chapter 23.5 6.7, 8. and Jeremy 30.9, 10. and Chap.
31.35.36. and Chap. 33.15, 16, 17, to the end of the chapter, Jeremy 46.27, 28.
Ezekiel 28.24.25.26. Ezekiel. 34.11, 12.13, 14, 15, 16.23, 24. to the 'end of the
Chapter.

Chapter. Ezekiel. 36. read the whole chapter, and also the 37 chapter. Ezekiel 9.25.
to the end of the chapter.

Daniel 2.44 45. and chapter 7.14.27. and chapter 12.1, 2, 3.13.

Hosea 2.14. to the end of the chapter.

Joel 3.1, 3.12.16, 17, 18.20.21.

Amos 9.11. to the end of the chapter.

Haggai 2.6 7 8 9.

Zechariah 6.12, 13. and chapter 12.8. and chapter 14.4. read to the end of the
chapter.

Matthew 5.5. Acts 2.19, 20, 21. Romans 8, 9.20. and 1 Cor. 2.9. and 2 These.
1.7.8. and 2 Pet. 3.13. Hebrews. 4.9. read the whole Chapter Revelation
3.12.21. and Chapter 5.10. and chapter 7.15 16 17. and chap. 11.15, 16, 17, 18.
and chapter 21. but read the whole chapter, and also the 22. chapter.

The Prophet Esaias is wonderful excellent in expressing the happiness of the
Saints for ever and therefore to these former places set down, I also add
these places following,

Esaias 32.15 16 17 18 19. and chapter 33.15, 16, 17.20 21.22.24. and chapter 35.
read the whole chapter, and Esaias the 45.17, 18, 19. Esaias 49.9, 10.11, 12, 13.

CChristian Reader it may be thought that I have not been so large in this
last matter concerning the happiness of the Saints in glory for ever with
Christ their Lord and King upon this earth as the matter required, and
therefore for thy more full satisfaction in the same J refer thee to a book
called the land of promise and the covenant thereof printed 1641 for John
Wright the younger in the old Baily, wherein this thing is fully manifested it
being the subject matter of the whole book and proved by many places of
Scripture, for indeed the Scriptures are very plentiful in this thing, it
being that which God chiefly intended from all eternity it being the rest of
God, wherein he always took delight and pleasure, the setting up of the
Kingdom of his Son Christ, and his dwelling with the Sons of men his Saints
for evermore, even the full perfection of all his works which he intended from
everlasting.

Revel. 11.15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in
heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

Revel. 21.3. Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with
them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be
their God.

Revellation 22.3, 4, 5. verses, And there shall be no more curse, but the
throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve
him, and they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their forheads.

And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of
the Sun, for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever
and ever.

Christian reader, for thy further information in this point, J refer thee
also to two other books th one called the holy rest of God printed for John
Wright the younger, in the old Bailie 1641. the other called the two olive
trees, or the Lords two anointed ones, etc. being an exposition of the 11
Chapter of the Revellation printed by Matthew Simmons 1645. in these two books
this point is largely set forth against the millenaries of these times, thus
desiring thy furtherance in the truth, I commend thee to the grace of God.

J A.

FINIS.

