December. 22. 1646.
HAving with great content viewed these Golden Sands gathered upon the shores
of that Crystal stream, the Holy Scripture: I cannot but more then approve,
much desire, they should be coined into current money, for the enriching of the
Saints with a further knowledge of the Free grace of God, and of their own
happiness in the enjoyment of such a Treasure.

Joseph Caryl.

(...) Golden Sands: OR, A few short HINTS about the Riches of Grace.

Begun to be opened from the words of the Apostle, in Ephesians. 2.7.

That in the Ages to come, He might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace, in
his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. PART. I.

Dedicated to the Royal Bud of our English hopes, Princess ELIZABETH.

By JOHN BACHILER, M. A. sometime of Emmanuel college in Cambridge.

Job. 22.23, 24. If thou return to the Almighty -- Then shall thou lay up gold
as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks.

In minimo est magnum. Lemn. de gemmis. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Giles
Calvert, and Henry Overton. 1647.

TO THE Royal Bud Of our English hopes, PRINCESS ELIZABETH.
May it please your Highness,
WHen Providence gave me a call, (so strong and urgent, Abcut September. 1645.
that I could not withstand it) for a few days to exercise my mean Abilities
at Court; such was the acceptance which then I found both from your Highness,
and your Honorable Attendants, that altogether unexpectedly, through your
undeserved goodness, I was received into your Presence with an eye of favor.

Since which time, (I must needs confess) I have endeavored so to carry it,
that I might not in the least, draw a just suspicion upon my self, of being
troublesome or intrusive through an uncomely insinuation: but finding, on the
other hand, that this my modest forbearance has not a little hazarded the
interpretation of neglect (a crime toward such a Princess almost
unpardonable) I have resolved for time to come to deliver my self from this
danger also. Where Estrangednesse from Persons both greatly eminent, and
eminently virtuous, (a rare conjunction) is rather distastefull than pleasing:
He cannot be faithful either to God's interest, or his own, that is not
careful to avoid his being charged with it. And therefore having so good an
argument to plead for me, I shall be the better able to bear censures,
especially in this present service, wherein I do but answer some intimations
given me, by which I find that this way, rather then by written Papers, I shall
most conveniently become officious, both to your commands and your good
desires; the forward piety whereof in such tender years, I cannot but with joy
declare. Indeed the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 1.26.
Not many mighty, not many Noble are called. i. Few Great ones prove good; but
me thinks your Highness should be one of those Few: What mean else those golden
speeches, which in my own hearing you have sometimes uttered, That you prefer
Grace to Greatness, because you know it is the only way to Glory. That beggary in
this world is much rather to be chosen, on condition to be a Queen in Heaven,
then here to be a Queen, and not come thither at last. Which brings to my
remembrance that passage also, which I observed at another time to fall from
your Highness, when your favor admitted me to stand by, whilst you read the
24. of Matthew. Besides the streines of pure wit which ever and anon came
sparkling from you, in your pretty critical doubts and queries; coming to these
words, Two women shall be grinding at the mill, the one shall be taken, and the
other left: verse. 41. Your Highness here made a pause, uttering these words, I
think she that was left, was the worst; and then presently added, I wish I
might be the woman taken! If these things be in you, and abide, how sweet a
mirth will it be to Angels! yea, and how welcome news to all truehearted
Protestants, in whatsoever Kingdom!

The reports that are abroad already in the just commendations of your
Highness, have set thousands on work to pray for you, and engaged as many
thousand hearts to love you.

That diligent attention which you are wont to yield unto the preaching of the
Gospel; that encouragement which you give unto the Preachers of it; yea, and
that which is a great deal more, that careful industry which you seem not a
little to take delight in, whilst you not only write down every Sermon as it is
presently delivered, Oh may they be written also with indelible characters in
your Royal heart!
but at special times are wont to pick out the choicest sentences, and
transcribe them into a Book on purpose, with your own Royal hand; how great a
comfort must it necessarily be, both to your godly and learned Chaplain, Mr.
Torshel The Lady Southcot.
and your Religious Tutresse! Verily, if still you proceed on farther, if you
continue so fair a progress in this so blessed path which you have begun to
walk in; Will it not turn all eyes upon you with veneration? will it not fill
all mouths with pleasant discourses of you? and after a peculiar manner render
those who shall have the privilege of being near unto you, not only willingly,
but ambitiously obsequious?

Yet (sweetest Princess) you will not be offended with me, if by way of
caution I reminde you of that excellent Advice, The Countess of Northumberland.
which your prudent and Noble Governesse sometimes instructs you with, viz.
That in all this, you take heed of affectation, and vanity; striving rather to
be like unto the Kings daughter; Psalm. 45.13.
who was wife to Solomon, a type of Christ, All glorious within; and to put on
the ornament of an humble mind, which is in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 3.4.
of very great value. Pride and hypocrisy have ever proved, as fatal, as they
have been incident to great persons: which I heartily wish, may frequently be
the serious meditation of your Highness, especially in aftertimes, as you
shall increase in the years of discretion: Forewarned, fore-armed. Flatterers
will not be wanting, (you may expect) to do you wrong; and your own heart, in
all likelihood, will be as all hearts are, apt enough to hearken to them: so
pleasing a thing is it naturally, to be deceived in this kind. For the
preventing whereof, Faithful and plain-dealing Servants, especially such as
are as well wise, as godly, will be your Highness best friends; Such, of all
others, you shall do well not only to make choice of, but to put the marks of
your favor on, and oblige them to you with more then ordinary respects. You
are now a goodly fragrant Rose, and but newly blown; What pity would it be
that for want of such about you, any Canker of vice should be suffered to eat
up your blossoms, or any Worm thereof lie gnawing at your root! That Divine
spark, or little Ray of GOD, Prove. 23.26.
I mean the Immortal soul within your Royal breasts; Give me thine heart.
me thinks I see how the very Heavens court it, yea, and how God himself is in
a manner enamoured on it! Why therefore should any thing below the Heavens or
less than God himself, be thought worthy of it? The riches, glory, and
greatness of the other World, participations and fruitions of Blisses there,
are the only proper objects of an intellectual Being. And this, were there no
other Arguments to prove it, yet is most invincibly demonstrated by those
inbread vehement desires, and motions, with which the Noble Mind (like an
Empress, scorning the unworthy meannesse of sublunary things) in a perpetual
restlesnesse (...) naturally ascend's to that original and highest good, from
whence it once descended. The consideration whereof, most of all prevailed with
me, to take the humble boldness of presenting this little offering of Heavenly
Treasure to your Highness, Graced (as it is) and protected with your Highness
own sacred Name.

Sacred, 1. in Scripture story: For it was Elizabeth, Luke 1.6.
that was righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and Ordinances
of the Lord, blameless; it was Elizabeth, ver. 41, 42
that was filled with the Holy Ghost, when she blessed the Mother of our Lord,
ver. 44. (...).
and had a Babe leaping in her womb for joy at the first news of Him.

And verily, (...), de iis dici tur qui prae nimia laetitia non possunt se
continere, quin varios gestue edunt, hinc and illinc subfilientes. Beza.
should tidings from Jesus Christ at any time occasion Heavenly dancings in
your Highness heart would not the Motions be suitable to the Melodies?

Sacred, (...) So both the Latin and English pronounce it, with th. Elizabeth.
and Elizabetha.
secondly, is the Heavenly sense and signification of it. Elizabeth, The Rest
of my God. So the Church is, Zeph. 3.17. He will rejoice over thee with joy, he
will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing. The very place of
repose, and sweetest rest of the heart of God himself (we here see) was the
bosom of his Church: So may he bosom of your Highness be!

Or, Elizabeth, (...) Quietavit unde Sabbatum, i. sancta quies.
My God (is) rest. David found He was so to his soul, when after all his
troublesome and weary wanderings, he turned in unto him, Psalm. 116.7. Return
unto thy rest, Oh my soul. How brave a flight would this be for your Highness
also!

Or, Elizabeth, the Branch of God. (...) The Greek pronounces it, (...) with
(...).
May it not be said so of your Highness? Yes verily, you are (not only as all
mankind) his offspring, (...) Germen ex arbore nascens.
but hitherto a pregnant and thriving Branch, which we may shortly see
spreading out into a fruitful and pleasant Vine, that shall yield forth both
the smell, and the wine of Lebanon, Hos. 14.7.

Or, (...) Saepe sceptrum significat, vel insigne regiu^, quod prisci Reges
majestatis gratia manu tenebant. Mr. Leigh in his Crit. Sacr.
Elizabeth, God's scepter; A piece of Princely Majesty in the hand of GOD.
This also is no improper interpretation of your Highness Name, in which
respect it has also a fair possibility of being no less really and truly
sacred, then in any of the former.

Thirdly, (which yet adds unto the splendour of it) it is sacred also by that
Sovereignty, and greatness with which it has been invested, both heretofore
in that orient Piece of Majesty and Virtue, (so powerfully endearing all hearts
unto it) our learned Q. Elizabeth of famous memory; and now also in persons of
so great Extraction, as your Highness Royal Aunt, the Queen of Bohemia, and
your Royal Cousen, Princess Elizabetha. Which last, upon the very naming, we
cannot but admire, as well for her depth of Judgment in the whole Theory of
Divinity; as her eager progress which she has already made through the Flowery
Elysians of all humane Learning; An Equal unto whom, among very many thousands
of a Lower rank, perhaps might be rarely found; but within the Line of Royalty,
scarce such another, unless it be the Supervival of that most Renowned
Gustavus Adolphus, Christina by name, now Queen of Sweden, who it seems has
derived from Heaven, tam magnum and grandescentem Animum, a Mind so big, and
outgrowing the Body in which it is seated, that at little more then 17 years of
age, she knows how familiarly to converse with all the Arts and Sciences, in
no less then seven Languages. These Princely patterns of singular ingenuity,
and unparalled advance in Learning, does not your Highness seem with delight
to imitate? witness the visible proofs thereof, both in Greek and Hebrew
Characters under your own hand; and witness also the promptness of your
intentive mind, while that learned Mistress of Tongues, Mrs. Bathshua Machin.
one of the Ornaments of our Nation, gladly attend's you about Studies of that
nature. Sure ere long, it will be a kind of Golden Age, since such tender
Female -- Glories encircle themselves with brighter beams of knowledge, than
many Scarlet robes have been invested with in our Universities. Where
Literature, and Religion, not only meet each other, but are both embraced into
the very bosom of greatest Ladies, how happy a presage is this? And verily, we
are fairly promised such a blessing from your Highness. Go on therefore, Great
example of a Princely mind; Go on and prosper: Become the learned Grandchilde
of a learned Grandfather; K. James.
and thereby also become the wonder of many Ages, the myrrour of your Sex,
which all that behold or hear of, may either imitate, or admire. Send forth
diffusions of vertual and magnetic Powers; Be like the Sun in the Heavens to
the Flowers on earth, every way attractive and influential, to the utmost
Circumference of that Royal sphere wherein you move. Let all the little Ladies,
and young Gentlewomen, (I might say the greatest and eldest too) take Lively
patterns of Ingenuity, Piety, Sweetness, and Goodness, from your Highness, though
as yet not full 11 years of age, and let it be reckoned among the glorious
successes of the Parliament of England, Not much above two years and an half.
that in so short a time since they undertook the care of your Highness
education, you have made so pleasant and quick a progress. And why should not
so sweet a Bud of bravest hopes be still accomodated with all possible
Advantages, whereby it may blossom out and flourish to the fairest growth of
beauty and maturity? So contend's,

Your HIGHNESS Most humbly Devoted Servant, John Bachiler.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
IF thou expectest an Apology for my appearing thus in Print, as well thou
may; I shall only tell thee, That after much haesitation about it, yea and
many resolutions against it, in my own thoughts; I have not at last been drawn
to it, but by the instigation and advise of those, whom I dare say, thou thy
self would judge worthy of an honorable esteem for their fitness to give
counsel therein.

That which I here offer thee, has no controversy or sowrenesse in it, being
altogether practical, and of most inward usefulnes to thy precious Soul. I
shall tell thee the occasion of my Meditations upon the following subject, and
my design therein. For the occasion of it, 'twas thus:

Meeting with several sorts of spirits among those that profess Godliness,
some pretending zeal for the Law, and the rights thereof, others as much
pretending for the Gospel; some pleading for Moses, and some for Christ: the
first sort passing under the name of Legalists, the second under the name of
Antinomians; Neither of them clear and distinct in their Apprehensions. For the
satisfaction of my self, and some others with me, I resolved in my course of
Preaching to handle the Doctrine of Free Grace, which accordingly I did:
Therein considering the rise and spring, the nature and properties, together
with the peculiar object of it. And also enquired into the high and excellent
Privileges, as well in point of Justification, Sanctification, and present
Consolation, as of future Glorification; which all those Believers must
necessarily enjoy, who live upon the right use and improvement of this Grace.
After all which, in the Application, one part of my message was, a sharp
reproof to all men whatsoever, that in any kind offer wrong and injury to this
Grace of God; either by neglecting, abusing, or profaning it, while they turn
it into wantonness, or take any occasion from it to allow themselves in Evil,
or cast off Duty. The very best of Gods own people were not spared, who were
any way found guilty in the least; and were told, That even those of the sons
and Daughters of. Freegrace, that happily might think themselves the only
darlings of God's bosom, yet can never be able to bring a satisfying proof
thereof, unless they honor the glory of his Sovereignty as much by yielding
obedience to his righteous Law, as they embrace the sweetness of his Love, by
believing his blessed Gospel. When this work was done, the same good Hand of
Heaven, that led me thus far into the study and view of Grace it self, carried
me much farther, to behold the Riches and Glory of it, as it is in part already,
and shall hereafter be much more revealed unto the world: And so now thou have
my design also, which (out of the Apostles words, Viz. That in the Ages to
come he might show the exceeding Riches of his grace, in his kindness toward
us, through Christ Jesus.
Ephesians. 2.7.) is to do these three things.

First, to enter into Free Grace her treasuries, to open her Cabinets of
Jewels, there to take notice of the exceeding Riches of it.

Secondly, To make it appear, that it is, and ever has been the great
business and delight of Gods heart, to show forth and discover the exceeding
Riches of this his Grace unto the sons of men.

Thirdly, That though these exceeding Riches of Grace have in all times past
been more or less revealed; yet, that the fullest and cleerest manifestations
thereof are reserved for the last Ages: And that though for the present, the
very foundations of the world are in a manner shaken, Kingdoms and Nations
almost dashed in pieces with miserable concussions among themselves; though all
things seem now dark and stormy, with a dismal kind of Blackness round about:
Yet when these blustering Menaces shall be hushed into a Calm, and these
uncomfortable Clouds be dissipated, (which may not be very long first) Then
shall the Light arise, I mean the light of glorious Grace, with the splendors
and brightness of it, in a far greater height than in all former Generations.

All this I thought to have brought within the compass of one small Volume;
but I find my self very much disappointed of my Project, And therefore shall
prepare that by peece-meal, which I thought to have presented in one entire
Discourse. And perhaps, all things considered, it will be the best way: For,
the Commodity which I set to sale being very rich, and yet absolutely necessary
for the use of All; when it is made up in small parcels, such as may neither
burden the Pocket, nor the Purse, neither prove too big for many to buy, nor
for any to carry about them; they will be the more able, and willing to furnish
themselves Therewith.

In this first Parcel, I bring but a minute quantity of the Riches mentioned;
very little, in comparison of what thou may expect hereafter: Therefore the
Title is, Golden Sands. If thou accept of these, I shall show thee afterward
(Christ assisting me) whole Mines and Mountains of this Grace-Gold; Mountains
that reach up unto, yea, and above the Heavens. And therefore, that thine Heart
(mean while) may be as a pure Crystal glass, to hold these precious Sands of
Grace (till more comes) is the earnest desire of

An affectionate Seeker of thy Sovereign welfare, JOHN BACHILER.
From my Study at Windsor castle, December. 21. 1646.
The TABLE.
CHAP. 1. THE various acceptions of the word Grace; and in what sense it is
understood in this Discourse. CHAP. 2. That there is a Richness in Grace,
proved by 4 Demonstrations. CHAP. 3. Wherein the Richness of it lies, chiefly
that it is so preciously sovereign to save. CHAP. 4. How many ways the Riches
of this Grace are divided among, and participated by the Saints. Where, of the
losses that Grace susteins from the Saints; and of the Debts which it forgives
to them. CHAP. 5. The Ransom that Grace lays down to redeem the Saints. CHAP.
6. The Expenses which it is at, in maintaining of them.
GOLDEN SANDS.
EPHESIANS. 2.7. That in the Ages to come he might show the exceeding Riches of his
Grace, in his kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus.


HAving in the Epistle to the Reader, already glanced at the scope of these
words, and the chief parts of them; I shall presently apply my self to that
which lies first in order to be opened, viz. The Riches of Grace, dividing the
most distinct pieces of the whole Discourse into so many Chapters.

CHAP. I.
Of the various acceptions of the word Grace in Scripture, and in what sense
it is understood in this Discourse.

IT sometimes signifi's the comlynesse, gracefulness, or beauty of a person or
thing, such as the excellency of speech, Prove. 22.11. For the grave of his
lips, the King shall be his friend. Psalm. 45.2. Grace is powered into thy lips:
or the glory of an ornament, Pro. 1.9 and 4.9. An ornament of grace unto thy
head: or the gallantry of a garden, in its verdure, Jam. 1.11. speaking of the
withering flower, the grace of the fashion of it perishes.

It sometimes signifies a condescending sweetness, or gracious affability
especially toward one much inferior, Judge. 6.17. If now I have found grace in
thy sight, says Gideon to the Angel of the Lord: and Moses often, that I may
find grace in thy sight, Exodus 33.12, 13, 16, 17. Genesis 39.4. And Joseph found
grace in the sight (of his Master) and he served him.

It sometimes signifi's a placability, or gentle appeaseablenes of spirit, an
aptnes to be reconciled, and return again to thoughts of former amity and
friendship, forgetting and passing by of injuries, if any such have been. Thus
Jacob to his brother Esau, when he brought his Present, Genesis 38.8. these are to
find grace in the eyes of my Lord. (...) Invenire vel conciliare gratiam.


It sometime signifie's an honorable esteem, grounded upon an apprehension of
something excellent in a person: it is said of the Apostles whose preaching was
grown famous to a multitude that believed, Acts 5.32. Great grace was upon them
all. Luke 2.42. And Jesus grew in wisdom, and stature, and in favor ((...),
grace) with God and man.

It sometime signifies a testimony of special good will, conferred upon a
person in some eminent mark of favor, Romans 1.5. By whom we have received
grace and Apostleship. Ester 2.17. And the King loved Esther above all the
women, and she obtained grace and favor in his sight, more then all the
Virgins: so that he set the Royal Crown upon her head. Thus when Kings make
Earls and Dukes by Charter or Patent, the Royal style is, We of our special
good will, or of our mere grace and favor, etc.

It sometime signifi's a gift freely given: thus of the contributions from the
Churches of Macedonia. 2 Cor. 8.1. after whose example, the Apostle exhort's
the Corrinthians, therefore as ye abound in every thing, fee that ye abound in
this grace also, v. 7. In this sense after an especial manner, the gifts and
divine qualifications of the Saints are called Graces, (...) Gratia gratis data.
as the grace of Faith, the grace of Love, the grace of meeknes, etc. which
live as so many heavenly principles, habits, or Roots of holiness in the
hearts where they are planted.

Lastly, to mention but this one more, most properly, most emphatically, and
(...), it is spoken of God, and signifi's the most abundant freenes, (...).
Gratia grati^ dans.
and bountifulnes of his heart, in the blessed communications of himself, unto
his Elect, as such, I say as such, for none else are the proper objects of this
grace but they, it is their peculiar attribute, God is good to others, but
gracious to them only: to them he Ray's forth and Beam's out himself. He
diffuseth and shed's among them, the pure and bright emanations of his glory:
so that it is their privilege, to fit as it were encircled with irradiations,
with eternal smiles from his face: so powerfully are his affections ever
working toward them, through this his grace, that to them he is always most
easy to be entreated, most placable, most sweet. Them he embraces, and
embosometh with a kind of inbred and natural Love, a Love so exceeding active
in the declarations of it self, that it never cease dispensing to the
Saints, the most rich things they are capable of, either here or hereafter. Of
this grace it is, and the riches of it, we shall now speak.

CHAP. II.
That there is a richness in Grace, viz. That Grace which is properly known
by the name of the Free grace of God.

NOt a mere putative richness, a richnes in opinion only, whereby things are
esteemed rich, which are not so in themselves. Some Chronicles tell us of
pieces of leather, that with the Kings stamp upon them passed for current
coin; as Cockle-shels and Fish-bones do now amongst the Indians.

But the richness which is in the grace we speak of, is a real, substantial,
sollid richness, such a richness as truly render's it a most rich thing in it
self, though all the world should think otherwise: which will appear from
these four Demonstrations, besides many others.

First, if you consider this grace in the effects, which it self only is
causall and influentiall to, viz. those supernatural and most precious
operations of it in the Saints hearts. Some have fancyed pure gold in the
veins under ground to be nothing else but a condensation of Sunnebeames
concocted by the influences which themselves brought with the^: which opinion,
though very absurd and ridiculous, yet may serve to illustrate the thing in
hand. For what are those holy dispositions in renewed hearts? those divine
participations of Grace we there meet with? Are they not the precious things
wrought by the Sun, the precious things of heaven; to allude to that in Deuteronomy.
33.13, 14. Surely (says Job, speaking of the earth) there is a vein for
silver, and a place for gold, the stones of it are the place of saphirs, and it
has dust of gold, in it is hidden every precious thing. Job 28.1, 6, 10. and
surely it is as true concerning gracious hearts: Surely there is a vein for
silver, and dust of gold, there is a place for Saphirs, and many a precious
thing lies hidden in those hearts. Such as the things whereof we read, 1 Cor.
2.9, 10, 11. The things of God, the deep things of God, the things prepared or
wrought by God, and that by his free grace only, as is intimated, ver. 12. And
these things, what are they else, but the very same, which (for want of some
one intelligible word that might fully express the richnes of them all at
once) are represented to us, under the many several exegeticall terms of the
richest things in the world, viz Silver, choice silver, gold, fine gold, choice
gold, pure gold, gold of Ophir, Jewels of fine gold, Pearls, Rubies, the
precious Onyx, the Saphir, the Topaz of Ethiopia. See Job. 28.14, 20. with
Prove. 3.14, 15. and Prove. 8.10, 19. yea, better then all these, v. 11. All
things that can be desired are not to be compared to them. Quod facit tale est
mag is tale.
Now that which is causally productive to such rich things, how rich is it in it
self?

Secondly, the holy Spirit, which always speak's Truth it self, says it is
rich, and that in more places the^ one in the New Testament. This Spirit also,
which never mis called any thing, call's Grace by its name, gave it that name
it has. The very Single word Grace, though riches had not been added to it,
is a word importing a most precious thing. The very word Diamond carry's a
sense along with it, that speak's it richer then a pebble. So that when you
name that and a pebble together, a man needs not help it, with adding this
Epithet Rich unto it, to persuade a belife that it is better then a pebble. In
like manner, name what you can of created Excellencies, the very single
monosyllable Grace presently speaks it self, infinitely more rich and excellent
then all things. It was a proof of Adams Wisdom and perfect knowledge in
natur's secrets, that by Gods own appointment, he gave names to the living
creatures, which were all so pertinent and significant, that the text says
they stood unaltered. Genesis 2.8. And whatsoever Adam called every living
creature, that was the name thereof. Now the holy spirit much more knows what
is in every thing, especially in this rich Grace, to the nature whereof it
self is so intrinsecally coessentiall. It was this spirit gave the Stars
their names at first, and the Heavens also that very name by which now they are
called; and he also understood himself when he gave Grace its Name. Men may
indeed be mistaken and call things by better names then they deserve. Hence
Copper sometimes goes for gold, and Bristoll-stones for Diamonds, they may
overvalue things through their ignorance, but who can charge the holy Spirit
thus? It He says grace is rich, we must needs conclude it is so indeed; for
what is rich, if that be not, which this holy Spirit account's so?

Thirdly, that the Saints might be actual sharers and enjoyers of this grace,
it cost much; and that from him who knew it was worth the price he pai'd for
their fruition of it, else would never have bought it at so dear a rate. The
lifeblood of the Prince of Peace, the Lord of glory, the beloved Son of God
himself went for it. called Gods own blood, Acts 20.28. therefore necessarily
precious, 1 Pet. 1.19. Saint Paul speak's emphatically, 2 Cor. 8.9. Ye know the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he
became poor, that you through his poverty might be made rich. He was rich,
(...), (...), quasi (...), cui opes plurimae.
i. e. he had abundance, a most plentiful affluence of all riches, as the word
import's, yet for your sakes (...), Significat extremam Christi inopiam, and
quasi mendicitatem. Vorstius. Ad extremam inopiam redactus. Beza. (...),
prop^^e mendicus, qui nihil habet nisi quod ostia. tim acceperit. Step. Mat.
2611. (...) peculium, i.e. possessio proprio and peculiari empta pretio.
he became poor, even so miserably poor, that he even begged his bread, for so
it properly signifies, he laid out his whole estate, scarce left himself worth
a groat (as the Proverb is) even begger^ himself, that he might purchase this
grace unto the Saints; which is therefore called the purchased possession,
Ephesians. 1.14. he emptyed himself, (...), Philip. 2.7. poured all out from
himself, that he might fill them, and their treasuries to the brim.

If it be said, had not the Saints an interest in this free grace from all
eternity, when they were at first made objects of it by God himself, and that
without any consideration had unto Jesus Christ as Mediator? Was it not theirs
then by free gift? And does not the first title to it, hold good still? And if
so, how then are we said to have no share in it without his blood? Ans. The
election of the Saints, and decreeing of all that glory which they shall one day
be invested with in heaven, was indeed a pure act of Free grace, yet so that
all the three persons as one God, equally concurred in it, and so in that
sense, one Person had not a greater hand, or was sooner in the act of election,
then the other; therefore the Saints are therein alike beholding to all three,
Father, Son, and Spirit. But secondly, consider all the three Persons, in the
several parts (as we may so speak) which they act toward the
accomplishment, and execution of all that blessedness which was at first jointly
intended by them for the Saints; and then the actual fruition thereof will
most eminently depend upon the shedding of Christ's blood. The case being much
otherwise in supernaturals, then in things sublunary. In this world, if a man
has but a single title to a thing, provided it be a just title, though it be
but by gift only, or by purchase only, he enter's the possession of it
without interruption. But the Saints cannot do so; for although they have an
interest in the riches of free grace by gift, yet their actual enjoyment of
them must be by purchase. The Son as Mediator must really invest them with that
which Himself as God together with the Father and the Spirit did really intend
for them. From hence it is, that his blood, as it is a Ransom in one sense, (of
which anon) so it is the price of a purchase in another, and that so
necessarily, that the Saints could never have actually enjoyed their
blessedness without it. The consequence of all which, is, That as it hereby
appears what a richness there is in this blood that could purchase such
precious Grace; and what a richness in that love that was willing to lay down
such a price for it; so also, what a richness there is in this grace that
could be procured upon no cheaper terms.

Fourthly, these riches of grace are the wealth of God himself, the very gold
of heaven. Men are reputed rich either in bags of money, cabinets of jewels,
brave lands, and goodly buildings; yea, and some of them in Crowns and
Kingdoms: but all God's jewels, his money, his Revenues, yea and his whole
Kingdom's wealth, ly's in this one rich commodity, his grace. Ephesians. 2.4. God
who is rich in mercy, etc. When Moses desired to know what God's glory was, and
to have a sight of it, the Lord caused all his goodness to pass before him,
and his name to be proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious,
etc. As if he had said, Moses would thou know wherein my Glory consists? It
is in my Goodness, Mercy, and Grace. The same answer must be given to those
that enquire wherein his Riches and great abundance ly's? it is in his Grace.

CHAP. III.
What that is in Freegrace that mak's it so rich a thing.

NAmely, the most incomparable and sovereign excellency thereof, the singularity
of its most beatificating sweetness, it being (as 'twere) the Root of all
those attributes whereby in so peculiar a manner the most blessed God is so
transcendently amiable, sweet and glorious to the Saints. Nor is there any
thing wherein we can suppose the richness of this grace consists more, then
in that never-fading and semp-eternall Efloriscation of it: the Flowring out
(as one may say) of Gods good nature in the fairness of its blossom from its
own most aromatic root.

For as they say Love in man is the Root of all the other virtues: so after a
sort may we say of God's free grace, that it is the root of his Mercy, Pity,
Patience, Goodness, Kindness, etc. yea that only whereby he is the highest
and chiefest Good. By this it is, that he is the inexhausted fountain of all
those streams of Blessedness that flow forth and overflow all the Creation
over; the eternal spring and Wellhead of all those fresh seas and oceans of
the swelling tides and bottomless depths of ineffable sweetness and love, to
all his elect, both men and Angels. And how then can the unparalleld richness
of it be estimated? Set Christ and his blood aside, and what is it can be
thought upon, that can come up to the price of one dram of it for a poor soul?
it would beggar all the Angels in heaven to do it. Stars are but the dust of
heaven, and yet one single staris richer in its substance then the whole globe
of earth. The soul of the meanest man alive is more worth then a world, as he
himself tel's us, who went to the price of souls: what then shall we think of
this grace, by which alone it is possible a soul may be saved? And indeed
herein ly's very much of the Richness of it, that it is the only All-head, so
sovereign to save: yea so much of the richness of it, that Seraphims want
Arithmetic to sum up the value thereof. That balm which never fails of
healing, in no case whatsoever; that Cordial which always quicken's and keep's
alive at the very touch of it, how inestimable is the worth of it for that very
reason? But we are forced to fall off from this so high a speculation, to
something that com's better under our shallow apprehensions.

The several ways by which the Riches of Grace are participated by, and
divided among the Saints.

FIrst, consider the losses which Free Grace sustein's from the Saints. Had
Adam stood, and his posterity after him, what a revenue of love, obedience and
honor should God have had, for almost 6000. years? Millions of millions had
come in unto him, treasuries of glory, which by means of that unhappy fall, he
has totally and irrecoverably lost. For though the wicked rout of men, which
shall certainly perish and go down to hell at last, must thereby undergo
eternal torments for the making of some kind of payment to Divine Justice: yet
the Elect go free, altogether free, as touching their own individual persons;
so that Grace is an absolute loser by them, has no payments at all from their
hands, no not one single farthing for all the rents that have been so long
behind.

Secondly, consider the debts which Grace freely forgiv's to the Saints. Their
sins are their debts, witness our Savior's own words, Mat 6.12. Forgive us
our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

Now 1. How innumerable are these debts? what multitudes of transgressions of
all sorts are the Saints guilty of? David was a man after God's own heart, yet
hear what he says, Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his errors? and more
fully, Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about. A man would
soon lose himself in the observation of the very actual aberrations which
are multiplied by him continually; but what are these to the swarms of searet
corruptions within him, that lie out of sight?

2. How great and vast are the sums, which these debts amount unto? think on
that also. The Saints cannot sin at so cheap a rate as others. Christ is a
King to them, and God is Their Father. Now suppose a Child that has had costly
breeding, yea and more love then ordinary from his careful and tender Father,
should break out in some act of violence and indignity against his Father,
that has deserved better at his hands: or suppose a professed subject, who by
all the laws of nature and nations, is obliged to loyalty under his gracious
Sovereign, should become guilty of Rebellion; Nay, to rise yet a great deal
higher, suppose a favorite at court, one that is familiar with the King, that
know's his secrets, liv's in his very heart, that ever stand's before, and even
next his chair of State; and which is yet more, one whose life has been
saved, and that many times over by the mercy and clemency of this his Lord the
King: And besides all this has been advanced to eminent places of Honor, with
all the marks of Royal love upon him. I say, suppose such a favorite as this
should asperse the Name, deface the picture, rend the Arms, clip the coin,
contemn the Laws, vilify the government of the King. Suppose he should
suggest plots unto, or any way strengthen the hands of those that seek his
life; or would make an Assault upon his Crown and Dignity: Would not this man's
crimes be more then ordinarily treasonable? For a stranger that liv's under
another Prince, or a sworn enemy to do this, would be the less wonder; but
for one so many ways, and so strongly tied by all the bands of Humanity,
ingenuity, gratitude, obedience, yea, and of friendship it self (which is ever
wont to bind with silken cords) I say for such an one to fall into so foul a
fault, what punishment can be a sufficient expiation for it? And yet all the
sins of the Saints even every one of them are more or less of this horrid
nature: For God is a Father to them, though not to others; and Christ is a King
to them, even a King acknowledged and owned by them, though not by others:
Therefore for them to Crucify him afresh, or be any way in the least,
accessory to such mutinies and rebellions against him, as are found in the
hearts even of the very best of them; how great a wrong is it? surely the
sins of the Saints then are debts of no petty or small values.

And it were well if this were all, for over and above there are other debts of
another kind, and these as great and as innumerable as the former, which the
Saints perpetually run into: And if this rich grace did not suffer them to do
so, they must all famish and starve quickly, even (as the proverb is) for cold
and hunger: not one of them being able to put bread into their mouths, or get
a rag for their backs, without a supply from the hand of grace. They all live
on credit, and take up on trust: so that should they cease from borrowing, they
would soon cease to be. And it is not a little that Grace furnishes them
withal; not such trifling sums as shillings or pounds, but with hundreds,
with thousands, with millions. And it is not but for now and then only, or
very seldom, but which add's abundantly to all the rest, it is constantly. They
not only never wipe out old scores, but on the quite contrary, still are
beginning new ones, multiplying scores without number. Oh the piles of
debt-bookes that lie heaped up in Free Grace her Counting House! All which as
Grace suffer's with riches of patience, so she forgiv's at last with riches of
mercy.

Now that Grace is able to do this, and that without feeling it or being
impaired at all by it, how convincing an argument is it of the riches of it?
Should any man alive, even the richest of the whole race of Adam do so; should
he lose mighty revenues, forgive multitudes of vast debts, supply the wants of
thousands, suffer old scores and new to increase upon him, from a numberless
number of bankrupt and bad debtors, and that continually, would it not break
him over and over? could he be able to hold up his head, or keep his trade
going? yet Grace does this, and break's not. As there are multitudes of sins
and debts which the Saints can never take off, so Grace has multitudes of
mercies to cross them out: and as those debts are vast and exceeding great, so
Grace has as tender and great mercies, even bowels, rolling bowels of pity to
forgive. It abundantly pardons, Esaias 55.7. and where sin abound's, there to a
Believer this Grace superabounds. Romans 5.20. (...).


One would think, the very back of Grace should crack under it, that it should
be totally impoverished and undone. But behold, it is so far from sinking, or
giving out, that as if it had suffered no loss at all, or met with no bad
debtors, but had received its due unto the utmost, it liv's and maintain's its
port with as much magnificence as ever. Grace reigns, says the Apostle,
(...).
Romans 5.21. keep's Court in Heaven like an Empress notwithstanding.

CHAP. V.
The Ransom which Grace lays down for the Saintss

THirdly, consider the Ransom which Free Grace lay's down for the Saints. The
best of them before conversion are under a double bondage. 1. In the hands of a
most cruel Tyrant. 2. Of a most exacting Creditor.

First, of a most usurping tyrant, Sin, which exercises dominion over them,
and to which they also for a time yield themselves as servants to obey it, Romans
6.6, -- 20. Sin reign's like a Lord of mis-rule, the most Princely Offsprings
of heaven, the most royal births among the Saints, have known the sorrows of
vassals under it. They also, till a Deliverer com's, are sold under sin, Romans
7.14. as slaves are sold for a base price, and to do base work. And as for the
Devil with his fellows, all the while the poor Saints are in this kind of
bondage under sin, they are but the tyrants executioners: bloody ones indeed
they are; for besides the horrid threats of death and hell with which they
scare them, how sorely do they whip them to all those cruel services in which
they are employed by sin? Believe it, they strike smartly, who will take off,
they lay on most deadly blows, scourges that draw blood apace, and cut deep,
even to the very bone. As the taskmasters of Egypt made the Children of Israel
serve with rigor and hard bondage, and made their liv's bitter, what with
their work, and their sore beating them, Exodus 1.13, 14. Thus these Diabolical
tormenters lay about them most severely, using the precious sons of Zion, as if
no better then the Skullions of hell. Nor will they suffer a moments rest to
them, but make them work even in the very fire, among fiery temptations, to
allude to that of the Prophet Hab. 2.13: Now so long as the Saints are under
such a merciless tyrant, and such Dragon-lawes, so fiercely imposed and
executed, how great a bondage is it?

Secondly, they are in the hands also of a most exacting Creditor, Divine
Justice; for whatever Free Grace please to do, in bearing its own losses, and
forgiving its own debts; yet Justice will not be so satisfied, neither for it
self, nor for all those other Attributes which have been as much wronged as
ever Grace it self was; the Saints are as much behind hand with Justice,
Wisdom, Faithfulness, Goodness, Patience, and all the rest; therefore
Justice serv's an Arrest upon them, and that not only in its own name, but in
the name of all the other Creditors; yea and it keeps them in safe custody
without bail or main-prize; and to prison they must go, there to lie, till
they have answered for all wrongs, and paid all debts, even to the utmost
farthing; which if they can never attain, the wrath of God seizes on them in
pains unutterable for evermore, Mat. 5.25, 26.

In this most miserable double bondage, in the state of unregeneracie, do the
poor Saints lie; and are like to continue so, unless freegrace com's in for
their reli^se, which at one time or other it is sure to do, and with so
powerful an hand too, that immediately it rescu's them from all these miseries
at once. And the means by which Grace does this, is by laying down a Ransom,
(even the same which before we told you went for the price of a purchase also)
the lifeblood of Christ. He is the great Lord Treasurer of heaven, Free Grace
her Cash keeper, at whose only appointment 'twas (for in this business she
rul's all) that he came down from his glory, with all the fullness of the
Godhead in him bodily. He brought all his wealth with him, that he might be
sure to take off all reckonings before his return. Well, when he did come, and
that by free grace her sending, what was the work she set him about? was it not
to perform her promises, and make good her engagements for the poor Saints?
Go, says Grace to him, go down from heaven, go and ransom such and such
whom I have elected. Lo I am ready, says Christ, Psalm. 40.7, 8. I go
willingly: and as he said, he did; according to all the Commission that Grace
gave him, he most punctually perform's. Grace order's him to lay down a
ransom, and he does so, and that such a ransom, as is every way, and to all
purposes, effectually sufficient. He gave his life a ransom for many. Mat.
20.28. the word imports a double ransom, (...) a (...) solvo, to pay, or to
loose, as when one unty's bands or fetters.
answerable to the double bondage mentioned. First, a ransom by power, whereby
the captive with strong hand is rescued from the oppressor. Secondly, a ransom
by price, whereby full satisfaction is made to the Creditor, either in ready
money, or something else equivalent, and so the Prisoner set free both from the
jail and the debt too. Now in both these senses the death and bloodshed of
Jesus Christ is become a ransom to the Saints. First, it sets them free from
the power of sin, the Devil, death and hell, by conquering and triumphing
over them. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, Tit. 2.14. As Grace before delivered from sin, in respect of the
guilt of it, by forgiving it, and therein declared the riches of it, as the
Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 1.7. By whom (speaking of Christ) we have the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of grace; so here also it
deliver's from the dominion of sin, even through the redemption of his blood,
as we there also have it. And by the same blood he sav's from death and hell
too, yea and him that has the power of them both, which is the devil, Heb.
2.14. Through death he destroyed death, Colos. 2.15. Having spoiled
Principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them.
He speaks it of those principalities and powers, which are also called
spiritual wickednesses, Ephesians. 6.12.

Secondly, yet that was not the only ransom that was laid down, for Grace
pay's the Creditors also, even all that they can demand; whatsoever it is, that
the Saints are endebted to any Creditor in heaven or in earth, Grace
discharges all; for the vastest sums it makes such ample satisfaction, not
only for Principle, but for Interest, even to an hour's forbearance, that more
in justice cannot be required. Therefore it is said of Christ, that he saves to
the utmost, Heb. 7.25. because he has paid the utmost farthing, as it is
phrased, Mat. 5.26. so that none of the Creditors, no not Justice it self, as
exacting as it is, has any thing to do now to keep the Prisoner any longer,
but looks graciously, and says, Deliver him from going down into the pit, I
have found a ransom, Job 33.24 The Jailer what ever he be must open doors, and
let his prisoner out; yea and more then so, he must deliver up the keys also,
even all that bunch of keys with which the poor Saints were locked in. And if
you ask, into whose hands these keys are given? it is into the hands of Grace,
who having them at her dispose, she again put's them into Christ's hands to
keep. Rev. 1.18. I have the keys, says he, of hell and death. A privilege
which he may well enjoy, having been the play master of all the debts, and the
setter of the Prisoners free: though still indeed it must be remembered, it was
with Free Grace her money.

And alas! what a case had the poor Saints been in, if free grace, besides the
bearing so great losses, and forgiving such mighty debts due unto it self, had
not done this also? even made an end and gotten a full acquittance from all the
other creditours? How did the Saints groan under their many obligations; and
what fears were they in continually? still looking for new arrests every hour.
Justice for its part, and the other creditors with it, stood upon it, nor would
they hearken to any compositions, or make abatements in the least. As for
suretyes, or undertakers; the whole creation could not afford them. Should they
have craved the help of Angels, alas! their bail would never have been
taken, because their riches would never have amounted to any considerable part
of payment, they might soon have cracked their credits, have broken and undone
themselves upon it, but could never have taken off the debts: The poor Saints,
in mean time, stand gazing upon each other, with palenesse in their faces,
with floods of tears in their eyes, and as many sorrows in their hearts,
while they think of this their helpless and most hopeless condition. But
behold! in this most pitiful and deplorable a distress, just in the very
nick of it, Free grace com's in with her bags of untold gold, I say free grace
(who had entered into bonds before) she lay's down the whole debt, in manner
as has been said. An act of bounty which not only out-went the former ten
times over in the multiplications of new sums, because so many creditors had
their own from it; but most of all, in that it procured a full deliverance:
take an instance to clear it. If a man be endebted to me ten thousand pounds,
and be also endebted to many other creditors, and to each of them as much as to
my self; for me to forgive him mine own debt, and that so great an one, even
every penny of it, you will say it is a very bountiful and friendly act; but to
pay down so much ready money also in his behalf unto his other creditors,
without which (notwithstanding my forgiving him as concerning my self) he must
have lay'n and rotted in prison, you will acknowledge this is far greater
bounty, and a more excellent kindness then the former. For perhaps you might
suppose, I forgave him mine own debt, because I could never hope to get it of
him; but to answer for his debts to others also, and that in ready money, out
of mine own purse; all that hear it, will conclude, this is a strange piece
of most singular liberality; yea and as unparalled a love also. And thus has
Grace done for the poor Saints, paid all (as has been said) with good gold
and silver, shall I say? nay with that which is far more precious then such
corruptible things, the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Hence it is, that the
Saints are said to be bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20. with an honorable
price, as the word is. (...).
Yea, they are bought twice over, with a double price, they are twice ransomed,
with a ransom so great as has satisfied all parties, and perfectly delivered
from all bondages. And which yet add's to all the rest, it is not a ransom for
the present only, but a most full and satisfying ransom to all eternity.
Indeed if a Gally-slave of Turkey, or any other tyrant captive be once ransomed,
and so delivered, yet if he be taken again, he cannot be redeemed without a
new ransom; or if a debtor be once discharged, and run into new debts, he must
make new payments, or else to prison again. But here the case is far
otherwise; the ransom is everlasting, the satisfaction is for ever. Heb. 9.12.
The blood of Christ offered once for all, having obtained eternal redemption.
So that though sin in the dominion of it, may have mind enough to seize on
the Saints, and embondage them again, yet it is more then it can ever do: And
though Justice may seem to come again upon them, and take them by the throat,
in the several afflictions and sufferings they encounter with: yet let there
be no mistake here, for it is not properly from the hand of Justice that the
sorest troubles at any time befall the Saints, as though thereby it would
receive some satisfaction from them, and pay it self out of their sufferings.
No verily, there can be no ground for such a thought as this; Justice being
already fully and eternally satisfied, as concerning the Saints, through the
death of Christ. It is from the hand of Grace rather, (who we may be sure will
never lash too hard) that all these lashes come; and that for excellent intents
and purposes: as Parents when they correct their children, it is not out of
unappeased wrath or hatred to their persons, but out of tenderest care and
love. Heb. 12.5, -- 12. Well then, we have seen somewhat more of the riches of
Grace in the ransom it lay's down for the Saints. The ransom of a man's life
are his [owne] riches, says Solomon, Pro. 13.8. but the ransom of the Saints
lives, are the Riches of Grace.

CHAP. VI.
Of the expenses which Free grace is at in maintaining of the Saints.

THe fourth channel through which the riches of Grace run unto the Saints, is
its expense in maintaining of them. Consider at what a rate they live, how
Princelike they are, as well in their breeding as in their birth.

First, for their apparel, how sumptuous is it? Grace clothes them all with
cloth of gold, (...) In recamat is. Ar. Mon. Cum phrygianis. Jun. (...) Auri
ocellaturis vel polymitis aureis induta. Ar. Mont. Fundis aureis vestita. Jun.
yea with wrought gold, and raiment of needle work. Psalm. 45.13, 14. Wrought
gold supposes something richer then gold alone; as if embroydered over with
pearl, or enouched with diamonds, as some Critics would seem to understand
from the Original word, which is translated All glorious within; (...)
as if it came from that word, which sometimes signify's a precious stone cut
with angles. M. Ainsworth thus, Her clothing is of purled works of gold, in
embroideries she shall be led, etc. such purled works, (says he) or such
grounds, and closures of gold, as precious stones are set in, Exo. 28.11, 14.
But what ever it be, we see it is very brave, for what more can be said even of
a Kings roabes, then that as they are most rich in their stuff, so most costly
is their make, by the very phrases here used, viz. needle work and wrought
gold, what less can we understand, then the very curiosity of skill, and the
excellency of contrivement by the finger of grace it self, in ornifying the
suits which the Saints wear. Ezekiel. 16.7, 10, -- 13. Thou art come to excellent
ornaments, says he of his beloved Church, I clothed thee with broydered work,
I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee with silk, I decked
thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thine hands, and a chain on
thy neck, and I put a jewel on thy forehead, and ear rings in thine ears; thus
wast thou decked with gold and silver, and thy raiment was of fine linen and
silk, and broydered work. How aptly may this be applied to our sense in hand,
at least wise by way of allusion? for as rich parents that have goodly children
which they dearly love, are wont to put comely garments upon their backs, and
bedeck them with rings, jewels, bracelets, with chains of pearl and diamonds,
the better to set off these fondlings of theirs, to the eye of all beholders;
especially if in the way of preferment, if it be wooing time, and they have
hopes of good matches for them: even so does Grace with her darlings, set them
off with best advantage, with all their finery and jewels on them. And good
reason too; for now is the time of their preferment, and of their growing
acquainted with that great Heir of glory which they must one day marry. Jesus
Christ go's brave himself, as it is meet he should, for he is the Prince of
heaven, Heb. 1.13. girt about the paps with a golden girdle, Mar. 9.2, 3. He
was transfigured before them, and his raiment became shining, even white as
snow: like unto Princes, with whom the manner was to be clad in white, Esth.
8.15. The very servants which attend Princes wear gorgeous apparel, Luke
7.25. how much more then the favorites; yea, the Royal Consorts themselves,
who are wont to live in their Sovereign's arms? Though the Son lov's all
that the Father recommend's to him, none so well, and which is yet more, none
else; yet he is of a curious eye, and must be pleased. He lov's to see his
beloved ones handsome in their attire, because it is them his heart is set upon,
and which he has chosen unto him self as an eternal object of his affections
and sweet embraces. How was he taken at the sight of his Spouse, when she
appeared to him with her chain about her neck? Cant. 4.9. Thou have ravished my
heart, my sister, my spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one of thine
eyes, with the chain of thy neck. Mark the expression, it is not, with one of
thine eyes only, but the chain of thy neck also. Is the person of Hester set
apart for the pleasure and delight of the King? Then she must have ornaments
and perfumes accordingly, though it be at the King's own cost. And verily
herein, if Ahasuerus was not, yet Isaac was a type of Christ, when he sent
jewels of gold, earerings and bracelets to his Rebecca, Genesis 24.22. yet
whatever it is that even Christ himself either send's or bring's in this kind,
to his espoused Saints, it is from the hand and at the cost of Grace, her purse
find's all. And because Grace will be sure, that the clothing and very dress
of the Saints, shall in all points be pleasing to the eye of Christ, therefore
it is all spun of the very same thread, cut out of the very same piece, made up
in the very same shape and fashion, that his own garments are. Rev. 19.7. The
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready, (viz. in
preparation for this marriage day) and to her was granted that she should be
arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, for the fine linen is the
righteousness of Saints: Which righteousness of Saints, what is it else, but
the righteousness of Christ? those garments of his that smell of myrrh, aloes
and cassia, Psalm. 45.8. these are the Saints robes, stately and rich indeed,
the verdure of whose beauty and glory, that it might for ever keep fresh and
new without the least stain and spot upon it, therefore grace has washed them
in such a lasting die, that can never out, viz. the blood of the Lamb, Rev.
7.14. Well therefore may the Church sing as she does, I will greatly rejoice
in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God: for he has clothed me with
the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of righteousness,
as a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her
self with her jewels, Esaias 61.10.

Secondly, as the Saints go gorgeously at the Cost of Grace, so they eat
delicately, and live high. Answerable to their garb is their diet. Their very
bread is the bread of Heaven. Joh. 6.51. I am the living bread which came down
from Heaven. Food for Angels, yea, and better then any they have, for Angels
have not the body and blood of Jesus Christ to feed upon, as the Saints have.
We find in the song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.14. that it was reckoned among the
privileges of the Jews, that they did eat of the fat of the kidneys of
wheat, as they had sweet Manna in the wilderness, so they had pure manchet in
Canaan, and in both of them representative of this living bread from Heaven:
such a bread as serv's not only for the Saints necessity, but for their
delight. And if the very bread of the Saints be so dainty, what shall we think
of their other viands? of the fatness which they meet with in God's house?
Psalm. 36.8. The fat things full of marrow, Esaias 25.6. We read of Asher, that
out of him, as his bread shall be fat; so he shall yield royal daintyes. Genesis
49.20. we may here well allude to it. It Is worth the observing, Psalm. 37.3, 4.
what a significant term is used, and in what connection. v. 3. says he, Trust
in the Lord and verily thou shall be fed, (...) Pascere fide. Jun. i. ex fide
vive.
i. e. thou needst take no care for provisions to live upon Or as M Ainsworth
read's it feed on Faith, i.e. nourish thy self and live by it; for the just
man lives by his faith. Habak. 2.4. and then mark what fallows, Delight thy
self also in the Lord. v. 4. The word is exceeding Emphaticall, (...) (as some
will have it) from (...) pi^suit, placentas proprie.
delight thy self in the Lord, that is, satiate thy self, please thy pallat,
be filled with an holy gluttony, be as the hungry sensualist is at the
sweetmeats and made dishes that are before him. Such a kind of pleasure 'twas
that the heart of David fed upon, when he uttered those words, oh taste and see
how good, or how sweet, the Lord is! Psalm. 34.8. a speech which we know is
usall to the next that si 's by: when a man meet's with some excellent dish which
he looked not for. And such dishes do the Saints meal upon continually. The
very water that they drink, is it not out of springs that bubble up eternal
life? Joh. 4.10. What then are their wines? yea, and their streams of honey,
with the milk of the flowing breasts they suck? as their bread (we heard) is
of the fat of the kidneys of wheat, so their wines are the pure blood of the
grape, to allude again to that in Deuter. 32.14. yea, and over and above their
wines are spiced, mingled wines; not only brewed out of Christ's blood, but also
sweetened with the sugar of his love, mingled with bowels of compassion. Wines
upon the lees, well refined, that are vigorous, sparkling and full of
revivement; they say burnt wine is a cordial, it is true of this wine of the
Saints, which is heated with the flames of divine love; therefore well may it
pass for a Royal wine, as those wines were, which we read of, in Esth 1.7.
see and compare, Deuter. 32.14. Prove. 9.2. Esaias 25.6. Their honey, it is of the
sweetest and purest strain, honey out of the rock, viz. the rock Christ Jesus,
sucked immediately from thence, Deuteronomy. 32.13. and from the honey-combe of the
Gospel, the blessed word of grace, which is sweeter then the honey and the
honey comb, Psalm. 19.10. Their milk is sincere, full of cream, battening and
nourishing, such as giv's both present satisfaction, and future growth. Esaias
66.11. That ye may milk out and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolations. 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the
Word, that ye may grow thereby. All these with what ever other provisions the
hand of Grace ministers unto the Saints, are ministered to them in (...)
plentifulnesse, equal to their variety. Prove. 9.2. She furnishes her table
with full feasts, Esaias. 25.6. with store and great abundance, that the eaters
may be abundantly satisfied, and drink as freely as out of rivers Psa. 36.8.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou
shall make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures. Grace deal's not with a
sparing hand, but liberally, and with hearty welcome. Eat oh friends, drink,
yea drink abundantly oh beloved, Can. 5.1. drink drunk, (...) Inebriate. Ar.
Mon. Inebriamini. Jun.
as the word imports, be you filled with an holy excess, as is intimated
Ephesians. 5.18. When Ahasuerus made a feast for his Nobles, 'twas of long
continuance, and according to the state of the King, Esth. 1.7. Grace does so
likewise; the very fragments of her board would feed thousands. Mat. 14.20. And
they did all eat and were satisfied, and they took up of the fragments that
remained twelve baskets full. How many sweet meals might be made of the Saints
leavings? time was when the very crumbs under Grace her table, gave a full meal
to a daughter of Canaan, Mat. 15.27.

Thirdly, the habitation of the Saints, the very housing which Grace has built
over their heads, in the sumptuousness thereof, is no whit inferior to their
garb and diet. They sit in heavenly places with Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2.6. And
has made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Their habitation
is on high, even within the secret of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. Lord thou have
been our dewlling place in all generations, Psalm. 90.1. As if he had said, when
we have had no hole to put our heads in, no rocks to run unto, no towers to be
safe in; we have found both a safe and glorious habitation with-thee, in the
very secret of thy pavilion; thou have admitted us even there where thou
sit in most magnificent state, and where only thou give access to the
friends of thy heart. Oh how glorious a palace have they, who thus dwell in
God? yet it is a privilege, common even to the meanest Saint, such as scarce
have cottages in this world. While their bodies lodge but in houses of clay,
yet even then their nobler part, viz. their mind and spirit inhabit's higher.
They have buildings in another world, (which also they dwell in at present,
(though here below) so bright and shining, that even Angels are dazzled to
behold them. For our conversation is in heaven, says the Apostle, Philip.
3.20. and in an higher part of heaven then ever the Angels attained unto, even
nearer God. The very first stone laid in the Saints buildings, how precious is
it? 1 Pet. 2.6. He is the chief corner stone, elect and precious. 1 Cor. 3.12.
Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, Jesus Christ. And
answerable to the foundation is the whole structure, all polished from top to
bottom, most goodly to behold, so that the very spectators that pass by,
Zach. 4.7. being filled with admiration at the luster of it, lift up their
shouts, and cry, Grace, grace unto it. So that all those fair colors,
foundations of Saphirs, windows of Agats, gates of carbuncles, with borders of
all pleasant stones, mentioned Esaias 54.11, 12. with all other the like
expressions, are used but as metaphors, the more lively to set it out. And as
this habitation of the Saints, which Free Grace at her own proper cost and
charge has raised for them, is most richly built; so it is an huge and vast
thing, and so in that sense as stately and magnificent as in the other. For the
Saints are all children of the same womb, and they love each other dearly, so
dearly, that they will never by their good will be apart or dwell asunder. Now
Grace lov's to see such a disposition in them, and therefore to suit it
accordingly, she has made one house big enough to hold them all, that they may
be all under one roof. So far and wide does this glorious edifice enlarge it
self (having multitudes of rooms to spare in it for new comers) that it
grow's into a City, and that a mighty one; a city as big as a Kingdom. Heb.
11.16. He has prepared for them a City. Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. Prepared, it intimat's a kind of
extraordinary thoughtfulness for the building of it; that the materials, the
fashion of it, and all that belongs to it might be sumptuous. As David speaks,
1 Chro. 29.2, 3. Moreover, says he, because I have set my affection to the
house of my God, I have prepared with all my might, gold, silver, onyx stones,
and stones to be set, glistering stones, and of diverse colors, and all manner
of precious stones, etc. so Grace did, when she built Heaven for the Saints,
she knew who were to dwell there one day, and therefore she spar's neither cost
nor art; she provid's her gold and precious stones to build with, pearls so
fair and goodly, that the mighty gates of the City, each of them, were but of
one entire pearl; and the very streets thereof paved with no worse then pure
gold, as bright as transparent glass, Rev. 21.21. But this is not all, for
that the house should stuff and furniture might be suitable to the building: the
very spoones and dishes, yea, the candlesticks and snuffers, (and that but in
the type only) are all of pure gold, Exodus 25.38. And if these so rich, what
then may we judge of the more Noble utensils, of the vessels of honor, and the
hangings wherewith the rooms are furnished?

Fourthly, free grace, which thus clothes, feed's, and houseth the Saints in
glory and state, is not sparing to them any other way, she put's store of money
into their purses also. Parents that love their children, and are at great
expenses with them otherwise, are not wont to pinch them in this respect; but
make allowance to them with such a free and liberal hand, that abhorring
baseness, they may carry it out with a generous and worthy spirit. The same
rule free grace observes also, never let us the Saints want money, no not the
poorest of them; she stor's them with good gold and silver, see else, Job
22.23, 24, 25. If thou return to the Almighty, then shall thou lay up gold as
dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks; yea the Almighty
shall be thy most choice gold, (...) Lectissinu^ aurum tuum.
(so Junius read's it) and thou shall have plenty of silver. So that the Saints
know no want, no not the meanest, or youngest of them; they all have enough, as
well in their Nonage as in their full age. They are rich in faith, Jam. 2.5.
rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6.18. rich in precious promises, 1 Pet. 1.4. rich in
the saving knowledge of the word of life, which dwel's in them richly, (...).
Col. 3.16. Their money is current in heaven, though few will receive it for
good coin in this world.

Fifthly, agreeable to these things are all the rest. The very attendants upon
the Saints, how high and noble are they? a train so glorious, that even
greatest Emperors may veil unto: for Angels wait on them. Heb. 1.12. Are they
not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister unto them, who shall be
heirs of salvation?

Does it please the Saints at any time to ride out, and take a prospect abroad
in the company of that Royal lover which Grace has espoused them unto?
Behold, his own charret is ready for them, with all the equipage thereof.
Cant. 3.9, 10. King Solomon made himself a charret of the wood of Lebanon. He
made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the covering
thereof of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, for the daughters
of Jerusalem.

To all this, what riches of Grace go? besides those incident experces that
occasionally arise; for as it is in a great family, if there be many sick in
it, or lie hurt or wounded, weak and diseased, especially if they be the prime
pieces, the best beloveds, the dear children, and those whose lives are most
desirable on all sides; what cost is spared? Nay what cost is not most
industriously improved, and that all the ways that can be imagined, for the
recovery of them? no Surgery, Physic, choice provisions, most helpful
attendants neglected, night or day; how many a rich man has beggared himself
in costly remedies on his own crazy body? or upon the body of his dear wife
or child? Bezar stones, dissolved gold magisteriall pearl, with a thousand
such like precious ingredients have been as common things, in such cases as
these are. And just so it is among the Saints, how many of them often lie thus,
sick and wounded, weak and feeble under the hand of Grace? always ailing
something, either heads ache, or hearts ache, this member is wounded, and that is
out of joint; the eyes are sore, the stomack's ill, the spirits faint, of one
or other of them continually: nothing but complaining among them, and crying
out for playsters, for cordials, for some good thing, this or that which they
may be able to digest: all these free grace has the care and the charge of;
whose very looking to, with the remedies that are applied, amount's to full as
much, if not to much more, then all the disbursments upon the others that are
more healthful. When free grace com's among her wounded patients in her
Christ's hospital; she com's, with no common salves; no balmes are applied by
her hand, but the very balmes of Heaven; no others can serve the turn, to
work the cares that she mean's to make. No cordials of her administering, but
what have been prepared by her own hand and skill, in her own Apothecaries
shop, and applied at the sole direction of the great Physician of souls, JESUS
CHRITT.

Now lay all together, the losses, the forgivings, the ransomes, the expenses
of Grace in behalf of the Saints: consider but how much it is all these ways
out of purse, and then speak what you think of the riches of it.

But yet all this is nothing to what may be farther said, in consideration of
the most inestimable worth of those rich and precious things, which free grace
may be said to bestow upon the Saints, more properly by way of gift. A view
whereof (as in one treasury where all ly's) we shall take, by considering the
love of God, and that kind heart of his, which his own strong and most dear
affection has so abundantly filled with sweetest inclinations toward, and
most glorious intentions concerning the Saints.

Which most precious and glorious love, that it may the more clearly shine out
unto us; it will be necessary to open the meaning of those words, Ephesians. 2.7. In
his kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus. Where occasion will be given to
make this double enquiry.

First, what the greatness of Gods love is to the Saints, as they stand, in a
kind of single relation to himself, from those words, in his kindness toward
us.

Secondly, what the greatness of his love is to the same Saints, as they stand
in a double relation, viz. both to himself, and to his Son, and how that
love wrought from all eternity in behalf of the Saints, while 1. it gave the
Saints to Christ, and 2. gave Christ to them, from those words, through Jesus
Christ.

A speculation most ineffably delightful; which, it was no marvel that the
Angels should so much desire to peep into, (...) Propenso collo vel in clinato
capite introspicere.
stooping down, as the Apostle speak's, in allusion to the Cherubims over the
Mercy-seat, that they might pry into the depths of this glorious mystery, viz.
the mystery of this love. Of which, if God permit, I shall speak in the next
part by it self.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 33. line 10. for head read heal. Page 48. margent read (...).


