A VIEW Of many ERRORS and some gross ABSURDITIES in the Old Translation OF THE
PSALMS in English Meter;

AS ALSO In some other Translations lately published:

SHOWING How the PSALMS ought to be translated, to be acceptable and edifying.

Together with sundry Epigramms and Suffrages of many Godly and Learned men in
behalf of the Author's TRANSLATION, And Reasons for publishing the same.

By W. B. M.A. and Minister of the GOSPEL.

Psalm. 47.7. Sing Praises with understanding.

Malach. 1.8. If ye offer the blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil?
And if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil?
LONDON, Printed by W.D. and are to be sold by F. Eglesfield and Thomas
Underhill in Paul's Churchyard; and F. Tyton, at the three Daggers near the
Temple in Fleet Street. M.DC.LVI

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
THere are three main ends of Psalms:

1. That the praises of God (which Psalms do chiefly express) may be
celebrated by all, Psalm. 34.3. and 69.30.

2. That every Christian might not only be a visible Professor, but an audible
Actor in these praises, Psalm 66.1, 2.

3. That all men might learn by heart the Principles of Religion, the Psalms
(as Rivet says) being a compendium of Scripture, affording all points
necessary for doctrine and duty. Coloss. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in
you richly in all wisdom; teaching, and admonishing one another in Psalms, and
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, etc.

From which words follow also these Conclusions:

1. That Scripture psalms (even David's Psalms, called in Hebrew by the name of
Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs) and no other, should be used in the
Church; for no other are the word of Christ, and consequently cannot have that
certainty, purity, authority and sufficiency that the Scripture psalms have.

2. That these Psalms of David must as well be translated into Verse for
Singing, as into Prose for Reading; yea, into such Verse as is proper for every
Nation to take into Tunes, and that they should all be so translated, that the
Church might be fully furnished.

3. That they must be translated very plainly for understanding, very smoothly
for easy reading and remembering, and very sweetly for our delighting:
otherwise they cannot be suitable to those ends for which God has ordained and
indicted a Psalm book, in his Word, for the edification of his Church.

Now that the Psalms of David may be thus translated, since nothing in the Text
may be omitted, but must (virtually at least) be put into the Translation,
neither must any thing be added in the Translation that is not virtually in the
Text: it must needs follow, that some latitude of paraphrastical expressions
must be allowed; neither can any Translator, either by way of Verse or Prose,
avoid it; for what (I pray you) is the translation of any Hebraism but
paraphrase? The Vers-translation therefore which require's exact measure and
abundant meter, and some variety for the better help of memory and delectation
of the mind, require's (oftentimes) a more ample paraphrase.

For the Matter therefore of the Vers-translation; let it be 1. The very words
of the text, or 2. words to the same effect, or 3. an allusion to some parallel
Scripture, or 4. an amplification of the plain scope of the text, or 5. an
explication of the true sense of it, or 6. a fuller exposition of the Hebrew,
of which there are at least five hundred instances to be given in the
Translation which I offer.

For the Manner of the Translation also, 1. Let it avoid all transpositions of
the words (and consequently all interruptions of the sens) except what we
admit of usually in prose. 2. Let it retain some degree of sense in every line,
and use no broken verses at all. 3. Let it be in usual and known tunes (and
that for the most part in double meters, which is so excellent an help to
memory, and a quickner of affection.) And for the rarer sort of tunes
(generally harped on) let diverse be done in Aliters, according to the old 51,
113, and 148. 4. Let it avoid all hypermeters whatsoever, except what do
naturally run into one syllable. 5. Let the Verse be smooth in running, for
harshness (as well as disorder in the words) will render it very difficult in
reading. 6. Lastly, let the words be all pure, proper, seemly and significant;
the want whereof was the most visible defect of the old Psalm-book, and was
doubtless the first and principal of those causes that took off and alienated
the minds of Christians from this sweet and sacred duty. But now that the
removal of all defects of the Psalm-book, (and to bring it in it is kind to
the degree and perfection of the Prose-translation) is in so ready and hopeful
a way, let me gratify the Reader with a brief and plain Narrative of the
whole business whereby the Providence will appear that has brought it so about.

Whenas Francis Rous Esquire had many years ago put forth a Translation of the
Psalms; which Book was by the first Parliament committed to the Assembly of
Divines, who thinking to bring it nearer to the Original, did make it much more
harsh and far less acceptable then it was before, I (having put out a
Translation of mine own and, a second Edition thereof, which found good
acceptance, (as may appear by the Epigramms which follow) addressed my self to
Mr Rous, and was by him accepted, encouraged, and directed to amend all, and
compose a new one out of his and mine.

This I did, and tendered with a Petition to the said Parliament, who referred it
to a Committee of Divines to report; which report being never made during the
Sitting of the said Parliament, there was neither opportunity nor safety to
print and publish it, till I obtained an Order from His Highness for security
of the Copy. And then not being at leisure in person to attend the Press, some
errors escaped without correction, which might easily have been prevented, and
for the present may be tolerably amended with a pen.

In this long vacancy that was, there were published two other Psalm books; one
by the Scots, the other in the name of Mr White of Dorchester deceased: Both
these do take the greatest part of that which is well done in them, wholly or
partly out of Mr Rous his and mine. Compare Psalm. 1. of the Scot's Translation
with Ours, the 16. of that with Mine, the 119. of the other with Mr Rous his.
Their own Verse consist's generally of single rhyme, and that very imperfect: it
consist's also of broken Verses and multitudes of Transpositions; (the great
inconvenience whereof I must needs lay open to your view in the ensuing pages)
insomuch as if all the broken and disordered lines, and all which they have
borrowed out of Ours were taken away, I appeal to those that search and see,
whether one whole Psalm would be remaining in either of the said Translations.

If now any shall imagine that We go in a way to make our Composure too
curious, I answer no; for (to be sure) we take in plainness, and then all Art
and Industry is little enough to shun a harsh Translation: because as ill
cooking spoil's good meat, and make's men loathe; so ill Psalmodie (like the
looseness of Ely's sons) make's men abhor the offering of the Lord: to recover
whose appetites to this Ordinance, there had need to be an exquisite composure.

Now to give the Reader some account of the particulars under publication, I
desire that he may understand,

I. That I do not magnify my self, but (as the Apostle says, in another case)
I magnify my Office; so say I, (in this) I magnify God's ordinance: many
ravishing expressions we have heard in prayer, (though not altogether composed
out of Scripture) how much more might we be stirred with Psalm-composures out
of Scripture, if it were indeed exactly don? as to the worthiness of this work,
I say, in relation to men, that it is not all mine own; and in reference to
God, I say it is not one jot mine own, except the Errata; and truly they are
not all mine own neither.

II. Much less do I endeavor to cast aspersions upon any, or to triumph in the
ruins of an old Psalm-book; which, as in many things, it may easily be
mended, so in some respects it is heard to be excelled, nor in all defects is
easily redressed; wherefore I have mentioned the faults but sparingly, as may
appear by these particulars.

1. There are many unseemly phrases unmentioned; as, I do not lust to haunt or
use; be bold and have a lust; yea from my youth I had a lust; and in other
places, so Trade often used for Religion, etc.

2. Many obsolete words; as, glory goodly dight; the woeful hearted wight;
thousands of Neat and Kine; the springing wels and bourn, ay, eke, aghast,
revere, and many more.

3. There are many more examples to the other heads but for swelling the View
into a volume.

4. I have but instanced in one or two examples for the 7th head whereof are
many hundreds, were it not necessary to compare them with the text still, and
so to set down both, which were too troublesome and tedious; for omissions,
additions and mistakes are not easily judged of, but by them that know the text
very well.

5. I hinted not how many faults may often be spied out of one example, let me
give a short one, Psalm. 107.27. Or had of sense no feel; First the word is
clipped, No feel for no feeling; Secondly transposed, of sense no feeling, for no
feeling of sense. Thirdly improper, for we say, no sense or no feeling, but,
no feeling of sense is an improper Pleonasm.

6. I omit to mention of Apocryphal Psalms and tunes which are many, and (as
all men know) need to be redressed.

III. Lastly, I do least of all intend disadvantage to any man's interest by
this work; wherefore I crave the concurrence of all good people, that the old
Psalm book (more exceptionable then the Common-Praier-book) may (without
farther prejudice against singing Psalms) be removed, and a complete one come
in the room.

The only end of this enforced pains and publication being this;

1. To discover the original Cause that impedeth Psalm-singing, and the
effectual Cure. 2. To engage all parties interessed to accommodation for the
public good. 3. To acknowledge the deserved honor of those worthy Men that have
encouraged and do encourage this necessary Work.

I. Improper, unseemly and non sensical passages in the old Psalm-book.
Psalm. 33.21. Our soul in God has joy and game

Psalm. 31.9. my womb for woe does ache.

Psalm. 35.21. With open mouth they run at me,
They gape, they laugh, they steer.
Well, well, say they, etc.
and verse 18. Lord when will thou amend this geer?

ver. 26. so, so, this geer goes trim.

Psalm. 119.110. to catch me at a bay:

Psalm. 18 14. and at thy chiding cheer

ver. 35. nor stumble at a balk.

Psalm. 77.8. for ever and a day.

Psalm. 33.8. All men on earth, both least and most

Psalm. 94 20. Will thou inhaunt thy self, and draw with wicked men to sit?

Psalm. 74.20. Forget not always in thy power the poor that much do rue.

Psalm. 8^. 6. And likewise laws both all and some,

Psalm. 87.7. through God's device appear.

Psalm. 119.131. For joy I have both gap't and breathed

Psalm. 24.6. This is the brood of travelers
in seeking of his grace,
As Jacob did the Israelite
in that time of his race.
Psalm. 119.53. -- and did procure
thy judgments who know's when?
Psalm. 27.2. While yt my foes with al their strength
begin with me to braul.
Psalm. 89.39. -- anoint
him king of all the rout.
Psalm. 119.93. when I was at last cast.

Psalm. 60.6. this was his joyful tale.

Psalm. 35.16. But they at my diseas did joy,
and gather on a rout:
Yea abject slaves at me did toy,
with mocks and checks full stout.
Psalm. 119.120. My flesh alas is taken with fear,
as though it were benumbed:
For when I see thy judgments, straight
I am as one aston'd.
II. Old, obsolete, clip't and coined words, bald words, and botches in the old
Psalm-book.
Psalm. Psalm. 1.1. TO wicked read his ear.

Psalm. 119.100. I held it ay best read.

Psalm. 2.7. did say to me, I wot.

Psalm. 88.13. of all thy wonders wot.

Psalm. 22.9. I came by thy behest.

Psalm. 44.3. the land of his behest.

Psalm. 73.15. when other men be shent.

Psalm. 119.80. That no confusion seize on me,
whereby I should be shent.
Psalm. 35.14. And clad my self in sack:

Psalm. 73.2. And ere I wist, even at a pinch,
my steps awry began glide.
Psalm. 106.23. before him in the break
To turn his wrath, lest he on them
with slaughter should and wreak.
Psalm. 78.24. a food of micle wonder.

Psalm. 80.1. Thou herd that Israel do keep,

Psalm. 28.4. let them receive their meed.

verse 6. his law nor yet his lore.

Psalm. 119.122. with rage as they were wood.

Psalm. 106.24. that he behight to give.

Psalm. 136.1. O laud the Lord benign.

Psalm. 9.16. lie trapt in his own wark.

Psalm. 51.2. my sin is in mine eyne.

Psalm. 107.17. and cannot from them wend.

Psalm. 91.10. with thee it shall not mell.

Psalm. 44.1. in alder time, O Lord.

Psalm. 78.11. and all his work most magnifique.

ver. 12. that called is Thaneos.

Such has the Scot's Psalm-book.
Psalm. 18.26. PVre to the pure, froward the kythes
unto the froward wight.
III. Transposition, or words shamefully put out of order in the old Psalm-book.
Psalm. 109.20. IT shall be far him fro.

Psalm. 118.6. when God stand's me about.

Psalm. 60.8. for favor me unto.

Psalm. 91.12. still waiting thee upon.

Psalm. 119.75. the cause just need's be must.

ver. 172. and on this wise say shall.

Note that these Transpositions are very great faults, especially in
Prepositions (made Postpositions, contrary to their nature) and in signs of
Verbs, as in the last example; but are so exceeding frequent in the Scotch
Psalm-book, and Mr White's, that they need no other faults to be alleged to
satisfy the Reader of their unhandsomness for public use.

IV. Cacophonia's, or Ill soundings:
1. By Repetition of words.

Psalm. 90.3. THou grindest man through grief and pain
to dust or clay, and then
And then thou sai'st again return,
again ye sons of men.
2. In likeness of the sound of the Verse in three endings together.

Psalm. 47.3. The people he shall make to be
unto our bondage thrall:
And underneath our feet he shall
the nations make to fall.
3. In the like sound of both rimes.

Psalm. 74.12. Why do thou draw thy hand aback,
and hide it in thy lap?
Oh pluck it out, and be not slack
to give thy foes a rap.
Note that the Scotch Psalm-book and Mr White's do err with intolerable
frequency, in the two former ways; but for the last, they are not guilty of
it: for Mr White has not any double rhyme that I can find in all the book; no,
not in lines wholly of 8's, which is very unhandsom.

V. Seeming Contradictions of the old Psalm-book.
Psalm. 119.38. WHich am thy servant and do love and fear nothing but thee.

Yet in the next line;

Reproach and shame which I so fear. Psalm. 129.7. And made as grass upon the
house;

yet in the next Verse he speak's of those that are the reapers, that they
should go

to glean upon the land. Psalm. 42.9. I am persuaded thus to say
to him with pure pretense.
Psalm. 70.3. And at my hurt do laugh, and cry



But these are nothing so many as those that arise by frequent breaking,
transposing or ill-couching of the words in a line.

VI. Ill Rimes and botches in the old Psalm-book.
Psalm. 5 COnsider and prayer.

Psalm. 13. remembered and offended

Psalm. 16. together and consider.

Psalm. 22. break and heat.
hereafter and wonder.
Psalm. 78. after and wonder.
Caterpiller and Grasshopper.
So, Lord and world,
price and wise,
flies and lice.
But the defect of rhyme is much more in the Scot's Psalm-book, and in Master
White's, except when they borrow out of Ours; as I would desire you to note out
of Psalm. 102. of the Scot's Psalm-book, the 2d Meter, which I cast my eye upon
but even now.

Botches.

that were not sprung up tho. I say] is as frequent a botch as any in the book,
but yet is tolerable and allowable (if not commendable) in a repetition or
question.

VII Mistakes, omissions or additions to the Text.
Mistake.

[Text.] Psalm. 68.11. God gave the word: great was the company of those that
published it.



[Translation.] GOD will give women causes just,
to magnify his name:
When as the people triumphs make,
and purchase bruit and fame.


[Mr White also has it.]

Great multitudes of women it
did publish all abroad.
But must they needs be women publishers, because the word is of the feminine
gender? May not the word be rendered publicantium, as well as enunciatricum? I
leav the Learned to judge: sure I am that there are Hebrew words as, The Lord
of Hosts, this is of the feminine gender too, but not restrained to women.
Certainly learned Master White took it so restrained; it was not, we see, to
make up the rhyme, as the Scot's Psalm book says in Psalm. 140.3. the poison of
a snake,

for Adder's poison: whereas a Snake has no poison at all, but is of an
harmless nature, as the Physicians teach us. So Doctor Read in his Treatise of
Tumors.

Yet if these be not mistaken, I believe that is Psalm. 18.44. whereas mine own
will swerve.

and in the next line, I shall be irksom to mine own, where is interpreted an
acquaintance (whereas it should have been interpreted a stranger;) the word
being of so near kin in the Original, tanquam notum propter nothum, says
Pagnine.

Omission.

[Text.] Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart,
There is no God.


[Translation.] There is no God, as foolish men
affirm in their mad mood.


Here the principal clause [hath said IN HIS HEART] is utterly left out,
without any thing equivalent or pertinent.

Addition.

[Text.] Psalm. 48.11. Tell the towers thereof.



[Translation.] And tell the towers that thereupon
are builded on a row.


I count it no unlawful addition, to say the towers were builded, (for they
must needs be so) but to say they were builded on a row, I question; howbeit I
find Master White to add this also: but if this be not an addition, doubtless
that is

[Text.] Psalm. 8.3. The Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained.

[Translation.] The Sun the Moon and all the Stars,
in order as they stand.


The Sun ought not to be put in, being a nocturnal meditation, when he could
behold the Moon and the Stars, which by day he could not do.

VIII. Ill running.
Psalm. 2.9. AS men under foot trod.

Psalm. 49.18. saying, all is well done.

Psalm. Psalm. 137.7. when they raised our city.

Psalm. 119.24. and my heart's great solace.

Psalm. 102.18. The people yet uncreated,

Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy on me God after

Note that extensions or harsh contractions and hypermeters do beget ill
running.

Psalm. 119. to be thy creature.

Psalm. 51.17. and of all sacrifice the effect.

Psalm. 119. thy statutes of most excellency.

Psalm. 72. Than thousands ten of silver and gold.

But these being more frequent in the Scot's Psalm-book, I will give some
instances out of that book:

Scot's Psalm. 2.6. to be my king appointed:
And over Sion my holy hill,
I have him king anointed.
Psalm. 119.36. my heart unto thy testimonies.

Psalm. 12.4. We Will with our tongue prevail, our lips
are ours, who is Lord over us?
Psalm. 57.9. I Will prais thee among the people, Lord,
among nations sing will I
Psalm. 56.9. I know it God is for me.

Psalm. 78.21. against Jacob and against Israel.

Psalm. 51.12. with thy free spirit me stay.

Psalm. 113.4. 'bove heaven his glory raised.

We may all see what little fear there is of having Psalms too smooth, when
verily the best art of man is not able every where to avoid all harshness: In
these Synalepha's the rule must be to curtail no word out of the ordinary
rode; and of the Hypermeters, that there be none at all but where a short
syllable does naturally run into another.

IX. Presumptuous Assertions.
Psalm. 24.6. ANd God his God and Savior
shall yield to him his right.
Psalm. 20.3. And so receive right thankfully
thy burnt offerings each one.
Psalm. 76.3. To all that do in Jury dwell
the Lord is clearly known:
For God is neither known to all, ( Some have not the knowledge of God, says the
Apostle) nor clearly known to any, for we know but in part; and whatsoever
excuse any may make, yet it were the best way to remove it, as also that place
like to it.

Psalm. 119.130. And very idiots understand,
when they it read or hear.
Psalm. 84.13. For God the Lord, light and defense
will grace and worship give.
136. ult. Wherefore of heaven the God
To laud be it your will.
X. Broken lines.
Psalm. 75.2. I Will uprightly judge, when get

Psalm. 99.1. The Lord does reign, although at it

Psalm. 139.16. Were written all, naught was before,

Psalm. 140.13. The just shall prais thy name, just shall

144. ult. The people blessed are, that with

Psalm. 145.2. Prais, and thy power preach

ver. 7. And they into the mention shall
break, of thy goodness great:
Those Psalm-books that do very frequently break their lines, and transpose
their words, must needs run into many shameful absurdities, as may abundantly
appear out of the Scot's Psalm-book and Master White's: as the instances
declare in the ensuing page.

XI. Unavoidable inconveniences occurring by frequent breaking off the lines
and transpositions of the words.
Scot's Psalm-book. Mr White's Psalm-book. Psalm. 14.1. Psalm 145. THat there is
not a God the fool ANd widows but turn's upside down Nonsense. Psalm. 183.
Nonsense. Psalm. 17.9. Upon the Lord who worthy is of praises will I cry. and
from that wicked scout who are my deadly enemies. Ridiculous sense. Psalm.
34.15. Ridiculous sense. Psalm. 141.3.1. God's eyes are on the just his ears set
thou my mouth before Strange sense. Psalm. 16.5. Strange sense. Psalm. 99.1. God
is of mine inheritance and cup the portion. The Lord does reign before his
face: Contradiction. Psalm. 34.9. Contradiction. Psalm. 145.14. Fear God his
saints none yt fear him down he upraiseth all. Improper sense. Psalm. 37.21.
Improper sense. Psalm. 18.36. The wicked borrow's but the same So that I safely
walk my feet. Sense broken beyond two lines. Psalm. 22.1. Sense broken beyond
two lines. Psalm. 17.14. My God, my God why have thou me forsaken why so far By
thy hand, from men of this world who in this life obtain False sense Psalm.
57.6. False sense Psalm. 14.3. for me they fallen are. most filthy there is
none.

Thus it plainly appears (neither can any help this manner of version;) if you
keep the sens, you plainly spoil the Verse; if you keep the Verse, (as the Clerk
does to the people) then you confound the sens: neither can people understand
it, unless it keep order and sens in the line, or correspond thereto.

An Epigram upon the exact translation of the Psalms by Mr W. Barton.
TO raise, increase, inflame and ravish love,
Are Psalms indicted, uttered, taught and tuned,
But how much more affections shall they move,
Now thus translated, ordered, phras'd and pruned?
The numbers, measures, meter with the Matter,
Are full and just, delightful and Divine:
Who so compare's the former with the latter,
Will give to these his praise, as I do mine.
Laz. Seaman.

To Mr Barton, upon his apt translation of David's Psalms in Meter.
ISrael's sweet Psalmist now in English meter
We have, and never till now; and it is the sweeter
(Me thinks) because so plain; nor does affect
To keep the Hebrew phrase and dialect:
And now none more, I hope will scruple make
Of singing Psalms in Gospel times, nor take
Offense at others. Fondlings, read, and then
You Will change your minds, I hope, and sing again.
Yet, against this book, it is like that envy fierce
Will plot, as once Saul David sought to slay.
But, friend, the Harp of David, in thy verse,
Will surely drive such evil spirits away.
Sir, in this you have the real thoughts and hopes of your near neighbor and
assured friend, Arthur Jackson.

An Epigram upon Mr Barton's excellent version of the Book of Psalms.
Reader,
SEt all disdeign and doubting by,
No longer wait, dispute nor try,
But come away and buy.
Then put thee in a pleasant vein,
Sing out some sweet and curious strain,
And pay thy self again.
When ere thou shall a better see,
Buy that, and bring it unto me,
And I Will buy this of thee.
Posuit Fr. Roberts,
Sept. 9. 1645.
In Magistri WILHELMI BARTONI Versionem Metricam Sacro-Sanctorum Psalmorum
operosius Elaboratam, (...).
VAde, Liber, summo debes servire Magistro,
Concinnatus eras integer ejus open.
Pulcra reformatis poliuntor tempora formis,
Qualia Metra vigent, candida, compta, nova.
Es cordi doctis, mulces solertibus aures;
Art scatens tanta, compositusque stylo.
Es stimulus tardis, rudioribus es Paraphrastes,
Nodosus, Momus, solvitur, arguitur.
Exiguo venis, tanti tamen esse valoris
Pagina quaeque rata est, ut valuisse duplum.
So approved by Thomas Case, George Walker, James Nalton, Jeremy Burroughes,
Samuel Clarke, Leonard Cook, Robert Harris, Francis Woodcock, Jeremy Whitaker,
John Conant, John Langley, Edmund Staunton, Joseph Caryl, Henry Scudder,
Richard Lee, Edmund Calamy, Thomas Hodges, Arthur Salway, John Downame, William
Carter, Sydrac Simpson, Henry Wilkinson,

To Master Barton upon his sweet Translation.
JUstly our French do their translation boast,
Citing in Sermons our heart-moving measures:
But now must give the garland to your coast,
Adorned with tropes and all rhetorical treasures.
For God, and nature, art and education,
Long time and study meet in this Translation.
So approved by me SAMUEL DELAPLACE, one of the Assembly.

REader, improve thy reason,
Behold a work in season,
Most perfect and profound.
The Psalms that went on crutches,
Stark lame with maims and botches,
Are now made whole and sound.
O then admire the CVRE,
The sense and rimes so pure,
In every piece and part.
Let the Physician shine,
In thine eyes as in mine,
And give him hand and heart.
William Tutty, Martins Orgars, LONDON.

Upon Master WILLIAM BARTON's elaboborate Translation of the sacred Book of
Psalms.
GO Book, and serve thy Master, none so great,
His gift alone did make thee so complete:
Polish the fabric of reformed times,
Fresh, fair and fine, to flourish as thy rimes.
Lo! thou have art the Learned to content;
To please the curious thou art eloquent.
Quickness thou giv'st to them that quickness want,
And do interpret to the ignorant.
The scrupulous thy skill does satisfy,
And captious Carpers are convinced thereby.
Thy price is little, but thy worth is such,
That every leaf deserves twice as much.
So approved by Ra. Robinson, Immanuel Bourn, Fulk Bellers, Cornelius Burges,
Timothy Dod, Simeon Ash, Thomas Clandon, Anthony Burges, Samuel Fawcet,
Christopher Love, John Foxcrofte, Matthew. Newcomen, Edward Corbett, Humphrey
Hardwick, John Tombs, Francis Roberts, William Jenkin, Walter Tailor, Samuel
Bolton, Thomas Porter, Samuel Fisher, William Tutty, Cum multis aliis.

Upon the Translation and Approbation.
FOedavere sacros male tersa vocabula Psalmos,
Illustrata metro quae meliore nitent.
Sublimis doceat Majestas addita rebus
Mente intellectis concinuisse sonis.
Debita fundentes vigili praeconia curae,
Ornant conspicua Te Pietate Pii.
JO. LANGLEY.

REader, thou behold'st the front,
And what praise there is upon it,
It Is to sharpen sight so keen,
Lest such treasure lie unseen;
But if once thou read it through,
There are Epigrams enough:
It Is not other men to dare,
Or to make a proud compare,
Who shall bear the Bell away,
That the Author will not say;
But praie's thee to have an eye,
And to judge impartially.
John Barton.

In Magistri WILHELMI BARTONI Psalmorum Versionem Poeticam Epigramma.
MAgna Caledoniae Buchananus gloria terrae,
Aptavit Cytharae Latiali Davidis odas:
Hunc sequitur, genio felix, aequaliter illi,
Felix Bartonus, modulamina caetara vincens.
Ecce, reformatis, Psalterion induit, Anglis,
Fulgentem vestem, votis quae mill petita est.
Anglia Bartonum, Buchananum Scotia jactat,
Alterutrique decus par est Psalmodia docta.
WALL. TAILOR, in Ecclesia Clementis Pastor.

To Mr BARTON upon his Exquisite and Elaborate Translation of of DAVID'S Psalms
into English Meter.
TWere strange, thy times and tunes should meet in one,
While harshness suit's the times, thy tunes have none.
If by thee David's works translated are,
And on thee David's woes, it is Kingly fare.
If both his lines and life thou do explain,
Not Helicon, but Heaven shall be thy gain.
Exactly thou translatest David, when
His life thy lot translate's, his lines thy pen.
Momus, my friend neglect's thy frown, thy tush:
This wine of Angels sell's without thy bush.
Christ-Church, London. WILL. JENKIN.

Upon the sweet and exquisite Version of the PSALMS, by my dear and loving
Friend Mr William Barton.
THis music rock's the spheres: Ye heavenly Quires
Make melody, wipe off your tears; wing your desires,
Be ravished with these notes. Let every creature,
Each instrument give strings or throats, join art with nature.
It Is turnd' and tuned so well, our hearts are wonn,
And this shall bear away the bell, when all is done.
PETER WATKINSON of Chigwell in Essex

To the Reverend, Learned and Godly Ministers whose hands or hearts are to my
Book, An Epigram. A.D. 1645.
LOvers of desert and Learning,
You are pleased, beyond my earning,
To vouchsafe me commendation.
Were my thanks as great and learned,
It should be as well returned
With deserved gratulation.
All the honor I can do you,
Is submitting all unto you:
For one day you must be tryers;
If you find a word amiss,
I Will provide a help for this,
And complete it to the buyers.
Show what version then is vicious,
Tell what tie is superstitious,
Say what scope the work afford's,
Speak what Dialect earn's your praises,
Proper or improper phrases,
Ordered or disordered words.
Though I fear a lingering death,
More then strangling my first breath,
Do your mind, and do not sin.
And, if so you can please God,
Let it quite be under-trod,
When a better shall come in.
But I have such hopes in store,
That unless the world loos more,
I shall never loos my labors:
And however envy spites's me,
This requite's me, this delight's me,
To have dwelt by so good neighbors.
After Publication of these Epigrams, sundry of the city-Ministers
(beside-those that are already set down) gave their approbation in order to
public use, Anno 1646.

(viz.) Stanly Gower, Thomas Gouge, John Yates, William Tailor, James Sibbald,
John Dickes, George Fowler, John Cross, Thomas Cawton, George Cross, William
Blackmore, John Thompson, John Garret, William Wickins, William Rosewell.

And now at present being in pursuance for public use, diverse of the chief
Ministers of London have given subscriptions to a Petition for the removal of
the old, and the admission of this translation: whose ready acceptance and
encouragement (with diverse in the Country now concurring) induces and
engages me to tender my service and supply at their direction; as is further
expressed in the lines following.

August 10th 1655. To the Reverend and Learned Ministers of England whose
hearts or hands are to my book. A double Epigram.
DId not I well
At first foretell,
and say,
You must be Triers of my work one day?
My promiss then,
To all good men,
was this,
That I would mend what ever word amiss.
I have begun,
And shall have don
no less,
May my prepared papers guide the press.
If ought beside
Unrectify'd
appear;
The change is easy, or the answer clear.
One crooked knot
My lines may not
retain;
But Verse and Prose must join in every strain.
Your lines and hands
Are strong commands
to me,
To make my Verse as good as good can be.
I willingly
Embrace the tie
and call
To get faults mended by the aid of all.
And you can tell
It savour's well
(mean while)
Of Hebrew roots and Academick oil.
II.
DVlcia famigero capiatis Carmina plausu:

Edo1, condio2, paro3 CANDIDA3, COMPTA2, NOVA1.

Mellita Celebres rapiant dulcedine Co^us;

Tempus1, anior,2 pietas3, postulat1, urget2, agit3.

Solertis celerem repetant modulaminis usum

Afficit1, ornat2, habet3, secula3, rostra2, choros1

ANd thus at length I turn my pen
To the pursuit of erring men;
That either Idolize the old,
Or do against the duty hold,
Or that prefer to sacred Writ
The fancy of their mother-wit,
Or dare defend the lying plea
Of Psalms Composed ex tempore:
So have I heard with shame enough,
The pedling fiddlers paltrie stuff;
And now in public these must have
As poor expressions as the Knave:
Their Plalms must be as seldom else
As are the Quakers miracles.
Postscript.
IT is easy to be understood, how sparingly Psalms are used in these days;
the Clarks keeping to some few of better translation, yet therein can hardly
avoid expressions too exceptionable. Psalm. 11. has, say thus my soul until;
the 15 has, bribe or else purloin. This not only beget's a decay of the duty,
but a continuance of the fault for lack of notice; and our scorn and scandal
among the Papists for want of reformation. Excuse therefore (good Reader) this
impeachment of the old, and embrace, yea, and advance our endeavor for
admission of the new.

FINIS.
Sive serena tibi sit frons (Liber!) ibis in urbem,
Sive superveniat grande supercilium.

Courteous Reader,
TAke notice that the old Psalms do follow the old Translation of the Bible,
and therefore must needs differ greatly in expression from the new; now if
there were such great necessity (as godly people did plead) to cause a better
Translation of the reading Psalms, together with the whole Bible; how much more
should we think it necessity to have a new Translation of the Psalms in Meeter.

2. Observe that ten or twelve of the old Psalms are in such obsolete Tunes,
that of necessity those must be wholly new Translated.

3. This new Translation being in the very order of the Prose, as near as may
be, will soon be as familiar as ever the old was, and far more ready, because
it runs so much upon the words of the Text, as the Epistle of my book more
fully argues.

4. The old Psalms are amended in this Translation of mine and every perfect
line that would well accord with the text of the new Translation is left in,
for example see the 113. Psalm.

5. If we did bring the old Psalms to as complete an amendment as the Text
affords, there would scarce be two lines of the old Text together in any place.

Soon after the publishing of this Book, there were many hands of Eminent
persons added to several Petitions in behalf of this Translation, an account
whereof follows.
M. G. Whalley. M. G. Goffe. L. Chief Justice Glin. L. Chief Baron Steel. Col.
Chadwick of Notingham. Col. Hacker. Col. Beaumont. Col. Temple. Maj. Beak. Maj.
Babington.
Esquires.
Archibald Palmer. Will. Sherman. Will. Danvers. Edw. Smith. Mr. Stanley of
Leicester. Mr. Cradock. Jo. Goodman. Capt. Hubbert. Capt. Dale. Capt. Dreury.
Capt. Cockram. Capt. Sherman.
Ministers Commissioners for approbation of public Preachers.
Mr. Greenehill. Mr. Caryll. Mr. Peter's. Mr. Carter. Mr. Griffith. Mr.
Balmford. Mr. Cooper. Mr. Manton.
Ministers of London.
Mr. Calamy. Mr. Carter. Mr. Jacomb. Mr. Clendon. Mr. Nalton. Mr. Cranford. Mr.
Watson. Mr. White of Holb. Mr. White of Maryhill. Mr. Wood (then of Christ
Church, new) of the Abbey at Westminster. Mr. Gouge of Sepulchers. Mr. Crofton
of Algate. Mr. Blackwell.
Ministers of the Country.
Mr. Sheffield of Ibstock. Mr. Simmes of Leicester. Mr. Yaxley of Kibworth. Mr.
Grace of Rearsby. Mr. Rocket of Market-Bosworth. Mr. Firth of Mansfield. Mr.
Palmers of Gedling. Mr. Lee of Hatfield. Mr. Owen. Mr. Watkinson sometimes of
Chigwell in Essex. Mr. Bagshaw. Mr. Porter of Paintridge. Mr. Tailor of Darby.
Mr. King of Okeham. Mr. Rowlandson of Whitewell. Mr. Bourne of Ashover. Mr.
Bourchier of Biscarthorp. Mr. Buroughs of Codsbrook Mr. Lawry of Harborough.
Mr. Gilbert. Mr. Boheme of Hallaughton. Mr. Johnson of Sutton-Cheney. Dr.
Boylston of Weston. Mr. Shelmerdine of Maileck Mr. Birdall of Walsall. Mr.
Fowler of Crick in Northhamtonshire. Mr. Whitlock of Nottingham. With some
others.

