A DECLARATION Of the Commander in Chief of the Forces in SCOTLAND, Also
another DECLARATION Of the Officers of the ARMY in SCOTLAND To the Churches of
Christ in the three NATIONS, Together with Three LETTERS from the Lord General
MONCK, Commander in Chief of the Forces in Scotland, and one of the
Commissioners by Act of Parliament for the Government of the Army of this
Commonwealth, VIZ. 1. To Mr. SPEAKER, 2. To the Lord FLEETWOOD, 3. To the Lord
LAMBERT.


EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, 1659.

A DECLARATION OF THE COMMANDER in Chief of the Forces in SCOTLAND,
HAving, to the great grief of our hearts, been informed of a most unhappy
difference lately fallen out betwixt the Parliament and some Officers of the
Army at London, which has occasioned the displacing of sundry of the said
Officers; And also the in interruption of the Members of Parliament in the
discharge of their Duty, We therefore, having earnestly besought the LORD to
direct us in this great and weighty Affair, wherein the Liberty and Peace of
these Nations, and the Interest of the Godly and Faithful therein is so nearly
concerned, do find it our duty to Declare, and we do hereby Declare,

That we shall use our Christian endeavors to the utmost for the begetting of
a Right understanding and Reconciliation betwixt the Parliament and the said
Officers of the Army. And we do also Declare, That we shall, through the
strength of God, assert and maintain the Freedom and Pr^viledges of the present
Parliament, the so often, and lately acknowledged Supreme Authority of these
Nations, and not suffer the Members thereof to be illegally interrupted or
molested in the discharge of their Duties; And we do solemnly avow to all the
world, that our only intention in doing this, is to preserve the Rights of our
Country, and to protect and encourage all the Godly and Faithful therein,
according to our Declaration to the Churches, lately emitted and published; and
likewise to establish the Peace of these Nations, and the Government of a
Free State or Commonwealth, To which we stand obliged by several Vows and
Engagements, made before GOD and many Witnesses: And as we have within us the
Testimony of sincere hearts and unbyassed consciences to encourage us in these
our Undertakings, so we doubt not of the concurrent assistance of all the
unprejudiced Faithful in the Land, for whose sakes principally we are drawn
forth to this Engagement.

And we therefore invite all our Brethren of the Arnw, and of the Militia, and
all others that profess love to GGD and His People, and to their own and their
Posterities Liberties, to come and give us their cheerful aid in this Work,
whereunto the Lord has called us, lest they be made a Prey to the Lusts of
Men, and then bewail the loss of this opportunity which God has put into
their hands.

Signed in the Name and by the Consent of the Commander in Chief and the
Officers of the Army in Scotland. WILLIAM CLARK, Secretary.

A Declaration of the Officers of the Army in Scotland to the Churches of
Christ in the three Nations.
ALL the great works the Lord Jesus has been doing in these three poor
Nations, has been to make his Churches in them a glory, that he might
establish Jerusalem a praise in the Earth, and we are confident his heart will
never be at rest, nor his providence shortened till upon this Glory he creates
a defense, and that so strong that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it; the establishing of his Churches we conceive to stand upon a double
foundation, Truth, and Peace, the Defense he will create upon it, is his own
presence with them in Christ, and the instruments in his hand which he has
raised to be a shelter to them in the worst of times.

Of this latter we may speak it to the praise of free grace, that no persons in
their capacity have been more instrumental in the hand of God then the Army,
through whose faithful endeavors for Christ and his Ordinances, and the
Liberties of his people, God has been pleased to redeem the precious
privileges of his Saints, (upon whose account all other Rights are only
valuable,) from mixture in their Ordinances, from unjust and Antiscriptural
usurpation upon their consciences, to a State of Freedom, to profess and
practice any thing that is warranted by the word, though diversely interpreted
according to that measure of the spirit, which Jesus Christ the head is pleased
to dispense.

The prosecution of which, while God gives us an oppertunity to serve our
Generation, we must still hold forth to be the principle and practice of the
Army, however different they may seem in the ways they pitch upon to promote
it.

The blessing also that has followed it, though it is not the alone motive to
make us at this time declare it to you, because we know Christ's work is wages
(let it be sucess'd how he pleases, by sowing in tears or reaping in joy) Yet
it is enough to encourage us as to the issue let it be what it will, the work
carrying in it acceptance with him whom we would only please, and engagements
of your selves, as to your prayers coincident with the end of all his glory,
which the Churches are to hold forth in all ages.

In order to this we do (as in the omnicient eye of our dear Lord Jesus who
walks in the midst of you) declare.

First, That we own and assert the Authority of this present Parliament which
is now through sad mistakes and misapprehensions interrupted; and principally,
because We do jude that a well regulated Commonwealth is the safest Government
to secure the just Liberties of all the Churches of Christ though in differing
forms, and to balance the Lamented and circumstantial differences (whose
wounds are yet bleeding) in the great scale of Christian and spiritual Love,
and as far as we know our own hearts, the security it may give to our civil
rights as men, are dear to us only as they relate to this most desired and
promised unity amongst Gods people though very diverse in their judgments.

Secondly, That to this end, if the Lord again please out of reserved mercy to
his poor Churches, to unite the Parliament and Army together, We do declare,
that we shall assert it as the undoubted right of the Churches, and humbly
represent it to the Parliament as our great request, that an impartial and just
countenance according to the Word, and the nature of their Privileges, may be
afforded to all that may encourage the Ministry of the Churches, and that may
hedge about the flock of Christ, that they may feed quietly in all Godliness,
and this with the largest allowance that Gods word will admit of both to
Pastors and people in what way soever constituted and congregated.

Thirdly, As further conducing to this end, We do profess our selves to be
persons that would follow Truth in Love, and therefore can readily and heartily
allow that in affection to all who profess Christ, and walk (...) him as they
have received him, which we may not possibly in Judgment; for as far as we
have attained we would walk up, and where we think not the same things, we
shall till God reveal further, pray for a Spirit to practice that which is
unquestionably revealed, that we love one another even as Christ has loved us.

Fourthly, We do further Declare, however the present exigent may enforce us to
the restraint of some of our Brethren and Friends, whose mistakes about their
way to this end, appear to our consciences to be such as we cannot reconcile
either by the Word or the promises and protestations to such a purpose as we
Declare for, That it is not upon the least account out of disrelish of their
Judgments as to any profession of Christ, which they hold forth, but only to
preserve the civil peace and unity of the Army, that there may be a due time
left to the Parliament the supreme Authority of the Nation, to put in Execution
the forementioned Ends which they have promised and obliged themselves to, to
settle this birthright, which we have asserted in the possession of the
Churches, as a fundamental we prize and value as part of the Testament in the
blood of Jesus Christ, and we should account it a greater mercy to have it as
free born sons of Christ's visible Kingdom, then whatsoever we as mere Subjects
of this Commonwealth may challenge were our outward Liberties never so much
advantaged.

Of which, that we may see the Topstone as well as the foundation, We would
desire all the Lords Remembrancers to give him no rest till he makes Sion a
praise in the Earth, and shall account it no small encouragement to our
endeavors, let what difficulty soever attend them, to have your prayers as our
strength in the Lord, whose cause and work we hope we own: however we can
truly say we really intend it, and shall believe God will pardon the upright
in heart, and if we be mistaken so ought you: forgiving one another even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

Edinb. October. 23. 1659.
To the SPEAKER.
Right Honorable,
HAving received notice, that there was a Force put upon the Parliament on the
twelfth of this Instant, I have sent this Messenger to your Lordship, to know
whether that force does continue; for I am resolved by the Grace and Assistance
of GOD, as a true Englishman, to stand to and assert the Liberty and Authority
of Parliament; And the Army here (praised be God) is very courageous and
unanimous, and I doubt not but to give a good account of this Action to You. I
have, according to your Act of the Eleventh instant, being constituted a
Commissioner of the Government of the Army, put out such persons as would not
act according to your Commission: I do call GOD to witness, That the Asserting
of a Commonwealth is the only intent of my heart, and I desire, if possible, to
avoid the shedding of Blood, and therefore entreat You, that there may be a
good understanding between Parliament and Army; But if they will not obey Your
Commands, I will not desert You, according to my Duty and Promise. Which is all
at present from

Edinburgh, October. 20. 1659. Your humble and faithhful Servant, GEORGE MONCK.

To the Lord FLEETWOOD.
Right Honorable,
I Have sent this messenger to your Lordship, to let you know that we have
received notice that a part of the Army have put force upon the Parliament;
which they so lately called together, and owned with the greatest Testimonies
of Obedience and Repentance for their former Apostasy from them; I hope your
Lordship will not abet an Action of such a dangerous and destructive
Consequence; I know that you love the Liberty and Peace of England so well,
that you will use your best Care, that Attempts of this nature be suppressed. I
do therefore humbly entreat you that the Parliament may be speedily restored to
that Freedom, which they enjoyed on the eleventh of this Instant, otherwise I
am resolved by the assistance of God, with this Army under my Command to
Declare for them, and to proseeute this just Cause to the last drop of my
Blood; I bless the Lord, that the Officers here are very unanimous: and for
such, whose hearts fail them, or which will not act according to their
Commissions from the Parliament, I having Authority as one of the Seven
Commissioners appointed by Act of Parliament, Do constitute such as cheerful
for this Good Old Cause, till the Parliaments pleasure be further known; And I
do plainly assure your Lordship, that I was never better satisfied in the
justice of any Engagement than in this: You cannot but remember that God has
already showed Himself glorious in it, and determined the Quarrel on this side,
against Arbitrary power of raising Money without the Peoples consent first had,
and the management of the Militia by any other then the Parliament, I desire
your Lordship not to be deluded by the specious pretenses of any ambitious
persons whatsoever, and do not bring all the blood that will be shed upon your
own head; My Lord, Consider how you will answer to the dreadful God for the
ruin of three Nations, for to serve a lust, or to gratify a passion: For my
particular, I am ashamed of these Confusions and Changes that we have made,
that we are now become a scorn and a reproach to our very friends, and designed
to Ruin by all our Neighbors. I take God to witness, that I have no further
ends then the establishing of Parliamentary Authority, and those good Laws that
our Ancestors, have purchased with so much blood, the settling the Nations in a
free Common wealth, and the defense of Godliness and godly men, though of
different Judgment; And I take my self so far obliged, being in the
Parliaments Service, to stand though alone in this Quarrel, and doubt not but
your Lordship, having the fear of God in your heart, will carefully consider of
this matter Which is all at present from.

Edinb. October. 20. 1659. You Excellencies humble servant, GEORGE MONCK.

To the Lord Lambert.
Right Honorable,
HAving notice, that part of the Army under the Parliaments Command, have,
contrary to their duty, put force upon them; I have therefore sent this
Messenger to your Lordship, to entreat you to be an Instrument of Peace and a
good understanding between Parliament and Army: for, if they should continue
this Force, I am resolved, with the assistance of God, and that part of the
Army under my Command, to stand by them, and assert their lawful Authority. For
Sir, the Nation of England will not endure any Arbitraray Power, neither will
any true Englishman in the Army, so that such a Design will be ruinous and
destructive; Therefore I do earnestly entreat you, that we may not be a scorn
to all the world, and a Prey to our Enemies, that the Parliament may be
speedily restored to their Freedom which they enjoyed on the 11. of this
instant. Which is all at present from.

Edinburgh, October. 20. 1659. Your Lordships humble servant, GEORGE MONCK.

FINIS.

