engraved portrait of John Bastwick, facing right (...) 164^

Man's days are vain, and as a flower they fade,
Here Is one proclames, whereon man's life is stayed;
His sufferings, Changes, Comforts, in strict thrall,
Shen's GOD alone, preserves, and Gouernes all.


INDEPENDENCY NOT GODS ORDINANCE: OR A Treatise concerning Church Government,
occasioned by the Distractions of these times. Wherein is evidently proved,
that the Presbyterian Government DEPENDENT is Gods Ordinance, and not the
Presbyterian Government INDEPENDENT. To which is annexed a Postscript,
discovering the uncharitable dealing of the Independents toward their
Christian brethren, and the fraud and jugglings of many of their Pastors and
Ministers, to the misleading of the poor people, not only to their own
detriment, but the hurt of Church and State; with the danger of all Novelties
in Religion. BY JOHN BASTVVICK, Dr in Physic.

2 CORIN. 13.8. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

1 THESSALONIANS. 5.21. Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for Michael Spark junior, and are to be sold
at the sign of the blue Bible in Green-Arbour. 1645.

A Treatise proving the Presbyterian Government DEPENDENT to be Gods Ordinance,
and not the Presbyterian Government INDEPENDENT.
THe Apostle Saint Paul in the fourth of the Ephesians, exhorting all
Christians to walk worthy of the Vocation whereunto they were called, and to
behave themselves as beseemed brethren; wishes them with all lowliness and
meekness, with long suffering and patience, to bear one with another in love:
And uses a forceable Argument, to move them to brotherly kindness, Because,
says he, there is but one body and one spirit and one hope of Salvation: We
all worship one God, we are all consecrated to him with one Baptism, and we
all hope for one and the self-same glory: Therefore as there is but one Lord,
one faith, one Baptism; so be ye also of one mind, live in love, and keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. If ever there was need of this
Exhortation, there is now singular use of it, especially in this distracted
Nation wherein we live. For the division of a Kingdom is the ruin of it: the
division of a family destroys it: the division between brethren brings a
confusion amongst them. It has ever bin observed, That diversity of judgment
and opinion has made a difference in affection. The difference between the
Jews and the Samaritans in points of Religion, made the Disciples desire, That
fire might come down from heaven to end that controversy. The difference
between us and the Papists, and the diversity of opinions between us, made
them, because they could not bring down fire from heaven, fetch it out of hell,
to blow up the Parliament; and because that had not the desired effect, and the
diversity of opinion still remaining, makes the difference of their affection
from us so great, that nothing can expiate their indignation against us, but
the utter internetion and destruction of us all; and this and this only, next
unto our own sins, is the cause of all those fatal calamities this miserable
kingdom is now imbroyled with. And therefore, all care and diligence among
brethren, should be used to get a right understanding one of another, and to
move them to bear one with another, and ever to call to mind the saying of
Abraham to Lot, Genesis 13. Let not us contend together, for we are brethren. I am
most assured, if there were a right understanding of the differences that are
now among brethren, there could not be such bitter expressions one against
another, and such alienation of affection as is now too frequent and too well
known to the common enemy. We are commanded, If it be possible, as much as lies
in us, to be in peace with all men, Romans 12.18. And the fruits of discord are
set down in the 5th of the Galathians verse 15. If says the Apostle ye bite
and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one with another, and in
the 20. verse. Hacred says the Apostle, varience, emulation, strife, etc. and
envyings are of the flesh, and they that do such things shall not enter into
the Kingdom of God. A double misery follows those that do these things, misery
here, and misery hereafter, it excludes men out of heaven. The contemplation of
the sad condition, that will inevitably come upon that Land, Kingdom, and
Church, where those variances and heart-burnings are, and where there is such
diversity of opinions, and by reason of them, such difference in affection, put
me chiefly upon this employment, to see and try, if by any possible means, I
could, by showing wherein the difference between the brethren lies, be an
instrument of a good accord amongst them: resolving with my self by Gods
assistance whatsoever others do, to observe to the uttermost of my abilities,
the royal Law, Jan. 2.8. I do conceive, that if there were a right
understanding one of another opinions, the world would wonder there should be
such invectives in every pamphlet one against another, and such varience among
those that are joined together and that with nighest relations. The truth is,
the misunderstanding of each others opinions and the mis-prisian of each
others intentions, is the only cause of this diversity of affection which to
the dishonor of God and of our holy profession, and indeed to the disgrace of
Christian Religion, every where too much venteth it self. And therefore as
Abraham said unto Lot, so say I to all those that love the truth in sincerity
and wish the Peace of Zion; Let not us contend, especially with evil language,
for we are brethren; we have one father, we worship one God, we have one light,
one truth, one way. And this I profess to all the world, That I contend not
for victory, but for that ancient light, the faith once delivered unto the
Saints, Jude 3. For that truth which we have heard from the beginning, 1 John
2. ver. 14. for the old way, verse 6. The way the truth and the life, Joh. 14.
and for the honor of that Church against which the gates of hell can never
prevail; in the which these are all those undeceiveable marks, as are able for
ever to declare her to be built upon the foundation of Peter, in which the
Gospel of Jesus Christ is purely and sincerely both preached and believed, and
where the Sacraments are rightly administered, and in the which there is the
true invocation of God, and all other requisites that make her a true Church;
and from which there is no just cause of separation. That I have dedicated this
Treatise to no man, nor sought the patronage of any Authority, no mortal
creature I presume will blame me, knowing my Reasons. For writing in defense of
the Prerogative Royal of Kings, against Papal Usurpation; I dedicated my book
unto the King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, supposing my self safe
under his protection, whose honor and imperial dignity I maintain: but all
men know, what misery to the ruin of me, my wife, and many small children came
upon me by it, through the power and exorbitant authority of the Prelates: so
that for my duty and Loyalty to the King, I had a prison for my reward, and the
scorns and contumelies of the world to comfort me in it. And when I most
humbly petitioned his highness, complaining against the injustice done me, and
most submissively supplicated his Majesty (who was the Caesar to whom only I
could then appeal) that he would be pleased to grant me one of these humble
requests, either That his Majesty would be pleased, but for one hour to give
me a hearing of my just defense; or if that could not be granted, That at lest
he would then grant me that liberty in his Kingdom, that he denied not to
Crows and Kites and other Vermin, that I might provide for my young ones; and
if his highness would not be pleased to condescend unto either of the former
just demands, That then he would give me leave to depart the Kingdom, and to
go into any other Country where I might enjoy my Liberty and provide for my
poor distressed family. I am most assured there was never a more equal
Petition put up to any Prince in the world, yet his Majesty vouchsafed not to
yield unto any of these my requests, nor to any other Petition put up either by
my poor distressed wife or calamitous children; so that without any wrong unto
his Majesty, I may truly say, That Paul found more favor from a Heathen Roman
Caesar, then I had from a Christian King, the defender of the faith. After I
saw all possibility of relief was now taken from me, I writ my Apology to the
Bishops themselves, discovering unto them their unjust proceedings in their
Courts, and their unrighteous dealings toward my self, and gave them my
reasons of all I spoke, without any offensive language and without any
purturbation of Spirit; and Dedicated this my Book to the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council expecting aid and relief from them, and indeed I
had no hope of succor from any other, nor knew none to whom I could better
apply my self, earnestly imploring their patronage; but they, as it is well
known, of Patrons became my unjust Judges, and after they had made me a
spectacle to Men and Angels, and exposed me to the scorn and ludibry of the
world, sent me into banishment, where I lived a living death and a dying life,
and suffered such intolerable misery of all sorts, as would exceed belief to
relate; and I am most consident, if all the particulars were truly known, the
world never heard the like, and there I had ended my doleful life, had not God
of his infinite mercy called this Parliament, and put into their hearts to
redeem me from my capacity; for the which incomparable favor, I do, as of duty
I am ever bound, profess my self to the last drop of my blood to be their
servant in the Lord, and in all their most just and honorable employments; I
hope, with all fidelity to answer to the expectation of the world, and shall in
life and death show my self to be one, that without all by-respects shall ever
aim at the glory of God, the honor of them and my Country, and the common
good of all: and shall never by Gods assistance do any thing in their
concernments, that shall be unbeseeming a Man and a Christian. Now because by
my sad experience, I found that I could neither from King nor Nobles have
protection, I resolved never any more in Gods matters, to shroud my self under
any covert but Divine Providence, and that, I with an assured confidence
promise my self, especially when I now maintain the prerogative royal of the
King of Saints, and King of Kings, the Lord Jesus Christ, Who is our Lawgiver,
upon whose shoulders the government of his Church is laid, who is the
wonderful Counselor, the Prince of peace; whose dignity and roialty in all
this dispute between me and Mr. Walter Montague, I have to the uttermost of my
power maintained, under the shadow of whose wings I have ever found there is
only safety; whose blessed assistance, in all calamities, they that trust in
him, may be most assured of. His patronage now and his defense, is my shield,
whose cause and the honor of whose kingdom at this time I contend for. And
howsoever, in all my life, in all humane learning, I was never so wedded to my
own resolves, but upon better reason I could easily be divorced from them, yet
in Gods matters, if an Angel should come from Heaven and teach me that, that
there were another way to happiness, then by that new and living way, the
blood of Jesus Christ, who was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world, I would count him Anathema. Or if an Angel should tell me there were a
new way of worshipping God, and serving him, then that which God himself has
set down in his holy Word, I would account him accursed; for I have learned to
believe God and Faith upon their word and bond, without any either Angelical
or Humane reason, or the authority of Councels and Fathers: and whatsoever I
find a warrant in Gods Word for, I have learned to cleave close to it against
all humane reason, supposing such men none of Gods, nor Faiths, truest friends
that will not believe them upon their own word and bond, except they have
reason, humane authority, Councels, and Fathers, and vain traditions joined
with them for sureties. Again, if any man should go about to persuade me, that
there were any other government established in the Church of God, then an
Aristocraticall and a Presbyterian one, I should notwithstanding all humane
reason to the contrary, submit my self to that kind of government, as being
most confidently assured that it is warranted in Gods Word; which all
Christians are bound for ever to make the Rule and Square, both of our faith,
manners and government. And here I must mind all those that shall read this
Book, that this is no new opinion of mine, but that which I have once and again
suffered for: and if ever they have read my Elenchus religionis papisticis, or
my Flagellum pontificis, or my Apology, or any of my Latin Books, in all
those they will find, that the cause of all my sufferings was this, and this
only, That I maintained that all Churches were to be governed by an
Aristocraticall and Presbyterian government, which in those Books I have
clearly and fully (through Gods assistance) made good. Yea, in my answer to the
Bill of Information put up against me in the Star Chamber, they shall have some
reasons I gave there, of this my tenent, to the Lords of his Majesty's Privy
Council, and Judges in the Star Chamber; so that I stand to my principles and
am no starter. And if then amongst Gods people it was thought an opinion worthy
the suffering for, and my Christian brethren deemed me worthy of honor for it,
and afforded me their prayers, and showed me and mine in all our distresses,
many courtesies, when we found little favor from our own brethren (which their
humanity I must never forget, but with all due thankfulness for ever
acknowledge) I say, if then this my opinion was thought Orthodox, and worthy of
their applause, I see no good reason why a truth then should not be counted a
truth now; for the Word of God out of which I had it is the same, and if it
were good then, it is good now: for the change of men's minds cannot change the
truth, but it must be ever truth: but this my opinion I learned out of Gods
Word then, which shall be for ever, by his gracious assistance the warrant of
my belief and practice. This Word therefore, I desire all my Christian
Brethren, in the deciding of this question now agitated, amongst Gods people
and his faithful servants, concerning Church Government, to take into their
hands, and with those noble Bereans to sit down and examine whatsoever shall be
said on either side according to the holy Scriptures: and I entreat them also
to lay aside all passion (which Religion has no need of) and all vainglory and
bitterness, which is a dishonor to our holy calling, and in the spirit of
meekness, and with a Virgin judgment, not ravished with any previous or
anticipated opinion, to come and approach to the Altar of truth, and so
consider and examine, which of those two opinions the Brethren on both sides
now sacrifice themselves unto, be the offering that will best endure the
firy-tryall, 1 Cor. 3.13, 14, 15. viz. Whether the Presbyterian government
Dependent, or a Presbyterian government Independent, both now laid upon the
Altar, be the acceptablest service, and best pleasing sacrifice. This is
granted on all sides, and of necessity it must be yielded unto, that that
Oblation is the best and most acceptable that is offered up by faith, without
which it is impossible to please God, and that sacrifice only is offered up by
faith, which is according to his Word, and has its warrant from his revealed
will, which is the rule both for worship and the government of his Church we
are to be guided by. The Brethren on both sides agree about the rule in
deciding of this Controversy and make the written word the rule. They agree
also about the materials, both acknowledgeing a Presbytery, the difference
between them is only about the mould and manner of the offering. I will
therefore state the questions between us, and show wherein we differ, and then
set down my own opinion with my reasons, and after endeavor to be a Moderator
for the determining of this unhappy difference, which has been an occasion of
so much rejoicing to the common Enemy.

There is a twofold question between us, they call the Presbyterians, and our
Brethren they term Independents. The first is concerning the government of
the Church, viz. whether it be Presbyterian Dependent, or Presbyterian
Independent. The second question is, concerning the gathering of Churches: but
of that in its due place. The first question is whether many Congregations or
Christian Assemblies (commonly called Churches in our dialect) in the which
there are all the acts of worship, or all Ordinances, as the pure preaching of
the Gospel, the due and right administration of the Sacraments, the true
invocation of God, Discipline rightly executed, and all other performances,
which make for the essence and form of a true Church, and in the which
assemblies likewise, they have all such offices and helps of Government, as in
their several places being rightly employed, may serve for the edification of
the same, and mutual comfort and benefit of each other, and the preservation
of all, as Presbytors, Elders, Deacons, and all other Officers; I say the
question between us and the brethren is, Whether all these several
Congregations and Assemblies, may be accounted but one Church, or make but one
Church within their Precincts; and be to be under the government and rule of
one Presbytery, or a Council or College of many Presbyters together, upon
which, all the Congregations and several Assemblies under it are to depend;
and to which in all weighty businesses they are to appeal, for any injury or
conceived wrong, or scandal; or for redress of any abuses in Doctrine or
manners, and for the exercising of Church Discipline upon incorrigable and
scandalous offenders; as admonition for giving offense, suspension from the
Ordinances till amendment and reformornation; or if obstinate, Excommunion? Or
whether every one of those particular Congregations, or Assemblies be they
never so small, severally or considered a part, and by themselves, be
Independent; that is to say, have full and plenary authority within themselves,
without reference to this, or any other great Council or Presbytery, for
transacting or determining all differences about faith or manners amongst
themselves, or for the redressing of any grievances or abuses, or the
exercising of the power of Discipline or jurisdiction, and from the which there
is no appeal for relief, though the parties offended conceive they have never
so much injury or wrong done them? In a word, whether two Presbyters with a
slender Congregation, have an absolute kind of Spiritual Sovereignty among
themselves, in their own Congregation, and as ample authority as was given to
the whole College of the Apostles, Mat. 17. and to the whole Presbytery in the
Church of Jerusalem? And this is the first Question: Which that it may the
better be understood, I will propound it in a simile, and that in a matter well
known unto all men: The government of this famous City of London, and of many
other great Cities through the Kingdom, are called Corporations, that is to
say, majestracies; and have in them a Secular or Civil Signory or Presbytry,
who are invested with Authority to exercise all acts of Government amongst
themselves, as if they were an absolute Principality; and this Government, by
which all Citizens and inhabitants within their Precincts and liberties, are to
be ruled and ordered, as occasion and necessity shall require, is committed to
the Lord Mayors, Aldermen, and Common Council, who only by such other
Officers as they shall allegate, are to manage and exercise this government so,
that all particular Citizens, and all the Companies of several Tradesmen, are
in their particular Wards, Precincts, and Fellowships, by their constitutions
and Charter, to depend upon the determination of that Counsel, and are to make
their addresses unto them upon any urgent occasion, or conceived wrong, or when
it concerns the common good, and for the time to stand unto their arbitrament.
Now then, the question between us and our Brethren is, as if there should arise
a controversy in these several Corporations; Whether the Companies in each
City where they all have their several Halls, and their several assemblies
and meetings upon all occasions, and have all their Officers, and exercise also
a power of ruling and jurisdiction among themselves be independent, that is to
say, have plenary authority within themselves without reference to the Lord
Mayor or Aldermen or Common-counsell, to determine of all things among their
several Companies, and from the which there is no appeal for relief; though
one be never so much injured and damnified by any unjust act; and whether these
several Companies and several Assemblies be each of them a several
Corporation or Magistracy, or all of them put together make but one
Corporation, under one civil Presbytery consisting of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common-counsell? This I thought fit to propound, that every one
may the better understand the question. Now, as this kingdom of England has
its several Corporations through all Counties, and the which Corporations,
although they have their several Companies in them, yet are all dependent upon
a civil Presbytery and Common-counsell, and every Company in them makes not a
several Corporation or Magistracy, or a several City, but are all dependent
upon the Common-counsell or Presbytery, for the better ordering and governing
of them in all their common affairs, and for the redressing of abuses, and
taking away and removing of common grievances, and have their several appeals
to the Common-counsell, the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen; and if they find no
justice there nor satisfaction, have their redress and appeal to some general
Court, or some supreme judicature, as to the Parliament of the Kingdom, who
redress and determine all things according to the laws and constitutions of
the whole Kingdom. So in the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, which is his
Church, all these several Churches which we read of in the holy Scripture of
the New Testament, are so many several Corporations and Associations, all the
several congregations and affemblies as so many several Companies in them,
depending upon a Presbytery or Common-counsell and College of Pastors and
Rulers, all making up but one Church in every one of their jurisdictions and
several Precincts, though they be consistent of never so many several
Assemblies, according to the greatness of the Cities or Towns wherein they
are, or according to the several Hundreds or Divisions assigned to each
Presbytery, and all these and several associations to be governed by their
several Presbyteries for the better ordering and preserving of the same, to
the which every particular man, as well as any Assembly or Congregation, may
have their appeal for the redress of any abuses or enormities, and if they
find themselves wronged there, then they have appeals to some other higher
Presbytrie or Counsel of Divines for relief and justice; and both they and all
other of the several Corporations to be governed and regulated by the laws
and statutes given by Christ himself, the only Head and King of his Church,
according only to whose laws they are to be governed and ruled for the common
good and preservation of the whole Church, divided into those several
Jurisdictions, Corporations or Precincts, in imitation as near now as may be of
the Churches of Jerusalem, Ephesus, Corinth, and Galatia, etc. and whose laws
alone must be the rule for the ordering of all their government, doctrine, and
manners.

I have premised this I have now said, that all men may the better understand
the state of the question and controversy in hand. Now then, if it shall be
made appear out of the holy Scripture, that all the several Churches we have
mention of in the New Testament, were all particular corporations or
associations, and governed by a common-counsell of Presbyters, or by a
Presbyteriall government in each of them; and that there were many assemblies
and congregations in those several Churches, and all of them had their
distinct Officers amongst themselves, in the which likewise they had all the
acts of worship amongst themselves and did partake in all ordinances of
Church Fellowship, especially in the preaching of the Word, Prayer, and in the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and yet made but one Church, and
were all governed by a common-counsell of Presbyters, or by a common
Presbytery within their Precincts, then it must of necessity follow, that as
the Mother-churches were first governed, all the Daughter-churches to the end
of the world must be so governed, and according to that rule that is set down
in the Word of God. So then, the question in hand between us and our Brethren
is, Whether there were many Congregations and Assemblies in any of those
primitive Churches, as in that of Jerusalem the Mother Church, and many Elders
or Presbyters in that Church, and all other Officers; and whether all those
Congregations and Assemblies were one Church, and those Presbyters and Officers
all of them Elders and Officers of that one Church, and whether all those
Congregations and Assemblies were under one Presbytery? This I say is the
question between us and our Brethren. Now then if it can be proved, that there
were more Believers in the Church of Jerusalem then could all meet in one
place, or in one congregation for all acts of worship; and if it can be
evidently elucidated, that there were several assemblies and congregations in
the Church of Jerusalem, and yet so, as they made but one church for
government; then our Brethren must of necessity acknowledge that the church of
Jerusalem was governed by a common council of Presbyters, or was
presbyterially governed. Neither did our Brethren ever yet undertake to prove,
that in case there were many Assemblies in Jerusalem, they had several and
independent presbyteries, neither if they should go about to prove, could they
do it. And therefore we may conclude, and that with very good reason and
warrantable authority, that as the Mother Church, the Church of Jerusalem in
her greatest glory was governed, so all other Churches must likewise be
regulated to the end of the world; For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and
the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isay 2. v. 3. We must have both our Law
from thence, and our pattern of government. And our Brethren do make the
Church of Jerusalem the pattern of their proceedings.

Now that all things may be handled in good order and in a methodicall way, I
will reduce the whole Disputation concerning the first Question into these four
Propositions, and prove them in order. The first, That there were many
Congregations and several Assem^^^^^ of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem,
in the which they enjoyed all acts of worship, and all the Ordinances amongst
themselves, and did partake of all acts of Church-followship, especially of
preaching, and in the administration of the Satraments and Prayer, and that
before the Persecution we read of, Acts 8. v. ^. The second, That all these
Congregations and several Assemblies made but one Church. The third, That the
Apostles and Elders governed, ordered, and ruled this Church, jointly and by a
Common-counsell and Presbytery. The fourth, That this Church of Jerusalem, and
the government of the same, is to be a pattern for all several congregations
and assemblies in any City or vicinity to unite into one Church; and for the
Officers of those congregations to govern that Church jointly in a College or
Presbytery.

But before I come to the proof of these particulars, it will not be amiss in
general to take notice that all the Churches we read of in the New Testament,
were Aristocratically and Presbyterially governed, and were all dependent upon
their several Presbyteries; and that the ordering and managing of that
government lay only upon the Presbytery, and was their peculiar who had the
power of the Keys. Now Christ gave the Keys to the Apostles and Presbyters
only, and whatsoever the Apostles did in ordering and settling the government of
the Church, they did by Christ's command; and that order and constitution they
set down in the Church, was to be perpetuated and continued to the end of the
world. And the violating of this order and divine constitution, was the
occasion of the rise and growth of Antichrist, and the very cause of all those
confusions that the Christian world has for these many generations been
wearied and annoyed with; and the occasion of all those Schisms, Sects, and
Heresies the world has ever swarmed with: and the re-establishing and reducing
of it to its pristine constitution, will be a means not only of removing all
scandal, and taking away of all division amongst Brethren, and be a singular
means also of establishing a flourishing governments in Church and State, and
for the procuring of the blessings of God upon the three Kingdoms, but a way
also of ruining that Man of Sin, and of making an absolute Reformation
through the whole world.

Let us therefore first take notice what government was established by God in
all the Primitive Churches, Acts 1 ^^ And when they had ordained them
Presbyters (for so it is i^ (...) original) in every Church, and had prayed
with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed. Here are
two things observable. The first, that the government of the Church was
committed to the Presbyters. The second, that the Presbyteriall government was
that government that was established in every Church; for so says the Holy
Ghost, when they had ordained them Presbyters in every Church. This was Gods
ordinance, Acts 20.17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the
Presbyters of the Church. Here we see there were many Presbyters in one Church.
And Verse. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, says the Apostle, and to
all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, to feed the
Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. Here, as we may
observe, that in Gods Dialect, Presbyters and Bishops were all one, so likewise
is evident that the Church was committed to their government: this Church
therefore of Ephesus was under a Presbytery, and was to be regulated jointly by
them by a common-counsell of Presbyters. And Paul to Titus, chap. 1. verse. 5.
For this cause, says he, left I thee in Creet, that thou should put in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain Presbyters in every City, as I
appointed thee. If any man be blameless, etc. for a Bishop must be blameless
as the Steward of God, etc. From this place likewise we may take notice of the
parity between Presbyter and Bishop, and that the Presbyterian government was
that way of ruling that God appointed, not in one City only, but in every City,
and that these Presbyters were the Stewards in Gods house, which is his Church,
1 Timothy 3. and had the government of those Churches in every City laid upon
them, which they were jointly to govern and order by the common-counsell of
Presbyters. And Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, chapter 5. v. 17. Let the
Presbyters, says he, that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in word and doctrine. Still we ever observe, that
the rule and government of the Church was in the Presbyters hands. And the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, chapter 13.7. Remember, says he, them that
have the rule over you, who have spoke unto you the Word of God, whose faith
follow, considering the end of their conversation. And verse. 17. Obey, says
he, them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give an account, etc. And in verse. 24.
Salute all them, says he, that have the rule over you, and all the Saints.
Here again he injoynes all the Churches to yield obedience, and to submit
themselves unto the government of the Presbytery, showing them that it is
their place to obey, and for their Ministers to rule; and that so long as they
command in the Lord, they out of conscience ought to obey them, and that for a
double reason; For they watch, says he, for your souls, and they must also
give an account of their stewardship. And in 1 Peter 5, 1, 2, 3. The Presbyters
that are among you, says Saint Peter, I exhort, who am also a Presbyter, and a
witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that
shall be revealed; feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the
oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, etc. neither as being
Lords over Gods heritage, but being examples to the flock. And Saint James
chap. 5. ver. 14. Is any among you sick? says he, let him call for the
Presbyters of the Church. He does not say of the Churches, but of the Church.
So that the Presbyterian government was in every Church, and every Church was
to submit it self unto the Presbytery. And in Acts 15. it is said, that Paul
and Barnabas went up to the Apostles and Presbyters, etc. And when they came to
Jerusalem they were received of the Church (it is not said of the Churches, but
of the Church) and of the Apostles and Presbyters, etc. and Verse. 6. And the
Apostles and Presbyters came together to consider of the matter, etc. and Verse.
22. Then pleased it the Apostles and Presbyters with the whole Church, etc. and
wrote Letters by them after this manner. The Apostles, and Presbyters, and
Brethren. And Acts 21.17. And when we were come to Jerusalem, says Saint Luke,
the Brethren received us gladly. And the day following Paul went in with us in
to James, and all the Presbyters were present. From all which places, and many
more which might be produced, it is most clear and evident, that in all Cities
there was a Presbytery, and that the Presbyters had the power of order, namely,
of preaching, and the power of jurisdiction, that is of ruling, which was ever
to be exercised with others, and not alone; and that consisted in admitting of
members, and in conventing men before them upon occasion, in admonishing if any
offended, in suspending from the holy Communion till reformation or amendment;
and if they continued obstinate and incorrigible, in excommunicating and
casting of them out of the Church, and upon repentance, in receiving of them in
again, and in ordaining of Officers, and in appointing the times of meeting,
and the places where. And within these limits, as I conceive, is all the power
given to the Presbyters terminated, and this they are by Gods ordinance jointly
and by the common-counsell of Presbyters to exercise; and therefore the
Presbyterian government was the order of ruling and governing all Churches,
that God himself established, and is to be continued to the end of the world;
neither do I ever read, that the people or the congregations were joined with
them in their commission, or had any power given them of ruling. For Saint Paul
professes of himself in 1 Cor. 14.37. that whatsoever he writ in his Epistles
were the commands of the Lord. And the same may be said of all the other
Apostles. Now Paul writ to Titus, that the Churches in all Cities should be
governed by a Presbytery. And in his first Epistle to Timothy he commands
Timothy again and again in chap. 5. verse. 21. and in chap. 6. v. 12, 13. I
give thee charge in the sight of God, etc. That thou keep this command without
spot, unblameable till the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Here Timothy and
all Ministers in him, are to the end of the world bound to maintain that
government unblameable that was appointed by the Apostles; and that was the
Presbyterian government, and the ruling of all Churches by joint consent, and a
common-counsell or College of Presbyters; so that nothing ought to be done or
transacted of public concernment without their joint and mutual accord or
agreement and common consent of the Presbytery. And therefore when Diotrephes
assumed unto himself and his particular congregation a power and authority to
rule according to his will and pleasure, without the consent of the Presbytery,
and opposed John the Presbyter, he sharply reproves his proceedings and
signifies to the Church, Epist. 3. That when he came he would remember his
words, and teach him how to prate against the Presbytery with malicious words;
For he (says S. John) contenteth not himself only to prate maliciously
against us, but he will not receive the brethren, nor suffer others, but
casts them out of the Church; which is an evil thing in him, says Saint
John: But for you, says he, speaking to the Church, follow not that which is
evil but that which is good. It was evil in him to assume unto himself
alone, and his particular Congregation, that power that belonged unto the
college or council of Presbyters, and was to be moderated and exercised only
by the conjoynt and common consent of the Presbytery. For God had appointed,
that his Church should be governed by a Presbytery; and Diotrephes would have
his Congregation Independent, and have an absolute jurisdiction within it self,
Which, says Saint John, is an evil thing. So that I cannot but wonder, that
our brethren the Independents should call Diotrephes the Patriarch of the
Presbyterians, as one of them did to me not long since; whereas if the place be
duly weighed and considered; it will appear that he was the first that opposed
the Presbyterian Government, and for the which he was by Saint John sharply
reproved, and in him, all that follow his steps, and will not submit themselves
to the Presbytry which is Gods Ordinance, and that will not receive the
brethren into the Churches, but upon their own terms and conditions. But of
this business when I come to the second Question: In the mean time, it is by
the Word of God, sufficiently confirmed, that all the Churches we read of in
the New Testament were so many corporations in Christ's Kingdom, which were to
be governed by a common council of Presbyters. And so for many years after the
Apostles it was governed Communi consilio Presbytererum, as our brethren the
Independents do confess and prove by antiquity and humane authority, which
weapon I do wonder they will contend with, in deciding of Gods matters, which
are only out of his holy Word to be proved; which is to be the rule of our
faith. But it seems Saint Ambrose his Authority pleases them well, though if
we look into it, it makes much against them. He lived, as the Author that
cites him says, within the fourth Centory, his words are these upon the first
of Timothy, Synagoga and postea Ecclesia seniores habuit, quorum sine consilio,
nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. Quod qua negligentia obsoleverit nescio, nisi
doctorum desidia aut magis superbia, dum soli volunt aliquid videri. Take with
it his own interpretation. The Jews Synagogue, says he, and afterward the
Christian Church had Elders, without whose counsel nothing was done in the
Church; which by what neglect it grew out of use, I know not, unless it were
perhaps the sloth, or rather pride of the Teachers, whilst alone they would
seem to be some body. Here it is acknowledged by their own testimony, that in
the Apostles time and many years after the Apostles, nothing was done in the
Church without the counsel of the Presbyters; so that it is evident the
Primitive Churches were governed by the joint and common council of the
Presbytery, and the people had nothing to do with it. We may add here unto
Saint Ambrose, Saint Jeromes testimony, who in his Commentaries upon the first
chapter of the Epistle of Paul to Titus, largely declaring himself (as in many
other places) concerning the occasion of the change of that government
established by the Apostles, says, Idem est ergo Presbyter qui and Episcopus,
and antequam, diaboli instinctu, studia in religione fierent, and diceretur in
populis, ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum
consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur, etc. In the which words he acknowledges by
the first institution, all Churches were governed by the common council of the
Presbyters, and not by the advice of the people. Yea the very Canons of the
Pope in the first part, and the 95. distinction, giving the reason why the
Presbyterian Government came to be changed, and the Hierarchiall was put in the
place; affirms, that it was through faction, and for the avoiding of further
Schisms and rents in the Church and cities, the very words before coted out of
Saint Jerome, and confess that before that time, the Churches were governed
Communi consilio Presbyterorum, not by the people or any one Prelate, but by
the Presbytery and their council. And if humane authority were needful in
this business, I might make a volume with their very expressions, to prove the
novelty of the Hirarchicall government, and that of the peoples jurisdiction
assuming the Authority of governing into their hands, and the Antiquity of the
Presbytery and that by the enemies own consession. But I am resolved to cleave
only unto the Word, and sound reason deduced from thence, for the deciding of
this controversy, being sorry that there was so much as occasion of naming
humane authority in a point of Divinity. As for the Presbyterian government, in
the sense that I understand it, there is nothing more clear to me in all the
holy Scripture. Yea the very word and name of Presbytery signifies a
magistracy, or Aristocracy, or Signory, or Court; that is, a Company, or
Senate, or Council of grave, wise, and understanding men, invested with
authority and power of ruling, ordering, and commanding, and in whose hands the
government is put. And as the word is taken in the civil polity and
Government, so in the Ecclesiastical; by a Presbytery we understand, a
Religious, Grave, Solid, Learned, and wise council of Divines and Ministers,
or men of inveterate experience; and such as know how to Rule and Govern those
that are under their command, with wisdom and moderation, and according to
the Word of God; and the which men likewise are invested with Authority and
Power, for to exercise a jurisdiction over others, and are hereunto called by
such as are able to judge and discern of the sufficiency of their gifts and
abilities for this work, which the ordinary and common people cannot do. And as
in the civil State, the Presbyters and Elders of the people, were those that
had the rule over them, for the common good of them all and for their bodily
preservation: So the Presbyters and Elders of the Church are those that have
the rule and government over the Churches for the spiritual good of their
souls. And as Kings and Rulers are by a Metaphorical and borrowed speech
called Pastors and Sheepheards of the people, and are said to feed the flocks
committed to their charge, by which word is understood the exercise of all
lawful and moderate authority agreeable to the Law of God over them; so the
Presbyters and Ministers are called the Pastors and Sheepheards, yea, and
Stewards over the flocks committed to their charges, and they are commanded to
feed them, by which metaphor they are invested with the authority and power
both of preaching and ruling, and have the Government over those flocks put
into their hands, which they must always exercise according to Gods Word; they
must feed them and rule them in the Lord, and not after their own wills and
pleasures, they may not have dominion over our faith, as Paul says in the 2.
of the Corinthians, chap. 1. verse. 24. But that they should be helpers of our
joy; that is, they may not usurp an absolute Sovereignty or power over the
consciences of the people, as if the spiritual state and welfare of their
flocks depended on them, which is only grounded upon their faith in Jesus
Christ; but as they are the Stewards of God, and Ministers and servants of the
Church, so they should comfort them and rejoice their hearts in the Lord, and
establish them in the faith; and use all the care and diligence that is
possible, like good Sheepheards, to preserve the flocks committed to their
charge, that they straggle and stray not from Christ's fould, and run not into
the by-ways and thickets of sin and error, and be corrupted with noisome
food, and false Doctrine: and if they have any among them that are unruly, that
they bring and reduce them into order: or if they have any sick, feeble, poor
or weak, that they cure, releeve, comfort, and restore such: and if they have
any that are infected or scabby, that they remove such from the sound, till
they be recovered: or if they have any broken or wounded, that they heal and
recover them with all lenity and humanity; and that they should by common
council govern and order their flocks, and take special care that the
particular Pastors and Ministers of the several Congregations and Assemblies
under their Presbytery and charge, assume not any sole and sovereign Authority
to themselves over the flock, to do any thing of public concernment, without
the joint consent of that Presbytery or spiritual corporation, under whose
commands they are. And it stands with all reason, that a Common Council, of
godly, grave, learned, and experienced ministers, should ever be more able to
manage and order a government, then two or three unexperienced men, or two or
three hundred young people, of which most Congregations consist, in whom the
sap of youth is not yet dried up; or if many of them should be of riper years,
yet they know little what belongs to government, and therefore they can never
be so well able to govern, as men both of known learning, ancient experience,
and honesty, and approved judgment and integrity, as a whole College or an
Assembly of learned Presbyters commonly are; who by God himself have the
dispensation of the Word and the ordering and ruling of the Church committed
unto them, and who in the preaching of the Word, and the administration of the
Sacraments, and in all ordinary acts of worship, and in governing and ruling
the flocks committed to their several charges; are the successors of the holy
Apostles. But by the way, an objection is here to be answered unto, made by
some of the Independents after this manner. The Elders and Presbyters of the
Apostles times, say they, by the imposition of their hands, gave the gifts of
tongues and prophecy, Acts 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and the 8.18. and 1 Timothy 4.14.
and healed the sick James 5.14, 15. according to our Saviors promise Mark
16.18. Let, say they, the Presbyters of our time, let them impose their hands
upon the sick and heal them, let them by imposing hands upon their disciples
enable them on a sudden to speak with strange tongues, and foretell things to
come; and then we will acknowledge them for a true Presbytery, then will they
be a right assembly of Elders, and the Apostles successors: but, if they cannot
give to others, nor yet have for themselves in store, any of the true Apostles,
any of the right Presbyters gifts and characters, we may not, we dare not
acknowledge them as such. These are their formal words in print. Before I come
to my answer, I desire there may be special notice taken of this Objection,
and such like; for, for ought that I know, if any man will argue after this
manner, all Christian religion may be called in question, and no man will have
any Creed or Belief, except he may make his own Articles, as Thomas did, who
said, Unless I put my hands into his side, and my fingers into the print of
the nails, I will not believe. And as the Jews said unto our blessed Savior,
Thou that savest others, now save thy self, come down from the Cross and then
we will believe in thee, do this miracle and then thou will persuade us. Here
we see, they would make their own Articles, or else they would have no Creed.
The Jews had learned this method of disputing from the Devil, who at his
meeting of our Savior Christ, and at his first assault, thus disputed, If thou
be the Son of God, says he, and would have the world so believe, and me
too, on thee, then command these stones to be made bread, do this miracle
first; but thou can not do it, Ergo. So in like manner these men argue,
except, say they, the Presbyters by the imposition of their hands upon their
Disciples, can enable them on a sudden to speak with strange tongues, to
foretell things to come, and heal the sick, etc. we will not acknowledge them
to be true Elders: but let them do all these things by the imposition of their
hands, and then we will acknowledge them for a true Presbytery. See the vanity
of these men, and the instability of their faith, by their own confession;
miracles will make them believe any thing, if we may credit their own words,
though never so contrary to their judgment and to the faith once delivered to
the Saints. It is well known to the Learned, that the Apostles and those
Primitive christians had extraordinary and wonderful gifts, that ravished the
world then into admiration; and it is confessed also by all understanding
Christians, that those wonder-working miracles were but temporary, as the
miraculous feeding of the people with Manna in the Wilderness, where they were
fellow-communers with the Angels, and continued but till they came into the
Land that flowed with Milk and Honey. So those miracles of the Primitive
christians continued but for a time, till the Gospel and the truth of the
Christian faith and doctrine was confirmed and established, which being once
done, and the holy Scriptures which were to be the rule of faith to the end of
the world being left to posterity, and to which we are tied and commanded not
to be wise above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. and forbid in Gal. 1.8, 9.
to believe otherwise then we have been taught, though the Apostles or an Angel
from Heaven should teach otherwise, after, I say, the Doctrine of the Christian
Faith and Religion was confirmed, the ordinary working of Miracles ceased. And
it is said of Antichrist in 2 Thessalonians. chap. 2. That he shall come with strong
delusions and lying wonders, and with all deceiveablenes in them that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. So
that I cannot sufficiently wonder, to see the dealing of these men, who in
these days expect and look for miracles to confirm their faith, when
notwithstanding we are forwarned to take heed of all false delusions, and
commanded to the contrary. Show us some miracles, say they, and then we will
believe you are true Presbyters. So dealt the Jews with Christ, What sign
show thou that we may believe in thee? But when Christ had showed them sign
upon sign, and miracle upon miracle, were they ever the more convinced? Did
those miracles create belief in them? No surely, but rather hardened them and
made them blaspheme. When he cast out Devils, they say, he did it by the Prince
of Devils. So without doubt, if the Presbyters had those gifts of miracles,
that they could gratify these men with daily prodigies and works of wonder,
they would then say, they came with lying wonders, and with the working of
Satan, and they would make the world abhor them the more. There is an old
saying, That he must rise early and never go to bed, that will please all men:
and truly it would be not only difficult, but an impossible thing, for any
State or great Council, were it never so wise, to please all the people under
them. God himself, nor Moses, nor Aaron his servants, could please the
Israelites though they saw never such wonders continually before their eyes, to
confirm their authority; yea they told Moses and Aaron to their faces, that
they took too much upon them. And afterward they cast off Gods own government
and God himself, as the Lord complains to Samuel in 1 Samuel, and would set up
a government after the model of their own brain, as it is at large set down
in that Book. And not long after they changed the manner of Gods worship, in
Jeroboams time, and taught the fear of God, as the Lord complains, Isay 29.
after the precepts of men, and rejected Gods Commandments, as Christ says,
Matthew. 15. and Mark 7. So that what they thought best in their own eyes, that
was ever best pleasing unto them. They would not content themselves with the
written Word, though they were never so often by Moses, and all the rest of the
Prophets, commanded to cleave unto it; saying to the Law and to the Testimony,
Isay 8. Even so it is now in these days, they content not themselves with that
ordinance that is set down in the written Word, but say; Come show us some
miracles, and then we will believe you are a right Presbytery. Our Savior
speaking to the Jews concerning S. John the Baptist and Himself, John, says
he, came neither eating nor drinking, and ye say behold he has a Devil; the
Son of Man came both eating and drinking, and ye say, he is a wine-bibber, a
friend of Publicans and Sinners. So that whatsoever method or way God used to
convert them, they cavil'd against it, and were never satisfied; always
resisting the Spirit of God, as Stephen told them in Acts 7. So now, in these
our times they look for miracles, and a new way of teaching. But all good
Christians are forbid to listen after, or to give heed to miracles; and are
sent unto Moses and the Prophets Luke 16. and are commanded to search the
Scripture John 5. Yea our Savior himself in the person of Abraham, Luke 16.
says, That if men will not believe Moses and the Prophets, they will not be
persuaded by miracles: and I am confident, that could the Presbyters do al
those miracles these men desire, they would the more reprocah them, and exclaim
against them, and affirm they wrought by the Devil, as the Jews told our
Savior he did. I must confess, I am of a contrary opinion to these men, not
only in the matter of miracles, but in all external performances; for I am
instructed in the holy Scriptures, that the Devil can transform himself into
an Angel of light, and that the Deceivers and false Teachers shall come forth
in sheeps clothing, and for outward appearance shall equallize, if not exceed,
the faithfullest and truest Pastors and Ministers of Christ; and therefore we
are in special, commanded to take heed of such: and for my particular, if any
men whatsoever, of never such seeming sanctity, sufficient abilities,
unblameable life, should come forth and teach any other Doctrine of Faith,
Manners, or Government, then that I have been taught in the holy Scripture; and
should confirm this their doctrine with never so many miracles, I will still
continue steadfast in the Doctrine of the Apostles, and cleave unto the written
Word, and will never believe contrary to that, though I should undergo the
greatest misery, or be exposed to the greatest want by it, that any man ever
saw: for I know that all these momentary trials and afflictions, are not worthy
that exceeding weight of glory that shall be revealed. And for this very point
of the Presbytery, in that sense I take it, I am so well assured that it is
Gods Ordinance, as I am of any point of Religion. But as I said before, if men
may argue afthis way, The Presbyters in the Apostles times did miracles, and
spoke with strange tongues, and their Scholars and Disciples did the same; do
you likewise, and then we will acknowledge you to be true Presbytters,
otherwise we will not. Thus the Jews might have argued against all their
Prophets, as against Isaiah, Jeremy, Ezekiel, etc. Moses and Elias fasted forty
days and forty nights, and did many miracles, do you so, and then we will
believe you are true Prophets, and sent to us of God, otherwise we will not
believe you to be true Prophets. Yea all the wicked and ungodly men of these
times may argue thus also. God gave unto his Church Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, etc. and they spoke all strange tongues and diverse languages, and did
many miracles; but you and your Congregations, have neither Apostles Prophets,
nor Evangelists, nor ye have not the gifts of Tongues, nor ye can do no
Miracle: Ergo, you are not the true Church. The Primitive Christians and the
servants of God in those times, had the gifts of Tongues and Prophecy, and the
Holy Ghost came down upon them, and they spoke by direction from God his
infallible truth and Gospel, whose speeches were not tied to time, and to one
speaker, but many spoke one after another by interpreters, as it is at large
set down in the 1. of the Corinthians, chap. 14. verse. 27, 28, 29, 30. etc. So
that they spoke infallible truth by direction from God: but you have none in
your congregations so miraculously inspired with sundry languages and diverse
tongues, nor ye do not speak infallible truths by direction from God; nor you
cannot cure diseases nor do miracles: Ergo, your religion is not the same
Religion; nor your congregations the true Church: show us these miracles and
then we will believe you to be the true Church, otherwise we may not, we dare
not acknowledge you to be the true Church. Again, they may argue thus: The
Apostles and Primitive Pastors, and Teachers preached freely, and labored with
their own hands, and were helpful to the necessities of others, and were not
burdensome and exacting from others, and spoke ex tempore, by direction from
God: but your Ministers in your Congregations do not preach freely, nor labor
not with their own hands, nor are not helpful to others necessities, but are
rather burdensome and exacting from others; nor they do no miracles, nor speak
not immediately by inspiration, and ex tempore; but by Study and out of their
Books, and are confined to time, and speak not in strange tongues and
languages, one after another by Interpreters. Ergo your ministers are not Gods
Ministers, nor your Congregations the true Church, nor your people true
Christians; for you want all those things that the Primitive Christians and the
Primitive Churches had.

There is a Pamphlet lately come out, and highly esteemed and prised amongst
many, full of such consequences as these, which if they hold good against the
Presbyters, they may also for ought I know, be of equal validity to overthrow,
not only all Christian Congregations, but indeed all Christian Religion. But
briefly to answer. We look upon the Apostles and Primitive Presbyters, as men
miraculously and extraordinarily gifted, and as wonder-working men for the
confirmation of the truth of the Gospel to all succeeding ages; and we
consider in them and in the Christians of those times, something extraordinary
and temporary, as their working of miracles, and speaking of strange tongues,
and gifts of healing, etc. And those we conceive were to continue no longer in
the Church, then for the confirmation of the truth of the Gospel; Christ
himself proclaiming those blessed, that believe without seeing of miracles,
speaking unto Thomas, John 20.29. Because thou have seen me, says he, thou
believe, blessed are they that have not seen, and have believed. So that
miracles now are not ordinary, and we are tied to the written Word. But we
consider likewise in the Apostles and Primitive Presbyters, that that was
permanent and to continue in all Ministers and Presbyters, in all succeeding
ages to the end of the world, and that was the power of order and preaching,
and the power of jurisdiction that is of ruling (which is not denied by the
most learned of the Independents themselves) and this I have proved by the Word
of God, to be transacted over to all Christian Churches, whose Presbyters have
that power given unto them; neither will the Learned Brethren deny it, what so
ever the ignorant may do. Yea, the very name of a Presbytery (as I said before)
if we look through the whole Scripture, signifies a Magistracy, or Signiory,
or Corporation invested with authority of governing and ruling; and such a
counsel and company of men, as upon whom the government under Christ is laid,
and to be extended so far, as their jurisdiction extends, and as far as by
common consent it may make for the good and edification of the Church, and for
the safety of the same. And such was the government of all those Churches of
the New Testament, which were as so many Committees, their limits and bounds
prefixed them, as at this day all Committees through the Kingdom have in their
several Hundreds, Wapentakes, and Cities, to whom the ordering and government
of those places that are under them, are committed; so that all that is done or
transacted, must be done by the joint consent and counsel of the whole
Committee, not any particular man or any two of them severally considered by
themselves, can make an order, but that order only is binding which is made by
the joint consent and common agreement of them all, or the greatest part of
them assembled together. Even so all those particular Congregations that are
within the compass and jurisdiction of the several Presbyteries, are to be
ordered and governed by the common and joint counsel of the several
Presbyters, or the greater part of them. For this was the order the Apostles
established, appointing in every City a Presbytery; and when they had so
ordered the Churches, they set them all to their several employments, the
Presbyters to command, and all the people and particular assemblies and
congregations under them, to obey; neither is it ever found in the holy
Scriptures, that the people were joined with the Presbyters in their
commission. So that they that oppose this government, resist Gods Ordinance.
And if we look into all the Epistles writ by the Apostles to the several
Churches, we shall find in them, that they enjoyne all the several
congregations to yield obedience to their Pastors and Rulers over them, and
signify unto them that they owe unto them double honor, especially such as
labor in Word and Doctrine; that is, they must yield unto them, not only due
reverence and subjection, and obedience to their counsel and just commands in
the Lord. But that they should also afford them the honor of maintenance, and
take order there be a sufficient and competent, yea, an honorable allowance
for their support; and that as they minister to them spiritual food for their
souls, they should likewise minister unto them all things necessary for the
maintenance of them and their Families, that they may comfortably and without
solicitous care, follow their holy employments and wait upon their several
Ministeries. So that the place and employment of the Presbyters, is to teach
and rule the people; and this is their proper work, and peculiarly belongs unto
them; and the employment and place of the several congregations under them, is
to hear and obey: and therefore if the several congregations do assume unto
themselves the power of ruling, they take more upon them then by God is allowed
them: and the Presbyters in yiedling unto it, reject their own right, and
divest themselves of that authority that God has put into their hands; and by
so doing, in time may not only bring confusion into the Church, but to all
those Countries where such usurpations are tolerated. I cannot but speak my
conscience in this point: And truly, very reason dictates unto a man, that they
only should have the authority of commanding and ruling over the Churches, to
whom the power of the Keys is given. Now it is given only to the Ministers and
Presbyters, as we see it in John 20.21. and Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17, 18. Where our
Savior Christ established a standing government, to be continued to the end of
the world, the violating and the overthrowing of the which, was the cause of
all those confusions, both in doctrine and manners that is now come upon the
world, and was the cause, not only of the rise, but the growth of Antichrist.
And the reducing of it again into the Church, and the reestablishing of it,
will be the confusion of that Man of Sin, and of all the Antichristian-brood,
and be a means of establishing truth and peace through the Christian world. But
it will not be amiss a little to consider that place in Matthew. 18. If thy
Brother, says Christ, shall trespass against thee, go and tell him of it
between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou shall gain thy
brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be established. And
if he shall neglect to hear them; then tell it unto the Church: but if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen man and a
Publican. Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be
loosed in heaven. In these words our Savior Christ has respect unto the order
and custom of judicature in those times in censuring men's manners and
doctrines, which among the Jews was ordered and administered by an assembly and
counsel of learned, experienced, and judicious men, and by a Presbytery,
Consistory, or College of able men for government, chose and selected out of
the people for this very purpose, by such as could judge and discern of their
abilities: the which assembly and company, is by Christ himself called a
Church, because it did represent the Church, and in this place Christ did
establish the like to be continued in the Christian Church to the end of the
world, making his Apostles this representative body, and their successors all
the godly and holy Ministers and Presbyters, and gives unto them the same power
and Authority, to judge and determine of all things belonging unto faith and
manners that was observed in the Jewish Church, in all Ecclesiastical
Discipline. For otherwise, the Christian Church should be inferior to that of
the Jews, if they had not the same Privileges for the censuring of manners and
Doctrines, and the same power of jurisdiction and ruling that they had. Now all
power of jurisdiction among the Jews, was exercised not by the promiscuous
multitude, or by the whole Congregation, nor by any particular man, nor by two
or three (as the place above specifies) but by an Assembly, Senate, Council,
or Presbytery of understanding men assigned to that purpose, which our Savior
himself calls a Church; and this government established in the Christian
Church, are the several Presbyteries, where all things are transacted by
common and joint consent, and this was the practice of the Apostles at
Jerusalem, who did all business of public concernment, by common and joint
consent, as is manifest, in the first chapter of the Acts, in choosing of an
Apostle in Judas his place. And in the sixth chapter in choosing of Deacons, and
in the 15. chapter in determining the question there in hand, all in a
Presbyterian way and by common consent. And this is that government, that God
has commanded to be perpetuateds to the end of the world, in these words;
Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye
shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. So that the Presbyters only
have the power of the keys, and it is their place only to ordain Ministers
and Church Officers, (whatsoever Authority the people may exercise in the
choosing of them) as Paul writes unto Timothy and Titus, and they only are to
judge and determine and to censure in matters of manners and doctrine, and the
people are to allow and approve it according to the Word of God. Yea the very
Synagogues of the Jews, which were the same that our Churches are, were
governed by a Presbytery, (as our brethren acknowledge) called by the name of
the Rulers of the Synagogue, who governed by joint and common council; as is
evident and manifest, in that there were superior and inferior Judges,
Commanders, and Rulers, according as their years, gravity, and wisdom made
them more eminent then others, and venerable to the people: as may appear in
many places as Acts 18. ver. 8. It is said there, That Chrispus the chief
Ruler of the Synagogue believed with all his household. So that if there were a
chief Ruler, or Judge, or a President; there must of necessity be a Council or
Segniory of inferior ones, that had Rule and Authority over others as well as
he: as where there is a chief Justice or Judge, there are other Judges joined
with him, as all reason persuades, and there must needs be a Court of
Judicature, where all things are transacted, by conjoynt and common consent and
agreement: and so it was in the Synagogues of the Jews, who were subject to,
and ordered by the determinations and arbitrament of their Rulers and
Governors. So that the several Churches or Synagogues under the Jews, were in
subjection to those Rulers, and were governed according as by common council
they ordered. And Mat. the 5. verse. 22. And behold there came one of the Rulers
of the Synagogue, whose name was Jairus, here was a special Ecce added to take
notice, that a great man, and one in authority, came unto Christ, and that in a
public way, and one of the Rulers of the Syn gogue. So that we may observe the
people in every Synagogue were governed and commanded by their Rulers, and they
were to yield obedience unto them, and were not joined with them in Commission,
but stood to their determination, as all men use to do in Courts of Judicature,
that appeal unto them for justice. And this custom and manner of government
was transacted over to the Christian Churches, and those that were called
Rulers among them, are among Christians sometimes called Presbyters, sometimes
Guides, sometimes Rulers, and by Christ himself and by his Apostles, are
appointed over all Christian Churches as so many corporations; to which all the
Assemblies and Congregations under them, and committed to their charge, are to
yield obedience and submission, in whatsoever they command in the Lord, and
according to his blessed Word; for that must be the rule both of their
commanding and of the peoples obeying. And this Presbyterian government, is
that manner and way of ruling all Assemblies and particular Congregations under
it, that God has appointed in his Church, to be continued to the end of the
world; the which whosoever resists, resists the Ordinance of God. And this
shall suffice to have spoken in general, in way of proof, That all Churches we
have mention of under the New Testament, were Aristocratically and
Presbyterially governed, that is, were under the Government of a college or
Assembly of Presbyters.

And now I come to prove in order the four Propositions or conclusions, I
undertook to make good. The first was, That there were many Congregations and
several Assemblies in the Church of Jerusalem, in the which they had all acts
of worship, and did partake of all Ordinances and of Church Fellowship; and
that before the persecution we read of Acts 8. and under the persecution, and
after the persecution. And for the proof of this Proposition, and every branch
of it, I will first produce such places of Scripture as make for the
manifestation of the truth, and from thence frame and form my Arguments. Mat.
3. ver. 1, 2, 5, 6. In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the
wilderness of Judaea, and saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of heaven is at
hand. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judaea and all the Region round
about Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins. The
Baptism of John, as all the learned know, was the same with that of the
Apostles, for he preached the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins,
and Baptized all that came to him, into Jesus Christ, saying unto the People,
That they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ
Jesus, Act. 19. ver. 4. He had his Commission also from God as well as the
Apostles, and Baptized Christ himself; he preached also the Gospel and the
Kingdom of the Messiah as well as the Apostles; and had many honorable
Testimonies from Christ himself; as, That he was the greatest Prophet that ever
was born of woman, and That he was a bright shining light, and That he was his
witness; and many other Encomiums and praises did Christ give of him, to
ratify his Authority, and to show that he was sent of God, and that he was
that Elias that was to come before the Messiah: And all the people owned, and
took him for a man sent of God, and Jerusalem went out to him, and all the
Region round about, and were Baptized of him. In these words we find that the
people of Jerusalem were all turned Christians, and made members of the
Christian Church, and were believers. For which way soever the word Jerusalem
be taken, it signifies a numberless multitude of men, or an innumerable
company. For, if we consider Jerusalem at this time, she was a most populous
City: the Historians that write of that age, relate that she had sometimes in
her, no less then eleven or twelve hundred thousand; but let it be taken that
there were but six hundred thousand inhabitants, it is a vast multitude, and
yet seldom was there less inhabitants in Jerusalem, if any belief may be had
to Historians; for at that time it was one of the Metropolis Cities of the
world, and the glory of Nations, and the joy of the whole Earth; and besides.
there was then great expectation, as we may read, Luke 19.11. That the
Kingdom of God should immediately appear, and all the Jews out of all Nations
where they were scattered, now repaired to Jerusalem, and returned into their
own country, expecting the Messiah. So that at this time, we cannot conceive
but that there were infinites of people in Jerusalem, and it is said, That
Jerusalem went out and was baptized by John. By Jerusalem, here metonimycally
the place is taken for the people. Now when it is said that a City goes out,
it is to be understood either of the whole people, Man, Woman, and Child, old
and young, with all the inhabitants; as many times it happens, in great Earth
quakes, or some Pestilence or Inundation, that all the Inhabitants are forced
to leave a City, and to seek some other habitation, but we cannot conceive the
going out of Jerusalem to John Baptist in this large sense and expression; so
that in this place it must be taken Synecdochically, and we are to understand a
great part, or a chief part for the whole: as when a City is said to entertain
a King, or to go out to meet a King, here it is to be understood principally of
the chief Officers, as the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and the Common-counsell, and
all their several Companies, and chief Captains and Commanders, with all
their magnificence; so that in this notion the common people and the ordinary
Citizens are not thought on, or at least are not numbered. As when JESUS was
born in Bethlehem, and the Wise Men came to Jerusalem, to enquire where they
should find him that was born King of the Jews, that they might worship him,
for they had seen his Star, it is said, That when Herod heard these things, He
and all Jerusalem was troubled with him. Here, by all Jerusalem, is to be
understood, all the chief Officers and Courtiers, for the common people were
glad of it; for that was the day they had long looked for, and rejoiced at: but
Herod being an Usurper and a Tyrant, and all his Nobles, Peers, and Great men
being confederate with him, and adjutors in his usurpation and tyranny, and
conceiving that Christ was an earthly Monarch; and that after the manner of the
Kings of the Earth, he would not only pull down the Usurper, but likewise call
all them in question, as guilty of High Treason, and cut them off as complicers
and abettors; this made them tremble and fear; and because it was the general
fear of all the great men in Jerusalem, and of all the Courtiers and Officers
under Herod, therefore it is said, that Herod and all Jerusalem with him was
troubled. So that Tyrants and their complyces never have any real peace. But
in this sense also it cannot be understood, that Jerusalem went out to John and
was baptized; it must therefore by a Synecdoche be taken for all the common
people promiscuously, or for a mighty multitude of all sorts, and of all ranks
of people, and of all professions, as Publicans, Soldiers, and the ordinary
Inhabitants: and in this sense the word Jerusalem must be taken, for a mighty
multitude of men in Jerusalem that were made Christians; for otherwise the
Evangelist would have said, many went out of Jerusalem also, as well as out of
other places: but in saying that all Judea, and all the Regions round about,
and Jerusalem went out; this metaphorical expression does signify, That an
infinite number of people in Jerusalem it self, were made Christians and
members of the Church, and that it is so to be understood the places following
will evidently evince it: for in Matthew. 11.12. our Savior says, That from the
days of John the Baptist, until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force, then the which, there could nothing
be spoke more emphatically, to set forth the growth and increase of Believers,
and the multitude of Christians, as Luke also in chapter 16. v. 16. expresses
saying, That the Law and the Prophets were until John; since that time the
kingdom of God is preached, and every man presses in to it: that is, the
generality of the people became believers, and were baptized: as it is yet more
evident from Luke 7.29, 30. by the very testimony of our Savior, who says,
That all the people that heard him, and the Publicans, justified God, being
baptized with the baptism of John, but the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the
counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him. So that by the
witness of our Savior Christ, except the Pharisees and the Priests; all the
people, or the generality of the people in Jerusalem were baptized, and became
Christians, and embraced the Gospel: and this was accounted among the miracles
that was wrought in those days, and as a thing of special observation, and as
a matter of wonder; as we may see in the message our Savior Christ sent unto
John the Baptist by his Disciples, when he bad them relate unto their Master,
what they had seen and heard in the 22 Verse; tell him says he, That the
blind see, the lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, and the
dead are raised, and the poor receive the Gospel, this I say, was among the
miracles, that the generality of the poor embraced the Gospel, and were
baptized and made Believers: which must needs import a mighty multitude, and a
great increase, or else it would not have been a thing of such wonder, and have
been sent unto Saint John as a miraculous thing; and a thing worthy to prove
Christ himself to be the Messiah looked for; for no mere man could have wrought
such a work, as to draw the hearts of the people to embrace the Gospel, but the
Messiah himself, For Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, 1 Cor. 3. but God
only, the Messiah, must give the increase; he must move the heart to embrace
the Gospel, and to believe; for faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. and
therefore this was the wonder that the generality of the people did believe and
were baptized, and this was the sole work and operation of Christ, and
therefore proved him to be the Prophet they looked for. And it stands with all
reason that there were infinites of people in Jerusalem that believed; and that
John was greatly magnified of the people, and publicly followed, because for a
time, Herod himself countenanced John, Mark 6.20. and feared him, knowing that
he was a just man and an holy, and observed him, and when he heard him, he did
many things, and heard him gladly. And although we read not that he was
baptized by John, yet he highly honored him; till John reproved him, and told
him, it was not lawful for him to have his Brothers Wife. And in this interim
of his seeming favor, we may conceive, that the Courtiers also and the great
men would do as their Master did: for if we observe the manner of all Courts to
this day, what the King does the Courtiers also do; if the King laugh, though
there be perhaps a cause of mourning, they will all laugh; and if he frowns,
though there be a cause of cheerfulness and smiling, they will all frown; and
if the King commends any man, they will all admire him; and if he hears any
Minister gladly, they will all hear him willingly: and if he when he is
reproved, be angry and displeased, and will cut off his head whom he had so
honored but the day before, then all the Courtiers, they will help him, and
further the work: as we may see, not only in the example of John Baptist, but
in Haman; as soon as the King fround upon him, the Courtiers they covered his
face, and up they trussed him; be it right or wrong it is all one to Courtiers.
But in that interim, I say, that John Baptist was in favor with the King,
without doubt it annimated the people greatly to follow him, and by hearing
him, many thousand Saints were converted, and the multitudes of them were
numerous, as is manifest from Matthew. 14.5. for it is said, That when he would
have put him to death he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a
Prophet. Here are two observables, the one, That he that feared not God, was
afraid of his servants. The second, that it was a mighty multitude of Believers
that were in Jerusalem, for a few could not have awed the King and kept him in
fear: and therefore he was forced to defer the cutting off of his head, till he
had got to him all the strength of Galilee, all his Lords and high Captains,
and his chief Estates and Commanders, Mark 6.21. And when he thought himself
strong enough, then he exercised his tyranny. Ye, when John was taken away,
yet the multitudes of the people continued steadfast in the faith, as we may see
in Luke 20. by the confession of the very enemies: for when our Savior asked
them concerning the baptism of John, whether it was from Heaven or of Men? And
they reasoned among themselves, saying, if we shall say from Heaven, he will
say, why then believed ye him not? and if we say of Men, all the people will
stone us, for they be persuaded that John was a Prophet. Here by the confession
of the very enemies, all the people, or the generality of them were Believers;
and it must of necessity be a mighty multitude, that kept all the Priests and
all the Elders that had all the power in their hands, in awe, that they durst
not so much as open their mouths against John the Baptist. From all which
places, and many more that might be produced, to prove, that there were so many
Believers in Jerusalem as could not all meet in one place or room, or in one
Congregation, to partake in all acts of worship, I thus argue.

Where there was an infinite multitude, or a mighty City of Believers, there
they could not all meet together in one place or room, or in one Congregation,
for the enjoying of all acts of worship, and for edification (which is required
in the Churches, 1 Cor. 14.26.) but of necessity must be distributed into
several Congregations and Assemblies, and diverse divisions, that they might be
all edified, and partake in all Ordinances. But in the Church of Jerusalem, by
the very baptism and preaching of John, there were infinite multitudes, and a
very City of Believers. Ergo, they could not all meet together in one place or
room, or in one congregation for the enjoying of all acts of worship, and for
edification (which is required in the Church of God) but of necessity must be
distributed into several congregrtions and assemblies, and diverse divisions,
that they might all be edified, and partake in all ordinances. For the major,
it is clear, by the very light of nature, and all reason: for there is no one
place or house that can contain a whole City, or infinite multitude of
Believers: and if any great place could contain them, they could not all be
edified and partake of all the acts of worship. For if the very great raw-bon'd
building of Paul's it self were crammed full of people, and had a Preacher of
the strongest lungs in the City, half the people could not hear and be edified,
as daily experience teelleth us; so that of necessity, if they would be
edified, and partake in all the Ordinances, they must be distributed into
diverse congregations, and several assemblies. I am most assured that there
were such multitudes of Believers in Jerusalem, that five such buildings as
Paul's could not have contained their very bodies within their walls, much less
receive them, or entertain them for edification. So that for the major, I am
confident there is no intelligible man will doubt of it. For the Minor, it is
manifest from the places above produced, for our Savior says, excepting the
Pharisees and the Lawyers (which were but a little handful) all the people, or
the generality of them, justified God, and were baptized, and were Believers.
So that the conclusion from the premises does necessarily follow. But from the
former places I argue yet further after this manner.

Where there was such an infinite company and multitude of Christians and
Believers, as kept a tyrannical King in awe, and all the Magistrates and
Elders in whose hands was all the power and authority; and struck such a fear
and terror into them all, that they durst not exercise their cruelty and
tyranny over them, though they were their inveterate enemies, and desired it:
There of necessity the number of the Believers must be so great, as they could
not all meet together in one place or room, or in one congregation, for the
enjoying and partaking in all the acts of worship, but if they would be
edified, must be distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies. But in
Jerusalem there were such an infinite company and multitude of Christians and
Believers, as kept Herod himself, the tyrant, in awe, and all the Magistrates
and Elders, in whose hands was all the power and authority; and struck such a
fear and terror into them, that they durst not exercise their cruelty and
tyranny over them though they were their inveterate enemies, and desired it.
Ergo, of necessity the number of the Believers was so great, as they could not
all meet together in one place or room, or in one congregation, for the
enjoying and partaking in all acts of worship, but if they would be edified,
must be distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies. For the Major and
Minor of this Syllogism, besides the force of reason and common understanding,
which were enough to convince any rational creature of the truth of them: the
holy Scripture it self (as from the places above specified, is manifest) prove
them. So that none can doubt of the truth of the conclusion, but such as will
call in question truth it self. I might out of the several places above
mentioned draw many more Arguments to prove the conclusion; but because I study
brevity, these for the present shall serve, to prove, That by the very baptism
and Ministry of Saint John the Baptist, there were such an infinite company of
Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, as they could not all meet together in
one place or congregation, for the enjoying of all the Ordinances. I will now
therefore go on, to show the increase of Believers that was made by the
miracles and preaching both of Christ and his Apostles, and from the several
places out of the holy Scripture, frame my Arguments as out of the former to
prove the same conclusion. John 4.1, 2. Now when the Lord knew how the
Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples then John
(though Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples) here observe, that where
there was a mistake in the relation, there the Evangelist forthwith shows it,
to rectify men's understandings, as where it was reported that Christ baptized,
he shows it was a mistake, for his Disciples only baptized: but where it is
said, that Jesus made more Disciples then John, that is taken pro confesso; and
it was true; for John himself in Chap. 3. verse. 30. had said, He must increase,
but I must decrease. Christ therefore made many more Disciples and Believers
then John, and added daily to the Church, that was then in Jerusalem, such as
should be saved; for he came to save the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and
he received all that came to him, John 6.37. And as many as received him, to
them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe upon
his Name, John 1.12. and these were infinite multitudes, as we shall see by and
by. In John 7.31. it is said, That many of the people of Jerusalem believed on
him; and in Verse 40. they said, Of a truth this is that Prophet. And in the
same Chapter, when the High Priests sent the Officers to apprehend Christ, and
returning without him; and the High Priests demanding the reason why they had
not brought him, the Officers replied, saying, That never man spoke as this
man, Verse. 47, 48. Then answered the Pharisees, are ye also deceived? Does any
of the Rulers of the Pharisces believe in him? but this people that knows not
the Law is cursed. Take here notice of the confession of the very Pharisees,
exceping themselves and the High Priests, they acknowledge that the generality
of the people believed in him. Here was increase upon increase of Christians
and Believers, all the people generally believed in him: certainly one place
could not have contained them all. And which is yet more to be observed; that
whereas the Pharisees said, none but the cursed people believed in him, and
none of the Rulers; in this very Chapter we find one Ruler one Nicodemus,
Verse. 50. none of the least of the Rulers. And in John 12.42. it is affirmed,
That among the chief Rulers many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees
they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue. And in
Verse 11. of the same Chapter, it is asserted, That many of the Jews went away
and believed on Jesus; here was multiplication upon multiplication of
Believers. And in Verse 19. The Pharisees therefore said among themselves,
perceive ye, how ye prevail nothing? behold the world is gone after him. These
words the Pharisees spoke in private among themselves deliberately, and
confessed, that the world of men were turned Christians; all Jerusalem swarmed
with Believers; without doubt all these could not meet in one place. And indeed
through all the Evangelists we shall read of infinite multitudes that believed
in him; and the reason is given, Matthew. 7.29. Because he taught them as one
having authority, and not as the Scribes: and did such works of wonder, and
wrought such miracles, as in John 7.31. they confessed, none could do but Christ:
and in Chap. 12. Verse. 11. it is related, that the raising up Lazarus from the
dead made many believe on him, and was the cause that such multitudes of people
followed him, and did so highly honor him and magnify him; and did receive
him coming into Jerusalem with such an acclamation, crying, Hosanna, as in
this 12 Chapter is specified; and is more largely set down in Matthew. 21.8.
where it is related, That a great multitude spread their garments in the way,
and others cut down branches, and the people that went before, and they that
came after, cried Hosanna, and said, this is Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth,
they all believed in him, and confessed him before the world. Now our Savior
says, He that shall confess me and own me before men, I will confess and own
him before my Father in Heaven. Here is a whole City of Believers and
Confessors. Yea, the very children believed in him, and openly, and in the
Temple cried Hosanna. And Christ himself allowed of their testimony, and
avouched they did well, and accordingly as was written. And in Luke 19.47, 48.
it is said, That he taught daily in the Temple, but the chief Priests and
Scribes, and the Elders of the people sought to destroy him, and could not
find what they might do; for all the people were very attentive to hear him.
The universality therefore of the people by all these places were believers,
and such as followed Christ: So that a man may wonder, how that Jerusalem it
self, though it were a mighty City, could contain such multitudes of people as
believed in Christ: so far improbable it is, that any one place or congregation
could contain the hundredth part of them. And we may also gather, that the
great miracles at his Suffering, and at his Resurrection, and the apparition of
so many that rose from their graves and went into the holy City, made a great
increase and addition of Disciples and new Believers; so that the number was
daily augmented; we find no diminution: but if some that followed Christ for
bread, that were but Hypocrites, left following him; yet in those places we
read again and again of numberless companies that daily came in, and believed
in him. And to all this we may add, that John the Baptist and his Disciples, a
little before his death; and Christ and his Disciples, by reason of the
increase of the multitudes of Believers, were forced to baptize in several
places. For so it is in John 3.23. After these days came Jesus and his
Disciples into the land of Judea, and there he tarried with them and baptized,
and John also was baptizing in Enon, near Salim, because there was much water
there, and they came and were baptized. And very reason will tell all men, that
of necessity there must be an innumerable multitude of believers, (for none
were Baptized but believers) that must take up an hundred preachers or
thereabouts; for our Savior had twelve Apostles, and 70. Disciples, as we may
see in the 9. of Luke, and in the 10. chapter of the same book: and John had
also many Disciples, though not so many as Christ, and all these were employed
in preaching the Gospel, and many of them in working miracles and wonders; so
that the very Devils were subject unto them, as they rejoycingly confessed to
Christ, when they returned to give him an account of their Ministry. And
without doubt if these miracles wrought so with the very Disciples, they
prevailed much more generally with the people to make them believe, so that
infinite multitudes of people came in and were Baptized, as the Scripture it
self informs us. And of necessity, so many Ministers, must have several
places to Preach in, and several congregations and Assemblies to Preach to,
and several places to Baptize in: for otherwise there would have been great
confusion; for but one of them could speak at once; and all these Disciples
were taken up in their several Ministeries, and had their hands full, as the
Scripture it self sufficiently declares in express words; for it is said,
That Christ's Disciples Baptized in Iudaea; and John in Enon near Salim, because
there was much water there. It seems there was too little water to Baptize them
in, in other places, which expression is worthy to be taken notice of. And
amongst those that came to be Baptized, multitudes of them came from Jerusalem.
And if we compare times with times, which will make much for the evidencing of
the truth, and consider the diverse passages in the holy Scriptures, we shall
find the like division of the people in those days; some standing for Christ
and John Baptist, and speaking in the justification of them and their
Ministry, and others that were of the Pharisaicall faction, and of the high
priests company; as is even in these our days, between them they call
Caviliers, and those they call Parliamentiers. Now what twenty or thirty places
in the City of London, can contain all the Parliamentiers to partake in all
acts of Worship? Or what ten places can hold all those of the Prelaticall
faction, that contend for their Bishops and Service, and all their other
trumpery and accoutrements? And yet, although they be in diverse and sundry
Assemblies, they are still the Prelaticall party, and all of them of the
Malignant Church: and as the diversity of the places changes not their
complexions, so it alters not their faith, nor manners, but they continue
still Malignants and remain all members of the Malignant Church. And as in
these days all that wish well unto the true Religion through both city and
kingdom, and love their Country, stand for the Parliament; so in those days
those that loved Zion and the prosperity of Jerusalem cleaved unto Christ and
the Gospelll and stood for him, and all his ministers, and by all computations,
though all the power and Authority, was in the hands of the malignant
Magistrates of those times, who were swayed and guided by the Scribes,
Pharisees, Elders, and the high Priests; yet to one Pharisee or Malignant
Scribe or Ruler, there was ten of those that believed in Christ, and honored
him and all his Ministers and Disciples. Yea the Pharisees themselves do
acknowledge it, not once but many times, as is evident from the places above
cited, and many more that might be produced. So that if I should frame no
Argument out of them, it is apparent, that those new additions of believers
that were converted by Christ and his Ministry, considered by themselves a
part, from those that Saint John the Baptist converted, were so great and
numerous, that they could not all meet in any one place for partaking of all
acts of worship, but of necessity must be distributed into several
Congregations and Assemblies, if they would all be edified, much less could
they all meet together, being joined to those that believed through the
Baptism and Ministry of John. But out of the former places above specified I
thus argue.

Where there was an innumerable multitude of believers, in a word, the whole
people and City of Jerusalem, whom the Pharisees accounted accursed, there they
could not all meet at any one time, and in any one room or place and in one
Congregation, to partake in all the Ordinances, but of necessity must be
distributed into several assemblies, and diverse Congregations, if they would
all be edified: But in Jerusalem (the Scribes, Pharisees, and Rulers by their
own confession, being excepted) there was an innumerable multitude of
believers, and in a word, the whole people and City of Jerusalem, whom the
Pharisees accounted accursed. Ergo, they could not all meet together at one
time, and in one place to partake in all the Ordinances, but of necessity must
be distributed into several assemblies and diverse Congregations, if they would
all be edified. For the major no rational man will deny it, that has but read
the Scriptures, or is but a little acquainted with the Histories of those
times. For the minor it is evident from the placed produced; and therefore the
conclusion does necessarily follow, But I yet further thus argue.

Where there was a world of believers, with many Rulers and men of great place
and office, with infinite multitudes of men and children, and all the people,
they could not all meet together at one time, and in one place and Congregation
to partake in all acts of worship; but of necessity must be distributed into
diverse assemblies and several Congregations, if they would all be edified. But
in the Church of Jerusalem, there was a world of believers, with many Rulers
and men of great place and office, with multitudes of men and children, and all
the people. Ergo, they could not all meet together at one time, and in one
place, to partake of all acts of worship, but of necessity must be distributed
into diverse congregations and assemblies if they would be all edified. For the
Major it is evident by the very light of nature, neither will any rational man
deny it, that has not resolved to sacrifice himself to stupidity. For the
Minor, the places above specified prove it: for in express words it is said,
that the World followed him; that is, believed in him, and that great
multitudes entertained him with their acclamations, and crying Hosanna, the
very children also seconding them. And that the chief Priests, Scribes, and
Elders, sought to destroy him, and could not find what to do, for all the
people were very attentive to hear him. The whole people we see here, or the
generality of them, except the Scribes, Pharisees, Elders, and High Priests,
(which in comparison of them were very few) believed in Jesus Christ, and were
his Disciples, and such as were converted by his ministry; and such a
multitude there was of them, as for that present, they so awed the High Priests
and Elders, that they durst not destroy Christ, though they desired it; so that
the minor stands firm; and from the premises the conclusion necessarily
follows. But out of the former places I yet further thus argue.

Where there was such an increase of multitudes of Believers, as that there was
not water enough in any one place to baptize them all, nor any one place in the
wilderness capable to contain or receive them all; so that Christ himself,
and his seventy Disciples, and twelve Apostles, and John Baptist and all his
Disciples, were for the numerosity of them, forced in several places to preach
unto them and baptize them; there they could not all meet at any one time, or
in any one place or room, or in one congregation, to partake or communicate in
all acts of worship; but of necessity were distributed into several
congregations or assemblies, if they would all be edified. But in Jerusalem
there was such multitudes of Believers that went out to the Baptism of John
and Christ, as that there was not water enough in any one place to baptize them
all; nor any one place in the wilderness capable to contain or receive them
all: so that Christ himself and his seventy Disciples, and his twelve Apostles,
and Saint John Baptist and his Disciples, were for the numerofity of them
forced to divide themselves into several places, and several assemblies and
congregations, that all the people might partake in all acts of worship, and be
edified. Ergo, they could not all meet at any one time, or in any one place,
but were of necessity forced to divide and distribute themselves into diverse
places, and several congregations and assemblies, that they might all be
edified. For the Major and Minor of this Syllogism, they are so evident, both
by reason, and the holy Scripture, that no man that has not resolved with
himself to remain incredulous, and continue in his obstinacy, can deny the
truth of them; so that the conclusion of necessity must from the premises be
granted. And all these multitudes of people, were believers before Christ's
Sufferings, Resurrection, and Ascension. Now I will take a Survey of the
numbers that were added to the Church, and to these Believers, by the powerful
preaching and miracles of the Apostles after Christ's Ascension. And from the
diverse places that I shall gather out of the Acts of the Apostles, frame such
Arguments, as shall make it yet more evident, that there were such multitudes
of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, as they could not all possibly meet
together at one time, and in one place or room, or in one congregation, to
enjoy all the ordinances and partake in all acts of worship, but must
necessarily be distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies, if they
would all be edified: and that before the persecution we read of in Acts 8.1.
and in the Persecution, and after the Persecution. But before I come to the
proof of the particulars, I must answer to some Objections, made by our
Brethren the Independents; the first of the which is, out of the first Chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles, from which they endeavor to prove, that the
number and multitude of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem was not so great,
but that they might all meet in one room or place, and in one congregation, to
partake in all acts of worship; the words on which they ground their Argument,
are these. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples,
and said (the number of the names together, were about an hundred and twenty)
Men and Brethren, etc. From whence they conclude, that the whole Church in
Jerusalem, that is to say, all the Believers, did meet in one place; for in
this number of names they would have all the whole Church in Jerusalem included
or confined; which to me is a wonder, that such Learned Men as many of them
are, should so argue: for this must be the scope of the Argument, if they
intend to prove, That the whole Church in Jerusalem and all the Believers
there, were not so numerous, but that they might all meet in one place, and
partake in all acts of worship, and that these in Peter's company were all that
Church, and all the Believers that were in Jerusalem: this, I say, must of
necessity be their meaning, or else their Argument concludes nothing to the
purpose. The invalidity of the which, I am most confident will by and by
evidently appear (though all the former Arguments to the contrary should not so
much as be thought of) and withal, it will also be obvious to any judicious
man, that in all respects their Argument makes much against themselves. For if
I should grant unto them, that at this instant of time that that place speaks
of, the whole Church in Jerusalem, or the number then of Believers, were no
more, but that one place might have contained them all for the enjoying of all
Ordinances (which I cannot do, for innumerable reasons, and some of them above
specified) yet it does not follow nor evince, that after there were daily such
additions of Believers, and such multitudes of new Converts added unto the
Church, that then also, one place or room could contain them all; and that
they might still meet in one congregation, and all together partake in all acts
of worship. For there is a vast difference between one hundred and twenty names
(for there was no more in this assembly) and in many ten thousands, which all
the World knows could not be contained in any one place of Jerusalem to
communicate in all the Ordinances, though that place had equallized the most
magnificent Structure that ever the World yet saw; especially, they could not
have all met there to edification, for they could not have all heard and
understood: and we know that in the Church, all must be done to edification;
and this would rather have hindered the mutual edification of the assembly, and
have brought a confusion, rather then any profit or benefit unto them. But the
truth is, the number of names here spoken of, if we will go to the genuine
interpretation of the place, not to speak of the universal consent of all the
learned Interpreters, who gather that in this assembly, the seventy Disciples
the Lord Jesus sent out to preach through all Judea, and all those other
Ministers of the Gospel that had been Christ's, and Saint John the Baptists
Disciples, every one of the which was thought fit for learning and divine
knowledge, to succeed Judas in his Apostleship and to be a Disciple; all these
or most of them, or such like, were those that are included in this number of
names. I say, to omit this interpretation of all the most orthodox Divines, and
their universal agreement and harmony in their learned Commentaries about this
portion of Scripture, the very words themselves following show they were select
and eminent men, and men of note, and Disciples of longest standing; and all of
them or the most of them Ministers and Preachers themselves; and were indeed the
Presbyters of the Church, to whom with the Apostles, the power of ruling was
committed; and who within themselves, and without the consent of the common
multitude of Believers, had power to ordain their own Officers, and that by
their own authority as we may see, Verse. 21.22. Wherefore, says S. Peter, of
these men which have companied with us, all the time that the Lord Jesus went
in and out among us, beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day he
was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of the
resurrection. And they appointed two, etc. and they prayed, etc. and they gave
forth the Lots, etc. all businesses here were managed and carried in an
Aristocraticall and Presbyterian way, and all was done by a joint consent and
the common counsel of them all. Here we find none of the multitude of the
people, though Believers, here were no Women that gave forth their lots.
Neither does the Apostle Peter say, Men, Mothers, and Brethren; or Men, Women,
and Brethren; or Men, Brethren, and Sisters; but Men and Brethren. For
howsoever in the foregoing Verses it is said, that these (meaning the Apostles
and Elders) all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the
women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, and with his Brethren, by which they
fitted themselves for the Ministry after they should receive the Holy Ghost;
though I say, they joined with them in those duties of humiliation and prayer,
which any women may do, in the society and company of godly Ministers: yet when
they went about other acts of Church government, as choosing of an Apostle,
then the Apostles and Elders only by themseves, to whom the power of the Keys
was given, ordered that business, and left the Women to their private
devotions, and their several employments: for in this action of giving forth
their lots, there is no mention of the Women. And it is manifest from the Text
it self, that this choosing of Matthias was at another time, and without all
doubt, upon a set day for this purpose; for it is said Verse. 15. And in those
days Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples, and said, Men and
Brethren. Here was only Disciples, Men and Brethren, and no Sisters. Till Pope
Joans time, and our days Peter's Keys never hung at any Woman's Girdle; and we
hear not in Scripture that they had any voice in choosing of Church Officers,
and admitting of Members into the Church, or casting out of any, till these
unhappy times; an usurpation not beseeming that Sex, as afterward in its due
place I hope to make appear. But this by the way. Now to the matter in hand, I
say it is apparent to any that will not shut their eyes, that all those, or
most of them that were in Peter's company, and at that time met together, were
capable of an Apostleship, and such as were the most eminent of all Christ's
followers, and such as were best instructed in Christian Religion, as having
been bred up in the doctrine of Saint John the Baptist, and under the Ministry
of Christ himself, the Prophet of his Church; and therefore they were the
Teachers of the Church and people, who were their flock which they all fed in
common: And from thence it argues, that the multitude of Believers in
Jerusalem was not only a distinct company from them, but that it was
exceedingly great and numerous, that had so many Pastors and Teachers over
them: for if they had been but so small a company as is here mentioned, and
that the whole Church had consisted but of sixscore names, then the Pastors
exceed the number of the flock; which is not only absurd to think, but against
the evident truth of the holy Scriptures, which relate unto us multitudes upon
multitudes, that were daily converted by the ministry of John the Baptist, and
of Christ and his Apostles, and added unto the Church before this their
meeting. So that by this I have now said, it is most clear and evident, that
all or most of these, were the most eminent Ministers of the Gospel, and the
Presbytery of the Church. But in this, that our Brethren do acknowledge, that
this assembly here spoke of were the Church, it makes as much against them, and
greatly for us: for it is manifest from the Text, that they were the Ministers
and Preachers of the Gospel, and in that they give them the name and title of
the Church, it follows that the representative body and Presbytery is a
Church, and that to them only belongs the power and authority of the Keys:
according to that of our Savior in Matthew. 18.17, 18. Tell it unto the Church,
etc. and whatsoever ye bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever
ye loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven. By which words, all authority is
put into the true Ministers hands; so that they only have the power and
authority of ordaining Pastors and Presbyters among themselves; as Paul
sufficiently declares in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus: and that they have
not only the title of the Church, but a Charter and Warrant also granted unto
them of ruling and governing the Church, and of ordaining Church Officers, and
that by joint and common consent among themselves, without the help and
assistance of the people and congregations under them, which by God were never
joined in commission with them.

And howsoever Paul in the 1. of the Corinthians, chap. 6. For the taking away
the scandal in going to Law before unbeleevers; gave them liberty to make
choice of some that were least esteemed in the Church, for the deciding of
their controversies, yet that did not authorize them to make choice of all
other Church Officers; for he limits them to go no farther then to the choice
of such as are of least esteem. And howsoever likewise, the Apostles in the 6.
of the Acts, to free themselves from all impediments, that they might the
better attend upon their Ministeries, and that without interruption they might
Preach the Gospel, gave them liberty to choose their Decons and Deconesses: yet
they prescribe the Rule by which they shall choose them, and keep the authority
of ordaining them still in their own hands: Look you out among you, say they,
men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may appoint
over this business, and when they had chose such, says the Scripture, They
put them before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands
on them. So that howsoever they gave unto them a Liberty to choose, yet it was
with limitation, not an absolute liberty, for if they had chose men that had
not been of approved honesty, well gifted, and wise, and qualified as they
appointed; it was arbitrary in the Apostles to reject their choice, for they
keep the power of Ordination still in their own hands, and to them it did
belong to ratify their Election; so that the people had not the power of
Ordination then, nor have not to this day, no not of the meanest Deacon or
Deaconesse, that belongs only unto the Presbytery, much less have they power
of ordaining Presbyters. Indeed for the deciding of controversies and
differences, they have a liberty given them of making choice of some petty men
amongst them, and that they may do without the Presbytery; but they have no
power of Ordination. Neither did I ever yet read in the Sacred Scriptures that
the people or Congregation had any hand at all in choosing of Ministers and
Presbyters, neither were they fit for that employment; for it is one thing to
judge of a man's external carriage and manners, and another thing of his
sufficiency for his indowments and abilities of learning, and that men of
learning and knowledge only can do, and the Sons of the Prophets; and it is in
special given in charge to the Presbyters and Ministers, as it is manifest in
the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and Titus, 1 Timothy 4.14. Tit. 1. And they only
know how rightly to examine them, in the knowledge of the tongues and Sciences,
and such Arts as are requisite, besides the knowledge of the holy Scriptures;
all which are little enough for the making of a Minister complete and fit for
that Sacred employment. And all the Primitive Churches in the Apostles times
willingly submitted themselves to what the Presbytery then did, and assented to
their choice as in the 14. of the Acts verse. 23. it appears. But I say, in
that our brethren do acknowledge this company, this hundred and twenty names,
to be a Church, and in that it is also sufficiently manifest, that they are
considered in a distinct notion from the people, which also in the holy
Scriptures, when they are joined with their Ministers, are called a Church (as
is frequently to be seen through the acts of the Apostles) and in that it does
abundantly appear, by what has formerly been spoken, and will yet in the
following discourse be farther elucidated, that there were many congregations
and Assemblies of believers in the Church of Jerusalem, and that they were all
governed by the joint consent and Common Council of the Apostles and
Presbyters, to whom the Apostles themselves were subject; who were sent this
way and that way by their direction, and to whom they were to give an account
of their Ministry, as we see in diverse places in the Acts, and were ordered by
them, what they should do, and also made their appeals unto the Apostles and
Presbyters in any business of common concerement: I say, in all these
respects, it is evident that the Church of Jerusalem consisted of many
Congregations and Assemblies, and was yet but one Church, and that governed by
a Presbyterian Government, and by a Common Council of Ministers, to whose
order all the several Congregations were to submit themselves: And therefore
this their Argument makes much against them and greatly for us. And this shall
suffice to have answered to this their first Objection; which, to speak the
truth, is that that carries the most appearance of any Argument they produce
to prove their Assertion and tenent: for all their other Objections raised from
the several meetings of the Apostles and people, and from the multitude
coming to them about the ordaining of Deacons, by which they would persuade
the world, that the company of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem was not so
numerous at any time, but that they might all meet in one congregation, or in
one place, to partake of in acts of worship, they consist most of them in
Homonymies, and mere Paralogismes, which indeed beseem not the gravity of
reverend men, and in the weighty matters of Divinity, would be undecent in a
sucking Sophister; and therefore are much more blameworthy in them, who by such
fallacies labor to amuse the people, to the disturbance of the whole Church
and Kingdom, and alienating the affections of Brethren one from another.

I shall briefly run over them. Acts 2.46. where it is related, that the
Believers and new Converts continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and
breaking bread from house to house. From these words the Brethren conclude,
that the multitude of Believers was not so great, but that they might all meet
in one congregation, and in one place, to partake in all acts of worship; for
here in express words, the place where they met is specified, and it is said
to be the Temple. I appeal to the wisdom of any learned man, or but of a
rational Christian, whether this be a candid or ingenuous way of arguing; That
because three thousand Christians might meet together in the Temple of
Jerusalem. Ergo, all that believed in Jerusalem that were converted by John the
Baptist, and all that believed by Christ's ministry and miracles, and all that
were converted by the Apostles, and the seventy Disciples before Christ's
sufferings, and all that were after his Resurrection converted for twenty years
together, by the Ministry of all the Apostles, and all the other Ministers of
the Gospel, they might yet all meet in any one place or Congregation, to
partake in all acts of worship, and to edification. I refer this, I say, to the
consideration of any Learned man, or any intelligible Christian, whether this
be an ingenuous way of arguing. I believe if one should argue against them
after the same manner, they would laugh at him. If one should thus dispute;
within these seven years, all the Independents continued daily with one accord
in such a place, and they all met together in one congregation: Ergo, there is
but one congregation, and but one Church still of Independents in London, and
they all meet together in one congregation. Would not the Brethren make
themselves as merry with such a way of disputing, as they have made others sad
with their way of arguing? yes doubtless. The truth is, their way of arguing
is not to their own honor, to speak but favorably of it, as will appear. For
should I grant unto them, that at that time this place of Scripture speaks of,
there had been no more Believers in Jerusalem, but those hundred and twenty
names specified in the first Chapter of the Acts, and these three thousand new
Coaverts; and accord also unto them, that all these did meet together in one
place, and in one congregation, and did partake in all the Ordinances, which
notwithstanding I cannot grant them, for diverse reasons: for in the same place
it is said, that although they continued daily in the Temple, yet they brake
bread from house to house; that is to say, some of them did daily meet to hear
the Word in the Temple, and then followed their several employments, and
others in private, and they had the holy Communion or Sacrament in several
houses; from which it is manifeltly evident, that then when there were newly
added to the Church but three thousand Believers, they had many and several
congregations and assemblies; and without all doubt as the multitudes of
Believers increased, they were still distributed into more congregations: for
it is said, They brake bread from house to house; that is, they had their
assemblies and meetings in several houses and places, besides the Temple: and
in those several houses, they had not only the preaching of the Word and
Prayer, but the administration of the Sacraments, and communicated in all the
Ordinances; which they could not do in the Temple, as afterward will appear:
and all that I now say is evident from the 41 Verse of the same Chapter to the
47. But I say, should I silence my own reason, and suffer it to speak nothing;
and should I grant to our Brethren, that there were but three thousand, and
that these three thousand Believers might all meet in one congregation, and
partake in all the ordinances to edification: would it follow, that when ten
thousand were added unto them, and twenty thousand more to them, and thirty
thousand more to all these; and it may be in a short time many hundred
thousands more; would any man think or believe, that ten thousand men can meet
in one congregation to edify, and to partake in all the Ordinances, much less
when there is so many thousands more added to them, that they could still meet
in any one place or congregation? I think no man that has not abdicated his
understanding will so conclude. So that all men may see, not only the weakness
of this argumentation, but the strength of truth: For this very weapon with
which they had thought to have defended themselves, and wounded the Truth, they
wound themselves, and overthrow their own tenent; as God willing, I shall more
fully by and by make appear. But out of Chap. 5. our Brethren conceive they
have a very strong and invincible Argument: where it is related, that after
Ananias and Saphira were miraculously taken away, for lying unto the Spirit of
God. It is said, That great fear came upon all the Church, and upon as many as
heard these things. And by the hands of the Apostles were many signs and
wonders wrought among the people, and they were all with one accord in Solomon's
Porch. Ergo, say they, the number of Believers in Jerusalem, was not so great,
but that they might all meet together in one congregation; for the place where
they did meet, is set down, viz. in Solomon's Porch: and it is further
specified, That they were all with one accord in that place. This is their
Argument faithfully and truly set down, and with the best advantage for their
cause. But to speak the truth, this kind of arguing has no force in it,
neither does it beseem grave men, to trifle thus, in the matters of God and
Religion. For should I grant unto them, that all the Believers that then were
in Jerusalem, and had been converted by John the Baptist, and by Christ and all
his Disciples, before the Passion and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ; and
the three thousand converted by the first Miracle and Sermon of Peter, after
they had received the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the five thousand after by
the second Miracle and Sermon, and after the new additions of so many
multitudes of Believers both of men and women, by reason of the miracle wrought
upon Ananias and Saphira his Wife; and the other miracles that the fifth
Chapter speaks of; should I say, grant that all these might yet have met in
one place, and in any one congregation to communicate in all the Ordinances,
which all reason forbids me to yield to; will it follow, that when there were
additions upon additions, and that of multitudes of Believers, that they might
still meet in any one congregation to edification, and have communicated in all
acts of worship? For in all reason we may conceive, had we no testimony out of
the holy Scripture to back it, that if eight thousand were converted besides
multitudes both of Men and Women, with a few Miracles and Sermons: and if at
the first preaching of the Gospel after the Resurrection there was such a
great increase, and such a multiplication of Christians; all understanding, I
say, persuades, that in the space of twenty years, there will be innumerable
multitudes added daily to the Church, when the miraculous working of wonders
with the same doctrine still continued: and with all, the same reason will
dictate to any man, that then the whole multitude of all those Believers could
not all meet together in one place, and in one congregation for edification, to
communicate in all Ordinances. So that any judicious man, without the help of
any great Schoole-learning, may perceive the invalidity and vanity of such
argumentation. And truly were it not, that they are Brethren, and that I desire
in the spirit of meekness to deal with them, I would have made it appear,
that it is so poor a way of disputing, that it did not bessem men of gravity,
much less of learning; and that there were many ways to evade the dint of
such reasoning, and to prove the nothingnesse of the Argument, and that by the
words of the Text: the people there spoke of, to be in Solomon's Porch, are to
be limited and confined within the number of those that were converted by the
last miracle, and some other new miracles of the Apostles, which they were then
working in Solomon's Porch; for there is the place where the Apostles, and they
were together; and I do acknowledge, that as many as were then, and at that
time, in Solomon's Porch with the Apostles, were of one accord. But does this
with any rational man conclude, that every Believer in Jerusalem, both Men and
Women and all the Christians and Disciples in Jerusalem, were then together in
Solomon's Porch, and in one Congregation? I am confident that no wise man will
think so; for without all controversy there were then such multitudes of
Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, as neither many Porches nor many Temples
could have contained their very bodies, much less could they have all met in
any one congregation to edify. But I say I will not deal with Brethren so
rigidly as I might, and therefore wave many things that I might justly here
utter. But grant it were so, that now in the beginning of the Christian Church,
and if I may so speak in the infancy of it, that all the Believers then in
Jerusalem night all meet together in one place; does it follow that they
mightever so do in succeeding times, when there was such infinite increase of
Christians daily added to the Church? all reason will contradict that
assertion. Within this seven years, as all men know, one place and
congregation would have contained all the Independents; but will one place now
or ten contain them? And there is no man as I conceive will deny, but that the
Apostles and those Primitive Ministers, had mother manner of converting faculty
then our Brethen; for the Apostles as it is well known did not build upon
others foundations; yea, they took it as a disparagement unto them, for so
Saint Paul in the 15 of the Romans v. 20. affirms. Now our Brethen they build
upon others foundations, and gather the sheep, and them the good and the fat
sheep, with good fleeces on their backs; yea, the Velvit-sheep, and the
Plush-sheep, and the Satin and Taffitysheep, out of other Sheepheards foulds;
and while they seem to gather Churches, they scatter them, and the poor sheep.
But I will proceed to the other Argument out of the sixth of the Acts, where it
is related that when the number of Disciples was multiplied (here we may take
notice of multiplication) There arose a murmuring of the Greeks against the
Hebrews, because the widows were neglected, in the daily ministration. And the
Apostles called the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and gave them liberty
to choose their Deacons, and it pleased the whole multitude, says the
Scripture. From thence our brethren conclude, that all the believers in the
Church of Jerusalem came here together to the Apostles, and were then no more
then could all meet in one congregation: as if our brethren should thus argue;
As the wheel-barrow goes rumble, rumble, even so is Prelaticall Episcopacy,
better then the Presbyterian Government. But to be serious, should I grant unto
the Brethren that at this time, all the believers that were in the Church of
Jerusalem, did then come together, and were all in one place, and might meet in
one congregation; does it follow, when there was a daily increase of more
believers, and that of multitudes of them (as this very chapter signifies) that
then also they might all meet together in one place or in one Congregation? I
suppose no man will think or believe so. But I must confess, that I cannot
grant unto them, that by the multitude of believers here spoke of, is to be
understood every individual Christian, or the greatest part of them, much
less that all the whole body of them came together, and that for warrantable
reason to the contrary. For the controversy and murmuring here spoken of, was
not among all the Disciples and believers in Jerusalem, but only between two
Nations of them, viz. between the Greeks and the Hebrews. Now we are informed
out of the second of the Acts verse. 5. That there were dwelling in Jerusalem
Jews, devout men, out of every Nation under heaven: for so in express words,
it is said, of the which the Greeks were but one Nation, and the Hebrews
another. So that all the Christians and believers of all the other Nations,
were of one mind, and in good accord among themselves, as the foregoing
Chapters tell, and were at peace one wish another, so that there was no
murmuring amongst them, nor no controversy, contention or varience and they
all continued quiet in their several houses, and lived in love, and were none
of that multitude here spoken of: so that of necessity, by the multitude in
this place, we are to understand the Greeks only and the Hebrews, for so in
express words it is specified: and this every rational man can easily
perceive. Again, by multitude here is to be understood not a confused company
going in a tumultuous way, but a considerable number of rational men of each
differing and dissenting party, and such as were called and sent for by the
Apostles, as it is commonly seen, in those that go by way of complaint to
petition to any council, they send a compitent multitude of understanding and
able men, to grace their cause and to manage the business: and not every
particular and individual person, men and women to negotiate it, which could
not be without mighty confusion, which was not in this multitude: and therefore
by multitude, and the whole multitude, we are to understand, that both those
parties that came to negotiate this business, were well satisfied with the
Apostles Order, and obeyed it: but from hence if any man would infer and
conclude, that every one of the believing Hebrews, and every individual
believing Greek, that was then in Jerusalem; and that all the Greek Church and
all the Hebrew Church, both men and women, not one person excepted, were all in
one place together before the Apostles, the whole world would judge, that this
man that should thus argue, were very much crased in his brain: but much more
would it argue a great imbecility of wit and judgment in any one, to conclude
that all the believers in the Church of Jerusalem were there: And unless they
can so conclude, the Argument is nothing to the purpose, nor of any validity to
evince and prove the Assertion of our brethren. But if I should yield unto the
brethren, these two things; the first, That all the believing Greeks and all
the believing Hebrews, none excepted, were all before the Apostles in one
place: yet still this will follow, that all the believers of every several
Nation were not in this multitude and number: for they had nothing to do in the
business, for they were no parties; so that the Argument is nothing to the
purpose, but a mere fallacy to delude unstable souls, and to make them believe
that bladders are Lanthorns. Secondly, should I grant unto the brethren, that
by multitude here, and by the whole multitude, all the believers then in
Jerusalem, were to be understood, and that then they might all meet in one
congregation: does it therefore follow, that many years after, when there was
daily such additions of multitudes of Believers, that they might all still meet
together in one place, and in one congregation for all acts of worship, and to
be edified? I believe our Brethren themselves the Independents will not grant
it; yet they must grant it if they will stand to their principles. But from
this murmuring between the Greeks and the Hebrews I, with very good reason, can
frame an Argument to overthrow our Brethrens tenent, and may from thence
gather, that in the Church of Jerusalem there were many and several
congregations, where they had all acts of worship; and that every several
nation had their several congregations and several assemblies, where they
might hear the Word of God in their own lauguage and to edification, and
communicate in all Ordinances with comfort. For if there should arise a
controversy in London, between the Dutch and the French, about points of
Religion, or about any other matter of practice concerning Religion; and they
should all apply themselves to the grave and learned Assembly for the decision
of it; would not all men gather that there were two distinct congregations of
them in the City? So it may well be concluded against our Brethren, that every
several Nation of Believers in Jerusalem, had their several congregations and
assemblies apart, (as well as the Greeks and the Hebrews) where they might
partake in all Ordinances to edification, and understand their Ministers
preaching to them in their own language. As for my part, I verily believe it
was so, and from warrantable reason: and yet all these several congregations
made but one Church, and were under one Presbytery: and for this my belief I
shall give my reasons in the ensuing discourse. But had there been but one
Nation in Jerusalem, so many thousand Believers as the Scripture relates there
was, could not all have met in one place, and in one congregation, as all
reason will persuade. So that all the Arguments of our Brethren to the
contrary, are but as so many Squibs which only make a noise, and then vanish in
the air; to say no more. And these are the most rational objections that as
yet I ever heard from them, to the which I have briefly given my several
answers, which I hope by Gods assistance I shall ever be able to make good
against them all. And now I will go on to prove, that by the ministry of the
Apostles, and the diverse miracles daily wrought by them, after they had
received the gifts of the holy Ghost, there were such additions of multitudes
of Believers to those that were converted by Saint John the Baptist, and our
Savior and his Discples, before the death of John and the sufferings of our
Savior, as that they could not all meet at any one time and in one place or
congregation, to partake in all Ordinances; no, nor in a few; but were of
necessity forced to be distributed into several assemblies and congregations,
and that before the persecution, under the Persecution, and after the
persecution. And for proving of what I lay down, which is still but the first
conclusion I undertook to make good, I will begin with the first eight Chapters
of the Acts, and then go forward to the ensuing story of the same Book in
order, to prove my assertion. In the 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 Chapters of the Acts, it
is related how the holy Apostles employed themselves in their several
ministeries, after they had received the gifts of the holy Ghost, and were
endued with all power of working miracles, and had received the gifts also of
tongues and languages, and the effects also of their ministry, preaching, and
miracles, are there set down at large: and it is specified, that by means of
that first miracle, when all the people of several Nations heard the Apostles
speak to them, every one in their several tongues and languages (who were very
well known to be Galileane) that they were amazed to hear the wonderful Works
of God, and from their amazement it is said, they gave attention to the Sermon
of Peter; the Sermon it self being there set down, and the effect of it, which
was, That when they had heard it, they were pricked in their heart, and said
unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?
Then Peter said unto them, Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ, for the remissions of sins; and ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost, etc. Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and
the same day were added unto them about three thousand souls. And they
continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of
bread, and prayer. And fear came upon every soul: and many signs and wonders
were done by the Apostles: and all that believed were together, and had all
things common: and they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple; and
breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart, praising God, and having favor with all the people. And
the Lord added to the Church daily such as should he saved. Here we see, that
by virtue of one Miracle and Sermon (God working with them) were added to the
Believers, that Saint John the Baptist, and Christ and his Disciples had
converted, and such as were formerly baptized, three thousand more; a great
Miracle: all which, with the many other that were converted afterward, are
called but one Church. For it is expressly said, that the Lord added to the
Church daily such as should be saved. We heard of the great multitudes, and of
a world of such as believed in Christ, before this Miracle and Sermon. And can
any man in reason conceive, that all these could meet in any one place or
congregation, to partake in all acts of worship? But let us go on. In the 3 and
4 Chapter, by means of that Miracle that was wrought upon the Impotent Man, who
was known to all the people to have bin a Cripple from his Mothers womb; and
through the powerful preaching of Peter, who exhorted them to repent and to be
converted, that their sins might be blotted out, when the time of refreshing
should come from the presence of the Lord, etc. It is said, that many which
heard the Word believed; and the number of those new Believers is there
specified, to be about five thousand men, which were also added unto the
Church, and joined to all the former Believers; so that we have here eight
thousand new Members added unto the Church, in a very little time: and this was
a greater Miracle then the former. So that the Prophecy in the 110 Psalm,
verse. 3. was not fulfilled; That in the day of Christ's power, his willing
people from the womb of the morning should be multiplied as the Dew upon the
Earth. And which is not to be passed by without due notice, It is supposed by
the best Interpreters, and the most orthodox Writers, (and there is good reason
for it) that these new Converts were Men, not Women and Children. And without
doubt, these new Believers endeavored to convert, their Wives, Children,
Servants, and Neighbors: and there is good reason also why we should be
induced to believe, that Truth, with such wonders and miracles annexed to it,
should be as prevalent to convert Women, Children, Servants, and Neighbors,
and whole Families; as errors and novelties, in these our days, are able to
mis-leade those poor creatures, that are ever learning, and never come to
knowledge; and the which are carried about with every wind of doctrine, and
believe every newborn truth (as they term it) and follow every New Light, and
every newfound way, though it tend to the confusion of the Church and
Kingdom. It is said of that man of Sin, that Son of Perdition, that he
shall come after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying
wonders, and with all deceiveablenesse and unrighteousness in them that
perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved. 2 Thessalonians. 2. But to see people so deluded without Miracles, is a Miracle.
So that those poor Women that are carried about with every wind of doctrine,
from that truth that was taught by Christ and his Apostles, and confirmed by so
many Miracles; and those that do and have misled them, have all of them a
great deal to answer for. But this I speak by the way, conceiving that all
those new Converts would endeavor, as the good Samaritan Woman did after
conversion, not only to bring their Wives, Children, and Families, but their
Neighbors also, and whole Cities to the same faith. And I have that opinion
also of all the Women and people of that Age, that they were as ready to
embrace the truth, as the Women and people of this Age and in these our times
are to follow errors. But let us now see what effects the other Miracles
wrought upon the people that are related in the fifth Chapter; as of Ananias
and Saphira his wife, who for tempting the Spirit of God, were both stricken
down dead and gave up the ghost; and the other Miracles wrought by the
Apostles. It is said in Verse. 11. That fear came upon all the Church, and to as
many that heard these things (and that to the rest, viz. the Scribes and
Pharisees, the Malignant party) durst no man join himself. And Believers were
added unto the Lord, multitudes, both men and women: Here come in the good
Women now. And in Verse 26. it it is said, that the Captain, with the Officers,
brought the Apostles without violence (for they feared the people, least they
should have stoned them.) It will not be amiss briefly to take notice of the
several effects these Miracles wrought. The first is, that great fear of
offending God came on all the Church, Gods own people; which notwithstanding of
the many additions of Believers is called still but one Church. The second,
that none durst join themselves to the contrary party, the Pharisaicall
malignant crew. The third, that Believers were added to the Church, and that
multitudes no small companies both of Men and Women. Here is a new increase,
and that a great one. The fourth is, that the very Captain and Officers were
awed and kept in fear, by reason of the multitude of Believers: so that those
that feared not God were afraid of his servants. By which it may be gathered,
that the party of Believers did balance the number of the incredulous and
Pharisaicall party, if not by far exceed them. And therefore by all
probability, must needs be an innumerable company and a mighty multitude; and
such a number as could not all meet in any one place or congregation, to
partake in all the Ordinances. And to say nothing of the diversity of Tongues
and Languages which were not given to the Apostles to be useless and of no
profit; nor to speak any thing of the diverse Jews that were then dwelling at
Jerusalem, devout Men and Women, out of every Nation under Heaven; which
notwithstanding may be a sufficient argument to prove that they all had their
several meeting places, and their several Ministers to preach unto them in
their several Languages, that they might be edified. I say, for the present to
wave all this, let us take notice what is positively set down in the last Verse
of the fifth Chapter, that is, that the Apostles daily in the Temple and in
every house, ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. That is to say, they
preached both publicly and privately, and the very places where they preached
are set down, as in the Temple, and in every house. So that of necessity, there
must be several congregations and assemblies of Believers in Jerusalem,
according to that in the 2. of the Acts verse. the 46. where it said, That they
continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking of bread from house
to house, which by all Interpreters is understood the administration of the
Lords Supper: and that the several assemblies and congregations were wont
usually to meet in private houses, is frequent mention in the holy Scriptures,
as in the 16. of the Romans verse the 5. and in the 1. of the Corinthians chap.
16. verse. 19. Col. 4.14. and Saint Paul in the 20. of the Acts verse. 20. says,
That he kept back nothing that was profitable unto them, but taught them
publicly and from house to house, so that they had their Assemblies as well
private as public, even in the Church of Ephesus, where they did partake in
all acts of worship; and in that Church also they had many Presbyters, and yet
were but one Church. But now I will pass on to the sixth chapter, where in the
1, 2, 3, and 7, verses it is said, That in those days, when the number of
Disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the
Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in their daily ministration. Then
the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, It is not
reason that they should leave the Word of God and serve tables. Wherefore
brethren look you out among you seven men of honest report, and full of the
holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. But we will
give our selves continually to prayer and to the ministry of the Word, verse.
7. And the Word of God increased, and the number of the Disciples multiplied in
Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedient unto the
faith. In the which words, we may take notice briefly of these observables. The
first, of the cunning and policy of the Devil, who when he cannot by all his
wiles and stratagems assault the Church without, then he labors to assail it
within, as here with civil discords and differences among brethren: and in
other Churches in all ages, even in, and from the Apostles times, by
dissentions in opinions, by Sects, Schisms, Factions, and Heresies; and by
these his wiles and craft, he first brings in difference in opinion, and
afterward diversity of affection, and that among brethren; and all this he
does, that in fine, he may bring ruin upon them all. And thus he began with
the Church of Jerusalem, raising a controversy between the Hebrews and the
Greeks, who complained, That their widows were neglected in the daily
ministration; as either that they were not made Deaconesses, as the widows of
the Hebrews were, or that there was not an equal distribution of the Alms,
according to the intention of the Church, who sold their possessions and goods
to that end, that they might be parted to all men, as every one should have
need, Acts 2. verse. 44, 45. chap. 4. v. 35. And this their supposition was the
cause of that controversy. The second abservable, is, To whom the differing
and dissenting parties did apply themselves and appeal; and that was to the
Presbytery or College of Apostles, not to any one of them particularly, but to
the twelve; as in that difference at Antioch, Acts 15. Paul and Barnabas and
certain other of the Brethren in the Church of Antioch appealed to the Apostles
and Presbyters, and in both those differences all the Churches submitted
themselves to the Apostles Order, and that willingly: and this example of the
Apostles, is the Rule for ordering of all controversies that all the reformed
Churches set before them; deciding all debates in Religion by the Word of God,
and according to the president they have laid down unto them, by the Apostles
and Presbyters in Jerusalem. Here I say, the whole Presbytery and College of
the Apostles determined the business; neither do we read, that the Assemblies
of the Hebrews and Greeks at Jerusalem, or the Church of Antioch, pretended
their own Independent authority, though several Congregations, or challenged a
power within themselves, of choosing their own Officers, or determining of
differences amongst themselves, or pleaded that they had Authority within
themselves, to make their own Laws by which they would be ordered, or that they
challenged any such privileges unto themselves, but they all appealed unto the
Presbytery at Jerusalem, as the supreamest Ecclesiastical Court, and freely
submitted themselves to their arbitrament, and to the Order they set down, as
the story specifieth. The third observable is, the employment in which the
Apostles were all taken up, and the effect of it; and their employment is said
to be continuing in prayer and the Ministry, and preaching of the Word; and
the effect of this their Ministry was, That the Word of God increased, and the
number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of
the Priests were obedient to the faith. By all which it is most apparent, that
such multitudes being daily added to the Church, and where there was such
variety of teachers, and so many Apostles, and all of them taken up in
preaching; and where there was so many different Nations, and such diversities
of tongues and languages as was in the Church of Jerusalem, they could not all
meet together at any one time, or in any one place to edification; and that
they might all communicate in all the Ordinances, but of necessity they must be
distributed into several Congregations and Assemblies; if they would avoyde
confusion; and all that I now speak is evident by the very light of Nature and
all reason, and therefore it follows, That there were many Assemblies and
Congregations in Jerusalem, and yet all made but one Church, and that that
Church was Presbyterianly governed. But that I may make this truth more
evidently yet appear, I will first out of the former discourse frame several
Arguments, and then go on to the ensuing history. And out of all these six
chapters I thus argue.

Where there were eight thousand new converts, besides women and children, by
virtue of some few miracles and Sermons, after Christ's Resurrection added to
the Church of Jerusalem, and the society of believers, besides those that were
converted by John the Baptist and Christ and his Apostles Ministry, before his
sufferings; and to the which also there were afterward great multitudes of
Believers both of men and women, and a great company of the Priests joined; in
so much that they kept the very Officers and Soldiers in awe, and struck a
fear and terror into them: there they could not all meet together in any one
place or congregation, to partake in all acts of Worship, but of necessity must
be distributed into diverse Assemblies and Congregations. But in the Church of
Jerusalem there were eight thousand new converts, besides women and children,
by virtue of some few miracles and Sermons after Christ's Resurrection added to
the Church and society of Believers, besides those that were converted by John
the Baptist, and Christ and his Apostles Ministry, before his sufferings; and
to which also there were afterward great multitudes of Believers both of men
and women, and a great company of Priests also joined; insomuch as they kept
the very Officers and Soldiers in awe, and struck a fear and terror into
them. Ergo, They could not all meet together in any one place or Congregation,
to partake in all acts of worship, but of necessity must be distributed into
diverse Assemblies and Congregations if they would all be edified. For the major
it is so evident, that I cannot believe that any rational man will deny it:
for who yet did ever see an Assembly of above ten thousand people in any one
place or Congregation, that could partake in all the Ordinances to edification?
Yea, to affirm this, is to fight against common reason and daily experience.
For the minor it is proved by the several places above quoted, and therefore
the conclusion does also of necessity follow. Again, I thus further argue.

Where there was almost an hundred Preachers and Ministers, besides the twelve
Apostles, and all these continually taken up in prayer and preaching, and could
not leave their ministry to serve Tables; and where there was such a company
of Believers and people as did employ them all; there of necessity they must be
distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies, if they would all be
edified and avoid confusion, and partake in all Ordinances. But in the Church
of Jerusalem there was almost an hundred Preachers and Ministers, besides the
twelve Apostles; and all these were continually taken up in prayer and
preaching, and could not leave the Ministry to serve Tables; and where there
was such a company of Believers and people as did employ them all: therefore of
necessity they must be distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies, if
they would all be edified, and avoid confusion, and partake in all Ordinances.
For the Major, very reason and the common light of understanding, without any
reluctation will assent unto it. And for the Minor, it is manifest from Chap.
1. Verse. 21, 22. and from Chap. 6. Verse. 2. and 4. Chap. 8. Verse. 1. so that
the conclusion is undeniable. Again I thus further argue.

Where there were people of all Nations under the Heavens, and the in some
multitudes, and most of them Believers, and devout Men and Women, which waited
upon the Ordinances, and had a desire daily to hear the Word; there of
necessity they must be distributed into diverse and sundry congregations and
assemblies, and have such to preach unto them severally in their own language;
or else they could not partake in all acts of worship to edification. But in
the Church of Jerusalem there were people of all Nations under the Heavens, and
them in some multitudes, and most of them Believers and devout Men and Women,
that waited upon the Ordinances, and had a desire daily to hear the Word.
Ergo, of necessity they must be distributed into diverse congregations and
assemblies, and have such to preach unto them severally in their own language,
or else they could not partake in all acts of worship to edification. For the
Major, no reason can gainsay it, for the Apostles and the other Ministers
employed all those gifts of the Holy Ghost, and those diverse languages which
they had received for the edification of the Church, to the utmost, and did
improve all opportunities for the converting of the people committed unto their
charge, and for the further building of them up in their holy faith, which was
their calling and employment: and this they could not have done, unless they
taught those Nations in their several Languages; and that they could not do
without confusion, unless they were distributed in several assemblies, where
they might distinctly hear their own Languages. For otherwise, as Saint Paul
says in the 1 Cor. 14.23. if men should speak to the people with unknown
tongues, if the unlearned, says he, come in and unbelievers, will they not
say, that they are all mad? And therefore Tongues are given for a sign, not to
them that believe, but to them that believe not. Now they were devout Men in
Jerusalem and Believers; and therefore the Apostles and Ministers were to speak
to them severally in their own languages: and for that purpose God gave them
those Tongues, and that diversity of Languages, that those that were Believers
might be more edified, and that the unbelievers and unlearned, and such as
belonged unto Gods election, might be convinced and judged of all; and that the
secrets of their hearts might be manifested, that so falling down upon their
face they might worship God, and report that God was in them of a truth, as the
Apostle there says. So that I say for the Major, no reasonable creature will
call it in question. And for the Minor, it is manifest out of the Chap. 2.
Verse. 5. etc. and in Chap. 6. Verse. 1. and Verse. 2, 4. And for the conclusion,
that from the Premises does also ensue. Again, I thus further argue out of the
former Chapters.

That which the holy Scripture in express words and in diverse places has
declared unto us, that every Christian is bound to believe: but the Scripture
in express words and in diverse places has declared unto us, that there were
diverse assemblies and congregations of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem,
and that the Apostles and all the Believers in Jerusalem, did continue daily
with one accord in the Temple; and that they brake bread from house to house,
and that daily in the Temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and
preach Jesus Christ. Ergo, there was diverse congregations and several
assemblies of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, where they did daily
partake in all the Ordinances, and enjoyed all acts of worship. For the Major,
no Christian can deny it. For the Minor, it is manifest from 46 Verse of the 2
Chapter, and Chap. 5. v. 12. and v. 42. and Chap. 3. v. 12, 13. and many more
places that might be produced. And in those places it is not only said they
preached in every house, but that they brake bread from from house to house; by
which expression all Writers interpret, the holy Communion, and partaking of
the Lords Supper: and if it should not so be understood, we never can read
that any Christians in Jerusalem besides the Apostles, ever enjoyed all acts of
worship, especially those that are peculiar to Church Communion. It is related
often that they preached the Word daily in the Temple, which was common to Jews
and Christians (though no Jewish worship) as all men acknowledge. And by
evident Arguments it may be proved, that they never administered the Sacraments
in the Temple, those discriminating and distinguishing Ordinances of the
Christian Church; as all the most Orthodox Interpreters gather from the ensuing
words, where it is said, They continued daily with one accord in the Temple,
but when they speak of the Administration of the Lords Supper, it is expressed
in these words, and breaking of bread from house to house, which is interpreted
by all Divines, of Sacramental bread; which phrase and manner of speaking is
usually so expounded by all the Learned, upon Acts the 20. verse. the 7. And our
Brethren do not deny this. And it is well known, that the Primitive Christians
had their meetings and assemblies in private houses, as by the many places is
manifest, which I cited but a little before. Besides the Sacrament of breaking
bread is no Temple-ordinance; and therefore could not be administered in the
Temple with the safety of the Christians and Believers: for if they were so
highly displeased with the Apostles, for preaching Jesus and the Resurrection,
in the Temple, as it appears Act. 4.2. They would not have suffered them to
have administered the Sacraments there. And if Paul was so assaulted, Acts
21.28. for being but supposed to have brought Greeks into the Temple, what
would these men have done, if one should have brought in a new Ordinance, and a
new worship and service; and that so contrary to their legal rights? Surely
the Jews would never have suffered it, neither do the Brethren contend for
this. Now it is well known that in the Primitive Church, if not every day, yet
every first day of the Week at least, they met together to break bread; that
is, to receive the holy Sacrament, which never was without preaching, as we see
in Act. 20.7. and in the places above quoted: in which it is said, they daily
brake bread together, and that in several and particular houses; and that of
necessity must be, for a few houses could not have held so many thousands, as
all reason will dictate: and if they were or could be contained under one roof,
yet they must be forced to be in diverse and several chambers or rooms. So
that what is done and spoke in the one, the other knows nothing of it, so that
they are still several congregations: as under the roof of Paul's, there are
diverse meeting-places where Men may partake in all Ordinances, and they are
called several Churches, and they that meet there several congregations,
though under one roof: for the distinction of the places under one covert,
makes always a distinct assembly, as it is daily seen in the several
Committes at Westminster; where every Committee of both Houses have their
several rooms and equal authority, and are yet all but one Parliament, though
distributed into so many several assemblies. So here, they had several
assemblies, and that in several houses, as is declared: and reason it self,
without any testimony of holy Scripture will persuade this: for the Apostles
they all preached, and that daily; and they must have several rooms to preach
in, to avoid confusion: for all things in the Church must be done in order,
and they must have several auditories or assemblies, or else they should
preach to the walls: so that if the Apostles would all preach, and the people
all hear, of necessity they must be distributed into several congregations
and assemblies, to avoid disorder; and that there were several congregations
and several assemblies, the places above specified do declare and tell us. So
that there is no man, that resolves not to oppose all truth that is contrary to
his received opinion, but may evidently perceive that there were many
congregations and assemblies in the Church of Jerusalem, and yet they all made
but one Church, and were governed by one Presbytery; as the many Committees in
both Houses are in diverse rooms, and make diverse assemblies, and have equal
power and authority among themselves; and yet they all make but one Parliament;
and all those several Committes are governed by the joint consent of the Great
Civil Presbytery of the Kingdom, which is all the Parliament, and all this
without confusion, yea, with most excellent order and decency.

Having thus evidently proved that there were many congregations in the Church
of Jerusalem before the Persecution: I will now by Gods assistance make good,
that there were also many assemblies under the Persecution, and after the
Persecution: and this I do the rather undertake, because some of the Brethren
have said; That howsoever it could be proved that before the Persecution there
were many several assemblies; yet by reason of the dispersion of the
Believers, the Church of Jerusalem was so wasted and scattered, that there were
no more left then could all meet in one congregation. And were it so, that
after the scattering of the Believers and Christians in Jerusalem, it could
never be evinced and made good, that there were more then could meet altogether
in one place: yet all this were nothing for the enervating of the Argument: for
we must ever look upon the first constitution and Government of the Church, and
what it was Originally and by Divine constitution, and not what it was
accidentally and through persecution and oppression, and by the violence of
men: for Governments of Churches are often changed from their primordiall State
through many casualties as it happened often in the Church of the Jews: and
therefore in all Reformations things are to be reduced to the first rule and
original pattern: and we are not to look upon them, as by occasion they vary
or change through the injury of the times. And therefore if we look into the
Church of Jerusalem, as she was in her youth and in her most flourishing age,
we shall find her consisting of diverse Congregations, and many assemblies, and
all them governed by a Common Council and joint consent of a Presbytery, which
must be the pattern of all Church Government to the end of the world, if we
will in our Reformation conform our selves to Gods Ordinance and to the first
constitution. But because I say they think it so difficult a thing to prove
many Congregations in Jerusalem after the persecution, I will now God-willing
make it evident, and not only after the persecution, but even in, and under
the persecution: and I will do it first out of that very place our brethren
bring against us, and by which they labor to evince the contrary: the place is
in the 8. of the Acts verse 1, 2, 4. In these words, And at that time there was
a great persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem, and they were
all scattered abroad through the Regions of Judea and Samaria, except the
Apostles, verse 3. As for Saul he made havoc of the Church, entering into every
house and haling men and women, committed them to prison. Therefore they that
were scattered abroad, went every where preaching the word: From whence the
brethren gather, that there were no more beleivers left, than could meet in one
Congregation.

Before I come to prove my Assertion, I must give some Reasons to evince and
make good, that this dispersion and scattering of the Beleivers here spoke of,
was not so general and universal and so great, as that there might not yet
remain more Congregations in Jerusalem, and more people then could possibly
meet in any one place or two: for persecution is the bellows of the Gospel,
which blows every spark into a flame: so that this their division proved their
multiplycation at home and abroad, as we shall see after I have set down my
Arguments and Reasons, so that it was no cause, why we should conceive that
there were fewer assemblies in the Church of Jerusalem then before; for
although I should grant that this persecution was very great in respect of the
intention of the persecutors, as reaching to imprisonment and death of all
sorts, chap. 22. verse 4. and although I should likewise accord, that in regard
of the extent of it, it reaches to all sorts both Preachers and Christians,
because it is said, They were all scattered abroad through all the Regions,
etc. except the Apostles, both which notwithstanding I cannot yield unto for
some reasons following: but I say should I grant all this, yet I affirm that
this persecution rather made more Congregations in Jerusalem then fewer then
there were before, though they might be smaller and lesser, then so, to wast
them and bring them to such a paucity, as they might all meet in one
Congregation: for this their division was a cause of their multiplication at
home and abroad, as I said before, and will afterward appear. And even as it
was here in England in the time of the Prelates power, when any assembly of
those they called Puritans, were at any time found together, they were haled
before Authority, (as the whole Kingdom can witness) and these people were
all scattered; yet so, as they still had their meetings in less numbers; and
whereas before they met perhaps a hundred in a company, now this hundred was
divided into three or four several assemblies, which were so many several
Churches, for in all these they enjoyed all the acts of worship, and did
partake in all the Ordinances as fully, as if they had been in the most crowded
aslemblies; but this they did for their own safety, and that there might not be
such notice taken of them: for commonly if men see a good company of people go
into a house, and none of them come out again, they will by and by gather, that
there is something there to be done, more than ordinary; and that there is some
exercise of Religion, or some consultation and plotting about some design or
other; and therefore it stirs up the people to take more notice of it, and then
they begin to examine the occasion of that concourse, and to pry into their
proceedings: whereas, if they come but in slender companies, they conceive it
to be some ordinary entertainment, and think no farther of it; so that they
then more peaceably enjoy the society and fellowship one of another, without
any interruption, which they could not so well have done, if they had come in
greater assemblies and companies. And even so it was among the Beleivers and
Christians in Jerusalem, in that persecution; they could not now meet in the
Temple, nor possibly at their wonted meeting houses, and yet even then they had
their assemblies; no terrors could make them forsake the companying of
themselves together. For in that persecution that is spoken of in the 12. of
the Acts, we find the Church assembled in several places; for they were
praying in the house of Mary, verse 12. there was one Congregation, to which
Peter comes and relates unto them the manner of his delivery, and bids them go
and tell it James and the brethren; and there was another assembly, and without
doubt Peter went unto a third: for he would not go among the enemies: and it
stands with all reason, that in this persecution also, they were as zealous as
then, and therefore did not forsake the assembling of themselves together.
Neither would the Apostles be idle, who gave themselves continually to prayer
and the ministering of the Word, which they could not have done if there had
been but as many Christians in Jerusalem as could all have met in one place and
in one Congregation; for one or two of the Apostles could have preached unto
them all, and then to what end or purpose did all the other Apostles tarry in
Jerusalem (who in all their motions and stays, were directed by the Spirit of
God) unless it were to comfort and support the Church there, in the heat and
rage of this persecution, when they had scattered their other teachers from
them? From all which it may evidently appear, that there was a very great
multitude of believers at this time in Jerusalem, and that they were not
diminished or scattered, though all their Pastors and ministers, saving the
Apostles, were. And I have very good reason to induce me to believe, that this
persecution did not extend to all Christians promiscuously, and that all the
believers were scattered and dispersed except the Apostles, as our brethren
conceive. For if we consider the usual method of the persecuting Jews, and the
manner and custom of all the enemies of the Church in all ages, we shall ever
observe that they chiefly aimed at the taking away and extirpating of their
teachers and ministers, and those that instructed them. So the Jews malice was
greatest against the Prophets in all ages, as we may see Mat. 5. ver. 12. For
so they persecuted the Prophets: and in the 23. of Matthew, our Savior says,
verse 29. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, because ye build the
tombs of the Prophets, and say, if we had lived in the days of our Fathers,
we would not have been partakers with them of the blood of the Prophets; and
therefore ye witness unto your selves, that ye are the children of them which
killed the Prophets. Wherefore behold I send unto you Prophets, and wise men,
and Scribes, and some of them you shall kill and crucify, etc. Here our
Savior Christ declares what method they had formerly used in their
persecutions; and that was chiefly to persecute their teachers, and what
method they would for the future take, and that was, principally To kill and
crucify, the Prophets, Wisemen, and Scribes, which Prophecy of Christ, was
here in this persecution manifestly fulfilled: for here it is said, They were
all ( viz. their teachers) scattered abroad and persecuted, except the
Apostles. It was I say ever the method and custom of persecutors to aim
principally at the rooting out and taking away of those they supposed were
ablest to teach and instruct the people, and this enraged them against John the
Baptist and Christ himself; and that made them at this time so mischievously to
persecute their Ministers and Teachers. Neither do I read in all the new
Testament, before this persecution, that as yet they were come to the
massacreing of the common people; they had slain the Lord of Life, and stoned
Stephen; and after in the 12. of the Acts we read, How Herod slew James, and
because it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to take Peter: they always had their
eyes upon their teachers, and haled them to prison, as they did Peter and John
in the 4. of the Acts; but for the people the only punishment they under-went,
till this persecution, was this, That they were cast out of the Synagogues, if
any of them did publicly profess Christ. Indeed in this persecution their
violence extended to the haling of men and women to prison; but before we read
of no violence offered unto the people; only they railed on them, reviled, and
reproached them, as all wicked men, whose tongues are set on fire from hell,
use to do, on all the generation of the just. The same method did the Prelates
here in England use; they chiefly and more principally persecuted the faithful
and painful Preachers and Ministers every where, and such as they thought best
able to instruct the people, and selected but here and there some private
families for to scare others, and this method Antichrist and his accomplices had
learned from the devil and the Jews. So that when it is said they were all
scattered except the Apostles, it is to be understood that all their Preachers
and Teachers, the Apostles only excepted, were scattered, For the word all in
this place, must be understood, either of all the believers, or of all the
Teachers and Officers in the Church of Jerusalem, except the Apostles. But it
cannot be understood of all the believers, that they were all scattered; and
therefore it must be understood of all the Teachers, and that for many reasons.
The first, if all the believers had been scattered and none left, to what end
then should the twelve Apostles have remained in Jerusalem? They were not to
Preach to the walls, neither would they have remained there idle; but would
rather have shaken off the dust off their feet, (as Christ commanded them) for
a witness against them, Luke 10. And would have departed and have gone away
with the rest of the Teachers, as all good reason persuades. A second reason
is; because if this particle all be always exceptive, or taken to the utmost,
and in the largest extent, as some of the brethren imply and would have it;
then there should not one believer have been left in Jerusalem besides the
Apostles, which is expressly against the Text, for verse. 3. It is said, That
Saul brake into houses, haling men and women, committing them to prison, and
this he did at Jerusalem at this time, as he acknowledges himself Acts 26.
ver. 10. And therefore of necessity it must follow, That all the believers were
not scattered abroad, for some of them were in prison in Jerusalem. And for
ought I can gather, all the rest were in their several houses, or else the
Apostles could have had no harbor: for if all their friends had been scattered
by this tempest, and if all the sheep had been drove away and the whole flock
dispersed, their Pastors without doubt would have followed them: for he would
be counted a very bad sheep-heard that should not follow or look after the poor
sheep that were scattered by the Wolves. Neither can we imagine that the
Apostles that were the Pastors of the flock of Jesus Christ and to whose care
he had committed his sheep and his Lambs, with a special charge that they
should feed them, would relinquish their care and choose rather to dwell
amongst a company of Wolves, from whom they could expect no fair measure, then
among the sheep: But in that all the Apostles still remained in Jerusalem, I
rather gather, and that without all controversy, they continued there for this
very purpose, that they might comfort and support the Church there, and refresh
the believers in this heat of persecution, when they wanted the help of their
other faithful Ministers and Pastors. Thirdly, it is very evident from the
Text, they were only the Preachers that were scattered; for verse 4. It is
said, That they that were scattered went every where preaching the Word, which
expression in the Original, as may be proved by innumetable places, signifies
such teachers as were ministers by Office, and such as Preached by way of
Sermons to a multitude, though they might likewise in private conference
instruct, which their public Ministry did not exempt them from. And although
private Christians may teach and instruct one another, as Aquilla and Priscilla
taught Apollos, and as all Christians are commanded to instruct one another,
Col. 3. ver. 16. Yet this text speaks not of such a teaching, but of preaching,
They went every where, says the Scripture (...), preaching the Word. For
teaching may be an act of charity, but preaching is an act of Office, for how
can they preach except they be sent? Romans 10. So that by virtue of their
Office, they might both publicly preach, and in private converse also instruct
others wheresoever they came, whether they were sent out by persecution or by
mission. As I do conceive of any of those Godly Ministers, that were not many
years since, drove from their habitations, and that were persecuted out of
their places by the Prelates, that they might have preached publickely in any
Congregration as Ministers and men in Office, and might also have instructed
privately, but the one was an act of duty as it was their Office, and the other
of love and charity. And so may a well gifted private Christian instruct and
teach others upon occasion, and in private conference, which is an act of love;
but he cannot properly be said to Preach, which is an act of one in Office and
belongs only to the Presbyters and Pastors and such, as for their sufficient
learning and abilities are called unto the Ministry and ordained and set a part
to this Office: and such only were those that were scattered, except the
Apostles: and by all probability these Ministers and Preachers that were
scattered were those that were at the choosing of Matthias, the seventy
Disciples and many more. So that for ought I can gather, all the believers in
Jerusalem, yet remained in their several habitations and dwellings, except
those that were haled to prison. And therefore of necessity there must be many
Assemblies and Congregations yet in Jerusalem, that made all the Apostles abide
and continue still among them all, which makes exceeding strongly to prove,
that there were innumerable multitudes of believers still in Jerusalem, which
of necessity were forced to divide their assemblies into more distributions and
less congregations then formerly, and therefore rather multiplied their
assemblies then otherwise, that by such Privacy they might avoid persecution,
as in our times, good Christians here in London were wont to do, when the
Prelates were in their ruff. But out of this place I thus argue.

Where there were twelve of the most ablest painfullest, and diligentest
preachers in the world, and that gave themselves continually to prayer and the
Ministry of the Word, and at such a time, as there was most need of preaching,
and when they could not publicly come together, by reason of the persecution,
and where there were innumerable multitudes of believers of all Nations to be
taught and preached unto in their several Languages and tongues; there of
necessity there must be several Congregations and assemblies for the
employment of them all, both Preachers and hearers. But in the Church of
Jerusalem in the time of the hottest persecution, there were the twelve
Apostles, the most able, painful, and diligent Preachers in the world, and
that gave themselves continually to prayer and the Ministry of the Word, and
when they could not publicly come together, by reason of the persecution, and
where there were innumerable multitudes of believers of all nations to be
taught and preached unto in their several Languages and tongues. Therefore of
necessity there must be several congregations and Assemblies for the
employment of them all, both Preachers and hearers. For this Syllogism, all and
every part of it, is so cleared by what has formerly been said, as I am most
assured, no rational man will call either of the Propositions in question. But
from the former place I thus further argue.

Where there were such multitudes of believers of all Nations and Countries,
still remaining even in the hottest time of persecution, as had for many years
employed and continually taken up above an hundred painful Ministers and
Teachers, there they could not all meet together in any one place or room, but
of necessity must be distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies, if
they would all be edified, and much more now they were forced unto it, if they
would avoyde persecution, and provide for their own safety: But in the Church
of Jerusalem in the hottest time of persecution, there were such multitudes of
believers of all nations and Countries still remaining, as had for many years
employed and continually taken up above an hundred painful ministers and
teachers: Ergo, they could not all meet together in any one place or room: but
of necessity must be distributed into diverse congregations and assemblies, if
they would all be edified, and much more now were they forced unto it, if they
would avoid persecution and provide for their own safety.

The Major of this Syllogism by the very light of nature and reason, which we
may not in a matter of disputation especially relinquish, is manifest and
evident. For the Minor it is also apparent from the foregoing discourse: by
which it is proved, that their preachers only were scattered, and all those
Ministers that were at the choosing the Apostle Matthias chap. 1. and many more
that instructed the people: but for the people and believers they remained
still in Jerusalem, the conclusion therefore is firm but I will now go on to
evince that after the persecution, there were more believers still in the
Church of Jerusalem, then could all meet in any one place and room together:
and therefore of necessity, they must be distributed into many Congregations
and Assemblies. And for proof of this Assertion, the places following will
suffice: and first that in the 9. chap. of the Acts, verse 31. Then had the
Churches rest through all Iuden, and Galilee and Samaria, and were all edified,
and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were
multiplied. Out of which words it may evidently appear, that persecution is but
the bellows of the Gospel, and that which the enemies of the Gospel think to
be a means of extinguishing the light of it, makes it but more gloriously shine
forth, and the farther to spread its rays: for by blowing and puffing at it,
they spread it the more, and extend it here and there farther abroad; as we see
by this persecution and scattering of those Preachers and Ministers of the
Gospel: for this their dispersion, by which the persecuters had thought to
have wasted the Churches, was an occasion of the multiplication of them, and
the cause of the increasing of believers every where. And here we may also
observe, That by how much more the rage of the enemy is great and violent, by
so much it is less dureable; for this great persecution was but short. And it
cannot be conceived, but they who were scattered by persecution, would upon the
ceasing of it, return again to Jerusalem, as most people commonly do, to their
own Countries, Cities, and places of habitation after persecution. And this
also must needs be a great Argument, to induce others to the love of that
Religion, which they see God so much favors the lovers and prefessors of;
the which the Lord so preserves, comfort, and follows, with so many
mercies, and upholdeth in all their afflictions and trials never forsaking,
nor never leaving them. But if those that were scattered had never returned,
that makes nothing for the weaking the truth of this Proposition, that there
were many Congregations and Assemblies still in the Church of Jerusalem; for
this Text proves that it was not decreased after the dispersion. Out of the
which words I thus argue.

That Church before the persecution and dispersion of whose Ministers and
Pastors, was so numerous and had such multitudes of believers in it, of all
Nations, as they could not all meet in any one place or room, for edification,
and to partake in all asts of worship, but were forced to preach in diverse and
sundry places, as in the Temple and from house to house; and after the
persecution ceased and the Church had rest, was greatlier yet multiplied than
before; and whose companies were more and more in number increased, they of
necessity could not all meet together in any one place or room for edification,
and to partake in all acts of worship, but must necessarily be distributed into
diverse and sundry congregations and assemblies if they would all be edified.
But the Church of Jerusalem, before the persecution and dispersion of her
Ministers and Pastors, was so numerous and had such multitudes of believers in
it of all nations, as they could not all meet in any one place or room for
edification, and to partake in all acts of worship; but were forced to preach
indivers and sundry places, as in the Temple, and from house to house; and
after the persecution ceased and the Churches had rest, was greatlier yet
multiplied than before: and whose companies were more and more in number
increased. Ergo, Of necessity after the persecution there were more believers
in the Church of Jerusalem, then could all meet together in any one place or
room for edification, and to partake in all acts of worship, but must
necessarily be distributed into diverse Congregations and Assemblies if they
would be edified. For the Major besides common understanding and ordinary
reason which confirm it, it is manfest from the 2.3. and 5. Chapters of the
Acts, which in express words signifies, That they met daily in the Temple and
from house to house, yea in every house, and therefore that is true and out of
all doubt: and for the Minor it is evident from the place above cited, where it
is said, The Churches, (that is to say, all the Churches in Judea, of which
Jerusalem was the mother Church) were multiplied, the word in the Original
(...) signifies properly an increase in number and multitude and not in
measure; and is so to be understood in this place, and cannot being applied
unto persons, be otherwise taken, whatsoever it may of sins and graces; and
then also the word is capable of this construction, as may be proved if need
required: So that the conclusion does follow. And truly that of Saint Paul in
the 1. of the Galatians is an excellent Argument to evince there were more
Congregations in Jerusalem then one, where proving that he had not received the
Gospel which he preached from men, but from God, he uses this reason; That if
he had received it from men, it must be from the Jews, and from the Apostles;
for the Gentiles were ignorant of it, and he was to carry the Gospel unto
them, and therefore they could not teach it him; and to prove that he received
it not from the Apostles, he thus speaks of himself.

When it pleased God to reveal his son unto me, that I might preach him amongst
the Heathen, Immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood, neither went I
up to Jerusalem, to them that were Apostles before me, but I went into Arabia.
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem, to see Peter, and aboade with
him fifteen days, but other of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords
brother.

Out of the which words besides the singular testimony we have that the
preaching and writings of S. Paul, are the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the
Word of the living God, against the Papists: we may evidently gather against
the Independents, that after the persecution there were more believers in
Jerusalem then either did or could all meet in one place; for in saying that he
was with Peter fifteen days, but in all that time saw none of the Apostles
save James, this I say, is a sufficient Argument to prove more Congregations
and assemblies of believers in the Church of Jerusalem, which so employed the
Apostles in their several ministeries as they had not so much spare time to
visit Paul, and that Paul also was so taken up in preaching there, that he had
no leisure to visit them. And for the diligence of the Apostles in their
Ministry it is said in the sixth of the Acts, That they gave themselves
continually to prayer and to the Ministry of the Word: and therefore they were
never idle; and that the Apostles either all or the most of them continued
resident for many years in Jerusalem, before they distributed themselves into
several Nations and Countries; and that very few of them were sent abroad
there are frequent testimonies in Acts of the Apostles; neither as yet did I
ever hear it scrupled, or called in question, whether the Apostles were then
there or no, when Paul was at Jerusalem, for it is taken pro confesso, that
either all or the most of them were at that time in Jerusalem: neither does
Saint Paul say, I saw none of the other Apostles because they were absent, or
were gone to Preach the Gospel in other places. And for Saint Paul we read,
that wheresoever he came, he went into their Synagogues and into their
Assemblies to Preach, and that he preached from house to house: and he that gave
so strict a charge to Timothy (and in him to all Ministers) that he should
Preach in season and out of season; he himself without all doubt, would not
neglect his duty, who in the 20. of the Acts, sets his own example before all
the Presbyters for their imitation in their diligent preaching, and he
ordinarily preached by the day and by the night, as is manifest out of the same
Chapter and many other places; and surely the time he remained with Peter in
Jerusalem, he was as diligent in Preaching, as he was in any of the other
Churches; and he professes of himself that the care of all the Churches lay
upon him, and that he labored more then all the other Apostles in their
particulars: so that it stands with all reason, that while he was in
Jerusalem he was very sedulous in Preaching, as who had both strength of body,
and Gods special assistance, and his immediate inspiration always to help him
in his Ministry; so that I conceive, as of charity I am bound, that Paul was
daily in one assembly or other: now if there had been at that time, no more
believers in Jerusalem then could have met in one place, congregation, and
Assembly, then of necessity Paul must have seen the other Apostles there, as
well as Peter and James (for they also were good Churchmen, to speak a little
in the Prelates dialect) and they never left the Word, but were always taken
up either in praying or preaching amongst them in the Temple, and from house to
house, yea in every house: and if there had been but one Congregation or
Assembly of believers in Jerusalem, the Apostles would daily upon all occasions
have been with their flock: Now in that Paul saw them not in all that time he
was in Jerusalem, it is evidently apparent there were more Congregations of
believers in the Church of Jerusalem then one, and more Christians then could
all meet in any one or a few places.

But to proceed to a place or two more for the further confirmation of this
truth Acts 12. verse 24. It is said there, that the word of God grew and
multiplied. Here also we have another good effect of a new fierce persecution
in Jerusalem; it increased the number and multitude of Believers there after
the Persecutor was taken away, For the Word of God grew and multiplied, says
the Holy Ghost. Out of which words I thus argue.

Where the Word of God daily more and more grew and multiplied after the
persecution, that is to say, where there were more multitudes and greater
numbers of Believers added unto the Church, through the Ministry and preaching
of the Gospel then was before; which notwithstanding was then so numerous, as
they could not all meet in any one place or room, to enjoy all the Ordinances
to edification, there of necessity they must be distributed into diverse
assemblies and congregations, to enjoy all the Ordinances to edification. But
in the Church of Jerusalem after a double persecution, the Word of God daily
more and more grew and multiplied; that is to say, there were more multitudes
and greater numbers of Believers added unto the Church through the ministry
and preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles then was before; which
notwithstanding was then so numerous, as they could not all possibly meet in
any one place and room. Ergo, there was a greater number of Believers after
the Persecution then before: and therefore of necessity they could not all meet
in any one place or room to communicate in all the Ordinances, but must be
distributed into several congregations and assemblies if they would all be
edified.

For the Major I conceive it is so evidently clear as no man of ordinary
understanding will not see the truth of it. For the Minor, the Text proves it:
and if we will compare Scripture with Scripture, the truth of it will by and by
be out of controversy, for in the 15 of John verse 16. Our Savior speaking
there to his Disciples, says, I have chosen you and ordained you that you
should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that is, I
have chose you to preach the Gospel and convert men, which is the fruit of
preaching the Word; and causes the multiplycation of Believers, for Faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10. Now this Scripture is here fulfilled, for it is
said, that the Word of God grew and multiplied; that is, it brought forth the
great fruit and increase of multitudes of Believers, and converted many,
notwithstanding all the persecutions that were raised against it and the
Church. So that the conclusion must necessarily follow from the premises, and
it is most apparent, that there were many congregations of Believers in
Jerusalem after the Persecution. But in the 21 Chapter, 20 Verse, there is a
place that puts an end to this Controversy; and with the which I will
conclude my first assertion. In these words, Thou see Brother (says Saint
James, and the Presbyters of Jerusalem to Saint Paul) how many ten thousands
(for so it is in the Original, (...)) of Jews there are which believe, and
they are all zealous of the law: In this place the Evangelist speaks of the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem that were Believers, and had their abode there, and
not of strangers, as our Brethren suppose; and such as they conceive were come
up to Jerusalem at that time to the feast of Pentecost, at which they think
Paul then was: which opinion of theirs might be confuted with many reasons, if
it were necessary; some of the which I shall briefly set down: as first, it is
well known that the feast of Pentecost lasted but one day, and that in the
time of Wheat-harvest, when ordinarily but few came to Jerusalem. Besides none
of the Jews that lived out of the Country of Judea, and the confines of
Israel, were enjoined to come to that feast, or any other of the feasts so
far as I remember; neither indeed could they, dwelling in such remote
countries; except they spent all their time in running about. So that as I
conceive it was arbitrary in the Jews, that dwelt in other countries, whether
they would come or no to all those several Feasts: though I have this opinion
of some of the most zealous of them, and best ablest and richest of them, and
that had time and leisure, that they would spare neither pains nor costs, so
they might enjoy the Ordinances and the society of their Brethren. Besides we
read but of very few strangers, that were at Jerusalem at this time when Paul
was there, and they were them of Asia, which were persecutors rather then
believers, as the story relates, verse 27, 28. Now the multitude of which
there is mention made in this place in the 22 verse, they were all Believers,
and were inhabitants, and such as were well known to Saint James and the
Presbyters, and were all strangers to Paul; and such as had only heard that
Paul taught all the Jews that were among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, etc.
And therefore none of these many ten thousands were of the believing Jews
amongst the Gentiles: for they are clearly distinguished from them: for it is
said, that those Myriads of believing Jews were informed that Paul taught all
the Jews among the Gentiles, etc. They then were informed that Paul had taught
others. The Jews among the Gentiles were they who Paul had so taught, and how
could they be in the number of them that were informed? Had they need to be
informed by others what St. Paul had taught themselves? Therefore they must
needs be the believing Jews of Jerusalem, and the inhabitants and dwellers
there. So that out of the Text I thus argue.

Many ten thousands of Believers could not all meet at any one time, or in any
one place or congregation to enjoy all the Ordinances to edification; but of
necessity must be distributed into diverse and sundry congregations and
assemblies, if they would partake in all acts of worship and be edified. But in
the Church of Jerusalem after all the persecutions, there were many ten
thousands believers. Ergo, they could not all meet together at any one time, or
in any one place or congregation, for the enjoying of all acts of worship to
edification; but of necessity must be distributed into diverse and sundry
congregations and assemblies, if they would partake in all the Ordinances, and
be edified.

For the major all reason will assent unto it; for the minor, the text it self
confirms it, neither does that word ever express less then ten thousand as
might out of many places of Scripture be proved and diverse Authors. And truly
to any man but of an ordinary understanding it would seem strange, yea, an
incredible thing, that Jerusalem, the theater of so many miracles, and where
there were twelve Apostles, and the most of them for the most part resident,
and so many famous Preachers and Presbyters; and who at the first beginning of
the Ministry, after they had received the gift of the Holy Ghost, by their
powerful preaching, and a few miracles, had in a short time converted about
eight thousand people, besides great multitudes both of men and women, besides
Priests, and who preached daily in the Temple, and from house to house, and
that for above twenty years together, (as most of the Apostles did without
interruption) that in all this time of the Gospels spring, and that in so
populous and numerous a City, that all these famous Ministers should convert no
more to the faith, then might all meet in one Congregation. I say, all this
will seem strange to any rational man, and as it is against all reason, so it
is against the express Word of the holy Scriptures, as has out of many places
in the foregoing discourse been sufficiently made appear, and out of the place
last cited; which does affirm that there were many ten thousands believers in
the Church of Jerusalem, after all the persecutions; all which could not meet
in any one place to enjoy all acts of worship, no not in a few: Whether
therefore, it has not by this and the many other testimonies of holy
Scripture, and the arguments out of both, been sufficiently proved, that there
were many Congregations in the Church of Jerusalem, I report my self to any
that have not the pearl of prejudice in the eye of their judgment? and this
shall suffice to have spoke for the proof of my first assertion.

The second now follows, viz. That all these Congregations and several
Assemblies made but one Church. And for proof of this I shall not need to use
many words, or any great dispute; for the brethren themselves acknowledge that
all the believers in Jerusalem were all members of that Church; and they accord
further, that it was but one Church. and it is manifest out of the holy
Scripture, for it is said, they that were converted were added to the Church,
and therefore members of it, and that they continued in the Churches communion,
and in the Apostles doctrine and put their estates in the Churches common
treasury, and chose Officers for the Church; all this I say our brethren do
acknowledge, and take this fellowship of these members for a pattern of
ordinary Church communion, and therefore this my second assertion is without
controversy, it being in express words set down in the 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Chapters of the Acts, and many more places of the same story, and consented to
by the Brethren.

I now come to prove my third assertion. viz. That the Apostles and Presbyters
governed, ordered, and ruled this Church, consisting of many Congregations and
Assemblies, by a Common Council and Presbytery. Which is also evident by the
places following, Act. 11. And in those days there came Prophets from
Jerusalem to Antioch, and there stood up one of them named Agabus, and
signified by the Spirit, that there should be great dearth through all the
world, which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar; then the Disciples
every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the
brethren that dwelt in Judea, which also they did, and sent it to the
Presbyters by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. Here in these last words we see
that the Presbyters, and none but the Presbyters received the alms, for it is
said, they sent it to the Presbyters by the hands of Barnabas and Saul, which
sufficiently proves that the Presbyters in all Churches were the men in
government, as who had the ordering and authority of appointing unto the
Deacons, how they should distribute those moneys, that they might be best
improved and disposed of, which is an act of government, as all men (that know
what belongs unto government) will acknowledge. Now, should it be granted that
these Presbyters here spoken of, were the Presbyters of Judea, which
notwithstanding is not specified, but only the distressed brethren in Judea,
yet had it been in express words set down, that the alms had been sent to the
Presbytery of Judea, the Presbytery of Jerusalem must necessarily have been
included in it, as being the Metropolis of Judea; and it was an ordinary thing
for the Churches abroad, and particularly that of Antioch, to send to the
Apostles and Presbyters of Jerusalem, as we may see Act. 11. ver. 22. and Act.
15. And by all probability Paul and Barnabas brought these alms to the
Presbyters of Jerusalem, for he in the fifteenth Chapter of his Epistle to the
Romans, makes mention of a contribution that was made in Macedonia and Achaia
for the poor Saints in Jerusalem, whether the Apostle, says he, was going to
minister unto them and desires the Romans to pray for him, that he may be
delivered from the unbeleeving Jews, and that his service for Jerusalem might
be accepted of the Saints, which by the learned Interpreters is generally taken
that Paul speaks of this time, and that they were then sent from Jerusalem to
Antioch. But howsoever, it should be understood, that these alms were sent to
the Presbyters in Judea, yet these two conclusions necessarily result from it.
The first, that this expression comprehends also the Presbyters of Jerusalem,
as being the chief City of Judea. The second, that the Presbyters in all
Churches were the men to whom the government and ordering of businesses was
committed, and in whose hands the power and authority lay of disposing of the
very charity and bounty of the brethren to all the necessitated Disciples
within their jurisdictions, and who gave directions to the Deacons how they
should be distributed to the best emolument and benefit of the poor, and
according to the intention of these benefactors, which, as it is an act of
Government, and that a principal one, so of necessity the Presbyters must then
meet together, that by their joint and common consent and counsel, all things
may be rightly ordered.

But in the chap. 15. v. 2.4.6.22. the Presbyters of Jerusalem by name are
expressed, and in chap. 16. and in Act. 21. v. 17, 18. in these words. Then
they determined that Paul and Barnabas and certain other of them should go up
to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Presbyters, about this question and they
were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and Presbyters, to whom they
declared all things that God had done with them, and how that there rose up
certain of the Sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying, that it was
needful to circumcize them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses, and
the Apostles and Presbyters; came together to consider of this matter, etc.
ver. 22. Then pleased it the Apostles and Presbyters with the whole Church,
etc. and chap. 16. v. 4. And as they went through the Cities they delivered
them the Decrees to keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Presbyters
which were at Jerusalem, etc. and chap. 21, v. 17, 18. And when we were come to
Jerusalem, the Brethren received us gladly, and the day following Paul went in
with us unto James, and all the Presbyters were present, and v. 25. As touching
the Gentiles which believe, we have written and concluded, say the Presbyters,
that they observe no such thing.

Out of all which places, before I frame my arguments to prove that the Church
of Jerusalem, consisting of many Congregations and assemblies was governed by a
Presbytery, that is, by the joint consent and common council of the Apostles
and Presbyters, which made but a grand Presbytery: I shall desire all men to
consider, that howsoever the Apostles in the places above specified, are
differenced by that title from the Presbyters, yet in all acts of government
performed by them in the Church of Jerusalem, they were for the substance of
them ordinary acts, such as Presbyters daily perform, and therefore answerably
the Apostles themselves are in them to be considered as presbyters, that is,
men governing in an ordinary way, as such as had received the keys, which is
the power of jurisdiction, and therefore were in their ordinary employment,
though at other times in their several ministries, and going from Nation to
Nation to preach, as Christ's extraordinary Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. they used
superlative authority, and I am induced so to believe as having received
authority, because the Aopstles in holy Scripture are called Presbyters, that
was the ordinary Governors and Magistrates of the Church, though the more
principal and primary ones, and therefore did act as Presbyters in ordinary
acts of Church government, and for a pattern to all Churches in like
administration: Neither may any suppose, for all this, that the Apostles did
fall lower in their power, in that they acted as Presbyters; for our Brethren
do acknowledge, that at Jerusalem the Apostles acted as Presbyters of a
particular Congregation; Now then if they did not fall lower in their power by
acting as Presbyters in a particular congregation, what reason will dictate to
any man, that they should fall lower in their power by acting as Presbyters in
a joint Presbytery? The truth is, to govern and to rule the Church was the
ordinary employment of the Apostles, and therefore they are styled Presbyters,
which is to say, the Rulers, Counselors, Magistrates, and Governors of the
Church; neither, for all this, did their Presbyterships exclude their
Apostleships, nor did their acting as Presbyters, deprive them of their
Apostolic power, nor of that apostolic spirit which guided them, even in
these things wherein they acted as Presbyters, for although under one notion we
look upon the Apostles as extraordinary men, yet under another, as in all
those affairs of public concernment, and in matter of government, and for
that end the assembling of themselves together; we do not consider them as
Apostles, for therein they did not act as Apostles, with a transcendent and
infallible authority, and in an extraordinary way, but as Presbyters, and
ordinary Governors and Counselors and in such a way, as makes their meetings
and actions a pattern and president to succeding ages, and of the Prerbyters
congregating of themselves together for common acts of Government, whether in a
Presbyterian or Synodicall way. And as it is in civil affairs, and in the
government of Kingdoms and States, so it was then in the Church of God; in a
Kingdom some of the Counselors are of the more secret admission, and are
generally called Cabbinet Counselors, and are accounted of as extraordinary
men, and others of the general Council; yet when all these sit in a common
council together, to consult about matters of State and public concernment,
they sit then together as ordinary Counselors, and every one of them has as
much authority and liberty to debate things by reason and dispute in way of
consultation, and to give his vote about any thing as well as any of the most
extraordinary Counselors, and this has been the practice of all ages. We read
that Hushy when he was by Absalon called into council, had his voice and gave
his vote as well as Achitophel the Oracle of that time; and as in the
Common-Councels and Parliaments of Kingdoms, whatsoever honor, dignity, or
extraordinary employments any of them were taken up in before their session and
meeting, or whatsoever dignity or titles of honor they have extraordinarily
above others, and take their places accordingly before they come together into
the Parliament, yet they all sitting there as Judges and Peers in the
Kingdom, the meanest Lord in the Kingdom has as much authourity there as the
greatest, and so in the House of Commons: as they are Judges, and chosen by the
people for that purpose, have all of them, even the meanest, as much voice and
authority in way of consultation as the greatest: And so likewise in the Synod
or Assembly now of Divines, the meanest Presbyter has as much voice and
liberty in way of debate and voting, as the greatest Bishop there. And even so
it was in the Church of Jerusalem, when the Apostles those extraordinary gifted
men, and presbyters met together in counsel, they all acted there as
counselors and ordinary presbyters; and therefore in all those particular
actions of the Apostles, we have mention of in their several meetings, whether
we consider them by themselves alone, and not joined with the presbyters, or in
common council with them, those actions, I say, were done and acted by men
which were Apostles, but not as they were Apostles exclusively, so as they
might not act them under another notion, neither will our Brethren affirm it;
for if the Apostles did preach, take the trust of the goods of the Church,
ordain Officers, as Apostles exclusively and in an extraordinary way, and as
by a privilege peculiar to themselves, it would follow from thence, that none
may do any of those things but Apostles, which the Brethren will not assent
unto: as for some instances, In that ordination of Deacons in the sixth of the
Acts, the Apostles there acted partly as Apostles, and partly as presbyters,
for in constituting an office in the Church, which was not before, they acted
their apostolical authority, but in ordaining men to that office which the
Church had chosen, they did act as presbyters: and there is no doubt but the
Brethren will yield to this, for if they will not grant that the Apostles did
herein act partly as Apostles, and partly as presbyters, they must then accord,
that they acted either only as presbyters, or only as Apostles: If only as
presbyters, thence it will follow, that all presbyters have power, not only to
ordain men, but to erect a new office in the Church: If only as Apostles,
then hence is no warrant for presbyters, so much as to ordain men into any
office, nor for so much as to meet together to consult about acts of
government, either in a presbyterian or in a Synodicall way: and by this means
all Church Government would speedily be overthrown. Neither is it a difficult
thing in our Brethren or any other man to distinguish between these two; for
look by what infallible rule they make some thing in the practice of the
Apostles, to be not only a pattern and president for imitation, but even a
proof of institution, yet decline other things practiced by the same Apostles
as things not only by institution, not commanded to us, but not permitted to be
imitated by us: By the same rule, they may infallibly distinguish between what
they acted as Apostles, and what they acted as Presbyters and as ordinary
Counselors, Judges and Governors, and withal they may infer and conclude,
that what they acted as Presbyters, and by joint and common consent, it was to
give a pattern and president to all Presbyters and Synods in all succeeding
ages; and as the taking in of the consent of the Church in the choice of
Deacons, Act. 6. was to give a pattern for the sufferage and voice of the
people in all Churches to the end of the world, in chosing of their Deacons; so
for another instance, as there were many congregations in the Church of
Jerusalem, and diverse assemblies, and all these congregations made but one
Church, and the Apostles and Presbyters who were officers governed that jointly
and by a common council, (as our Brethren acknowledge:) Here likewise they
left a pattern and president to all ages, for several congregations and
assemblies in a City, or vicinity to unite into one Church; and for the
Officers and Presbyters of these congregations to govern that Church jointly
in a College and Presbytery. And for a third instance, as the Apostles and
Presbyters met together in a Synodicall way, and the Apostles in that assembly
acted not by an apostollicall and infallible spirit, no more then the
Presbyters did, (as when they were writing of Scripture) but stating the
question, and debating it from Scripture in an ordinary way, (as it is at large
discussed in Act. 15. (which we never read they did when they writ the
Scripture,) and having by disputing, arguing and searching the Scripture, found
what was the good and acceptable will of God; thereupon they determined the
question, saying, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us, as the assembly now
of Divines, or any other, for ought I know, upon like assurance of Scripture
warrant, may do. In this action also, and their so doing, the apostles and
Presbyters left an example and president to all the Presbyters of all
succeeding ages, what they should do upon the like occasions, for the deciding
of controversies and differences of opinions in Religion. viz. To congregate
and meet together in some one place, to state the questions, and to debate them
from Scripture, and to follow the written Word, as their rule in all things,
and whatsoever they do, to do it by joint consent, and the common council of
them all, or by the most voices, but in all this their proceedings they must
ever cleave to the rule of the Word of God, or warrantable authority and
evidence of reason deduced from thence, as then the apostles and presbyters
did; yea, the very name of the Presbyters in Jerusalem, signifies the Judges,
Counselors, Magistrates and Rulers of that Church, who had the keys committed
unto them as well as the apostles; and by their place were more peculiarly
overseers of that Church, as they were tied unto it, then the apostles; as the
Presbyters of Ephesus were in that Church, and were assigned in their several
places to execute their office, and to look to their particular charges in the
government; so that whether the apostles were present or absent, the presbyters
had the government laid upon their shoulders; and if the apostles themselves
had taught contrary to this constitution, or an angel from Heaven, Gal. 1. I
am confident the Presbyters would not have obeyed them, nor have relinquished
their authority, neither ought they, but would still have kept that rule, power
and authority, which God had put in their hands; so that for my own
particular, I look upon the apostles in all these several actions, and in all
those acts of government, joined and met together with the Presbyters, as I
look upon Counselors and Judges in the great councels of Kingdoms, where all
the judges have equal power and authority in decisive voting, and I do verily
believe, that the Presbyters siting at any time in council with any one or
more of the apostles, did act as authoritatively as the apostles themselves and
I am ever able to prove it and make it good against any man, that the
Presbyters might as well conclude, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us,
as well as the apostles, and may say, we have written and concluded, as well as
the apostles; as any two or three of the Parliament, whether of the Lords or
Commons, may as well say, we have made such an Ordinance, as any twenty of
them, or the whole council, and that without disparagement or impeaching the
dignity of any, when they joined with them in that work, and assented to it;
and in this very notion I look upon the presbyters in Jerusalem, joined with
the apostles and consider them as in my contemplations I look upon the Lords
and Commons now sitting in the great Council, as the grand civil presbytry of
the Kingdom, where all binding Ordinances are to be passed by the joint
consent and Common-counsel of them all, and whose place and office it is to
command and rule, and the peoples office and place to obey and yield subjection
to whatsoever they command and injoyne, according to the will of God and for
the common good and preservation of themselves and the whole Kingdom; and that
whosoever should resist this their just authority are guilty of contumacy and
are high offenders and delinquents; for God has laid the government upon
them, and left the duty of obedience to the subjects who may not without a
public cale intermeddle with matters of government.

And so in the matters of Church government, I look upon Presbyters as Gods
peculiar servants, and as upon the Stewards, Councillors and Magistrates and
Judges in the Church as men set apart by God himself for this purpose to be
the teachers and rulers of their flocks committed unto them in the Lord; to
whom in the matters of their souls all people under their several Presbyters
so far as they command in the Lord, and according to the written word, are to
yield obedience, and much to reverence and honor them, and this according to
Gods command, for it is his ordinance. And they are not to be looked on and
slited as the fagge ends of the Clergy, as many black mouths and profane
lips speak of them: for the Presbyters, they have their authority as well
grounded in the word of God, as Kings and States have theirs; and therefore as
they are employed in a more supreme orb, and in matters of eternal
concernment, so they should be venerated as men watching over our souls, and
all contumelious speeches against them deserve severe punishment and ought not
to be tolerated: and so much the more the Presbyters of this Kingdom in these
our days, have deserved better from the Church, the Parliament and the whole
Kingdom then any of their predecessors, not only in desiring a perfect and
through Reformation in both Doctrine and Discipline, but in that they have
stood now so cordially to the common cause, and more for the liberty of the
Subject then any before them, and have cleaved most faithfully to the
Parliament and have bin also a most singular means of keeping the people
whersoever they were suffered to Preach, in obedience. In all these respects. I
say, they deserve well, yea better, not only from the Church but from all the
Kingdom for the present, than any of their predecessors, and their memories
ought to be famous to all posterity for this their good service. And that
government that God has given unto the Presbyters, if the Lords and Commons
shall now labor to establish it in the Kingdom, and to settle it on them,
they may not only promise unto themselves a blessing from heaven, and peace
unto the Church and State, but also immortal praise from all succeeding ages.
Having taken leave to make this digression, I will now to my business, and
prove that the Church of Jerusalem consisting of many Congregations and
Assemblies, were all governed by a common Presbytery: and that the Apostles
there acted as Presbyters among the Presbyters.

They that in the holy Scripture are called Presbyters, and acted and ordered
things in a joint body and common counsel, with the Presbyters, and exercised
that ordinary power that was committed to them in the 18. of Matthew, they
acted as Presbyters: but the Apostles in governing the Church of Jerusalem
consisting of many Congregations and Assemblies, acted and ordered things in a
joint body and common council with the Presbytery of that Church as
Presbyters, Ergo, the Church of Jerusalem was Presbytrianly governed, and by a
common counsel of Presbyters. The major and minor of this Syllogysme being
proved, the conclusion will necessarily ensue. And for proof of the major the
Scripture is clear, as 1 Timothy cha. 4. ver. 14, where Paul writing unto Timothy
says, neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee to preach,
with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery: in the which Presbytery Paul
was one that laid his hands on him and ordained him, as is evident in the
second Epistle to Timothy, chap the first, verse the sixth, where putting
Timothy in mind of his duty, he says stir up the gift of God which is in
thee, by the putting on of my hands: so that Paul joining in this public
action of ordination, though an Apostle, yet acted as a Presbyter, and counts
himself in the number of them, as any of the Presbyters that now ordain the
Ministers, may say as well as all of them together, to any new ordained
Minister, neglect not the gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my
hands. As men ordinarily in a Jury, may assume that unto themselves that all
may do, as being actors in common. So Peter likewise in his first Epistle,
chap. 5. ver. 1, 2. calls himself a fellow presbyter, and Saint John in his
second and third Epistles styles him so also, The presbyter unto the elect
Lady, etc. The presbyter unto the well beloved Gajus, etc. So that his
presbytership did not exclude his apostleship, nor the acting at any time of a
presbyter, deprive him of his apostolical power, for at that very time he calls
himself a presbyter, he wrote Scripture by an apostolical and infallible
spirit, and yet continued still a presbyter. Sothat for the major, although I
should say no more it is sufficiently proved; yet for a further corroboration
of it, it is not good to reject the consent of our Brethren in this point, for
they acknowledge, that the apostles are called presbyters vertually, because,
as they say, apostleship contained all offices in it; yea, they further assert,
the act of ministerial power to be the same in the Apostles and Presbyters,
the only difference they seem to insinuate, is, in the extent; from which it
may be inferred, that in all the affairs transacted by the apostles, properly
concerning the Church of Jerusalem, they did act as presbyters, because in such
acts there was no extent of their power to many much less to all Churches. But
when they affirm, that the apostles power over many congregations, was founded
upon their power over all churches, and so cannot be a pattern and president
for the power of presbyters over many.

For answer, first I say, that the Brethren, in my opinion, take more upon them
then beseems them, and usurp a kind of unlimited authority to themselves
that they can make what pleases them exemplary, only, and reject whatsoever
agrees not with their opinion, though they were all the acts of all the
apostles, and transacted by joint consent, and common agreement and accord, and
left in the Church of Christ, as well for a pattern and president for the
Presbyters and Ministers to follow in all succeeding ages to the end of the
world, as any of their other acts; and so they pick and choose at pleasure, and
in so doing (under reformation be it spoke) I say they assume unto themselves a
greater authority then beseemes them, for they can make the apostles joint,
gogoverning of one congregation, (for so they take it pro confesso, that the
church of Jerusalem, was but one congregation,) to be a pattern of many
ministers governing one congregation; but whereas it is most evident, that the
Church of Jerusalem consisted of many congregations, and were yet under but one
presbytery, and was governed by the joint consent of the Apostles and
Presbyters, as under a grand common presbytry, this at pleasure they teject and
make it no way exemplary and binding. But for a further answer I assert, that
the apostles power and authority over many assemblies as one Church, to rule
and govern them all as one church, jointly and in common, was not grounded
upon their power over all churches, but upon the union of those assemblies and
congregations into one church, which union lays a foundation for the power of
presbyters ruling and governing many congregations; and the apostles practice
in governing many assemblies jointly as one church, is the pattern and example
of that government to all succeeding ages; and this president of the Apostles,
the presbyters in all churches ought to set before their eyes in all
reformation, for what the apostles did in the public affairs of government,
they did as presbyters, and for imitation. Neither do our Brethren only grant
the act of ministerial power to be the same in the apostles and presbyters,
saving in the extent: but they acknowledge also, that they were called
presbyters vertually as I said before; and that the apostles acted in a joint
body and by common consent and affirm that it was fit that they should so do,
and say withal, that the apostles wherever they came, left the presbyters and
people to the exercise of that right which belonged to them, although they
joined with them: These are their formal expressions, out of which their
concession my argument, yea, the whole syllogism, is not only confirmed and
strengthened, but the truth does more evidently shine forth; for if the
apostles left the presbyters and people to the exercise of that right which
belonged unto them, in all churches, and the presbyters right be to rule as
Ecclesiastical Magistrates, as to whom the power of the keys peculiarly
belongs by Gods institution, and the right of the people in all churches be
to obey, as they are every where commanded; then it follows necessarily, that
it does not belong unto the people to ordain either deacons or presbyters,
whatsoever they may do in the choosing of them, nor to excommunicate or cast
out any out of the Church, or to make members whom they please, nor to rule and
govern the Church, which is the peculiar right of the presbyters, left unto
them by Christ and his Apostles, for none of all these things was ever left
unto the people, neither is there any president of it in holy Scripture, so
that while the Brethren seem to contend for the liberty of the people, they
plainly overthrow it; for they grant, that the Apostles left the Presbyters
and people to the exercise of that right belonged unto them, in all Churches,
the right therefore of the keys of government and jurisdiction belongs
properly unto the Presbyters in every Church, who are the Officers and
Magistrates appointed by God himself for that purpose, Act. 20. ver. 28. and
therefore when the Apostles writ to the Church of Corinth, to excommunicate
that incestuous person, although his Epistle be directed to the whole Church
yet the Presbyters in that Church only executed that act of government which
of right belonged unto them, though the people also assented unto it, even as
we see daily, and experience teaches us in all well ordered Corporations, when
the King or Counsel writes unto any City ot Corporation, though their mandats
be directed to the whole City or Corporation, for the raising either of men or
moneys, or about any other employment of public concernment, the Majors,
Aldermen, and Common Council, and the Officers under them, only manage the
business, for that is their right and place, and the people under them do
yield obedience, and submit themselves to what they order and command, and
intermeddle not in that employment, as knowing very well it is their right and
place only to obey. And even so it was in the Church of Corinth, the
Presbyters only exercised the government, and ordered all according to the
Apostles injunction, and the people assented unto it, and submitted themselves
to the order; and the mistaking of that place and many more has been the cause
of so much confusion in the Church at this time, when not only the men in
every assembly, but the very women in many of the new Congregations, as
Members, challenge a power and right both in the electing of Church Officers,
and of admitting of Members, and of casting out and excommunicating, which
before these our times, was never heard of in the world, when as the right of
jurisdiction, and of the keys, (as I have often proved) peculiarly belongs
unto the Presbyters, and the people, neither men nor women, ought to
intermeddle with it, for if they should, in short time it would overthrow all
government in Church and State, and bring confusion into the world: But I
conceive the cause of so gross a mistake of that place concerning the
excommunicating of the incestuous person, arose from this, that they look upon
the Church of Corinth and the other churches spoken of in the New Testament,
not as corporations, as they were indeed, but as on their now sucking
independent new Congregations and Assemblies, such as many of those be, whereas
those several Churches are to be considered under another notion, as
consisting of many Congregations, (as that of the Church of Jerusalem) united
into one Church or body in the several Corporations, and each of them governed
by a Common Council of Presbyters, and by the joint consent of three several
Presbyters, all these several congregations making but one Church, though
never so much daily increased, and keeping still the name and denomination of
such a Church, either from the place, city, country, or nation, or several
language, as the Church of the Jews, the Greek Church, the Latin church: or
from the Cities as the church of Jerusalem, of Ephesus, Rome, etc. though they
consisted of never so many Congregations and Assemblies, they ever kept the
name of unity, and were accounted but one Church, in their several places, as
at this day the Church of Geneva, though it consist of many Congregations, is
counted but one Church, as it is; so that I say, the conceiving of the Church
of Corinth, and those seven churches in Asia, under the notion of one of their
congregations, caused through this mistake, that great confusion that is now in
the church, and was the original cause of the opinion of Indepency, when
notwithstanding it is manifest, that those very churches were not Independent,
but made their appeal to the apostles and presbyters at Jerusalem, upon all
occasions, as that of Antioch; and it is said that the Apostles and presbyters
came together to consider of that matter; which meeting of the Apostles and
presbyters: for Synodicall acts of government is no weak proof of meeting for
presbyteriall acts of government, unless men will suppose, that they who were
careful to assist other churches, did neglect their own churches committed to
their peculiar charge, and take no course of governing them.

Yea Act, 15.2. it does most certainly prove a presbyteriall government in
Jerusalem, out of the which place I thus argue; Where the Apostles and
Presbyters did govern, and many congregations were by them ordered and
governed, yet so, that all these congregations were one church, there was a
presbyteriall government; but in the church of Jerusalem the Apostles and
Presbyters did govern, and many congregations were by them governed, yet so
that all these congregations were one church; ergo, in the church of Jerusalem,
there was a Presbyterian government, all which is sufficiently manifest out of
the places above specified, and from all the former discourse. For in the 21.
chapter it is asserted, that there were many ten thousands of believers in
Jerusalem, which could not all be contained in a few places, but must of
necetssity be distributed into many and several congregations and assemblies,
all which notwithstanding make but one church, as is evident, Act. 8. ver. 1.
and many other places, the which congregations could not be one politic
ministerial church, except only because they were united under one
Presbyteriall government, and therefore of necessity the Church of Jerusalem
must be aristocrattically and presbyterially governed, yea, the very mentioning
so often of the Presbyters meeting together, proves that they met together
about acts of government, from which I thus argue.

That Scripture which proves a Presbytery in Jerusalem, or an association of
Presbyters in that church, proves that the presbyters of the church of
Jerusalem did meet together for acts of government, and did really govern
that church. But the places above coted prove a presbytry in Jerusalem, or an
association of presbyters in that church; ergo, they prove that they did meet
together for acts of government, and did really govern that church, and that
the church of Jerusalem, consisting of many congregations, was presbyterially
governed.

For the major, the Brethren cannot deny it; for the very name of presbytery,
signifies a company or common council of rulers, governors, and magistrates;
now all men know, that governouts in common cannot do their duty, but must of
necessity neglect the work committed to them, if they do not meet together for
acts of government.

Neither can they deny the minor, unless they will deny the Scripture, for
that expressly declares, that James and the Presbyters met together, and our
Brethren take their warrant from that place, for the Presbyters meeting apart
from the multitude to consult, and to prepare matters: Yea, it is not only set
down, that James and the Presbyters met together, which had it only been for
the entertainment of Paul, it is an argument sufficient to convince any
rational man, that if the Presbyters would meet together for a salutation they
did much more meet for acts of government: But I say it is not only specified,
that the Presbyters met together, but what they did in consultation in that
their meeting, and what they acted upon deliberation, and that was to advise
Paul, and to direct him what he should do, which council of theirs was not
lax, but restrictive and binding, ver. 23. Do therefore that which we say unto
thee. By all which it is evident that they met about acts of government, when
they gave an order and rule to Paul himself, how he should behave himself at
that time, and we read that Paul followed their counsel, and submitted
himself to their order; by all which it is most apparent, that the church of
Jerusalem was ordered and governed by the joint consent and common council of
Presbyters, though consisting of many congregations, and was presbyterially
governed.

But I further thus argue, Where there were many assemblies in Jerusalem, and
many presbyters, and these assemblies were all one church, and these presbyters
all of them presbyters of that one church, there, of necessity there were many
congregation under one presbytery and that church was presbyterially governed;
but in the church of Jerusalem there were many assemblies, and many presbyters,
and those assemblies were all one church, and those presbyters all of them
presbyters of that one church; ergo, in-the church of Jerusalem there were many
congregations under one presbytery, and that church was presbyterially governed.

For the major, no man of sound reason or judgment will deny it.

And for the first part of the minor, that there were many assemblies in that
church, it has sufficiently been proved in the foregoing discourse and is
evident out of the 21. chapter, where it is said there were many ten thousands.

And for the other parts of it, that the Church of Jerusalem was but one Church
and that all the Presbyters there were Presbyters of that one Church, the
Brethren themselves do acknowledge it; and they do also accord and grant that
the Church of Jerusalem was governed by a Presbytery, and that it was
presbyterianly ruled; but withal they conceive the church of Jerusalem to
consist of no more believers than might all meet together in one place and
congregation; so that the difference between us and the Brethren is not whether
the Church of Jerusalem was presbyterianly governed or no, for that they do
acknowledge, and would have their Churches governed after that manner, but this
is all the debate between us and them, whether there were no more believers in
the Church of Jerusalem than could all meet in one Congregation, which is their
opinion; but whether or no, it has not by the foregoing discourse been
sufficiently proved, that there were more Congregations and Assemblies in the
Church of Jerusalem, and a greater number of believers than could all meet in
any one place or Congregation, and that all these were under one presbitery:
that I refer to the understanding Reader to judge of: and this shall suffice to
have spoken of the third conclusion or proposition.

And now I come to the fourth, viz. That the Church of Jerusalem and the
government of the same, is to be a pattern for all Congregations and
Assemblies in any City or vicinity, to unite into one church; and for the
Officers and Presbiters of those congregations to govern that church jointly,
in a college or Presbitry. And for the proof of this there needs no great
dispute; for all men acknowledge, that the mother Church must give an example of
government to all the daughter Churches, now then, when it does evidently
appear, that this mother Church of Jerusalem in her most flourishing
condition, and by her first constitution, was confisting of many Congregations
and several Assemblies, and that they were all governed by a Presbitry, or a
joint and common Council of Presbiters: then it follows, that all other
Churches should be governed after the same manner as the mother Church was, to
the end of the world; neither do the brethren deny, but the government of the
Church of Jerusalem must be the pattern of government to all Churches, and
therefore out of that misprision and mistake, that she was consisting of but
as many as could meet in one Congregation, they take the Church of Jerusalem
for imitation, and teach all their several Congregations to do the same, and
to exercise the same power among themselves independent, and to govern with as
absolute an authority in their several Congregations, as the whole College of
the Apostles and Presbiters did in the Church of Jerusalem and from the which
they allow of no appeal as all that know their tenent can witness: So that
this last proposition being strengthed both by reason and the consent of the
brethren, needs no further proof.

And now I come to the second question between us and the brethren, which is,
concerning the manner of gathering of Churches and admitring of members and
Officers, viz. Whether Ministers of the Gospel may out of already congregated
Assemblies of believers, select and choose the most principle of them, into a
Church Fellowship peculiar unto themselves, and admit of none into their
society, but such as shall enter in by a private covenant, and are allowed of
by the consent and approbation of all the Congregation. And this question
brancheth it self into these several Queries: The first, whether for the
gathering of Churches, there be either precept or president in the holy Word of
God, that the Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel did ever leave their own
ordinary charges, to which they are called, and whereto they are fixed, with a
command not to leave them, and under pretense of a new way, or a newborn
truth, or a new light, did run about and alienate the minds of the people,
welaffected formerly to their several Ministers as of duty they were bound as
who had converted them to Christ by their ministry, and fed them still with
the sincere milk of the Word, and built them up in their most holy faith: I
say, the first quere is, whether there be precept or example in the Word of God
of any true Ministers so doing? and whether it was ever heard of in the
Apostles and primitive times that any believing Christians were in great
numbers congregated from among other believing Christians and molded into
several Congregations and Assemblies, as separate and distinct bodies and
Churches from them, and who had no Church Fellowship with the other
Congregations nor communicated with them in the Ordinances, but were
independent from them, and absolute among themselves? and whether this way of
gathering of Churches was ever heard of before these days? and whether this be
to set Christ upon his Throne, to make devisions and scismes in churches, and
among believers and brethren, and that upon groundless pretenses?

The second quere is, whether for the making of any man or woman a member of
the church, it be requisite or necessary, to the believing and being baptized,
that they should walk some days, weeks, months, perhaps years with them, that
they may have experience of their conversation before they can be admitted, and
after that, a confession of their faith should be publicly made before the
congregation, and the evidences of their conversion, as, the time when, the
place where, the occasion how they were converted, should likewise openly be
produced for satisfaction to the church before they can be admitted to be
members, and if any, either men or women shall except against their evidence,
that then they are not to be admitted; this is the second quere.

The third is, whether for making any man or woman a member or an officer of a
church, the consent of the whole congregation, or the greater part of them
besides the Presbyters and Ministers be requisite?

The fourth quere is, whether for the admission of any one into
church fellowship and communion, a private solemn covenant be requisite or
necessary for the making of any one a member, the neglect or refusal of the
which, makes them incapable of their membership and admission? There is no
question between us and the brethren, about a public covenant, for we have
presidents of that in holy Scripture, in all public reformations.

The fifth quere is, whether the women and people, as well as the Presbiters
and Ministers have the power of the Keys, and whether the women have all their
voices in the church, both for election and reprobation of members and
officers, as well as the men, and whether the consent of all the women, or the
greatest part of them, be requisite for the making of any one a Member or
Officer, so that if they gainsay it, being the greater number, or allow of it,
the most voices carry the business? this is the fifth quere, the practice of
the which as of all the former, the brethren in some of their congregations
hold for orthodox, and think all these things required of any that offer
themselves to be a member.

The last quere is, whether the practice and preaching of all these things, and
the gathering of churches after this manner, be to set up Christ as King upon
his Throne? and whether churches and assemblies thus congregated be the only
true churches, and in the which only, Christ rules and reigns as King, and
all other that are not molded up after this fashion be no true congregated
churches, and in the which Christ is not set up as King upon his Throne, which
is the opinion of the brethren, as will afterward appear.

If I have failed in any thing in stating the question, or in any of these
Queres, the brethren must pardon me; for I speak according to the practice of
some of their congregations, and according to the doctrine many of them teach,
not only in their own assemblies, but in every Pulpit through the Kingdom
where they come, as I shall be able to prove: And therefore if I have been
mistaken in any thing, they may blame their own practice and teachers, and
thank themselves also, that in the space of almost two years (though it has
been again and again desired at their hands) they have not so much as set down
the model of their government, and what they would have, with all the
appertainances belonging unto it, that all the world might be out of doubt.
What, therefore, I find practiced amongst some of the most zealous of them, and
the most approved for integrity, and what I shall be able to prove, that I have
without any spirit of bitterness specified: But now I shall set down Gods
method, and the Apostles practice in gathering of churches, and the manner they
used in making Members in every church, and compare it with the method our
brethren the Independents use, in gathering of their congregations, that all
men may the better discern truth from error, and may all be undeceived in
this business of so great concernment. And I will first begin with Christ's
Commission given to his Apostles, and in them to all Ministers, and then
consider the practice of John the Baptist, and of all the Apostles and
Ministers in the primitive church and the order that God himself used for the
gathering of those that belong unto his election, and for the congregating of
the lost sheep of the house of Israel, into the fold of Jesus Christ, who is
that great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls; and I conceive that Gods order
and the Apostles practice is rather to be followed than any other newfound way.

But to begin with Christ's commission to his Apostles, Matthew. 21. verse 19.20.
Go ye therefore, says Christ and teach all Nations, baptizing them, In the
Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I command you, and lo, I am with you, even to the end of the world,
Amen. And in the 16. of Mark verse, 15, 16. He says unto them Go ye into all
the world, and preach the Gospel unto every creature: He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. And in the
26. of the Acts, Saint Paul after he had declared the manner of his conversion
to King Agrippa he likewise made known unto him the commission he had received
from Christ Jesus, in the words following, verse 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. And I
said, who art thou Lord? and he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; but
rise and stand upon thy feet, for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose,
to make thee a Minister and a Witness, both of these things which thou have
seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee, delivering
thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee to open
their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith which is in me; whereupon
I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, but showed first unto them of
Damascus and at Jerusalem, and through all the coasts of Judea, and then to the
Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for
repentance.

Out of these several places, from the commission of Christ given to his
blessed Apostles, and to all Ministers and preachers of the Gospel to the end
of the world: here observe these things, First, that their bounds and limits
were set them, how far they should go in their teaching all Nations, and
beyond which they might not pass; and they were these, that they should teach
no other things but what Christ commanded them and appeared to them in, and for
the which they had his word and warrant; and so long as they should do this, he
promised them and all that should succeed them in the Ministry, to the end of
the world to be with them. We also further observe the condition in the
executing of this their commission, they were to propound unto all Nations and
people upon which they were to be admitted in to the Church, and that was faith
and repentance, and they were to receive all such as believed and were
baptized, and that upon the profession of their faith and repentance, without
any further testimony of others, unless they had bin formerly known to be
open enemies and persecutors of the Church, and then they were justly to be
suspected, till they had given public evidence by witness to the Apostles
and Ministers of their true conversion, as it happened to Paul, who for a time
the Disciples feared, Acts 9.26, 27. till they had better information and
proof that he now preached the faith that he had once persecuted and had,
suffered for it, which is the only president we have in all the Acts of the
Apostles of any that were refused to be admitted into the comunion and
fellowship of the Apostles; as I remember (for he was a Minister before) but
all the other that came in were admitted upon their own offer, if they tendered
themselves and embraced the Gospel and were baptized, and that without any
reluctation or scruple. The third thing we may observe, is that this commission
was delivered only to the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel and that it was
their place only, who had the Keys delivered unto them to open and shut the
doors of the Church, to admit such as they thought for their faith, knowledge
and repentance were sufficiently qualified and fitted to be made members; and
to refuse such as they conceived not fit to be received into the fellowship of
the Church, either for their ignorance or other sins and offenses; and to
cast such out of the Church, as through their malversation declared themselves
to be no believers: for the commission was only delivered unto the Apostles
and Ministers, that they should admit who so ever believed and were baptized;
and they that believed not and would not be baptized, were not to be admitted,
This commission I affirm, was only given to the Apostles and Ministers, and
it was and is that office that peculiarly belongs unto them.

And if we look into the method of Gods dealing with his Church in all ages,
under the Law and under the Gospel, both for the admitting of any into the
Church as members and officers or the casting out of any; and to all the
practice of the Prophets and Priests of the old Testament, or the practice of
John Baptist and the blessed Apostles in the time of the new Testament; we
shall find, that they that were admitted into the society and fellowship of
the Church, were by the Ministers only under both the Testaments received, and
to them the people by God himself were sent, and they sent unto the people for
this purpose. And for proof of this I now say, I will first begin with the old
Testament, a few testimonies of the which may serve for the confirmation of
that truth, as that of Malachi 2. ver. 4, 5 6, 7. And ye shall know that I
have sent this my commandment unto you, that my covenant might be with Levy,
says the Lord of hosts. My covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave
them to him, for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my
name. The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his
lips, he walked with me in peace and equity and did turn many away from
iniquity; for the Priests lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the
law at his mouth; for he is the messenger or angel of the Lord of hosts. A
sufficient testimony to prove, that the Ministers only under the old Testament
had the power given them of admitting of any into the fellowship and communion
of the Church, and that all the people were directed to them as the Messengers
and Angels of the Lord of hosts, if they desired to be admitted into the
Church. And so Jeremy and Ezekiel, as we read in the first chapters of both
their prophesies, and the same may be said of all the Prophets, they were sent
unto the people. The people were to be directed by them and the Prophets and
Priests only had that power delegated unto them of proclaiming both mercies
and judgments, and of receiving into the Church such as should come unto them.
And under the new Testament in the third of Matthew we find Jerusalem and all
Judea, and all the regions round about Jerusalem going out to John the Baptist,
and were baptized of him, and admitted into the Church by him alone without the
people; and the substance of his preaching with his manner of admitting of
members into the Church, and the conditions upon which he received them, and
what the people did before their admission, is all fully set down in the third
of Luke and the seventh. And for the sum of his preaching, it is said, verse
the third, that it was the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.
And for those that came unto him, as the common people, the Publicans and the
Souliders, they all ask John what they should do? and after he had instructed
them severally their duties, and told them upon what conditions they might be
admitted, it is said in the seventh of Luke verse 29. that all the people that
heard him, and the publicans justified God, being baptized with the baptism of
John; but the Pharisees and the Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him. So that by Christ's own testimony (the
Pharisees and Lawyers only excepted) all that came to him were baptized and
admitted into the Church without the consent of the people. And so we find in
the Gospel of Saint John, cha. 3.4. yea, through the whole book, that the
people every where made their addresses to John the Baptist, and to Christ and
his Apostles only; and that as many as came to Christ unfainedly, were
received by him and his Apostles, and none upon the offer of themselves, if
they accepted of the conditions and were baptized were ever refused. And we
find further, that when our Savior had at any time cleansed and cured the
Lepers, he sent them to the Priests for to be admitted by them into the
communion of the Church, from which their noisome disease, as a type of sin,
had for the time excluded them.

But now to go on, after the resurrection and ascension of Christ, and that
the Apostles had received the gifts of the holy Ghost, and at their first
entering upon their ministry, had preached unto the people, and that the people
were pricked in their hearts when they heard them; it is said that the people
addressed themselves only unto Peter and the other Apostles, saying, Men and
Brethren what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gifts of the holy Ghost, etc. Act. 2.37, 38. then they that
gladly received the word were baptized, and the same day were added unto them
about three thousand souls.

Here we may observe these two things: The first, that the Apostles by
themselves alone, without the multitude or Church admitted the people into the
society and company of believers. Secondly, that in the execution of their
commission, they did nothing but according to their warrant, and according to
their injunction that was given unto them by Christ, they propounded no other
condition or terms for their making all and every one of them members of the
Church but baptism and repentance; the which when the people had accepted of,
they were forthwith admitted, and that upon their own word and testimony,
without any more ado, or further inquiry. Concerning the soundness of their
repentance, without any witness from others of their conversation, and without
the voice, allowance or approbation of the people, or the multitude of
believers in Jerusalem, much less of the whole Church, who were never joined
with the Apostles in their commission or consulted with by them, whether they
should be admitted or no into the fellowship of the faithful, or demanded or
asked by the people whether it were not fit that they should take some time of
further consideration, that they might walk with them, to the end that they
might behold their conversation, and by their own experience might further be
confirmed that their conversion was sound and well: Neither did any call for at
their hands, that they should make a public confession of their faith to the
Church, and give in evidences to the Congregation, that they were converted
really, or that they should take a private covenant, or enter into the church
by way of a peculiar covenant: nothing of all this is specified: But it is
only related, that the people upon their being pricked in their hearts applied
themselves unto the Apostles, and that the Apostles by their own authority,
and that power that was delegated unto them without reference to the church or
people, admitted them into the number of believers.

We further may take notice, that when the Angel appeared unto Cornelius in
the tenth of the Acts, he sent him unto Joppa, to call for one Simon, whose
surname was Peter; he did not send him unto the Church in Joppa. And it is
related, that when Peter came to Cornelius, and that he had recited unto him
the manner of the vision, and that he was commanded by the Angel to send for
him; it is further also declared what Peter there did, and that he said, of a
truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation, he
that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted with him. And after a
Sermon made unto Cornelius and all that were assembly there with him; It is
said, that the holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the word, and that all
the believers that came with Peter were astonished at it, for they heard them
speak with diverse tongues and magnified God. Then answered Peter, can any man
forbid water that these men should not be baptized, which have received the
holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of
the Lord. Here we see first, that Peter was sent unto, and not the Church:
Secondly, that he admitted Cornelius and those that were with him into the
number of believers and into the fellowship of the Church by his own
authority, and never consulted with the Church to ask their leave or voice but
concludes the business with an interrogation which has a greater force of
binding that no man ought to hinder any believer from coming into the society
of the Church and communion of Saints, in whom the graces of God spirit
evidently appear as in these; so that if either the Ministers come into their
houses, or they go into the Ministers and make sufficient testimony by
themselves of their faith and that they fear God, of what nation soever they
be, they are by the Ministers to be admitted; the congregation has nothing to
do to hinder any such, nay, they may not, it is more than belongs unto them;
neither did those that came with Peter intermeddle in that business or require
a covenant at their hand, or a public confession of faith.

Again when the Lord of his infinite mercy was purposed to reveal himself
unto the Eunuch in the 8 of the Acts, he sends Phillip the Evangelist unto
him, whom he found reading in his Chariot, the prophecy of Isaiah, and after
that he had interpreted unto him that prophecy and preached unto him Jesus and
Baptism in his name it is related that when they came unto acertaine water the
Eunuch said unto him, what does hinder me to be baptized? and Philip said if
thou beleevest with all thine heart, thou may: And he answered and said, I
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: and he commanded the Chariot to
stand still and they went down both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch
and he baptized him. Here we see that Philip and not the Church was sent unto
the Eunuch and that Philip by his own authority, and upon the Eunuch his own
testimony, without any reference unto the Church or without consulting with the
Congregation admits him into the number of believers, and makes him a member of
the Church and here was neither a publik confession required of him by any of
the Church, or any covenant exacted by the people: and so when Saul in the 9.
of the Acts was fallen down out of astonishment, and afterward was converted
as the story there fully declares the whole manner of it, the Lord sent one
Ananias a Disciple and Minister unto him; he did not send the Church unto him,
neither did Ananias when he came to Saul, say unto him. I will consult with the
Church to see whether they will admit thee to be a member, for thou have
greatly wasted the Church, and made havoc of the Saints, and therefore I will
have their approbation and consent, and I will have thee first walk with the
Church some time, that they may behold thy conversation, and then thou shall
make a confession of thy faith publicly before the Congregation, and give in
thy evidences of the truth of thy conversion and enter in a private and solemn
covenant, and so be received and admitted. But without all this ado he
baptizes Paul and admits him into the number of believers, and makes him a
member of the Church, and that by his sole authority, and he was received
immediately among the Disciples at Damascus without any reluctation, or so much
as any scruple, and strait-way he preached Christ in the Sinagogue that he was
the Son of God; he was both ordained and put in office without the approbation
and consent of the people, who knew nothing of the business, but only stood
amazed, and said, Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this name
in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he might bring them bound
unto the high Priest? The Ministers in those days when they were all taught of
God, they only admitted members by their own authority into the Church,
without the approbation of the people; but in these our days, wherein people
have gotten itching ears, and teachers after their own humors (such as S.
Paul speaks of in his Epistles to Timothy) they teach a new doctrine, and bring
forth newborn lights, to the darkning of truth it self, and to the bringing
in of confusion on all things. See what Saint James says in his 5. chapt. to
all Churches and Christians in the world, It any man sick, says he? let him
send for the Presbiters of the Churches, and let them pray over him, etc. and
the prayer of faith shall save the sick and the Lord shall raise him up, and
if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. The Apostle James here
sends all Christians to the Presbiters of every Church, who had the power of
the Keys delegated unto them for spiritual comfort, and whose office only it
was to pronounce pardon and remission of sins unto the sick upon their true
repentance, if they had offended and sinned against God in the time of their
health, and so scandalized the Gospel and the Church; and it was the
Presbiters place and office to admit them again into the fellowship and
communion of the Saints upon their cordial and unfeigned repentance, and that
without asking the Church any leave; for as the Presbiters only had the power
of casting out offenders out of the Church, so they only had the authority of
receiving them in again upon their repentance, and not the Church; so if we
look into all those Epistles that were written unto the seven Churches of Asia
in the 2. and 3. of the Revelations, we shall find them all directed to the
Angels of the seven Churches, which is as much as to say, to the presidents of
every several Presbitry established and constituted in every one of those
Churches; which is a sufficient argument to me, to prove a Counsel or College
of godly Ministers in every one of those Cities, according to that of Paul to
Titus chap. 1. ver. 5. for this cause left I thee in Creet that thou should
ordain Presbiters in every City, not one but many. And in the 14. of the Acts
ver. 23. And when they had ordained them presbiters in every Church, etc. many
Presbiters, a College of them was appointed to every Church: and so in the 20.
of the Acts, there were many Presbiters who had the charge and government of
that Church committed unto them in common, ver. 28. there was a College of
them constituted in that church, and therefore for order sake (which the light
of nature teaches) they must have a President, who by the way of excellency,
and to distinguish him from the other, is called an Angel, as the inscription
of the Epistle Rev. 11.1. declares, saying, Unto the Angel of the church of
Ephesus. As in our dialect, when we speak of the great counsel of the Kingdom
or of the reverend assembly of Divines, if there be occasion of distinguishing
the Presidents of those councels from the other Judges in those assemblies, we
say, Master Speaker in the House of Lords or Commons, or of the President of
the Ministers, we say, Master Prolocutor; and if any have occasion to write to
either houses or to the Assembly, they direct their letters to the Speakers, or
to the Prolocutor, who communicates them to each Assemblies, as being the
Presidents of each Society, and yet none of all these Presidents by that their
place of honor and eminency have any more power or authority then the rest,
but only in the casting voice when the parties upon any occasion are for
number equal, and for appointing of the times and places of meeting, and for
the methodicall and orderly carriage of the businesses; yea, it is ever
observed, wheresoever there is a President, there is a college or council, or
a court, nature dictates this, and the custom of all nations proves it: and
withal, by the same light of reason, that counsel or college to whom God
himself writes and directs his letters for redressing of abuses, has the power
in their hands for the rectifying of things amiss and that it peculiarly
belongs unto them as to the Magistrates invested with authority, to order
things according to direction, and to punish and cast out offenders; and that
by their own power, without the consent and approbation of the people, as it
is now in the great Counsel and Parliament of the Kingdom; who make not the
people acquainted with what they have to do, but so far as it pleases
themselves, and not out of any duty: and so it was in the government of Gods
Church by the first constitution, every Church consisting of many
congregations, were governed by a college of Presbiters, as that of Jerusalem,
and this of Ephesus, and the other six Churches; in all the which the
Presbiters by their sole authority governed them according to Gods Word,
without taking the people in to counsel with them, who were no where joined in
commission with them: and therefore it is most apparent by those examples I
have now produced, and many more that might be added; and from the commission
that Christ gave to the Apostles, and in them to all Ministers, that the people
had not their voices, either for the admitting of any to be members in any
church, or in the easting out of any for their delinquency much less have they
authority to require a public confession of their faith to be made unto the
congregation, or to exact of them to bring in the evidences of their true
conversion, or to require that they should walk with them some time before
admission, or to enter into a solemn private covenant before they be admitted
as members, for we have no president for any of these things in Gods Word, much
less any command, only in Acts the sixth, there is mention made, that the
Apostles for the freeing of themselves from all unnecessary incombrances, and
that they might the better attend upon their ministry and preaching, gave the
people liberty to make choice of their own Deacons, but still keeping the
power of ordaining them in their own hand, which always was arbitrary in them
whether they would exercise it or no, neither would the Apostles have ordained
them, unless those that were to be ordained, had been man so qualified as they
had appointed; for otherwise, it lay in their choice whether they would ordain
them or no. But that ever the congregation or people had the power of admitting
of members, or of ordaining of Officers, it is no where extant in Gods Word:
But that the women should have a voice in the Church, either for receiving in,
or casting out of members or officers, or should have any thing to do with
Peter's Keys, it is against the law of God and nature: For Paul in the first
Epistle to the Corinths, 14. makes it one of the marks of confusion in any
Church where women have their voices, saying, God is not the Author of
confusion, but of peace, as in all the churches of the Saints; and in the next
verse following in express words says. Let your women keep silence in
churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded to
be under obedience as also says the law: and if they will learn any thing, let
them ask their husbands at home, for it is a shame for women to speak in the
church. And what S. Paul writ to this Church of Corinth he writ to all
Churches, and proclaims that what he writ to them were the commandments of the
Lord, ver. 37. so that God had commanded that the women should not speak in the
Church, and says that it is a shame they should: and yet in these our days,
and in many of the new congregations, they have their voices in choosing of
officers and admitting of members, and have all of them Peter's Keys as their
Girdle, and make learned parts of speech in the congregation, and dispute
questions and debate of matters and give their reasons con and pro as it is
credibly reported and others of them set forth and print learned Treatises in
polemicall divinity with great applause and admiration of the Independent
Ministers who cite their authority, and quote them in their writings as
classical authors, to the shame of the Nation and ludibry of Religion: and
howsoever there is not any that shall more honor the truly virtuous and pious
of that sex than my self, yet I must confess when I see how far they become
transgressors of the law of God and do those things that the holy Apostle has
not only forbidden but proclaimed a shame; I cannot but exceedingly blame
them, and those Ministers that allow of and approve of such rebellion against
God and nature. And as if it had been the special care in the Apostle to
prevent this evil of women's intermedling in matters of the Church, he
foreseeing the confusion that would be brought in upon it: In his first Epistle
to Timothy, and in him to all Ministers, to whom the government of the Church
was committed, he gives him direction how to behave himself in the house of
God, which is the church of the living God; in cap. 2. ver. 11.12. he says Let
the women learn in silence, with all subjection; for I suffer not a woman to
teach, nor to usurp authority over the man but to be in silence; for Adam was
first made, then Eve; and Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived
was in the transgression etc. Here the Apostle again and agun twice in these
few words, enjoins them silence in the church, and imposes upon them subjection
and obedience: I suffer not, says he a woman to teach or to usurp authority
over the man, but to be in silence; and he gives his reasons of this his
command, because says he Adam was first made not by the woman nor of the
woman, but the contrary; and therefore she may usurp no authority over the
masculine sex especially in Gods matters and she is to be the disciple if the
man, and not the man her scholar: and therefore that superiority that the God
of order had established upon the man in the first creation, he does now
re-establish upon him again in his holy Word, after all things through sin
had been disordered and confused; and commands the woman to be both subject and
silent especially in the Church. Another reason of this his command is, because
the woman was first in the transgression, and was the cause of Adams fall, as
he accuses her, and her disputing and voycing of it then brought confusion upon
all mankind; and for this her so doing. S. Paul concludes for ever hereafter,
that she ought to hold her peace and be in subjection to her husband, and ought
to learn in silence at home, but more especially in the Church; for if they
come to voice it once again in the Church. as Eve brought confusion upon
mankind by her disputation and reasons, so these with their loquacity and
babble and confusion of voices. will bring in a new Babel into the Church and
State as they have prettily well already begun to do. Saint Paul says, I
suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in
silence. Here the Apostle as in the place above cited, out of the Cor. chap.
14. commands them silence and permits them not to speak, and expressly forbids
them to usurp authority over the man that is, the virill sex. Now I appeal
unto any understanding creature, whether or no, to make large parts of speech
in the Church (as many of them upon occasions do) and dispute and give their
reasons con and pro, be not to speak in the Church? and whether to have their
voices in either admitting of members or officers, or in the casting of them
out, be not to usurp authority over the man? for all the world knows, that
they that have the power in their hands of either admitting of any into the
fellowship or communion of the Church, or of hindering their coming in, or have
their voices for the casting of them out when they are received, exercise and
usurp authority over those they so deal with; and therefore they do against
the express prohibition of the Apostles, and all those women that have usurped
this authority, and all those Ministers that have permitted them so to do, or
tanght this doctrine unto them, are all guilty of great contumacy against God,
and ought seriously to repent for this their temerity and rebellion, and it
will be the immortal honor of those women that have not intermedled; and if
there be not some speedy course taken by authority to forbid such disorder, we
may promise nothing to the Church and whole Kingdom but confusion. It has ever
been observed that Hermaphrodite counsels in any Kingdom or country, when
women that are subjects intermeddle in government and matters of state, that
that Kingdom and country is very crased and not far from ruin and
destruction; and we need not look into many ages or countries for presidents of
this kind; and if hermaphrodite counsels in Kingdoms has ever been so fatal
unto them, what may any man think in time will become of this Church and
Kingdom, when the women have gotten Peter's Keys at their girdle, and have
their voices in many congregations, and a power of ordering and disposing of
things in Church affairs? certainly; nothing but confusion can be expected;
for this their doing is against the express command of God, who is the God of
order, and injoynes the contrary: yea, it is not only against the law of God,
but against the very law of nature and the practice of all Nations; for never
was it yet heard of in any well governed city, or common wealth, or Kingdom,
that women that were subjects had their voices in choosing officers or
Burgesses, or making of freemen, or disfranchising of them, or were permitted
so much as to sit in counsel with them, much less to rule and give laws to
others out of their own houses: And therefore as it is a thing odious to God
and man, and that which is a shame to that sex it ought to be cast out of all
wel-governed Churches and States; and as the women ought to know their places,
so ought all men that are under obedience to learn their duty, and not to take
upon them that which God never gave unto them, as to have their voice either in
making of members in Churches, or casting of them out, or of ordaining of
officers, or of imposing laws upon others, either of making public
confessions before the Congregations, or of producing evidences of their
conversion, or that they should walk with them some time that they might behold
their conversation, or of imposing a covenant upon any that shall be admitted;
for all rule and government in the Church is put into the hands of the
Presbiters, and does not belong unto the people or multitude, neither may the
Presbiters usurp authority, but they also must exercise it only, according to
the commission given unto them by Christ, they may not transgress it or go
beyond it in the least thing; and therefore when many of the brethren call for
a public confession of men's faith to be made in their new Congregation and the
evidences of their conversion to be produced, and impose a covenant upon them
before they admit them to be members of their Church, (as if they had lived
before in infidelity; Who notwithstanding were known to be holy and godly
Christians, and as true believers as any that now live in the world) and think
them only Christians and believers that do as they would have them, and count
of others that will not conform themselves to their customs and novelties,
but as the off-scowring and refuse and no Christians: I say it is an
intolerable usurpation, and a thing that was yet never before practiced in the
world, in any Church either Jewish or Christian till these days, and therefore
they go beyond their commission in so doing; for God in his commssion to his
Apostles and all Ministers, bids them admit of all that come in and believe and
are baptized, he quenches not the smoking flax nor breaks the bruised reed;
now then, when they know thousands in this Kingdom that do believe, and are
men of unblamable lives, and such as would lay down their lives for the faith
once delivered unto the Saints and are baptized; what have they to do to lord
it over them, and to hinder them from communicating in the Ordinances and to be
admitted into Church Fellowship with them, or to debar them from the
communion of the Saints? Me thinks the vision to Saint Peter in the tenth of
the Acts should teach such men their duty, When God said unto Peter rise kill
and eat, Peter said not so Lord, for I have never eaten any thing that is
common and unclean; and the voice said what God has cleansed call not thou
common. And this, says the Scripture, was done thrice, that by the mouth of
two or three Witnesses this truth might be confirmed to Peter and all other
Ministers, not to call those people common, profane and unclean, and to count
them but rubbish, whom God has graced with the gifts of his holy Spirit, and
has sanctified, and such as believe in Jesus Christ and are baptized as well
as themselves, and such as stood to the truth when they durst not show their
faces, but ran from the Cause and deserted it, or at least temporized, and such
as if the like occasions were offered, would manifest unto the world (by Gods
assistance) that their lives and all they have should not be dear unto them
for the testimony of Jesus; and yet such as these must be debarred from the
communion in their assemblies, unless they will conform to their newborn
traditions; for these are no traditions of the Elders, but of the younger: and
if Christ in his time sharply reproved those that brake the Commandments of
God through the traditions of men, and deeply reproved the Ministers in those
days for teaching the people to prefer the traditions of the Elders before
the commandments of God, and for teaching them the fear of God after the
precepts of men: What shall we think those Ministers will have to answer at the
dreadful day of judgment, when they set up their traditions in the Church of
God, and prefer them before the Commandments of God? and what can any man
think of the condition of that people, that account of such novelties as the
Oracles of God, and violate the law of Love, and make rents and scismes in the
seamelesse garment of the Church through these traditions? Surely whatsoever
they may promise to themselves, their condition is very dangerous; for our
Savior says, Woe be to those by whom offenses come, Matthew 18. and whosoever
shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the sea. And whether this be not to transgress the Commandments of
God through their traditions and to offend those little ones that believe in
Christ, when they will not receive such into the communion and fellowship of
the Church, as believe and are baptized, but count them as aliens and
strangers, yea infidels and rubbish, I refer my self to any that is but of
ordinary understanding? For Gods command unto all Ministers was, that they
should admit all such into the Church as believed and were baptized upon their
desiring it, without any confession either private or public, or entering into
any covenant: Now this command of God they transgress by their traditions, and
keep out many thousands of believers through the Kingdom, as unholy, and as
having no right to the Ordinances, because forsooth they will not obey their
newborn laws and traditions; for where did ever God command that no believers
should be admitted into the Church except they made a public confession of
their faith, and walked some time in fellowship amongst them, and then give in
the evidences of their conversion, and entered into a private covenant, and gave
the Church satisfaction? Or where was it ever practiced by any of the primitive
Christians either by those that were converted by Peter's Sermon and the other
Apostless, or by Paul's preaching? was Lidia (when God opened her heart to
believe Paul's preaching) admitted into the Church upon any such terms? was the
Jailer and his converted family forced to make a public confession to the
Church of their faith and to give in the evidences of their conversion and to
enter into a private covenant before they could be made members of the Church,
or was the Churches assent required before they could be admitted and made
members of it, or were ever any of these things they impose upon Christians
now, required at believers hands before these our times? and therefore they are
to be abominated as vain traditions, and such as by which they break the laws
of God, making devisions in the Church and Kingdom, and through all the
families, and houses of the same, so that neither masters of families nor
parents have any rule over their wives, children or servants, their husbands
go out one way, the wife another, their children to this assembly, their
servants to that congregation, and as it was among the Corinthians which Paul
blames in them, one said, I am of Paul, another I am of Apollo, the third I am
of Coephas, and so they flutter about like a company of chickings without
either heads or wit, and none will be under obedience to either parents or
masters (notwithstanding God has commanded children to obey their parents and
servants their masters) no farther than pleases their own humors, and all
this they have learned by the traditions of the younger: and whether I have
wronged the brethren in any thing I have now said, I report my self to all the
distracted families in the Kingdom where they have been preaching, and the
daily experience of any moderate minded Christian: and if ever there was a
pantheon of all Religions in the world, it is now in England, by reason of
these new teachers, to the great dishonor of God, the hinderance of
Reformation, and the allienating of the affections one from another of those
that are joined together in nighest relations.

And by all that I have now spoke, I hope it does sufficiently appear that
there is neither precept nor example through all the holy Scripture to warrant
the practice of these men in the gathering of their new Churches; and if a man
will but look a little more upon the practice of Christ's seventy Disciples and
of all the Apostles in the gathering of Churches they shall not find one
footstep through the whole book of God of the gathering Churches after the
manner of their congregating of their assemblies: as for Christ's Disciples,
they were all sent to gather in the lost sheep of the house of Israel, they
went not to gather in converted men from amongst converted men, for they were
to bring the lost sheep into Christ's fold (and we are taught there is but one
Shepherd and one sheepfold) we never read that after they were once folded and
brought into the Church, that any true Pastors came into the fold and flocks of
their fellow-shepheards and picked out all the best and the fattest sheep, and
the most wholesome, and molded them into an independent fould by themselves, as
separate and distinct from the others, and with the which they would have no
fellowship and communion in the Ordinances, this was never heard of before
these days: Paul was so far from getting away of others sheep that he took
it for a dishonor to him to build upon another foundation, Romans 15. and
preached Christ in those places where they had never heard of him before; and
planted the Church of Corinth himself, and left Apollo to water it, and
committed all the flocks that he had gathered, as that of Ephesus, to the
charge and care of faithful Pastors, and commands both the flocks and the
Pastors and in them all shepherds and folds, to keep unity and love one with
another, Ephesians. 4. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and forbids them to make seperations
and devisions, and scismes between flock and flock, and this method he used
wheresoever he came; yea, as soon as he was converted and entered upon his
ministry, as we may see in the first of the Galatians, he went into Arrabia and
preached there among the poor Infidels, he got not other men's sheep from them,
neither did he ever make any separation of sheep from sheep, yea, even in those
flocks and Churches, as that of Corinth, Galatia and Colosse, where there were
many that walked disorderly and against the rules prescribed, and taught false
doctrine and heresies, and made scismes in the Church, and were very
scandalous, so that if ever there were in any Churches a just cause of making a
separation, it was then; and yet the Apostles bid not the Christians separate
themselves from the communion and assemblies of the Saints, and from the
Ordinances for these men's causes, but only that they should look unto
themselves, and examine their own consciences, that they may not offend, and
so make themselves unworthy of the holy things, and gives them power to cast
out the profane, but no way tolerates them to separate; only he bids them not
be familiar with such as walk disorderly, that by this means they might learn
to amend their lives, and tells them of what judgments have always happened to
such as were wicked, and bids them by their example to take heed how they
provoke God by the like, as it is at large set down in the tenth chapter, and
commands them to make no separation, but from Idolaters and Infidels: and so
likewise in his Epistle to the Galatians, he says for his own particular, he
could wish that they that troubled them were cut off, yet he bids not the
Galatians to separate themselves into independent congregations.

Nothing of all such things were taught before these days, that true believers
and the faithful servants of God should separate from the assemblies of their
brethren every way as deerly beloved of God as themselves, and such as with the
twelve Tribes of Israel, serve their God night and day, and would suffer any
thing for the Gospel, and that any Christians I say, should make separation
from the fellowship of such, or that such should be accounted as enemies of
Christ, it was never heard of before our times; by which their so dealing, they
have made the greatest scisme in the Church that was ever yet made, to the
scandal of of our holy profession.

I have been ever taught in Gods holy Word, that those faithful Ministers that
preached Jesus Christ and him crucified, and opened the eyes of the blind, and
turned them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that
they might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance amongst them that
are sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ, and taught the people that they should
repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance; and that instructed
all men that they being delivered out of the hands of their enemies, they
should serve God without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all
the days of their life, and teaching them that the grace of God bringing
salvation, has appeared to all men, for this very end that they should deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and should live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope and the glorious
appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works. I say I have been ever taught by Gods
holy Word, to believe that those Ministers that instruct the people to do al
these things, and where the people by faith embrace and receive this doctrine,
are the true Ministers of Jesus Christ, and those congregations under them the
church of Jesus Christ, and of his sheepfold, and that Christ in all such
congregations is set up as King in his Throne, as who rules in the hearts of
his people, and the which are swayed and guided by the Scepter of his Word and
Spirit, and deserve none of those contumelious languages the brethren asperse
both Ministers and people with.

Of the ministers they thus speak and print, That they deny, disclaim and
preach against Christ's Kingly government over men's consciences and Churches, so
that such a conversion (as is wrought by them) comes not home to whole Christ;
and such with their converters do deny Christ's kingly government; or at least
and best they are converted but in part, and that maine thing is wanting, to
wit, Christ's Kingly office; and of all the people and Christian believers
through the Kingdom that are not in their Congregations and new-gathered
Assemblies, they speak and print thus: We (say the brethren, the independent
ministers) exhort them to set up Christ King in their hearts: We exhort them to
become and profess to be those Saints, of whom Christ is King; for he is King
of Saints, Rev. 15.3. but they will not believe us (say they) they will not
depend upon Christ as the only lawgiver and King over their consciences: Now
what would you have us to do in this case? (say they) baptize the infants of
such parents as will not in this respect profess nor confess Christ to be
their King? Why, do you not know (say they) that no Infants have any title to
baptism that are not within the covenant visibly? and how are they within the
covenant visibly, but by virtue of their parents faith outwardly professed? and
what outward profession of faith is there in the parents that refuse Christ for
their only King? that are ashamed or afraid to profess to be in covenant with
Christ, as their King? if therefore the parents profess not, yea, refuse thus
to be in visible covenant, can the children be said to be in visible covenant,
and so to have a right in baptism, the external seal of the covenant? here is
an obex, a bar put. These are their own words, which I have set down at
large; the sum of them briefly is this; that all the Ministers of the Church
of England that are not of their fraternity, do deny, disclaim and preach
against Christ's Kingly government over men's consciences and churches; and that
all the people under their Ministry are men unconverted, or at least converted
but in part, wanting the main thing, to wit, Christ's Kingly office; men visibly
out of the covenant of grace, who have not so much as an outward profession of
faith, who deny Christ to be their King; to whose persons and infants the very
sacraments and seals of grace, with all church communion, may and ought to be
denied.

Another of the Independents, amongst many of the contumelious and disgraceful
speeches he utters out aganst the Ministers of the church of England, calling
them the blackcoats in the Synod, who, he is afraid, will prove more cruel
Taskmasters than their Fathers the Bishops, who cowardly sit at home, and in
his apprehension, for no other end but to breed faction and devision amongst
the well affected to the Parliament, promoting their own interest, which (says
he) is laziness, pride, covetousness and domination, and amongst many such
expressions as these, he proclaims them the sworn enemies of Jesus Christ:
and desiring that the Parliament may be put in mind of their covenant, for he
thinks they have sworn to root out popery: he tells them they have established
Tithes the very root and support of popery, which he does humbly conceive is a
contradiction to their covenant, and which will be a greater snare than the
Common Prayer to many of the precious consciences of Gods people, whose duty it
is in his judgment, to dye in a prison before they act or stoop unto so
dishonorable a thing as this is, to their Lord and Master, as to maintain the
black-coats with tithes, whom they look upon as the professed enemies of their
anointed Christ etc.

These are some of his formal expressions, I leave the comment of these
several passages to others: neither do I rehearse innumerable such like
sentences as are daily vented, to the intolerable disgrace both of all the
Ministers of the Church of England, and of all those believing christians that
are under their several charges, and that in every pamphlet in the which they
proclaim all the Ministers to be the sworn and professed enemies of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and such as deny, disclaim and preach against Christ's kingly
government over men's consciences and Churches; and for the people and believers
in England, they proclaim them to be men unconverted, or at least converted
but in part, wanting the maine thing, Christ's Kingly office; men visibly out of
the covenant of grace, who have not so much as an outward profession of the
faith; who deny Christ to be their King, to whose persons and Infants the very
Sacraments and seals of grace, with all church communion, may and ought to be
denied, etc.

By the which words, they not only unchurch all the congregations of England,
Scotland, Ireland, but indeed all the reformed churches, and unchristian all
christians but those that are in their own independent assemblies, and account
them as aliens and strangers from the commonwealth of the Saints, and make
Christ to be no King over them, or to have any Kingdom in or amongst them, but
only amongst themselves in their new congregations: whereas Christ ever had a
church or Kingdom upon earth in all ages before they were, and has without
all controversy a true Kingdom in many churches in these our days, where
they are not. Had I not seen their expressions in print, and the book in which
they are uttered, set forth by authority with approbation, I should not have
believed that they had all of them bin so uncharitable; but finding that book
not only printed by license, but generally applauded by them all and much
magnified, as the frequent edititions of it do manifest, I gather, it is the
universal opinion of them all. Than, the which, what could be more
uncharitably and unchristianly spoken? what comfort can any of the Ministers of
the church of Engand have in the society of these men, who (whatsoever outward
seeming favor they show to them) in their hearts conceive of them as the
sworn enemies of Christ and his Kingdom, and as men unworthy to live, and who
count it a dishonorable thing to their Lord and Master, to maintain those
black-coats with tithes, whom they look on as the professed enemies of their
anointed Christ? can, I say, any Ministers with joy and alacrity converse with
these men? no surely; what real comfort can any poor christian believers
through the Kingdom either expect or look for at these men's hands if they were
in their power, whom they declare (and that in print, and in their Pulpits) to
be men unconverted, or converted but in part, wanting the main thing, Christ's
Kingly office, men visibly out of the covenant of grace, who have not so much
as an outward profession of faith, who deny Christ to be their King; to whose
persons and Infants the very Sacraments and seals of grace, with all
church communion, may and ought to be denied? can any true christians be real
friends to the enemies of Christ? He (says Saint Paul, 1 cor. chap. 16. v. 22)
that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathama Maranatha; will any
true Christians bless those that God has cursed? David said, I hate them that
hate thee, yea, I hate them with a perfect hatred:

And surely those that are true friends to Christ, hate all his enemies; now
they look upon our Ministers as the professed enemies of Christ, and upon all
the people under their ministry as enemies of his Kingdom, and as men to
whose persons and infants the very Sacraments and seals of grace, with all
church communion, may and ought to be denied (they are their own words;) can
they therefore expect any real friendship from them, whatsoever outward
courtesy they seem to show them? no doubtless; how can any poor christian
have any delight to come amongst these men, or so much as to be in their
society, whom they account of as the enemies of Christ and his Kingdom? For my
own particular, I would not willingly come in any man's company, or be familiar
with any that I thought a professed enemy of Christ and his Kingdom, neither
should I ever believe I could have any real esteem from such as think me an
enemy of Christ and his Kingdom.

It was the greatest calamity to the poor sufferers under the Prelates tyranny,
and to all those distressed christians that were haled into the High Commission
court or into the Star Chamber, or before the Counsel table for matter of
Religion and conscience (which was the lot of many thousands through the whole
Kingdom) that commonly their greatest enemies were those of their own house;
their parents, their brethren and fisters would be the chiefest calumniators
and reproachers of them, and that in word and deed would most despightfully
persecute them, denying them the common humanity of hospitality, and would not
so much as look on them, except it were to revile them and insult over them,
and would ordinarily join with their enemies both privately and publicly, and
desert them in their greatest streights, as all of them can generally witness,
which not only encouraged their enemies against them, but added credit to
their false accusations and calumnies; for they would usually say, ye may see
what manner of men these are, whose nighest friends are not only ashamed of,
but thus speak of them; which was a greater affliction unto them than all the
other miseries and sufferings they underwent; for had they been their professed
enemies, as David said, they could easily have endured it, and there would
less credit and regard have been given to their words but they were their
parents brethren, sisters and familiars and therefore it added more sharply to
their affliction: So had they been our professed enemies as Papists, Socinians,
Arminians or those of the Prelaticall faction that should have proclaimed us
enemies of Christ and his Kingdom, and had they denied unto us and out
children the seals of grace, with all church communion, it would not have
troubled us, but tu Brute, that brethren, that fellow sufferers in affliction,
that had gone up to the house of God together, and had taken sweet counsel
together; that they should now proclaim us the enemies of Jesus Christ, and
deny communion with us; oh let not this be spoken in Gath and Ashkelon.

This is that that grieves and fads the hearts of their brethren more then all
their former afflictions, and gives a great advantage to the common enemy, and
scandalizes the Gospel, and exposes both themselves and us to the scorn of
the Malignants, who ordinarily jeere and say, see those holy Brethren that lost
their cares together, are now together by the ears, and count one of another
as a company of Infidels, and disclaim all holy communion one with another,
and will not so much as admit of their children to baptism, or suffer them to
receive the Sacraments with them.

But this is that that makes all men wonder, to hear them proclaim all the
Ministers of the Church of England, to be such as deny, disclaim and preach
against Christ's Kingly government, when it is apparently evident, both by all
their preachings and writings, and all their practices, that they ever advance
Christ's Kingly government as really as any of those that oppose them, who in
preaching up the Kingly office of Christ, and setting Christ upon his Throne,
are inferior to none of them in this work; For we are taught out of Gods Word,
that those Ministers set up Christ in his Throne, that open the eyes of the
blind, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance amongst
them that are sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ, and that teach men to repent
and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance; and when the people that
hear them give themselves first to the Lord and unto his Ministers by the will
of God, and after denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world.

And this, the Word of God teach^^ us, is to set up Christ upon his Throne; and
those Ministers that teach all these things set up Christ upon his Throne, and
those people that embrace this doctrine, make Christ their King, as we may see
2 Cor. chap. ^. ver. 5. Tit. 2. ver. 12. For Christ sits as King upon his
Throne when he is believed in to be that horn of salvation, that was raised up
for us in the house of David, that has saved and delivered all that believe in
him, out of the hands of all their enemies both spiritual and bodily, that
they may serve him without fear, and when Christ rules in all their hearts by
the Scepter of his Word and Spirit, and when they own him as their only
lawgiver, and acknowledge him to be the only King in his Church, and the
Savior of all those that truly believe in him; and this is to set up Christ
upon his Throne, and the brethren themselves accord unto this.

Now when the Ministers of England teach this doctrine, in their preachings and
writings, how can they be truly said to deny, disclaim and preach against
Christ's Kingly government, over men's consciences and Churches? and how can that
people be said truly to deny Christ's Kingly government who do both believe and
to the uttermost of their power practice this doctrine and follow only the
guidance of his holy Spirit and Word, both for doctrine and government, who is
King of the Church? whether therefore this be not an unjust and unchristian
calumny, laid both upon the Ministers and people of the church of England, I
leave it to the consideration of any moderate minded christian! doubtless all
charitable minded christians if they consider althings aright, will not think
so dishonourably neither of the Ministers of England nor of the people under
their ministry; for they deserve not to be accounted the professed enemies of
Christ, who are freed from that heavy accusation by Christ's own testimony; who
when it was related unto him by Saint. John, Mark 9. ver. 38. That they had
seen one casting out devils in his name, which followed them not, and that the
Disciples had forbad him because he did not follow them: Our Savior Christ
replying, forbid him not, says he, for whosoever is not against us, is on our
part.

Now these Ministers that open the eyes of the blind, and turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, they cannot be e^^^emed
enemies of Christ, and to be against Christ but for him, and ought highly to be
honored for their works sake. 1 These. chap. 5. ver. 13. and singularly, to be
beloved, and deserve not to be maligned and reproached especially by brethren,
who owe all their conversions next unto God, to their ministry; yea, both the
Pastors and people of all the new congregated Churches are beholding unto them
for their conversion; for they admit none into their Assemblies but believers,
and they were made believers and converted by their ministry; and therefore
they are friends of Christ and not his enemies, and they ought all of them to
look upon them as their Fathers, and on the Church of England as their Mother,
and on the believers of England as their brethren, and ought not thus
unchristianly and ungratefully to cast dirt in all their faces.

Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Phillippians, chap. 1. has these words, Some
says he, preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also of good will;
the one preach Christ of contention and not sincerely, thinking to add
affliction to my bonds, but the other of love: What then? notwithstanding every
way, whether in pretense or in truth Christ be preached, I therein do rejoice,
yea, and I will rejoice. S. Paul speaks here of such as preach pure doctrine,
though not with a pure mind and was glad that Christ was preached, and counts
them not the enemies of Christ, as he did the false teachers among the
Galatians, who joined the ceremonial law and their own inventions with the
Gospel, and therefore he wished that they were cut off; but in this place he
rejoices that Christ and the Gospel were purely preached, though it were of
envy.

Now when the Ministers of the Church of England, do not only preach the
Gospel purely, but of sincerity and of love, and mingle not their own
traditions and inventions with the Gospel, but follow their commission; how
can any men without intolerable injustice proclaim them the enemies of Jesus
Christ, and make them odious to the people under the name of Presbiterians whom
they persuade all men that they will prove more cruel Taskmasters than the
Prelates? yea and they have generally possessed the people with so prejudicate an
opinion of them all, as if they would more lord it over them than ever the
Bishops did, and causelessly have moved the people to hate the name of
presbitry: And notwithstanding they themselves pretend they contend for the
ancient presbitry, and by this make themselves Presbiterians as well as the
other: What justice or equity then is there in their dealing, to make their
brethren odious to the world for endeavoring to set up a Presbitry after Gods
Word, when they themselves are Presbiterians, and labor to set up a Presbitry
of their own? and therefore if the name of Presbiters be odious in the
Ministers of the Church of England, no reason can gainsay it, but that they
also should be as odious to the people as their brethren, for they also are
Presbiterians. But that the truth may the better appear, whether the Ministers
of the Church of England, or the Independent Ministers, be most guilty of all
the accusations laid to their charge, it will not be amiss to compare the
practice of the Ministers of the Church of England and the proceedings of the
Independent Ministers together, and that both for their doctrine and
discipline, and in their several studies and eudeavours, for the advancing of
Christ's Kingdom; and by so doing it will be easy for any to judge, which of
their governments and which of the Ministers are more intolerable, and which of
them are most guilty of those foul reproaches the Ministers of the Church of
England are aspersed with by their Brethren; for he has a shallow
understanding and a very dim sight that cannot discern, whether those that
advance Christ's their Kings Word and laws only, and follow his commission and
the example of the holy Apostles in their ministries, and that of John Baptist
and the primitive Preachers, or those that set up their own inventions, and
prefer them before the laws of Christ, and have neither precept nor
president for their doings in all the holy Word of God: He I say that cannot
judge which of these most advance Christ for their King, either those that obey
Christ's laws, or those that observe their own, neglecting Christ's, is of a
very shallow capacity.

But now let us compare them together; the Ministers of the Church of England
preach faith and repentance, the Law and the Gospel, according to Christ's
commission given to his Apostles, and they receive all into the Church that
believe and are baptized, and such as but desire to be admitted, they demanding
of them what they should do to be saved; and in their so doing, they have both
precept and presidents: For Christ in his commission unto them has given them
auhority so to do.

Neither did he ever say unto his Apostles and Ministers, admit none into the
church, although they believe and are baptized, without they walk with you some
days, weeks, months or years, that you may behold their conversation and
manner of life, and after you have had some trial and experience of them see
then that they make a public confession of their faith before the Church, and
give in the evidences of the truth of their conversion before the congregation,
and enter into a private and solemn covenant, and be admitted by the consent
and approbation of the Church; or otherwise if they will not submit themselves
to this law, and come into the Church upon these conditions, receive them not
into your assemblies, nor admit of them for members.

Here is nothing of all this in Christ's commission, nor in his holy Word, nor
any president of the same in all sacred Authority; and therefore John the
Baptist and the holy Apostles and primitive Ministers admitted all that came
unto them, and such as but demanded of them what they should do to be saved;
and baptized them and received them into the Church-without any gainsaying or
question: as we may see in the third of Lake, and in the seventh chapter of the
same book, and in the second of the Acts; and no sooner did the Eunuch desire
baptism, but Philip granted it; the Jailer did but ask Paul and Silas, What
they should do to be saved, and they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ
and thou shall be saved and thy house; and it is related that the Jailer and
all his were streightway baptized, Acts 16. ver. 31, 32, 33. that is, they were
forthwith admitted into the Church, without either walking any time with the
Church for their approbation, or without either making a public confession of
their faith before the Church, or giving in evidences of the truth of their
conversion to the congregation, or entering into a private covenant, and without
the consent and allowance of the Church.

And Christ notwithstanding was embraced by them as their Lord and King, and
was preached by Paul and Silas, as the Lord and King of his Church, and was set
up upon his Throne as King by them, as well as he is in any independent
Churches and yet they had none of all their newborn truths, and they could
then see how to set up Christ upon his Throne without their new lights; and as
Christ was then by Paul and Silas and the other Apostles set upon his Throne as
King in all those primitive Churches, so he is at this day in all the true
Protestant Churches through the world, as well as in any of the Independent
Assemblies and yet they were and are all ignorant of their new way; so that any
understanding christian may gather, that all their newborn truths are no way
requisite for the setting up of Christ as King in his Church, nor for the
advancement of Christ's Kingly government; for if they had, Christ would have
put them into the Apostles commission, and the Apostles who were led into all
truth by the holy Thost, who brought whatsoever Christ had taught them
concerning the Kingdom of God ( Acts 1.) into their memories, would have
suggested all these things, The new way, the newborn truth, the new lights to
them, that they might have been recorded, if they had been necessary for the
setting up of Christ upon his Throne; but when neither Christ nor the holy
Ghost, nor the blessed Apostles have prescribed any of all these to the church,
nor called for them, nor required them of any that desire to be saved or made
members of the church; whether this be not a great temerity in any men, to
preach all these things as the laws of Christ, I leave it to the judgment of
any ingenuous minded christian? and whether this be not to prefer their own
inventions and traditions before the commandments of God and the laws of
Christ the King of his church, and whether this be not rather to set up
themselves than Christ? I refer it also to any judicious and impartial
christian to weigh and consider.

I shall now demand of any moderate christian therefore, and let him answer me
heartily, whether of those Ministers and people most advance the Kingdom of
Christ, and acknowledge him to be their only Lord and Lawgiver, that both in
their teaching and believing follow his commission and Word, and teach nothing
nor believe nothing (as they are enjoined) but what Christ their King commands
them? or those, that to the commission and commands of Christ add their own
inventions and traditions, and prefer them before the laws of Christ the
King and Lawgiver of his church? I am confident, if he will deal impartially,
he will answer me, that those Ministers and that people most advance Christ for
their King, and most set him upon his Throne, that own his law, and that only
for the rule of their faith and obedience; for Christ himself has said it,
John 10. My Sheep hear my voice, they will not listen unto the voice of a
stranger; Christ's voice only the King of his church is to be heard, and they
only that obey it advance him for their King and set him up on his Throne,
which when the Ministers and believers in the church of England do, and the
Independents do not, they more advance Christ for their King than they; for
the Independents to Christ's law and commission add their own traditions and
inventions, and enjoyne all that will be admitted as members into their
congregations, besides their believing and being baptized, to walk with them
some time for approbation, and to make a public confession of their faith
before the church, and to bring in the evidences of the truth of their
conversion, and enter into a private and solemn covenant, and not to be
admitted as members without the consent of the Church, all which Christ the
King of his church never commanded, and those that will not submit themselves
to these their traditions, they will not permit or suffer to enter into their
church as joined members, which they call the only true churches of Christ,
and count of all others that differ from them as enemies of Christ and his
Kingdom, and as men without the covenant: and if this be to set up Christ upon
his Throne, then the Pharisees set up Christ upon his Throne, who preferred
their own traditions before the commandments of God; yea, the pope himself and
the Prelates set up Christ upon his Throne, who preferred their own traditions
and idolatries before the laws of Christ.

Now if all the traditions of the Papists were justly abhorred and cast out of
the church as things derogatory to the Kingly and Prophetical dignity of Jesus
Christ, and as things repugnant to his royalty; I see no reason but all other
popery under whatsoever name or title it be intruded upon, the people should be
eliminated and cast out of the church; and whether this be not a new kind of
popery, to bring in new ways, and newborn truths, and new lights, and impose
them upon the people as the commands of God, and to excommunicate and unchurch
all churches in the world but their own assemblies, I refer my self to the
judgment of any intelligible christian? Saint Paul writing to the Galatians,
blames those false teachers amongst them, that would have joined but the
ceremonial law with the Gospel, and calls it a perverting of the Gospel of
Christ, and wishes that such teachers were cut off, Gal. 5. v. 12. and blames
likewise those Galatians that received their doctrine, saying, Oh foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth; and yet
they only urged the ceremonial law which God by Moses had appointed to
remain till the fullness of time, but was now abrogated; they were not their
own traditions, they were no newborn lights, no new ways, no new truths.

Now if Paul was so displeased, or God rather with the Galatians, both teachers
and hearers, the one for bringing in or joining the ceremonial law to the
Gospel, and the other for admitting of them, how highly would God have been
displeased with them if they had set up their own inventions for the laws of
God, and had brought in newborn truths, and intruded them upon the people as
necessary to salvation, and for the setting up of Christ upon his Throne?
Without doubt the Apostle would most sharply have reproved them, and have given
special caveats against them, as he did in his Epistle to the Colossians, the
second chapter of the which, being chiefly spent in condemning all humane
traditions; yea, in his first chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians, ver. 8,
9. He charge them, that though the Apostles themselves, or an Angel from
Heaven should preach unto them otherwise than that they had received, they
should count him accursed; and as I said before, says the Apostle, so say I
now again, if any man preach unto you otherwise than that you have received,
let him be accursed.

But none of the Apostles ever taught the Church, that christians and
believers, though baptized, should not be admitted as members into the church,
unless they had walked some time in church fellowship with them, and had first
made a public confession of their faith, and had brought in the evidences of
the truth of their conversion, and entered into a solemn private covenant, and
were admitted by the consent of the church, none of all this did ever the
Apostles teach, or the christians of those times embrace or believe, and
therefore such doctrines as these ought not to be received.

In the first of the Corinthians in many places he reproves those that made
scismes and brought in heresies and sects into the church; and in the fourth
chapter and sixth verse, under his own and Apollo's name, he sets an example
before them, that they should contain themselves with in the limits and bounds
of that doctrine and manner of preaching, prescribed and set down in the Word
of God, and used by the Spirit of God; and commands them that they should
learn in the Apostles, not to presume or to be wise above that which is
written, and enjoynes all christians to reject all ways of teaching that have
not Gods Word for their warrant: Now in all Gods Word there is nothing of all
this written, that after men believe and are baptized, they should not yet be
admitted into the church, without they had walked sometime with them for their
approbation, and without they had made a public confession of their faith
before the congregation and brought in the evidences of their true conversion,
and had entered into a private covenant, and were admitted by the consent of the
church; none of all this is written in Gods Word, and therefore we ought not to
embrace it.

And in the second of the Corinths, chap. 11. ver. 4. the Apostle signifies
unto the Corinthians, that no man can teach the Gospel more exactly tahn he and
the other Apostles have taught them, nor set before them a more perfect
doctrine of Jesus Christ than that that they have taught them, for the
converting of any unto Christ, and for the setting up of Christ as King upon
his Throne and for the making of them members of the church, and for the
building of them up in their most holy faith, and commands the Corinthians to
take heed of all false teachers, whatsoever piety and godliness they make show
of, calling them deceitful workers, and such as transform themselves into the
Apostles of Christ: And no mervaile, says he for Satan himself can transform
himself into an Angel of light; and therefore it is no wonder his ministers
transform themselves, as though they were the ministers of righteousness.

Now if men will consider what those false teachers were, we shall find them to
be no other, but such as under show of holiness and piety taught their own
inventions and grolleryes, and abused the simplicity of the people for their
own advantage, and brought them into bondage and devoured them, verse 20. as
the Pharisees did the Widows houses, under pretense of their long prayers,
which our Savior Christ sharply reproves them for and denounces a woe against
them for their so doing; after the same manner did these falls teachers amongst
the Corinthians, who made their own traditions joined members with the Gospel,
as if they had had a more fine, neat and eliganter way of gathering of Churches
and admitting of members than Paul and the other Apostles: But the Apostle bids
the Corinthians take heed of all such, how glorious soever they seem to
appear, and tells them they cannot teach the way to Heaven and happiness
better than he and the other Apostles have done; and yet neither Saint Paul or
any of the Apostles in preaching of the Gospel, taught them that they should
admit of none to be joined members of the Church, although they believed and
were baptized, except they walked some time in fellowship amongst them, that
they might have approbation and trial of their conversation first, and after
make a public confession of their faith before the church, and did give in
evidences of the truth of their conversion to the congregation, and entered into
a solemn private covenant, and were admitted members by consent of the church.

Not a word of all this in the Gospel that Saint Paul and the other Apostles
taught, and therefore all that teach their new ways, their newborn truths,
and set up their new lights, are wise above that which is written, and teach
otherwise than Christ and his Apostles have taught, or the christians of the
primitive times had received, and therefore ought by the Apostles command, Gal.
1. ver. 8, 9. to be accursed. Saint John also in his second Epistle to the
Elect Lady, ver. 9, 10. says, Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God; he that continues in the doctrine of Christ
he has both the Father and the Son: If there come any unto you that brings
not the doctrine of Christ, receive him not into your house, neither bid him
God speed; for he that bids him God speed, is a partaker of his evil deeds.

Now the doctrine that the Independent Ministers teach for the gathering of
Churches and admitting of members, and joining and jumbling of them together,
was never taught by Christ nor any of his Apostles, for they themselves
confess it is a new way, and a newborn truth, and a new light, and therefore
not the doctrine of Christ, and therefore such novelties are not to be
entertained nor embraced, nor the teachers of them, if we will be obedient to
Apostolical precepts: I desire therefore those of the Independent brethren to
produce any one testimony, or any one president out of the Word of God, where
these things following are taught or have been practiced. First; that although
men and women believe and are baptized, they are not yet to be admitted as
joined members till they have walked some time in fellowship with the church
for approbation of their conversation; this is the first thing; I desire of the
brethren either a precept or an example for this in Gods Word. The second,
where it is commanded that those that believe and are baptized should not be
admitted as members of the church, without a public confession of their faith
before the church. The third, where it is enjoined, that to their faith and
baptism, they should bring in the evidences of the truth of their conversion
before they can be capable of their membership. The fourth, where it is
commanded that they should enter into a solemn and private covenant before
they can be admitted to Church Fellowship. The fifth, where it is imposed upon
those that believe and are baptized, that they should not be received into the
church without the consent of the congregation. Sixthly, where it is commanded
that the Ministers of the Gospel shall run about from their own places and
charges into the sheepfolds of their fellow-shepheards, and separate and pick
out all their best sheep and bring them into their own folds, and debar them
from all church fellowship and communicating with the other believers in Gods
holy Ordinances and Sacraments; or where ever it is commanded that the
preachers of the gospel shall gather believing christians from amongst
believing christians and separate them from the other sheep, into Independent
congregations, and shall proclaim all that are not thus molded up after this
new model, to be people out of covenant, and to have no right to the seals of
the new covenant, neither they nor their children, though believers.

All these things I desire the brethren by evident places of the holy Scripture
to make good and to confirm, or by any president or example to declare to have
been practiced either by Christ or his blessed Apostles; for I look for a law
from Christ the King of his church, who was as faithful in the house of God as
Moses was, and has not left the ordering and disposing of his church to the
will of men, but has commanded the church to hear his voice, who is the great
Pastor and Bishop of our souls, and the teacher of his church; his Word
therefore I look for, for a warrant for the ratifying of all these doctrines;
and I have good ground and reason to demand of them a warrant and authority out
of Gods Word for what they both teach and practice; for we are taught by Christ
the only Prophet of his church, that they that serve God after the precepts of
men, offer him a vain worship: and it stands with all good reason, that if all
humane traditions, though of never so ancient standing, and of never so long
antiquity were all cast out of the church, because they had no footing or
ground in Gods Word, that all novelties or new inventions of men (which
notwithstanding are imposed upon the people as the ways of God) should be
abrogated and nullified and cast out of the church.

It is recorded in holy writ, Joshua 9. that the Gibeonites deceived Joshua and
the people of Israel, under pretense that they came from a far country, and
for proof of that they produced their moldy bread, and their tattered boots
and their old shoes, and they taking what they said, pro confesso, and not
consulting with the mouth of the Lord (as it is fully related in that chapter)
were deceived by them, and entered into a League with their enemies: And thus
the Papists and Prelates, for these many hundred years, have deluded the world,
under pretense of their moldy antiquities and tattered rags of traditions,
and in all this time they prevailed to mislead the poor people, because they
consulted not with the mouth of God, nor examined things by the Word of God and
the holy Scripture, as the noble Bereans did.

Now whatsoever was written, was written for our instruction, upon whom the
ends of the world are come; and therefore as it was the error of the
Israelites that they received things barely upon report, without consulting
with the mouth of God; and as it was the honor and praise of those noble
Bereans, that they searched the Scriptures to see whether the preaching of Paul
were according to the holy Scripture: so if we shall receive these newborn
truths, these new lights, these new ways without consulting with the living
Oracles, we shall offend as the Israelites did in believing the Gibeonites upon
their words, and shall degenerate and be unlike to those the renowned Bereans,
who would not receive Paul's doctrine, though an Apostle, without searching the
Scriptures, whether things were so or no, as he taught them: and surely now
much more ought we to try all things by the Word in these erroneous times;
whosoever they be that preach them unto us, and if they be not evidently proved
unto us out of the Scriptures, we may not admit of them, for it will be not
only a sin, but for our immortal shame, to be deluded with novelties, much
more than it was our ancestors disgrace to be deceived by pretended antiquities.

And therefore it is the duty of every christian seriously to consider with
themselves, that these are matters of God, and concern no less than our
eternal welfare; and in that regard, we may not call men's ways, Gods ways
but we are to seek for the old ways, Jer. 6. we are to examine Christ's and his
holy Apostles ways in gathering of churches and making of members, and if we
find no footstep in all Gods Word of these new ways, we ought to relinquish
them and turn again into the paths that God has commanded us to walk in,
wherein we shall be sure to find rest for our souls and comfort in life and
death and it will be no disgrace to any to be undeceived; for they are
deceived, and that, greatly and dangerously, that think or believe, that any
men mortal can show or teach a better way to Heaven, or set down a better way
of converting souls and of gathering of churches and making of members and of
setting up Christ as King upon his Throne, than that which Christ himself and
his blessed Apostles have taught and set down to all posterity; and from the
which rule we ought not to swerve, though an Angel from Heaven should teach us
otherwise, Gal. 1. ver. 8, 9.

When therefore the Ministers of the church of England follow Christ's and his
Apostles way and method in their teaching and for the converting of men, and
hear only the voice of Christ their King, and the christian believers through
the Kngdome under their ministries, do all faithfully cleave unto the written
Word and square both their faith and obedience according to that rule; there is
no just cause why the Independents should proclaim them all enemies of Christ
and his Kingdom, and such as oppose his royalty; and preach up themselves and
their congregations as the only people of God and his Saints, and account all
those that dissent from them as opposers of Christ's government, telling the
people in their Sermons, that they come over from beyond the seas, thinking
that they would have set up Christ upon his Throne, and that they would have
embraced him for their King, and would have established his government, and
have gone on in a church way, and have set up the ways of God; but they find
it otherwise, that they deny and disclaim and preach against Christ's Kingly
government, and persecute the ways of the Lord Christ; so that they can find
more favor from moderate Papists and common Protestants than from them, by
which their dealing, say the brethren, they have so taken off the edge of Gods
peoples affection from them, that the Saints and servants of God cannot pray
for them, proclaiming themselves the Saints and people of God, as if all the
other believers through the Kingdom dissenting from them, in their opinions
were no Saints nor people of God.

Nay, they affirm it in their Pulpits and in every Pamphlet, that both
Ministers and people are enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, and all such
as will not join with them in their new ways: And one of them not long since
affirmed unto me, that the church of England was a Strumpet and an arrant
Whore, and that she being once a Whore, could never be presented unto Christ
as a chaste Spouse: which was an expression not only uncivil and unbeseeming
a christian, but untrue also; for grant she had been so, she is now come out
of Babylon, and has entered into a public covenant against her; and we read of
Juda and Samaria, howsoever they had defiled themselves and played the Harlots,
yet upon their unfeigned repentance and true faith in Jesus Christ and renewing
their covenant publicly of new obedience, were presented unto Christ as a
chaste Spouse, so that what is impossible with man is possible with God.

But this is the general opinion of the brethren. and howsoever they will not
all of them speak it out in plain words, as some of them do, yet they preach
and practice a separation from all our assemblies and congregations, as from a
people not to be communicated with, and declare that by their deeds, which
they will not as yet publish in their writings, nor express words as he did.

And one of the Independent Ministers not long since, denouncing Gods
judgments against all those that would not assent unto their new ways, nor
light their candles at their new lights, nor embrace their newborn truths,
told them, that by their standing out against the ways of God (for so they
suppose these are) and by their unkind usage of the Saints, and persecuting of
them, they would at last drive from amongst them the praying people (meaning
themselves, as if no other prayed but they only) and then they might look that
the judgments of God would speedily come down upon them, as it happened to
the Lutherans in Maydenburge in Germany, who thrust out all the Calvanists out
of their Town, a praying people, and immediately after, the enemy came upon
them with fire and sword and destroyed them all.

With these and such like expressions are their preachments stuffed, and to say
the truth of many of their Sermons, they are like Tailors cushions, consisting
of a hundred several shreds of various colors, all independent, making a fine
show, but comely no where but in a Tailors shop: and surely such kind of
expressions as these are may beseem their Pulpits, but no grave and learned
honest men's; for they have no just cause to complain of persecution amongst
us, it is a calumny; neither deal they christianly with us, to accuse us that
we oppose the ways of God, for we do not so; we only contend for the faith
once delivered to the Saints, and against the ways of men, and such as were
brought into the Church by the cunning craftiness of some, and thrust upon the
people as the Laws and Ordinances and ways of God, when they are but their
own inventions, and tend to no edification, but to the trouble and disturbance
of Church and State, and such as already have brought a confusion upon us all,
and if the Lord does not speedily from Heaven send his helping hand, we can
expect nothing but desolation, and all from these devisions that their new
ways have brought in, and therefore it is high time for all good christians
and such as love the peace of Sion, more exactly to examine all these new
ways; and to put them upon the proof of them.

But that the brethren should complain of persecution amongst us, and of evil
usage, it is against all reason and humanity, and shows little gratitude in
them to all the christians both through city and country; for if they remember
when they came over, though they had deserted the cause when they had most need
of them, they were more honored then any of those famous and learned Ministers
that had undergone the labor and heat of the day, and they were preferred
before them all, and settled in the prime Lectures of the Kingdom, and had more
honorable maintenance than was usually given to any Lectures before them; and
therefore they deal not brotherly in none of all their proceedings, nor
humanely so to asperse them as they ordinarily do both publicly and privately.

I am confident there is not such a president in the world of humanity as that
showed here to them; it is well known, and their books and practices declare
it, that they preach new ways, newborn truths, and set up new lights: Now
where was it ever heard of either in the Christian or Pagan world, that it was
ever permitted unto any Ministers or Preachers to have all the Pulpits in any
nation to preach a diverse doctrine, to that which is set up by authority, and
such as tends to make a faction and devision amongst the people? I do most
assuredly believe that there cannot the like president be produced.

Amongst the Heathen, the Jewish Religion in many countries was tolerated; but
they were confined to their own Sinagogues, they might not come in the
Heathens Pulpits to preach up the Jewish worship amongst them or to set up
another service contrary to the custom of the Nation: It was an abomination to
the Egyptians that the Jews should sacrifice in their land, they would not
have suffered them then to have preached up their Religion in all their Pulpits.

In Turkey at this day Christians in many places have the liberty of their
consciences amongst themselves, and have their places for worship to assemble
in; but they are not so much as permitted to come into their Temples, much
less to preach up their Religion in their Pulpits.

In France the Protestants are permitted to preach, but it is only in such
places as are appointed for them, they may not preach in popish Pulpits, that
is not permitted unto them.

In the Low countries there is liberty of conscience, which they so much plead
for (of which afterward) and yet the diverse sects that are there, are not
suffered to preach out of those places assigned unto them, or to preach
publicly in any of their Pulpits against the Religion established by
authority, neither are they permitted to unchristian them or unchurch them, and
publicly and in print to proclaim them enemies, of Christ's government; and if
any should dare attempt such a thing, or go about to disgrace their Ministers
and church government, or in the least entrench upon the Mrgistrates authority,
they would be made fly like lightning before thunder.

And yet the brethren among us have the liberty of all the Pulpits through the
Kingdom without control, and vent all their new ways and their newborn
truths, and set up their new lights without any molestation, and have all
respectfull usage and the only esteem of the people, and are more followed
than all our learned, godly and painful orthodox Ministers, and yet they cry
out of persecution, and unchurch and unchristian us all, and proclaim both
Ministers and people all enemies of Christ and his Kingdom, and count of us
little better than of Infidels, and keep our children from baptism, and
debar us from communion with them, and exercise a kind of absolute lordship
over all their brethren, so as Deotraphes never did the like, nor the Pope
more, and yet they cry out of persecution against the Saints, and lay odious
aspersions upon their brethren and fellow-Presbiters, persuading the people
that the presbiterian way will be as bad or worse than that of the Prelates.

But if we as duly examine the manner of the Independent government, and
compare it with the Presbiterian, as we have done the manner of their preaching
with theirs, we shall find there is little reason why they should so villipend
the Presbiterian and magnify their own, and why they should make it so
hateful and odious to the people; laying aside therefore all prejudice, let us
examine things with deliberation, and then it will be soon evident, that the
Presbiterian government is not as bad or worse than that of the Prelates, nor so
lordly as that of the Independent government which is also Presbyterian, and
they as well Presbyters as their brethren.

It is well known that the Prelates assumed and arrogated unto themselves to be
the only Pastors of their Diocesses, and ruled all the Ministers and people
under them by their own authority and spoiled all both Minsters and people,
and the several congregations under them of their liberty, and made them all
both Ministers and people their vassals and slaves, and from whose Courts there
was no appeal: Whereas the Presbiterian manner of government is not as that of
Lords and Masters over Subjects and Servants, but sociall as between equals,
between brethren, friends and colleges, who all judge and are all judged
according to the Word of God, where no congregation is above another
congregation, no Minister is above another Minister, but only for order-sake,
where every Presbiter is left to enjoy the whole office of a Presbiter, and
each congregation to the freedom of a congregation, and what belongs unto
them, and they able to perform it, and the classes to corroborate and
strengthen them.

And if any man be wronged by the Presbitry, he may have the benefit of his
appeal, and be cleared by more righteous Judges (a course ever followed by the
Churches, and agreeable to the light of nature) so that I say, if men would
without a prejudicate opinion weigh and consider all things, and compare the
government of the Prelates with that of the Presbiterian, they would speedily be
undeceived. And again, if they would compare the Presbiterian government
dependent with the Presbiterian government independent, they would have more
honorable thoughts of the one and a less esteem of the other; for in the
Presbiterian government independent, they exercise a kind of absolute power and
sovereignty amongst themselves in every of their several Churches or
congregations; so that if two or three of the Presbiters be malicious or
self-willed, or corrupt or heretical, as it happens many times, and by their
learning or eloquence or great abilities of wit and schollership, or by their
wealth or power, the congregation perhaps consisting of many poor people, and
it may be ignorant, who are relieved by them, and whose favor they dare not
forfeit, if they prevailing with the major part of the congregation (as
commonly the poor people are like a company of wild Gees, who which way soever
their leader flies they all follow) I say, if they do once deliver a man to
satan, and will not by any art of persuasion be induced to reverse their
unrighteous sentence, the innocent and wronged man must live under this doom
all the days of his life without any remedy, and must be held by all the
Churches of Christ (that are after that new model) to whom their sentence is
given notice of as an excommunicated person and shunned accordingly, they have
no power to absolve or help him, and from which he has no benefit of appeal.

And this that I now speak, there is not any of the brethren that is well
verst in the grounds of that kind of government, that either will or can deny
it: And this rigor to my knowledge, both in the low Countries in the several
congregations of the English there, and in some here in England among us was
the cause of making so many several sects; for when they were cast out of one
congregation, for some particular opinion, in the which they differed from
them, the other churches and congregations of the same mould and profession
could not absolve them, nor durst not receive them into church fellowship with
them, without an attestation from the church, out of which they were
excommunicated of their christian walking amongst them, or had given
satisfaction to that church of which they had been members, and that they would
never be brought unto conceiving that the wrong was theirs, who complained as
unjustly excommunicated, neither would they relinquish their opinion, as being
persuaded it was grounded upon the Word of God; whereupon they finding others
of their own opinion joined themselves into a new society and congregation,
and had a peculiar church by themselves, and this has been one of the chiefest
causes of all these rents and devisions we now see every where; for when they
are upon every slight occasion, or for any difference in opinion cast out then
they congregate a new church by themselves, and turn Pastors.

The which, blessed be God, in the reformed churches of France and Germany,
has not yet been seen since the first reformation; for the governing of
Churches by the Common-counsell of their Presbiters, where they find such
brotherly dealing, and where they have their appeals upon any conceived wrong
or injury, and have right and justice done them, makes them willingly submit
themselves to that manner of government, without making rents and scismes: And
truly, if things were but maturely weighed, all men would readily perceive that
there is no just ground of reproach to be laid upon the Presbiters, neither
would they see any reason, why, in way of disdain, the Ministers of the Church
of England should be more called Presbiterians than the Independent Ministers;
for they also are Presbiterians, and labor to set up a presbiterian government
as well as the other, and profess in their writings that they contend for the
ancient presbitry, so that they also are presbiterians as well as the other;
and if the one be made hateful and formidable to the people, in the judgment
of all solid men, the other also may be made as odious and hateful; for if
that odium and hatred they bring upon the presbitry, be for the only fear,
they have conceived the Presbiters will lord it too much over them, and that
only I say, be the occasion that so terrifies the people from that government;
let all men here consider and compare each kind of presbitry together, both
that of the Dependent and that of the Independent; for if the Independent
Presbiters in the infancy and very first beginning and rise of their government
assume unto every several congregation and presbitry of theirs, an absolute
kind of sovereignty and jurisdiction from which there is no appeal, and if
they already take upon them to unchurch all Churches but their own, and
proclaim all the Ministers and people, but those of their own congregations,
professed enemies of Christ's Kingdom; what would they do if they were once
established by authority in their several Jurisdictions and Assemblies? and if
now they will admit of none into their several Assemblies, though never so
eminent believers, but upon their own conditions, and unless they will be
admitted members upon such terms as they propound, without either precept or
president out of the Word of God for their so doing (which is the greatest
tyranny of the world) how would these men lord it if their government were once
established by Parliament? It is well known and can sufficiently be proved,
that godly christians and people of approved integrity and of holy
conversation, against whom they had no exception either for doctrine or
manners, and who offered themselves to be admitted members upon their own
conditions, and yet were not suffered to be joined members, only because they
were poor; and this very reason was given unto them for their not admission,
that they would not have their Church over butdened with poor.

And others desiring that their Children might be baptized in their
Congregations, and going to the Ministers of those Assemblies to entreat this
favor, that their children might be baptized among them. For answer, it was
told them; that they could baptize none but such as were infants of their
joined members (which is their practice) and wished them first to be made
joined members in one of their Churches: Whereupon they thought that there was
no congregation fitter for them to join to, than to that Pastors Assembly that
had given them this counsel, and therefore applied themselves unto him, and
desired that they might be admitted joined members: for answer, it was replied,
that the congregation of which he was Pastor, consisted of great personages,
Knights, Ladies and rich Merchants, and such people as they being but poor,
could not walk so suitably with them; withal he said, he could do nothing
without the consent of the Congregation, wherefore he persuaded them to join
themselves to some other Congregation among poor people, where they might
better walk, and more comfortably in fellowship with them, so that the last
news I heard of this business, was that the children were neither baptized nor
the poor men admitted to be joint members of that Congregation.

What their Ministers have done since I know not, but I well perceive, it is as
great a difficulty for a poor man to get into some of their Congregations, as
to get into Suttons-Hospitall; and that I conceive to be the only occasion
that makes some walk so long in many Congregations before they come to be
admitted members, for if they be rich they are speedily received, nay invited
to be members.

It is too well known, that many godly and holy people have left their native
country, and transporttd themselves over into New England, where this
government is set up, only that they might enjoy the Ordinances there in their
purity, they were believers before they went, and were baptized, and such as
were known before they went thither to be the dear servants of God; but when
they came there (especially if they be poor) they make them walk some a year,
some more, yea, some six or seven before they can be admitted members of their
Congregations, and they baptize none of those children that are borne there
before their parents be joined members; and except they will in all things
conform themselves to their own conditions, they shall never be admitted.

And sometime the man only is admitted and his wife left out still to walk,
and sometime the wife is admitted and the man left out still to walk, and both
these notwithstanding are believers and baptized; and after with a great deal
of difficulty, they are admitted to be members, a very small offense will be
sufficient to cast them out again, if they be poor. But for stories of this
nature, I do not love to multiply them; but I have heard many of this kind
from those places, and from such as have been in New England, and men both then
and now no way evilly affected either to the place or people, serving God there.

But it is too notorious, they lord it there over Gods poor Clergies in the
superlative degree, and every man that has but eyes in his head may see it here
in England in their congregations, what difference they make between the rich
and poor, and that they have the faith, of the Lord Jesus Christ in respect of
persons, a sin in Saint James his time highly blamed in christians, James 2.
and as in their carriage toward the poor, they are very lofty, and look for
great observance and attendance from them wheresoever they come, so likewise a
little thing will displease them, if they speak a word amiss, it is enough to
be cast out of the Congregation; presidents of this nature might be brought
many: And if all this be not to lord it over Gods Clergies, I know not what it
is; to admit of none, though believers, and already baptized, but such as will
come in upon their own terms, and keep out the poor either altogether, or
as long as pleases them, without any other reason but because they are poor,
and cast them out again upon every slender occasion; I say, if all this be not
a most diabolical tyranny and lording it over Gods Clergies, I refer it to
any moderate man to judge of; and if to unchurch all churches but their own,
and at one blast to proclaim them all enemies of Christ and his Kingdom, and
to deny all church fellowship with them, be not more than a Diotrephian,
prelaticall and papal authority there was never any in the world, and if this
be not to lord it over Gods Clergies, there was never any known.

Now I say, if the Independent Presbiters do so timely begin their absolute
lording of it, what would they do if their government were established by
authority? Their ministry and government is far different from that of Christ
and his holy Prophets and Apostles, for they invited all the poor to come in
and to buy milk, yea, to come in and buy milk without money, Isa. 55.1. and
Saint Paul for the encouraging the poor to come in, says, not many mighty not
many noble, but the mean and contemptible things has the Lord made choice of;
intimating unto the poor, that they have as good right to Heaven as the
greatest and chiefest; and our Savior Christ says, come unto me all ye that
are weary and heavy laden, and ye shall find rest unto your souls: Our Savior
has no respect of persons, but the poor are with him as acceptable as the
rich, if they be weary and heavy laden with their sins; for that is all the
condition that Christ requires, in all that desire to be admitted members of
his Church.

Now when these Presbiters already make so great difference between the poor
and the rich, and between believers and believers, as they will admit none but
at their own times, and upon their own conditions, I do conceive that this is
a most tyrannically lording it over Gods Clergies and inheritance; which when
they daily do it, and the Presbiters of the Church of England do it not, it
is most apparent that their rule and domination is more prelaticall and more to
be feared than that of the Presbiters of the Church of England; for from the
independent Presbiters they can never expect any appeal for relief and
redress, whatsoever wrong or injury they have sustained by them; and therefore
there is no just cause why any should so traduce the Presbitry of the Church of
England, as to think they will lord it over the people, from whom they may ever
expect far better measure than ever they can from the independent Presbitry,
which if it should once be established, would tend to nothing else but to
enslave the whole Kingdom, and to bring in a confusion upon both Church and
State.

But now it will not be amiss before the conclusion, as we have compared the
Presbiters of the Church of England with the Presbiters independent, both in
regard of their doctrine and discipline; so now likewise here to paragonate
them together, in their proceedings for the advancement of Christ's Kingdom,
that all men may see in that regard also, which of their endeavors tend most
to the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and which of them ought to
be preferred before other, and which of them does more really and truly tend
not only to Gods glory but to the peace also of the Church and State: For the
Presbiters of the Church of England, they labor and endeavor, as there is but
one body, one spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
Father over all, who is above all, and through all, and one true christian
Religion, Ephesians. 4. so that this only may be established, through the three
Kingdoms; and that all erroneous ways of worshipping and serving God, and
that tends to lead men to perdition, and make disturbance in Church and State,
may not publicly be tolerated: The Independents on the contary, both publicly
and privately, and in all their bitter railing and intolerable pamphlets, as
that of the compassionate Samaritan, the storming of Antichrist, and that of
the arraignment of persecution, and in many more of their scurrilous writings,
plead for a toleration of all Religions (under pretense of liberty of
conscience) whatsoever they be, as Judiansme, Turcisme, Popery, Paganism, and
all manner of sects, and for the confirming of this their diabolical tenent,
they bring in the example of the heathen Nations, who suffered all Religions
amongst them; and the example of Poland, Transsilvania and Holland, those
pantheons of all Religions, and tell us of the Parable where Christ commanded
that the Tares and the Wheat should be suffered to grow together till the
harvest, the day of judgment: And use or abuse rather some other places of
Scripture, which as they conceive make all for a toleration of all Religions.

To all which their pretenses, I shall at this time briefly answer, after I
have set down some grounds out of holy Scripture, and produced some examples
of Gods dear children friends and servants out of the same, which must be the
warrant of all christians to follow to the end of the world; for whatsoever was
written before was written for our learning, 1 Cor. 10. Romans 15. and by the
Word of God, and from the example of Gods serants, we are ever taught, that
diversity of Religions amongst Christians ought not to be tolerated.

And first to begin with Abraham, the Father of the faithful, and his seed,
whose examples, all that are his and their children, oughtto set before their
eyes for imitation: The Lord called Abraham, as it is in Joshua 24. out of his
Father Terah's house, and from his kindred, when they served other Gods, and
made a covenant with him, as it is at large set down in the 12. of Genesis,
and in diverse other places of the same book, and in special in the 17. of
Genesis, verse 1, 2, 3, etc. where the Lord renews his covenant with him and
his seed, and sets down the conditions of his covenant with Abraham, which
was, that Abraham should walk before him and be perfect, and that then he would
be his God al sufficient to provide for him and protect him wheresoever he
came; which covenant the Lord ever kept with Abraham and his seed, delivering
them out of the hands of all their enemies, when they served him according to
the conditions of the covenant, walking uprightly before him (as he will do to
all his children to the end of the world, walking in father Abraham's steps)
and of Abraham the Lord says this, in the 18. of Genesis, ver. 17, 18, 19.
Shall I hide from Abraham that which I do, seeing that Abraham shall become a
great and a mighty Nation, and all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed in
him? for I know him, that he will command his children and household after him,
that they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that
the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him, etc.

In these words, we have Gods testimony of Abraham, in the which he gives this
witness of him, that he would command his children and household after him,
that they should keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment: Then it
is manifest, that Abraham tolerated neither in his children, nor in his
household any Religion contrary unto that that God had taught him, nor suffered
no Idolatry nor sects in his family, for this had not been to walk uprightly
before God, for it had been unjust dealing with God so to have done; for
Abraham and his seed were to walk perfectly and sincerely before God, and
therefore he would never tolerate all Religions or the worshipping of a false
God, or the worship of the true God after a false manner, which also is
idolatry, for this had not been to do justice and judgment; but Abraham set
up the true worship of God wheresoever he came, as the whole story of his life
does abundantly declare: And so did Isaac after him, and Jacob after him, as in
the 33. of Genesis does appear, where Jacob said, unto his household and to all
that were with him, put away the strange gods that are among you, and be
clean, and change your garments, and let us arise and go up to Bethel, and I
will make there an Altar unto God who answered me in the day of my distress,
and was with me in the way which I went; and they gave unto Jacob all the
strange gods that were in their hands, and Jacob hid them under the Oak that
was at Sechem, and the terror of God was upon the cities which were round
about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.

In these words we have a president for imitation with the fruit and benefit
that does redound to al those people and Nations that set up the true worship
of God, and root out all idolatry and false worship out of their families and
countries; for Jacob gives no toleration in his house nor amongst his people
for all Religions, or for any other but that which God himself had appointed;
he sets up the true worship of God, and that only within his Jurisdiction and
buries all the Idols, of what price and how rich soever they were, and he found
the comfort and benefit of this his so doing; for the Lord for this his
faithful service, blessed him and protected him from the fury of all his
provoked enemies; for the terror of God was upon them all, so that they durst
not pursue him.

And if we take notice in our reading of the holy Scriptures, we shall find and
that through the whole Word of God that the Lord ever followed that people and
those Kings and governors and their whole Kingdoms and countries with
special blessings and singular favors that purged their country from idolatry
and all false worships, and struck a terror into all their enemies round about
them; neither did they ever purge their countries from idolatry, and root out
idolaters, but the anger of the Lord was presently appeased by it, and it is
always recorded to the eternal praise and honor of those Kings, Rulers and
Judges that were most forward in reformation, and that set more thoroughly upon
that good work of reformation; and those that did things but to the halves in
reformation, have not so honorable a testimony in holy Scripture as the other:
and that God has ever been pleased when idolatry has been rooted out, and
idolaters put to death, there be many presidents of it in the Word of God.

Amongst others, that in the 32. of Exodus, how highly was God displeased there
with the making of that Calfe? and how well was he pleased when execution was
done upon the contrivers and authors of that idolatry? that place sufficiently
declares, yea, in the 13. of Deuteronomie, the Lord declaring how much he
detesteth idolatry and all false worship, gives a dispensation to children for
disobedience to their parents (who by his law they are bound to obey) in Gods
matters; so that if those of their nighest relations should go about to entice
any to idolatry, or to the worshipping of false gods, or the true God in a
false manner, or should endeavor but to bring in another Riligion than that
the Lord had appointed, that then they should bring them forth and have justice
done against them; so that God abhors that any Religion amongst his own
people should be tolerated or set up besides that he himself has commanded;
and he had forbid in his law, that any man should make to themselves any graven
Image, or set up any way of worshipping him but that which he himself had
ordained and enjoined, and commanded that they that should attempt any such
thing should be put to death.

We see likewise what Joshua did according to the commandment of God, who
ought to be a pattern to all christians, and all christian Magistrates, chap.
24. ver. 14.15, 16. Now therefore (says he) fear the Lord and serve him in
sincerity and in truth, and put away the gods which your Fathers served on the
other side of the flood and in Egypt, and serve ye the Lord; and if it seem
evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve,
whether the gods which your Fathers served that were on the other side of the
flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but for me and my
house we will serve the Lord: And the people answered and said, God forbid that
we should forsake the Lord and serve other gods, for the Lord our God is he
that brought us up and our Fathers out of the land of Egypt, out of the house
of bondage, etc.

Here we may observe, first, that Joshua injoynes them to serve the Lord in
sincerity and in truth, and that they might do that, to put away all their
idols; he gives no toleration of all Religions: and the like may be said of
Joshua, Jos. 24.15. and that they might with the more alacrity yield obedience
to God's command, he sets his own example before their eyes, with his
resolution, which was, that both he and his household would serve the Lord only
and set up his worship, and all the people likewise assented to do the same,
and gave their reason why they would serve the Lord, and tolerate no other
Religion, because say they, the Lord has brought us up out of the land of
Egypt and out of the house of bondage and made us his peculiar people, and
therefore they resolved to serve him only, and tolerate no other service
amongst them but that which God himself had commanded and appointed: And this
example of Joshua and the people of Israel is left to all the people of God, to
all ages for imitation, whose duty it is to set up the true worship of God
only amongst them, and none but that which Christ their Redeemer, King and
Lawgiver has enjoined them; and therefore all such as would have all Religions
tolerared, do exceedingly forget themselves, and are highly unthankful to
Christ their King and Redeemer.

And if we look into the story of the Judges, the book following that of
Joshua, when this generation was dead, and that they had forgot their covenant,
and began to tolerate all religions amongst them, they brought down all those
plagues upon themselves by it, that were written in the law of Moses; and for no
other cause, says the holy Scripture, but for that they set up those Religions
the heathens had served their gods by, as is manifest from the sixth chapter;
for when the people cried unto the Lord because of the Midianites; the Lord
sent a Prophet unto them first, who told them that the cause of all the
judgments was, because they had not obeyed the voice of the Lord, but had
served the gods of the nations which he had forbidden them: and afterward he
sent an Angel unto Gideon, and commanded him to break down the Altar af Baal
which his father had, and to cut down the Grove that was by it, and to set up
an Altar to the Lord: In the first place Gideon was enjoined to root out
idolatry, and then to set up Gods true worship only; here we find no
toleration of any Religion but the true Religion, when they set upon the work
of reformation and when the men of the City made inquiry after him that had
broken down the Altar and cut down the Grove, and would have put him to death,
it is related, that Ioash the Father of Gideon said to all that stood against
him, Will ye plead for Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him let
him be put to death whiles it is yet morning, if he be a god let him plead for
himself, because one has cast down his Altar: Here we find no toleration of
Baal's Religion, but that they that would plead for him should be put to death;
and surely, those that will plead for a toleration of all Religions, do no
less than fight against God.

But now let us see what Elias did, 1 King. 18. ver. 21. (who was counted as
the Chariot and Horsemen of Israel) with Baals Priests, and what he said to
all those of his times, How long (says he to the people) will ye halt between
two Religions? if the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal be God then follow
him. The holy Prophet would not admit, of a toleration of all Religions, but
when God had miraculonsly manifested from Heaven that Elias his Religion was
the true Religion, and which God in his holy Word had established, all Baals
Priests were put to death, and that by Elias his command, who said, Take the
Prophets of Baal let none of them escape, and they took them, and Elias took
them and brought them down to the Brook Kishon and slew them there. And so
upon all reformations, all other Religions were cast out but the true Religion,
as we may see through the whole Scripture, as in the stories of the Kings and
Chronicles, and those of Nehemiah and Ezra and through all the Prophets; and
the Lord in the second of Jeremiah complains against his people, that they
had forsaken the fountains of living water, that is, they had forsaken the
true God and served other gods, and forsaken their maker, and had been more
unconstant than the very Heathen, who had not forsaken their idol gods, and
therefore for this their rebellion and ingratitude, the Prophet denounces all
those plagues that were written in the law against them, as all the other
Prophets did: for there is not any sin in all the old Testament that the Lord
more complains of than that of idolatry, and the toleration of many Religions
amongst them, as is most abundantly set down both in Isaiah, Jeremiah and
Ezekiel, Daniel, and in all the other Prophets, all which were written for our
learning, so that if the people of God shall imitate them in their sins, they
must look to partake with them in their plagues; for the tolerating of all
Religions would be a just provoking of the Lord our God to anger now, as it was
then. And we have sad experience already, what the tolerating of the idolatry
of the Mass, that Dagon of Ginger-bread, has brought upon us; for God will
not be mocked, if God be God, and the christian Religion of the reformed
Churches, and which we find in the holy Scriptures, and which was confirmed by
so many signs and wonders, and miracles, be the true religion, than let that
and that only be set up amongst Christians, and no other tolerated, for if
they be, they will speedily bring the plagues of God upon the Kingdom, and
confusion upon us all; as we may well perceive by the suffering of them but a
few years, what good effects they will produce: for toleration of all Religions
cannot be pleasing unto God no more in our times, than it was amongst his
ancient people the Jews, and in the primitive Churches; and therefore all
those that plead for a toleration of all Religions are no friends of Christ nor
lovers of Religion, pretend what they will; for neither Abraham, Isaac nor
Jacob, nor any of the Prophets nor holy men of God would suffer it, neither
would the Apostles ever endure it, but in all their writings give especial
charge to all the people to take heed of all the false teachers of their time,
and forewarnes them to take heed of them in all succeeding ages, ever
describing them by their crafty dealings, that they should come in sheeps
clothing, and in all-seeming holiness and fained simplicity, and therefore
that they are the more to be avoided: And Paul writing to the Galatians, in the
fifth chapter, wished and desired that the false Teachers were cut off, so far
were the holy Apostles from tolerating all Religions, as in all their Epistles
they invay against them and that continually as false Apostles and deceivers,
and command all christians to receive no other Religion but that which they had
taught them, Gal. 1. and bids the people come out of Babylon; and tells them
there is no fellowship with light and darkness, and surely if all the Prophets
and Apostles did command all the people of God to come out of Babylon, they
never gave leave to any Christians to set up Babylon amongst them, and to
tolerate the confusion and mingling together of, all Religions, for this would
be a thing not only against the Scripture and revealed will of God, but
against all solid reason and sound judgment.

Nay we see that Christ himself in writing to the seven Churches in Asia, and
in them to all Christians in the world, he blames the Angel of the Church of
Pergamus, and that of Thyatira, in the second chapter, in these words, To the
Angel in the Church of Pergamus, write these things, says he that has the
sharp sword with two edges, I know thy works and where thou dwell, even
where satan's seat is, and thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied my
faith, even in those days wherein Antipas my faithful Martyr, who was slain
among you, where satan dwells: but I have a few things against thee, because
thou have them there that hold the doctrine of Baalam, who taught Baalak to cast
a stumbling block before the children of Israel, and to eat things sacrificed
unto idols, and to commit fornication: so have thou them also that hold the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate: repent, or else I come unto
thee quickly, and will sight against thee with the sword of my mouth. And unto
the Angel of the Church of Thyatira write, these things says the Son of God,
who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass, I
know thy works and charity and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy
works and the last to be more than the first; notwithstanding I have a few
things against thee because thou suffer that woman Jezabel which calls her
self a prophetess to teach and seduce my servants to commit fornication, and
to eat things sacrificed unto idols, etc. and in the 3. chap. ver. 14. Unto the
Angel of the Church of Laodicea write these things, says the Amen, the
faithful and true Witness, the beginning of the creation of God, I know thy
works that thou art neither cold nor hot, I would thou were cold or hot; so
then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out
of my mouth, etc.

Out of the which places, it is sufficiently manifest, that it is a thing
highly displeasing unto God, that his people should give a toleration of any
Religion but that he has established and those that labor for a toleration of
all Religions must needs be lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, which is an evil
the Lord is so much displeased with, as he tells them that he will spew them out
of his mouth; and surely there is nothing that savours more of licentiousness
and earelesnesse in Religion, and want of zeal to Gods glory in any men, than
when they would bring in a toleration of all Religions: And many of them can
report, that there is no Religion in Holland, where there is a toleration of
all Religions, though it is well known that there are men in that Country of
the native Dutch people, that are as zealous for the true religion as any of
them, and are as much desirous that tolerations of all religions amongst them
were not there permitted, as they now wish a toleration of all religions were
suffered here amongst us; for they find by experience that it is an occasion of
all profaneness, and if they should have there the like occasions of civil
combustions as we have, through Gods displeasure for our sins and ingratitude
toward him, here in England, I am afraid they would find the toleration of all
those religions amongst them, would prove an intolerable thing to them, if not
the cause of the ruin of their whole Country. The Lord divert his judgments
from them, and grant that they may never taste of the miseries that we now are
acquainted with, but for tolerating of popery and Arminianisme, and the
prelaticall faction and without doubt if the suffering but of these three has
so displeased God, the tolerating of all would give him a just cause of his
more hot indignation.

But now to answer to their Objections in order; the Heathens say the
Independents suffered Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the Patriarchs and the
people of Israel where ever they came to exercise their own religion, and
tolerated all religions amongst them. For answer, let them take notice, that no
thank is due to the heathens for it (as we may see in Genesis, the 12. chap.
and the 20 chap. and chap. 26.) but only the glory of that is to be ascribed
to God who restrained them when they intended evil against them; for he
appeared to some of them in visions, and commanded them not to touch his
anointed people, and forbad them to do his Prophets any harm, and by the
special blessings that he rained down upon his people, and by his miraculous
preserving of them in fiery furnaces and in Lions dens, from the fury of
Savage-beasts, and delivering them so often out of the hands of all their
enemies, he struck such a terror into the heathen nations, that they durst not
oppress his people, so that the singular providence of God, who watches over
them always for good, was their shield and Buckler; so that what they did in
tolerating them and their Religion, was not of their good nature, but it was
Gods special favor toward his own peculiar people, and for the maintenance
of his own Cause, and that Religion which they had learned from him; and
therefore those heathenish examples are not for Christians imitation to
tolerate all Religions, who are bound to obey Gods commandments, and to follow
the example of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the holy Prophets and
Apostles, who all of them have condemned the toleration of all Religions
amongst his people, and have denounced Gods judgments against them for so
doing.

Again, we must consider the principles of the heathen Philosophers, and the
practice of all wicked godless politicians in all ages; for the Philosophers,
though they were sufficiently convinced by their natural reason, that there
was a God, and that this God was the author of all good, and the punisher of
all evil, and therefore that he ought to be feared and served of all nations
and people, yet because they by that natural light of understandding (which
was but darkness in them) could not comprehend what that infinite Majesty and
divine being and Godhead was, and were not in themselves able to set down a
description of him, nor how to conceive of that invisible Deity, nor what
worship would be most pleasing unto him (which they could never do without God
himself had revealed himself unto them as he did to his own people) they
served him after some traditions they had received from their fathers, and left
all nations, cities and families to serve God as they thought best, and
according to their own vain imaginations; and for the Atheistical
politicians of all ages, all Religions are one to them, who never regard any
one more than another, and therefore tolerate all for their own base ends, and
think it best for the enriching of all their countries (as the experience of
all ages and histories can sufficiently witness) and many of them do not
refrain to say, that Religion was only brought into the world out of policy,
and to keep people in awe; so that God of his infinite goodness having the
ordering of all men's hearts in his hands, did so dispose of all things, that by
their own principles they should give toleration of all Religions in their
several countries and jurisdictions, so that his people being scattered here
and there through other nations by their sins, yet found this favor, that
they also for the most part enjoyed the liberty of their Religion (though they
met sometimes with most hot persecutions) but all this is ever to be ascribed
to God alone (as I said before) and to his over-swaying providence and
guidance, who ever preserved those that trust in him and served him according
to his revealed will, though it be in Babylon it self, and therefore it is not
to be attributed to the good nature of the Heathen neither would that
toleration now be tolerable in Christians, who have learned Christ otherwise
than to set up any Religion but that which he the King and Prophet of his
Church has taught them.

But now I will briefly answer to what they pretend out of Scripture, and run
through the several Objections drawn from thence.

And first to begin with that of Joshua 21. where he says, choose you this day
whom you will serve, etc. In these words, by their favor, there is no
toleration of many Religions, for he was to follow the law of God, and not to
decline from it, neither to the right hand nor to the left, Joshua 1. and by
that law he was forbid to suffer or tolerate any Religion but that which Moses
had taught them; and therefore those words were a mere scrutiny, and to find
out those that were idolaters to punish them, as any wise governor may at any
time make use of the like Query, to find out men not well affected to Religion
or to their Country, that by this means they may be brought to condign
punishment: As if now any Officer or Commander, under the Parliament should say
to a company of men that he were jealous of, being desirous to discover them
and find them out choose you this day who you will serve, whether the King or
the Parliament, but for my self and my house we will serve the Parliament:
would not any by and by gather that he spoke this only to find out Malignants
to punish them? Even so Joshua a wise and religious governor did the same, not
that he over intended to give them a toleration of all religions for that had
been against the law of God and against their own example for in the 22. of
Joshua, we read that because the people had built but an Altar on the other
side of Jordan, they intended forthwith to make war upon them (a president to
teach christians that they may fight for their religion) and they had gone out
to battle against them and had destroyed them, had they not given a
satisfactory answer that they had no intent to bring in any innovation in
religion; and therefore this is but a poor cavil: Now for that they pretend
out of Gamaliel's speech, Acts 5. ver. 38, 39. where he says, Refrain from
these men (speaking of the Apostles) and let them alone, for if this counsel
or this work be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot
overthrow it, least happly ye be found fighters against God: Ergo, all
Religions are to be tolerated.

This Objection has sufficiently shown that our brethren the Independents that
thus argue, may well be made fellows of Gotham-Colledge, as knowing not as yet
their Primer in polititicks, nor their Catechism in divinity: For who knows
not that it is as easy with God who is of infinite wisdom, out of men's
foolishness to procure safety for his own people, as it was for him, out of
Achitaphels wisdom to bring destruction upon himself, and to turn his
wisdom into foolishness; for that which Gamaliel spoke was neither as a wise
man, nor as a Christian; for he would never be thought a wise man that hearing
of any commotion in the Kingdom, and had the power in his hands to suppres it,
should say if it be of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God if we
shall oppose it, we shall be found fighters against God, and therefore let us let
them alone; would not all the world think this man a Ninny, that should thus
speak, and a man unworthy to sit in counsel in any State? whereas a wise man
if he hears of any insurrection he will forthwith use the weapons of his right
hand and first seek God by prayer and in his Ordinances, and then betake
himself to the weapons of the left hand and use the sword to suppress them,
and this man would be thought a wise man that should so do, and not he that
with Gamaliel should say, if it be of men it will come to naught, and so let
them go on to do mischife: Neither did he answer as a christian; for what
christian that should hear of any new monstrous Religion newly printed and
newly come forth (as there are many at this day to be sold about town and
Country for pence apiece) and should understand that some of those ancient
heresies were again revived, as that of the Arians, Pelagians, or Nestorians,
should say let them alone, for if they be of men they will come to naught, but
if they be of God ye cannot overthrow them, lest you will be found fighters
against God, and so let the seducers go on without questioning them, or
suppressing their heresies; would not every man that has any fear of God in
him say, surely that man that should thus answer, did not speak like a
christian? for a good christian like the good Bereans would say, come let us
sit down and examine these new doctrines newly brought into the world by the
holy Scriptures, and let us follow the example of the Apostles, Act. chapter 15. in
that assembly and search the Scriptures, and if we find them not to be grounded
on the Word of God, nor to be of God, let us forthwith as God himself has
commanded, suppress them and not say, without examining of them, as wise
Gamaliel let them alone, that was not God's method; for God sent his people to
the law and to the testimony, Isa. 8 and proclaims that all that speak not
according to them, it is because there is no light in them, and that all
opinions not grounded on the Word, are but darkness and error, and therefore
they are not to be tolerated or suffered; so that for any man to gather a
toleration of all Religions from Gamaliels speech, is but to prove himself a
mere groll; and as little to the purpose is that they urge out of the words of
our Savior, Matthew. 22. where answering the Sadduces, he says, Ye doc err not
knowing the Scripture nor the power of God, v. 29. From whence the Independent
brethren conclude a toleration of all Religions, for our Savior say they,
only convinced them of their error, and yet tolerated them and suffered them
to enjoy the liberty of their conscience.

I have heard many magnify our Independent brethren for their great learning,
some affirming that they were scholars from their mothers womb, and I for my
part believe it, for ignorance of God and of his holy Word came with all men
from their mothers womb, and if such interpretations of Scripture and such
illations from them, as these be proceed not from the ignorance of God and of
the Scripture never any did; for what learned man that knows what Christ's
office was in taking humane nature upon him, when he became a Mediator and the
high Priest of our redemption, would argue as these men do; especially when
Christ has so often in holy Scripture professed of himself that he came then
to save those that were lost, and not to judge the world; for he has left that
employment till his next coming, when I am most assured these men will have a
great deal to answer for, for so abusing the holy Scriptures to maintain
their own baggatellies: Besides, Christ came to keep the law for us, which he
himself had given unto his people and took no way the office of a judge upon
him, but in scourging out the buyers and sellers out of the Temple that I
remember, and says, that he came not to break the bruised reed, or quench the
smoking flax, only he had declared his laws unto his people, Malachy the 4.
by his servant Moses, and the execution of these laws was put into the hands
of the Elders of Israel, whose place it was to punish all seducers, and who
should have performed that work of justice which our Savior declaring does not
give liberty for the tolerating of all Religions, which was against the
revealed will of God; and therefore they that will out of this place argue a
toleration of all Religions, may as well conclude, that Christ tolerated
adultery and injustice, and all manner of wickedness, because our Savior
Christ said unto those that brought the Woman to him, that was found in the
act of uncleanness, he that is without sin amongst you, let him cast the
first stone, and when her accusers were gone, said unto the woman, Woman
where are thy accusers, go thy way and sin no more. Ergo, Christ gave a
toleration for all Adulterers; and when the young man in the 16. of Luke came
to our Savior and complaining of unjustice done unto him by his brother, and
desiring him to speak unto his brother that he would divide the inheritance
with him, to whom our Savior answered, man, who made me a judge or a divider
among you? ergo, Christ gave toleration of all injustice. And because our
Savior Christ said in that Parable of the good seed that was sown and of the
tares that sprung up, that they should let them alone till the harvest, an
argument which they much depend on: Ergo, all wicked men are to be tolerated
and no justice to be done upon them till Doomsday, and they are to live
without molestation, and the Magistrate ought not to meddle with them, because
Christ said, let the good corn and the tares grow together till the harvest;
who would not admire to hear any man thus to argue, that there should be such
either folly or wickedness in the heart of man, to abuse the holy Scriptures
for their own ends? And who knows not, that it is concluded amongst all
learned men, that Simbolica Theologianon est argumentativa; and that the
Parable inferres no more, but that it is not for any private man to take upon
him the Magistrates office, or rashly to intrude himself into the place of
Rulers and Governors: But truly all such consequences may as well be gathered
from every one of the above specified Scriptures, as they gather from our
Saviors words to the Sadduces, and from the Parable of Christ for the
tolerating of all Religions, and therefore all such argumentations as these are
but poor props to uphold their Tenent: For God-hath given us that are
christians both the Law and the Gospel, by which we ought to be guided in the
serving of him, and by the which all Christians are directed what course to
take in the punishing of vice, and for the suppressing of errors and offenders,
whether they be delinquents in doctrine or manners: And although christians by
the Gospel are freed from the ceremonial law, yet we are not freed from the
substance of it; for he that said to the Israelites, be ye holy as I am holy,
says also to all christians, be ye holy as I am holy, 1 Pet. 1: so that
although the ceremony be abolished, yet the substance remains still in force;
and although the rigor of the judicial law be taken away, and christians are
not tied to that manner of administration of justice, yet the equity of that
law does still continue, and righteous judgment is every where amongst all
christians to be executed, and satisfaction to be made to all such as have been
unjustly damnified; and although we are freed from the curse, malediction and
coaction of the moral law, yet we are not freed from the obedience of it; so
that whatsoever was commanded in it to the Israelites, or forbidden them, the
same is both commanded and forbidden to all christians to the ends of the
world, and whatsoever was death by the law of God and nature then, for ought I
know, ought to be punished with death now amongst Christians as blasphemours,
wizards, witches, idolaters, and all such as despise Moses law; under the month
of two or three witnesses, if they be people within the pale of the Church, and
make profession of the Christian Religion; for Christians have nothing to do
with those that are without to judge them except they offend against the civil
and municipal laws of the country, and against the laws of nations and nature
when they live amongst them: for Christ came not to change the moral law but
to ratify it in all things. And although the Sabbath be changed in respect of
the day, yet for the holiness of the first day of the week (which is the
Christians Sabbath) and which is in place of it, I am confident it ought most
carefully to be observed, and that the whole day ought in all sanctity and
holiness to be kept, and besides the fourth Commandment for the
sanctification of a seventh day, we have the example of the primitive
Christians and blessed Apostles, who always had their meetings on the first
day of the week, and spent the whole day in the duties of piety and charity;
for in the 20. of the Acts we read, that on the first day of the week the
Disciples came together to break bread, that was for the hearing of the Word,
and for the administration of the Sacraments, and for the exercising of all
holy duties and that Paul preached there until midnight, and that when Euticus
was fallen down with sleep. Paul restored him to life again to all their
comforts; so that here we have one president, that the whole Lords day was
spent by all those Christians in the works of piety and charity. Again in the
first of the Revelations Saint John says that he was in the Spirit on the
Lord's day, that is, the first day of the week called by Saint John the Lord's
day, and there the Angel preached unto him that day, and commanded Saint John
to take so much of his Sermon by writing, as God in his wisdom thought fit to
reveal unto his Church, and he that shall diligently read what is there
written, will gather, that the whole day was taken up by Saint John and spent
in hearing, and writing, and meditating of what he had heard; for without doubt
Saint John made it his whole days work to be spiritually employed, and as the
holy Communion is called the Lord's Supper, and all the time of that action is
holily to be employed, as being ordained by Christ himself to that end; even
so the Lords day being a day dedicated unto Christ, and ordained by him for
holy duties, and for the hearing of the Word, and for the administration of the
Sacraments and prayer, the whole day ought both privately and publicly to be
taken up in the employments and works of piety and charity, as hearing, reading
meditating, prayer, repetition of Sermons in their Families, catechizing and
instructing their children and servants singing of Psalms, in visiting the
sick and them that are in prison, relieving the poor and necessitated etc.

These examples of the primitive Christians are for our imitation for so Saint
Paul in the third of the Phillippians in the 17. verse says; Brethren, be
followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an
example, for our conversation is in Heaven. And in the 4. chap. ver. 8. he
says, Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, what soever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things: Those things which ye
have both learned and received, and heard, and seen in me, do, and the God of
peace shall be with you. By the which testimonies to omit many more, we are
tied to follow the examples of the Apostles, and to imitate them in all that is
holy and good, and of good report; now it is praise worthy and of good report
to spend the whole Lords day in holy employments, and we have the Apostles
examples and the primitive Christians for so doing, and therefore we ought to
spend the whole Lords day in the works of piety and charity; and by this the
sanctifying of the Christian Sabbath, (which is every seventh day) is ratified;
the profanation of the which in the reformed Churches, and in many places
through these three Kingdoms has been one of the causes of all those heavy
judgments the whole christian world now groans under, and so much more would
the Lord be provoked by the toleration of all Religions amongst us which would
give just occasion of violating of all the Commandments of God, and of
disobedience both to God and man; for it is most sure, that the moral law is
not altered in any thing for substance, and that God that by it enjoined but
one Religion to the Israelites, and commanded them to keep that pure and
undefiled, and to punish all idolaters, blasphemers and seducers has enjoined
the same to all Christians, and has not suffered or permitted them to tolerate
all Religions or any sects or heresies which by the Apostle in the fifth of the
Galatians are called the works of the devil; and that they that do them shall
not enter into the Kingdom of God. So that those that would bring in a
toleration of all Religions, have a desire to send men to the devil.

For the examples of Poland, Transsilvania and Holland, they are no presidents
to other Nations, their politic proceedings are no examples for other
christian Countries and Nations to follow; for christians are to live by the
rule of God's Word, and Christ's their Kings laws, and to follow the examples
of his own people only in their well-doing, and not in their failings; and
therefore we are to follow the example of Abraham, Joshua Elias and the other
Patriarchs, Prophets, and holy Apostles who never tolerated all Religions. Yea,
we are commanded in Romans the 12. not to conform our selves to this world,
but that we should be transformed by the renewing of our minds, that we may
prove what is the good and the acceptable and perfect will of God. Now when by
the Word of God that acceptable and perfect will of his we are taught that he
was displeased with his people the Jews, for tolerating of all Religions
amongst them, and that he was highly offended with those christian Churches in
Asia for tolerating the doctrines of Balaan and Jezabel, we are sufficiently
taught and instructed, that Christians ought not to tolerate any other Religion
but that which Christ the only King and Lawgiver of his Church has taught
us, and that whosoever should take that authority upon them to tolerate all
Religions, would be found fighters against God, and such as deservedly would
bring down his judgments upon the Land by it; for if but conniving at evil
and consenting to it be a thing displeasing unto God, how would the tolerating
of it by a law be abominable unto his sacred and divine Majesty? for this were
to establish iniquity by a law. We are taught in the holy Scriptures, that the
consenting with a thief makes a man as guilty before God as the acting of
theevery, and that they that assented unto Jezabel in killing the Prophets,
made themselves all as guilty as Jezabel her self, and that the Heathen Romans
Romans 1. ver. 32. who knowing the judgment of God (that they which commit such
things are worthy of death) not only do the same but consent with them that
do them; made themselves as equally guilty as the actors of them, as Paul in
his bill and information put up in the Court of Heaven against them
sufficiently declares; the same did Elias in his bill of information against
the people in his time, accusing them all as equally guilty of the blood of the
Prophets, and destroying Religion as Jezabel, and only because they consented
unto it; They (says Elias) have killed thy Prophets and have broken down thy
Altars: Which they? all the people that assented unto her, as well as the
Officers and Executioners: And so our Savior in his time, accuses the people
as well as Herod for slaying of John the Baptist saying, They have done to him
what soever they pleased. They, which they? all the Nobles that sat at table
with Herod, that did not dissuade Herod from that bloody and tyrannical act,
and all the people that liked well of it: the sin of this Nation who assented
unto the bloody decrees and censures given in the High-commission-Courts, and
in the Star Chamber, and in all other unjust Courts, the people that assented
unto all their cruel censures against Gods people and liked well of it, are as
equally guilty, who would ordinarily say, that had they been Judges they would
have done the like, and that they were men worthy of death, which made them (I
say) as equally guilty as their wicked Judges and Executioners; as we may see
also in those that assented unto the Highpriests, and to the Scribes and
Pharisees in putting to death the Lord of life, they made themselves all guilty
of his blood, and by that means brought the curse of God upon them and their
children by it to this day as well as the Highpriests themselves: a fearful
sin, though the world take no notice of it, and which all these Kingdoms
have yet to repent of: Saint Paul also makes himself as guilty of Stephen's
blood, as they that stoned him, saying, When the holy Martyr Stephen was
stoned, I stood by and assented unto it, and held the garments of those that
stoned him: By which he acknowledges himself equally guilty, and so all those
that assented to all the cruelty done to the people of God in these Kingdoms,
and were approvers of their tyranny, are as guilty as the actors of it, for
consenting unto any treason or conspiracy, or with any malefactors, and all
their accomplices, both by the law of God nature and nations, makes them all
guilty before God and men, and as liable to justice and punishment as those
that acted in those malefices; and therefore those that but assent unto a
toleration of all Religions (a sin so highly displeasing unto God) are as
guilty as the actors of it; and if but consenting make them guilty, how guilty
are they then that use arguments to bring in a toleration of all Religions, and
abuse the Scriptures to this end, and plead for it, and would have it
established by a law? surely they are offenders against divine Majesty in an
elevated nature, and have a great deal to answer for it before God especially
when they do it in a most scurrilous and railing manner, by which they
manifest to all the world that they are more verst and better acquainted with
the doctrine of Billingsgate than with the language of Canaan.

But this may seem a wonderful thing to all judicious men, that that people
which within these six years were afraid of a Surplice and of the cross in
Baptism and of any popish ceremony or of any of their vain traditions and
will worship (which was their honor then) should now plead for the toleration
of the body and soul of popery, and for all other both jewish and heathenish
Religions, and all manner of sects, so destructive to that Religion, which the
King of Saints and King of Kings, and the only King of his Church, the Lord
Jesus Christ himself has taught us, and to the peace and quietness of the
Land; this I say must needs seem a monstrous thing to any moderate minded
Christian: Nay, how unreasonably do these men deal with their brethren? they
plead for a toleration of all Religions here in England and yet in New England
banish men into Islands from amongst them, for dissenting from them in their
new model of Church government, and for but dissenting from them in their
opinions about Religion; and here amongst us what impious and railing books do
they make against the Ministers for endeavoring to establish that Religion and
that church government that God himself in his holy Word has set down? and
what opprobrious names do they give the faithful and painful Preachers and
Pastors of the Church of England, calling them Baals Priests the professed
enemies of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, the limms of Antichrist, false
Prophets the brood of Babylon, terming some particular men of them Rabshekes,
others Bands, others Black mouths, legal preachers, and stiling all of them
the cursed enemies of Jesus Christ, and think of them as men not worthy to
live, and in express words profess it; and yet these men plead for a
toleration of all Religions, when both by their words and deeds they manifest,
if it were in their power, the first work they would do should be to root us
all out of the Kingdom: so that all men may see, they say one thing and mean
another, that they would tolerate all Religions, but only that which is the
true Religion, and so by that means have no Religion at all but one of their
own making, which by their new lights they have of late found out, which they
call the straight way to Heaven, and the only way of setting up Christ upon
his Throne, which is nothing else, to say the truth, but to disthrone him and
set up themselves and their new model, for who does not see how already they
lord it over all good christians, not admitting them to the Sacraments but upon
their own terms, nor suffering their children to be baptized amongst them,
nor so much as suffering any they call Presbiterians to preach in their new
congregated Assemblies: and if this be to give a toleration of any Religion but
their own, let all the world judge: but I say, and will ever by Gods
assistance be able to make it good, in that they plead for a toleration of all
Religions, they are as guilty of heinous and soul sins being accomplices, as
well as they that are actors.

Now then, when the Presbiters of the Church of England seek and endeavor in
all their proceedings to establish that Religion which Christ the King of his
Church has taught them and his blessed Apostles, and labor to set up that
government that was ordained in all Churches to be perpetuated to the end of
the world; in their so doing, they imitate all the Patriarchs, Prophets and
Apostles, and in that they do more advance Christ's Kingdom than the
Independents, who under pretense of liberty of conscience, would bring in a
toleration of all Religions and confusion upon us all. Surely, if ever any
Ministers deserved well from the people, the Ministers of England now do, who
by all their endeavors show that they seek to bring them to the knowledge of
God and of his Son Jesus Christ, and to the knowledge of themselves which is
life eternal: For what could men do more than that which they have done, who
have petitioned the house of Lords and Commons now sitting in the great
Counsel of the Kingdom, that they might be armed with authority from them in
their several charges, to have the examination of such as shall be admitted to
the Sacraments, that they may be rightly informed in the knowledge of those
holy Mysteries and that none that are either ignorant or scandalous in their
lives, may be suffered to communicate at the Lord's Table, by which their
endeavor, they show the christian care they have of their eternal welfare
(for which the people are ever bound unto them) and by the which also they take
away all scandal and occasion of offense to others which formerly pretended
that the cause of their separating from our Congregations and Assemblies was,
in regard they could not communicate with dogs and swine, and with the tagragge
and bobtaile of all the Malignants; for in such terms they usually express
themselves.

Now when the occasion of this scandal and offense is taken away by the care
of the Ministers, and all superstition and popish ceremonies, and all
will worship is also rooted out, and when the Gospel is truly and faithfully
by them preached, both in season and out of season, and the Name of God truly
invocated and the Sacraments duly and rightly administered, what just cause have
the Independents now either of separation or of traducing either Ministers or
people of being enemies of Christ and his Kingdom, when by all their
endeavors they only seek the advancement of him and his Kingdom amongst
them? I have so good an opinion of all moderate minded christians, that when
they shall seriously weigh and consider what I have here writ, and truly and
faithfully set down, that those of them that have formerly been alienated from
them will again, being now undeceived, return every one of them to their own
Pastors, by whose ministries they have been converted; and that all other
understanding men will not only have more charitable thoughts both of the
Ministers and believers of the Church of England, but will likewise look more
narrowly into, and examine more diligently all those new ways, and by finding
them out, to be indeed but new, will seek for the old way and walk in it, which
shall ever be his prayer that wishes that all men may be saved, and come to
the knowledge of the Truth.

The POSTSCRIPL.
Discovering the uncharitable dealing of the Independents toward their
christian brethren, with the juglings of many of their Pastors and Ministers,
to the misleading of the poor people to the detriment of their own souls,
and the hurt both of Church and Sat, with the danger of all novelties in
Religion; is to come forth a fortnight hence, in the which it will be proved,
that it is the duty of all christian Magistrates, Parents, Masters of Families,
and all such as truly fear God, to yield their helping hand for the
suppressing of heresies and all novelties in Religion, if they really desire
the glory of God, the salvation of their brethren and the peace of Church and
Kingdom; in the which also there is satisfactory answer given to the principal
cavils of him that writ that railing Pamphlet, styled. The falsehood of Master
William Prynne's triumphing in the Antiquity of Popish Princes and Parliaments.

FINIS.

