A TREATISE OF Adhering to God; Written by Albert the Great, Bishop of
Ratisbon. Put into English by Sir Kenelme Digby, Knight.

ALSO A Conference with a Lady about Choice of RELIGION.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the New-Exchange. 1654.

To the Lady DIGBY.
MADAM,
WHen lately I was commanded out of England, I was so streightened in time,
that I was not able to carry any thing with me, besides what I had about me.
And the difficulties that my servants met with in following me, and in
bringing my carriages after me, made me remain here sometimes in want of my
ordinary attendants, and of such necessaries as I had daily need of. I was not
so sensible of any, as of the deprivation of my books: which in all fortunes I
had ever sound my best companions; and in whose conversation I as well
profited, as pleased my self. And therefore in all my journies (even the
longest and most cumbersome) I have ever used to have a convenient store of
them with me. I was now reduced to have none other by me, but a short
discourse of Albert the great, concerning the perfection of a spiritual life;
which at my setting forth from London, I had put into my pocket; invited
thereto, by the dignity of the subject, the excellency of the author, and the
smallness of the bulk of it. I read it over with much delight; And judged it
so profitable a work, that I desired to impress the contents of it as deep as I
could in my memory: and indeed to convert the whole treatise, into the very
substance of my soul, as hoping, it may one day serve me for a rule to govern
my poor devotions by; as far as my feeble eyes may be able to see by the light
of so dazeling a sun.

This occasioned me to employ my self in rendering in my own tongue, the
expressions which this author had made in Latin. For I believe, scarce any
study does so vigorously digest an other man's notions into the nourishment of
ones own mind, as does the translating or the paraphrasing of them. And when I
had done it, I deemed it one of the most profitable tasks (of so short an one)
that ever I had busied myself about. Neither could I be content to engrosse
unto my self alone so noble a feast: I desired that my best friend should
share with me in it: whose partaking with me in any good, I must ever account,
the crowning and completing of it, to me. And therefore I presently resolved
to send your La: a copy of this discourse: which I confess, is much empayred
and enfeebled by its change of habit. For to express the authors sense with
full weight, requires alike knowledge as he had, of the matter he wrighteth
of. And this is not to be acquired by humane industry, or dint of wit: but is
an effect of the unction of the holy Ghost; that is never wanting where it
finds due preparations and dispositions on the creatures part. And in this,
Mystical Divinity differs from all other sciences, that the right
understanding of it, depends of the precedent faithful practicing it. Like
as in divine truths, he that would see the light which shines in them, must
first believe them. To converse familiarly with the kingdom of God that is
within us, requires a total abstraction from the hindering objects that are
without us. And the various course in the world, that I have run my self out
of breath in, has afforded me little means for solid recollection. Therefore
it cannot be expected that I should otherwise comprehend this holy Bishops
notions, and express them in my language; then as men use to frame
apprehensions upon hearsay of countreies they were never in; and afterward
deliver them to others. They who have bin there, will soon perceive great
mistakes in the others discourses and descriptions. And so will your Ladyship
(whom long, constant, practice has rendered so profoundly knowing in this
sublime Science,) in this translation, or rather short Paraphrase of mine. I
have been fain to make it such, because I could not satisfy my self of
rendering completely the authors sense by a verbal translation of his words. The
composition of Authors are either forged in their fantasy; or are productions
of their understanding; or are expressions of their affective part. All these
(I conceive) do claim a different course to be taken in rendering them in
another tongue. Those of the first kind do exact a strict verbal translation.
For they springing from notions that have their residence in the fancy, and
being barely of that low orb: plain words, that have their lively pictures
also there, do represent them adequately; And consequently, in an other tongue,
words of the same signification, do render them fully. But in compositions of
deep judgment (in which the manners of expression do insinuate further
meanings, then the mere words barely considered, do seem to employ) one must
use a far different method to render them with their due weight and force in an
other language. One must first comprehend the fulness of their sense, and
settle in ones own thoughts the same; and then deliver those thoughts as
completely and significantly as one can, in ones own words and manner of
expression. For want of doing which, we see the best writers lose exceedingly
of their strength and energy, when they are translated by such as confine
themselves grammatically to their authors words.

This makes Tacitus so lame, and so bare in many translations; Aristotle so
obscure and unpleasant; Avicenna so barbarous; Virgil so ungracefull; and S.
Augustine himself appear oftentimes but flat and dry. Much more this happens
in affective expression. We see how the same words that are extremely moving,
when they are spoken in passion by a lover, prove flat and cold, when an other
person barely relates them. And such an effect as the manner of gesture and
earnestness works in speaking, the like does the manner of couching the
sense, and the phrase, in writing. The Arcadia of Sr Philip Sidney (of whom I
may say as St Augustine did of Homer, that he is passing sweet and delightful,
even in his vanities) though it be very faithfully translated into other
languages, in regard of grammatical construction, yet it appears with little
grace amongst forraigners, who cannot believe how strangely that book uses to
raise affections and passions in such as read it in the original English. If
this be so in the expressions of such affections as have but creatures for
their objects, how must it fare with those which being fixed upon the Creator,
do require a profound abstraction of the understanding and an admirable purity
of heart in the readers, that they may have a right taste of them. He that will
render efficaciously the expressions of a soul burning with affections, must be
endued with a spirit of a like temper. He knows that such a one is not
sollicitous about his words: and that therefore he ought not to be scrupulous
in weighing them. The understanding cannot look to the bottom of such
expressions, nor relish the sweetness that is in them. He must abound with
affections in himself, that would savor the language of affections spoken by
an other. Hearts of this temper, are like the strings of different lutes tuned
alike, which move in both, though but one be touched. Now Alberts language in
this treatise, being much of this strain, I cannot be so partial to myself as
to hope that my English arriveth near expressing the fullness of his sense. I
may upon this occasion say as St Thomas did, when he was desired to comment
Salomons mystical Song, as St Bernard before him had don (and with much more
reason and justice;) If I had St Bernards spirit, I would make such a comment
as St Bernard did. He only that has the spirit wherewith this illuminated
Bishop wrote, can fully comprehend and render his sense in this divine and
mystical treatise. Therefore I must necessarily have fallen very short in my
translation; since it is not to be expected that I should make it speak, but at
that rate, as my self did first understand it.

Besides this improportion on my side; the Authors manner of delivering
himself has made my talk much more difficult. It is evident that he little
regarded in what words or style he expressed himself.

He was so full of the matter, that he neglected the form and dress he put it
in. And writing it in the nature of a summary remembrance, for his own use, and
some other pious and intelligent persons of his own order, his particular
friends (sor he was a Dominican Friar, before he was made a Bishop) he
conceived it sufficient for him to give but hints or notes of what he aimed at:
which would presently bring before them the whole sequel of considerations that
were comprised under such heads, and that he had often discoursed largely unto
them. And the nature of such a writing admitting frequent soddain transitions
to new matter (or that may seem new, to one that sees not the connection of it
with what was said before) it is very hard to work such a piece into an even
contexture with one entire and continued thread. The course I took to wade as
well as I could through these difficulties, was to endeavor out of what he
had said, to raise my own thoughts to be as like unto his, as my weakness
could attain unto. And then I applied my self to express those thoughts as
significantly as I could, in my own manner of speech, upon the model he has
left; (in the mean time, departing as little as I could from his words, where I
might follow them) and connecting the broken transitions, as I conceived they
were connected in his mind, though they appear not so at the first sight in
the words that he has uttered his conceptions by. Yet, notwithstanding his
being thus short throughout, he often repeateth the same thing (but still with
some addition and further explication of the matter) to inculcate it the
deeper: as is recorded of St Jo. the Evangelist; who in his latter time,
whenever he was desired to preach, did still but repeat the same few words,
by which he invited his auditors to the love that charity ordains. This
shows how the substance and perfection of a spiritual life consists in a
very narrow room. And therefore St Denis the Areopagit, who is so diffuse in
his treatises, is most succinct in his mystical divinity: as having for its
subject but that only one thing which in the Gospel our Savior tells us is
necessary.

The end of all spiritual exercise, is but to love God with the whole activity
of ones soul; And the expeditest way to bring one thereunto, is to banish all
other affections and inclinations from the heart, and all other thoughts from
ones mind. The impressions which creatures make in one are like boisterous
winds, that wrinkling the face of a water (and peradventure raising mudde in
it) do deface and keep out those images, which would shine in it, if it were
calm and smooth. He that can wisely keep his soul from adhering to any thing
without him, shall find his creator shine gloriously within him. It is the
eminence of superior things to send always emanations from them, for the
bettering of inferior ones; if they exclude them not. So we see the sun sends
his beams into every corner of the hemisphere, if nothing shut them out. Open
the windows and draw the curtains, and the chamber that before was dark will
then immediately grow lightsome. The shutters and screenes which keep out the
divine sun from illuminating and warming our souls, are the images of
creatures, that reside in them. And therefore this Authors main endeavor
consists in advising and pressing a total denudation from all such. Hence
proceeds this frequent iteration, and inculcating of this document.

Yet he does no so absolutely exclude all corporal shapes out of the
imagination, but that he advises and exhorts all men to exercise themselves
in the continual meditation of our Saviors passion. Man being composed of two
natures; spiritual and corporal; and the corporal part having in this life
gotten the start of the other, it is impossible for us, to tie up our senses
from all commerce with material objects: and very hard for us to keep some of
them from making smart impressions in our fantasy; which is as it were the
window that lets in outward lights to the soul. For the most part they are
false and deceitful ones. And the only means to be secure from such, is to
fill that storehouse with safe materials; and than were it but through want of
room, it will not admit of others. Of all these, the perfectest, and indeed the
most agreeable to our nature, and consequently the most powerful to move us,
is the history of Christ's life and passion. We see that even tragedies and
Romances, of peradventure feigned subjects (or at least that concern not us)
do strangly affect the hearers, and do raise strong passions and affections in
them with a desire to imitate what they represent well done; and a compassion
for the misfortunes and calamities that arrive undeservedly to worthy and well
natured persons. How efficacious then must the consideration of Christ's passion
and sufferings be to beget like, and far stronger sentiments in any man that
shall insiste upon them? The dignity of the person; the extremity of his base
and cruel usage; his great deservings, even from them that so treated him; his
undergoing all this, merely for our sakes, and particularly for every one of
us; and the infailable certainty that the records of all these passages are
undoubtedly true, would move a heart of stone that should entertain it self
leisurely with these thoughts.

And such compassion and tenderness for his sufferings to redeem and deliver
us from misery, will beget love and passion in us to his person. And he being
God, as well as man; our affections that thus begun divinity, which is the
period of all spiritual exercises, and the top of all perfection, in this
life; and the happiness of the next. And therefore our Savior told his
beloved and loving penitent, that the share she had chosen should never be
taken from her.

Upon these grounds Albert recommendeth the continual meditation of Christ's
passion, to be always joined with the other exercise of depuring our
imaginations, and hearts from the images and affections of all created objects
whatsoever; Making thereby a ladder of his humanity to climb up to his
divinity; which if we should look upon it without that veyle between us and it,
would strike us blind. As when a medicinal simple is too strong for our stomach
to bear singly in its own substance, physicians use to allay and weaken it with
some gentle liquor that is agreeable to our taste: and then drinking what
delights us, with pleasure we swallow health.

But Madam, I perceive I engage my self before I am aware in a talk, I am not
able to go through with. Nor is it needful, for this little treatise (of as
great value, as it is of little bulk) requires neither commentary nor
apology. My sending it to your Ladyship is an action of duty, and of
affection. The first, in giving you an account of the expense of my time in
this place, where I have bin now a just week; and intitling you to all I shall
ever do, or bring to pass, in any kind whatsoever during my whole life: And
the other, in communicating to you what has afforded me so much contentment,
and may prove so solidly beneficial to me, if it please God to give me grace to
make right use of it. I beseech your Ladyship pray him so to do, and to be
pleased to give me your blessing. Calis the 6th of October (the feast of the
glorious Patriarch of the Carthusians, who most admirably practiced and
instituted, what this treatise recommendeth) in the year 1649.

Your Ladyships most humble, most obedient, and most dutiful Son, K. D.

To my Lady Winter, the wife of Sr. John Winter, late of Liddne in the County
of Gloucester.
MADAM,
THe worthy Author giving me the view of this Translation in Paris, at my
coming from thence I begged a coppie, which he was pleased to bestow: and as
he performed the work for his private use and recreation, and after dedicated
it to his virtuous Mother the Lady Digby: So I, who have no other share then
the conveying it to be printed for the public good, do offer up my little
industry therein to your La: Yet not for this only, but that indeed I
willingly take occasion to tell the world, how much my Lady Winter is esteemed
and valued by her faithful Friend, and Kinsman,

and most humble servant, W: Gr:

A TREATISE OF Adhering to God.
CHAP. I. Of the utmost and highest perfection that it is possiblefor a man to
arrive unto in this life.
I Have been casting with my self, how I might frame for my own use, a
complete and perfect draught (as far forth as our nature is capable of in this
life's banishment and peregrination) of what is the highest and noblest action
for a man to employ himself about. And surely this is none other, then a
ready, vigorous, constant and immediate adhesion unto God Almighty; by a total
abstraction (as much as is possible) from all creatures whatsoever. For, the
end of Christian perfection is Love and Charity; by which a Soul cleaves to
her Creator. And unto this adhesion of Charity, every man in particular is
undispensably obliged under pain of loosing Heaven, so far forth as concerns
the obeying Gods commands, and the conforming himself to his Divine will:
which obedience shuts out whatsoever is repugnant to the essence and habit
of Charity; and consequently all mortal sins. But religious persons have a
further obligation then this, by having bound themselves to Evangelicall
perfection, and to such duties, as though they be but of counsill and
superogation, yet by them the way is made more ready, and more secure to bring
the observers of them to their journeys end; which is the possession, and
fruition of God. And the observance of these shuts out not only what is
destructive to Charity; but also all other obstacles that may in any wise
hinder or loose the fervor and activity of Charity, or that may retard or
slacken the souls union with God Almighty, which is in a great measure
performed, by an entire and efficacious abrenunciation of all creatures
whatsoever; even of our own selves.

Now seeing that God is a spirit, and that he ought to be adored in Spirit and
in truth; Joh. 4. (that is to say, by knowledge and love, by understanding and
affection void of all mixture with any corporeal species, or material
imaginations) hence it is that we are thus taught in the Gospel; when thou
shall pray, enter into thy chamber, that is, into the inner room of thy heart)
and shutting the door, Mat. 6. to wit, of thy senses, there with a pure heart,
a good conscience and a firm faith, pray to thy father in spirit and in truth
in secret. All which is done, when a man laying aside all other affairs and
thoughts, withdraws himself wholly into himself: and then shutting out, and
forgetting all created objects whatsoever, the superior part of his soul
only powers out before Jesus Christ her desires to her Lord God, in deep
silence, and with confident security; and in so doing, dilateth, diffuseth,
drowneth, inflameth and resolves herself into him, through the violence of
love with the whole weight of her heart, and with the utmost straining of all
her faculties and powers.

CHAP. II. How one may cleave and intend wholly to Christ, despising all other
things.
BUt he who desires, and is resolved to apply himself to such a state, must
lay down for an absolutely necessary ground, that he must shut his eyes and
all his senses to all manner of outward implications and affairs that may
cause any trouble, and must cast from him all cares and sollicitudes, as being
altogether unconcerned in any creature whatsoever, or rather looking upon them
as hurtful and pernicious to him. And then he must retire his whole life into
himself; and there have no other object to entertain his thoughts withal,
but Jesus Christ wounded and crucified. And that with a continual attention,
and with all earnestness and straining himself to his utmost power, he must
make it his only business, to pass by him into him, that is to say, by his
Manhood into his Godhead, by the wounds of his humanity, into his glory and
Divinity: and there readily and securely commit himself and all that
concerns him, to his unwearied, and al-seeing providence; according to St
Peter's expression, when he says ( casting all your care and solicitude upon
him, 1 Pet. 5. who rules and disposes all things: And to St Paul, when he
bids us be solicitous for nothing, Phil. 4. And to that direction of the
Psalm, which advises us to settle all our thoughts upon the Lord, and he will
nourish us. Psalm. 54. And to the sense of the other which says, It is good for
me to adhere to God Psalm. 74. And also of the other that tells us, how the
Royal Prophet kept the Lord always before his eyes, Psalm. 15. And like the
Soul in the Canticles that rejoices for having found him whom her soul
loved. Cant. 3. The end whereof will be, that all goods will come along in
company with that supreme good. And this is that heavenly hidden treasure, and
that pearl of inestimable value which ought to be preferred before all other
goods whatsoever, and is to be sought with strength of Spirit, and purchased
with humble confidence, with tranquillity of mind, with careful guard upon
ones tongue, with indefatigable endeavors, and even with the loss of all
outward conveniences, and of ones very honor and reputation. For otherwise
what would it avail a religious man to gain the whole world, if at the same
time he should suffer detriment in his soul? or what profits him the state
he has engaged himself in, the holiness of his profession; the habit of
perfection that he has put on; and the whole economy of his outward
conversation, unless he be enlivened with the Spirit of Humility, and truth,
where Christ dwells by faith, that is informed and quickened with charity? To
him that is in this condition it may be truly said, the kingdom of God is
within you; which is our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

CHAP. III. In what the perfect conformity of man with God consists in this
life.
IT is most certain, that by how much more a man's Soul is busied and
sollicitous about inferior and humane affairs, by so much the further she is
carried away from superior and heavenly considerations, in which consists
the flower and vigor of devotion. And by how much more intensely and fervently
ones thoughts are recollected from remembering, loving and considering of
inferior objects, and are fixed upon superior ones, by so much their proper
will be the perfecter, and their contemplation the purer. For it is impossible
that ones attention should at the same time be entirely and perfectly knit upon
two distinct objects, that are as far distant from one another, as light and
darkness are. He that adhereth to God, dwells in light: but he that is
glewed to the world is overwhelmed with darkness. And therefore the sublimer
perfection of a man in this life, is to be so united to God, that his whole
soul withal her powers and facultyes be in such sort wound up and riveted in
him; and that he remember nothing but God; and that all his affections being
united in a joyful exercise of love, do repose sweetly in the sole fruition
of their Creator. For, the image of God expressed in the Soul, consists in
these three faculties of hers: namely in the understanding, the memory, and the
will. And as long as they in any man are not entirely impressed with the stamp
of God, and the whole extent of them are not taken up with that, his soul
cannot be said to be Deiformed, or perfectly resembling the divinity,
according to the state in which the first soul was created. For, God is the
form of the soul wherewith she ought to be impressed, as wax is with a
seal, and she ought to have such a relation to him, as the copy of a picture
has to its original. But this is never completely done, but when ones reason
and understanding is perfectly illuminated (according to its capacity with the
knowledge of God, who is the supreme verity; and his will is perfectly set on
fire with the love of him who is the supreme good; and his memory is totally
absorbed in contemplating and rejoicing in his eternal happiness, and in
reposing sweetly and delightfully in that thought. Now seeing that the glory of
heavenly bliss consists in the full possession of these three, which will be
completed in the next life, it is evident that a perfect beginning of them is
the utmost perfection that our present life is capable of.

CHAP. IV. How our operations ought to be in the Intellectual part of our
Soul only, and not in our Senses.
HE therefore is happy, who by continual receiving and expunging of all
species and Images from his fantasy, and by reducing and turning his
considerations inwards, and there raising his Soul up to God, grows at
length to that pass, that he forgets all material imaginations, and has no
other entertainment for his thoughts within him, but to employ them continually
by pure and simple operations of understanding and love, about the only pure
and simple object elevated above all composition, or materiality; which is none
other but God. Be sure then that you banish out of your mind all imaginations,
pictures, and forms of all things whatsoever, that are not God; to the end
that your whole exercise and employment within you, be immediately concerning
God, and be performed singly by your understanding, and by your will and
affections. For the end of all spiritual exercises is the applying all ones
thoughts to God, the busying them singly about him, the attending to him only,
and the reposing entirely in him without any other solicitude or occupation of
the mind; and this, fingly in the intellectual part of our soul, by pure
understanding, and by vehement strain of love, without any admixture of
Corporeal imaginations. And this exercise is of so refined and pure a nature,
that the fleshly organs of the body cannot reach unto it; but it is performed
by that part of us which makes us to be men, and reasonable creatures; that is
by our understanding and our will. And therefore as long as a man entertaineth
himself with his senses, and with the picture and impressions that outward
objects do make in any of them, and dwells upon them; It may rightly be said
of him, that he has not yet grown out the motions and limits of his brutall
nature; that is, out of the low orb in which he partaketh with brute beasts,
and is not above them. For they have cognition, and are wrought upon by such
material and sensitive species; and have not in them any spring of a higher
strain. Whereas man in regard of his reasonable soul, that is endowed with
the powers of understanding, of loving, and of the free will, is created
according to the image and likeness of God: and by them he ought to receive into
his soul pure and immediate impressons from God himself,, and cleave firmly
to him, and become one with him. And therefore the devil through his envy to
mankind is most vigilant and active to hinder a man from that exercise as much
as he can; as being a kind of essay and beginning in this life of the eternal
happiness he shall enjoy in the next. And in pursuance of that design he
labors always with his utmost power to draw our minds from almighty God,
sometimes by one temptation, sometimes by another, sometimes raising passions
in us, otherwhiles begetting in our minds needless sollicitousnesse,
superfluous cares, and indiscreet anxieties; otherwhiles disordering us with
unquietness within our selves, or with dissolute conversation without us, or
with unreasonable curiosity of what concerns us not; sometimes with begetting
in us an itch to read Books of unprofitable Subtilties, or to discourse of what
belongs not to us, or to inquire after news and occurrences of the world;
otherwhiles by assaulting us with adversities and contradictions, and with an
innumerable company of stratagems that he imployeth against us: whereof though
many may seem to be but of small moment, and not to be accounted as sins, yet
in very truth they are exceeding great hindrances of this holy and sublime
exercise. And therefore, be they concerning great affairs, or concerning but
small ones; nay, though they may seem to be advantageous to us, or even
necessary to be attended; nevertheless they ought to be wholly cut off and
cast away, and our senses ought to be divorced from them. And accordingly,
whatsoever we happen to hear, or to see, or whatsoever in any sort chances to
pass before us, we must have a singular care that we transmit it not from our
outward senses to our fantasy, and there frame an image or representation of
it, and entertain our thoughts with it. Which if we be diligent in, and do
keep such images from residing in our memory, and from recurring to our
thoughts; they will be of no impediment unto us, nor cause us any distraction
whiles we are praying, meditating, singing Psalms, or about any other
spiritual exercise; nor will ever after return to molest us again. Therefore
upon any occasion of what important affairs soever that may occur unto you,
let your security and fortress be to keep it out from admittance into your
thoughts, and from making any impression upon your mind; and to cast it and
your self readily and confidently and entirely, with peace and silence and
calmnesse, into the arms of Gods all knowing and all governing providence; and
then he will fight for you; and will certainly deliver you from all the evils
that might arrive unto you from that coast; and will shine in your soul by
Divine consolations. Whereas if you should think to overcome the difficulties
that will arise against you, by your own industry and vigilance, and by taking
them to task, and wrestling against them in your own thoughts; all that you
will gain by wearying your self out with continual solicitude, and with
having your restless imaginations day and night fixed upon what you would
prevent or compass; will be to discover plainly in the conclusion, that all
humane wisdom is mere folly, and that the result of such toylesome enslaving
of the soul to vain and unreasonable occupations, is but loss of time,
abasing of our mind, and even a fretting out of the spirits that give life to
our body; without effecting what we have so earnestly and passionately labored
for. When therefore any accident happens to you of what kind soever it
comes, make account it is sent you by a tender Father that is continually
watchful over you, and accordingly receive it with an even and unmoved mind,
and let it not afford you matter either for discourse with others, or for
thoughtfullnesse within you. But uncloath your imagination from all ideas and
images of corporeal objects, according to the duty of your condition and
profession; that so you may cleave fast with a pure soul to him you have
bequeathed your self, and that no created thing whatsoever may intervene
between you and him, and that through the sacred wounds of his humanity, you
may be securely and steadily wafted over to the incomprehensible light of his
divinity.

CHAP. V. Of the purity of heart, which above all things is to be aimed at.
IF therefore you desire to walk in the straight and direct way that will
bring you readily and safely to your journeys end, both of grace in this life,
and of glory in the next, you must with a constant and never interrupted
attention, employ all the diligence and industry you are able to purchase a
perpetual cleanenesse of heart and purity of mind, and untroublednesse of
senses. You must recollect as it were into one burning point all the
inclinations and affections of your Soul, and cast it upon God, and fix it
irremoveably upon him. Which to do efficaciously you must withdraw your self
from the conversation of your friends, and indeed of all mankind (as much as is
possible for you) and from all business of what kind soever that may in any
sort divert or retard this design of yours, laying hold of all conveniences
that may beget a quietness and tranquillity in your soul, and may advance
your contemplation: betaking your self for that purpose to the silence and
solitude of some close retreat, where you may lie secure at anchor, free from
the Rocks and dangers of this fading life (against which so many do suffer
unhappy shipwreck) and be sheltered from the noisefull storms of the
deceitful world. But while you are in this haven you must not grow remiss, as
though now all dangers were past, and your work were at an end; but you must
see your self with a continual vigilance to keep your outward senses
strongly shut, and to watch narrowly your own heart; so as no enemy may break
in upon it, and cause in it any disquiet, or taint the purity of it with the
drossie images of sensible and terrene objects. This purity of heart is the top
of all spiritual exercises, and is the end for which he that aspireth at
Evangelicall perfection, forsakes the world; and is the compensation that in
this life he can have of all his labors. And therefore you must strive with
all earnestness to free your heart, and to sequester your senses and
affections from all objects whatsoever that may hinder the liberty of your
spirit, or that may have any power to draw or inveigle, or bind you to them.
And you must sum up all the affections of your soul, and recollect all the
dispersions of your heart, and fix them inseparably upon that true and
supreme good, which being but one, and in it self most simple, contains all
good in it. And by such close adhesion to God, and dereliction of all created
objects, and rejecting of all terrene and frail affections, you must endeavor
to transform your heart through Jesus Christ into a kind of divine nature; and
when once you come to thrive so happily in this high employment, of unclothing
and purifying your imagination from all species and images residing in it, and
of refining and exalting your heart to such a simplicity that it can rest no
where but in God, and that you now begin to suck into the bowels of your soul
pure streams from the fountain of his divine providence, and that you relish
them savourly, and that you unite your self to him by conforming your self in
every thing to his divine will; then this alone, this single exercise is all
that you need busy your self about. This will suffice for your whole
occupation. In this will be summed up all your other studies; your reading and
meditating of the holy scriptures, your loving of god and of your neighbor.
And in a word, this will bring you to the highest degree of perfection that
this life is capable of, by such ways and paths as no man is able to
delineate, but are purely the work of the holy Ghost within you, and of his
unction. Let therefore all your study, endeavor, and labor be to reduce your
heart unto such a simplicity, that being unmovable at the strokes of all
outward objects upon your fantasy, you may repose your understanding, and
settle your affections with such tranquillity, and fixednesse in God, within
your self, as if your soul were already arrived to that happy state of
unvariable Eternity, in which the present fruition of the all-comprehending
divinity so overreacheth all times and actions, that there is nothing either
past or to come in relation to it; and therefore can admit no change or
vivicissitude of accidents. And this is attained by forsaking and abandoning
your self entirely without any restriction, for the love of Jesus Christ; and
casting your self upon God with a pure heart, and a firm confidence in his
all-seeing providence; and resigning your self with an unmoved patience and
security in all events and tribulations to his Fatherly disposing of you. But
this cannot be effected, unless you turn continually inwards, and there treat
closely with your own heart, without ever wandering astray out of it, and that
you deliver your self (as far as it is possible) from all outward
implications, and that you keep the eye of your soul in a perpetual purity
and tranquillity, and that you preserve your understanding from all commerce
with the forms and images of inferior and transitory things; and that you
weane the affections of your will from all terrene and fading goods, and settle
them with the whole activity of your soul upon the only true supreme good;
and that you raise and fix your memory upon a continual representation of
that essential and uncreated good; and that thus your soul, with all the
powers and faculties of it, absorbed up in God Almighty, do become one spirit
with him, which is agreed on all hands to be the highest perfection that in
this life man's nature is capable of. For by this union of spirit and love with
God; and by such conformity, or rather transformation of your will to Gods
eternal will; you become by grace, such as God is by nature. And you may lay up
this for an infayleable truth, that in the very instant wherein a man is
enabled by Gods assistance to overcome his own will, by casting from him all
inordinate love and solicitude, and by delivering himself totally in all his
necessities into Gods hands, to dispose and steer his course as he pleases; he
by this becomes so acceptable to God almighty, that he presently replenisheth
him with his grace, by which is kindled such a fire of charity and delection in
his soul, as immediately expels all ambiguity and fear, and fastneth his
hope and confidence in God. And certainly no condition can be so happy, as to
rely securely on all occasions upon him, who we are sure has no defect in his
nature. Therefore if at any time you find a wavering in your own thoughts, or
an inclination to any solicitude for ought that may have happened unto you,
throw your self with a careless security into his arms; and he will embrace
you, and cure your fears, and will deliver you from the assaults, and from all
danger of it. Believe it, those points if you duly ruminate, and digest them
within your own heart; will more conduce to make your life happy, then if you
abounded with all the riches, delights, honors, wisdom and knowledge that
this deceitful world can bestow upon her favorites; and that in them you
exceeded all the men that have ever lived.

CHAP. VI. That true devotion consists in adhering to God by the
Understanding, and Will, depured from all commerce with material Objects.
Seeing then by how much the more you shall cleanse your thoughts from the
drossy images of created objects, and sequester your self from outward, wordly
and sensible occupations; by so much the more your soul will recover her
natural vigor, and relish of those objects that are of kin to her; The
best lesson you can learn, is to keep her from all commerce with the ideas and
images of corporeal things. For certainly there is nothing so pleasing to
God, as a mind in such a state: And when he finds such a one, who being free
from all carnal affairs, passions, and distractions, attends unto him only,
and with a pure understanding fixes singly upon him; then he makes good what
he has said of himself, that it is his delight to be with the children of men.
Whereas if you suffer your memory to lodge the species of sensible objects in
her storehouse, or allow your thoughts and imagination to entertain
themselves with such, it is impossible but that your soul should be tincted,
either with the relics of what you have formerly conversed with, or with the
impressions of what you are presently busy about. And then you may be sure the
holy Ghost (who withdraws himself from those thoughts that are without
understanding) will make himself a stranger unto you. Therefore he who loves
Jesus Christ truly, ought to be so united by a pure understanding, and by a
good will to the goodness, and to the will of god, and so abstracted from all
wordly considerations, and so void of all passions, that he heed not what
opinions other persons do entertain of him; whether he be beloved, or hated;
esteemed or derided; or what any man can attempt or effect against him. For, it
is the goodness of the Will that supplyeth for all things, and is above all
things. And therefore as long as a man is owner of a good Will, and is purely
conformable, and united to God in his Understanding; he is out of danger of
receiving any prejudice by his flesh, or sensual part, or by his outward man,
though it should be inclined to evil, and be resty and benumbed to good; nay
though his inward man should be dry and heavy in the exercise of devotion, he
is safe, as long as he cleaves firmly to god by faith, and by good will in
the superior part of his soul. And this he does, when he reflecteth upon his
own imperfection, and nothingness; and frames a strong and deep judgment,
that all his good consists in his creator only, and with all the powers and
faculties of his soul renounceth himself, and all creatures, and drowneth
himself and all his powers in his creator, in such sort that he directs all his
operations purely and entirely to him, and neither seeks, nor desires any
thing but him, in whom he already perceives that all good, and al perfect
felicity is comprised. And by thus doing, he is in a manner transformed into
God: so that he can neither think, nor understand, nor love, nor remember any
thing but God, and of God: and if he chances at any time to see either
himself, or any creature, he sees them not as they are in themselves, but
only as they are in God. Nor does any share of his love rest in them, but all
of it passes through them to God, and rests in him. And this knowledge of
truth always renders a soul truly humble, and makes it severe to it self,
without ever judging others; whereas worldly wisdom swells a soul with
pride, vanity, and empty wind. Take this then for the foundation of all
spiritual doctrine; that if you desire to arrive to the true knowledge,
service, familiarity, and full possession of God Almighty; you must necessarily
divest your heart of all sensible love, not only of all persons whatsoever,
but of all creatures whatsoever; that so you may with a pure and entire heart,
and with all the powers of your soul, apply your self, freely, without all
doubleness, care and solicitude to your Creator, casting your self in all
occasions with a full confidence upon his single providence.

CHAP. VII. In what manner ones heart is to be recollected within ones self.
IT is very truly said in the book of the Spirit and the Soul, Cap. 21. that
to ascend up to God, is to enter into ones self. For without all doubt, he,
who turning his operations inwards, pierces* through himself, and goes
beyond himself, is really and truly raised up to God. We must therefore have
a care to recollect our heart from the dispersions, and distractions of this
world, and to recall it to those joys it will find within it self; that so it
may in time be enabled to keep it self steady in the light of divine
contemplation. For the life and rest of our heart consists in fixing it by
earnest desires upon the love of God, and in tasting the sweetness of those
consolations, which with a liberal hand he gives to those who love him. And
the reason is obvious why we are so frequently frustrated of the experimental
enjoying of this happiness, and are not able to taste and savor it in the full
sweetness of it. For whiles our soul effuseth it self upon exterior objects,
and is choked with the solicitude of transitory things, she enters not into
her self, by the setting before her eyes those solid considerations which her
memory ought always to be stored withal; whilst she is pestered and
overclouded with the images of creatures, she returns not into her self by
the superior part of her understanding, into which no such object can have
admittance; and whiles she is intangl'd with concupiscences, she is hindered
from reverting into her self by vehement desires of that interior sweetness,
and spiritual joy, which belongs only to a purified and enflamed soul: and
so lying groaning among these present material, and fading objects, she is not
able to turn her self inwards, and discern the image of God that is formed
there. It is therefore absolutely necessary for him who aymeth at this noble
and high pitch, that with profound humility, and yet withal with entire
confidence he raise himself above himself, and above the whole machine of
creared beings, by the abnegation of them all; saying thus to himself; he whom
my heart has chosen from among all things, whom it seeks above all things,
and whom it loves and desires beyond all things, is not to be known by my
senses, nor comprised by my imagination; but is above all that is Sensible, and
above all that is Intelligble: he is not perceptible to any faculty of mine,
but yet he is such, as I may desire, and love him with all the powers and
faculties of my soul: he is not representable by any shape, yet I may thirst
after him with the most enflamed affections that can be raised within me: nor
can he be prised, or valued near his worth, by all I can say or think of him;
and yet my heart, if it be clean from all drossie affections, can seize upon
him, and unite it self to him by excesses of love. For he is beautiful, and
delightful, infinitely beyond all things in the world, and is of infinite
goodness and perfection. And then after such like discourses and
considerations, his soul enters yet deeper into it self, and raises it
self yet higher above it self, and loses it self (as I may say) in the
divine mist of incomprehensible light. And this manner of ascending even to the
aenigmaticall beholding of the most holy Trinity, in Jesus Christ, is by so
much the more enflamed and vehement, by how much those operations, which carry
the soul upwards, are more interior; and is by so much the more profitable,
and raises one so much higher, as the love one soareth with is more vigorous
and fervent. For in spiritual operations the measure of their height and
excellency is their interiournesse, and recollectednesse from all outward
dissipation. Therefore you must not give over, or sit you down to rest, till
you have gotten some taste, as it were an earnest-penny of that fullness which
will hereafter swell you up; and till you have obtained some first fruits of
that heavenly sweetness which will hereafter please beyond all measure the
spiritual palate of your soul: nor must you slacken your pace in running
after that divine odor you begin to have the wind of, till you come to see the
God of Gods in Sion. For you must settle this as a fundamental rule in the
progression of the soul, and in the adhesion and union to God within you, that
you must never retire nor repose, till you have obtained what you aim at.
Consider those who travel up a mountain; and apply to your case what
happens unto them. If a soul engulfe her self by concupiscence among those
things that slide along beneath her, she presently loses her way in a
labyrinth of infinite distractions, and of oblique and crooked ways, and is as
it were divided from her self, and is torn into as many pieces, as there are
several objects that she is glewed unto by her desires. And from hence
proceeds the instability of men's actions, without any fixednesse upon the
resolutions they had once taken; their toylsome running, without arriving to
the end of the course, and their perpetual labor without any rest. But if a
soul do raise her self by divine affections, and love, from what is beneath
her, and would entangle her in a multitude of distractions; and, forsaking all
creatures without her, do recollect her self within her self unto that one,
immutable, all-sufficient good, whereof she will find the image within her
self; and do learn to dwell and converse always with it; and do cleave
inseparably to it, by enflamed desires and affections; such a one will increase
daily in strength and perfection, proportionably to the knowledge and desire
that lifts her up to that one supreme, immutable good; Till she herself
become at the last immutable too; and arrive without fear of change, to that
true life, which is none other but God himself; where without all succession,
or variety of actions, and without all vicissitude of time, she may repose
eternally in that interior quiet, and secret mansion of the divinity; unto
which the contemplation of Jesus Christ will bring her, who is the way that all
they must travail in, who propose heaven for their journeies end; and is the
truth of the Understanding, and the life of the Soul.

CHAP. VIII. How, in all chances, a spiritual man ought to resign himself to
God.
I Conceive, that by what is hitherto said, you now discern how the more you
cleanse your imagination from the ideas of all outward things, and sequester
your self from all wordly and created objects, and unite your self to God by
your Will and Understanding, so much the more you approach to the state of
innocence and perfection. And what condition can be better, happier, or more
delightful then that? strive then to keep your mind free from all impressions
that may amuse or entangle it: and let not your thoughts have any commerce with
the world, or even with your friends; nor be you concerned in the prosperities,
or adversities, either of them, or of your self; nor busy your mind with any
worldly affair whatsoever, either past, present, or to come: Nay, not so much
as to be over sollicitous of your own past sins: but with a kind of
confident simplicity, and purity of heart, imagine your self to be out of the
world, singly with God almighty; as though your soul were already in the state
of Eternity, severed from your body. Which if she really were, it is certain
she would then no longer trouble her self with secular affairs, nor care what
posture the world were in, nor be concerned with peace or war; or fair
weather or foul, or any other secular occurrent whatsoever; but would attend
wholly, and uniformedly to God alone, and would rest in him, and cleave
inseparably to him. Begin from this very hour, in some sort, to do thus.
Sever your self even now, by your affections, from your own body. Banish from
your thoughts all created things whatsoever, either present, past, or to come;
and fix the purified eye of your soul, as steadily, and as earnestly as you
can, upon the eternal, increated light. And when you are thoroughly cleansed
from all corporeal images, and your soul is delivered from all worldly
encumbrances and mists, you will become like an Angel that were assigned to a
body, but received no prejudice in his operations by that society, nor were
annoyed with vain and ungoverned thoughts. Let your spirit therefore
strengthen it self against all manner of temptations, trouble, and injuries;
that in all fortunes it may remain unmovable in God. And when any disturbance,
or tediousness, or opression of mind shall grow upon you, be not for that
dejected, or out of heart, or betake your self to vocal prayers, or to outward
consolations: but attend only to raise your self up to God by pure acts of
your will, and of your understanding, and to adhere to him in the superior part
of your soul, whither your corporeal part will or no. For a soul that is
truly devout, ought to be so united with God, and to conform her will so
entirely to his that she have no relation or adhesion to any creature, no more
then if her self were not yet created; or as though there were nothing else in
being, but God and she. And such a one will receive all things with
indifference, from the hand of divine providence; and resign her self
uniformely in all occasions to God, with patience, tranquillity, and silence.
When therefore you shall have arrived to this state, no creature will then
interpose it self between God and you. And this is that, which by the
profession of religion we aim at. For by the vow of voluntary Poverty, we
deprive our selves for the whole durance of our life of all outward goods: by
the vow of Chastity we renounce our bodies; and by the vow of Obedience, we
forsake our wills, and even our souls themselves: so that after these, nothing
remains that may intervene between god and us, to keep us at a distance from
one another. This we engage our selves unto, when we enter into religion, and
cloth our selves with the habit of our order. But whether or no our inward
purity do answer to our outward profession, that rests between God and our
own consciences. But certainly we should degenerate exceedingly, and sin
grievously against God, and against his Justice, if we should do otherwise, and
should prefer the creature before our Creator; and by our affections, and
desires, cleave rather to that, then to him.

CHAP. IX. That the contemplation of God is to be preferred before all other
exercises.
Now because all things that are not God, are but works of his hand, and
effects proceeding from him their Creator, and that their powers and beings are
limited, and, as being produced of nothing, are always tending to nothing; it
is evident that whiles they exist, there cannot pass a moment wherein they
draw not their beings, their conservations, their working, and all else that
follows of their beings, from God their Creator who is the fountain and
wellhead of all Being: in respect of whom they are not only lame and
defective, but even as nothing is to that which is Being it self, and as that
which is finite and narrowly circumscribed, is to what is infinite. And
therefore in him only, and about him, and for him, let us employ all our whole
life: admitting his infinite Wisdom, his infinite power, and other his
infinite perfections, who is able with one act of his will to create if he
please infinite new worlds, each of them infinitely more perfect then this
which he has created. Without doubt no contemplation of the understanding, nor
fruition of love by means of the affections is so profitable, so perfect, and
so blissfull, as that which has directly for its object God almighty our
Creator, and true supreme good, from whom all things do flow, in whom all
things are contained; by whom all things are preserved, and for whom all things
were made; who is infinitely all-sufficient both to himself, and to all things
else: who contains in himself from all eternity the perfections of all things
whatsoever, resumed in so pure a simplicity, that he has no mixture in him,
nor has any accident belonging to him, but all that is in him, is he himself:
with whom, and by whom, all the causes of fleeting and decaying things have a
permanent stability: in whom reside the immutable originalls of whatsoever is
subject to change and vicissitude: and in whose essence do live the eternal
principles and modells of all creatures whatsoever, either reasonable or
unreasonable, or any ways depending of time: who completeth all things: who
entirely fills all things, and every thing, essentially with himself; who is
more inward, and more present to every thing, then the thing is to it self:
and lastly, in whom all things are summed up and united together, and do live
eternally. But if any person should through weakness of capacity, or want of
trayning to these considerations, find them of too hard digestion for him; and
be inclined to ground his immediate contemplation rather upon the creatures,
then upon the creator: yet let him have a care to order his meditation or
contemplation in such sort, as out of it may rise in him a delectation in God
one and threefold; and in his breast may be kindled the fire of divine love, and
of true life, which may light and guide him to eternal felicity. And herein
consists the difference between the contemplation of faithful Christians,
and that of the heathen Philosophers. For these latter directed their
contemplation to themselves; and therefore it rests in the understanding; the
bettering of which was the end and scope of their meditation. But christians
do employ themselves in this exercise, for the love of him whom they
contemplate; that is, of God, who is the object of their contemplation. And
therefore it rests not finally in their understanding by cognition; but
passes to their will by love and affections. For it is much happier for a man
to know Jesus Christ, and be united to him spiritually by grace and Charity;
then without them, to have him in them corporally, or even essentially. Now the
ready means to enlarge the eye of contemplation, is, to have ones soul
abstracted from all creatures, and to keep it reflected upon it self; whereby
it makes a ladder of it self, by which it ascends to the contemplation of
God himself. And when it is fixed, there it burns with desire of heavenly,
eternal, and divine goods; and looks upon all transitory ones at a huge
distance, considering them indeed as nothing. But of the different methodes of
contemplating God, that which proceeds by negations, is the more excellent
and sublime. In which we begin by denying all corporeal things of him, or
whatsoever may be grasped by our senses, or figured by our imagination. Then we
proceed by denying of him, all intelligible objects, or whatsoever may be
faddomed by our understanding. And lastly, we deny even Being it self of him,
in that sense, and under that notion, as we conceive the Beings of creatures.
And then we are arrived (according to Dionysius Areopagita) to the highest
pitch of union with God, that our nature is capable of in this life. And this
is the mist which God is said to inhabit; Into which Moses entered; and by it
come to unaccessible light. But in this journey we must advance by orderly
steps, the animal part must precede the spiritual. And therefore we must begin
with the labor of action, before we can attain to the rest of contemplation;
and we must lay a foundation of moral virtues, before we can ascend to the top
of speculative ones. All which when thou have seriously considered (my soul)
tell me if it were not folly and madness to busy thy self in vain about
multiplicity of things? Do thou not see how thou art still in want, and in
necessity, as long as thou entertainest thy self with them? Give over then all
other employments and thoughts; and settle thy self to this only one of
contemplating, and loving the one only true good, in which all good is
comprised, and thou need no more. Oh! how unhappy were that man who knowing
all things else, and enjoying all things else, were in the mean time ignorant
of him? And though he should know all things, together with him; yet they would
add nothing to his happiness: for that consists singly in him. And
therefore the Evangelist says, The knowing of thee is eternal life: Jo. 17.
And the Prophet, I shall be satiated when thy glory appears. Ps. 16.

CHAP. X. That actual and sensible devotion is not so much to be regarded, as
to adhere to God with ones will.
BUt when I so much inculcate the raising of affections, and love in the soul,
my intention is not to advise you to insist upon actual devotion, or upon such
sensible sweetness (oftentimes accompanied with tears) which the spiritual
exercises of tender and devout persons are frequently accompanied with. I mean
only that you be mentally united to God by your will in the superior part, and
intellectual, of your soul. For no devotion whatsoever, or spiritual
exercise is of so high and excellent a strain, or so pleasing to God, as to
keep our mind free from the images, likeness, and Ideas of creatures. And this
is that which particularly belongs to a religious man, and which his
profession obliges him unto. For as by his vow he has renounced all creatures
whatsoever; so in his practice he ought to keep his mind free from them, to the
end he may have his thoughts and affections continually fixed and riveted upon
God alone. And therefore be careful to renounce your self in all things; that
so having reduced your self into a perfect nakedness of all creatures, you
may follow Christ our Lord God and Savior, and tread in those steps he has
marked out unto us, who was truly poor, chaste, and obedient; and was humbled
lower then ever man was: many were scandalized (as appears in the Gospel)
because their weak eyes, not being capable of that divine light that shone in
all his actions, they rejected and were offended at what was too sublime for
them. Now to give you an instance of the abstraction I require in you from all
created things, whereby you may conceive what it is I recommend unto you in all
the rest; I pray you consider what Sentiments a separated soul has of her
body she has left behind her. Certainly she regards not what becomes of it,
nor is she concerned whither it be burned or hanged, or any ways
contumeliously used; nor has she any regret for any injuries, ill treatments
or scorns that may be heaped upon it. But she has all her powers and
attentio^ fixed upon that state of Eternity she then enjoys, and upon that
one single necessary thing that our Savior has recommended in the Gospel.
Luc. 10. Such sentiments as these I would have you beget in your mind, even in
this life, whilst your soul is in your body. Regard it no more, then if your
soul were parted from it, and let all your thinking be of that one necessary
point: and rest confident, you will here find a wonderful increase of grace
and swift progress in obtaining true purity of mind, and simplicity of heart.
For that one necessary thing will immediately follow of it self, upon your
banishing all images from your thoughts, and upon your withdrawing your self
from all implications, proceeding from created objects; and you shall then
immediately find God shining in your soul, and you will feel her closely
united to him, that nothing can sever her from him. Neither will any
allurements inveigle her, nor any torments force her from her beloved. You will
be invincible in all tentations and assaults; as the holy Martyrs and Fathers
were, and the rest of the elect, and all those that are now Saints in heaven:
who despising all created things, attended to no other thought but such as
concerned security and eternity of the soul in God. And thus armed within, and
united to God by the affections of their will, they overlooked and neglected
all the things of this world, as though their soul were quite out of it, by
having taken leave of their body. Thus you see the admirable power that a
rightly placed love, and a will united to God has, rven so much, as though
through the impression that a soul receives then from God, and through her
spiritual separation from her compartner the flesh, she looks upon her
outward man at a far distance, and as if he belonged not to her, and
consequently neglects all the violences that can be used to her flesh, as
though they were executed upon an other, or upon some creature that were not a
man. For he who adhereth to God, becomes one spirit with him: and consequently
in respect of that of him by which he adhereth to God, he cease in some sort
to be himself, or what he was before. Of which transformation the fleshly part
not being capable, but remaining still in its own grossie nature, it is as it
were divorced from the soul, that has taken too high a flight for her flesh
to follow her in; and therefore she looks down upon it as if it concerned
her not. Be sure therefore never to give admittance within you to any thought
unworthy of God: but remember that your happiness and perfection depends on
raising up your soul to him; and on having him always present to the eye of
your understanding; and on fixing it so attentively upon him, that it look
upon nothing beside, as though there were nothing in the world but God and your
self. And in this union you will enjoy those happy embraces, that are in this
life a fair beginning of the blessedness and joys of the next.

CHAP. XI. In what manner we are to resist temptations, and to bear
tribulations.
THere is no man who comes to God with a true and entire heart, but he is
tried with sundry vexations and temptations; in which I can give you this
comfort, that though you be troubled by feeling them, yet you will receive no
prejudice by them, as long as you yield no consent unto them, but bear them
with humility, patience, and equality of mind. And if you should be assaulted
with temptations of blasphemy, oruncleane representations; the best you can do
in that case is to neglect them, and account them as nothing. For be they in
themselves never so foul, or wicked, or horrid; yet as long as they go no
further than your fantasy, and range there against your will, they are not to
be imputed to you, nor do they require that you should trouble your conscience
with them. The enemy will certainly fly, and leave you in peace, if you
contemn him and his attempts. For he is proud, and cannot endure to be
neglected and scorned. And therefore your best remedy is to regard them no
more, then as if they were but flies buzzing before your face against your
will. And consider how unseemly it were for the servant of Jesus Christ to be
made to loose sight of his master, by the importunity of a contemptible fly,
and fall into indignation, murmuring and complaints at so trivial a matter, as
a slight temptation of suspicion (for example) a sadness, or detraction, or
insufficiency, or any other such small adversity; all which (like flies chaced
away with the moving of ones hand) are put to flight by an act of the will
elevated up to God, and by love settled in him. For such a will brings a man
to be the particular possession of God (who will have a care of what is
particularly his own) and to have the Angels his guardians and protectours.
And therefore is peace promised to men of good will. Neither can any thing of
greater value be offered to God, then a good will. For such a one is the
origin of all goodness in the soul, and the mother of all virtues. And
whosoever has it, has compleately all that is requisite for him to be happy.
And therefore if any obstacle happen to hinder the good which such a will
desires, God supplyeth, and gives the recompense, as if the effects had
succeeded to his desire: whereupon by an immutable decree he has entayled
merit and demerit upon the will: according to which he proportioneth our reward
in heaven, or punishment in hell. And the merit of the will is nothing else but
love: that is, a great earnestness to serve God; a sweet affection in pleasing
God, and a most fervent desire of enjoying God. But to conclude the subject of
this chapter: let this trust comfort you in all temptations, that to be tempted
is no sin, but an occasion for you to exercise virtue, and a School to profit
exceedingly in. And indeed, the whole life of man is but a temptation upon
earth.

CHAP. XII. Of the love of God, and of the great power it has.
ALl that we have hitherto said, and in a word, whatsoever is necessary for
salvation, is performed best, most compendiously, most securely, and most
effectually, by love; which alone, is able to supply for the want of any thing
requisite to bring a man to beatitude; and in it, is contained the plenitude of
all good; for by it the object upon which one exercises it with earnestness,
becomes present to one. It is love only that turns us toward God, that
transformeth us into God, that we adhere to God by, that uniteth us to God, and
makes us become one spirit with him; and lastly, that rendereth us happy in
this life by grace from him, and in the next life by glory in him. For, love
rests not, but in the fruition of the object beloved, and in a plenary and
peaceful possession of it. It is the way by which God descends to mankind,
and by which man ascends up to God. For where Charity (that is to say, where
love) is not, God can have no residence. If therefore we have Charity, we have
God: for God is Charity. Nothing has a keener edge then love; nothing is more
subtle, nothing searches farther, nor pierces deeper. It allows it self
no repose, until it has surveyed all the qualities and dimensions of what it
loves, and have dived into the very center of it. It will cleave so fast to
the beloved object, that it will become one with it, or rather it will not be
content, till it have so transformed it self thereinto, as it cease to be
any longer it self, by becoming (If so I may say) the very thing that it
loves; and that it admits no immediate thing whatsoever to remain, or
intervene between it, and what it tends unto, which is God himself. Unto
whom it tends with so great a vehemence and force, that it is in a perpetual
unquietness and activity, until it have run through all things that lie
between them, and have seized upon him, and have submersed it self in him. For
love has an unitive and transformative power, that changes the lover into
what he loves, and again the beloved into the lover: so that each of them is
in the other as intrinsecally as possibly can be. Which how it is, will the
more plainly appear, if we consider severally the commerce that is between
them in the two several powers of the soul, the understanding and the will of
him that loves. First, in regard of the understanding, and apprehensive
faculties; the beloved is in the lover by his continual forming the image of
the beloved in his thoughts; where he converseth intimately with him in a most
sweet and delightful manner; and again the lover is in the beloved, not
contenting himself with a superficial knowledge of what belongs to him, but
using his utmost endeavors, to dive into the inmost secrets of him, and to
reach the bottom. Secondly, in regard of the will, and of the affective and
desiring faculties, the beloved is said to be in the lover by residing in his
heart through an affectuous compleasance, and joyous delectation in him: and
the lover is in the beloved by having the same desires which he has; by
willing the same things which he wills; by disliking the same things which
he disliketh, by rejoicing and grieveing for the same, and by having an exact
conformity with him in all things, as though he were not a distinct person
from him, but even he himself. For love draws the lover out of himself, and
planteth him in the beloved, and setleth him most intimately there: whereupon
it is said in the Canticles, Cant. 8. that love is as strong as death, which
carries the soul out of the body. And it may well be said, that the soul is
more where it loves then where it lives. For she is in the beloved according
to her own nature, and as she has an existence belonging to her self, that
is, by her will and understanding; whereas her giving life to a body is an
action of much lower degree, and only as she is the form and part of a whole;
in which consideration she has no prerogative above the forms of bruit
beasts. We may therefore conclude, that to draw us from outward and sensible
objects into our selves, and from thence to carry us to our savior Jesus
Christ; and in him to unite us to his divinity; there is no other way, no other
means then the love of him, and the ardent desire of his sweetness that
through his humanity we may feel, and perceive, and taste the presence of his
divinity. So great is the power of love, that it is able to raise the soul
from the earth to the highest heaven. Nor is it possible for any person to
arrive to Beatitude, but by the wings of love and desire. Love is the life of
the soul, her wedding garment, and her perfection: In which is comprised the
Law and the Prophets, and the whole doctrine of our Savior. And therefore the
Apostle says to the Romans, that love is the fullness of the law: Romans 3. and
to Timothy, that charity is the end of all that is commanded. 1. Tim. 1.

CHAP. XIII. Of the quality and utility of prayer: and how ones heart is to be
recollected within it self.
BUt sithence, we are not able of our selves, either to love, or to do any
other good work, nor can of our own stock offer any thing to God (from whom
alone flows all that is good) that is not already his: the only thing which
remains for us to do, is, that according to the instructions which he has
vouchsafed to give us by his own divine mouth and blessed example, we have
recourse to him by prayer in all our occurrences; and that we prostrate our
selves before him, like poor needy beggars, like wretched miserable
bondslaves, like feeble desolate children; and so with deep groans lay open
our hearts before him, representing our distressed condition with all ingenuity
and sincerity, with fear and shame; yet mingled with confidence and love; and
beseeching him with the utmost vehemence and fervor of our soul, to protect
and assist us in our imminent dangers; and in the close admitting and
abandoning ourselves entirely and securely into his hands, without reserving
any thing at all to our selves; but acknowledging whatsoever we have, or are,
to be absolutely his. And then, that will be fulfilled in us, which the holy
abbot Isack (speaking of his manner of prayer) says in the following words:
Cassian. Collect. 10. Chap. 6.
Then we shall be one in God, and our Lord, and only he will be all in all to
us; when that perfect love of his with which he loved us first, shall likewise
on our side have passed and be converted into the affection of our heart.
Which will be when all our love, all our desire, all our study, all our
endeavor, all that we shall think, imagine, speak and hope will be God alone;
and that a like unity as is between the father and the son, and again
between the son and the father, shall be transfused into our soul and mind:
that as he loves us, with a sincere, pure, and indissolvable charity, so we
may be joined also to him by a perpetual and inseparable dilection; whereby
thus linked unto him, all that we shall desire and hope for, that we shall
understand, that we shall speak of, and that we shall direct our prayers unto,
may be God only. This therefore ought to be the intention, the aim, and the
end of a spiritual man, that he may come to possess herein his corruptible
body, an image of the next life's beatitude; and that he may begin in this
world, to receive a kind of earnest penny, and taste some drops of that
beatitude, conversation, and glory, which we shall have in heaven. This I say
is the end of all perfection; that our soul being purified from all carnal
dross; it may daily be refined and sublimed up to spiritual objects, until
our conversation, and all the motions and affections of our heart do become one
continued prayer. And when our soul, free from all earthly alloy, Cass. Col.
9. cap. 5.
shall thus breath and pant after God only (on whom alone the intention of a
spiritual man ought to be fixed, and so such an one, the least separation from
him will seem a present and cruel death,) and shall be in a manner sent
beforehand to him, by enjoying so high a calm from all carnal passions (which
might inveigle and draw it to their objects) that it may firmly and
indissolubly adhere to that one supreme good; then the direction of the
Apostle will be fulfilled, who bids us pray without intermission; 1. These.
5. and in another place, lifting up pure hands every where without anger and
contention. 1. Tim. 2. For where the operation of the mind is absorbed (if so I
may say) with such purity, and is transformed from a terrene and gross nature,
to a spiritual and Angelical shape; then whatsoever she shall receive into
her self, whatsoever she shall employ her self about; and whatsoever she shall
do, will be a most pure and a most sincere prayer. To conclude, if you shall
continue, without interruption, that course I have traced from the beginning of
this discourse, it will be as easy and ready for you in your introversion and
recollection, to contemplate and to enjoy God, as in nature it is to live.

CHAP. XIIII. That in all judgments, we ought to resort to the witness of our
conscience.
IT is of no small avail, for attaining spiritual perfection, and the purity
and tranquillity of the soul in God; that upon whatsoever shall be spoken,
thought or done concerning us, we presently recurre in silence to the inward
secret of our heart and mind; and there sequestered from all other objects, and
wholly recollected within our selves, we call our selves to a strict account,
for discovery of the bare truth of what we make our inquiry about. And there we
shall find that it will be no advantage for us, but rather much prejudice, to
be praised and honored from without, if in the mean time our heart within us
reproacheth us of faultiness and guilt. And as it profits one nothing to be
praised by men, whiles his own conscience accuses him: so on the other side,
he is never the worse for being contemned, reproached, and persecuted, whiles
in the tribunal of his own heart he finds himself innocent and
irreprehensible: Or rather, upon such occasions, he has reason to rejoice in
our Lord with patience, silence, and tranquillity. For no adversity can hurt
him in whom iniquity reigns not. And since it is a certain truth, that as no
evil remains unpunished, so no good passes without reward; let us beware of
expecting or receiving ours like hypocrites, from men: but referr that wholly
and soly to God, to give it us, not in this life, but in Eternity that lasts
for ever. It is then evident, that no action we can do, can be nobler or
better, then always, in all our tribulations, and accidents whatsoever, to
resort into the secret of our own soul; and there invocate our Lord Jesus
Christ, our helper in our temptations and tribulations; and humble our selves
through acknowledgment of our own sinfulness; and praise God our Father, that
corrects and comfort when he judges fit. And let us be sure to receive
all things, either concerning our selves or others, prosperous or adverse, with
equanimity, and with a ready and confident resignation of our selves into the
hand of his infallible and Fatherly providence. And by doing thus, we shall
obtain the remission of our sins, the delivering us from all bitterness, the
contemning of sweetness and security upon us, the infusion of grace and mercy
into us, the settling and strengthening us in the familiarity of God, our
sucking abundant consolations from him, and our firm adhesion and union with
him. Let us therefore beware of imitating those, who through hypocrisy, and
after a Pharisaicall manner, do strive to appear better, and otherwise then
they are; and do labor to give men a better conceit of themselves then in
their own hearts they know they deserve; and do hunt after outward humane
praise and glory, whiles their souls within are full of impotent passions and
desires, and grievous sins. Certainly whosoever shall seek after such
vanities, which is the extremity of folly and madness, the real good we have
formerly mentioned will fly from him; and reproach and shame will in the end
betide him. Keep therefore continually before thine eyes the bad that is in
thee, and thy unaptnesse to all good. Know thy self aright, that thou may be
humbled. And considering thy great sins, and the excessive evils that are in
thee, repine not at being esteemed the most unworthy, vile, and abject creature
in the world: but repute thy self among other men, like dross mingled with
gold, like darnel growing among wheat, like chafe mingled with corn, like a
wolf among sheep, and like satan among the children of God; and shunn all
honor or preference from others, fly with all might and maine from the
infection of this pestilence, from the poison of praise, and from the vanity of
ostentation; least according to the royal Prophet, the sinner be praised in
the desires of his own soul. Ps. 9. For according to the other, They who
speak thee blessed, do deceive thee, and do destroy the way of thy stepps.
Isay. 3. And our Savior threateneth us with woe, when men shall bless us, and
speak well of us.

CHAP. XV. How the contempt of ones self may be caused in a man, and how
profitable that is.
IT is most certain that the better a man is acquainted with his own
unworthiness, and baseness, and the deeper conceit he frames thereof; the
further and the clearer he looks into the Majesty of God; and the meaner a
man appears in his own eyes through the value he puts upon God, upon
truth, and upon justice; the more worthy and precious he is in the eyes of God.
Let us therefore continually busy our thoughts upon those considerations that
may beget in us a contempt of our selves, and a belief that we are unworthy of
receiving any good turn. Let us mortify and displease our selves, and seek
to please God only. And let us be content to be reputed (as we are) most
unworthy and vile wretches. When any tribulations, afflictions, or injuries do
come upon us, let us not be moved at them, nor entertain any unquiet thoughts,
or indignation, or animosity against those that bring them upon us: but with
meekness and gentleness of spirit, let us conclude within our selves, that we
deserve all the injuries, scorns and mischiefs, with abandonments that can
arrive unto us. For certainly he who is truly penitent, and whose heart is full
of compunctions, abhors being honored and loved by men, and is content to
be hated, despised, and trodden upon, to the very last; that so he may attain
to true humility, and to a sincere, firm adhesion unto God alone, with a pure
heart. Which adhesion to God only, and loving of him only, together with the
hating of our selves, and thinking worse of ones self then of all creatures
else, and the deeming himself despisable, and desiring to be despised and
scorned by all men else, requires no outward labor, or strength of body; but
rather, the solitude and retirement of the body, whilst the heart labors by
affections, and the mind is quiet from all worldly affairs: to the end that
setting your heart upon the right object, and banishing the distracting
multiplicity of creatures out of our mind, and ritiring our senses from all
conversation with mean intertainments; our soul may then raise it self up to
a familiarity with heavenly and divine things, whiles our body is sequestered by
solitude from earthly ones. By doing thus, we shall change our selves after a
sort into God. To attain unto the perfection of this State, we must be always
upon our guard to pass no judgment or censure upon our neighbor, much less
to contemn or despise him. And we must heartily desire to be accounted by all
men as the dross of the earth, and the reproach of human nature, and to be
abhorred by them like dirt and noisomeness, rather then to abound with any
delights whatsoever, or to be honored or advanced by men, or to enjoy any
corporeal satisfaction, or transitory convenience. And we must wish for no
more of the advantages, or continuance of this life, then merely what is
necessary for us to bewail and lament without intermission our transgressions
and sins, and to grow up daily in the disestimation, contempt, hatred, and
annihilation of our selves in our own eyes; that so we may become more
pleasing in Gods. And lastly we must have no regard or solicitude for any
thing in the world besides God alone, but settle all our love and affections
upon him, and cleave inseparably to him, and have no object in our hearts, but
our lord and savior Jesus Christ; by whose power all things subsist, and by
whose providence all things are governed. The consolations of this life are the
most dangerous enemies, that can be encountered with to hinder one in such a
happy course. Remember then that this is not a place for you to receive
delights or contentments in; but to weep and lament in from the bottom of your
heart. If then your soul be so dry that you cannot weep, the very
consideration of that, will afford you abundant matter of tears. But if you
do weep, you will have reason to increase your lamentation, by considering
that through your grievous offenses and sins, you have drawn upon your own
head this doleful cause of sorrow; which whiles it lies so heavy upon you,
what madness were it in you to let your thoughts range astray after any other
affair that you are not concerned in? The delinquent at the bar, that
stands there pleading for his life, and fears the sentence of condemnation,
from a severe judge, little regards what is done abroad in the market place,
or how the sheriff marshalleth and disposes his guards for the security of
the prisoners. So he that has considered rightly the condition that his soul
is in; and upon that consideration entertaineth such a deep sorrow as belongs
to him; will have no relish of any of the delights of this world, nor will his
heart afford any room for anger, vainglory, indignation, or any other passion
whatsoever to harbor in it. And if at any time you chance to cast your eyes
upon the contented and cheerful state of other happy persons, that swim in
the delights of pure love, which banisheth all sorrow; do not presently flatter
your self that it belongs also to you, who are composed of like parts as
they, to have a mansion among them. For as there are prisons and dungeons for
malefactors, whiles the well disposed citizens live at ease in their own
houses; so there are different exercises and forms of living for those whose
past sins oblige them to penance and mourning, and for those that have
preserved themselves with greater purity and innocence. Otherwise, these latter
would have no advantage of the former; and injustice would have more freedom
then innocence. We may then conclude, that we must abandon all creatures; we
must despise them all; and we must repudiate and fly from all the delights of
this world; that so with entire faith, we may lay a solid foundation of
repentance and mourning. And if once we attain to love Jesus Christ in truth,
and to sigh after him from the bottom of our hearts, and to bear him
continually there, and to conform all our actions to the example he has given
us; and to have a real grief for our sins, and to have a lively apprehension
of the next world, and to have the consideration of the last judgment, and of
the eternal torments of hell, all ways before our eyes; and to be continually
apprehensive and sollicitous of the state we shall be in when we leave this
world; we shall then most assuredly be delivered from all affections to created
things, and be concerned with nothing that is of a fleeting and transitory
nature: and we shall arrive to such an impassibillity, as not only to be
contented with pressures and encroachments upon us, and with injuries done us;
but even to be afflicted, and so think that day lost wherein we receive not
some scorn, or malediction, or ill intreatment for Gods sake. The perfection
of which impassibillity consists, in being free from all vices and passions,
and in having a pure and clean heart; and in having our soul adorned and
replenished with virtues. Which to attain unto, it will much avail us, to
believe our selves already out of the world; and since we are sure that one day
we must necessarily dye; let us make account we are already dead. But because
through the frailty of our nature, and the cunning and malice of our enemy (who
endeavoreth to slide into our best actions, and so corrupt them) these
inferior and abstracted exercises may be liable to miscarriage, as all humane
actions are, let this be the touchstone to try all our thoughts, words, and
deeds by; whether they be according to God or no: namely, whether we become
more humble, more disaffected with the world, more recollected within our
selves, and more attentive and strong in the pursuit of God. For if we should
find it otherwise with us, we might with reason suspect that what we did, were
not according to God; nor pleasing to him, nor profitable to our selves.

CHAP. XVI. How the Providence of God extends it felfe to all things.
NOw to the end that according to what we have have hitherto discoursed, we may
without any disturbance, readily, securely, and calmely be raised up to God
Almighty, and be immediately joined and united to him, and cleave inseparably
to him with a perfect quietness, evennesse, and untroublednesse of mind,
as well in adversity as in prosperity, in death as in life: we must resign our
selves entirely, and commit all things confidently to his never erring, and
never shaken providence. In doing which we can have no difficulty or
reluctance, when we call to mind how it is he, and only he who gives unto
all creatures their being what they are, who endoweth them with their
individual virtues, powers and faculties; who enableth them to work and
perform all the operations that their nature can reach unto; and who does so
wonderfully order and range their infinite variety with exact proportion of
number, weight and measure, that like a music of so many parts, they compose
the admirable harmony and beauty of the created world. If you consider the
plants of nature, you will find them seated between two understanding agents;
the one giving them their essential being, the other working in them such
modifications, and changes, as may be introduced into them by art. This latter
is the share of the sons of Adam; who how admirable soever they be in the
rare productions of their Dedalean wits; yet they must sit still, and their
Art must remain buried in them, if bounteous nature did not furnish them with
materials and subjects to work upon. In the same manner Nature her self would
fall to nothing, were it not for a continual emanation of being into every
individual plant of hers, from him that is the author of all being. For as art
presupposes the productions of Nature, without which she cannot exercise her
skill; so the individualls of nature do presuppose the operation of God
almighty; creating, conserving, ordering, and governing them; without which
they would presently run into confusion, and into their original nothing. And
in the whole course of them, and in the economy of them we may read his
infinite power, wisdom, goodness, essential mercy, justice, truth, charity,
and unchangeable eternity, and immensity. For nothing can subsist and work by
its own virtue and power; it owes that entirely to God, and to him only, as
being the first mover, the original principal, and the Cause of all action in
every agent whatsoever. He provideth immediately for every thing, and cutteth
out their shares, even to the least and inconsiderablest creature he has made.
From the highest to the lowest, none of them escapes his providence, or
swarveth from the line he has traced out to them; whether it be in the
ordinary course of nature, or in theirs that depend of voluntary and free
agents, or in theirs that seem to be hatched out of the casual concurrence of
several causes, without any precedent design, in those that immediately
produce them. This all-seeing and all-governing eye of Gods providence,
reaches not only to all that is in nature, but even to all that God himself
can do. For since he can do nothing but according to the rules of wisdom,
and that a wise agent disposes all things that are in his power, by order and
foresight; it is necessary that all he does, must fall under the order of his
providence. So that it extends to all things, and to all actions, even to the
reclusest thoughts of man's heart. Therefore Saint Peter has reason to advise
us, to abandon ourselves wholly to his all-sufficient providence; without
having any anxiety for what may befall us, when he says, that we ought to cast
all our solicitude upon him, for that he has care of us. 1 Pet. 1. As also
the royal Prophet in these words: Pitch your thoughts upon the Lord, and he
will feed you. Ps. 54. And the like you will find in Ecclesiasticus in these
words. Look about you children of men, and know that no man ever hoped, and was
confounded, nor remained under his commandments, and was forsaken by him.
Eccle. 2. And our Lord himself warns us that we be not sollicitous, saying
what shall we eat? Matt. 6. Without doubt there is no blessing so great, that
we can hope for at Gods hands, but we shall receive it of his liberality and
mercy; if we rely on him with due confidence, according to his promise: in the
Deuteronomy, what place soever your foot shall tread upon shall be yours, Deuteronomy.
11. For the measure of a man's receiving, shall be the largnesse of his heart in
desiring, and his possession shall reach as far as he has reached out the foot
of his confidence; which has moved Saint Bernard to say, God the creator and
disposer of all things abounds with the bowels of so great mercy, that how
great favor and grace soever we can raise our confidence to beg of him, so
great we shall certainly receive at his hands. And therefore our savior
bids us in S. Mark, that whatsoever we ask for in our prayers, we should
believe that it will be granted us; and the effect will ensue accordingly. And
most certainly, the more strong, and the more pressing that our confidence
shall be in God; and the more violent assault it shall give him, with humility
and reverence, the more securely, the more abundantly, and the more speedily
we shall impetrate and obtain what we hoped for. The great impediment of such
noble confidence; that keeps it down from soaring to this high and
efficacious pitch, is the wieght of sin: Where that abounds, a soul is lasy
and benumbed, and unable to raise it self up with confidence to God. For
redress of this mischief, let him whose heart is in earnest turned from the
world, and converted to God, consider the infinite power of God Almighty. Let
him remember how all things are possible to him: and what his Will once
determines, must of necessity be crowned with its effect; and that what he
gainsayeth, has an impossibility of ever coming to pass. And therefore it is
as easy to him, if he pleases to remitt and cancel an innumerable multitude
of sins, be they never so enormous, as to forgive one single one. And from the
least single one a sinner is not of himself able to rise, and deliver
himself, no more then from the greatest load of innumerable ones. For of our
selves, we are not able so much as to think, much less to do any good thing, 2
Cor. 3. All that is of that nature, proceeds from God only; who works it
in us: and to him only we must refer, and acknowledge it. Therefore our
deliverance from sin belonging not to our selves upon our own score, but
being entirely the work of God Almighty his power and mercy; and all things
being alike easy to him; we may with confidence commit our selves into his
fatherly arms, and promise our selves from him a plenary abolition of all our
misdemeanors, be they never so many and never so great. Yet let us beware that
a wrong application, or a mistaking of this consideration, draw us not into
presumption, or into a foolish security. For it is also most certain, that
looking upon the condition as the case stands on his part, it is far more
dangerous for him to be involved in many sins, then to be under the weight of
one only sin. For it is an inevitable decree, that no evil action can escape
unpunished; and to every mortal sin an infinite punishment is due. If this
were not, Gods Justice would suffer thereby: since every such sin is an
injury in a direct line done to God himself; who is of infinite Dignity,
Honor and Reverence. But this is so evident a truth, that I need put no more
weight on this side the scale. Whosoever shall look upon his own unworthyness,
is out of danger of falling into presumption. He is in greater, of being kept
back by pusillanimity, from those blessings that by a virtuous confidence he
may obtain. Therefore for his comfort and advantage, let us add to what we
have already said, how God (as the Apostle tells us) has a certain and
infallible knowledge, and keeps an exact account of those who are his: and
that it is impossible for any of these to miscarry. They will be preserved
secure in the midst of all difficulties, dangers, scandals, schisms,
persecutions, quarrels, haeresies, tribulations, adversities, and temptations
whatsoever. For God has foreseen from all eternity the number of his elect;
and the last act of their lives, that settleth them in the state of merit; And
nothing can change or shake his infallible prevision. All things cooperate to
their good, as well the bad as the good, adversity as prosperity, as well what
is without them, as what is within them, and depends immediately of
themselves: with only this difference, peradventure, that out of adversity
they come more refined and shine brighter. Let us therefore securely and
readily commit our selves, and all things else to the divine providence; who
when it permits evil, it is with a design to draw good out of it. And
consequently it is good that such evils should be, and that God should permit
them. Nor can they be otherwise, or more, then strictly what he allows. For
his knowledge fadommeth the extent of all things; his power mastereth and
limiteth them as he pleases; and his will disposes and turns them to good.
For as all that is good proceeds from his immediate operation; so those evils
that are permitted by him, are turned into good by his goodness and power. Out
of which we may gather his omnipotency, his infinite wisdom, his clemency
through Jesus Christ our Savior, and repayrer, his mercy and justice, the
efficacy of grace, and the disability of nature, together with the beauty of
the Universe, resulting out of the comparing and harmony of contrarieties; the
chief of which are the virtue and reward of the good, and the wickedness and
punishment of the bad. Nor can we look upon the course and economy of Gods
converting and saving of a sinner, but with exceeding great comfort and joy. On
the sinners part, the change of his heart, his contrition for having offended
God, his confessing of his sins, and his doing penance for them: On Gods
side, his admirable meekness, his mercy, his charity, and his infinite
goodness, are subjects for a man to meditate continually upon, and to praise
God everlastingly for. But let him not grow too bold upon Gods mercies, for his
delivering a sinner by such admirable and secret paths from the misery he was
enfoulded in; For such grace is not imparted to all offenders: but the greatest
number by far perishes (alas) in their dangerous and crooked ways; and as
they are deprived of grace in this life, so are they banished from glory in the
next, and condemned to eternal punishment and torment. From which Jesus Christ
of his mercy preserve us. Amen.

FINIS.
A CONFERENCE With a Lady about choice of RELIGION.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Anchor in the New-Exchange. 1654.

MADAM,
MY being conscious to myself how confusedly and intricately I have delivered
my conceptions unto your Ladyship, upon the several occasions of discourse we
have had together, concerning that important subject of what faith and religion
is the true one to bring us to eternal happiness (wherein your Ladyship is so
wisely and worthily inquisitive and sollicitous) has begotten this following
writing; in the which I will, as nere as I can, sum up the heads of those
considerations I have sometimes discussed unto you in conversation. And I will
briefly and barely lay them before you, without any long enlargement upon them;
as having a better opinion of the reflections that your Ladyships great
understanding and strong reasoning soul will by your self make upon the naked
object sincerely proposed, then of any commentary I can frame upon it. And
indeed such discourses as these are deeper looked into, when they are pondered
by a prudentiall judgment, then when they are examined by scientificall
speculations.

But with your leave, I shall take the matter a little higher then where the
chief difficulty seems to be, at which your Ladyship sticks; conceiving
that if we begin at the root, and proceed on step by step, we shall find
our search the easier, and the securer, and our ascent to the conclusions we
shall collect, will be the more firm and vigorous.

We will therefore begin with considering why faith and religion is needful to
a man, before we determine the means how to find out the right faith: for that
being once settled in the understanding, we shall presently without further
dispute reject what religion soever is but proposed, that has not those
proprieties which are required to bring that to pass, that Religion in its
own nature aymeth at. And this must be done by taking a survey of some of the
operations of a human soul, and of the impressions made in it by the objects it
is conversant withal.

1. Your Ladyshipp may be pleased then to consider in the first place, That it
is by nature ingrafted in the souls of all mankind to desire beatitude, (By
which word I mean an entire, perfect, and secure fruition of all such objects
as one has vehement affections unto, without mixture of any thing one has
aversion from.) For the soul having a perpetual activity in it, must
necessarily have something to entertain it self about: And according to the
two chief powers of it (which are the Understanding and the Will) it employeth
it self, first in the search and investigation of what is true and good; and
then, according to the judgment it makes of it, the Will follows, and with
affections graspeth at it, which if it happen to seize upon, the soul is at
content and at rest; but if it miss, it is unquiet, and labors with all
vehemence to compass it: and if any thing happen that is repugnant to the nature
of it, it uses all industry and efficacious means to overcome and banish it:
so that all the actions and motions of it, tend to gain contentment and
beatitude.

2. In the next place you may please to consider, that this full beatitude
which the soul thirsts after, cannot be enjoyed in this life. For it is
apparent, that intellectual goods, as science, contemplation and fruition of
spiritual objects and contentments, in their own nature are the chief goods
of the soul, and affect her much more strongly and violently then corporal and
sensual ones can do: for they are more agreeable to her nature, and therefore
move her more efficaciously when they are duly relished. But such
intellectual goods cannot be perfectly relished and enjoyed, as long as the
soul is immersed in the body, by reason that the sensual appetite makes
continual war against the rational part of the soul; and in most men
mastereth it, and in the perfectest, this earthly habitation does so draw down
and clogge, and benumme the noble inhabitant of it (which would always busy
it self in sublime contemplations) as it may be said to be but in a jayl
whiles it resideth here. And experience confirms unto us, that the sparks of
knowledge we gain here are not pure, but have the nature of salt water, that
increases the thirst in them who drink most of it; and we swallow the purest
streams like men in a dropsy, who the more they drink are still the greedier
of more. Therefore to have this greediness of knowing satisfied, and to
exercise the powers of our soul in the pure and abstracted contemplation of
truth, and in the sincere fruition of spiritual objects, we must have patience
until she arrive unto an other state of life, wherein being separated from all
corporal feces, impediments, and contradictions, she may wholly give her self
up to that which is her natural operation, and from whence resulteth her true
and perfect delight. Besides, even they who have attained to the greatest
blessings (both inward and outward) that this world can afford, yet are far
from being completely happy; for that state admits no mixture of the
contrary: which who was ever yet free from, were his fortune never so specious?
The very fear of loosing them, that must always necessarily accompany those
blessings, is such a spoonefull of gall to make their whole draught bitter, as
that alone must needs take off the edge and vigor of the contentment that else
they might enjoy. How little can any man relish the objects of delight, which
with never so great affluence, beset him round about, when he knows a sharp
and heavy sword hangs by a slender thread over his head, and at length must
fall, and ever after sever him from them? A little distemper, an accidental
fever, an ill mingled draught (such a one as the miracle of wit and learning,
Lucretius, met withal) is enough to turn the brains of the wisest man that
is, and in a few hours to blot out all those notions he has been in all his
life laboring to possess himself of, and to render him of a more abject, and
despicable condition then the meanest wretch living that has but the common
use of reason. The Genius that presideth over human affairs, delights in
perpetual changes, and variation of men's fortunes, so that he who late sat
enthroned in greatest dignity, is all of a sudden precipitated headlong unto
a condition most opposite thereunto: he that but yesterday had all his joys
enlarged, and swelled up to their full height by the communication of a perfect
and entire friend (without which can there be any true joy?) has to day lost
the comfort of all that the world can afford him by the irrecoverable loss of
that one friend. In a word, death growing daily upon him, and incroaching upon
his outworkes, and by hours reducing him into a narrower circle, at length
seizes upon himself, and makes an eternal divorce between him, and what
was dearest to him here.

3. Our next consideration then shall be to discover what will result out of
our swift passage through this vale of miseries, and what impressions we shall
carry with us out of this pilgrimage; since we cannot suspect it is a journey
assigned us in vain, being the ordinary and natural course prescribed by the
wise author of nature to all mankind, and the inevitable throughfare for every
man in particular. Therefore to proceed on in this method, our third conclusion
shall be, that whatsoever judgment the soul once frames in this life, that
judgment and that affection will perpetually remain in the soul, unless some
contrary impression be made in it to blot it out; which only has power to
expel any former one. For judgments and affections are caused in a man by the
impression that the objects make in his soul: and all that any agent aymeth at
in any operation whatsoever (be it never so forcible in action) is but to
produce a resemblance of it self in the subject it works upon; and therefore
it excludes nothing that it finds formerly there (which in our case is the
soul) unless it be some such impression as is incompatible with what it
intends to effect there; or that the subject is not large enough, both to
retain the old and receive the new; in which case the first must be blotted out
to make room for the latter. But of judgments, and affections, none are
incompatible to one another, but those that are directly opposite to one
another by contradiction: Therefore only such have power to expel one another;
and all that are not such, are immediately united to the very substance of the
soul, which having an infinite capacity, it can never be filled by any limited
objects whatsoever: so that they always reside in the soul, although they do
not at all times appear in outward act; which proceeds from hence, that new
and other images are by the fantasy represented to the soul, and she seems
to busy herself only about what she finds there, which being but one
distinct Image at a time (for corporal organs have limited comprehensions, and
are quickly filled with corporal species) she thereupon seems to exercise but
one judgment, or but one affection at a time. But as soon as the soul shall
be released out of the body (which is like a dark prison to wall it in) then
she will at one and the same instant actually know and love all those things
she knew, and loved in the body; with only this difference, that her knowledge
will then be much more distinct and perfect, and her affections much more
vehement then they were in this life, by reason that her conjunction here with
resistant matter was a burden, and a clogge unto her, and hindered the
activity and force of her operations. The difference of these states, may in
some measure be illustrated by a gross and material example: Represent unto
your self a man walled up in a dark tower, that is so close, as no air nor
light can come into it, excepting only at one little hole, and that hole too
affords no clear and free passage to the sight, but has a thick and muddy
glass before it. Now if this man would look upon any of the objects that are
about this tower, he must get them to be placed over against the hole, unto
which he must lay his eye; and then, he can discern but one at a time, and
that but dimly neither; and if he will see several bodies, it must be by so
many several iterated acts as they are in number. But suppose some Earthquake
or exterior violence to break a sunder and throw down to the ground the walls of
this tower, leaving the man untouched and unhurt; then at one instant, and with
one cast of his eyes, he beholds distinctly, clearly, and at ease, all those
several objects that with so much labor and time he took but a mistaking
survey of before.

4. The fourth consideration shall be, that after the first instant wherein
the soul is separated from the body, she is then in her nature no longer
subject or liable to any new impression, mutation or change whatsoever. For
that which should cause any such effect, must be either a material or a
spiritual agent: But a material one cannot work upon it, for that requires
quantity in the patient, whereby it may be applied unto it to exercise its
operation upon it: Nor can any spiritual agent cause any succession of new
alteration; But all that spirits work one upon another is done at once and at
one instant: which we shall discern the clearer by examining the reason why
there is succession and time taken up in the alterations that are wrought
amongst material things, for in them, by reason of their quantity that causes
an extention and distance of the parts, the agent, although it have never so
much disposition and efficacy to work, must have his several parts applied to
I the several parts of the patient by local motion; which requires time for
performance thereof. And besides, even in the agent it self, the grossness
and heaviness of the matter gives an allay, and is a clogge to the activity
of the form; and as it were pulls it back whiles it is in action. But this
is not so in spiritual substances, and therefore we may conclude that among
them, in the same instant that the agent is disposed to work, the action is
performed, for on his part there is nothing to retard it, nor is there required
any local motion which should take up time; and likewise by the same reason,
in the very instant that the patient is disposed to receive any impression, it
is wrought in it: And thus, although there were never so many agents, and every
one of them to perform never so many actions, they would be all done, and
ended in one and the same instant.

5. The next consideration shall be, that those persons who in this world had
strong and predominant affections to sensible and material objects; and dyed
in that state, shall be eternally miserable in the next; for by what we have
said, it appearth that those affections will eternally remain in the soul;
and that after the separation of it from the body, they can never be blotted
out of it, or changed; And the affections of a separated soul are much more
ardent and vehement then whiles it is in the body. But it is impossible they
should ever attain in that state to the fruition of what they so violently
covet and love, and yet for its sake they neglect all other goods whatsoever
that they might have, whose beauty and excellency notwithstanding they plainly
discern: they cannot choose therefore but execrate themselves for their fondly
misplaced (yet then eternally necessary) affections, and pine away (if so I may
say) with perpetual anguish and despair of what they so impatiently, and
enragedly desire, and never can obtain.

6. The sixth consideration shall be, that to be happy in the next life, one
must not settle their predominant affections upon any creature whatsoever, or
any good that we can naturally attain to the knowledge of in this life. For
what natural good soever we love or enjoy here, we must by death be divorced
from, and (as we have said before) that separation will cause perpetual
sorrow, because the affections remain unchangeable. And although we should
place our felicity in natural knowledge, or any other intellectual good
whatsoever, yet that cannot satisfy the desires, and fill the capacity of the
soul, though it be never so perfectly enjoyed: for they are infinite; and this
can be collected but out of particular objects (for the whole created universe
is but so) and therefore they hold no proportion together; but the soul having
nothing else to fill it withal, although it should not be tormented with the
former mentioned corrosives of preposterous affections, yet it cannot be at
rest and quiet, and the thirst of it satisfied by that drop of water, in
comparison of the vehement ardor of it.

And thus it follows, that either man was not created for a determinate end,
and for a state convenient for his nature, and able to satisfy the original
appetences of his soul; or at the least, no man can by natural means arrive
to the end and period of happiness.

7. But now to proceed in the pursuance of this method of reasoning, and to
follow hence forward the conduct of a supernatural guide, since nature
quitteth us here, having lead us on as long as she was able to see; we may in
the seventh place consider that God when he created man did not assign him to
remain in the state of pure nature, but did out of his goodness and
liberality confer something upon him that exceeded the sphere of his nature.
For else the first part of the precedent consequence would follow; which were
not only impious, but absurd to say, to whosoever considers the infinite
goodness, wisdom and omnipotency of God. For as heat being essential to
fire, cannot but produce heat in whatsoever it has application unto; so God
being in his own essence goodness it self, cannot choose but do unto
whatsoever proceeds from him, all that good which the nature of it is capable
of; (whether by natural or supernatural means) and his wisdom can readily
contrive the means to bring that to pass which his goodness disposes him to
do; and his omnipotency as easily acts what his other two atributes have
projected; so that there wanting an infinite object to satisfy the infinite
capacity of the soul, and without which she must be eternally misefable; it
remains, that he who gave that capacity, must also afford the object, and
assign means how to compass and gain it. All which we have already proved is
out of the reach of nature to discern: and therefore it follows of
consequence, that the author of nature must endow man with some supernatural
gifts, if he be in a fit disposition to receive them, which may bring him to
the supernatural end he was created for.

8. Our eighth conclusion shall be that of these supernatural gifts, the
first, and the ground and foundation of all the rest, is faith. For we have
already determined, that we cannot by any natural means attain to the
knowledge of any object that may render us completely happy in the next life;
And yet such knowledge must be had, to the end we may direct our actions to
gain the fruition of that object Therefore there is no way left to compass
this, but by the instructions and discipline of some Master, whose goodness
and knowledge we can no ways doubt of; by which two perfections in him, we may
be secure that he neither can be deceived himself, nor will deceive us. Now
the Doctrine that such a Master shall teach us for such an end, we call faith.

9. In the ninth place we must determine that this Master must be God and man.
For first by our discourse upon natural principles, we have proved, that to
avoid misery in the next life, we must deny our senses the content and
satisfaction that they naturally desire in corporeal things, and that we must
withdraw our affections from all material objects: And next we have collected
that the object we must know and love, to be happy, does exceed the reach and
view of any created understanding to discern: Therefore we may safely conclude
that this doctrine ought to be delivered unto us originally by God himself.
For after the first branch, which is of withdrawing our affections from
sensible goods; although out of natural principles that doctrine is to be
collected, yet that is not a sufficient means to settle mankind in general,
in the belief of it: For the discourse that proves it, is such an abstracted
one, as very few are capable of it, being that it requires both a mature age
to be able to reason so (before which time many dye) and likewise strong and
vigorous powers of the understanding, which we see more do want, then are
endowed withal: And besides, of those that have both years and capacity to
wield such thoughts, there are so few that are not in a manner forced away from
such interior recollections by their particular vocations, and the natural
necessities they are obliged unto; as to beat it out by themselves is not a
sufficient means to serve mankind in this case. And to think that those few,
who having great parts, may with much labor have attained to the knowledge
thereof, should instruct others that are simpler, and are taken up by other
employments and courses of life, were very irrational; since no man, be he
never so wise, is such but may be deceived; and then, how can it be expected
that another man should without sensible demonstration believe his single word
in a matter so contrary to sense, and wherein he must forgo so great
contentments and present utility?

And for the other branch, which is in the instructing mankind concerning the
right object that he is to know, and love, to be happy, that is altogether out
of the reach of any man whatsoever by himself to discover; and therefore much
less can he in his own name instruct others therein: And if any man should
go about to do so, and to introduce a new doctrine of faith not formerly
heard of, drawing the arguments for confirmation thereof only out of his own
ratiocination and discourse; that alone were enough to convince him of
falsehood; since he should thereby undertake to know what were impossible for
him of himself to attain to the knowledge of.

Therefore it is necessary that the author of the doctrine we must believe, the
instructor of the actions we must perform, and the promiser of the happiness
we may hope for, be God himself; who only knows of himself what is said in
matters of these natures, and who only is neither liable to be deceived, nor
can deceive others; as being the prime verity it self.

But because the weakness of our intellectual nature is such, whiles we
remain here in our earthly habitations, imprisonned in our houses of clay, as
we cannot lift up our heavy and drousie eyes, and steddily fix our dim fight
upon the dazeling and indeed invisible Deity, nor entertain an immediate
communication with him (like the children of Israel, who desired that Moses,
not God might speak unto them) it was necessary that God himself should
descend to some corporal substance that might be more familiar and less
dazeling unto us; And none was so convenient as humane nature, to the end that
he might not only converse freely and familiarly with us, and so in a gentle
and a sweet manner teach us what we should do; but also preach unto us by his
example, and himself be our leader in the way that he instructed us to take.
The conclusion then of this discourse, is, that it was necessary, Christ, God
and man, should come into the world to teach us what to believe and what to do.

10. The tenth conclusion shall be, that those unto whom Christ did immediately
preach this faith, and unto whom he gave commission to preach it unto others,
and spread it through the world, after he ascended to heaven; ought to be
believed as firmly as he himself. The reason of this assertion is, that their
doctrine, though it be delivered by secondary mouths, yet it proceeds from
the same fountain: which is God himself, that is the prime verity, and cannot
deceive, nor be deceived. But all the difficulty herein is, to know who had
this immediate commission from Christ, and by what seal we should discern it to
have been no forged one. The solution of this arises out of the same argument
which proves that Christ himself was God, and that the doctrine he taught was
true and divine; which is, the miracles and wonders he did, exceeding the power
of nature, and that could be effected by none but by God himself: for he being
truth it self, cannot by any action immediately proceeding from him, witness
and confirm a falsehood: In like manner the Apostles doing such admirable works
and miracles as neither by nature nor by art magic could be brought to pass,
that must necessarily infer God himself cooperated with them to justify
what they said; it is evident that their doctrine (which was not their own, but
received from Christ) must be true and Divine.

11. The eleventh conclusion shall be, that this faith thus taught by Christ,
and propagated by the Apostles, and necessary to mankind to believe (as well
that part of it which is written, as the whole which is not) depends
intrinsecally upon the testimony of the Catholic Church; which is ordained to
conserve and deliver it from age to age: (By which Catholic Church, I mean the
congregation of the faithful that is spread throughtout the whole world) for
we have proved before, that the way to the true faith ought to be open and
plain to all men, of all abilities, and in all ages, that have a desire to
embrace it: and this cannot be but either by the immediate preaching of Christ;
or else by the information (either in writing, or by word of mouth) of them
that learned it from him, and their delivering it over to others, and so from
hand to hand until any particular time you will pitch upon. But from Christ's
own mouth, none could have it, but those who lived in the age when he did:
therefore there remains no other men's to have it derived down to after ages,
then by this delivery over from hand to hand of the whole congregation of
fathers or elders dispersed throughout the world, to the whole congregation of
sons or youngers; which course of deducing faith from Christ we call
tradition; so that this conclusion, proves that the Church is the conserver
both of the whole doctrine of faith necessary for salvation, and likewise of
the divine writ dictated by the Holy Ghost, and written by the Prophets,
Evangelists and Apostles, which we are also bound to believe. And the same
assent that we are to give to the truth of Scriptures (that is to say, that the
Scriptures we have are true Scriptures) the very same we are to give to other
articles of faith proposed unto us by the Church: for they alike depend of the
same authority; which is the veracity of the Church proposing and delivering
them unto us to be believed. And we may as well doubt that the Church has
corrupted the Scriptures, as that she has corrupted any article of faith.

12. The twelfth conclusion shall be, that into the Catholic Church no false
doctrine in any age can be admitted or creep in, that is to say, no false
proposition whatsoever can ever be received and embraced by the Catholic
Church as a proposition of faith. For whatsoever the Church believes as a
proposition of faith, is upon this ground, that Christ taught it as such unto
the Church he planted himself, and so left it in trust to be by it delivered
over to the next age. And the reason why the present Church believes any
proposition to be of faith, is, because the immediate preceding Church of the
age before, delivered it as such. And so you may drive it on from age to age
until you come to the Apostles and Christ. Therefore to have any false
proposition of faith admitted into the Church in any age, does Suppose that all
they of that age must unanimously conspire to deceive their children and
youngers, telling them that they were taught by their fathers to believe, as of
faith, some proposition which indeed they were not. Which being impossible (as
it will evidently appear to any prudent person that shall reasonably ponder the
matter) that so many men spread throughout the whole world, so different in
their particular interests and ends, and of such various dispositions and
natures, should all agree together in the forgery of any precise lie; it is
impossible that any false doctrine should creep into the Church.

But because the force of this argument may peradventure not appear at the
first sight to your Ladyship, that happily has not had much occasion to make
deep reflection upon the certainty that must needs be in the asseveration of
any history of matter of fact, subject to the sense, which shall be made by a
great company of men so distant from one another, and of such different
interests and affections as they cannot conspire together in the forgery of a
falsehood; But that you may happily think, since any one man is liable to be
deceived, or out of some indirect end may be induced to deceive another, it is
also possible that a multitude of men (be it never so great) consisting of
particular men, may also deceive or be deceived: I will therefore for a
further declaration of this matter, propose for the thirteenth Conclusion, that
faith thus delivered, is absolutely more certain and infallible then any
natural science whatsoever. And yet sciences are so certain (I mean such as
depend of experience and demonstration) as he were not a rational man that
should refuse his assent unto them: And consequently he would incur the like
censure that should not yield credence to faith, in this manner proposed unto
him. In the proof of this conclusion I must use two words appropriated to
philosophy (to wit matter and form) which is contrary to my intention at the
first, which was to abstain from all terms of artificial learning, and make
only a familiar discourse that should require no precedent help of study, but
only a clear and strong judgment (such as yours is) to weigh the strength of
the reasons: But I am the less scrupulous to avoid these words, because I know
your Ladyship understands what is meaned by them; and they have often
occurred in our discourses. To come then to the examination of this conclusion,
I say, that faith depends on these two propositions; first, that whatsoever
God says is true; Next, that God said this (whatsoever it be) that is
delivered thus by the tradition of the Church. For the former of these
assertions, there is no doubt made by any side; since all agree that God being
the prime verity, whatsoever proceeds immediately from him must necessarily
be more infallible then any collections made from creatures either by
experience or ratiocination of men.

The second assertion I shall also prove to be more infallible then any such
collectio^s; in this manner. Among material things, that are subject to time
and place, and are here in the sphere of contraries, and of action and passion,
although the laws that govern them are in the general certain (else no
science could be acquired of them) yet in the particular they are subject to
contingency and defection from those laws; which contingency does proceed from
the resistance of the matter, and the contagion and leprosy (if so I may say)
that the matter infecteth the form withal; which were it not for that, would
always constantly work the same effect in all occasions: and according as the
form has in particular more or less predominance over the matter, the
contingency and defect in them from the true nature of that body considered in
his perfection, is the greater or the lesser. Let us illustrate this by an
example: According to the ordinary doctrine of Philosophers in the Schools, we
collect by many particular experiences, that the nature of fire proceeding from
the form of it, is to ascend; and of them we frame a general doctrine, that
fire is the lightest of all the elements, and that his natural place is above
them all: yet we see that when the form of fire is introduced into gross and
terrestrial matter, it is wrested from his own natural inclination, and is
forced, instead of ascending, then to descend; as when wood, iron, earth,
coal, and such other terrestrial matter is set on fire: And it is more or
less violented from his natural place, according as the subject it resideth
in, has more or less power over it, and is more or less material: for it
shows more of his levity and natural propension to ascend, when it sets
an oily, or ayery substance on fire, and breaks up in flames, then when
meeting with a more material and terrestrial substance, as wood, it turns
it into a coal. Now to apply this to our purpose, I say, that of all forms
whatsoever that are joined to matter, the noblest and most elevated above the
faeculency of matter, is the soul of man: for it is not only the form of the
noblest material creature that is; but besides that, it is so full of efficacy
as it eve^ overfloweth the capacity of matter, which not being able to imbibe
(as I may say) and take it up all, it has a particular subsistence belonging
to its self; from whence Philosophers prove the immortality of it. Therefore
we may safely conclude that mankind, in the original appetences and natural
desires of his soul, is less subject to contingency, and more secure from
having his nature corrupted and perverted from his due course, then any other
material creature whatsoever is in the performance of those actions that
proceed from the activity of his form; and so consequently, being considered
in general, proceeds most certainly and infallibly to the pursuance thereof;
and it is impossible it should fall off from its own nature, and suffer that
to be extinguished in it; although in some particulars, by the immersion in
matter, and the terrene habitation it dwells in, some soul may be drawn, or
rather wrested to a contrary byas unto that which originally nature implanted
in it. Now the primary original natural appetence of man's soul, is the love
of truth; which it vehemently desires, and is always unquiet and ardent in
the search of it upon what occasion soever, and is never appeased and at ease,
until she have found it out; which she no sooner has done, but the violence
she was in is calmed; she is contented, and she setleth her self to repose, as
having arrived to her center and natural place of rest; wherein she continues
enjoying the purchase she has made, until some new occasion of disquisition
stir her up again; in which she uses the same industry and eagerness as
before. And thus we plainly see that the acquisition of truth is that which the
soul in every action naturlaly aymeth at, as fire does to ascend; and
detesteth falsehood, as flames suffer violence to be reverberated downwards.
Therefore, although any particular man may have his senses or fantasy so
depraved as to take imperfect and maimed impressions of outward objects; or the
powers of his understanding so weak as to make preposterous and disorderly
collections out of them; or his judgment so misguided by preoccupation of any
affection or particular end, as he may in himself be deceived, and feed his
soul with falsehood insteede of truth; or else, that finister respects and
interests, or sordide apprehensions of commodity to himself, meeting with a
soul so disposed and wrought upon by the sensual passions tyrannising over
it, as to cause him to swallow those bayter, may make him employ the faculties
of his understanding and the powers of his soul, contrary unto their natural
inclination, to the maintaining of a lie, and industriously to deceive others:
yet it is impossible that all mankind, or such a multitude of men as contain
in them all the variety of dispositions and affections incident to the nature
of man, and that are dispersed throughout the world, so as they can have no
communion together whereby they might infect one another, nor can have finister
ends common alike to them all, which should invite them to conspire together to
forge a falsehood: it is impossible (I say) that such a company of men should
so degenerate from their own nature (which is to love truth) as they should of
themselves invent a lie (and that in so important a matter as faith is) and
concur to deceive the world of men that should come after them in things of
such nature, as their deceit must of necessity damn for all eternity both
themselves and all them that shall receive that lie from them, and take it upon
their credit: without which unanimous conspiracy of one whole age of men
throughout all the world, we proved in our last conclusion that no false
proposition could be admitted into the Church as an article of faith. In a
word, this general defection of all mankind from truth, is more impossible,
then that all one entire element, or any primigeniall nature should absolutely
perish or loose its original propriety; as for all the fire in the world to be
corrupted and forsake his heat and levity, and so consequently to have no more
fire in nature: all which follows of what is said above. And thus I conceive
I have made good the assertion that has begotten all this discourse upon the
thirteenth head; which is, that faith conserved in the Catholic Church, and
delivered by perpetual succession and general tradition, is more certain and
more infallible then any natural science whatsoever: for natural sciences
being grounded upon the indefectibility of the natures of those things from
whence those sciences are collected; and faith depending upon the
indefectibility of human nature, which is infinitely more noble then they, and
whose form is elevated beyond the reach of matter (whereas theirs is
comprehended and shutt up within the womb of matter, and which is indeed the
end and period of all their natures, and of all the whole material world) it
follows of consequence that faith must be less subject to contingency, and
less liable to error then natural sciences are. And they being universal,
infallible and certain; faith must be so too; and more, if more may be.

But this is not enough, our disquisition must not rest here: We must not
content our selves in this divine affair and supernatural doctrine with a
certitude depending only upon natural causes. The wisdom of God proportioneth
out congruent means to bring on every thing to their proper end; and according
to the nobility of the effect that he will have produced, he ordains
equivalent noble causes. Therefore, man's obtaining beatitude being the highest
end that any creature can arrive unto, and altogether supernatural, it
requires supernatural causes to bring us to that end, and a supernatural
infallibility to secure us in that journey. We must not only have a
supernatural way to travel in (which is faith) but also a supernatural
assurance of the right way, unto the discovery of which, all that we have
already said, does necessarily conduce; for Gods providence that disposes all
things sweetly, will not in any general affair introduce into the material
world any supernatural effect, until the natural causes be first disposed
fittingly to cooperate on their parts; and then he never fails of his. As
for example, when a natural creature is to be produced into being, the father
and the mother must both concur in contributing all that is in their power,
to the generation of a child; and yet we are sure the soul to be produced has
no dependence of them; yet notwithstanding, without their precedentaction no
new soul would be: but when the matter is fittingly disposed in the mothers
womb, he never misseth creating of a soul in that body; which is not so able
an effect, and as much requiring the omnipotency of God, as the creating of
nothing all the material world; and yet we may say that the matter when it is
arrived to its last disposition for the reception of such a form, may in a
manner claim that miraculous action depending of his omnipotency; since for
mankind he created the rest of the material world, and therefore there ought
to be as certain and necessary causes for the productio^ of man, as there are
for the production of other material things, which we see do seldom miss in
any when the matter is fitly disposed for the reception of their several
forms. And so in like manner we may rationally conclude, that in this high and
supernatural business of delivering over from hand to hand a supernatural
doctrine to bring mankind to the end it was created for, he will first have all
the natural causes fittingly disposed for the secure and infallible
performance of that work: and then, that he will add and infuse into them
some supernatural gift whereby to give them yet further a supernatural
assurance and infallibility; which they may with an humble confidence in his
unlimited goodness, expect and claim at his divine hand, when they are reduced
to that state as is convenient for the reception of such a supernatural gift.

14. Our fourteenth conclusion therefore shall be, that God has given to his
Church thus composed, the holy Ghost, to confirm it in the true faith, and to
preserve it from error, and to Illuminate the understanding of it in right
discerning the true sense of those Mysteries of faith that are committed to the
custody of it, and to work supernatural effects of devotion and sanctify in
that Church. And this I prove thus; Considering that the doctrine of Christ is
practical, and aymeth at the working of an effect, which is the reduction of
mankind to beatitude: and that mankind comprehends not only those that
lived in that age, when he preached, but also all others that ever were since,
or shall be till the end of the world: It is apparent that to accomplish that
end, it was necessary Christ should so effectually imprint his doctrine in
their hearts whom he delivered it unto, as it might upon all occasions and at
all times infallibly express it self in action, and in the delivery of it
over from hand to hand, should in virtue and strength of the first operation,
produce ever after like effects in all others. Now to have this completely
performed, it was to be done both by exterior and by interior means,
proportionable to the senses without, and to the soul within. The outward
means were the miracles that he wrought, of which himself says, If I had not
wrought those works that no man else ever did, they were not guilty of sin,
but now, they have no excuse: (or to this purpose) and he promised the Apostles
they should do greater then those. And that miracles are the proper instruments
to plant a new doctrine and faith withal, the Apostle witnesses, when he
says that miracles are wrought for the unfaithful, not for the faithful, and
God himself told Moses that he would once do some prodigy in his favor, that
the people might for ever after believe what he said to them. But it is
manifest by the fall of the Apostles themselves, that only this exterior
means of miracles is not sufficient to engraft supernatural faith deep enough
in men's hearts, when as they upon Christ's Passion, not only for fear, through
human frailty denied their master, but had even the very conceit and belief of
his doctrine exiled out of their hearts and understanding, notwithstanding all
the miracles they had seen him work in almost four years time they continually
conversed with him: which appears plainly by the discourse of the Disciples
going to Emaus, when they said we hoped etc. and expressed their sadness for
the contrary success to their expectation; and by saint Thomas his saying that
he would not believe his resurrection unless he saw him, and put his fingers
into his wounds etc. And by the rest of the Apostles that were so long before
they would believe his resurrection, as having given over the thought of his
divinity, and after his death considered him but as a pure man like other men.
Therefore it was necessary that some inward light should be given them, so
clear, and so strong, and so powerful, as the senses should not be able to
prevail against it, but that it should overflowingly possess and fill all
their understandings and their souls, and make them break out in exterior
actions correspondent to the spirit that steered them within. And the reason is
evident: for while: on the one side the senses discern, apparently, miracles
wrought in confirmation of a doctrine; and on the other side, the same senses
do stiffly contradict the very possibility of the doctrine which those miracles
testify; the soul within, having no assistance beyond the natural powers she
has belonging originally unto her, is in great debate and anxiety which way to
give her assent; and though reason do prevail to give it to the party of the
present miracles, yet it is with great timidity. But if it happen that the
course of those miracles be stopped; then the particular seeming
impossibilities of the proposed faith remaining always alike lively in their
apprehension, and the miracles wrought to confirm it residing but in the
memory, and the representations of them wearing out daily more and more, and
the present senses and fantasy growing proportionably stronger and stronger,
and withal objecting continually new doubts about the reality of those
miracles, it cannot be expected otherwise, but that the assent of the soul
should range it self on the side of the impossibilities appearing to the
present senses, and renounce the doctrine formerly confirmed by miracles,
unless some inward and supernatural light be given her to disperse all the
mists that the senses raise against the truth of the doctrine. Now the infusion
of this light and fervor, we call the giving of the holy Ghost, which Christ
himself foreknowing how necessary it was, promised them, assuring them that he
would procure his father to send them the holy Ghost, the spirit of truth, that
should for ever remain among them, and within them, and suggest unto their
memory and instruct them in the right understanding of the faith he had
preached unto them. And this was prophesied long before, of the state of the
law of grace by Hieremy, whose authority S. Paul brings to prove that the law
of the Gospel was to be written by the holy Ghost in men's hearts and in their
minds, and accordingly, he calls the faithful of the Corinthians, The faith
of Christ, not written with ink, but with the spirit of God; nor graven in
stony tables, but in the fleshy ones of their hearts. And in performance of
this prophesy and of Christ's promise, the history tells us that on the tenth
day after the ascension of Christ, when all his disciples (who were then all
his Church, and were to preach and deliver it to all the world) were assembled
together, the holy Ghost was given them, and that in so full a measure, as they
not only were confirmed so perfectly in their faith as they never after
admitted the least vacillation therein, but they immediately, casting away all
other desires and thoughts, were inflamed with admirable love of God, and broke
out into his praises, and into a vehement ardor of teaching and converting
others; and when by reason of that zeal of theirs, any thing happened to them
contrary to flesh and blood, and humane nature (as persecutions, ignominies,
corporal punishments, and even death it self) they not only shunned it, as
before, but greedily rann to meet and embrace it, and joyed, and gloryed in it:
all which were effects of the holy Ghost residing in them, and filling their
minds, and governing their souls. Where upon by the way we may note, that in
what Church soever we find not a state of life for sanctity and near union
with God, and contempt of worldly and transitory things, raised above the pitch
of nature and morality, we may conclude the holy Ghost inhabiteth not there:
for every agent produces effects proportionable to the dignity of it, and the
excellency of any cause shines eminently in the nobleness of its effects. Now
that this gift of the holy Ghost is to remain with the Church as long as the
Church remains, to illuminate it with the spirit of truth, and to give it a
supernatural and divine unction, will appear manifestly upon consideration of
the cause why the holy Ghost was to be given at the first, which remains
always the same, and therefore the same effect must always follow; and
accordingly, Christ promised his Church upon his ascending into heaven, that he
would always remain with them until the end of the world, to wit, by this
holy spirit; for he was then at the point of withdrawing his corporeal
presence from them.

15. Our next conclusion shall be, that this Church or congregation of men
spread over the world, conserving and delivering the faith of Christ from hand
to hand, is even in its own nature perpetual in time, and cannot fail as
long as mankind remains in the world. This needs no further proof then
that which we have already made; which is derived from the necessity of
supernatural faith to bring mankind to the end it was created for, and that
there is no means to deliver this faith to mankind in the ages after Christ,
but by the tradition of the Church; and therefore as long as mankind lasts,
this means must be continued. Yet in this way of reasoning that I use, we are
to examine our conclusions as well by the genuine and orderly causes that beget
them, and by their own particular principles, as to assent unto them for the
necessity that we see in them in regard of the end that they are referred unto:
And when we have retrived those, and evidently discerned their force, it gives
an admirable content and satisfaction to the understanding. Thus then: as
philosophers conclude that it is impossible any whole species or kind of beasts
should ever be utterly exterminated and destroyed, that is diffused up and
down over the whole face of the earth, because the amplitude of the universe
is greater then the variety of causes can be from which such a general and
entire corruption must proceed: In like manner we may confidently conclude,
that it is impossible any depraved affections should so universally prevail,
and so absolutely reign in men's minds throughout the whole world, as would be
requisite to extirpate and root out a doctrine universally spread over it all,
that was at the first taught and confirmed with such seals of truth as the
miracles that Christ and the apostles wrought, that in its self is so pure and
agreeable to the seeds that every man finds sowed, even by nature, in his
own soul; that works such admirable effects as the reformation of manners
in mankind; that withdraws men's affections from humane and worldly
contentments, and carries them with a sweet violence to intellectual objects,
and to hopes of immortality and happiness in another life; that prescribes
laws for happy living, even in this world, to all men of what condition
soever, either public or private, as working a moderation in men's affections
to the commodities and goods of this life, which else in nature is apt to blind
men's minds, and is the cause of all mischiefs and evils; and lastly, that is
delivered over from hand to hand, from worlds of fathers to worlds of sons,
with such care and exactness as greater cannot be imagined, and as it is
requisite to the importance of that affair; which is infinitely beyond all
others, as on which the salvation and damnation of mankind wholly depends.
Now, unto these rational considerations let us add the promise which Christ
made to his Church, that the gates of hell should not prevail against it; and
I think we have sufficiently maintained that the Church of Christ in which the
true doctrine of Christ is conserved, can never fail, but must infallibly
continue unto the worlds end. Thus having proved, that a supernatural doctrine
is necessary to bring mankind to beatitude, that Christ taught this doctrine,
that from him the Church received it, and is the sacrary in which it is
conserved; that this Church cannot err in the tradition of this doctrine, that
besides the infallibility of it, this Church is perpetual; It remains now
that we close up this discourse by applying all these premises unto the
question in hand; which is, where we shall find out this infallible Church,
that by it we may gain the knowledge of the true says of Christ, whereby we
are to be saved.

16. For this end our sixteenth and last conclusion shall be, that the
congregation of men spread over the world, joining in communion with the Church
of Rome, is the true Catholic Church, in which is conserved and taught the
true saving faith of Christ.

The truth of this conclusion will without bringing any new proofs appear
evidently by reflecting upon what we have said, and only examining whether the
Roman Church be such a one as we have determined the true Church of Christ
must be; or whether the notes which we may infer out of our discourse to
belong inseparably to the true Church, may not rather with more reason be
acknowledged of some other then of that in communion with the sea of Rome? This
point after these grounds laid, requires no very subtle disquisition, but is
discernable even by the weakest sights: and therefore this way of arguing
appears to me most satisfactory and contentfull, when taking the whole body
of the question into survey, and beginning with the first and remotest
considerations of it, we drive the difficulties still before us; and pursuing
of them orderly, at every step we establish a solid principle, and so become
secure of the truth and certainty of all we leave behind us; which course,
although it may at the first fight appear to be a great way about, and looking
but superficially upon the matter we may seem to meet with difficulties which
concern not our question; yet in the effect we shall perceive it is the most
summary method of handling any controversy; and the only means to be secured
of the truth of what we conclude, and that will recompense the precedent
difficulties by making the conclusion (which is the knot of the affair) plain,
easy, and open. I say then first, that unity of doctrine in matters of faith
is inseparable from the Roman Church, and can never be found in any other: it
only, having a precise and determinate rule of faith. For it has believed in
every age, all that has bin plainly and positively taught unto it by their
Fathers as the doctrine of faith derived from Christ; and admits no other
article whatsoever as an article of faith. Whereas on the other side, all other
Christian Churches among us that pretend reformation, having no certain and
common rule of faith, but every particular man governing himself in this
matter by the collections of his own brain, and by his own private
understanding and interpretation of Scripture (which only he acknowledges as
the entire rule of faith) it must consequently follow, that according to the
variety of their tempers and judgments, there must be a variety and
difference of their opinions and beliefes; which difference of temper happening
for the most part between every two men that are, it likewise follows scarce
any two should in all particulars of their opinions agree together. And
accordingly we see by experience, that scarce any two authors, out of the
Roman Church, that have written of matters of faith have agreed in their
tenets, but rather have dissented in fundamental doctrine, and have inveighed
against one another in their writings with great vehemence and bittesnes.
Whereas on the other side, the Doctors of the Roman Church in all times, in all
places, and of all tempers have agreed unanimously in all matters of faith;
although in the mean time, several of them, have in diverse other points great
debates against one another, and pursue them with much sharpness: which
strongly confirms the ground upon which we frame this observation.

But to insist a little further upon this material and important
consideration; it is evident that the proceeding of the reformers opens the
gate to all dissension, schism, irreverence, pride of understanding, heresy,
and ruin of Christian Religion: for to justify the new births of their
rebellious brains, the first stroke of their pen must be, to lay a taint of
ignorance and error upon the whole current of ancient fathers and Doctors of
the Church, and general Counsels, and to blast their authority; which is so
precisely contrary to their doctrine, whose names and records ought to be
sacred with posterity. Which when they have done; to settle a constant and like
belief in all men, they give no general and certain rule; but leaving every
man to the dictamens of his own private judgment, according to the several
tempers and circumstances (as we said before) that sway every single man in
particular, there must result (which we see by experience) as great a variety
of opinions as those are different. And lastly since they quarrel at
Catholics belief in those points where they differ from them, because they
captivate their understandings with reverence to what the Church proposes and
teaches, and thereby admit into their belief articles which may seem absurd
to common sense; they may as well with presumptuous hands graspe at, and seek
to pluck up the very foundations of Christian Religion; as namely the Doctrine
of the Trinity, and of the incarnation of Christ, and of the resurrection and
state of life of the future world: since there are greater seeming
contradictions in them (especially in the two first) then in those mysteries
the reformers cavil at.

In the next place we may consider, that as infallibility is pretended by the
Roman Church alone, so it is apparently entayled upon it: for we have proved
that no means or circumstance, either moral, natural or supernatural, is
wanting in it to beget infallibility in matters of faith. Whereas on the other
side, from the reformers own position we infer by consequence, that their
doctrine cannot be hoped (even by themselves) to be infallible, and therefore
they that shall submitt their understanding to their conduct, though they
believe without controversy all they say, must needs (even by reason of what is
taught them) floate always in a great deal of incertitude, and anxious
apprehension and fear of error. For they looking upon the Church, but with
pure humane consideratio^s, and as an ordinary company of men, will have it
liable to mistaking, according to the natural imbecility of men's wits and
understandings, and of humane passions, and negligence, and other such defects
and weaknesses which every man is by nature subject unto: Against which they
produce no antidote to preserve and secure themselves from the infection and
taint they lay upon the Church. For, if they will have the conferences of
several passages of Scripture to be that which must give light in the several
controverted obscurities; what eminency have these few late reformers shown,
either in knowledge of tongues, insight into antiquity, profoundnesse in
sciences, and perfection and sanctity of life, which has not shined admirably
more (not to tax them here of the contrary) in multitudes of the adverse
party? And none will deny but these are the likelyest means to gain a right
intelligence of the true and deep sense of Scriptures. And besides, we may
observe that the reason why they deny the several articles wherein they differ
from the Catholic Church, is because it teaches a doctrine which is
repugnant to sense, and of hard digestion to philosophy; both which are
uncompetent judges of divine and supernatural truths: And whosoever steereth
by their compass, cannot hope for infallibility in a matter that transcendeth
their reach.

Thirdly we may consider that the universality of the Church in regard of place
(which is necessary, to the end that all mankind may have sufficient means to
gain knowledge of the true faith) can be attributed to none but to the Roman
Catholic Church; which only is diffused throughout the whold world; whereas
all others are circled in with narrow limits of particular provinces; And even
within them, the professors scarce agree among themselves in any point of
doctrine, but in opposing the Roman Church.

And yet further; besides this want of universality in regard of place; the
Religion taught by the reformers, has yet a greater restriction then that: for
even in its own nature, it is not for all sorts of persons and for all
capacities: whereas the true saving faith to bring men to beatitude ought to be
obvious to all mankind, and open as well to the simple as to the learned. For
since they lay the Scriptures as the first and highest principle, from whence
they deduce all to that ought to be believed; And that in all arts and sciences
the primary and fundamental principles thereof ought to be thoroughly known by
them that aspire to the perfect knowledge of those sciences; it follows that
one must have an exact knowledge of the learned tongues to examine punctually
the true sense of the Scriptures; and that one must be perfectly versed in
logic to be able to reason solidly, and to deduce true consequences from
certain principles (for want of which, we find by experience that great
controversies arise daily among the learned men; which would not be, if the
force of consequences were of their own nature easily discernable) and one
must be thoroughly skilled in natural philosophy and Metaphysickes, since unto
appearing contradictions in subjects of those sciences, they reduce most of
their arguments against the supernatural truths that Catholics believe. And
lastly, one must be endowed with an excellent judgment and strong natural
wit, to be able to wield and make good use of these weapons; without which
they would but advance him the faster to ruin and pernicious error. With which
excellencyes, how few are there in the world fairly adorned?

Fourthly, it is evident that the Roman Catholic Church only has had a
constant and uninterrupted succession of Pastors and Doctors, and tradition of
doctrine from age to age, which we have established as the only means to
derive down the true faith from Christ. Whereas it is apparent all others have
had late beginnings from unworthy causes: And yet, even in this little while,
have not been able to mantaine themselves for one age throughout (or scarce
for any considerable part of an age) in one tenor of doctrine, or form of
Ecclesiastical government. Lastly we may consider how the effect of the holy
Ghost his inhabiting in the Church, in regard of manners, making the hearts of
men his living temples, shines eminently in the Catholic Church, and is not
so much as to be suspected in any other whatsoever. For where this holy spirit
reigns, it gives a burning love of God (as we have touched before) and a
vehement desire of approaching unto him as near as may be. Now, the soul of
man moves toward God, not by corporeal stepps and progressions, but by
intellectual actions; the highest of which, are mental prayer and
contemplation; in which exercises, a man shall advance the more, by how much he
is the more sequestered from the thought and care of any worldly affairs, and
has his passions quieted within him, and is abstracted from communication with
material objects, and is untyed from human interests, and (according to the
counsels of Christ in the Gospel) has cast off all solicitude of the
future, and remitteth himself wholly to the providence of God, living in the
world as though he were not in it, wholly intent to contemplation, when the
inferior part of Charity calls him not down to comply with the necessity of
his Neighbors. This form of life we see continually practiced in the
Catholic Church by multitudes of persons of both sexes, that through extreme
desire of approaching as near unto God as this life will permit, do banish
themselves from all their friends, kindred, and what else in the world was
naturally dearest unto them; and either retire into extreme solitudes, or shut
themselves up for ever within the narrow limits of a straight Monastery and
little cell; where having renounced all the interest and propriety in the goods
of this world, and using no more of them then is necessary for the sustenance
of their exhausted bodies (which they mortify with great abstinences,
watchings and other austerities, that they may bring them into subjection; and
root out, as much as may be, the very fuel of concupiscence and passions)
and having of their own accord barred themselves of all propriety of disposing
of themselves in any action, and renounced even the freedom of their will; and
thus in sum, having taken an eternal farewell of all the joys and delights
that this world can afford, and that carnal men would be so loath to forgo
for any little while; yet by the internal joys that they find in their prayer
and contemplation (unto which all these actions of retrenchment from
superfluities, or outward solaces, do serve as a ladder to ascend unto the top
of it) they live so happily, and cherefully, and with such tranquillity of
mind, and upon occasions say so much of the overflowings of their bliss, as it
is aparent they enjoy there the hundred fold that Christ promised in this life.
Nor can it be objected that men usually betake themselves to this course of
Religious life, upon being distempered by melancholy, or for the ill success
and traverses they have had in affairs of the world, or out of simplicity and
weakness of understanding; since it is evident that this angelical form of
living has ever heene practiced by persons of the best composed and
cheerfullest dispositions; and by multitudes of such is and has been
embraced; and that in the world overflowed with all the blessings it could
afford them; and were of strongest parts of understanding and* judgment; and
were most eminent in learning So that it is apparent they had no other motive
thereunto, but purely the love of God and fervor of devotion: which being an
effect of the holy Ghost residing in their hearts; to his inspirations and
admirable ways of working in those his temples of flesh and blood, these
extraordinary effects are to be imputed. Whereas on the other side no such
examples, or supernatural form of life, are to be met withal in any other
Church whatsoever: Rather they disclaim from them; and like men of this world
(which is the expression that Christ uses in the Gospel to design those that
are not of his Church) not being able to discern things of the spirit, but
being blinded with the luster of them, too great for their weak eyes, they
neglect and disdain them, and imagine that all Christian perfection consists
in an ordinary humane moral life: which is the uttermost period that any among
them seek to attain unto. And therefore we may hence conclude that they have
no interior worker among them, more sublime then their own humane discourses
and judgments; and that supernatural sanctity (an effect of the holy Ghost)
is confined only to the Catholic Church.

Besides, we may observe by daily experience, how those persons that addict
themselves to such an extraordinary way of life, do absolutely prove the very
best, or the worst of mankind; the one excelling in admirable piety, fervor of
devotion, abstraction and sanctity of life, and some of them soaring up to a
pitch even above nature; the other abounding in all sorts of impiety,
wickedness and dissolution of manners, till at length their hearts become even
hardened against correction, and all sense of spiritual things; whereas it
ordinarily happens that the most flagitious men among those who live in a
vulgar worldly estate of life, do upon occasions frequently receive notable
impressions from divine objects, to the amendment and change of their dissolute
course. And this being a constant and certain effect noted at all times and in
all places, it must be attributed to a constant and powerful cause: which can
be no other then the near approaching of those persons to the original
fountain of sanctity and goodness; which being like a consuming fire, works
vehement effects in them, according to the disposition they are in, and to the
nearenesse that they have unto that fire: so that as the sunbeames (which are
the authors of life and foecundity to all plants and vegetables) shining upon a
tree that has taken solid roots in the earth, makes it budd, flourish, and
bear fruit, and on the other side, if it be weakly rooted, their heat and
operation upon that tree makes it the sooner to wither and die: And as the
fire sends an influence of heat into a pot of water that is symply applied
unto it, but if that pot be set in a vessel of Snow or Ice, and so be held
over the fire, it drives into the center the cold of the Snow formerly
diffused without, and in a very short space turns that water into Ice, which
else might have stayed there long enough without congealing: in like manner,
they who being rooted in Charity, approach to that divine Sun, do flourish
and bring forth excellent, and oftentimes supernatural fruits of devotion,
fervor, and sanctity; but those who have depraved affections so invironing
the roots of their hearts, as that the soil of Charity cannot introduce her
nourishing sap into them; and whose souls are compassed in with the Ice of
sensuality and carnal cogitations; if they come within the beams of this holy
Sun, or within the heat of this sanctifying fire, they do but wither away
the sooner, and their hearts grow daily more and more to be Ice, till at length
(like that of Pharaoh, amidst the wondrous works of the lord, happy to others)
they become miseerable and stony.

And again we see, that those who having addicted themselves wholly to such a
course of seraphicall life, and that being always vehemently intent to the
love and contemplation of the prime verity, and that having no other object for
their actions or thoughts; do thereby (as we may reasonably conceive) approach
nearest to God allmighty, and draw immediately from him (who is the fountain
of light and truth) strongest emanations and cleerest influences to illustrate
their understanding, and inflame their affections: those persons (I say) have
ever been most earnest in the maintenance of those points of the Roman
doctrine which are most repugnant to sense; as in particular, of that of the
real presence of Christ's body in the blessed Sacrament; unto which all other
sacraments, and acts of faith and devotion, are reduced) and adore them with
greatest reverence, and are inflamed with ferventest devotion unto them. And
therefore we may conclude that this confidence, religiousnesse, and fervor,
proceeds from hence, that these men, and such among them as cannot be
suspected for simplicity, ignorance, or sinister ends, are thus confirmed in
this faith, and are thus set on fire with this devotion more vigorously and
vehemently then ordinary secular men; by the immediate working and inspiration
of the holy Ghost; from whose streams it is likely they drink purer and
clearer waters, and nearer the well head, then other men of a more worldly and
vulgar conversation. And it were not agreeable to the goodness of God to
permit those persons that most affectionatly seek him, and who for his sake
out of pure devotion and desire of contemplating truth, do abridge themselves
of all other worldly contentments, to have their understanding worse blinded
with false doctrine then other men that seek him more coldly and care less
for him; and to have their wills more depraved then theirs with erroneous and
false devotion, as of necessity it would follow theirs were, if the doctrine
that the Catholic Church professes were not true, and the holy Ghost resided
not in it to work those effects. Now on the contrary part, let us make a short
inquiry whether it be probable that the late pretended reformers have been
illuminated by God in an extraordinary manner, to discover truth: which they
say has for many ages lain hidd. Surely if any such thing were, they would
have expressed in their manner of life by some extraordinary sanctity and
excellent actions, and supernatural wisdom, that extraordinary communication
which they would persuade us they had with the divinity. For as by a radiant
beam of light shining in at the chinke of a window, we know assuredly, the
Sun beats upon it, although we see not his body; so likewise there should
have broken out from them some admirable and excellent effect whereby we might
rest confident that the divine Sunn illuminated their understanding, and
inflamed their Will. Moses, when he came down from the mountain where he so
long conversed with God, expressed even by the luster glittering from his face
that it was not an ordinary or natural light which had shined unto him: the
Apostles when they were replenished with the holy Ghost, received immediately
the gift of tongues, and a clear intelligence of all the Scriptures; whereby
they made clear unto the auditors the obscurest passages of them; and
continually wrought miracles. And all those that ever since them have
introduced the Gospel into any Country, where formerly it was not received,
have still had their commission authorized by the same seals; and shall our
late particular Reformers be credited in their pretended vocation, and in their
new doctrine that shakes the very foundations of the faith that has been by
the whole Christian world for so many ages believed and delivered over from
hand to hand, when as nothing appears in them supernatural, and proceeding
from a divine cause?

This, Madame, is as much as I shall trouble your Ladyship withal upon this
occasion: which indeed is much more then at the first I intended, or could
have suspected my pen would have stolen from me. The substance of all which may
be summed up, and reduced to this following short question; namely, whether in
the election of the faith whereby you hope to be saved, you will be guided by
the unanimous consent of the wisest, the learned and the piousest men of the
whole world, that have been instructed in what they believe by men of the like
quality living in the age before them, and so from age to age, until the
Apostles and Christ; and that in this manner have derived from the fountain,
both a perfect and full knowledge of all that ought to be believed; and
likewise a right understanding and interpretation of the Scriptures, as far as
concerns faith; (the true sense of which, so far is also delivered over by
the same tradition.) Or whether you will assent unto the new and wrested
interpretations of places of Scripture, made by late men, that rely merely
upon their single judgment and wit (too slight a bark to sail in through so
immense an Ocean) and whose chief leaders for human respects and sinister ends
(not to say worse of them) made a desperate defection from the other maine
body; since which time no two of them have agreed in doctrine; and among whom
it is impossible your Ladyships great judgment and strong understanding should
find any solid stay to rely securely upon, and to quiet all those rational
doubts that your perceiving wit suggesteth unto you. And here Madame, I shall
make an end; having sincerely, and as succinctly and plainly as I can,
delivered you the chief considerations that in this affair turned the scale
of the balance with me; which in good faith I have done with all the
simplicity and ingenuity that I can express my sense with; being not at all
warmed with any passion or partiality, nor raised out of my even pitch and
temper with any spirit of disputation, or siding humor; (which few have avoided
upon this subject) but I have given you a true picture of my seriousest and
saddest thoughts and resolutions to my self in this most important business;
wherein you will believe I would take the greatest pains I was able, to be sure
not to be deceived. I have not sought to show wittiness or acuteness of
learning in the debating of these points; or have affected polished language in
the committing them to paper; for this matter should not be handled for
ostentation, but for use: and though peradventure if this discourse should fall
into the view of some learned man, he may at the first sight set but a slight
value upon it; yet I persuade my self whosoever he be, if he will ponder it
seriously and leasurely, and with alike interior recollection, as I at the
first settled the grounds of it in my own soul, he will then find it touches
the life of the matter: and though I have not delivered my conceptions smoothly
and well, yet he will not think his time lost in reading them; and having
stronger parts then I, he will make cleerer use of them then I have done. This
I am sure of; that although I have set this down for your Ladyship, in two or
three days (for it is not longer since you commanded me to do it) yet it is
the production and result of many hours meditations by my self; or rather of
some years: and how dry soever they may appear to your Ladyship at the first;
yet I dare promise you that upon your second and third readings, and
reflections upon them, they will gain more credit with you; and you will (I
know) by such application of your thoughts upon them, enlarge and refine what
depends of the maine heads, far beyond any thing I have said. For such is
the nature of notions that are wrought, like the silk worms ball, of ones
own substance; they alford fine and strong threads for a good workman to weave
into a fair piece of stuff: whereas they, that like bees do gather honey from
several authors, or that like Ants, do make up their store by what they pick
up in the original crude substance from others labors, may peradventure in
their works seem more pleasant at the first taste, or appear to have a fairer
heap at the first view; but the others web is more useful, more substantial,
and more durable.

I beseech God of his grace and goodness, in this life to enlighten your
Ladyships understanding, that you may discern truth, and to dispose your will
that you may embrace it; and in the next, to give you part among those glorious
Apostles, Fathers, Doctors, and Martyrs, that deriving the same truth from him,
have from hand to hand delivered it over to our times.

The Table.
CHAP. 1. Of the utmost and highest perfection that it is possible for a man to
arrive unto in this life. page 1. CHAP. 2. How one may cleave, and intend wholly
to Christ, despising all other things. p. 3. CHAP. 3. In what the perfect
conformity of man with God consists in this life. P. 6. CHAP. 4. How our
operations ought to be in the intellectual part of our soul only, and not in
our senses. P. 8. CHAP. 5. Of the purity of heart, which above all things is to
be aimed at* P. 14. CHAP. 6. That true devotion consists in adhering to God
by the understanding, and will, depured from all commerce with material
objects. P. 20. CHAP. 7. In what manner ones heart is to be recollected within
ones self. P. 24. CHAP. 8. How, in all chances, a spiritual man ought to
resign himself to God. P. 29. CHAP. 9. That the contemplation of God is to be
preferred before all other exercises. P. 32. CHAP. 10. That actual and
sensible devotion is not so much to be regarded, as to adhere to God with ones
will. P. 38. CHAP. 11. In what manner we are to resist temptations, and to
bear tribulations. P. 42. CHAP. 12. Of the love of God, and of the great power
it has. P. 44. CHAP. 13. Of the quality (and utility of prayer: and how ones
heart is to be recollected within ones self. P. 49. CHAP. 14. That in all
judgments, we ought to resort to the witness of our consciences. P. 52. CHAP.
15. How the contempt of ones self may be caused in a man, and how profitable
that is. p. 56. CHAP. XVI. How the Providence of God extends it self to all
things. P. 6^
FINIS.

