THE FILACERS OFFICE, OR, The Measne process Filacers make out before
Appearance, the Nature and Forms of their several Writs, and the manner of
their Proceedings thereupon. Together with a Table of their Fees. Very useful
for all Attorneys and Practisers of the Law, for the dispatch of their
business in the Filacers Office. With an exact Table, relating to all the
matters herein contained.

London, Printed for Tho. Firby, and are to be sold at his shop near
Grayes-Inne-Gate in Holborn.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THe due consideration of the daily use of the Books, both of the Theorick and
Practick parts of the Law, which by public Authority have been of late
Translated into English, as a motive induced me to set forth this small work,
(knowing it to be useful for all Attorneys, Sollicitors, and others, for the
dispatch of their business in the Filacers Office.) To the end we may unmask
that part of the Laws countenance that frowns upon those disobey her commands,
and refuse to appear at her Courts. I have herein presented unto thee, the
nature of the Filacers Writs, the proceedings thereupon, the Fees which they
take, and the certain forms of their Writs, and the Entries of the same.

Farewell J B

A TABLE.
THe Filacers measne Process with their Office. fol. 1. A Capias ad
respondendum. 3 Of a second deliverance. 5 Of a Returno habendo. ib. Of a
Capias in Withernam. 7 Of the Non Omittas. 8 Of a Partitione facienda. 9 A
Warrantia Chartae. 10 A Quare impedit. 12 Of Wast. 13 Inquiry of damages. 14 A
scire facias upon a special Bail in the Filacers Office. ib. A Supersedeas. 17
A Writ of Dower. 18 Of a Formedon. 20 A Habeas Corpus, Duces Tecum, Distringas
nuper vic. and Did. Bal. 21 Habeas Corpus ad respondend. 24 Of Rescous. ib. Of
an Adjournment. 25 Of a Discontinuance. ib. Of special Bail. 26 New Orders
concerning special Bail. 27 New Orders concerning appearances. 30 Of the
Filacers Fees. 31 A Capias in Debt against a Defendant. 34 The Entry thereof.
35 An Alias Capias, and Entry thereof. 36 A Plures Capias. ib. The Entry
thereof. 37 The Entry of a Capias, alias Capias and plures Capias in one Roll.
ib. A Capias in trespass. 38 The Entry thereof. 39 A Capias in Assault and
Battery. ib. The Entery thereof against several Defendants. 40 The Entry
against Defendants in several sums. ib. Against an Executor, and another
Defendant. 41 Testat. Capias. ib. The Entry thereof. 42 A Capias in Ejectment.
43 A Capias in action of Trover. 44 A Capias upon the Statute of Bankrupt. ib.
The Entry, as in another Capias. 45 A Pone in Debt. ib. The Entry thereof. 46 A
Pone and Capias in one Writ. ib. The Entry thereof. 47 An Alias Cap. and Alias
Distringas in one Writ. 48 The Entry thereof. 50 A Pone after Essoigne, and
entry thereof. 51 A Distr. in Debt upon a Pone. 52 The entry thereof. ib. A
Pone in Recordure. 53 The entry thereof. 54 A Distr. after Esloigne. ib. The
entery thereof. 55 Testatum Summons in Debt. ib. The entry thereof. 56 A Summon
in severance. 57 The entry thereof. 58 A Pone upon a Recordare, and Entry
thereof. 59 A Returno habendo. 60 The entery thereof 61 A second deliverance.
62 A Non omittas. 63 The Entry. 64 A Distr. Balivum. ib. The entry thereof. 65
A Grand-Cape in Dower upon the Summons. 67 The entry thereof. 68 The entry of
an Alias Grand-Cape. 69 A Pone after an Essoin in Dower. ib. The entry thereof.
70 A Writ of view in Dower. ib. The entry thereof. 71 A Languidus upon a
Capias. 72 A Habeas Corpus upon a Languide. 73 The entry thereof. 74 A Duces
Tecum upon the entry. 76 Entry of an Alias non omittas 77 Entry of a Distr. in
Debito 78 Distr. and Pone in one Writ 79 Entry of a Capias and Latitat. ib.
Entry of a Distr. and Pone in one Writ. 80 A Writ of view in a Formedon in
Descender 81 A Magnum Cape of a Non Omit. in a Writ of Dower 82 Entry thereof
83 Entry of an Amerciament against a Sheriff, for not returning a Writ 84 An
Original in Dower 85 The Sheriffs Return ib. An Alias Summon upon a Non Omit.
in Dower 86 The entry thereof 88 A Distr. Nuper vic. and Entry thereof 89 A
Writ of Alias Summons, where the Sheriff returns that the Plantiffe has
not found pledges to prosecute. 91 The entry thereof ib. The entry of a Writ
of Debt against two Executors, where they were Summoned, the Sheriff returns
the one esloin'd and the other to have nothing: a Distr. against the one, and a
Capias against the other 93 An entry in Debt brought by one Executor against
another, upon the Summons to prosecute, etc. 94 Nontu^t in a Replevin, and the
awarding of the Writ of second deliverance 97 A Latitat to the Chancellor of
the County Palatine of Chester, which was formerly used 98 Habere facias
seisinam, upon Recovery in a Writ of Dower by default 99 The entry of seisin
in Dower upon a Grand-Cape, etc. 100 A Return of a Grand Cape 101 A Writ to
enquire of wast 102 The entry of the aforesaid Writ 105 A Writ of Petite-Cape,
which is brought after appearance 107 The Entry thereof. 108 A Writ of seisin
upon a Petite-Cape. 109 Entry thereof ib. A Writ of Withernam upon a Plur.
Repleg. 111 The Entry thereof. 113 A Writ of adjournment 116 Return thereof.
117 The entry of a Non Process in a Writ of second deliverance 118 A Writ of
Distr. against one, and a Distr. of Esloign against another in a Quare impedit
119 Entry thereof 120 A Pone after an Esloign, and Distr. in one Writ in a
Quare impedit 121 Entry thereof 122 Distr. against a Bishop to cause the Clerks
to come 123 Entry thereof 124 Entry of Quid juris clamat. 125 Distr. in a Quid
juris clamat. 126 The entry of the Writ aforesaid, upon the Defenders praying a
Lilo. 127 The entry of a Writ of Ravishment of Ward. 149 A Distringas in a
Writ of Ravishment of a Ward 151 A Capias in Withernam upon an Averia
elongat. on a Writ of Retorno habendo 152 The entry thereof 154 The entry upon
a Return of a Nihil, on the Writ of Withernam 156 A Writ of Capias upon a Writ
of Withernam 157 The entry thereof 160 A Latitat. upon the Capias after the
Writ of Withernam 162 The entry of the Capias in Withernam where the Sheriff
returns a Rescue upon the same Writ 166 A Distr. and a Duces tecum in one Writ.
170 The entry thereof 171 A Writ of Petite-Cape, in a Writ of Formedon 172 The
entry thereof 173 A Writ of Magnum Cape in a cessavit after essoin 174 The
entry thereof 175 A Writ of Magnum Cape in a Writ of cessavit in Formedon ib.
The entry thereof 176 A Writ of Plur. Magnum Cape in Dower 177 The entry
thereof 178 A Writ of Magnum Cape, and non Omit. in a Precipe in capite 179 The
entry thereof 180 The Sheriffs Return in a Mand. Balliv. Libt. 181 A Writ of
Seisin in Dower 182 Seisin by default in a Writ of Dower, upon which the
Sheriff returns, that the Husband died in Fee Tail, upon which a Writ is
awarded of inquiry of damages in one Writ 183 A Writ of Habere facias seisinam
in Dower by default, and of inquiry of the value of the damages out of the
seisin of the Husband in one Writ 185 A Writ of Pone in Partition 187 A Writ
of Pone in Warrantia Chartae 188 A Writ of Habeas Corpus, and Entry thereof.
189 A Capias pro fine upon a Rescous 190 The entry of a Retorno habend. 193
Habere facias seisinand. 194 Entry thereof 196 The entry of a Summons in
severance upon an Alias Capias 198 The entrance of a Summons in severance upon
a Plur. Cap. 200 A Distring. nup. vic. ad Habend. Corpus, where the Sheriff
returns that he took the body, but had it not at the return of the Writ. 201
The entry thereof 203 A Distr. nup. vic. 204 Entry of a Distr. nup. vic. 206 A
Distr. nup. vic. aliter 207 The entry of a M^gnum Cape in Dower Ret. Crast.
A^imarum and per non misit, breve Magnum Cape, Ret. 8. Hillary, and thereupon a
nolle prosequi 208 Entry of a Capias alias, Cap. and plures Cap. against one
that was before the Plur. was returned, imprisoned in the Fleet now before you
can have the benefit of your Plur. Cap. to outlaw him, etc. 210 A Pone in a
Quare impedit, at the Suit of the Lord Protector 212 The entry of the Writ
aforesaid 213 An alias Summons in Dower 214 Entry thereof 215 Entry of a
discontinuance 218 A Pone in a Quare impedit 219 A Summons and severance in
Debt 220 A Habeas Corpus to the Wardens of the Fleet ib. A Pone after an
Esloign in a Quare impedit, etc. 221 Entry thereof 222 A Writ of view in
Formedon 223 Entry thereof 224 An entry of a Test. in Debt ib. A Writ of
Supersedeas 226 The entry of a Habeas Corpus to the Chancellor of the County
Palatine. 227
The FILACERS measne process.
What the Filacers their Office is, and what are the process they make out.
FIlacers make out all manner of measne process upon Original Writs before
appearance. But before we treat of the several sorts of their Writs, it will
not be amiss to speak something of the word Filacer, and the acceptance
thereof in the Law.

The Office of Filacer is derived from the French word filace, a Thread, Terms
ley, on which we may very fitly paraphrase thus: That it is a Thread indeed,
without which in the Common Pleas, there can be no Web, or work made, for the
dispencing and administering of Right, and Justice to all: A line whose bounder
is the appearance and imparlance of the parties litigant, and a rule that
leads men so directly to their rights, that it will force the Defendants at
last to appear and plead.

There are 14. Filacers in the Common Pleas, which make out all process there
upon Originals, and distress infinite upon Summons returned in personal
Actions, and the Capias upon the retorn of nihil. And all Writs in view, in
case where the view is prayed, And where the appearance is with them, they
enter the imparlance and the general issues in Common Actions and Judgment by
confession before issue joined, and make out Writs of Execution upon them: And
they make Writs of Supersedeas after a Capias awarded, when the Defendants
appear in their Office, and this Officer is mentioned in the Statutes of 10.
Hen. 6. c. 4. and 18. Hen. 6. cap. 9. I shall as briefly as I can treat of
their Writs, and the proceedings thereupon, and first of a Capias ad
respondendum.

Of a Capias ad respondendum, and of the proceeding thereon.
It is a Writ, which before Judgment in Actions personal, as in Debt,
Trespass, or Detinue, issues after the Sheriff has returned a nihil habet
in baliva, etc. upon the Original, or Summons, and which bears Test from the
retorn of the Original, and between its Test and retorn has 15. days at
least. And if thereupon you cannot take the Defendant, then you may have an
alias Capias, bearing Test from the retorn of the Capias, or a plures Capias
bearing Test from the retorn of the alias Capias, ever observing that there be
15. days between the Test and retorn of every one of them. And if on neither
of them you can take the person, you may proceed with your pluries Capias to
the outlawry against him.

For each of your Process, you bring not into the Filacers by the day of the
retorn, you are to pay 4d. as a Post diem for the filing thereof with the
Custos Brevium. And for each of them you bring not in to be entered there upon
the Roll before the Essoin day of the succeeding Term, you are to pay a penny
more as a Post Entry. And for each Writ that is not filed of the same Term it
is retornable, you pay 20d. for the Post Terminum every Term the same is
unfiled, which is due, and paid by the Filacers to the Custos Brevium.

If you have sued out your Original in London, and the Defendants live
elsewhere, and you would have them more speedily arrested, then by way of
outlawery upon the Sheriffs return of non est inventus, etc. on the Capias, you
may have a Testatum in the County where they live to Arrest them there.

All Filacers are to enter their Writs upon Rolls of the same Term they are
retornable, and the Writs after they are entered, are to be filed with the
Custos Brevium.

The filacers do likewise take them out upon their remembrance, marked with the
number Roll to the end, thereby you may know where to find your Writs entered.

Of a second Deliverance.
It lies after a Replevine is brought where the Plantiffe makes default,
being non-suite before Declaration, or the like, or Judgment is given against
him, then he that destrained the beasts, shall have them delivered to him again
by this Writ. Terms ley Replevine. Stat. 13. E. 1. cap. 2. Dyer 41. cap. 4.

Of a Retorno habendo.
It lies where a Plaint is removed out of the County Court, or Court Barron,
by a pone, or recordare into the Common-Bench, and after the Plaintiff in the
replevine is nonsuit before any Avowry be made, (notwithstanding, this
nonsuit) the party that distrained, may have again the same distress by this
Writ (which is only to revive the first suite.) And the Defendant in this case
cannot have a Recaption for a double distress: And after this Writ had, and
Trial thereupon, or that the Plaintiff be again nonsuit before Declaration,
Return irreplevisable shall be awarded to the Avowant, and then he may make his
Avowry to the intent to ground a Writ to enquire of damages, or he may hold the
beasts as a distress till he be satisfied: And if any Retorno habendo go forth
before this Writ, this is a Supersedeas to it, and the Sheriff must not proceed
upon it, F.N. B. 72. Dyer. 41.42, 280, 59. If the Sheriff upon the Retorno
habendo, do return that the Cattle were esloigned then a Capias in Withernam
shall be awarded to take other Cattle, and if the Sheriff retorn he has no
Cattle, then a Capias against the body.

Of a Capias in Withernam.
It is a Writ lying where he that destraineth, or the Owner of the Cattle after
the distress taken, does esloign them, or carry them out of the County, or
holds and keeps them in some Castle, so that the Sheriff cannot make a
Replevine, or Retorno habendo (as occasion is,) then the Sheriff by this Writ
may take so much of the other goods, or Cattle of the party that has done
this, instead of them: And if they be in a Castle within his County, the
Sheriff may take posse Comitatus, and break into the Castle and make Replevine,
3. H. 7.1. Terms ley distr. F. N. B. 73 West. 1. cap. 17. Dyer 41.59. West. 1.
c. 20. Brit. Chap. 17.

Note, that whatsoever the Sheriff retorns upon the plures Replevine, it ought
to be inserted and rehearsed in the Writ of Withernam: And if the Sheriff
retorn that he has commanded the Bayliffe of the Franchise, who has given him
no answer, or that the Bayliffe will not make deliverance, that then the
Plaintiff shall have a non omittas directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to
enter into the Franchise; and make the return, and if the Sheriff do it not,
the Plaintiff shall have an alias non omittas directed to the Sheriff, and
afterward a plures non omittas, etc.

Of the non Omittas.
It is a Writ, and lies where the Sheriff returns upon a Writ to him
directed, that he has sent to the Bayliffe of such a Franchise, which has
return of writs, and he has not served the Writ, then the Plaintiff shall have
this Writ directed to the Sheriff, that he himself enter into the Franchise
and execute the Writ, and the Sheriff shall warn the Bayliffe, that he be
before the Justices at that day contained in the writ: and if he come not and
excuse himself, then all the Writs judicials which shall pass out of the
Court, during the same Plea, shall be Writs de non omittas, etc. and the
Sheriff shall make execution of them, having that Plea, Terms ley. The
Sheriffs return that he has commanded the Bayliffe of the Liberty, etc. who
gave him no answer, etc. or the other return that that the Bayliffe will make
no deliverance, are no good returns, for by the Statute of Westminster, 1 Chap.
27. in the end of the same Statute appears, that the Sheriff upon such a
return made to him by the Bayliffe, ought presently to enter into the
Franchise, or Liberty, and make deliverance of the thing taken.

Of a Partitione Facienda.
This Writ lies, where two, or more men hold Lands, or Tenements together
jointly, or in Common, and undivided, which are divideable by Law, and some of
them refuse to divide them, in this case the rest may enforce them to it by
this Writ to the Sheriff, who will thereupon by a Jury of the Bayly-wick
divide it. Terms ley. Statute of 32. H. 8. cap. 10. and 32. H. 8. cap. 32. The
Writs that are made out on this Writ after the Summons returned, are a Pone,
and distress infinite, but before you can have your distr. you must be sure to
have your Pone returned by the Sheriff, and to file it with the Filacer, which
warrants the making out of the distringas, and upon that you may get an
amearcement of five pounds, if the Defendant appear not, then you may have an
alias distringas, doubling your issues, and so distress infinite till he do
appear.

Of a Warrantia Chartae.
This Writ lies for him that is enfeoffed with warranty, and is afterward
impleaded in an Assize, or other Action, in which he cannot vouch, then he may
have this Writ against the Feofor, or his Heir to compel them to warrant the
Land unto him, Terms ley F. N. B. fol. 134. D. A man may bring this Writ of
Warrantia Chartae, etc. in what County he will, if the deed bear not date at a
certain place, or County, for then he ought to bring the Writ where the deed
bears date: This Writ extends to the warranty of Lands, etc. of an estate of
Freehold, or inheritance, and not to any Chattle real personal, or mixed,
saving only in case of a wardship granted with warranty. The process whereby
the vouchee is called, is a Summons ad warrantizandum, and whereupon if the
Sheriff return that the vouchee is sumoned, and he make default, then there is
awarded a Magnum Cape ad valenciam, etc. when if he make default again, then
judgment is given against the Tennant, and he to have over in value against
the vouchee, but if the Sheriff return, that he has nothing, then after a
Writ of alias, and plures, a Writ of sequitur sub periculo suo is awarded, etc.
And the Demandant shall not have judgment to recover in value, etc. because
the vouchee was never warned. After the Summons comes a pone and then a
distringas, and if the Defendant appear not an alias distringas, setting
issues, etc. And so distress in infinitum, till there be appearance given.

Of a Quare impedit.
It is a Writ judicial that lies, where one has recovered a presentment to
the Bishop to command him to admit his Clerk that has recovered, and if the
suite were against the Bishop alone, then this Writ may be directed to the
Bishop of the Diocese, or the Metropolitan at the election of the party. And
if in this case the Bishop refuse him, the party may have a quare not admisit,
F. N.B. 38. or it is a Writ that lies where a man has an Advowson, and the
Parson dies, and another presents his Clerk, or disturbeth me to present,
then he may have the said Writ.

The Writ is a Summons at the Plaintiffs suite, and after your proceeds are the
same as in the Writ of Partition by pone and distringas, etc.

Of Wast.
Waste is, where Tenant for Term of years, Tenant for life, or Tenant for Term
of another life, Tenant in dower, or Tenant by the courtesy, or Guardian in
Chivalery, does make waste, or destruction upon the Land, (that is to say,
pulls down the house, or cutteth down Timber, or suffers the house
willingly to fall, or diggeth the ground, then he in the reversion shall have
one Writ for the waste, and shall recover the place where the waste was done,
and treble damages. Terms ley. The next process after this Writ, is Pone, and
upon the return thereof and filing it with the Filacer, he makes out a
distringas, and thereupon you may have an amerciament, in case the Defendant
appear not. And then an alias, and a plures distringas, and further
amerciaments as I told you before in other actions.

Of Inquiry of Damages.
It is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, whereby the Sheriff by the Oath of
Jurors is to enquire of the costs, which are the expenses of the suite: And
damages which contain the hinderance that the Plaintiff, or Demandant in a
real, or personal action has suffered by means of the wrong done unto him by
the Defendant, or Tenant, Terms ley.

Of a Scire facias, upon a special Bail in the Filacers Office.
It is a Writ that issues out after Judgment had, and obtained by the
Plaintiff against the Defendant by a nihil dicit, non sum informatus,
confession of the Action, Trial by nisi prius, or otherwise: And the Plaintiff
having so obtained judgment against the Defendant, and perceiving that he is
not easily to be arrested and taken in execution, or not sufficient to satisfy
the same, but knows the Bayl to be better able, than the Plaintiff, may at
his choice leave the Defendant, and prosecute the Bayl in this manner.

First Judgment being entered, he must sue forth a Capias ad satisfaciendum
against the Defendant directed to the Sheriff of the same County, where the
Action was first laid, and get the same returned by a non est inventus, then he
must procure a Writ of Scire facias from the Filacer against the Bayl, if the
Bayl were taken by the Filacer upon the Capias, alias plures, habeas Corpus,
etc. issuing out of that Office, upon which Writ, if the Sheriff return a
Scire feci, then there needs no second Writ to be made, but if he return a
nihil, then there must a second Writ of Scire facias, which being likewise
returned with a nihil, then the two Writs of Scire facias must be taken out
upon the remembrance in the Prothonotaries Office with the returns of them, and
rules thereupon given and filed accordingly, with the Custos Brevium, and
thereupon if the Bayl show not cause why Judgment should not be had, Judgment
by default shall be entered against them in the said Prothonotaries Office, for
the sum in which they became Bayl as aforesaid, whereupon the Plaintiff may
take execution out against them, either by fieri facias, or elegit: but not by
Capias ad satisfaciendum against their persons.

And in this case observe, that the Plaintiff may likewise sue and Arrest the
Bayl going by way of Original at the Common Law, for the sum for which they
became Bayl, and Arrest their bodies, either upon the Capias, or plures, or sue
them to the exigent thereupon, and declare upon the said Recognizance, using
all proceedings therein, as in an Action of Debt, but in this the Action must
be laid in the County of Middlesex, only where the Records do lie, and whence
the venew out of that respect must rise.

And if the Bayl cannot be Arrested in the County of Middlesex, upon a Capias,
etc. you may return (he cannot be found, etc. and sue forth thereupon a
Testatum, and by that means Arrest them in any other County, where they may be
found, observing all the proceedings, as in an Action of Debt.

Of a Supersedeas.
It is a Writ awarded to the Sheriff commanding him to surcease for to Arrest
the party, and if he have Arrested him, then that he set him at Liberty: For
that the Defendant has appeared, or found sufficient Bayl for his appearance
by the return of the Process, etc. See more of this Writ how and for what it
may be granted in F. N. B. 591. 593. 594.

Of a Writ of Dower, and of a Grand-cape and Petite-cape.
It is a Writ, and it lies, where a man is sole seized, during the Coverture
between him and his wife, of Lands, or Tenements in Fee-simple, or Fee-tail,
where, by possibility the issue between them may inherit, if such a man die,
his wife shall recover the third part of all the Lands whereof the Husband was
sole seized any time during the Coverture Terms-ley, it is called Dower, or
Dowery as a gift, because the Law it self does (without any gift of the
Husband) give it to her. The Process in this Action of Dower are,

First, a Summons between the Test, and return whereof, there is 5. returns.

And if the Tenant neither appear nor nor cast an Essoigne, entering a ne
recipiatur, a grand Cape lies to seize the Lands, etc. for that for such his
default the Tenant shall loose his Land.

But if he wage his Law of non Summons, he shall save his default, and then he
may plead with the Demandant.

Note, that in the Grand Cape the Tenant shall be summoned to answer to the
default, and further to the Demandant, but in petite Cape he shall be summoned
to answer to the default only, and not to the Demandant, and it is called a
petite Cape, because it includes less than the other.

And if the Tenant by the return of the Summons, Essoigne, the Demandant
adjourns 15. days longer, in such case the Attorney for the Tenant may enter
with the Filacer that the Tenant appears, and prays view, etc. then a Writ of
view goes out, whereby the Sheriff is to show the Tenant the Lands in
question, which supposes the Tenant knows not well what Lands it is that the
Demandant asks, by the return of which Writ of view the Tenants Attorney
takes a Declaration.

Note, that where a default is made after appearance, there a petite Cape is to
issue forth at the Demandants suite, which is made as likewise the grand Cape
by the Filacer of the County where the Land lies.

Of a Formedon.
There are three sorts of Formedon, viz. in Descender, in Remainder, and in
Reverter.

The first is where Tenant in the tail enfeoffeth a Stranger, or is disseised
and dies, the Heir shall have the Writ of Formedon in Descender to recover the
Land.

The second is where one gives Lands in the tail, and for default of issue the
Remainder to another in the tail, and that for default of such issue the Land
shall Revert to the Donor, if the first Tenant in tail die without issue, he in
the Remainder shall have a Formedon in Remainder.

But if the Tenant in the tail die without issue, and he in the Remainder also
die without issue, then the Donor, or his Heirs shall have a Formedon in the
Reverter, Terms ley.

The process incident to this action are first a Summons between the Test,
and return whereof there is 9. returns, and the same Process, which are in
Dower after the Summons, that is a grand Cape Writ of view and petite Cape, the
proceedings are much like to that of Dower.

Of a Habeas Corpus, Duces tecum Distringas nuper Vic and Distr. Bal.
If upon your Capias alias, or plures, etc. the Defendant be arrested, and put
in bond for his appearance to the Sheriff, you must have the Sheriff return a
cepi Corpus, upon which, if the party do not appear at the return of the Writ
you may give the Sheriff a Rule to bring in his body on pain of 40. s. etc.
which Rule the Filacer enters, if the Sheriff will not return this Writ of
habeas Corpus, you may amearce him as before if he does return the Writ, and
brings not in the body, he can return nothing but a languidus in prisona, etc.
And upon that you may have a duces tecum licet languidus, etc. or else after
the party is al rested, you may have a habeas Corpus. But if the Sheriff goes
forth of Office before he return the habeas Corpus, and delivers it not, nor
the prisoner to the next Sheriff, his Successor, there shall issue forth a
distringas nuper vic against him to the Sheriff his Successor. And if the
habeas Corpus be not returned, there may issue out an alias and plures
distringas nuper vic ad infinitum, until the Defendant appear, and the
amearcements shall be increased and doubled every time upon the distringas
nuper vic, but upon the habeas Corpus, alias, or plures there shall be but 40.
s. amearcements set, and the amearcements both of the distringas nuper vic, and
of the habeas Corpus are entered by the Filacer, and once every half year
extreated into the Exchequer.

If any of the parties to be arrested, dwell within a Liberty, you must get the
Sheriff to return a mandavi balivo on your Process, and upon that the course
is to have a non omittas, etc. If the amerciaments be not extreted, and the
Plaintiffs Attorney (to whose client the Sheriffs bond is commonly assigned) be
not contented and consent that you may appear as of the same Term, the first
Writ was returnable. And to accept of a Declaration, and not to delay the
Plaintiff in his suit: The Court will usually order the suite upon the
Sheriffs bond, to stay, or if the amerciaments be extreated, then upon the same
offer, and also to take off those amerciaments the Court will order the like.

A habeas Corpus ad respondendum may be granted to the Warden of the Fleet, or
to the Keeper of an inferior prison of a Liberty, or Franchize, where a Capias
is returned in Court non est inventus. And such Writ is to recite shortly the
Capias, and to be returnable at a day certain in Court, and to be a good cause
of deteiner, as well as where a Capias ad respondendum comes to a Sheriff,
vide. New rules and orders.

Of Rescous.
It is a Writ that lies where a man is arrested, and he himself, or another
in his behalf does rescue him.

Or where any man takes a distress, and another takes it again from him, and
will not suffer him to carry the distress with him, then he does to him
Rescous, etc. and upon that he may have this Writ, and shall recover damages
for it.

And if one distrain beasts for damage Fesant in his ground, and drive them in
the Highway for to impound them, and in going they enter into the house of
him, whose they be, and he withholdeth them there, and will not suffer the
other to impound them, then that withholding is a Rescous, Terms ley.

The Process incident to this Action are first a Summons, and then an
Attachment and Distringas, and then alias, and plures distringas in infinitum.

Of an Adjournement.
An adjournement is when any Court is dissolved and determined, and assigned to
be kept again at another place or time, and is compounded of two words (ad) or
(all) and jour. Terms ley, in what Process adjournment lies see in the Title
of adjournment, in F. N. B.

Of a Discontinuance.
As there is a discontinuance of possession, which it is not to our purpose
here, to treat of, so there is a discontinuance of Process, or Plea, and this
is when the instant is lost, and may not be taken again, but by a new Writ to
begin the suite afresh for to be discontinued, and to be put without day is all
one, and nothing else but finally to be dismissed the Court of that instance,
West. part. 2. tit. fines. Sect. 115. Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 131.

Note, that if you cannot arrest the party upon your first Process taken from
the Filacer, you must have them carefully continued from Term to Term,
otherwise if upon a second Writ the Defendant find your Writ discontinued, he
may enter a discontinuance. And the want of any one continuance is error at
the time of the judgment.

Of special Bail.
If the appearance be upon arrest by the Capias alias, or plures, then the Bail
must be taken, and entered by the Filacer of the same County where the action
was laid, and who made the said process.

Here follows the new orders concerning special Bail.
That if the Defendant appears upon the Summons, Attachment, or distress, or by
supersedeas quia improvide, or does truly render himself upon the exigent, no
Bail is requirable.

That in all causes of removeal, be it by habeas Corpus privilege, or
Certiorari, special Bail ought to be given.

That in causes where the Defendant comes in by cepi Corpus, be it debt,
detinue, trespass for goods, action upon the case (except slander) if the
debt, or damages amount to twenty pounds, special Bail is to be given, except
it be against an Heir, Executor, or Administrator.

That in Covenant, because the damages are uncertain, till declaration Bail at
discretion.

That in battery, conspiracy, false imprisonment no special Bail of course,
without special motion and order.

That in slander no special Bail, except in slander of title, wherein to be
left to the discretion of the Judges.

That in privilege, other than for Fees, and disbursements as an Attorney,
Bail at discretion of the Court. In such case wherein a suite by a common
person especial Bail is not requisite.

That if Bail be given upon reversal of an Outlary, or removeable by habeas
Corpus, the Original to be shown upon tendering of the Declaration, otherwise
the Bail not liable; unless the party, or his Attorney will voluntarily
appear, or take a Declaration without showing of it.

That in case of a removeal out of an inferior Court, or reversal the new
Original to agree in the nature of the Action, the sum in demand, and the
County, otherwise the Bail not liable: but if the party will voluntarily appear
to such varying Original, to be good as to the party: but if upon a cause
removed by habeas corpus out of the Courts of Canterbury, Southampton, Hull,
Litchfield, or Pool, which are Counties where the Judges of nisi prius seldom
come, if the Action be transitory, it must be laid in the County of Kent,
Southampton, York, Stafford, or Dorset, where the Town and County lies, and
the Recognizance to be taken accordingly.

That the principal rendering himself at any time after Bail put in, and before
or upon the day of appearance of the scire facias, returned scire feci, or of
the second scire facias returned nihil, or in case there shall be an action of
debt brought upon the Recognizance against the Bail, then if the principal
shall render himself upon, or before the process returned served, no further
proceedings to be against the Bail.

The new Orders concerning appearances.
That appearances be duly entered with the Filacers: but if special Bail be
requirable in the case, the Plaintiff not to be concluded by such appearances,
if he insist upon it.

That where an appearance is upon the Original Writ, if the Defendants
appearance be not entered of Record, the Defendants Attorney to give his hand to
the Plaintiffs Attorney, upon the delivery of the Declaration that he appears
thereunto.

That any Attorney of either Bench accepting a Warrant to appear, or
subscribing a Process, Declaration, or Warrant to appear, be compelled to
cause appearance, or be liable to an attachment, or put out of the Role, as the
case requires, and the party not to be received to countermaund such appearance
after his retainer, etc.

That if a Capias be returned in Court, non est inventus, against a Prisoner in
the Fleet, he is compellable to appear upon a habeas Corpus ad respondendum as
well at the suite of a stranger, as at his suite whereupon he is imprisoned,
and to answer to a Declaration according to the rule of the Court, or that
judgment be entered against him, etc. with many other Orders which tends not
to our purpose. Having thus gone through the greatest part of the course of the
Filacers Office, and the nature of their Writs. I shall now in order set down
their Fees, they take for their Writs, and the entry of them.

The Filacers Fees.
Inprimis. For every Capias alias, and plures in debt detinue and trespass,
not having more then 4. names in a Writ and entry thereof. 6. d. If there be
above 5. names it is double, and you pay for it. 1. s. Item, For delivery of
every first Capias upon Record and entry thereof. 4. d. Item, For every
Testatum upon any the said Writs, pone in Replevine and Summons. 1. s. Item,
For every Capias alias, and plures in account Covenant Annunity, Ejectione
firm, and upon penal Statutes. 1. s. Item, For every Writ in an Action upon
the case, if it contains not 10. lines. 1. s. But if it contains 10. lines you
pay six pence more, if 15. lines 12. pence more, so that they reckon for every
5. lines after the first 5. lines, if the Action of the case contained 10.
lines, or more. 6. d. Item, For every Retorno habendo, and second deliverance
before appearance, and entry thereof. 2.s. 6.d. Item, For every non Omittas and
Capias in Withernham. 2.s. 6.d. Item, For every Writ of Partition, War- Item,
For every writ for enquiry of damages in real actions Scire facias and
Supersedeas. 2.s. Item, For every grand Cape alias summons, petite cape, and
entry thereof. 2. s. 6. d: Item, for the Copy of the entry thereof. 8. d.
Item, For the demandant in every, writ of view and entry thereof 2.s. 6.d.
Item, For a Copy of the entry thereof. 8. d. Item, For every writ of Seisin
and entry thereof 4. s. 6. d. Item, For the view prayer 2.s: Item, For a Copy
of the entry thereof. 8. d. Item, For every writ of habeas Corpus, duc. coram,
distring. nuper vic. and distring. ballivum. 2. s. Item, For every writ of
rescous and entry thereof. 2. s. Item, For the entry of every adjournment,
discontinuance and resort 4. d. Item, For every special bail and the entry
thereof. 2. s. 10. d. Item, For every appearance in real and mixed Actions 4.
d. Item, Upon every appearance upon writs to arrest, and the entry thereof.
1.s. Item, For searches, Copies, number Rols, and giving of Rules, each of them
4. d.
THE FORMS OF THEIR SEVERAL WRITS, AND THE ENTRIES THEREOF.
A Capias in debte against one defendant only.
OLIVER Lord Protector etc. To the Sheriff of Middlesex greeting, we command
you that you take A. B. late of etc. if he shall be found in your bailywick, and
him safely keep, so that you may have his body before our Justices of the
Common Bench at Westminster (tali die) to answer I. P. in a Plea that he render
unto him 40. pounds, which to him he owes and unjustly detaineth, as it is
said. And have you there this writ, witness O. St. John at Westminster the 23
day of Ja. In the year of our Lord 1654.

The entry Thereof.
Mid. ss. I.P. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against A.B. late
of etc. in a Plea that he render to him 40 l. which to him, he owes and
unjustly detaineth etc. And he came not and the Sheriff was commanded to
summon him etc. and the Sheriff returns to that, he has nothing etc.
therefore let him be taken that he may be here from the day of St. Michael in
three weeks And the writ is delivered upon Record andc.

An alias Capias.
Oliver etc. (as above) we command you as heretofore we commanded you, that you
take etc. ut supra ad finem.

The entry Thereof.
I. P. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day etc. (as above until) and
he came not, and the Sheriff was commanded to take him etc. And the Sheriff
returned that he is not found etc. Therefore as heretofore he was been
commanded, let him be taken that he may be here in the morrow of All Souls etc.

A plures Capias.
Oliver etc. we command you as often times we commanded you, that you take etc
(as above to the end) etc.

The entry thereof.
M. ss. I.P. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day etc. (as above
until) and he came not. And as heretofore the Sheriff was commanded to take
him etc, And the Sheriff returned that he is not found etc. Therefore as often
times he has been commanded let him be taken that he may be here from the day
of St. Martins in 15. days etc.

The entry of a Capias, al. Capias, and plures Capias all in one roll.
I. P. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against A. B. late of etc.
in a Plea, that he render to him twenty pounds, which to him he owes and
unjustly detaineth etc. And he came not, and the Sheriff was commanded that he
should summon him etc. And the Sheriff returned that he has nothing etc.
Therefore let him betaken, that he may be here in the morrow of All Souls etc.
And the Writ is delivered upon record, at which day here came the aforesaid I.
P. by his Attorney and proffered himself the 4th. day against the said A. B. in
the Plea aforesaid, and he came not, and the Sheriff was commanded to take him
etc. And the Sheriff returned that he is not found etc. Therefore as
heretofore let him be taken that he may be here from the day of St. Martin in
15. days etc. At which day here came the aforesaid I. P. by his Attorney and
proffered himself the 4th. day against the said A. B. in the Plea aforesaid and
he came not, and as heretofore the Sheriff was commanded to take him etc. And
the Sheriff returned that he is not found etc. Therefore as often times he
has been commanded let him be taken that he may be here in Eight days of St.
Hillary, etc.

A Capias in trespass.
Oliver Lord Protector etc. (as in others unto) in a Plea wherefore with force
and arms the Close of the said A. at L. he brake and other wrongs to him did
to the great damage of the said A. B. and against the public peace; And have
you there this writ witness O. St. John at Westminster the (...) day of (...)
In the year of our Lord 1654.

The entry thereof.
I. P. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against A. B. late of etc.
in a Plea wherefore with force and arms the Close of the said I. at C. he
break and other wrongs etc. to the great damage, etc. And against the pub.
peace etc. and he came not; And the Sheriff was commanded to attach him etc.
And the Sheriff returned that he has nothing etc. (as it follows in others
before.)

A Capias in Assault and Battery.
Oliver Lord Protector etc. (as in others unto) wherefore with force and arms
upon him the said I. at C. he made an assault and him did beat wound and evil
entreat so that of his life it was despaired and other wrongs to him did etc.
as in the next before.

The entry thereof against several defendants.
If there be two defendants in debt then thus: proffered himself the 4th. day
against A. B. late of etc. and against C. D. late of etc. in a Plea that each
of them, (if there be three or more defendants) then in a Plea that every of
them, render to him 40l. which they owe him and unjustly detain, etc.

The entry against defendants in several Sums.
If the Sums are several then thus, against A. B. late of etc. in a Plea that
he render to him twenty pounds and against C. D. late of etc. in a Plea that
he render to him 10l. which they owe him and unjustly detain etc.

Against an executour and another defendant.
(If against an Executor or administrator and another defendant then thus
(against A. B. late of etc. Executor of the Testament etc. in a Plea that he
render unto him 20l. which he unjustly detaineth etc. And against C. D. late of
etc. in a Plea that he render unto him 20l. which to him he owes him and
unjustly detaineth etc.

Testat. Capias.
Oliver etc. to the Sheriff of Worcester greeting, we command you that you
take A.B. late of etc. (as in other Capias unto) as it is said, and for that
the Sheriffs of London have certified to our said Justices at Westminster
(tali die) last past that the said A. B. is not found their bailywick when as
it is witnessed in our said Court that he does lurk, wander and lie hid in your
County, and have you there this writ etc.

The entry thereof.
I. P. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day etc. (as in others unto)
and he came not, and the Sheriffs were commanded to summon him, and the
Sheriffs returned that he has nothing etc. therefore let him be taken that he
may be here in the morrow of All Souls etc. And the writ is delivered upon
record, at which day here came the aforesaid I. P. by his Attorney and offered
himself the 4th. day against the said A. B. in the Plea aforesaid and he came
not, and the Sheriffs were commanded to take him etc. And the Sheriffs
returned that he is not found etc. and thereupon it is witnessed here in Court
that the said A. B. does lurk wander and lie hid in the County of Worcester;
therefore the Sheriff of Worcester is commanded to take the said A. B. if he
shall be found in his bailywick, and him safely keep so that he may have his
body there (tali die) to answer the said I. P. in the Plea aforesaid etc.

A Capias in Ejectment.
Write as in another Capias till you come to; of a Plea, wherefore by force and
arms two messuages, one garden, eight Acres of land, two Acres of meadow and
three Acres of pasture, with the appurtenances in H. which R. C. to the
aforesaid T. P. did demise for a Term, which is not yet past, did enter and him
the said T. P. from his farm aforesaid he did eject and other harms to him he
did to the great damage of him the said T. P. and against the public peace
etc.

The entry is as in another Capias in trespass mutatis mutandis. And if you
cannot arrest upon the Capias, you may as in other actions proceed to the
outlary.

A Capias in an Action of trover.
As in another Capias till you come to in a Plea, wherefore with force and
arms the Cattle of the said L. to the value of twenty pounds at London lately
found he did take and carry away and other enormities etc.

The entry is as in another Capias mutatis mutandis.

A Capias upon the statute of Bankrupt where the Assignee sues one of the
Bankrupts debtors.
As in another Capias until you come to, in a Plea that he render unto B.
Assignee of the goods and Chattells of W. S. Bankrupt according to the form of
the statute in such case made and provided two hundred pounds, which he owes
him and unjustly detaineth as it is said and have you there this writ etc.

The entry is as in another Capias.
In a Capias at the suit of an heir or against an heir you must say at the
end of the Plea, which he owes him and unjustly detaineth as it is said, and
in the addition of him in either of the cases you must mention in your Capias
that he is heir, and whose heir he is or else the writ will abate.

A Pone in debt.
Oliver Lord Protector, etc. Put under security and safe pledges A. B. late of
etc. that he be before our Justices of the Common Bench at Westminster from the
day of Easter in 15. days to answer C. D. of a Plea that he render to him 40l.
which to him he owes and unjustly detaineth as it is said, and to show
wherefore he was not before our said Justices at Westminster in eight days of
the Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary last past, as he was summoned, and
have you there the names of the pledges, And this writ witness O. St. John at
Westminster etc.

The entry thereof.
C. D. by his Attorney proffered himself the 4th. day against A. B. late of
etc. in a Plea that he render unto him 40l. which he owes him and unjustly
detaineth etc. And he came not and the Sheriff was commanded to summon him
etc. And the Sheriff returned that he was summoned etc. Therefore let him be
attached that he may be here from the day of Easter in 15. days.

A Pone and Capias in one Writ.
Oliver etc. to the Sheriff of Middlesex, greeting put under security and safe
pledges A. B. late of S. Gentleman that he be before our Justices of the Common
Bench at Westminster in eight days of St. Michael to answer C. D. in a Plea
that he render to him 10. l. which to him he owes and unjustly detaineth as it
is said, and to show wherefore he was not before our said Justices at
Westminster, from the day of Easter in 15. days last past as he was summoned,
we command you also that you take Q. F. late of C. in your County, if he shall be
found in your bailywick, and him safely keep, so that you have his body at the
aforesaid Term, to answer the aforesaid C. in a Plea that he render to him C.
S. etc. as it is said and have you there the names of the pledges, and this
writ etc.

The entry thereof.
C. D. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against A. B. late of T. in
your County, in a Plea that he render to him 10l. And against G. F. late of N.
in the County aforesaid H. in a Plea that he render to him C. s. which they owe
him and unjustly detain etc. and they came not, and the Sheriff was commanded
to summon them etc. And as for the aforesaid A. B. the Sheriff returned that
he was summoned etc. therefore let him be attached that he be here in eight
days of St. Michael etc. And as for the aforesaid G. F. the Sheriff returned
that he has nothing etc. therefore let him be taken that he be here at the
aforesaid Term etc.

An alias Capias and an alias distringas in one Writ.
Oliver etc. greeting, we command you as heretofore we commanded you that you
distrain A. B. late of C. in your County Yeoman by all his lands and Cattles in
your Bailey week, so that neither he, nor any for him lay hands thereupon until
you receive further command from us, and that you answer us of the profits
thereof, so that you may have his body before the Justices of the Common-Bench
at Westminster in eight days of St. Hillary, to answer C. D. of a Plea
wherefore he together with G. F. late of N. in your County Husbandmen with
Force and Arms, the close of the said C. D. at N. he did break, and other
wrongs to him did to the great damage of the said C.D. and against the public
peace, and to hear his judgment for many defaults, also we command you as
heretofore we have commanded you that you take the aforesaid G. F. if he shall
be found in your Bailey week, and him safely keep so that you have his body
before the said Justices of the Common-Bench at Westminster, at the aforesaid
Term to answer the aforesaid C. D. of the Plea aforesaid, and have you there
this Writ, etc.

The Entry thereof.
C. D. By his Attorney offered himself the fourth day against A.B. late of T.
in the County aforesaid, Yeoman. And G.F. late of N. in the County aforesaid,
Husbandman in a Plea, wherefore with Force and Arms the close of the said C.
D. at M. they did break, and other wrongs, etc. to the great damage, etc. and
against the public peace, etc. and they came not, and the Sheriff was
commanded that he should distrain the aforesaid A. B. etc. and that he should
take the aforesaid G. F. etc. and as for the aforesaid A. B. the Sheriff
returned that he is distrained by his Cattles to the value of four shillings,
and is mainprized by John Do, and Richard Roo. Therefore he is in mercy, etc.
And as heretofore, let him be distrained that he be here in eight days of St.
Hillary, etc. and as for the aforesaid G. F. the Sheriff returned that he is
not found, etc. therefore as heretofore, let him be taken that he be here at
the aforesaid Term, etc.

A pone after Essoigne.
Oliver, etc. put under security, etc. as before unto, as it is said, and to
show wherefore he did not keep the day given him by his Essoigne in Court,
before the Justices of the Common-Bench at Westminster from the day of Easter,
in five weeks last past after he was summoned, and have you there the names of
the pledges, and this Writ witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
C. D. By his Attorney offered himself, etc. (as above) and he came not, and he
had thence day given him by his Essoign here even unto this day (that is to
say) from the day of Easter in 5. weeks after he was summoned, etc. therefore
let him be attached, etc. (as before.)

A distr. in Debt upon a pone.
Oliver, etc. we command you that you distrain A.B. late of, etc. by all his
Lands and Cattles in your Bailey week, so that neither he, nor any for him lay
hands thereupon, until you receive further command from us, and that you
answer us of the profits thereof, so that you may have his body before the
Justices of the Common-Bench at West-minster (such a day) to answer C. D. in a
Plea that he render to him 40. l. which to him he owes and unjustly detaineth
as it is said, and to hear his judgment for many defaults, and have you there
this Writ witnsse, etc.

The Entry thereof.
C. D. By his Attorney offered himself the fourth day against A. B. late of,
etc. in a Plea that he render to him 40. l. which to him he owes and unjustly
detaineth, etc. and he came not, and the Sheriff was commanded to attach him,
etc. and the Sheriff returned that he is attached by his pledges John Roo, and
Richard Roo, therefore they are in mercy, etc. and let the said A. B. be
distrained that he be here (tali die) etc.

A Pone in a Recordure.
Oliver, etc. Put under security and safe pledges, A. B. that he be before our
Justices at Westminster (talie die) to answer C. D. of a Plea, wherefore he
took the Cattle of the said C.D. and them unjustly detained against security
and pledges as it is said, and to show wherefore he was not in our Court before
our Justices at Westminster (tali die) last past, as day to him there was
prefixed, and have you there the names of the Pledges, and this Writ witness,
etc.

The Entry thereof.
A.B. By his Attorney offered himself the fourth day against C. D. in a Plea,
wherefore he took the Cattle of the said A. and them unjustly detained against
security and pledges, etc. and he came not, and he had day here unto this day
(to wit) in eight days of St. Martin by prefixion, etc. therefore let him be
attached that he be here in eight days of St. Hillary, etc.

A distr. after Esloine.
Oliver, etc. As in other distr. till you come to (as it is said then) and to
show wherefore he kept not the day to him given by his Essoine, before our
Justices at Westminster, in eight days of St. Martine after he was summoned,
and to hear his judgment for many defaults, and have you there this Writ, etc.

The Entry thereof.
C. D. By his Attorney offered himself the fourth day against A. B. late of,
etc. in a Plea that he render to him 100.s. which to him he owes, and unjustly
detaineth, etc. and he came not, and he had day by his Essoigne unto this day
(to wit) in eight days of St. Martine, after he was summoned (and if it be in
trespass, then thus) after he was attached, therefore let him be distrained
that he be herein eight days of St. Hillary, etc.

Testatum, Summons in Debt.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of Hereford: greeting, we command you that you
Summon by good Summoners, A.B. of, etc. that he be before our Justices at
Westminster (tali die) to answer C. D. in a Plea that he render to him 40. l.
etc. and for that our Sheriffs of London have certified to our Justices at
Westminster (tali die) last past, that the aforesaid A. B. has nothing in
their Bailey week, whereby he may be summoned when as it is witnessed in our
said Court that he has sufficient in your Bailey week, and have you there the
Summoners, and this Writ witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
F. The Sheriffs were commanded that they should Summon A. B. late of T. etc.
that he might be here at this day (to wit) in the morrow of St. Martine to
answer C.D. in a Plea that he render to him, per s. xx. which to him he owes
and unjustly detaineth, etc. and now here at this day came the aforesaid C. D.
in his proper person, and offered himself the fourth day against the aforesaid
A. B. in the Plea aforesaid, and he came not, and the Sheriffs returned that
he has nothing, etc. And hereupon it is witnessed in our Court here, that the
aforesaid A. B. has sufficient in the County of Hereford, where he may be
summoned. Therefore the Sheriff of Hereford is commanded that he should summon
him, etc. that he be here in the morrow of the Purification of the blessed
Virgin Marie, to answer the aforesaid C.D. in the Plea aforesaid, etc.

A Summon in severance.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of, etc. greeting, we command you that you take A.
B. late of T. etc. if he shall be found in your Bailey week, and him safely
keep, so that, etc. To answer C. D. and G.F. Executors of the Testament of G.
H. of a Plea that he render to them, c. s. zz. Also we command you that you
Summon by good Summoners, the aforesaid G. that he be before our Justices at
Westminster at the aforesaid Term, to persecute against the aforesaid A. B. his
Plea aforesaid, together with the aforesaid C. if he will, and have you there
the Summons, and this Writ, etc.

The Entry thereof.
S. S. The Sheriff was commanded that he should Summon A. B. late of, etc. that
he might be here at this day (to wit) (tali die) to answer C. D. and G. F.
Executors of the Testament of G. H. in a Plea that he render to them Cs. zz.
And now here at this day came the aforesaid C. D. by T. A. his Attorney, the
aforesaid G.F. being also complainant, etc. the fourth day of the Plea being
solemnly called came not, and hereupon the aforesaid C. D. offered himself the
fourth day, against the aforesaid A. B. of the Plea aforesaid, and he came not,
and the Sheriff returned that he has nothing, etc. therefore let him be
taken, that he be here in the morrow of all Souls, etc. and the Sheriff is
commanded that he should Summon the aforesaid G.F. that he be here at the
aforesaid Term to prosecute against the aforesaid A. B. his Plea aforesaid,
together with the aforesaid C.D. if, etc.

A Pone upon a Recordare.
Oliver, etc Greeting, put under security and safe pledges, A. B. that he be
before our Justices at Westminster (tali die) to answer C. D. in a Plea,
wherefore he took the Cattle of the said C. D. and them unjustly detained
against security and pledges as it is said, and to show wherefore he was not in
our Court before our Justices at Westminster (tali die) last past, as day to
him there was prefixed, and have you there the names of the pledges, and this
Writ witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
Middl. ss. A. B. by his Attorney offers himself the fourth day against C.D.
in a Plea, wherefore he took the Cattle of the said A. and them unjustly
detained against security and pledges, etc. And he came not, and he had thence
day here unto this day (to wit) in eight days of St. Martine by prefixion,
etc. Therefore let him be attached that he be here in eight days of St.
Hillary, etc.

A Returno habendo.
Oliver, etc. Greeting, whereas C. D. was summoned to be in our Court before
our Justices at Westminster (tali die) to answer A. B. of a Plea, wherefore he
took the Cattle of the said A.B. and them unjustly detained against security
and pledges as it is said, the said A.B. afterward in our said Court made
default, whereby it was ordered in our said Court, that the aforesaid A.B.
should go thence without day, and that the aforesaid C.D. and his pledges of
prosecuting should be in mercy, and that he should have return of the aforesaid
Cattle. And therefore we command you that the aforesaid Cattle to the aforesaid
C. D. without delay you cause to be returned, and them at the plaint, of the
aforesaid A. B. you deliver not without our Writ, which shall make express
mention of the aforesaid judgment, and how you shall execute this our Command,
you make appear to our Justices, at Westminster, in eight days of St. Hillary,
and have you etc.

The Entry thereof.
Mid. ss. C. D. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against A. B. of a
Plea wherefore he the said C. D. took the Cattle of the said A. and them
unjustly detained against security and pledges, etc. And he being sollemnly
exacted came not, and he was Plaintiff, etc. therefore it is ordered that he
and his pledges of prosecuting be in mercy, etc. And that the aforesaid A. B.
go thence without day etc. And that he have return of the cattle aforesaid,
etc. Inquire the names of the pledges, etc. and in what manner etc. the
Sheriff make appear here in eight days of St. Hillary, etc.

A. Second deliverance.
Oliver, etc. greeting if A. B. shall secure you for prosecuteing his plaint
and of returning his Cattle which to C. D. in our Court before our Justices at
Westminster, were adjudged for default of the said A. B. or for the price of
them, if return thereof shall be adjudged then to the same A. B. his Cattle
aforesaid without delay you cause to be delivered, and put under security and
safe pledges the aforesaid C. D. that he be before our Justices at Westminster,
in eight days of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary to answer the
aforesaid A. B. of the taking and unjustly detaining of the Cattle aforesaid,
and have you there the names of the pledges, and this writ, etc.

A Non omittas.
Oliver, etc. we command you that you omit not for any liberty of the liberty
of the Town of that St. Edmunds but you take A. B. late of T. etc. if he shall
be found, etc. To answer C. D. of a Plea that he render to him c. s. zz. And
whereupon your self has certified to our Justices at Westminster, (tale die)
last past that as to the taking the aforesaid A. B. you have commanded E. F.
bayliffe of the aforesaid liberty who has full return of all writs and the
execution of them within that liberty to whom the execution of the Writ
aforesaid, did belong to be done F. insomuch that execution of the said Writ,
out of the same liberty by you could not be done, which said bailiffe to you
thereof has given no answer, and have you, etc.

The Entry thereof.
C.D. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against A. B. late of etc.
of a Plea that he render to him c. s. zz. And he came not, and the Sheriff was
commanded that he should take him if, etc. And safely, etc. so that he might
have his body here at this day (to wit) in eight days of St. Michael, and the
Sheriff has certified that he had Commanded E. F. bailiffe of the liberty of
Bury of St. Edmonds who has full return, etc. And to whom, etc. who gave him
no answer, etc. therefore the Sheriff is commanded that he omit not for the
liberty aforesaid, but he take the aforesaid A. B. if etc. And safely, etc. So
that he have his body here in the morrow of all Souls, etc.

A. Distrin. Balivum.
Oliver Lord Protector, etc. we command you that you distrain our bayliffe of
Dour utchie of Lancaster in your County, by all his lands, etc. (as in others)
so that you may have (tali die) the body of A. B. late of T. in your County
yeoman, whom by our command, lately he took as your self to our Justices at
Westminster, in the morrow of All Souls last past has certified to answer C.
D. in a Plea that he render to him x. l. zz. as he says, and to hear his
judgment for many defaults, and have you, etc.

The Entry thereof.
The Sheriff was commanded that he should take A. B. late of, etc. if, etc.
and him safely, etc. so that he might have his body here at this day (to wit)
in the morrow of All Souls to answer C. D. in a Plea that he render to him Ten
pounds which he owes him and unjustly detaineth, etc. and now hereat this day
came the aforesaid C. D. by A. B. his Attorney, and offered himself the 4th.
against the aforesaid A. B. of the Plea aforesaid, and he came not, and the
Sheriff returned that he had commanded I. H. bailiffe of the liberty of our
Duchy of Lanchaster in the County aforesaid, who has return of all Writs and
of the execution of them within the liberty aforesaid, out of which liberty
execution of that writ by him the said Sheriff could not be done: which said
bailiffe to the same Sheriff thus answered, that he had taken the body of the
aforesaid A. B. whose body here at this day he would have, and because the
aforesaid bailiffe the body of the aforesaid A. B. here at this day has not,
therefore the same bailiffe is in mercy, and is amearced by the Justices herein
40.s. therefore the Sheriff is commanded that he distrain the aforesaid
bailiffe by all his lands, etc. and that of the proffits etc. so that he have
here from the day of St. Martine in 15. days the body of the aforesaid A. B.
whom etc. to answer the aforesaid C. D. of the Plea aforesaid, etc.
misericordia xl.s.

A. Grand Cape in Dower upon the Summons.
Oliver, etc. to the Sheriff of Middlesex greeting, take into our hand by the
view of honest and lawful men of your County the third part of two messuages,
two acres of land and Ten, acres of meadow with the appurtenances in B. which
Nicholas Penny and Alice his wife in our Court before our Justices at
Westminster claim as the Dower of the said Alice by the endowment of R. S.
heretofore her husband against I. K. by our Writ of Dower, whereof she has
nothing by the default of the said. I. And the day of the taking, you certify
to our Justices at Westminster by your letters sealed, and Summon by good
Summoners, the aforesaid I. that he be before our Justices at Westminster in
eight days of St. Michael to answer thereunto, and to show wherefore he was
not before our Justices at Westminster in the morrow of the holy Trinity last
past, as he was Summoned, and have you there the names of them by whose view
you shall make this Summons, and this Writ witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. Nicholas Penny and Alice his wife by I. G. their Attorney offered
themselves the 4th. against I. K. in a Plea of the third part of two messuages
twenty acres of land and ten acres of meadow with the appurtenances in B. which
the aforesaid Nicholas and Alice in our Court here claim as the Dower of the
said Alice by the endowment of R. S. heretofore her husband against him by our
Writ of Dower whereof she has nothing, etc. and he came not, and he was
Summoned, etc. therefore let the third part aforesaid with the appurtenances be
taken into our hand, and a day, etc. And the aforesaid I. K. be summoned that
he be here in eight days of St. Michaell, etc.

The Entry of an Alias Grand, Cape.
And the aforesaid I. K. was Summoned that he be here in eight days of St.
Michaell. etc. at which day here came the aforesaid Nich. and Alice by their
Attorney aforesaid, and the Sheriff has not Executed the Writ, therefore as
heretofore let the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances be taken into the
hand of the Lord Protector, etc. And the aforesaid I. K. as heretofore be
summoned that he be here in the morrow of All Souls etc.

A Pone after an Essoin in Dower.
Oliver, etc. Greeting put under security and safe pledges C. D. that he be
here etc. as he says, and to show wherefore he kept not the day to him given
by his Essoin in our Court before our Justices at Westminster in eight days of
the holy Trinity last past after he was summoned, and have you there the names
of them by whose view, etc. as before.

The Entry thereof.
ss. In the Entry of the Writ aforesaid let it be made as before until as
before (to Wit) and he came not, and he had thence day by his Essoin here unto
this day (to wit) in eight days of the holy Trinity after he was summoned,
etc. therefore let the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances be taken into
the hand of the Lord Protector, etc. And the aforesaid I. K. be summoned that
he be here in eight days of St. Michaell, etc.

A writ of view in Dower.
Oliver, etc. we command you that justly and without delay you cause C. D. to
have view of one message with the appurtenances in T. whereof Q. who was the
wife of F. G. in our Court before our Justices at Westminster claims the
third part against him as her Dower by the endowment of the said F. G.
heretofore her husband by our Writ of Dower, whereof she has nothing as she
says, and speak to 4. Knights of them that shall be present at that view, that
they be before our Justices at Westminster in eight days of St. Hillary to
testify that view, and have you there the names of the 4 Knights and this Writ
witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. Q. who was the wife of F. R. by N. M. her Attorney demands against C. D.
the third part of one message with the Appurtenances in T. as her Dower by the
endowment of the aforesaid F. heretofore her husband by a Writ of the Lord
Protector of Dower whereof she has nothing etc. and the aforesaid C. D. by I.
A. his Attorney came and demanded view of the message aforesaid with the
appurtenances whereof etc. let him have it etc. day is given to the said
parties here till in eight days of St. Hillary etc. And in the mean time etc.

A Languidus upon a Capias.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should take A. B. late of etc. if etc.
And him safely etc. so that he might have his body before our Justices here at
this day (to wit) in eight days of St. Michaell to answer C. D. in a Plea that
he render to him c. s. zz. and now here at this day came the aforesaid C. D. by
his Attorney etc. (as in other entryes unto) and he came not, and the Sheriff
returned that he took the body of the aforesaid A. B. which languished in
prison and with so many and such infirmities in the same he is detained that
without very great danger of death travail or be carried he cannot, when as it
is witnessed in our Court here that the aforesaid A. B. is healthful and
sound, and able to travail, therefore the Sheriff is commanded that he have
here from the day of St. Michaell in one month the body of the aforesaid A. B.
to answer the aforesaid C. D. in the Plea aforesaid, etc.

A habeas Corpus upon a Languidus.
ss. Oliver etc. We command you that you have before our Justices at
Westminster from the day of St. Michaell in one month the body of A. B. late
of T. etc. whom by our precept you have taken and in your power detaineth who
so languished in our prison of O. and with so many and such infirmities in the
same grieved that without very great danger of death travail or be carried, he
could not as your self returned to our Justices at Westminster in eight days
of St. Michaell last past to answer C. D. in a Plea that he render to him c. s.
zz. And have you etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should have here at this day to wit
from the day of St. Michaell in one month the body of A. B. late of etc. whom
by the precept of the Lord Protector, he had taken and in his power did detain
his body languishing in prison before the Justices here in eight days of St.
Michaell last past he could not have, insomuch that with so many and such
infirmities in the same prison he was detained that without very great danger
of death travail or be carried, he could not, as the same Sheriff at that day
there returned, to answer C. D. in a Plea that he render to him c. s. zz. And
now here at this day came the aforesaid C. D. by I. N. his Attorney and offered
himself the 4th. day against the aforesaid A. B. in the Plea aforesaid and the
Sheriff returned that the aforesaid A. B. as yet languisheth in the prison
aforesaid therefore the body of the said A. B. before the Justices here at this
day he cannot have, insomuch that with so many and such infirmities and greifs
in the same prison he is troubled that he cannot travail or be carried without
very great danger of death when as it is witnessed in the Court of the
Protector here as the Protector had received by the Testimony of a creditable
person, that the aforesaid A. B. is sound and healthful and able to travail
therefore the Sheriff is commanded that he or his under, Sheriff be here in
eight days of St. Martine bringing thither with him the aforesaid A. B.
whether he shall be healthful or infirm to answer the aforesaid C. D. in the
Plea aforesaid and this under the pain of twenty pounds, etc.

A Duces tecum upon the Entry.
ss. Oliver, etc. whereas we lately commanded you that you should have before
our Justices at Westminster in eight days of St. Hillary last past the body of
A.B. late of etc. whom by our precept you took to answer C. D. in a Plea that
he the said A.B. render to him 100.s.zz. And although the aforesaid A. B. be
sound and healthful and able to travail as by the Testimony of a creditable
person we have received, you notwithstanding permittum the said A. B. to wander
at large in the same eight days of St. Hillary and returned that the same A.
B. did languish in our prison under your custody so that the body of the said
A. B. thereat that day you could not have, insomuch that he was troubled with
so many and such infirmities and greifes in the same prison that he could not
then justly travail neither be carried without very great danger of death, and
for that we would not have our people in the prosecutions of their actions in
our Court to be persecuted nor our Court in such manner to be deluded, we
command you that you or your under Sheriff be before our Justices at
Westminster in eight days of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary
bringing thither with you the aforesaid A. B. whether he shall be healthful or
infirm to answer the aforesaid C. D. in the Plea aforesaid knowing for certain
that if this shall be omitted, you shall undergo the penalty of twenty pounds,
and have you there this writ, etc.

The Entry of an alias non omittas.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should not omit for the liberty of the
Town of Cant. but take I. G. late of R. in the County aforesaid yeoman if etc.
and safely etc. so that he might have his body here at this day (to wit) in the
morrow of All Souls, to answer A. L. in a Plea that he render unto him c. s.
zz. and now here at this day came the aforesaid I. L. by his Attorney and
offered himself the 4th. day against the aforesaid I. G. in the aforesaid Plea
and he came not, and the Sheriff returned that he is not found etc. therefore
as heretofore he is commanded that he should not omit for the liberty aforesaid
but take the aforesaid I. G. if etc. and safely etc. so that he might have his
body here (tali die) etc.

The Entry of an distr. in debito.
ss. A.B. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against T. C. late of
etc. in a Plea that he render to him c. s. zz. And he came not and the Sheriff
was commanded that he should attach him etc. and the Sheriff returned that he
is attached by pledges John Denn and Richard Fen, therefore he is in mercy etc.
and let him be distrained that he be here (tali die) etc.

A distr. and a Pone in one Writ.
ss. Oliver etc. we command you that you distrain H. S. late of etc. as in
another distr. etc. to answer T. M. in a Plea that he together with C. D. etc.
render unto him c. s. zz. And to hear his judgment for many defaults etc. we
also command you that you put under security and safe pledges the aforesaid C.
that he be before our said Justices at Westminster at the aforesaid Term to
answer the aforesaid T. M. together with the aforesaid H. in the Plea
aforesaid, and to show wherefore he kept not the day to him given by his Essoin
before our Justices at Westminster from the day of Easter in 15. days last
past after he was summoned and have you, etc.

The Entry of a Capias and latitat.
ss. A. B. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against I. L. late of
etc. and against W. C. etc. in a Plea that both of them render to him c. s. zz.
And they came not, and the Sheriff was commanded that he should take them etc.
and the Sheriff returned that they are not found etc. and hereupon concerning
the aforesaid I.L. it is witnessed in the Court of the Protector here that he
does lurk wander and lie hid in the County of Sommerset therefore the Sheriff
of Sommerset, is commanded that he take him if etc. and safely etc. so that he
have his body here in eight days of St. Hillary etc. and whereupon etc. and
also as heretofore let the aforesaid W. C. be taken that he be here at the
aforesaid Time etc.

The Entry of a distr. and Pone in one Writ.
ss. C. M. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against T. S. late of,
etc. of a Plea, that he together with C. his wife render to him C.s. which he
owes him and unjustly detains, etc. and they came not, and the Sheriff was
commanded that he should attach them, etc. And the Sheriff returned that they
are attached by pledges, John Do and Richard Roo, therefore they are in mercy,
etc. and let them be destrained that they be here from the day of Easter in 10.
days, etc.

A Writ of view in a Formedon in Descender.
ss. Oliver* etc. Greeting, we command you that without delay you cause T. A.
to have view of one message with the appuretnances in C. which D.E. in our
Court before our Justices at Westminster, claims as his right by our Writ of
Formedon in descender against him. and speak to 4. Knights of them, which shall
be present at that view, that they be before our Justices at Westminster (tali
die) to testify that view, and have you there the names of the Knights, and
this Writ witness, etc.

A Magnum Cape of a non Omit. in a Writ of Dower.
ss. Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of Cambridge, Greeting, we command you that
that you omit not for our Liberty of our Bishopric of Ely, the place being now
void within the Isle of Ely in your County, but take into our hand by the view
of honest and Lawful men of your County, the third part of one message with
the appurtenances in Outwell, which R.P. and D. his wife in our Court before
our Justices at the Town of St. Albanes, in our County of Hertf. claim as her
Dower, by the endowment of H. S. heretofore her husband against J. S. by our
Writ of Dower, whereof she has nothing by default of the said J. and the day
of the Captiom certify to our Justices, at the Town of St. Albane aforesaid by
your Letters sealed, and Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid J. that he be
here before our Justices at Westminster, from the day of the holy Trinity, in
3. weeks thereof to answer, and show wherefore he kept not the day to him given
by our Writ of Common adjournment after he was Summoned, and have you there the
names of them, by whose view you shall make this Summons, and this Writ
witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should take into the hand of the Lord
Protector, the third part of one message with the appurtunances in O. which
R.P. and D. his wife in the Court of the Protector claim as the Dower of the
said D. by the endowment of H.S. heretofore her husband against J.S. by the
Writ of the Lord Protector of Dower, whereof she has nothing, etc. and day,
etc. and that he should Summon by good Summoners, the aforesaid J. that he
should be here at this day (to wit) from the day of Easter in 15. days last
past, and now here at this day came the aforesaid R. and D. by A. B. their
Attorney, etc. and the Sheriff returned that for the execution of the Writ of
the Lord Protector lately to him directed, he commanded the Bayliffe of the
Liberty of the Lord Protector of his Bishopric of Ely, the place being now
void within the Isle of Ely, to whom, etc. insomuch that, etc. who thereof gave
him no answer, therefore the Sheriff is commanded that he omit not for that
Liberty, but take into the hand of the Lord Protector the third part aforesaid,
with the appurtenances in form aforesaid, etc.

The Entry of an Amerciament against a Sheriff, for not returning a Writ.
ss. At which day here came the aforesaid J. by his Attorney, and the Sheriff
of the County aforesaid, although was solemnly exacted to return the Writ
aforesaid came not, nor returned that Writ, therefore the same Sheriff (to
wit) J. S. is in mercy, etc. and is amearced by the Justices here to xl. s. etc.

An Original in Dower.
ss. Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of Cambridge, Greeting, command W. C. that
justly and without delay he render to L. S. Widow, who was the wife of R. S.
her reasonable dower, which happens to her of the Freehold, which was of the
aforesaid R. in time past, her husband in Wisbech, whereof she has nothing as
it is said, and whereof she complains that the aforesaid VV. deforceth her,
and unless he shall do it, etc. the xv. Pas Test. etc.

The Sheriffs Return.
ss. For the Execution of this Writ, I have made my Warrant to the Bayliffe of
the Lord Protector, of the Bishopric of Ely, the place being now void within
the Isle of Ely, who has the full return and execution of all Writs within the
same Liberty to execute, to whom the execution of this Writ does wholly belong,
insomuch that no execution thereof elsewhere, than within the same Liberty by
me could be done, which said Bayliffe no answer thereof to me gave, I.P. Ar.
vic.

An alias Summons of a non omittas in Dower.
ss. Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of Cambridge, Greeting, we command you that
you omit not for our Liberty of the Bishopric of Ely, the place being now void
within the Isle of Ely, but command W.C. that justly and without delay he
render to L.S. Widow, who was the wife of R. S. her reasonable dower, which
happens to her of the freehold which was of the aforesaid R. in time past,
her husband in VVisbech, whereof she has nothing as it is said, and whereof
she complains that the aforesaid W. deforceth her, and unless he shall do
it, and the aforesaid L. shall secure you for prosecuting her complaint, then
Summon the aforesaid VV. that he be before our Justices at Westminster, in the
morrow of the holy Trinity, to show wherefore he will not do it, and whereof
your self has certified to our Justices at Westminster, from the day of Easter
in 15. days last past, that you commanded the Bayliffe of our Liberty of the
aforesaid Bishopric, the place being then void within the aforesaid Isle of
Ely, who has full return and execution of all Writs within the same Liberty to
execute, to whom execution of the Writ aforesaid wholly belonged, in so much
that no execution thereof elsewhere than within the same Liberty by you could
be done, who no answer thereof to you gave, and have you there the Summoners,
and this Writ witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should command W. C. that justly, etc.
he should render to Luce S. Widow, who was the wife of R. S. her reasonable
Dower, which happens to her of the freehold, which was of the aforesaid R. in
time past her husband in Wisbetch, whereof she has nothing, etc. and unless,
etc. then he should Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid W. that he might be
here at this day (to wit) from the day of Easter in 15 days to show wherefore
he did it not. And now here at this day came the aforesaid Luce by Fr. T. her
Attorney, and the Sheriff returned that he commanded the Bayliffe of the
Liberty of the Lord Protector of his Bishopric of Ely, the place being then
void within the Isle of Ely, who has full etc. and to whom, etc. who to him no
answer, etc. Therefore the Sheriff is commanded that he omit not for the
Liberty aforesaid, but Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid W. that he be
here in the morrow of the holy Trinity to answer the aforesaid Luce in the Plea
aforesaid, etc.

A distr. nuper vic.
ss. Oliver, etc. We command you that you distrain A.B. Esquire late Sheriff of
your County, your predecessor by all his Lands and Cattles in your bailey week,
so that neither, etc. so that he may have before our Justices at Westminster
(tali die) the body of R.B. late of T. (as in the Writ) to answer S. P. in a
Plea, that he render to him C. l. zz. whom by our command he has taken as he
to our Justices at Westminster in 8. days of the holy Trinity last past
certified, and to hear his judgment for many defaults, and have you there this
Writ witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should have here at this day (to wit)
in eight days of St. Hillary last past, the body of H. late of, etc. whom the
same Sheriff took, and in his power detaineth to answer R. S. in a Plea, that
he render to him 40. l. which to him he owes, and unjustly detaineth, etc. And
now here at this day came the aforesaid R. by M.I. his Attorney, and proffered
himself the fourth day against the aforesaid H. in the Plea aforesaid, and he
came not, and the Sheriff returned that the same H. was not taken by him
Sheriff, but by J. D. late Sheriff predecessor of him the now Sheriff, nor the
body of the same H. to the aforesaid now Sheriff was delivered in his going
forth from his Office. Therefore the now Sheriff is commanded that he distrain
the aforesaid late Sheriff by all his Lands, etc. And that of the profits,
etc. so that he have here (tali die) the body of the aforesaid H. whom, etc. to
answer the aforesaid R. in the Plea aforesaid, etc.

A Writ of alias Summons, where the Sheriff returns that the Plaintiff has
not found pledges to prosecute.
ss. Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of Suff. Greeting, for that A. B. in our Court
before our Justices at Westminster, has not secured our said Justices for
prosecuting his Plaint by John Den, and Richard Fen, we command you that you
Summon by good Summoners C.D. of D. in your County, Yeoman, that he be before
our Justices at Westminster in 8. days of St. Hillary, to answer the aforesaid
A. B. in a Plea, that he render to him 40. s. which to him he owes, and
unjustly detaineth as it is said, and have you there the Summoners, and this
Writ witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should Summon by good Summoners, C. D.
of Dale, in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, that he might be here at this day (to
wit) in the morrow of all Souls, to answer A.B. in a Plea, that he render to
him 40. s. which he to him owes, and unjustly detaineth, etc. And now here at
this day came the aforesaid A. B. by G. D. his Attorney, and the Sheriff
returned that the same A. B. did not find for him pledges for prosecuting,
etc. And hereupon let the aforesaid A. B. here in Court find pledges for
persecuting his Plaint (to wit) John Den, and Richard Fen. Therefore as
heretofore the Sheriff is commanded that he Summon by good Summoners, the
aforesaid G.D. that he be here in 8. days of St. Hillary, to answer the
aforesaid A. B. in the Plea aforesaid, etc.

The Entry of a Writ of Debt against two Executors, where they were Summoned,
the Sheriff returns the one Essoined, and the other to have nothing, a Distr.
against the one, and a Capias against the other.
ss. C. D. By his Attorney offered himself the 4. day against T. B. of, etc.
and G.B. of, etc. Executors of the Testament of John C. in a Plea, that they
render to him 100. s. which from him they unjustly detain, etc. and they came
not, and the aforesaid T. B. had from thence day by his Essoin, here unto this
day (to wit) in 8. days of St. Hillary, after he was Summoned. Therefore let
him be distrained that he be here in 8. days of the Purification of the
blessed Virgin Marie, etc. And the Sheriff was commanded that he should
distrain the aforesaid G.B. etc. and the Sheriff returned, that he has
nothing, etc. therefore let him be taken that he be here at the aforesaid Term,
etc.

An Entry in Debt, brought by one Executor against another upon the Summons to
prosecute together, the Sheriff returns to the Capias he is not found, upon
which another Capias is brought. And has a Summons on which he returns a
Tarde, etc. upon which is brought an Alias Summons.
The Sheriff was commanded that he should take A. B. late of T. etc. if, etc.
so that he might have his body hereat this day (to wit) in the morrow of all
Souls, to answer C.D. and G.F. Executors of the Testament of J. H. in a Plea,
that he render to them 100. s. which from them they unjustly detain, etc. And
also that he should Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid G.F. that he might
be here at the aforesaid term to prosecute against the aforesaid A.B. his Plea
aforesaid, with the aforesaid C. D. if, etc. And the aforesaid A.B. came not,
and the Sheriff returned that he is not found, etc. Therefore as heretofore,
let him be taken that he be here from the day of St. Martine, in 15. days,
etc. And as to the Summoning of the aforesaid G. F. the Sheriff returned that
the Writ thereof came so late, etc. Therefore as heretofore let him be Summoned
that he be here at the aforesaid Term, to prosecute against the aforesaid A.B.
his Plea aforesaid, together with the aforesaid C. D. if, etc.

In Debt against the one Executor upon the Summons to prosecute together, the
Executor makes default upon which the other sueth alone.
The Sheriff as heretofore, was commanded that he should take A. B. late of T.
etc. if, etc. and safely, etc. so that he might have his body here at this day
(to wit) from the day of St. Martine, in 15. days to answer C.D. and G.F.
Executors of the Testament of G.H. in a Plea, that he render to them 100. s.
which from them he unjustly detaineth, etc. And also as heretofore, that he
should Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid G. F. that he might be here at
the aforesaid Term, to prosecute against the aforesaid A. B. his Plea
aforesaid, together with the aforesaid C.D. if, etc. And now here at this day
came the aforesaid C. D. by A. B. his Attorney, and the aforesaid G.F. the 4th.
day of the Plea, being solemnly exacted, came not, and was Summoned, etc.
Therefore it is ordered, that the aforesaid C.D. prosecute alone without the
aforesaid G.F. against the aforesaid A. B. his Plea aforesaid, and hereupon the
same C. offered himself the 4. day, against the aforesaid A.B. in the Plea
aforesaid, and he came not, and the Sheriff returned that he is not found,
etc. Therefore as often times let him be taken that he be here in 8. days of
St. Hillary, to answer the aforesaid C. D. in the Plea aforesaid, etc.

Nonsuit in a Replevin, and the awarding of the Writ of second deliverance.
ss. C.D. by his Attorney offered himself the 4. day against A. B. in a Plea,
wherefore the same C.D. took the Cattle of the said A. B. and them unjustly
detained against security and pledges, etc. And he being solemnly exacted came
not, and was Plaintiff, etc. Therefore it is ordered that the aforesaid C. D.
go thence without day, etc. and the aforesaid A.B. and his pledges for
prosecuting be in mercy, etc. enquire the names of the pledges, etc. and the
aforesaid C. D. have return of the Cattle aforesaid, etc. and in what manner,
etc. the Sheriff make appear to the Justices here in 8. days of St. Hillary,
etc. and afterward (to wit) tali die, and Anno came here in Court the aforesaid
A. B. by Th. N. his Attorney, and by the Statute, etc. he prayed a Writ of the
Lord Protector of second deliverance of the Cattle aforesaid, and it is granted
to him returnable here in eight days of the Purification of the blessed Virgin
Marie.

Note, that if the Defendant brings not the Writ of Retorno habendo, within a
year after the non Process, then he shall be compelled to sue out a scire
facias.

A Latitat. to the Chancellor of the County Pallatine of Chester, which was
formerly used.
ss. Oliver, etc. To our Chancelour of our County Pallatine of Chester, or to
him that holds his place there, Greeting, we command you that by our Writ
under the Seal of our County Pallatine aforesaid, duly to be made you to
command the Sheriff of the County Pallatine aforesaid, that he take R. I. etc.
as in a Testatum etc.

Habere facias seisinam, upon Recovery in a Writ of Dower by default.
ss. Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of Middles. Greeting, know you that C. D. and
A. his wife, who was the wife of A. B. in our Court, before our Justices at
Westminster have recovered their seisin against A.B. of the third part of one
message with the appurtenances in S. by our Writ of Dower, whereof she has
nothing by the endowment of the aforesaid A. in time past, the husband of the
aforesaid Alice wife of the said C.D. by default of the said A. B. And
therefore we command you that to the same C. and A. full seisin of the third
part aforesaid, with the appurtenances to be held by them in severalty by meets
and bounds you cause to have, and to be assigned, and how you shall execute
this our command you make appear to our Justices at Westminster, from the day
of the holy Trinity in 15. days, and have you there this Writ witness, etc.

The Entry of seisin in Dower upon a Grand-Cape, by default of the Tennant.
ss. C. D. and A. his wife, who was the wife of R. B. by N. M. their Attorney,
offered themselves the 4. day against A. B. in a Plea of the third part of one
message, with the appurtenances in S. which the same C. and A. in the Court of
the Protector here claim as the Dower of the said A. by a Writ of the Lord
Protector of Dower, whereof she has nothing by the Default of the said A. B.
etc. and he came not, and he heretofore made default here (to wit) in 8. days
of St. Michael last past, after he was Summoned, etc. so that then the Sheriff
was commanded that he should take the third part aforesaid, with the
appurtenances into the hand of the Lord Protector, and day, etc. and that he
should Summon by good Summoners, the aforesaid A. B. that he should be here at
this day (to wit) in the morrow of all Souls, to answer the aforesaid C. D. and
A. as well of the principal Plea, as of the default aforesaid, etc. And the
Sheriff now does testify the day of the taking, etc. and that he Summoned,
etc. Therefore it is ordered that the aforesaid C. and A. his wife recover
their seisin of the third part aforesaid, with the appurtenances against the
aforesaid A.B. by default, etc. and the aforesaid A.B. be in mercy, etc.

A return of a Grand-Cape.
ss. By virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have the 10. day of May, in the
year within written taken into the hand of the Lord Protector, the third part
of the Tenements within specified with the appurtenances by the view of J.T.
and R.H. lawful men of my County as within to me is commanded.

Summoners of the within written A.B. Jo. Roo, Rich. Roo.

Respons. T.M. militis, vic.

A Writ to enquire of Wast.
ss. Oliver, etc. Greeting, whereas lately we commanded you that you should
distrain A.B. by all his Lands and Cattles in your bayly-week, so that neither
he, nor any for him should lay hands thereupon, until you should receive
further command from us, and that of the profits thereof you should answer us,
so that you might have his body before our Justices at Westminster in eight
days of St. Michael to answer C. D. in a Plea, wherefore whereas by the Common
Council of our Commonwealth of England, it is provided that it shall not be
lawful for any one to make wast, sale, or destruction of Lands, Houses, Woods,
or Gardens to him demised for Term of life, or years, the same A. B. of the
Houses, Woods, and Gardens in T. which the aforesaid C. D. demised to the same
A. B. for his life made waste, sale and destruction to the disheriting of the
said C. and against the form of the aforesaid provisor, the same A. in our said
Court at that day made default, so that by a Statute in this like case
provided, it was ordered in our said Court, that in your proper person you
should go unto the Tenements aforesaid wasted (to wit) unto one message, and
ten Acres of Wood, with the appurtenances in T. and there you should enquire of
the waste done in the same. And therefore we command you that in your proper
person you go to the Tenements aforesaid wasted, and before you there you cause
to come twelv, as well Knights as other free and lawful men of that vicinage,
by whom the truth of the matter may the better be known, and who are not a
Kin to the aforesaid C. and A. and by the Oath of them you diligently enquire
what wast, what sale, and destruction the aforesaid A. has made in the
Tenements aforesaid (to wit) by suffering in the message aforesaid, one Hall of
the price of a hundred shillings, and one Barn of the price of 10. l. to stand
and to be uncovered, whereby the sound Timber of the same houses, by the rainy
tempests upon them falling, become rotten and corrupt, and the houses by reason
of the corruption of that Timber are endangered with ruin, by cutting down also
and burning in the wood, there ten Oaks of the price of every of them, xx. d.
and in the Garden there 40. Pear Trees of the price of every of them xii. d. to
the disheriting of the aforesaid C. D. and against the form of the provisoe
aforesaid, and the inquisition which thereupon you shall make, you certify to
our Justices at Westminster, in the morrow of all Souls, under your Seal and
the Seals of them, by whose Oath you shall make that inquisition, and have you
there the names of them, by whose Oath you shall make the inquisition, and this
Writ witness, etc.

The Entry of the Writ aforesaid.
ss. C. D. By his Attorney offered himself the fourth day against A. B. in a
Plea, wherefore, whereas by the Common Council of the Commonwealth of the Lord
Protector of England, it is provided, that it may not be lawful for any one to
make waste, sale, or destruction of lands, houses, woods, or gardens to him
demised for term of life, or years, the same A. B. of the houses, woods, and
gardens in T. which the aforesaid C. D. demised to the same A. B. for his life
made waste, sale, and destruction to the disheriting of the said C. D. and
against the form of the proviso aforesaid, and he came not, and the Sheriff
was commanded that he should distrain him, etc. and the Sheriff returned that
he is distrained by Cattle to the value of ten shillings, and is main-prised by
S. and N. therefore they are in mercy, etc. and hereupon the said C. D. says,
that he the first day of April in the year of our 1652. at T. demised to the
aforesaid A. B. one message, ten Acres of Wood, and one Garden with the
appurtenances in T. for term of his life, the same A.B. made waste sale and
destruction in the message, Wood, and Garden aforesaid, (to wit) by suffering
in the message aforesaid, one Hall of the price of 10. l. and one Barn of the
price of 10. l. to stand and to be uncovered, whereby the sound Timber of the
same Houses by rainy Tempests upon them falling, becomes rotten and corrupt,
and the Houses, by reason of the corruption of that Timber, are endangered with
ruin, by cutting down also and burning in the Wood aforesaid, ten Oaks of the
price of every of them xx. d. and in the Garden aforesaid 40. Pear Trees, of
the price of every of them xii. d. to the disheriting of the aforesaid C.D. and
against the form of the proviso aforesaid. Therefore the Sheriff is commanded
that in his proper person he go to the Tenements aforesaid wasted, and there
before him cause to come twelve, etc. by whom, etc. and who to the aforesaid C.
and A. shall not be a Kin, etc. to recognize upon their Oath, what waste,
what sale, and destruction the aforesaid A.B. has made in the Tenements
aforesaid, and the inquisition, which, etc. he certify here in the morrow of
All Souls under his seal, etc. and the Seal of, etc.

A Writ of Petite Cape, which is brought after appearance.
ss. Oliver, etc. Greeting, take into our hand 4 messuages with the
appurtenances in T. which C.D. in our Court before our Justices at Westminster
claims as his right against A. B. by our Writ of Formedon, in descender for
default of the said A. B. and Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid A. B. that
he be before our Justices at Westminster in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear
thereupon his Judgment, and have you there the Summoners, and this Writ
witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. C.D. By R. B. his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against A. B. in a
Plea of 4. messuages with the appurtenances in T. which the same C. D. in the
Court of the Protector here claims as his right against the aforesaid A. B.
by the Writ of the Lord Protector of Formedon in descender, etc. and he came
not, and he had thence day here even to this day (to wit) in eight days of St.
Michael, after he before had appeared here in Court, therefore let the
messuages aforesaid with the appurtenances be taken into the hand of the Lord
Protector, and the aforesaid A. B. Summoned that he be here in eight days of
St. Hillary to hear his Judgment thereupon.

A Writ of Seisin upon a Petite Cape.
ss. Oliver, etc. Greeting, know you that C. D. in our Court, before our
Justices at Westminster has recovered his Seisin against A. B. by default of
the said A. B. of four messuages with the appurtenances in T. by our Writ of
Formedon in descender. And therefore we command you that to the same C.D. full
Seisin of the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances without delay you
cause to have, and how this our Command shall be executed you make appear to
our Justices at Westminster in eight days of St. Hillary, and have you there
this Writ witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. C.D. By R. N. his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against A. B. in a
Plea of 4. messuages with the appurtenances in T. which the same C. in the
Court of the Protector here claims as his right against the aforesaid A. by
the Writ of the Lord Protector of Formedon in descender, and he came not, and
he had thence day hereunto in 8. days of St. Michael, in the year of the Lord
1654. after he before had appeared here in Court, at which day the aforesaid
A.B. made default, so that then the Sheriff was commanded that he should take
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances into the hand of the Lord
Protector, etc. and that he should Summon by good Summoners, the aforesaid A.B.
that he might be here at this day (to wit) in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear
thereupon his Judgment, etc. and the Sheriff returned that he took, etc. and
that he Summoned, etc. Therefore it is ordered that the aforesaid C. recover
his Seisin against the aforesaid A.B. of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances by default, etc. and the aforesaid A. be in mercy, etc.

A Writ of Withernam upon a Plur. Repleg.
ss. Oliver, etc. Greeting, whereas lately as oftentimes we have commanded you
that justly and without delay you should cause to be replevied to T. D. his
Cattle, which R.M. took and unjustly detaineth, as it is said, according to the
Tenor of our commands before thereupon to you directed, or you your self should
be before our Justices at Westminster in eight days of St. Hillary last past,
to show wherefore our commands aforesaid, so often thereof to you directed you
contemned to execute, yet you to our said Justices at Westminster, at the
aforesaid Term returned, that long before the coming of our Writ aforesaid to
you thence directed, the aforesaid R. esloined the Cattle aforesaid, to places
to you unknown out of your Baily-wick, so that the same cattle to the aforesaid
T. D. you could not replevy according to the Tenor of our Writs aforesaid, and
for that we will, to withstand so great an injury, if it shall be committed,
and that which is just to be done to the aforesaid T. D. Therefore we command
you, that if the aforesaid T. D. shall secure you for prosecuting his Plaint.
and also for returning his Cattle aforesaid, if return thereof shall be
adjudged, then put under security and safe pledges the aforesaid R.M. that he
be before our Justices at Westminster. from the day of Easter in 15. days, to answer
to the aforesaid T. D. of the taking and unjustly detaining of the Cattle
aforesaid, and as well us of the contempt to us, as to the aforesaid T.D. of
the damages and injuries to him in his behalf done, and in the mean time to the
same T. D. his Cattle aforesaid without delay you cause to be replevied if you
can. And if you cannot, then of the Cattle of the aforesaid R. M. you take in
Withernam for the aforesaid Cattle of the aforesaid T. D. and them to the same
T. D. without delay, you deliver to be by him detained until to him his Cattle
aforesaid you can replieve, and have you there the names of the pledges, and
this Writ witness, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded, whereas lately, as oftentimes the Protector
had commanded the same Sheriff, that justly and without delay he should cause
to be replevied to T. D. his Cattle which R.M. took, and unjustly detaineth,
etc. or to the Lord Protector the cause should signify, wherefore his command
to the same Sheriff directed, he would not execute, or could not, and he
having despised the Commands of the said Lord Protector, to the aforesaid T.
his Cattle has not hitherto replevied, or at least signified to the Lord
Protector the cause wherefore he would not, or could not do it, to the manifest
contempt of the said Lord Protector his commands, and to the great damage and
trouble of the said T. D. whereby the Lord Protector was injured very much, and
moved, firmly injoyning the aforesaid Sheriff, that to the aforesaid T.D. his
Cattle aforesaid he should cause to be replevied according to the Tenor of the
commands of the Lord Protector before to him thereof directed, or the same
Sheriff should be here at this day (to wit) from the day of Easter in 15.
days to show wherefore the aforesaid commands of the said Lord Protector, so
often to him thereof directed, he contemned to execute, and now here at this
day came the aforesaid T. D. by J. N. his Attorney, and the Sheriff returned
that long before the coming of the Writ aforesaid, of the Lord Protector to him
thereof directed, the aforesaid R. M. esloined the Cattle aforesaid to places
to him unknown out of his Bayly-week, so that the same Cattle to the aforesaid
T. D. he could not replevy according to the Tenor of the Writs aforesaid, and
for that the Lord Protector wills to withstand so great an injury if it shall
be committed, and that which is just to be done to the aforesaid T. D.
Therefore the Sheriff is commanded that if the same T. D. shall secure the
said Sheriff for prosecuting his Plaint, and also for returning the Cattle
aforesaid, if return thereof shall be adjudged, that then he put under security
and safe pledges, the aforesaid R. M. that he be here in 8. days of the holy
Trinity, to answer the aforesaid T. D. of the damages and wrongs to him in this
behalf done, and in the mean time to the same T. his Cattle aforesaid, without
delay he cause to be replevied if he can, and if he cannot, then of the Cattle
of the aforesaid R. M. he take in Withernam for the aforesaid Cattle of the
aforesaid T. D. and them to the aforesaid T. without delay he deliver by him to
be detained, until to him his Cattle aforesaid, he can replevy, etc.

A Writ of Adjournement made by the Filicer.
Oliver, etc. Greeting, we command you that all, and every our Writs, Bills,
and precepts to you delivered, or to be delivered before our Justices at
Westminster, in three weeks of St. Michael, in the month of St. Michael, and
the morrow of all Souls, next to come, or in the mean time from the aforesaid
three weeks, unto any day returnable in your custody you retain, and them have
before our Justices at Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin next, to come
together with the Executions of the same, and this Writ, that our said Justices
for the prosecution of the parties then may cause to be done, that which of
right, and according to the Law and Custom of our Commonwealth of England
ought to be done, and in your next County thenceforth to be holden you cause
publicly to be proclaimed, that the parties in the same Writs, Bills, and
Precepts their days before our said Justices in the aforesaid morrow of St.
Martin, observe, witness, etc.

The return of the Writ.
By virtue of this Writ to me directed, all the Writs, Bills, and Precepts,
whereof within mention is made, in my custody I have retained, and them I have
before the Justices within written, in the morrow of St. Martin within
specified, together with the Executions of the same, and also at my County
holden at G. in my County, the day, and year within written, which said County
was my next County after the within written tenth day of October, I caused to
be proclaimed, that the parties in the Writs, Bills, and Precepts within
specified, their days before the Justices within written, in the aforesaid
morrow of St. Martin they observe, as within ^o me is commanded.

C.D. Knight, Sheriff.

The Entry of a Non Process, in a Writ of second deliverance.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded, that if T. H. would secure him for prosecuting
his Plaint, and also for the returning of the Cattle, which to C. T. in the
Court of the Lord Protector here were adjudged by default of the said T. H. or
for the price of the same, if return thereof should be adjudged then to the
same T. his Cattle aforesaid, without delay he should cause to be delivered,
and should put under security, and safe pledges the aforesaid C. T. that he
might be here at this day (to wit) in 8. days of St. Hillary, to answer the
aforesaid T. H. of the taking of the Cattle aforesaid. And now here at this day
came the aforesaid C. T. by W.O. his Attorney, and offered himself the 4th. day
against the aforesaid T. H. in the Plea aforesaid, and he being solemnly
exacted came not, and was Plaintiff, and the Sheriff returned that the same C.
T. found to the same Sheriff pledges of prosecuting, and of having return (to
wit) I. K. and K. O. and that the aforesaid C. T. is attached by pledges, J.O.
and A.B. Therefore it is ordered that the aforesaid T.H. and his pledges of
prosecuting be in mercy, etc. and that the aforesaid C. T. go thence without
day, etc. and that he have return of the Cattle aforesaid, to be detained by
him irrepledgeable for ever; enquire the names of the pledges, etc. and how,
etc. the Sheriff make appear here in 8. days of the Purification of the
blessed Virgin Mary, etc.

A Writ of Distr. against one, and a Distr. after Esloin against another, in a
Quare impedit.
ss. Oliver, etc. Greeting, we command you that you distrain Philip Champernon,
Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid, by all his Lands, etc. to answer William
Kirkham, Esquire in a Plea, that he together with Peter Maynwaren, Clark, permit
the said William to present a fit person unto the Parish Church of the blessed
Marie of Upton Pyne, which is void, and belongs to his Donation, as (he
says) and to hear his judgment for many defaults, we also command you that
you distrain the aforesaid Peter M. by all his Lands, etc. (as above) so that
you have his body before our said Justices at Westminster at the aforesaid
Term, to answer the aforesaid W. together with the aforesaid Philip in the Plea
aforesaid, and to show wherefore he kept not the day to him given by his Esloin
in our Court before our Justices at Westwinster in 8. days of St. Martine
after he was attached, and to hear his Judgment for many defaults, and have
you there, etc. T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. William Kirkham, Esquire by his Attorney offered himself the fourth day
against P. C. Esquire Sheriff of the County aforesaid, and P.M. Clark in a Plea,
that they permit the said William to present a fit person to the Church of St.
Marie, of R. Upton Pyne, which is void and belongs to his Donation, etc. and
they came not, and the Coronor was commanded that he should attach the
aforesaid Philip, and the Cororonor returned that he is attached by Pledges, R.
O. and C. D. therefore they are in mercy, etc. and the aforesaid Peter had
thence day given him by his Esloin here even to this day (to wit) in eight
days of St. Martine after he was attached, etc. therefore let the same Philip,
and P. be distrained that they be here in eight days of St. Hillary, etc.

A Pone after an Esloin, and a Distr. in one Writ, in a quare impedit.
ss. Oliver, etc. Greeting, put under security and safe pledges, Thomas
Brerewood, and Will. Leuston Clark, that he be here (as in another Writ) to
answer John Crugge in a Plea, that they together with John Bishop of Exiter,
and Robert Perens Clark, permit the said John Crugge to present a fit person to
the Church of Exmister, which is void, and does belong unto his Donation as he
says, and to show wherefore they kept not the day to them given by their
Esloin in our Court before our Justices at Westminster, from the day of St.
Hillary in 15. days after they were Summoned, we also command you that you
distrain the aforesaid R. by all his lands, etc. (as above) before our Justices
at Westminster at the aforesaid Term, to answer the aforesaid J.C. together
with the aforesaid T. and VV. in Plea aforesaid, and to hear his judgment for
many defaults, and have you, etc. T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. J.D. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against T. B. and VV.L.
Clark, and P. Clark in a Plea, that they together with John Bishop of Exeter,
permit the said J. C. to present a fit person to the Church of Exmister, which
is void, and to his Donation belongs, etc. and they came not, and the
aforesaid T. and VV. had thence day by their Esloin, here even to this day (to
wit) from after they were Summoned, etc. therefore let them be attached that
they be here in 8. days of S. Hillary, and the Sheriff was commanded that he
should attach the aforesaid R. etc. and the Sheriff returned that he is
attached by pledges, John Do, and Richard Roo, therefore he is in mercy, etc.
and let him be distrained, that he be here at the aforesaid eight days of St.
Hillary, etc. or at the aforesaid term, etc.

Distringas against a Bishop to cause the Clark to come.
Oliver, etc. Greeting, we command you that you distrain William Bishop of
Lincoln by all his Lands, etc. and that of the profits of the same to us you
answer, so that he may have before our Justices at Westminster, in eight days
of St. Hillary A.B. his Clark, to answer C. D. in a Plea, that he render to him
one hundred shillings, which to him he owes, and unjustly detaineth, as (he
says,) and to hear his Judgment for many defaults, and have you, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The reverend Father in Christ, William Bishop of Lincoln was commanded
that he should cause to come here at this day (to wit) in eight days of St.
Hillary, A.B. his Clark to answer C. D. in a Plea, that he render to him 50. s.
which to him he owes and unjustly detaineth, etc. and now here at this day
came the aforesaid C.D. by William S. his Attorney, and offered himself the
4th. day against the aforesaid A.B. in the Plea aforesaid, and he came not, and
the aforesaid Bishop returned, that he is attached by pledges John Do, and
Richard Roo, therefore they are in mercy, etc. Therefore the Sheriff is
commanded, that he distrain the aforesaid Bishop by all his Lands, etc. and
that of the profits, etc. so that he have here in eight days of the
Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, the aforesaid A. B. his Clark to
answer the aforesaid C. D. of the aforesaid Plea, etc.

The Entry of a quid Juris clamat.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should cause to come here at this day
(to wit) in eight days of St. Michael, Jane Wevel Widow, to acknowledge what
right she claims in four messuages, and two hundred Acres of Land, with the
appurtenances in Pinghill, also Philip Buttler to acknowledge what right he
claims in 50. Acres of Land, and five Acres of Meadow, with the appurtenances
in P. aforesaid, which Thomas Prous in the Court of the Protector here has
granted to John Gye, by Fine thereof between them made, etc. and now here at
this day came the aforesaid John Gye by John Ford his Attorney, and offered
himself the 4th. day against the aforesaid Joan and Philip in the aforesaid
Pleas, and they came not, and the Sheriff returned, that the aforesaid Joan is
attached by pledges, John Den, and Richard Fen, and that the aforesaid Philip
is attached by pledges, John Do and Richard Roo, therefore they are in mercy,
etc. and let them be distrained that they be here in 8. days of S. Hillary,
etc.

A Distr. in a Quid Juris clamat.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, we command you that you distrain Joan
Wevel Widow, and Philip Butler by all their Lands, etc. (as in another Writ)
and that of, etc. so that, etc. in eight days of St. Michael, to acknowledge
what right (that is to say) the aforesaid Joan claims in 4. messuages, and CC
Acres of Land, with the appurtenances in Poughill, also the aforesaid Philip to
acknowledge what right he claims in C. Acres of Land, and 5. Acres of Meadow,
with the appurtenances in P. aforesaid, which Thomas Prous in our Court before
our Justices at Westminster, has granted to John Gye by Fine thereof between
them made, and to hear their Judgment for many defaults, and have you there
this Writ, T. etc.

The Entry of the Writ aforesaid upon the Defendors, praying a Lilo.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should distrain Joan Wevel Widow, and
Philip Butler, and M. his wife by all their Lands, etc. and that of the
profits, etc. and that he should have their bodies before the Justices of the
Lord Protector, here at this day (to wit) in eight days of S. Michael (that is
to say) the aforesaid Joan to acknowledge what right she claims in four
messuages, and 200. Acres of Land, with the appurtenances in Poughil, and the
aforesaid Philip, and M. to acknowledge what right they claim in 100. Acres of
Land, and 5. Acres of Meadow, with the appurtenances in P. aforesaid, which T.
Prous in the Court of the Protector here has granted to John Gye by a Fine
thereof between them made, etc. and now here at this day came as well the
aforesaid John Gye, by John F. his Attorney, as the aforesaid Joan, also the
aforesaid Philip, and M. in their proper persons, and hereupon the aforesaid
John Oye prays that the aforesaid Joan, of the aforesaid four messuages, and
two hundred Acres of land with the appurtenances, and that the aforesaid Philip
and Mary of the aforesaid C. Acres of Land, and five Acres of Meadow, with the
appurtenances to him may attain, etc.

And the aforesaid Joan, Philip and Mary pray, hearing of the Writ aforesaid,
and to them it is read, they pray also hearing of the Note whereupon the same
Writ issues forth, and it is read to them in these words: Between, etc. which
being read, and heard, they pray License thence of imparling here, till in 8.
days of St. Michael, and they have, etc. the same day is given to the
aforesaid John Gye here, etc.

The Entry of a Writ of Ravishment of Ward.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded, that if John Prior of Taunton, and John Soper
would secure the said Sheriff for prosecuting their Plaint, then he should put
under security and safe pledges, R. C. late of, etc. that he might be here at
this day (to wit) in the morrow of the purification of the blessed Virgin Mary,
to show wherefore T. Prior, Son and Heir of N. P. being within age, whose
marriage unto the said John Prior, and John Soper does belong, at Taunton found
he Ravished, and took away against the will of the said J. P. and J.S. and
against the peace of the Lord Protector now, etc. and that the same Sheriff
should diligently inquire where the said Heir might be in his Bayly-week, and
him, wheresoever he might be found, he should take, and safely, and securely
keep, so that he might have him, and now here at this day came the aforesaid P.
and J. by T.C. their Attorney, and offered themselves the 4th. day against the
aforesaid R. in the Plea aforesaid, and he came not, and the Sheriff now
returns that he has nothing, etc. and that the aforesaid T. is not found,
etc. therefore let the aforesaid R. be taken, that he be here from the day of
Easter in 15 days, and in the mean time he diligently enquire where the Heir
is in his Bayly-week, and him wheresoever he shall be found, he take, and
safely, and securely keep, so that him he may have at the aforesaid Term to be
rendered, to which of the aforesaid P. and John he ought to be rendered, etc.

A distr. in a Writ of Ravishment of a Ward.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, we command you that you distrain (as
in another Writ) to answer R.C. of a Plea, wherefore A. Son and Heir of R.S.
being within age, whose marriage to the said R. and S. does belong, at S.
found, he Ravished and took away against the will of the said R. and S. and
against our peace, and to hear his judgment for many defaults, and to show
wherefore he kept not the day to him given by his Esloign, before our Justices
at Westminster, from the day of Easter in 15. days after he was attached, and
in the mean while you diligently enquire where the Heir is in your Bayly-week,
and him wheresoever he shall be found, you take, and safely and securely keep,
so that him you have before our said Justices at Westminster at the aforesaid
Term to render, to which of the aforesaid R. and S. he ought to be rendered,
etc. and have you there this Writ, etc.

A Capias in Withernam upon an averia clongat. on a Writ of Returno habendo.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, whereas J.C. and T.D. were Summoned to
be in our Court, before our Justices at Westminster (tali die) to answer W. G.
in a Plea, wherefore they took the Cattle of the said W. and them unjustly
detained against security and pledges, as it is said, the same W. afterward in
our said Court made default, whereby it was ordered in our said Court that the
said W. and his pledges for prosecuting should be in mercy, and the aforesaid
J. and T. should go thence without day, and that they should have return of the
Cattle aforesaid, whereupon by our Writ we have commanded that to the aforesaid
J. and T. the Cattle aforesaid you should cause to be returned, and them at the
Plaint of the aforesaid W. you should not deliver without our Writ, which of
the aforesaid judgment express mention should make, and how this our precept
you had executed, you should certify to our Justices at Westminster, from the
day of St. Hillary in 15. days last past, and you to our Justices at
Westminster at that day did return, that before the coming of the Writ
aforesaid, the Cattle aforesaid were Esloigned to places to you unknown by the
aforesaid W. so that them to the aforesaid J. and T. you could not return as by
that Writ you were commanded, and therefore we command you that of the Cattle
of the aforesaid W. to the value of his Cattle aforesaid first taken, in
Withernam you take, and them to the aforesaid J. and T. you deliver to be
detained by them, until the aforesaid Cattle first taken you can return, and
put under security and safe pledges, the aforesaid W. that he be before our
Justices at Westminster, from the day of Easter in 15. days, to answer as well
us as the aforesaid T. and J. for the damages and injuries to them in this
behalf done, and have you there the names of the pledges, and this writ, T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded, that whereas J.C. and T.D. were Summoned to be
in the Court of the Protector here (tali die) to answer W. G. in a Plea,
wherefore they took the Cattle of the said W. and them unjustly detained
against security and pledges, etc. the said W. afterward in the said Court made
default, for which it was ordered in the same Court, that the said W. and his
pledges for prosecuting should be in mercy, and that the aforesaid J. and T.
should go thence without day, and that they should have return of the Cattle
aforesaid, whereupon the said Protector did command the said now Sheriff, that
to the aforesaid J. and T. the Cattle aforesaid he should cause to be returned,
and them at the Plaint of the aforesaid W. he should not deliver without the
Writ of the said Protector, which of the aforesaid judgment express mention
should make, and how, etc. he should certify to the Justices here at this day
(to wit) in eight days of S. Hillary, etc. and now here at this day came the
aforesaid J. and T. by E. P. their Attorney, and the Sheriff now returns
that before the coming of the Writ aforesaid, the Cattle aforesaid were
esloigned unto places to him unknown, so that them to the aforesaid J. and T.
he cannot return as by that Writ he was commanded, etc. therefore the Sheriff
is commanded that of the Cattle of the aforesaid W. to the value of his Cattle
aforesaid, first taken in Withernam he take, and them to the aforesaid J. and
T. he deliver to be detained by them, until the Cattle aforesaid first taken
he can return, and that he put under security and safe pledges the aforesaid W.
that he be here in 8. days of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, to
answer as well the Lord Protector for the contempt as the aforesaid J. and T.
for the damages, and injuries to them in this behalf done, etc.

The Entry upon the return of a Nihil, on the Writ of Withernam.
ss. At which day here came the aforesaid R. by his Attorney, and offered
himself the 4th. day against the aforesaid J. in the Plea aforesaid, and he
came not, and the Sheriff now returns that there are no Cattle of the
aforesaid J. in his Bayly-week, which in Withernam he can take, and deliver to
the aforesaid R. to the value of the Cattle aforesaid first taken as he is
commanded, and that the aforesaid J. has nothing, etc. therefore let him be
taken, that he be here from the day of Easter in 15. days. And hereupon
continuation and process as in the Capias before.

A Writ of Capias upon a Writ of Withernam.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, whereas R. W. was Summoned to be in
our Court before our Justices at Westminster, to answer T. H. in a Plea,
wherefore he took the Cattle of the said T. and them unjustly detained aagainst
security and pledges, as it is said, the same T. afterward in our said Court
made default, for which it was ordered there, that he and his pledges for
prosecuting should be in mercy, and that the aforesaid R. should go thence
without day, and that he should have return of the Cattle aforesaid, whereupon
by our writ we commanded you, that to the aforesaid R. the Cattle aforesaid you
should cause to be returned, and them at the Plaint of the aforesaid T. you
should not deliver without our Writ, which of the aforesaid judgment express
mention should make, and how that our precept you had executed you should
certify to our Justices at Westminster in eight days of the holy Trinity last
past, and you to our Justices at Westminster at that day did return, that
before the coming of the Writ aforesaid, the Cattle aforesaid were esloigned to
places to you unknown by the aforesaid T. so that them to the aforesaid R. you
could not return, as by that writ you were commanded, whereupon we commanded
you that of the Cattle of the aforesaid T. to the value of his Cattle aforesaid
first taken in Withernam you should take, and them to the aforesaid R. you
should deliver to be detained, until the Cattle aforesaid first taken to the
same R. you could return, and that you should put under security and safe
pledges, the aforesaid T. that he might be before our said Justices at
Westminster, in eight days of St. Michael then next ensuing, to answer as well
us of the contempt to us, as the aforesaid R. of the damages and injuries to
him in this behalf done, and you to our Justices at Westminster at has day
returned, that the aforesaid T. had no Cattle in your Bayly-week, which in
Withernam you could take, and them to the aforesaid R. could deliver, as by
that Writ you were commanded, and that the aforesaid T. had nothing in your
Bayly-week whereby he can be attached. And therefore we command you that you
take the aforesaid T. if he shall be found in your Bayly-week, and him safely
keep, so that you may have his body before our Justices at Westminster, in
eight days of St. Hillary, to answer as well us of the contempt to us, as the
aforesaid R. of the damages and injuries to him in this behalf done, and have
you there this Writ, T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded, that whereas R. W. was Summoned to be in the
Court of the Protector, here to answer T. H. in a Plea, wherefore he took the
Cattle of the said T. and them unjustly detained against security and pledges,
etc. the same T. afterward in the said Court made default, for which it was
there ordered, that he and his pledges of prosecuting should be in mercy, and
the aforesaid R. W. should go thence without day, and that he should have
return of the Cattle aforesaid, whereupon the Lord Protector by his Writ to
the said Sheriff did command, that those Cattle to the aforesaid R.VV. he
should cause to be returned, and them to the aforesaid T.H. he should not
deliver without the Writ of the Lord Protector, which of the aforesaid
judgment express mention should make, and how, etc. the Sheriff should
certify to the Justices here, from the day of the holy Trinity in xv. days
last past, at which day the Sheriff returned here, that before the coming of
the Writ aforesaid, the Cattle aforesaid were esloigned to places to the same
Sheriff unknown by the aforesaid T. so that them to the aforesaid R. he could
not return, as by the Writ he was commanded, whereupon the said Sheriff was
commanded that of the Cattle of the aforesaid T. to the value of his Cattle
aforesaid first taken, in Withernam he should take, and them to the aforesaid
R. he should deliver to be detained, until the aforesaid Cattle first taken he
could return, and that he should put under security and safe pledges, the
aforesaid T. that he might be here at this day (to wit) in eight days of St.
Michael, to answer as well the Lord Protector of the contempt to the said Lord
Protector, as the aforesaid R. of the damages and injuries to him in this
behalf done, etc. and now here at this day came the aforesaid R. by J. Jener
his Attorney, and the Sheriff now returns that the aforesaid T. has no
Cattle in his Bayly-week, which in Withernam he could take, and them to the
aforesaid R. could not deliver as by the Writ aforesaid he was commanded, and
that the said T. has nothing in his said Bayly-week, whereby he may be
attached, etc. therefore the Sheriff is commanded that he take the aforesaid
T. if, etc. and safely, etc. so that he have his body here in 8. days of St.
Martine, to answer as well the Lord Protector for the contempt to the said Lord
Protector, as the said R. for the damages and injuries to him in this behalf
done, etc.

Note, that a Latitat may be awarded, as is awarded in another writ of Capias.

A Latitat upon the Capias after the Writ of Withernam.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, whereas R. W. was Summoned to be in
our Court before our Justices at Westminster, to answer T. H. of a Plea,
wherefore he took the Cattle of the said H. and them unjustly detained against
security and pledges as he says, the same T. afterward in our said Court made
default, whereby it was considered there, that he and his pledges of
prosecuting should be in mercy, and that the aforesaid R. should go thence
without day, and that he should have return of the Cattle aforesaid, whereupon
by our Writ we commanded our Sheriff of Devon, that to the aforesaid R. his
Cattle aforesaid, he should cause to be returned, and them at the Plaint of the
aforesaid T. he should not deliver without our Writ, which of the aforesaid
judgment express mention should make, and how that our precept he should have
executed, the same Sheriff should certify to our Justicces at Westminster,
from the day of the holy Trinity in 15. days last past, and the said Sheriff
of Devon to our Justices at Westminster at that day returned, that before the
coming of the aforesaid Writ, the Cattle aforesaid were esloigned to places to
him unknown by the aforesaid H. so that them to the aforesaid R. he could not
return, as by that Writ it was commanded, whereupon the said Sheriff of Devon
we commanded that of the Cattle of the aforesaid H. to the value of his Cattle
aforesaid first taken in Withernam he should take, and them to the aforesaid R.
he should deliver to be detained, until the aforesaid Cattle first taken to
the said R. he could return, and that he should put under security and safe
pledges, the aforesaid H. that he should be before our said Justices at
Westminster, from the day of St. Michael in 15. days then next following, to
answer as well us for the contempt to us, as the aforesaid R. for the damages
and injuries to him in this behalf done, the same Sheriff of Devon to our
Justices at Westminster at that day returned, that the aforesaid H. had no
Cattle in his Bayly-wick, which in VVithernam he could take, that them to the
aforesaid R. he might return, as by that Writ he was commanded, and that the
aforesaid H. had nothing in his Bayly-wick whereby he might be attached,
whereupon by our Writ the said Sheriff of Devon we commanded, that he should
take the aforesaid H. if he might be found in his Bayly-week, and him safely
should keep, so that he might have his body before our Justices at Westminster
in 8. days of St. Martin last past, to answer as well us for the contempt to
us, as the aforesaid R. for the damages and injuries to him in this behalf
done, at which day the said Sheriff of Devon to our Justices at Westminster
returned, that the aforesaid H. was not found in his Bayly-wick, whereas it is
witnessed in our said Court, that the said H. does lurk, wander, and lie hid in
your County, and therefore we command you that you take the aforesaid H. if he
shall be found in your Bayly-wick, and him safely keep, so that you have his
body before our Justices at Westminster in 8. days of St. Hillary, to answer
as well us for the contempt to us, as the aforesaid R. for the damages and
injuries to him in this behalf done, and have you there this Writ, etc.

The Entry of the Capias in Withernam, where the Sheriff returns a Rescue upon
the same Writ.
It was commanded to the Sheriff, whereas L. S. was Summoned to be in the
Court of the Lord Protector here to answer W.W. in a Plea, wherefore he took
the Cattle of the said W. and them unjustly detained against security and
pledges, etc. the said W. afterward in our said Court made default, for which
it was ordered there, that he and his pledges of prosecuting should be in
mercy, and that the aforesaid L. should go thence without day, and that he
should have return of the Cattle aforesaid, whereupon the Lord Protector by his
Writ the said Sheriff commanded, that those Cattle to the aforesaid L. he
should cause to be returned, and them at the Plaint of the aforesaid W. he
should not deliver without the Writ of the said Lord Protector, which of the
aforesaid judgment express mention should make, and how, etc. the Sheriff
should make appear here in eight days of St. Hillary last past, and the same
Sheriff to the Justices here at that day returned, that before the coming of
the Writ aforesaid, the Cattle aforesaid were esloigned unto places to him
unknown by the aforesaid W. so that them to the aforesaid L. he could not
return, as by that Writ it was commanded, whereupon the said Lord Protector to
the Sheriff of the said County commanded, that of the Cattle of the aforesaid
W. to the value of the aforesaid Cattle first taken in Withernam he should
take, and them to the aforesaid L. he should deliver to be detained, until the
aforesaid Cattle first taken he could return, and that he should put under
security and safe pledges, the aforesaid W. that he might be here at this day
(to wit) from the day of Easter in 15. days, to answer as well the Lord
Protector for the contempt to the same Lord Protector, as the aforesaid L. for
the damages and injuries to him in this behalf done, etc. and now here at this
day came the aforesaid L. by R. P. his Attorney, and the Sheriff (to wit) J.
F. Esquire now returned that he by virtue of that Writ made his certain Warrant
with his seal, sealed to one J. H. that of the Cattle of the aforesaid W. to
the value of his Cattle aforesaid first taken in Withernam, he should take, and
them to the aforesaid L. he should deliver to be detained, until the Cattle
aforesaid first taken, he might return according to the express command of the
said Writ, and by virtue of the Warrant aforesaid, the said J. H. the Cattle of
the aforesaid W. in Withernam did take, and them to the aforesaid L. would have
delivered, but there came the aforesaid W. the 10. day of May last past, with
many other unknown persons arrayed in warlike manner, and the aforesaid Cattle
at Baunton, in the County aforesaid, from the custody of the aforesaid J. H.
his Bayliffe took and lead away, and upon the aforesaid Bayliffe of the said
Sheriff then and there made an assault, and him would have killed, except he
had suffered his said Cattle to escape, and so for fear of his death he
suffered them to escape to the aforesaid W. and those Cattle for the cause
aforesaid he could not deliver as by the Writ aforesaid to him it was
commanded, and further the said Sheriff to our Justices here certified, that
after the aforesaid tenth day of May the said VV. had no Cattle within his
Bayly-wick, which any wise in VVithernam he could take according to the form of
the aforesaid Writ, and that the said VV. had nothing in the Bayly-wick of the
said Sheriff whereby he might be attached, etc. therefore to the Sheriff is
commanded that he do take the aforesaid VV. if, etc. and safely, etc. so that
he may have his body here from the day of St. Michael in xv. days, to answer
as well the Lord Protector for the contempt to the said Lord Protector, as the
aforesaid L. for the damages and injuries to him in this behalf done, etc.

A Distr. and a Duces Tecum in one Writ.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, we command you that you distrain J.H.
late of, etc. (as in another Distr.) to answer R. B. in a Plea, that he render
to him one hundred shillings, which to him he owes and unjustly detaineth as
he says, and to hear his judgment for many defaults, we command you also that
you have before our Justices at Westminster at the aforesaid Term, the body of
W. D. late of T. etc. whom by our command you have taken, and in your custody
you detain, being sick in prison as you your self to our Justices at
Westminster in 8. days of S. Hillary last past, returned to answer the
aforesaid R. in the Plea aforesaid, and have you there this Writ, T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
R. B. By his Attorney offered himself the fourth day against J. H. late of
etc. and W.D. late of, etc. in a Plea, that they render to him C. s. which to
him they owe and unjustly detain, etc. and they came not, and the Sheriff was
commanded that he should distrain the aforesaid J. H. and that he should take
the aforesaid W.S. and as for the aforesaid J. H. the Sheriff now returns
that he is destrained by Cattle to the value of x. l. and is mainprized by T.C.
and M. R. therefore they are in mercy, etc. and as heretofore let him be
distrained that he may be here in eight days of St. Michael, and as for the
aforesaid W. D. the Sheriff now returns that he took the body of the
aforesaid W. D. whose body he committed to the prison of the Lord Protectors
Goal of his Castle of York, which said W. in the same prison is sick, and with
such infirmities is detained at the present, he cannot be sent without the
danger of death, therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff that he may have
here at the aforesaid Term the body of the aforesaid W. whom, etc. as, etc. to
answer the aforesaid John in the Plea aforesaid, etc.

A Writ of Petite Cape, in a Writ of Formedon.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, take into our hand by the view of
honest and lawful men of your County one Toft with the appurtenances in B.
which C. D. in our Court before our Justices at Westminster, claims against
O. P. as his right by our writ of Formedon in Descender for the default of the
said O. and Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid O. P. that he may be before
our Justices at Westminster in 8. days of St. Hillary, to hear thereupon his
judgment, and have you there the Summoners and this Writ, T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. C.D. by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against A. B. in a P^ea
of one Toft, with the appurtenances in B. which the same C. D. in the Court of
the Protector here claims against him by the Writ of the Lord Protector of
Formedon in Descender, etc. and he came not, and he had thence day given him,
here even unto this day (to wit) in 8. days of S Michael afterward before he
appeared here in Court, and judgment that the Toft aforesaid with the
appurtenances be taken into the hand of the Lord Protector, and day, etc. and
the aforesaid A. B. be Summoned, that he may be here in 8. days of St.
Hillary, etc.

A Writ of Magnum Cape in a Cessavit after Essoin.
The Protector to the Sheriff, Greeting, take into our hand by the view of
honest and lawful men of your County, one message with the appurtenances in
S. which A. G. in our Court before our Justices at Westminster, claims as his
right against R.B. by our writ of Cessavit per biennium for the default of the
said R. and the day of the taking certify to our Justices at Westminster by
your Letters Sealed, and Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid R. B. that he
be before our Justices at Westminster in 8. days of St. Hillary, thereupon to
answer and show wherefore he kept not the day to him given by his Essoin here
at this day (to wit) in eight days of St. Michael after he was Summoned, and
have you there the names of them, by whose view you shall make this Summons,
and this Writ T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. A. G. by T.M. his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against R. B. in a
Plea of one message, with the appurtenances in S. which the same A. in the
Court of the Protector here claims as his right, by the writ of the Lord
Protector of Cessavit per biennium against him and he came not, and he had
thence day given him by his Essoigne here unto this day (to wit) in 8. days of
S. Michael after he was Summoned, etc. judgment that the message aforesaid,
with the appurtenances be taken into the hand of the Lord Protector, and day,
etc. and the aforesaid R. be Summoned that he may be here in 8. days of S.
Hillary, etc.

A Writ of Magnum Cape, in a Writ of Cessavit of a Formedon.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, take into our hand by the view of
lawful men of your County, one Toft with the appurtenances in B. which R. C.
in our Court before our Justices at Westminster claims as his right against
T. M. by our Writ of Cessavit per biennium, for the default of the said T.M.
and the day of the taking certify to our Justices at Westminster by your
Letters sealed, and Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid T. that he may be
here before our Justices in eight days of the holy Trinity thereof to answer,
and show wherefore he was not before our Justices at Westminster in 8. days of
St. Hillary last past, as he was Summoned, and have you there the names of
them, by whose view you shall make this Summons, and this Writ T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
R. C. by T. H. his Attorney offered himself the fourth day against T. M. in a
Plea of one Toft with the appurtenances in B. which the said R. in the Court of
the Protector here claims as his right by the Writ of the Lord Protector of
Cessavit per biennium against him, and he came not, and he was Summoned, etc.
Judgment that the Toft aforesaid, with the appurtenances be taken into the
hand of the Lord Protector, and day, etc. and the aforesaid T. be Summoned,
that he may be here in eight days of the holy Trinity, etc.

A Writ of Plur. Magnum Cape in Dower.
ss. Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, we command you as many times, we
have commanded you that you take into our hand, by the view of lawful men by
your County, the 3. part of two messuages, with the appurtenances in K. in
three parts divided, which A. H. Widow in our Court before our Justices at
Westminster claims against M. H. as her Dower by the endowment of J. H.
heretofore her husband for the default of the said M. and the day of the taking
you certify to our Justices at Westminster by your Letters sealed, and Summon
by good Summoners the aforesaid M. that he may be here before our Justices at
Westminster in eight days of St. Hillary thereof to answer, and show wherefore
he was not in our Court before our Justices at Westminster in eight days of
the holy Trinity last past, as he was Summoned, and have you there the names of
them, by whose view you shall make this Summons, and this Writ T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. A.H. Widow, lately the wife of J. H. by J. B. her Attorney offered her
self the fourth day against M. H. of the third part of two messuages, with the
appurtenances in K. into three parts divided, which the said A. in the Court of
the Protector, here claims against him as her Dower by the endowment of the
aforesaid J. H. heretofore her husband, and he came not, and he was Summoned,
etc. Judgment that the third part aforesaid, with the appurtenances be taken
into the hand of the Lord Protector, and day, etc. and the aforesaid M. be
Summoned, that he may be here in 8. days of St. Michael, etc. at which day
here came the aforesaid A. by her Attorney aforesaid, and the Sheriff
thereupon did nothing, nor the Writ thereof returned. Therefore as before, let
another Writ thereupon be made to him in form aforesaid, returnable here in the
morrow of all Souls, etc.

A Writ of Magnum Cape, and Non Omit. in a Precipe in Capite.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, we command you that you omit not for
any our Liberty of the Town of S. but take into our hand by the view, etc. as
in another Writ, for the default of the Defendant, and whereupon your self
before did return to our Justices at Westminster, that you commanded A. B. and
T.T. your Bailiffs of our Liberty of our Town of B. who have full return of all
Writs, Bills, and Precepts, and the Execution thereof within the Liberby
aforesaid, within which Liberty the Tenements aforesaid are, which said
Bailiffs no answer to you gave, and the day of the taking you certify to our
Justices at Westminster by your letters sealed, and Summon as in another Writ,
T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should not omit for the Liberty of the
Protector of S. but Summon R. M. that he might be here at this day (to wit)
from the day of the holy Trinity in 15. days, to answer R. C. in a Plea of one
message with the appurtenances in S. which the said R.C. claims as his right
against him by the Writ of the Lord Protector of a Precipe in Capite, and
whereupon the aforesaid Sheriff before here did return, that he commanded A.B.
and T. T. Bailiffs of the said Lord Protector of the Liberty of his Town of S.
who have the full return, etc. and to whom, etc. and who to him no answer etc.
and now here at this day came the aforesaid R C. by J. O. his Attorney, and
offered himself the fourth day against the aforesaid R. M. in the Plea
aforesaid, and he came not, and Summon, etc. Judgment that the aforesaid
message with the appurtenances be taken into the hand of the Lord Protector,
and day, etc. and the aforesaid R. M. be Summoned that he be here in the morrow
of St. Martine, etc. and that the Sheriff omit not, etc.

The Sheriffs return in a Mand. Balliv. Libt.
I have commanded A. B. and C. D. Bailiffs of the Liberty of the Town of C. who
have full return of all Writs and Mandates, and the Executions thereof within
the Liberty aforesaid, within which Liberty the Tenements in the Writ
contained are, which said Bailiffs thus answer me, as it appears in the
pannell indented to this writ fixed.

A Writ of Seisin in Dower.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, etc. know you that A.H. etc. in our
Court before our Justices at Westminster has recovered her seisin against M.
H. of the third part of two parts of the Manor of K. with the appurtenances in
three parts divided, as her Dower by the endowment of the aforesaid J. H.
heretofore her husband for default of the said M. and therefore we command you
that to the aforesaid A. plenary seisin of the third part aforesaid, with the
appurtenances to be held by her in severalty by Meets and Bounds without delay
you cause to have, and how this our Writ shall be executed you make appear to
our Justices at Westminster in eight days of St. Hillary, and have you there
this writ T. etc.

Seisin by default in a Writ of Dower, upon which the Sheriff returns, that
the husband died in Fee-Tail, upon which is awarded a Writ of inquiry of
damages in one Writ.
ss. A.H. By her Attorney offered her self the fourth day against M. H. of a
Plea of the third part of two parts of the Manor of K. with the appurtenances
in three parts divided as her Dower by the endowment of J. H. heretofore her
husband against him, and he came not, and heretofore he made default here (to
wit) from the day of the holy Trinity in 15. days last past, after he was
Summoned, etc. so that then it was commanded to the Sheriff, that he should
take the third part aforesaid, with the appurtenances into the hand of the Lord
Protector, and day, etc. and that he should Summon by good Summoners the
aforesaid M. that he should be here at this day (to wit) from the day of S.
Hillary in 15. days then next following, to answer the aforesaid A. as well of
the principal Plea, as of the default aforesaid, etc. and the Sheriff now
restifieth the day of the Caption, etc. and that he Summoned, etc. Therefore it
is ordered that the aforesaid A. should recover her seisin against the
aforesaid M. of the third part aforesaid with the appurtenancies by default,
etc. and the said M. be in mercy, etc. and hereupon the aforesaid A. prays
the Writ of the Lord Protector of causing plenary seisin of the third part
aforesaid, with the appurtenances to have to her, and it is granted her
returnable here from the day of Easter in 15. days, etc. and also the
aforesaid A. says, that the aforesaid J. H. heretofore her husband, etc. died,
seized of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof, etc. in his
demeasne as of Fee-Tail, and prays the Writ of the Lord Protector of inquiry
of damages, etc. and it is granted her returnable here at the aforesaid Term,
etc.

A Writ of Habere Facias seisinam in Dower by default, and of inquiry of the
value of damages, and of the seisin of the husband in one Writ.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, know you that T. Rusmer, and E. his
wife, which was the wife of William Mawsey, in our Court before our Justices at
Westminster have recovered their seisin against Thomas Mawsey, of the third
part of one message one Garden, and nine Acres of Land, with the appurtenances
in K. by our Writ of Dower, whereof she has nothing of the endowment of the
aforesaid W. Mawsey, heretofore her husband by the default of the said T. M.
and therefore we command you that to the same Thomas Rusmer, and E. plenary
seisin of the third part aforesaid, with the appurtenances to be held by them
in severalty, by Meets and Bounds without delay you cause to have, and
furthermore by the Oath of honest and lawful men in your County you
dilligently enquire, whether the aforesaid W. M. did die seized of the
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances in his demeasne, as of Fee-simple,
or Fee-tail, and after that by that inquisition you shall so find it then by
their Oath you diligently inquire how much those Tenements with the
appurtenances are worth by the year in all profits besides reprizes, according
to the true value of the same, and how much time is elapsed from the time of
the death of the aforesaid William, and also what damages the aforesaid T.R.
and E. have sustained, as well by occasion of the detention of the Dower
aforesaid, as for the costs and charges by them, about their suite in this
behalf laid out, and the inquisition which thereof you shall make under your
seal, and the seal of them, by whose Oath you shall make that inquisition you
certify to our Justices at Westminster, from the day of the holy Trinity in
three weeks, and have you there this Writ T. etc.

A Writ of Pone in Partition.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, put under security and safe pledges,
W. A. and J. his wife, that they may be before our Justices at Westminster,
etc. to answer T. W. and M. his wife in a Plea, wherefore whereas T. and M.
together, and undivided do hold one message, one Garden, etc. with the
appurtenances in Gistingham, the same W. and J. partition thereof among them,
according to the form of the Statute in this case provided to be made do
gainsay, and it to be done do not permit, unjustly, and against the form of
the Statute aforesaid, as it is said, and to show wherefore they were not
before our Justices at Westminster, from the day of Easter in 15. days last
past, as they were Summoned, and have you there the names of the pledges, and
this Writ, etc.

A Writ of Pone in Warrantia Chartae.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, put under security and safe pledges,
J. R. and T. P. that they be before our Justices at Westminster, in the morrow
of the holy Trinity, to answer J.D. in a Plea, that they Warrant to him
thirteen Acres of Land, with the appurtenances in W. which he holds, and of
them to hold claims, and of whom he has his Charter as he says, and to show
wherefore they were not before our Justices at Westminster, from the day of
Easter in 15. days last past, as they were Summoned, and have you there the
names of the pledges, and this Writ, etc.

A Writ of Habeas Corpus.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, we command you that you have before our
Justices at Westminster, from the day of St. Michael in 15. days, the body of
W. J. late of, etc. whom by our command you have taken, and in your custody do
detain as your self to our Justices at Westminster, from the day of the holy
Trinity in 15. days last past, have returned to answer R.S. in a Plea that he
render to him forty shillings which to him he owes, and unjustly detaineth as
he says, and have you there this Writ, T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should take W. J. late of, etc. if etc.
and safely, etc. so that he might have his body here at this day (to wit) from
the day of the holy Trinity in fifteen days, to answer R. S. in a Plea, that
he render to him forty shillings, which to him he owes and unjustly
detaineth, etc. and now here at this day came the aforesaid R. by W. B. his
Attorney and offered himself the 4th. day against the aforesaid W. J. in the
Plea aforesaid, and he came not, and the Sheriff now returns that he took
the body of the aforesaid J. whose said body here at this day he has ready,
and because the said Sheriff the body of the aforesaid J. now here has not,
therefore the said Sheriff (to wit) N.B. Esquire is in mercy, and is amearced by
the Justices here to forty shillings, and in mercy, xl.s. the same Sheriff is
commanded that he have here from the day of St. Michael in 15. days the body
of the aforesaid J. whom, etc. to answer the aforesaid R. in the Plea
aforesaid, etc.

A Capias pro sine upon a Rescus.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff, Greeting, we command you that you omit not for
any liberty of your County, but take T. W. late of, etc. if he shall be found
in your Bayly-week, and him safely keep, so that you may have his body before
our Justices at Westminster in eight days of St. Michael, to answer as well us
for certain Trespasses, Rescues, and Contempts by you, before our Justices at
Westminster in the morrow of the holy Trinity last past returned as William
Game in a Plea, that he render to him one hundred shillings, which to him he
owes, and unjustly detaineth as he says, and have you there this Writ, T. etc.

The Entery thereof.
ss. T.D. Esquire Bayliffe of the Liberty of E. in the County aforesaid, by his
Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against T. VV. late of B. in the County
aforesaid, etc. with an alius dictus in a Plea, that he together with S. F.
late of, etc. render to him xx. l. which to him they owe, and unjustly
detained, etc. and he came not, and as heretofore the Sheriff was commanded
that he should take him, if, etc. and safely, etc. so that he might have his
body here at this day (to wit) in the morrow of the holy Trinity, etc. and the
Sheriff now returns that he by virtue of the Writ of the Lord Protector to
him thereof directed the third day of June, in the year of our Lord 1654. at
Marleford in his Bayly-week (to wit) within the County of Norfolk aforesaid,
took the body of the aforesaid T. VV. and the said T. in his custody by virtue
of the Writ aforesaid then, and there had, and kept until afterward (to wit)
the same third day of June, in the year of our Lord 1654. aforesaid, the same
T. VV. of K. in the said County of Norf. having gathered together to him very
many malefactors, and disturbers of the peace, of the now Lord Protector with
force and arms on the aforesaid Sheriff, together with the aforesaid
malefactors an assault and affray did make, and the aforesaid Sheriff did
beat, wound, and evil entreat, so that of his life, it was despaired, and the
said Thomas, and the malefactors, the aforesaid Thomas from the custody of the
said Sheriff with force and arms aforesaid, took and rescued, whereby the said
T. at large, whether he would against the will of the said Sheriff escaped out,
against the peace of the said Lord Protector, and afterward the said Thomas was
not to be found in his Bayly-week. Therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff,
that he omit not for any Liberty of his County aforesaid, but he take the
aforesaid T.W. if, etc. and safely, etc. so that he may have his body here in
8. days of St. Michael, to answer the said Lord Protector of the rescues,
trespasses, and contempts aforesaid, etc.

The Entry of a Retorn. Habend.
ss. John Scot by his Attorney offered himself the 4th. day against Thomas
Smart in a Plea, wherefore the same John took the Cattle of the said Thomas,
and them unjustly detained against security and pledges, etc. and he being
solemnly exacted came not, and was Plaintiff, etc. Therefore it is ordered
that the said Thomas and his pledges for prosecuting be in mercy, etc. and that
the aforesaid John go thence without day, and that he have return of the Cattle
aforesaid, etc. enquire the names of the pledges, etc. and how, etc. the
Sheriff make appear here in eight days of St. Michael, etc.

Habere facias seisinand.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of Cambridge, Greeting, know you that Rich.
Paterick, and Dorothy his wife, in our Court before our Justices at Westminster
have recovered their seisin against John Street, of the third part of one
message with the appurtenances in O. as the Dower of the said Dorothy by the
endowment of Henry Street, heretofore her husband by our Writ of Dower, whereof
she has nothing by the default of the said John, and therefore we command you
that ^o the same Richard and Dorothy, plenary seisin of the third part
aforesaid, with the appurtenances without delay you cause to have, to be held
in severalty by Meets and Bounds: we command you also that by the Oath of
honest, and lawful men of your County you diligently inquire, whether the
aforesaid Henry died seized of the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances
in his demeasne as of Fee-simple, or of Fee-tail, and if you shall find it so,
then by their Oath you diligently enquire how much those Tenements are worth by
the year in all profits besides Reprizes, according to the true value of the
same, and how much time is elapsed from the time of the death of the said
Henry, and what damages the aforesaid Richard and Dorothy have sustained by
occasion of the detention of the Dower aforesaid, and how this our Writ you
shall execute you make appear to our Justices at Westminster, in 8. days of
St. Michael, under your Seal, and the Seal of them, by whose Oath that
inquisition you shall make, and have you there this Writ, etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. Richard Paterick, and Dorothy his wife, by Matthew Wallingham their
Attorney offered themselves the fourth day against John Street in a Plea of the
third part of one message, with the appurtenances in O. which the same Richard
and Dorothy in the Court of the Lord Protector, now at the Town of A. in the
County of Hertf. claim as the Dower of the said Dorothy, by the endowment of
Henry Street, heretofore her husband by the Writ of the Lord Protector of
Dower, whereof she has nothing and he came not and has made default here (to
wit) from the day of Easter in 15. days last past after he was Summoned, etc.
so that then the Sheriff was commanded, that he should take the third part
aforesaid, with the appurtenances into the hand of the Lord Protector, and day,
etc. and that he should Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid John, that he
might be here at this day (to wit) from the day of the holy Trinity in three
weeks, then next following, to answer the aforesaid Richard, and Dorothy, as
well of the principal Plea, as of the default aforesaid, and the Sheriff now
does testify the day of the taking H. aforesaid, etc. and that he has
Summoned, etc. Therefore it is ordered that the aforesaid Richard and Dorothy,
recover against the aforesaid John their seisin, of the third part aforesaid,
with the appurtenances by default, etc. and the said John be in mercy, etc.
and hereupon the aforesaid Richard and Dorothy, pray the Writ of the Lord
Protector to the Sheriff of the County aforesaid to be directed of causing
plenary seisin to them to have of the third part aforesaid, with the
appurtenances to be held by them in severalty by meets, and bounds, and it is
granted them returnable here in 8. days of St. Michael, etc. and also the said
Richard and Dorothy say, that the aforesaid Henry died seized of the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances in his demeasne as of Fee, and pray the Writ
of the Lord Protector to enquire of damages, etc. and to them it is granted
returnable here at the aforesaid Term, etc.

The Entry of a Summons in severance upon an Alias Capias.
ss. The Sheriffs were commanded as heretofore that they should take Robert
Godfrey, late of, etc. and William Cornwallis, late of, etc. if, etc. and
safely, etc. so that they might have their bodies here at this day (to wit) in
the morrow of the holy Trinity, to answer Francis Wyndam, Michael Stanhope,
Edw. Cook, and Miles Corbet, Executors of the Testament of Roger Towns^end,
Knight, lately called Rogeri Towns-hend de East Rainham in Com. predict Armig.
in a Plea, that the aforesaid Robert render to them three hundred pounds, and
in a Plea that the aforesaid William render to them two hundred Marks, which
from them they unjustly detain, etc. and now here at this day came the
aforesaid Michael and Miles by Stephen Drewry their Attorney, and the aforesaid
Francis, and Edward the fourth day of the Plea, being solemnly called, came
not, and hereupon the aforesaid Michael and Miles offered themselves the fourth
day against the aforesaid Robert and William, in the Plea aforesaid, and they
came not, and the Sheriff now returns that they are not found, etc.
therefore as many times, let them be taken that they be here from the day of
the holy Trinity in three weeks, etc. and the Sheriff is commanded that he
Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid Francis and Edward, that they be here at
the aforesaid Term, to prosecute against the aforesaid Robert and William,
together with the aforesaid Michael and Miles their Plea aforesaid, if, etc.

The Entry of a Summons in severance upon a Plur. Cap.
It was commanded to the Sheriff as many times that he should take Christopher
Heydon, late of, etc. Robert Jervis, late of, etc. if, etc. and safely, etc. so
that he might have their bodies here at this day (to wit) from the day of the
holy Trinity in three weeks to answer Francis Wyndham, Michael Stanhope, Edward
Cook, and Miles Corbet, Executors, etc. in a Plea, that he render to them, etc.
which from them they unjustly detain, etc. and now here at this day came as
well the aforesaid Michael Stanhope and Miles Corbet, by Stephen Drewry their
Attorney, as the aforesaid Christopher by R.B. his Attorney, and the aforesaid
Francis Windham, and Edward Cook, also Plaintiffs, etc. the fourth day of the
Plea, being solemnly called came not, and were Summoned, etc. Therefore it is
ordered that the aforesaid Michael Stanhope, and Miles Corbet, do prosecute
alone, without the aforesaid Francis Windham and Edward Cock, against the
aforesaid Christopher Heydon, and Robert Godfrey their Plea aforesaid, and
hereupon the said Michael Stanhope and Miles Corbet offered themselves the 4th.
day against the aforesaid Christopher and Robert Godfrey in the Plea aforesaid,
and they came not, and the Sheriff now returns that they are not found, etc.
And so follow the old form.

A Distr. nuper vic. ad Habend. Corpus, where the Sheriff returns that he took
the body, but had it not at the return of the Writ.
Oliver, etc. Greeting, we command you as many times we have commanded you,
that you distrain John Choyn, late Sheriff of your County, your predecessor by
all his Lands and Chattles in your Bayly-wick, so that neither he, nor any for
him lay hands thereupon, until you receive further command thereof from us,
etc. as in another Distr. until. so that he may have before our Justices at
Westminster (tali die) the body of W. L. late of C. in your County Merchant,
whom by our command he took, and in his power detained, as he to our Justices
at Westminster in eight days of the holy Trinity last past did return, or who
at the County of Devon hol^en at Exon Wednesday the 5th. day of October, in the
year of our Lord 1654. the fifth time was called and appeared, and rendered
himself to the prison of our Castle of Exeter, whose body before our Justices
at Westminster (tali die) he should have had, to answer Jo. Hach, Esquire in a
Plea, wherefore with force and arms, the goods and Cattle of the said John, to
the value of C. l. at C. found, he took, and carried away, and other
Enormities, etc. and to hear his judgment for many defaults, and have you
there this Writ, etc.

The Entry thereof.
The Sheriff was commanded, as often times that he should distrain John Choin,
late Sheriff of the County aforesaid his predecessor by all his Lands, etc. and
that of the profits, etc. so that he might have here at this day (to wit) from
the day of St. Michael in xv. days, the body of Walter H. late of C. in the
County aforesaid Merchant for that at the County of Devon holden at Exon
wednesday the 5th. day of October, in the year of our Lord 1654. the 5. time he
was called, and appeared, and rendered himself to the prison of the Lord
Protector of his Castle of Exon, whose body here at this day aforesaid, he
should have had to answer John Hach, Esquire in a Plea, wherefore with force and
arms, the Goods and Cattle of the said J. to the value of one hundred pounds at
C. found he took and carried away and other Enormities etc. to the great
damage etc. and against the peace of the Protector etc. and now here at this
day came the aforesaid John Hatch by B. A. his Attorney and offerred himself
the 4th. day against the aforesaid Walter in the Plea aforesaid, and the
Sheriff now retorneth that the aforesaid late Sherriffe is distrained by
Cattle to the value of twenty shillings, and is mainprised by E. H. and R. H.
Therefore they are in mercy etc. and as ofttentimes the now Sheriff is
commanded that he distrain the aforesaid late Sheriff by all his Lands etc.
and that of the profits etc. so that he might have here (to wit) from the day
of St. Hilary in 15 days the Body of the aforesaid Walter, who etc. to answer
the aforesaid I. Hatch in the Plea aforesaid.

A Distringas nuper vic.
Oliver etc. To the Sheriff of Worcester greeting, we command you that you
distrain John Chechester Knight. late Sheriff of your County, your Predecessor, by
all his Lands and Chattells in your Bailywick, so that neither he nor any other
for him thereon do lay hands, until you shall receive further command from us,
and that of the profits thereof you answer us, so that he may have before our
Justices at Westminster on Monday next after the month of St Michael, the body
of Michael Short, whom by our command he took, and in his power detained, and
whse body before our Justices at Westminster on Saturday next after 8 days of
St Hillary in the year of our Lord 1653. he had ready, as the same Sheriff to
our Justices at Westminster at that day returned, to answer Will. Warren, one
of the Attorneies of our Court of Common Bench, according to the Liberties and
Privileges of the same Court for such Attorneies and other our Ministers of
the same Bench from the time whereof the memory of man is to the contrary, used
and approved in the same, in a Plea of Trespass upon the Case, and have you
there this Writ etc.

De infra nominat. I. Chechester militis J. Do, and Ric. Roo. Exit xxs. W. C.
null. vic.

The entry of a Distringas nuper vic.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should have here at this day (to wit)
in 8 days of St. Hilary last past, the body of H. late of etc. whom the said
Sheriff took, and in his power detained, to answer R. in a Plea, that he
render to him 40s. which he owes him and unjustly detaineth etc. And now here
at this day came the aforesaid R. by M. I. his Attorney and offered himself the
4th. day against the aforesaid H. in the Plea aforsaid, and he came not, and
the Sheriff now retorneth that the said H. was not taken by himself, but by
I. D. late Sheriff Predecessor of him the said now Sheriff, nor the body of
the said H. to the aforesaid now Sheriff was delivered in his going out of
Office, therefore the said now Sheriff is commanded that he distrain the
aforesaid late Sheriff by all his Lands, etc. and that of the profits, etc. so
that he may have here (tali die) the body of the aforesaid H. whom, etc. to
answer the aforesaid R. in the Plea aforesaid, etc.

A Distringas nuper, vic. aliter.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of S. Greeting, we command you that you distrain
O. S. Esquire late Sheriff of your County by all his Lands (ut supra) and that you
have his body before our Justices at Westminster, to deliver to you the body of
D. late of, etc. whom by our command he took as he to our Justices at
Westminster, at a certain day now past returned, so that the body of the said
D. you may have before our Justices at Westminster (tali die) to answer Q. in a
Plea, that he render to him, x. l. which to him he owes, and unjustly
detaineth as it is said, and to hear his judgment for many defaults, and
whereupon your self did formerly return to our Justices at Westminster, that
the aforesaid D. in the time of the aforesaid G.S. was taken, which said G. the
body of the aforesaid D. to you did not deliver nor in our prison under your
Custody he is, nor ever was, and have you there this Writ, T. etc.

The enter of a Magnum Cape in Dower Ret. Crast. animarum, and per non mi sit,
bre. Magnum Cape, ret. 8. Hill. and thereupon a nolle prosequi.
ss. Elizabeth Dalby Widow, who was the wife of William Dalby Gentleman, by her
Atorney offered herself the 4th. day against Lionel Dalby Gent. in a Plea of
the third part of one message, one Garden, thirty Acres of Land, twenty Acres
of Meadow, thirty Acres of Pasture, twenty Acres of Marsh, and ninety Acres of
Wood, with the appurtenances in Tottenham High-Crosse, and Edolneton, otherwise
Edmonton, which the said Elizabeth in the Court of the Lord Protector here
claims as her Dower by the endowment of the aforesaid William, heretofore her
husband against him by the Writ of the Lord Protector of Dower, whereof she
has nothing etc. and he came not, and he was Summoned, etc. judgment that the
third part aforesaid, with the appurtenances be taken into the hand of the Lord
Protector, and day, etc. and that the aforesaid Lionel be Summoned that he be
here in the morrow of All Souls, etc. at which day here came the aforesaid
Elizabeth by her Attorney aforesaid, and the Sheriff has not returned the
Writ, therefore let the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances as before
be taken into the hand of the Lord Protector, etc. and the aforesaid Lionel as
before be Summoned that he be here in eight days of St. Hillary, etc. before
which said 8. days of St. Hillary, (to wit) the 15. day of November, in that
same Term came here in Court the aforesaid Elizabeth by Edward Lodesham her
Attorney, and acknowledged here in Court that she will not prosecute against
the aforesaid Lionel, in the Plea nolle prosequi aforesaid, but further therein
to prosecute against the aforesaid Lionel, wholly desisteth and refuses,
therefore let no further Process, nor any thing else thereof be made against
the aforesaid Lionel, etc. To. 783.

The Entry of a Capias alias, Cap. and Plures Capias, against one that was
before the Plur. was returned, imprisoned in the Fleet now before you can have
the benefit of your Plures Cap. to outlaw him, etc. you must have a Habeas
Corpus against him, and have the Cap. Al. and Plur. Cap. and Habeas Corp.
entered ready to be produced in Court.
ss. Henry Sackford Esquire by his Attorney offered himself the fourth day against
Thomas Philips, late of, etc. in a Plea, wherefore whereas, etc. to the damage
of the said Henry of, etc. and he came not, etc. therefore let him be taken
that he be here in the morrow of All Souls, etc. at which day, etc. therefore as
heretofore let him be taken, that he be here from the day of S. Martin in
fifteen days, etc. at which day, etc. therefore as often times, let him be
taken that he be here in eight days of St. Hillarie, etc. and the aforesaid
Thomas on Wednesday next, after eight days of St. Martine, in that same Term
by the Warden of the Fleet, by virtue of a Writ of the Lord Protector of Habeas
Corpus, being brought to the Bar here, and spoken to whether he would appear
yea or no, said that he would not, therefore let him be taken, and exacted, etc.

A Pone in a Quare impedit, at the Suit of the Lord Protector.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of L. Greeting, put under security and safe
pledges, John Arch, Bishop of C. and T. C. Clerk, that they be before our
Justices at Westminster in eight days of St. Michael, to answer us in a Plea
that they permit us to present a fit person to the Church of St. S. near G.
which is void, and unto our donation belongs, and to show wherefore they kept
not the days to them given by their Essoigns in our Court before our Justices
at Westminster (to wit) the aforesaid Archbishop, in the morrow of the holy
Trinity, and the aforesaid T. from the day of the holy Trinity in three weeks
last past after they were Summoned, and have you there this Writ, T. etc.

The Entry of the Writ aforesaid, upon which the Archbishop was esloined, and
the Clark had the same days, and afterward the Clark was esloigned, and the
Archbishop had the same days.
ss. E. C. Esquire Attorney General of the Lord Protector, who for the same Lord
Protector prosecutes in his proper person offered himself the fourth day
against J. Arch Bishop of C. and T. C. Clark in a Plea, that they permit the
said Lord Protector to present a fit person unto the Church of St. J. near G.
which is void, and unto the said Lord Protectors donation belongs, etc. and
they came not, and they had thereof day (to wit) the aforesaid Archbishop his
esloigne hereunto this day (to wit) in the morrow of the holy Trinity, etc. the
same day is given to the aforesaid T. here, etc. and the aforesaid T. had
thereof day by his esloigne here unto this day (to wit) from the day of the
holy Trinity in three weeks, etc. the same day is given to the aforesaid
Arch-Bish. here, etc. after they were Summoned, etc. judgment that they be
attached, that they may be here in eight days of St. Michael, etc.

An Alias Summons in Dower.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of C. Greeting, we command you as heretofore we
have commanded you that you Summon by good Summoners Theophilus ^uckworth,
Gentl. that he be before our Justices at Westminster, from the day of Easter in
15. days, to answer John Pain, and Grace his Wife in a Plea, that he render to
the said John and Grace the reasonable dower of the said Grace, which happens
to her of the Freehold which was of Thomas Palmer, heretofore her husband in
Elm, whereof she has nothing as it is said, and whereof your self returned to
our Justices at Westminster in eight days of St. Hillary last past, that the
aforesaid John and Grace found you pledges for prosecuting their Writ, (to wit)
John Do and Richard Roo; and that the aforesaid Theophilus was summoned by
Thomas Love, Thomas Estman, John Cook, and Thomas Day, and that by virtue of
the Writ aforesaid, to you lately directed upon the Lords day, being the 16.
day of January last past, at the most usual door of the Church of Elm
aforesaid, immediately after Divine service (no prayer in the same Church,
being) you caused the Summons aforesaid to be proclaimed according to the form
of the Statute, in such case lately made and provided, and have you there the
Summoners, and this Writ, T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should Summon by good Summoners
Theophilus Buckworth, Gentl. that he might be here at this day (to wit) in 8.
days of St. Hillary, to answer John Pain and Grace his wife in a Plea, that he
render to them the reasonable Dower of the said Grace, which happened to her of
the Freehold, which was of Thomas Palmer heretofore her husband in Elm,
whereof she has nothing, etc. and now here at this day came the aforesaid John
and Grace by their Attorney, and the Sheriff (to wit) Anthony Cage, Esquire
returns that the aforesaid John and Grace have found to the same Sheriff
pledges for prosecuteing the Writ aforesaid (to wit) John Do and Richard Roo,
and that the aforesaid Thephilus was Summoned to be then here, by Thomas Love,
Thomas Estman, John Cook, and Thomas Day, and that he by virtue of that Writ to
him directed upon the Lords day, being the 16. day of January last past, at the
most usual Door of the Church of Elm, immediately after Divine service (no
Prayer in the same Church, being) caused the Summons aforesaid to be
proclaimed, according to the form of the Statute in such case made and
provided, and for that Proclamation of the Summons aforesaid, was not made by
the space of 14. days before the return of the Writ aforesaid, as by the form
of the statute aforesaid it should have been done, as by the return aforesaid
fully appears, therefore as heretofore the Sheriff is commanded that he
Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid Theophilus, that he be here from the day
of Easter in xv. days, to answer the aforesaid John Pain, and Grace in the
Plea aforesaid, etc.

Or thus you may begin your Entry.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded, that if John Pain, and Grace his wife had made
the said Sheriff secure for prosecuting their Plaint, then he should Summon,
etc. as above.

Or thus you may make your Writ.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of C. Greeting, whereas by our writ we lately
commanded that you should command Theophilus B. that justly, and without delay
he should render to J.P. and G. his wife the reasonable Dower, etc. until, as
it is said, and whereupon they complained that the aforesaid Theoph. does
deforce them, and unless he had done it, and the aforesaid J. and G. had made
you secure for prosecuting their Plaint, then you should Summon by good
Summoners the aforesaid Theoph. that he might be before our Justices at
Westminster in eight days of St. Hillary last past, to show wherefore he had
not done it, and that you should have there the Summoners and that Writ, and
you to the said Justices at Westminster at that day returned, that, as in the
Writ of Dower aforesaid.

The Entry of a Discontinuance.
ss. It is Recorded by the Court the eight day of May, in the year of our Lord
1653. that that Plea has not day of continuance by that Roll, further then the
aforesaid eight days of the Purification of the blessed Marie, therefore let
the Plea aforesaid at the request of the aforesaid Plaintiff be discontinued,
etc.

A Pone in a Quare impedit.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of H. Greeting, put under security and safe
Pledges, William Bishop of L. and Toby Blaud Clark, that they be before our
Justices at Westminster in eight days of St. Michael, to answer Peter Ashton,
Gentl. in a Plea, that they permit him to present a fit person unto the Church
of B. which is void, and unto his donation belongs as it is said, and to show
wherefore they kept not the day to them given by the esloigne of the aforesaid
Tobie in our Court before our Justices at Westminster, in the morrow of the
holy Trinity last past after they were Summoned, and have you there the names
of the pledges, and this writ, T. etc

A Summons and severance in Debt.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriffs of London, Greeting, we command you that you take
R.S. late of L. Gent. otherwise called R.S. de E. in the County of K. Gent. if,
etc. to answer William Berby, and Henry Matties, Executors of the Testament of
William Cutting, Gent. in a Plea, that he render to them three hundred pounds,
which from them he unjustly detaineth, as it is said, we also command you that
you Summon by good Summoners the aforesaid Henry, that he be before our
Justices at Westminster at the aforesaid Term to prosecute against the
aforesaid R. together with the aforesaid William their Plea aforesaid, if he
will, and have you there the Summoners, and this Writ, T. etc.

A Habeas Corpus to the Warden of the Fleet.
Oliver, etc. To the Keeper of our Prison of the Fleet, Greeting, we command
you that the body of R. T. by what name soever he may be thought in our Prison
under your custody to be detained as it is said, you have before our Justices
at Westminster on Thursday next, after eight days of the holy Trinity next to
come, to do and receive what our Court shall order of him in this behalf, and
have you there this Writ, T. etc.

A Pone after an Esloign in a quare impedit, Ret. 8. Mich. the Bishop esloigns
at xv. Pasch. and adjourns unto quinque Pasch. and then Bland Esloigns and
adjourns unto Crast. Trin.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of H. Greeting, put under security and safe
pledges William Bishop of Lincoln, and Tobie Bland Clark, so that they be
before our Justices at Westminster in eight days of St. Michael, to answer
Peter Aysham Gent. in a Plea, that they permit him to present a fit person unto
the Church of B. which is void, and unto his Donation belongs as it is said,
and to show wherefore the aforesaid Will. Bish. of L. kept not the day to him
given by his Esloigne in our Court before our Justices at Westminster from the
day of Easter in 5. weeks last past, and wherefore the aforesaid Tobie kept not
the day to him given by his Esloign in our Court, before our Justices at
Westminster, in the morrow of the holy Trinity last past, after they were
Summoned, and have you there the name of the pledges, and this Writ, T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. Peter Aysham Gent. by his Attorney, offered himself the 4th. day against
Will. Bish. of L. and Tobie Blaud Clark in a Plea that they permit him to
present a fit person unto the Church of B. which is void, and to his Donation
belongs, etc. and they came not, and it is known that the aforesaid Bishop
had thence day by his Esloigne here (to wit) until from the day of Easter in
5. weeks last past, and the same day was given to the aforesaid Tobie here,
etc. at which day the aforesaid Tobie had thence day by his Esloigne here even
to this day (to wit) in the morrow of the holy Trinity, and the same day was
given to the aforesaid Bish. here, etc. after they were Summoned judgment,
that they be attached that they may be here in eight days of St. Michael, etc.

A Writ of view in a Formedon in Descender.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of Midles. Greeting, we command you that without
delay you cause R. D. to have view of one message, one Garden, one Acre of
Meadow, and six Acres of Pasture with the appurtenances in K. which T. S. in
our Court before our Justices at Westminster claims as his right by our Writ
of Formedon in Descender against him, and speak to four Knights of those that
shall be present at that view, that they be before our Justices at Westminster
in 8. days of St. Hillary, to testify that view, and have you there the names
of the Knights and this writ, T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. T. Smith, by A. Garland his Attorney demands against R. D. one message,
one Garden, one Acre of Meadow, and six Acres of Pasture with the appurtenances
in K. as his right by the Writ of the Lord Protector of Formedon in Descender,
etc.

And the aforesaid R.D. by T. Carter his Attorney comes, and prays view of
the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, and let him have it, etc. day
is given to the parties aforesaid, here until in 8. days of St. Hillary, and
in the mean time, etc.

The Entry of a Test. in Debt.
It was commanded to the Sheriff that he should take Edward Mausel Knight. of
London, Yeoman, otherwise called Edward Mausel de Danford, in Com. North.
Yeoman, if, etc. and safely, etc. so that he might have his body here at this
day (to wit) in 8. days of St. Hillary, to answer Elizabeth Squier, Widow in
a Plea, that he render to her thirty pounds, which to her he owes and unjustly
detaineth, etc. and whereupon the Sheriffs of the Lord Protector now of London
returned to his Justices here from the day of St. Martine in 15. days last
past, that the aforesaid Edward lurked, wandered, and lay hid in the County
aforesaid, and now here at this day came the aforesaid Elizabeth by her
Attorney, and offered herself the 4th. day against the aforesaid Edward of the
Plea aforesaid, and he came not, and the Sheriff now returns that he is not
found, etc. therefore as heretofore the Sheriff is commanded that he take him,
if, etc. and safely, etc. so that he may have his body here from the day of
Easter in 15. days, to answer the aforesaid Elizabeth of the aforesaid Plea,
etc.

A Writ of Supersedeas. Lo: ss.
Oliver, etc. whereas by our Writ we lately commanded you that you should take
R. M. late of, etc. if he should be found in your Bayly-wick, and him safely
should keep, so that you might have his body before the Justices of the
Common-Bench at Westminster at a certain day now past, to answer T. B. in a
Plea, wherefore, etc. cite the Capias until you come to as it is said, yet
because the aforesaid R. M. by J.C. his Attorney in the Court of Common-Bench
has appeared, we command you that of the further taking, arresting, and
imprisoning, or in any wise molesting the aforesaid R. on the occasion premised
you altogether Supersead, and if the said R. upon that occasion and no other,
you have taken, or imprisoned, then the said R. from the prison, wherein he
shall so be detained, if upon that occasion and no other in the same he is
detained without delay you deliver under the danger that will thereon ensue, T.
etc.

The Entry of a Habeas Corpus to the Chancellor of the County Pallatine of Lanc.
ss. It was commanded to the Chancellor of the Lord Protector of his County
Pallatine aforesaid, or to him that holds his place there, that by the Writ of
the said Lord Protector, under the Seal of the County Pallatine aforesaid duly
to be made, he should command the Sheriff of the County of Lanc. that he should
take Mark Woodrow, late of London, Draper, otherwise called M.W. of Manchester,
in the County of Lanc. Draper, if, etc. and safely, etc. so that he might have
his body here at this day (to wit) in the morrow of the Purification of the
blessed Virgin Mary, to answer Edward Elioes in a Plea, that he render to him
one hundred shillings, which to him he owes and unjustly detaineth, etc. and
hereupon the Sheriffs of the Lord Protector now of London, returned to his
Justices here from the day of S. Martin in 15. days last past, that the
aforesaid Mark was not found in their Bayly-wick, when as it is witnessed in
the same Court of the said Lord Protector here, that the said Mark lurked
wandered, and lay hid in the County aforesaid, and now here at this day came the
aforesaid Edward by his Attorney, and offered himself the 4th. day against the
aforesaid Mark in the Plea aforesaid, and he came not, and John Fortescue
Knight, Chancellor of the County Pallatine aforesaid, now returns that he by
virtue of the aforesaid Writ of the Lord Protector to him directed by the Writ
of the said Lord Protector under Seal, etc. he commanded the Sheriff of the
County of Lanc. as, etc. which said Sheriff to him returned that he took the
body of the aforesaid Mark, whose said body here at this day he has ready, as
etc. but because the Sheriff, the body of the aforesaid Mark now here has
not, therefore he (to wit) Edmund Crafford Esquire is in mercy, etc. and it is
commanded to the aforesaid Chancellor of the said Lord Protector of the County
Palatine aforesaid, that by the Writ of the said Lord Protector under the Seal,
etc. he cause the Sheriff of the said County to be commanded that he have here
from the day of Easter in 15. days the body of the aforesaid Mark, whom, etc.
to answer the aforesaid Edward in the Plea aforesaid, etc.

The Entry of an Alias Distringas, nuper vic. ad Habend. Corpus.
ss. It was commanded to the Chancellor of the Lord Protector of his County
Palatine aforesaid, or to him that holds his place there, that by the writ of
the said Lord Protector, under the Seal of the County Palatine aforesaid duly
to be made, he should cause to be commanded the Sheriff of the County
aforesaid, that he should distrain Robert Halsall Knt. late Sheriff of the
County aforesaid, predecessor of the now Sheriff by all his Lands, etc. and
that of the profits, etc. so that he might have here at this day (to wit) in
the morrow of the Holy Trinity the body of O. W. whom, etc. to answer J. W. in
a plea, that he render to him xx.l. etc. and now here at this day came the
aforesaid J. W. by his Attorney, and offered himself the 4th. day against the
aforesaid O. W. in the aforesaid plea, and he came not, and John Fortescue
Knight, Chancellor of the County Palatine aforesaid now returns that he by
virtue of the Writ aforesaid to him directed by another Writ of the said Lord
Protector, under the Seal, etc. he caused the Sheriff of the County aforesaid
to be commanded, as etc. which said Sheriff (to wit) Edmund Trafford Esquire thus
answers, that the aforesaid Edward Halsall Knight, late Sheriff is
distrained by Cattle, to the value of 3.s. 4.d. and is mainprised by John Do,
and Rich. Roo, therefore they are in mercy, etc. and it is commanded to the
Chancellor of the County aforesaid, that by the Writ of the said Lord
Protector, under the Seal, etc. he cause to be commanded to the Sheriff of the
County aforesaid, that he distrain the aforesaid Edward Halsall Knight, late
Sheriff by all his Lands, etc. and that of the profits, etc. so that he have
here in the morrow of All Souls, the body of the aforesaid O. W. whom, etc. to
answer the aforesaid John, in the Plea aforesaid, etc.

The form that was used in a Test to the Chancellor of the Court of Lancaster.
To the Chancellor of our County Palatine of Lancaster, or to him that holds
his place there: Greeting, we command you that by our Writ, under the Seal of
the County Palatine aforesaid, duly to be made you cause the Sheriff of the
same County, to be commanded that he take, A. B. etc.

An Alias Summons in a Quare impedit, where the Sheriff has returned that the
Original Writ was delivered to him too late.
Oliver, To the Sheriff of Middlesex. Greeting, we command you that you Summon
by good Summoners Richard Bishop of L. and David English Clark, that they be
here before our Justices at Winton in eight days of S. Hillary, to answer
William Freeman in a Plea, that they permit the said William to present a fit
person to the Vicaridge of the Church of Stebon heath, alias Stepney, which is
void, and to his Donation belongs, as he says: and whereupon your self has
certified to our Justices at Winton, in the morrow of St. Martine last past,
that our Writ to you formerly thereof directed so late to you was delivered,
that by reason of the brevity of the time you could not execute it, and have
you there the names of the Summoners, and this Writ, T. etc.

The Entry thereof.
ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he should Summon by good Summoners Rich.
Bishop, of L. and David English Clark, that they might be here before the Lord
Protector at Westminster in 8. days of St. Michael last past, to answer
William Freeman in a Plea, that they permit the said William to present a fit
person to the vicarage of the Church of Steban-heath, otherwise Stebun-heath
otherwise Stepney, which is void and to his Donation belongs, etc. at which
day the Plaint aforesaid was adjourned by the Writ of the said Lord Protector,
of common adjournement at Westminster aforesaid, until from the day of St.
Michael in one month then next following, at which day the Plaint aforesaid
was further adjourned by another Writ of the said Lord Protector, of common
adjournment from Westminster aforesaid, unto the City of Winton, in the County
of Southampton in the morrow of St. Martine then next following, and now here
(to wit) at the aforesaid City of Winton at the same morrow of St. Martin came
the aforesaid William by his Attorney, and offered himself the fourth day
against the aforesaid Richard and David of the aforesaid Plea, and they came
not, and the Sheriff now returns that that Writ was delivered to him so
late, that by reason of the brevity of the time he could not execute it,
therefore as heretofore let them be summoned, that they may be here in 8. days
of St. Hillary, to answer the aforesaid William in the aforesaid Plea, etc.

The Entry of a Summons in Severance.
ss. E. R. and J. W. Executors of the Testament of VV.M. by their Attorney
offered themselves the 4th. day against B.N. late of, etc. in a Plea, that he
render to them C. s. which from them he unjustly detaineth, etc. and he came
not and the Sheriff was commanded that he should Summon him, etc. and the
Sheriff now returns that he has nothing, etc. therefore let him be taken
that he may be here in the morrow of All Souls, etc. and now here at this day
came the aforesaid J. VV. by Thomas Bullock his Attorney, and offered himself
the fourth day against the aforesaid B.N. in the Plea aforesaid, and the
aforesaid E.R. the fourth day of the Plea being solemnly called, came not, and
the Sheriff was commanded that he should Summon the aforesaid E. R. that he
might be here at the aforesaid Term to prosecute against the aforesaid B. N.
together with the aforesaid J.W. his Plea aforesaid, if, etc. and hereupon it
is ordered in the Court of the Protector here, that the aforesaid J.VV. may
prosecute alone against the aforesaid B. N. his Plea aforesaid, and he came
not, and the Sheriff was commanded that he should take him, if, etc. and the
Sheriff now returns that he is not found, etc. therefore as heretofore, let
him be taken that he may be here from the day of St. Martin in 15. days, etc.

The Entry of a Resort.
ss. Enter your Testatum first, then follow, at which day here came the
aforesaid C.D. by his Attorney, and offered himself the fourth day against the
aforesaid A.B. in the plea aforesaid, and he came not, and the Sheriff now
returns that he is not found, etc. and hereupon the aforesaid C.D. by his
Attorney aforesaid, prays the Writ of the Lord Protector, of taking the
aforesaid A. B. to the Sheriffs of London to be directed where his Original
Writ first issued out, and it is granted to him, etc. therefore the Sheriffs of
London are commanded that they take the aforesaid A. B. if, etc. and safely,
etc. so that they may have his body here from the day of Easter in 15. days,
etc.

The Entry of a common Appearance.
L. ss. The Sheriffs of the said City were commanded that they should take
T.S. if, etc. and him safely keep, etc. so that they might have his body
before the Justices of the Common-Bench at Westminster (tali die) to answer J.
G. in a plea of debt, etc. and the aforesaid T. by VV. S. his Attorney prayed
that his appearance might be recorded by the Court, and it is Recorded.

The Entry of a special Bail.
L. ss. The Sheriffs were commanded that they should have here at this day (to
wit) from the day of St. Martin in 15. days the body of a A.E. late of M. in,
etc. whom of late, etc. to answer unto B. D. in a plea, etc. now here at this
day came as well the said B. as the said A. in his proper person, and moreover
here came D. H. of, etc. and N.H. of, etc. in their proper persons, and each of
them did acknowledge himself to owe to the said B. the sum of 200. l. of
lawful money of England, which said sum of 200. l. the said D. and N. for
themselves and their Heirs, do will, and grant, and either of them do will, and
agree shall be made of the Lands and Cattles of both of them, and shall be
levied to the use and behoof of the said B. and his Executors, and the said A.
likewise present here in Court does acknowledge himself to owe to the aforesaid
B. the sum of 400. l. of lawful money of England, which said sum of 400.
l. the said A. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does, will, and
agree, shall be made of his Lands and Goods, and shall be levied to the use and
behoof of the said B. and his Executors yet under this condition, that if it
shall happen that judgment in the aforesaid Plaint to be here given for the
said Plaintiff in the said debt, and also all damages adjudged to the said
Plaintiff against the said Defendant, here in Court by occasion of the
detaining of the aforesaid debt he shall satisfy it, or render his body here
in Court in execution of the same judgment, etc.

A Writ of Scire Facias against the Bail.
Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of Surry, Greeting, whereas John Haslock, late of
Catteram in your County, Yeoman, and Anthony Basset of the same Husbandman,
late in our Court (to wit) in the Term of the Holy Trinity, in the year of our
Lord 1653. before F. W. one of our Justices of the Common-Bench at Westminster
have bailed, and both of them did become bayl for Robert Onusted, late of, etc.
in twenty pounds, that if it should happen the same Robert in a Plea of debt
upon demand of twenty pounds against him by one John Slater, otherwise Green
Executor of the Testament of Robert Slater, alias Green, in our said Court of
Common-Bench aforesaid prosecuted by any lawful means to be convicted, and
judgment for the same Executor in the Plea aforesaid, against the aforesaid
Robert in the same Court to be given, that then the same Robert the aforesaid
debt of twenty pounds, and also all damages to the said Executor by occasion of
the detention of the debt aforesaid against the said Robert in the said Court
to be assessed, or by any way to be adjudged should satisfy, or that the said
Robert his body in Execution of that judgment in our said Court should yield,
which said twenty pounds the aforesaid John Haswell and Anthony have
acknowledged to be made of the Lands and Cattles, and to the behoof and use of
the aforesaid Executor to be levied, if it should happen the said Robert
against the Bayl aforesaid in any way to make default, and although the
aforesaid Executor in the Term of St. Michael, in the year, etc. before E.A.
Knight, and his associates, our then Justices of the Common-Bench at
Westminster, by order of the same Court had recovered against the aforesaid
Robert, as well the aforesaid twenty pounds as thirty shillings, which to the
same Executor in our said Court were adjudged for his damages, which he has
had by occasion of the detention of that debt, whereof he is convicted as by
the Record and Process thereof in our said Court remaining it manifestly
appears, yet the aforesaid Robert his body in Execution of the judgment
aforesaid in our said Court has not yielded, nor to the aforesaid Executor for
the debt and damages aforesaid, according to the Form of the Recognisance
aforesaid has satisfied, as by the information of the aforesaid Executor we
have received, and for that we will that those things which in our said Court
have been rightly done and recognized be duly demanded for execution, we
command you that by honest and lawful men of your Bayly-wick you give to the
aforesaid John Haswell and Anthony to know that they be before our Justices at
Westminster, from the day of Easter in 15. days to show if they have, or know
any thing to say for themselves, why the aforesaid twenty pounds by them in
form aforesaid severally acknowledged of their Lands and Cattles in your
Bayly-wick ought not to be made, and to the aforesaid executor yielded
according to the form of the Recognizance aforesaid, if they shall think fit,
and have you there the names of them, by whom you shall give them to know, and
this Writ Witness, O. St. John, etc.

FINIS.

