ALL THE PROCEEDINGS OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE EARL OF ESSEX, From the 1. of
October to the 14.

BEING A true Relation of diverse Skirmishes which happened between the Earl of
Essex his Forces and the Cavaliers in the foresaid time.

Also a true Relation of the taking of diverse Forts and Castles by the said
Earl. Likewise a true Relation of the taking of nine Boats laden with
Ammunition by the Parliaments Forces upon the river Severne as it was going to
Shrewsbury.

LONDON, Printed for Th. Tompson. October 14. 1642.

All the Proceedings of his Excellency, the Earl of ESSEX, From the 1. of
October to the 12.
Worthy Sir,
THe cause of my writing to you is, that because the time is so troublesome, I
will only certify you what has happened here these 11. days last past. This
day there was great preparation made for His Majesty's welcome to Shrewsbury:
the lodgings are all bespoke and taken up already: for here are now 4500.
soldiers in and near adjoining, where they are billeted. His Majesty stayed
here but one night, but went toward Chester to a place called Whitchurch, and
was welcomed by the Lord Chomley, Lord Rivers, and Sir Thomas Aston, and went
toward Chester with 10. troops, for his guard, besides Sir Thomas Astons
troop, the Mayor, Aldermen and Recorder received him very lovingly; but Sir
Thomas Astons troup coming after His Majesty, met with a troop of the
Parliaments Forces, that was marching toward Shrewsbury, where there was a
battle fought between them, the manner whereof was as follows. The Earl of
Essex marching toward Shrewsbury with his Army by the side of a wood, and the
brow of an hill, when he came at the bottom of the hill he saw a great army of
men, coming against him, and the first they met was a Welsh Commander, who
cried aloud and said, Sir Thomas, here are the Parliaments Forces, therefore
stand, stand, stand brave soldiers and be valiant. The Earl of Essex hearing
this, went on most valiantly, they being on the top of an hill, and had the
advantage of us, so that we could not pass, whereupon the Earl made on
toward them, but they resisted him and shot at him, and that with a great
advantage, they being on the top, and we on the bottom of the hill, so we
marched up toward them, shooting at them with great courage and valor, that
we routed them from the top of the hill in a strange manner; for the Noble
Earl first sent up 1400. horse, and they made such work, that Sir Thomas Aston
was fain to fly with all his company, but they could not fly fast enough, by
reason of a pair of gates at the bottom of the hill, so that they could not
pass, except a few that fled through the wood with Sir Thomas Aston, who lost
75. men, and but 9. on our side, we took most of their horses and arms, yea
Sir Thomas Astons horse that was left on the wood side, which we call by the
name of great Aston, which goes along with us, and our General says, it
shall be for the next man that he takes to ride on, the saddle on his back was
almost worn out: as we went toward Shrewsbury we met 8. Regiments of horse and
Foot under the command of diverse Commissioners of Array, who fell upon us so
fiercely, that at first we thought they would have got the better, but God
prevented them: for they met at a heath where the battle begun, they having
the wind of us, and the higher ground, yet we discharged so stoutly against
them, that they could not keep their ground, but came in upon us, and we
defended our selves as well as we could, and drew out our swords, but they came
so violently in, that we were one among another in such a confused manner as is
hard to be reported. At last our trumpeter rid forth, and sounded his trumpet
with a cheerful and shrill wind, and we all repaired to the trumpet, and there
were scarce any but cried out, A parley, A parley; so at last not finding
themselves able to resist us, yielded to our demands and followed us. There
were slain about 100. men on their side, and about 30. on ours; so that now we
have 8. Regiments more to stand for us against the Cavaliers, so that we hope
to settle the peace of the Kingdom; for we molest none but those who trouble
and set upon us, for we want nothing, the countrey-people give us good victuals
and beer for nothing. As we passed along, we came near to the river Severne,
where we saw 9. boats going toward Shrewsbury, so we rid toward them, as near
as we could, asking what they were laden with, they said, that they had most of
the ammunition that came from the Papists in Ireland, and that they were going
with all speed toward Shrewsbury with it, for they thought we had been
Cavaliers; so we desired to see what it was, and they very honestly came and
brought it to Severn side, where we entered, and found 3. laden with powder, 2.
with bullets, 1. with pikes, 2. with muskets, 1. with engines to shoot
fireballs, and we stopped them all from their journey, and landed them at a
village within three miles of Shrewsbury, where we keep our randevouz, because
the weather is wet, and the waters are up, so that we cannot march. The Earl
of Essex has not yet delivered his Petition to His Majesty, but he hopes ere
long to do it, and now the King is gone from Chester toward Shrewsbury, where
it is thought he intends to stay.

The 2. of this month we marched with our army to a place called Pomfret
Castle, and when we came within a mile of it, we heard a Piece of Ordnance from
the Castle that flew over our heads, being amazed at the report thereof,
knowing no cause thereof; whereupon our Captain said he would go to it, but
coming near it, we found it strongly fortified, and the gates shut: whereupon
our Captain demanded the Castle, but they refused, and said, they could keep
the Castle as well as we, and except we would be gone, they would send us
going, and that we were unwise to come thither: whereupon our Captain told
them, that unless they would deliver up the Castle upon fair demands, they
would have it by force; but they derided his request, bidding him do his worst;
so we came and intrencht our selves against the Castle, shooting at it and
assaying to scale the walls for the space of two hours, but all in vain,
wherefore being almost night we kept our selves in our trenches: betwixt one
and two a clock at night a Post was sent from the castle, who was discovered by
six of our men which pursued after him, took him, and brought him back, and one
of our men spoke to the Captain, asking him what he would give him to obtain
the Castle before the next day at noone, who answered, that he should have five
Marks; whereupon he desired the Captain that he might have the Posts clothes,
and he would warrant him the castle, or lose his life: then the Captain desired
the Post to shift his clothes, and so he did, and this man put the clothes on
his back, getting upon the Posts horse with his horn by his side, rid toward
the castle and blew his horn, they being all abed, only the Porter sat up to
wait the Posts coming, and being joyful he was come so soon, rose from the
fire to let him in: as soon as the Post was within the gate, he struck up the
Porters heels, saying, hold thy tongue if thou love thy life, the Porter for
fear durst not speak a word; then he took the keys from him, and bid the
Porter go and call in the soldiers which were without, which he did; so when
the soldiers came, some of them kept the gates, and others went up into the
castle, and the men that were within said, if they would be pleased to save
their lives, they would serve them, which our Captain willingly accepted of,
and told them, if that they would serve him, they should presently enter into
pay, and those that would not, he desired to depart; so some entered into pay,
and others went away unarmed. In the morning our Captain asked them, who was
their chief Commander, they said, Sir William Savill, who fled hither for
shelter and refuge, but he was one that went away. So in the morning we began
to search the Castle, where we found many places furnished for war, with
several sorts of Ammunition: upon the walls we found 15. Pieces of Ordnance,
500. Pikes, 700. Muskets, 6. barrels of powder, and 600. head-peeces, as many
Corslets, 550. Carbines, with a great yard full of bullets, pickaxes,
wheele-barrowes, wagons, abundance of swords, and 4. quarters of wheat with
other come, 3. powdering tubs full of beef, 5. hogsheads of beer, 3. of wine,
1. of sack, with many other things of good worth, which are now in the hands of
our noble Captain, who has left a garrison of his soldiers to secure the
Castle.

FINIS.

