A DECLARATION DEMONSTRATING AND INFALLIBLY PROVING That all Malignants,
whether they be Prelates, Popish-Cavaleers, with all other ill-affected
Persons, are enemies to GOD and the KING:

Who desire the suppression of the Gospel, the advancement of superstition, the
diminution of the Kings Prerogative and Authority, with the oppression of the
Subject.

All which is evinced by strong Proofs, and sufficient Reasons.

By John Bastwick Dr. of Physic.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXLIII.

The simply Portrareture of Mr John Bastwick Dr of Physic sat Captain of a
foot Company


A Declaration of John Bastwick, Doctor of Physic, infallibly proving, that
all who desire the suppression of the Gospel, the advancement of superstition,
etc. are enemies to God and the King.
THe said Defendant saving and reserving to himself, now and at all times
hereafter, all advantages and benefits of exceptions to the incertainty and
insufficiency and other imperfections of the said Information: For answer
thereunto, so far forth as concerns the said Defendant; he says: He does with
all thankfulness acknowledge his Majesty's great care and zeal at all times,
for the maintenance and defense of the true Christian faith and Religion, and
the service of Almighty God, love, charity and concord among his Subjects; and
withal, that his people, and all loyal Subjects, have great cause, daily to
praise God for the happy government they have under him, and for that they may
for futurity promise unto themselves under his Royalty and Principality;
especially, when he has so graciously made known his pious intentions for the
good and welfare of Church and State, in that his Majesty's Declaration to all
his loving Subjects, of the causes which made him dissolve the last Parliament,
published by his Majesty's special command; in which Declaration, page 21. his
Majesty thus speaks: For we call God to record, before whom we stand. That it
is and always has been our hearts desire, to be found worthy of that Title,
which we account the most glorious in all our Crown, Defender of the Faith;
Neither shall we ever give way to the authorizing of any thing, whereby
innovation may steal or creep into the Church, but preserve that unity of
Doctrine and Discipline established in the time of Queen Elizabeth, whereby
the Church of England has stood and flourished ever since, etc. These words
and solemn protestations of our most pious King, cannot but stir up the
hearts, loves, and affections of all his true and loyal Subjects, both
incessantly to pray for his happy life, reign, and preservation, and also to
the utmost of their powers to yield all subjection, obedience, yea, and their
lives and liberties for the honor of his Crown and Dignity, in the number of
which Subjects, the said Defendant professes himself to be, being willing and
ready at all times, and upon all occasions, not only to lose his liberty,
livelihood and estate, but millions of lives, if he had them, in defense of his
Empire and Prerogative Royal: and does again and again acknowledge, and that
with the thankfulness, his renowned Highnesses zeal and care, for the
maintenance of the true Religion, love, charity and concord amongst his
Subjects, and beseech the King of kings, and Lord of lords, long to continue
him among us, and to put into his royal heart, to remove all scandals in
Church and State, which have been such hindrances of the propagation of the
Christian Faith and true Religion established in his Majesty's kingdoms (of the
which he is Defender, in his dominions) and the right instruction of the people
in the same: who alone are most of the Prelates in general, and the
Arch-Prelates in special, being so far from seeking the right and due
instruction of the people in the true Christian Faith and Religion, as the
Information would infer, as they spend their whole endeavors, to take away all
the possibility and means of instruction, which is the preaching of the word,
that is only able to save our souls, and without which, no man can believe,
or come to life eternal, as thousand places in sacred Writ witness; and among
other, that in the 26. of the Acts, where Christ says unto Paul, Rise, and
stand upon thy feet: For I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make
thee a minister and witness, both of the things which thou have seen, and of
those things in which I will appear unto thee, delivering thee from the
people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, to open their eyes,
and to turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith, which is in me. And Paul was not disobedient to
this heavenly vision, but preached unto all men that they should repent, and
turn to God, and do works meet for repentance. And this was, and is the only
way that God has appointed to save our souls by; for, Faith comes only by
hearing; and this preaching was all that Paul did; I came not to baptize, says
he, but to preach the Gospel, so that preaching is the effect of all the
ordinances: and in another place he says, Woe be me, if I preach not the
Gospel. And in the sixth of the Acts, the Apostles told the Church, That it was
not reason that they should leave the word of God and serve tables; and
therefore they resolved, continually to give themselves to prayer, and to the
ministry of the Word. And in the 4. of the Acts, when the Rulers commanded
Peter and John not to speak, nor teach in the Name of Jesus, They answered and
said unto them: Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you
more then unto God, judge ye: for we cannot but speak the things which we have
heard. Here we see, the whole office and care of the Apostles was to preach the
Gospel; and this is only the work, task and duty of Ministers to publish the
same word of life. And Paul set his own example before them for his sedulity
in preaching day and night, and commands them to follow him in that, and
charge Timothy and Titus, and all Ministers in them, to be instant in season
and out of season in preaching the Word, and they that neglect that duty are no
Ministers of Christ, nor of the Gospel. Yea, the Bishops themselves, and all
their Priests, as they call them, as we may see in the Book of Ordinations,
solemnly promise before God and the Church, that they will be diligent in the
preaching of the Word of God, and publishing of the Gospel: And for the better
stirring of them up to that Duty and Office, they read the 20. Chapter of the
Acts, concerning the charge that was given the Elders and Bishops of Ephesus
for their diligent preaching of the Gospel. And in most of all their Prayers
before their Sermons, they beseech God to bless the two fountains of all
learning in this kingdom, and that he would send out streams for the watering
of the garden of the Church, and that he would preserve those fountains pure
and incorrupt. Now, all men know how Paul planted, and Apollos watered the
garden of the Church, and that was by preaching, as is manifest in the 1. of
the Cor. Notwithstanding all this, viz. the charge that is laid upon them by
God himself, that they should preach the word diligently, and as they love
him: notwithstanding also the promise that the Bishops and their Priests have
made of their particular care in preaching, which is only able to save our
souls: and notwithstanding the curse that is laid upon them if they do not
preach: and notwithstanding they pray, that the two fountains may send out
streams for the watering of the garden of the Church. Notwithstanding all the
premises, the Defendant says, That the Prelates neither preach themselves,
nor will let others preach, but silence almost whole Diocesses together, and
have extinguished very many of the chief burning lights amongst us, and do
daily suspend the remnant of the most laborious and painful Ministers through
England and Wales, and have deprived the people of all soules-comfort and
spiritual solace, without which a man's life is miserable, to the infinite
dishonor of God, and hinderance of the Christian faith, and the good
institution of the people, yea, and to the trouble of the whole Church and
State: and therefore the Prelates are the only hinderers of the instruction of
the people in their Christian faith, and the saving of their souls, and by
consequence the enemies of the Church and Kingdom; for from these Priests is
iniquity gone out through the whole kingdom; and of the truth of that the
Defendant now says, all the Realm can witness, and the Prelates practices
prove, who make void the commandments of God by their vain traditions, and
trample his holy and divine precepts under their sect, and stop the course of
the everlasting Gospel: and therefore the enemies of Christ's Kingdom, and the
salvation of their brethren.

But now more especially; whereas he the Defendant is accused of long
continuance to have envyed and maligned his Majesty's happy government, and the
good discipline of the Church; He the defendant protests in the presence of
God, and before the world, that it is a most false accusation, and that there
is never a Subject in his Majesty's Dominions a more honourer of the government
of his imperial Majesty, and one that desires more the good discipline of
the Church and is able to produce the testimonies of all the places he has
lived in, in this Kingdom, both from Magistrates and Ministers for the honesty
and integrity of his life and conversation, and that in all respects he has so
demeaned himself as that he has not only been free from vice, faction and
schism, but from the suspicion of all: which testimonies he has ready to show
to this honorable Court, and the which he exhibited to the High Commission
Court, at that time they studied most to defame him, and all this both Town and
Country can testify, as also of the indefatigable diligence, in his particular
calling. How that he neglected no opportunity to do the indigentest men good,
and how that being unwearied in his employments, he went through the heat of
Summer, the cold of Winter, rose early and went to bed late, exposing himself
at all times, to any danger whatsoever of plague and pestilence, and all to do
the meanest of the Kings Subjects good, never taking penny of poor, nor never
of servant, never suffering the most neglected creature of nature to perish for
want of care or looking to, but made them all an object of his pity and of his
Art, giving them out of his poor competency both for their food and Physic;
neither can any man say, that ever he asked the richest a farthing for any
pains he took day or night for their preservation, or that he ever murmured at
the smallest content they gave him; and if the Prelates had let him follow his
calling, this Defendant had continued in this diligent course of life, till the
day of his death. But they picking a quarrel with him for writing in defense
of the Kings Prerogative Royal against the Pope, saying, that while he writ
against the Pope, he meant them, put him upon such employments as he indeed
thinks, will be very little pleasing to the Prelates, although he is most
confident, that in them he has, and shall do the King and Church good service,
and so he knows it will appear when he is dead and gone. But because this
book is now laid unto the Defendants charge as tending to the maintenance and
upholding of Schism and division in His Majesty's Church of England, and
opposition against the laudable Orders and Ceremonies of the said Church;
howsoever there be no such thing in the said Flagello, yet this Defendant
desires to give a reason unto this Honorable Court for the writing and
publishing not only of that book, but of all other his writings since. And
first, concerning the book for which he was censured, He says, that he was
provoked thereunto by a Popish Jesuiticall Doctor of Physic, who continually
dared him into the field of Dispute, and set down his own theames about which
he would contend, which were concerning the Popes Supremacy and the sacrifice
of the Mass. And it is well known to the Towns and Country where they both
dwelt, that the said Defendant could never be quiet for his brags and
scriblings to himself and others till he had answered, which was the sole cause
of his ruin, and the which answer of his though he had long time for peace
sake neglected, yea at last, he was through his adversaries importunity put
upon it. Neither could he for the honor of the truth, and the honor of his
Prince, both which he loves more then his life, delay it any longer: and
therefore out of his duty to God and the King, he entered the combat with the
enemy. To which duty he the Defendant says he was bound, by Christ himself,
who has commanded to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto
God the things that are Gods, which commandment of Christ ties all Christians
under obedience to a double duty which by them may not be neglected: viz, to
give unto God his due, and unto the King his. Yet for obeying of this
commandment this poor Defendant must be defamed, ruined, undone, and left
friendlesse, moneylesse, and in captivity, and given to the Devil, and yet say
nothing. But the Defendant desires this honorable Court to give him leave to
say, as Queen Hester spoke to Ahashuerosh, if that he and his wife had been
sold for bondmen and bond-women, he had held his peace: but for them to be
ruined and undone because he could not see God and the King dishonored, he the
Defendant cannot but speak. Let the King live for ever, and never let it be
said that he has such a base cowardly fellow in his Kingdoms, that will suffer
his Imperial Majesty to be trampled upon the suffer it in silence. For his
own part, this Defendant confesses, that he is but poor, and the Prelates have
made him so: but as rich in Loyalty as any Subject in his Highnesses three
Dominions: and as Job said concerning God, though the Lord should kill him, yet
he would trust in him: so this Defendant says. Though the King should leave
him to the mercylesse fury of the Prelates, yet he will ever honor him with his
ife, and all that ever he has, and as he was borne under obedience, under
obedience he will die, and will ever say vivat Rex let the King live for ever,
and our gracious God put it into his Royal breast to look into the devilish
plots of the Prelates, that do not only equalize the painted Tombs in
Christ's time but far exceed them in cruelty and wickedness. This he is
resolved living and dying to do, invito Diabolo, to give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods, for he is bound
to this duty by Christ himself; neither will he ever rebel against his
blessed will.

Now the things that belong unto God, as he is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; and by whom alone kings reign, is an absolute command and Sovereignty
over his Church, and who requires of all his Subjects that they should love him
with all their hearts, with all their Souls, and with all their mights, and
that they should not serve him by any of their own inventions. And for the
manner of his worship he has abundantly declared it in Sacred Writ. And Saint
Paul writing unto Titus warnes him, sharply to rebuke his auditors, that they
may be sound in the faith, not giving heed unto the commandments of men that
turn from the truth, and charge the Corinthians, that they should not be
servants of men, nor wise above that which is written: and says unto the
Colossians, wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world: Why as though living in the world are ye subject unto ordinances? and
Christ himself says, In vain do they worship him, teaching for Doctrines the
commandments of men. By all which it is manifest, if Christians will give unto
God that which is his, and will not worship Him in vain; as they must love him
with all their hearts, so he only must rule in them, and they must give him
his own worship, and such service only, both for matter and manner, as he
requires at their hands and commands from them, and not serve him according to
men's precepts and devices: for in his worship they must not be the servants of
men: for he is the only King and Lawgiver in his Church, and this is his
prerogative Royal, which no man may meddle with, and this is to give unto God
that which is Gods: and this duty he the Defendant says, all Christians are
bound unto. Again, for all Subjects duties toward the King, the Defendant
says, that must also freely and willingly be yielded, and that by special
precepts, for they are commanded to fear God and honor the King, and to be
subject unto his Authority in all things in the Lord, and to give unto Caesar
that which is Caesar's.

Now in regard of his duty, both to God and the King, and also of his special
Oath of allegiance, the Defendant says, he could do no less then that which
he did in writing his book, being provoked thereunto by an enemy of both. And
so much the rather, because himself and all Christians are commanded to give a
reason of their hope, to whomsoever shall demand it of them, and earnestly to
contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints: he says, in
all these respects he could do no less in answering that Popeling then that he
did, by giving unto God the right of his government in the hearts and
consciences of men, and taking it from the Pope that Vicar rather of hell then
of Christ, and by giving the King that jurisdiction and authority of regiment
in his Dominions and over his Subjects, which God has conferred upon him; Both
which Authorities Spiritual and Temporal, the Pope and Popish Bishops most
blasphemously arrogate unto themselves, trampling all Divine Laws and Kingly
regality under their polluted feet, making Kings and Emperors their Vassals,
which is a most horrible arrogance and usurpation, and not to be suffered by
either Kings or their Subjects. And therefore when this Defendant did nothing
but that which by his special duty he was bound unto. If this by the Informers
be thought either Schism, Faction, or Sedition, he this Defendant is resolved
to live and die in it, and never to think any a good Subject that is not of his
mind. He does withal freely confess unto this honorable Court, that he
looked for no ill usage of the Prelates for this his endeavor, which when he
found at their hands, it was the occasion of the writing of many other books
since that time, amongst the which there is one called Apologeticus ad
Praesules Anglicanos, etc. Dedicated unto the privy Counsel; but whether the
book that is annexed unto the Bill be the same, that the Defendant knows not,
but a book with that Title he confesses, he writ, wherein he set down the
proceedings of the Prelates against himself, and their dealings toward other
of their brethren, the theme of which book he the Defendant desires the
honorable Court to take a brief relation of, at this time, that they may the
better be informed of the falsity of the Information. And first for the
principal theme and matter of the book it is the State of the questions in
his Flagello Pontificis for which he suffered, with the sum of the Arguments
he produced for the confirmation of the truth. The questions arising between
the Babylonian and the Defendant, concerning the authority of the Pope, were
these. The first, whether Christ did constitute Peter sole Monarch of the
Catholic Church? The second, whether the Pope of Rome (if he be a Bishop) as
he is a Bishop, has Authority and jurisdiction over Kings and Emperors?
Thirdly, whether Popish Bishops be true Bishops or no? and of the discussing of
these questions, the Defendant says, his adversary was the sole cause. In the
handling of the which the Defendant further affirms, that he used all the
caution that was possible, as he supposed for man to use prefacing in his book,
that being to dispute about the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, he desired
heartily to be understood of all men; for while he disputed of Episcopal
Authority, he meddled nor contended not against such Bishops as acknowledge
their Authority and jurisdiction from Kings and Emperors, into whose hands the
government of States, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths is by God committed. For if
the Popes themselves would acknowledge their immense and unlimited authority
from Kings and Emperors, he the defendant there said, if they commanded nothing
contrary to the will and Word of God, that he for his part out of the
reverence, duty, and loyalty to his Prince would obey it. The Words in the
Original are these. Verum de Episcoporum autoritate locutus a bonis been
intelligi cupio. Non enim litis litem moveo quatenus ab Imperatoribus and
Regibus and Principibus. Terrae quorum interest salutem civium tueri,
potestate, Ius and Imperiii in socios totumque Dei gregem adepti sunt. Nam si
Romani Episcopi immensam illam and nullus limitibus circumscripta^ autoritate^
indulgentiae Principu^ accepta^ ferrem, voluntati Episcopali, nihil voluntati
divinae inimicum jubenti obtemperandu^ putem ob reverentiam Principi si volenti
debitam, etc. So that the Defendant having thus plainly set down his mind
before, and knowing that all the jurisdiction that the Bishops in England now
exercise over others is from the King, he thought himself not only secure from
danger, but expected favor at least from the Bishops and their helping hand,
especially, when the opposing the Popes Authority in England, is a thing that
the King and State have ever so well allowed of.

And that this honorable Court may yet be farther informed of the special
cause for which the Prelates are so displeased with the Defendant, it was for
the truly and narrowly disputing and discussing of the second question, to
wit, whether the Pope of Rome (if he be a Bishop) as he is a Bishop, have
Authority and Jurisdiction not only over his fellow brethren but over Kings
and Emperors? which the Defendant there denied for many warrantable Arguments,
the sum of which he desires here to relate unto this honorable Court, for
his just and necessary defense and justification. For by the very light of
nature and unanswerable reason, it is evident and manifest; that where there is
an equality and parity amongst men, there the one does not exceed the other in
power, or Dominion, Paris enim in Parem non esse imperium inter Naturae (...)
est. Now, Divine constitution has made Bishops and Presbyters or Elders a like
and equal, which that it might the better appear, the Defendant propounded
three things to be proved. The first was, that Bishops and Presbyters were by
the Word of God one and the same. Secondly, That Presbyters had equal
Authority of Government, Ordination and Excommunication with Bishops, wherein
only consists their preheminency and Authority above their brethren: which
things being proved, it will necessarily follow, That the Pope of Rome as he is
Bishop does no way exceed other Bishops and Presbyters, they being in all
things alike and equal unto him, much less has any Authority and power over
Kings and Emperors. And for the proof of the first position, the words
Presbyter and Bishop do sufficiently evince it, which is holy Scripture, though
diverse in sound, signify one and the same thing, as not to cite the words
themselves which would be large. The Apostle Paul to Titus in the first Chapter
does sufficiently show, where the words Bishop and Presbyter are confounded.
And likewise in the first Epistle of Peter and the fifth Chapter, there
Presbyter and Bishop signify one and the same thing. And the Epistle to the
Philippians the first Chapter and the first verse does apparently demonstrate
it, and diverse other places might be produced dilucidating the same thing. But
the 20. of the Acts puts all out of controversy, where Presbyter and Bishop
signify one and the same thing, for office, honor and function, so that the
idenity of their office, is signified by those two expressions. Neither is
there a confusion of their names, with a difference still of their functions
and administrations, as some would cavil: for in these places where Presbyters
are called Bishops, the disputation is not about the title, but about the
office signified and specified by the title. For when Saint Paul exhorts the
Presbyters to have an eye to their duty and charge, he uses this reason, that
the Holy Ghost has made them Bishops, and the truth of this is so evident,
that the Rhemists themselves, as learned men as any Bishops in England, and as
able to maintain an error, are forced ingeniously to confess it saying in
express words in their Notes upon the 28. verse. of that Chapter. That in the
Apostles times there was no difference between Presbyter and Bishop; so that
for the first position, it is not only by the Word of God clearly evident, but
by the very confession of the adversaries of the truth granted, as a thing
without controversy. Now for proof of the second position, that Presbyters as
well as the Bishop of Rome, have the power and right of Government, Ordination
and Excommunication, by which in these times Bishops only exceed Presbyters,
the Defendant will here briefly demonstrate it, referring those of this
honorable Court, that have a desire to search into the full truth of it, to
his book. And for the proof that the Government was committed unto them, and
that they exercised the same, it is most perspicuous out of the first of
Timothy 5. where the Apostle says the Presbyters that rule well are worthy of
double honor, especially those that labor in Word and Doctrine. By this
testimony it is evident, that they had rule and government in their hands. And
that they had power also of Ordination and imposition of hands, it is likewise
apparent out of the first Epistle of Paul to Timothy the first Chapter. For the
Apostle speaking to Timothy says, Do not neglect the gift that is in thee
which is given thee for prophecy by the imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery. Here also the Presbyters had the right of imposition of hands. And
that they had the power of Excommunication and Absolution, it is likewise
manifest from the fifth of the 1. of the Corinthians and the second Chapter of
the second Epistle, where the Apostle gives them the power of casting the
incestrous person out, and upon his repentance receiving of him in again. By
all which Authorities of Sacred Writ it is sufficiently clear and evident;
That the Presbyters had the Authority and power of Government and rule in the
Church, with the faculty also and ability of Ordination and Excommunication,
and all this by Divine institution and express words of holy Scripture,
howsoever this right and their due, was through the fraud and deceit of the
Bishop of Rome, and Romish Bishops afterward taken away from the Presbyters.
Wherefore the Defendant concluded, That if there were any difference between
Presbyters and the Bishop of Rome (which he denied) that then the Presbyters in
dignity and honor exceeded, and that greatly the Bishop of Rome and Romish
Bishops, for all these Privileges of government, Ordination and
Excommunication are in formal words given unto the Presbyters, and no where
granted unto the Bishops. And for farther illustration and proof of this, the
Defendant, with many other arguments proved, that Presbyters were better men
then the Bishop of Rome, if there were any difference. The sum of which he
desires this honorable Court, to take notice of, that they may more
ponderously weigh the business in hand, and see the vanity of the Information.
And for the arguments in brief, they are these.

They who are most obedient to the Precepts, Commands, and Prohibitions of
Christ, and do most diligently obey the Apostles admonitions, they are, and so
ought to be esteemed, more worthy and excellent, thou such, as regard neither
of both.

But the Presbyters are more obedient to the commands of Christ, and do more
diligently obey the Apostles admonitions then the Romish Bishops.

Therefore they are more worthy and excellent.

For the major, no man can deny, that knows loyal and obedient Subjects to
their Prince, and his Officers just commands, are to be preferred before
Rebels, and them that regard neither of both. Now Christ and his Apostles have
commanded, That all Ministers should feed the stock of Christ diligently in
preaching the word, and administration of the Sacraments, and that they should
not be Lords over his inheritance; Both which precepts and prohibitions the
Presbyters do more exactly observe then Romish Bishops: for they neither preach
themselves, nor will let others, and are Lords over Christ's inheritance, which
the Lord Jesus and his Apostles have peremptorily forbid. Ergo, the Presbyters
are more worthy then Romish Bishops. Again:

That name which is and has ever been a name and title of dignity and honor,
is to be preferred before that which is a name of pain, labor and solicitude.

But the name of Presbyter or Senior, is and has been ever a name of honor
and dignity, and a title of mighty Emperors and Princes, and the name of
Bishop is a name and title of labor and travel. Ergo, the title and name of
Presbyter is to be preferred before that of the Romish Bishops.

For the major, none that are truly noble and learned can deny. And for the
minor, to omit many other places, it will evidently appear to any that will
look upon 1 Timothy 5. There the Apostle says, The Presbyters that rule well are
worthy of double honor. So that it is apparent enough, That honor and dignity
is contained in that name, which deserves both reward, reverence, and respect.
And in the same Epistle the Apostle says, Rebuke not a Presbyter, but honor
him as a Father: and speaking of Bishops, he says, He that desires the Office
of a Bishop, desires a good work: He says indeed a good work, but a work
notwithstanding full of care, watchfulness, toil, and labor. From all which
it is ratified, That the name and title of Presbyter is a name full of dignity,
honor and splendor, and the title of Bishop a compellation or name full of
labor, anhelation and solicitude; and therefore to be preferred before the
title of Bishop, being far more excellent. Again:

That name which whenever it is joined with the name of Bishop, has always
the first place and precedencie, that name is most excellent.

But the name of Presbyter, when it is joined with the title of Bishop, has
ever the precedencie. Ergo, it is to be preferred before it.

For the major, the adversaries cannot deny it, For they conclude and the
precedencie and preeminencie of Peter, before the other Apostles, because he is
often first named. And for the minor, the word of God declares it
illustriously, as may be seen in the 20. of the Acts, and the first of Titus,
and the fifth Chapter of the first of Peter. In all which places the names of
Presbyter and Bishop being joined together, Presbyter is ever first named. To
all this, Peter calls himself a Presbyter. The same does Saint John, as if all
Ecclesiastical dignity were placed in that name. But there are many Arguments
yet remaining to prove the dignity of Presbyters to be above that of Bishops,
if there be any difference between them. For,

They to whom in the most difficult controversies of the Church, and greatest
dissentions, the Primitive Christians had ever recourse, and who the Spirit of
God did in a special manner assist, and who made Decrees by which the Church
of God to this day is to be regulated and governed, and who the Apostles
themselves made their sociates and companions in both General and Provincial
Councels, and the which had the next place unto the Apostles in their
Assemblies: they are more worthy, and to be had in greater honor and
veneration thou the other Ministers of the Church, which are neither by name
nor place known in those holy meetings. But the Presbyters are such, and

Therefore the Presbyters are more worthy and excellent then Bishops.

As for the major, the adversaries cannot doubt of that, which bestow dignity
and honor upon their Bishops, according to the place and degree they had in
the first Councels. And for the minor, none can doubt of it, who has read Acts
15. and Acts 20. But they that desire to be satisfied concerning this Argument
at large, the Defendant desires would read any of his books Lastly, That the
dignity of the Presbyters may yet appear, above the title of Bishops, it is
thus evident:

Those to whom the keys of the Kingdom of heaven by name are committed, those
are more worthy and honorable then those that have not that privilege.

But for the Presbyters, they have the privilege of the keys granted unto them
by name:

Ergo the Presbyters are more honorable then Bishops.

For the major, no good Christian will or rational man can deny it. And for
the minor, he that reads the last of James shall find it manifestly enough
confirmed and proved. By all which arguments, the Defendant did sufficiently
beat down the Bishop of Romes authority, and by the very light of reason
overthrew it. For if that every Presbyter be by the word of God as good a man
as the Bishop of Rome if not better; and withal, if the Presbyters neither can
nor may usurp authority over their fellow brethren, much less may they do it
over Kings and Emperors, and by consequence and necessity of reason it
follows, that the Bishop of Rome has no cause to arrogate such authority to
himself over the whole Church as he does: and therefore that his rule and
government is a mere usurpation, and an abominable tyranny over the whole
Church of God, and ought of all men to be defied, abominated and abhorred with
all his accomplices, as impious and blasphemous against God, injurious to Kings
and Princes, and nocent to all the faithful members of Jesus Christ. The
recapitulation of all the which Arguments, this Defendant thought sit to make
known to this honorable Court, that their illustricities might in every
respect see his innocence, who first exempted all Bishops that acknowledge
their authorities from Kings and Emperors out of the number of those against
which he disputed: and secondly, never by name fought against any other but
Romish Bishops, and with their own Arguments wounded them. And therefore he
could not but take it unkindly, that when in this combat they should have
helped him against the common enemy, they defending him, fell upon the poor
Defendant, to his perdition, saying, that he meant them, and that he was
erroneous and factious in his opinions. Now if the Defendant has erred in the
discussing of these truths, the Scripture that word of life, has brought him
to it, which were blasphemy to think; and therefore when they adjudged this
book to be burnt, they might as well have burnt the Scripture also, yea all
antiquity, and the gravest and learned of ancient Fathers, whose testimonies
also he has made public for the greater vindication of the truth against
error and cruelty. But that the integrity of the Defendant may yet more
clearly appear, he most humbly entreats this Illustrious Tribunal to hear
how the business was carried against him at his Arraignment before the
Prelates Bar at Lambeth, and how submissively he demeaned himself these, and
how superciliously they carried themselves toward the Defendant on the
contrary side. When it came to his part to speak for himself, the Advocate
having formerly denied to plead his case any farther then about the witnesses
testimony, which he also did very jejunely, being an Advocate of such
excellent parts of learning and eloquence as he was, and also at the Bar
renouncing it, saying, That the Defendant should plead himself, which, when it
was put upon him, he then first related unto the Assembly the Theme of the
book, which was the maintenance of the Kings Prerogative royal. Then he told
them the occasion of his writing of it, that he was provoked thereunto by a
Pontifician, who often had dared him into the list of dispute; which at last he
could not deny, as he was a Christian, and as he was a Subject; for by the Word
of God he told them, and by the Law of the land, and his special oath, he was
bound unto it: which oath he also read at large in open Court, the which also
all the Bishops of England, and all the Judges of the kingdom had taken, and
were equally bound with him to observe. Then before he entered into the combat
with the adversary, he showed, what caution he used; that being to write
against the Bishop of Rome and Italian Bishops, it was only as they arrogate
their authority over their brethren and the Church of God, yea, over Kings and
Emperors jure divino, against such Bishops only he affirmed he did dispute
and read the words of exception formerly cited at the Bar: as for such
Bishops as acknowledge their jurisdiction, power and authority from Kings and
Emperors; he said, he had no controversy against them, as he there again and
again declared himself, in the number of which he the Defendant said ours
were, for all the Bishops of England, and in his Majesty's Dominions, had, and
received (or at least wise ought so to do) their authority and jurisdiction
over their brethren from him; For proof of which, he cited and read publicly
the Statutes and Acts of Parliament, as follow:

First, that of the first of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, wherein the Oath
of Allegiance was ratifyed, in the which Statute there are these words, That
all jurisdiction, all Superiorities, and all Privileges and preeminencies
spiritual and temporal are annexed to the imperial Crown which by Oath he
being bound to maintain, could do no less being provoked by an adversary of
regal dignity: He read also the Statute which was inacted in the 37. of Henry
the eight, which is, That Archbishops and Bishops and all other Ecclesiastical
persons, have no other Ecclesiastical jurisdiction but that which they
received and had by the King, from the King, and under his Royal Majesty. He
read also the Statute made in the first of King Edward the sixth, in these
words, That all jurisdiction and Authority spiritual and Temporal, is derived
and does come from the Kings Majesty as supreme head in the churches and
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and that by the Clergy of both the Kingdoms,
it ought no otherwise to be held or esteemed of, and that all Ecclesiastical
Courts, within the said Kingdoms ought to be held and kept by no other power
and Authority either domestical or foreign, then that which comes from his
most excellent Majesty. And that whosoever did not acknowledge and venerate
this authority, that the same men are ipso facto in a praemunire, and under the
Kings high displeasure and indignation; as the words of the Statute run, and
the mouth of the law speaks: and then with some reason, also which the
Defendant produced, besides the Word of God, he showed, That no Romish Bishops
had authority over their fellow brethren, nor could jure divino challenge it,
much less over Kings and Emperors, and therefore so long as the Defendant had
the word of God, the Laws of the Kingdom, and reason it self on his side, he
told them, he thought himself reasonably secure from all danger in that place.
And then applying his speech unto the right Honorable and noble Lord the Earl
of Dorset then present, the Defendant told his honor, that he could not but
wonder, that he should stand there at the Bar as a Delinquent, for maintaining
the Religion established by public Authority, the honor of the King, and the
glory of his Majesty: and that one Chouny a Sussex man a laick as well as
himself, should write a book and set it forth by public authority, maintaining
the Church of Rome to be a true Church, and never to have had so much in her,
as the suspicion of error in fundamental points, and that this book should be
dedicated to the Prelate of Canterbury, and patronized by him (which book the
Defendant both read and exhibited in Court) by which notwithstanding the King
himself and all his Subjects were made Shismaticks and heretics, to the
infinite dishonor of God, our Gracious King, and King James of blessed memory,
and our most holy profession and Religion. This as the Defendant told the Lord
of Dorset struck an amazement in him, and especially when the author of it
must be favored and countenanced by Canterbury, and for the defending of the
honor and dignity of our church and the honor of the King, the Defendant
should stand as an evil doer. Now when the Defendant was come thus far, and was
then approaching more closely unto them all, intending more fully in the
pleading of his cause to have set forth their unjust dealing, they told him,
that he railed, and Imperiously commanded him to hold his peace, which was the
reason of his Apologericus ad Praesules Anglicanos, where he took liberty to
write that, and publish it to the view of all the world, which he would have
then spoke. But after they had silenced him, they then fell a thundering
against him every one as he pleased, all of them joining in this, (one only
excepted) that they censured him only for his Book; and in their censure,
they unanimously agreed, that the Defendant should pay the costs of suit, a
thousand pounds unto the King for a fine, be debarred of his Practice, that his
Book should be burnt, and that the Defendant should lie in prison till
recantation, and in the mean time be delivered unto Satan. And thus did the
Sublime Court deal with the Defendant for doing his duty. But here the
Defendant craveth favor again of the honorable Court, that he may briefly,
letting the puny Judges and their nonsense die in silence, say something of the
Prelates haranges, because they only were the men that found themselves
agrieved at his writing: and to say the truth, all the other are Officiers
under them, and are the Prelates hang-byes (he means the Doctors) to do what
they would have them: as hourly experience teaches all men. And so much the
more earnestly he desires this liberty, because it will make much for the
demonstration of the justice of his accusation against the Prelates, both in
respect of the dishonor they have done unto God by it, the dishonor of the
King their Master, and King James of precious memory, and the wrong done to
himself in particular. Now the first that entered this combat was Francis White
Bishop of Ely, who in the first place most blasphemously and with many
contumelyes reproached the holy Scriptures, making nothing of their divine
Authority, (as all the standers by can witness) for he revising the Defendant,
said, That he had nothing in his book but Scripture, which was (as he termed
it) the refuge of all Heriticks and Schismatics, openly averring withal, That
the Scriptures could not be known to be the Word of God, but by the Fathers,
and Saint Augustine would not have believed the Scriptures to be the Word of
God, had not the Church told him so. Further he said, That the Scripture could
not be known and distinguished from the Apocrypha, but by the Fathers: nor the
meaning of the Scripture found out but by the Fathers, and that all the Fathers
from all antiquity (which is most false, as the Defendant in a special book
has sufficiently showed) made and proved a vast difference between Bishops and
Presbyters, and that there was ever a greater excellency and Authority in the
Bishop then in Presbyters, and this with an unaminous consent they all agreed
in till a base fellow Calvin (for so he termed that ever to be honored
Divine) rose up in an obscure corner of the world and violated and overthrew
all order and authority in the Church, and would also have demolished the
authority of the Magistrates. And then turning his speech to the Defendant
unhumanely; he called him base fellow, brazen faced fellow, base Dunce, and
said in the face of the Court, that if he could not maintain his Episcopal
Authority to be Iure Divino, he would sling away his Rotchet: And so concluding
with those that had gone before him in his censure, he sat down in a very great
fury and passion.

After him came forth the Bishop of York, and in that numerous Assembly,
proclaims, That Jesus Christ made him a Bishop, and the holy Ghost consecrated
him, and that he had not his authority from the King, for Bishops were before
Kings, and that Bishops held the Crowns of Kings upon their heads, and so
peremptorily averring, that the Defendant ought to be knocked down with club-Law
for his ignorance, assenting with the rest in their Censure, he fell asleep. In
the third place the Bishop of London advanced forwards, speaking very loud and
temerarious words against the holy Scriptures saying, that he had thought to
have found some great matters in the Defendants book, seeing him so confident
and so peremptory, but diligently reading of it, he met with nothing in it but
Scripture, which, as he said was the refuge of all Schismatics and Heretics,
and so according with his predecessors in their opinion and censure, he
concluded his part of speech. But last of all came forth the Prelate of
Canterbury, who with a frontlesse boldness avouched his Episcopal authority
and preeminency over his brethren to be only from God, very much blaming
Calvin for his factions Spirit, saying: That their Ecclesiastical Authority
and the power they exercised, was from Christ Jesus, and produced Timothy and
Titus to prove the same assertion, and that Bishops were before Christian
Kings, and they held the Crowns of Kings upon their heads. For, no Bishop no
King, and those that would have no Bishops, sought to overthrow all Government,
and in his censure he jumped in all things with the rest, saving in the Fine,
which (as he said) he thought too little, and therefore ought of mere
conscience, as he told the other Judges, he fined the Defendant a Thousand
pounds more. But he had one thing more to speak as he said, concerning the
Church of Rome, and about that he resolved publicly there to declare himself,
in regard the Defendant had cast Chounyes book unto him in open Court, and of
the Synagogue of Rome he spoke very honorably, affirming, That she was a true
Church and that she did not err in fundamental points, and all this he spoke
in that public Sessions.

All which the Defendant has been forced to recite, because it makes very much
for the justification of what he writ in his Apology, and that he had good
ground greatly to blame the Prelates, as well for these as for many other of
their proceedings, as afterward this honorable Court shall well perceive: And
now that the Defendant may come to the things that he is charged with the
Information, as to have accused the Bishops of, in his Apology, which by the
informers is termed a Libell, though it contains nothing but a true Narration
of the passages of the High Commission Court; which he never spoke nor writ
against, but only, against the abuses of the Judges in it, who have turned
that Court, which was of purpose appointed by the State for the suppressing of
Heresy, Popery and vice, to the beating down of the Religion established by
Authority, and the promotion and advancement of superstition, and the
molestation and undoing of the Kings faithfullest Subjects, and the dear
servants of God, as daily experience teaches us, and the whole Kingdom can
witness. In the writing of which book he the Defendant thinks himself so
far from being a Delinquent, as he conceives he has done good service to
King, Church, and State, having in it vindicated and maintained regal
Authority against the Tyranny of the Pope, discovered also the Prelates
lawless usurpations with their ungratitude to the King, and cruelties against
their brethren, maintained the honor likewise of the Laws of the Land and the
dignity of sacred Writ, (both which they slight and make nothing of) and by
innumerable testimonies of learned men, proved the assertion for which he is
thus traduced and envyed, to be neither novell nor heretical, but according to
both the Divine Scriptures and all ancient truth, and the vetust est Bishops,
and by the whole Clergy of England in King Henry the Eights days, as all the
Learned and ingenuous do well perceive and know; both at home and abroad. So
that if the Informers with the Prelates will make this book a libell, then let
them make holy Scripture, the Laws of the Kingdom, and all the ancient
records of learned Bishops libells also: for the Defendant, in that, has said
nothing concerning the Presbytery, which is not agreeable to them all. And for
the matters in special he is charged with the information, viz. That he has
causlesly enveighed against the oath ex officio, and other ancient forms of
proceedings in that Court, and against the Sacred Hierarchy and orders of
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, preferring a Presbyterian parity before it. And
that he has falsely and scandalously defamed the witnesses produced against
him, and falsely and maliciously taxed the High Commission Court it self, and
the Judges therein in general, and some of them particularly and personally
with cruelty and injustice, with want of wisdom and temperance, and that they
are perswaders of his Majesty to bloodshed, and are upholders of idolatry,
superstition, Popery and Profaneness, and further most maliciously, and
falsely, affirms, that Canterbury, London and Ely, are disgracers and
contemners of holy Scriptures, and falsely traduceth them and the rest of the
Bishops for Traitors and invaders of his Majesty's Prerogative, and that in the
said book there are contained diverse other unlawful and scandalous passages
against the established government and settled discipline of the Church of
England, the Bishops and Clergy, and their proceedings, which being many, and
of various nature, is delivered into his Majesty's Court of Starchamber.

To all which things that he is here charged with, the Defendant will answer
with what brevity, and the best Method he can, and doubts nothing but
whatsoever he has writ in his Apology against the Prelates and their
proceeding, shall be made evidently appear to this Court to be most true. And
to begin with the things laid to his charge in the last place, that he accuses
the Bishops to be disgracers and contemners of holy Scripture, to be invaders
of his Majesty's prerogative, upholders of idolatry, Popery, superstition and
profaneness, All which is most true, for so they are, as he has sufficiently
proved against them in that book, and does here also add, that they have
greatly dishonored the King their Master, and King James his Father of
perpetual Memory, all which he will briefly declare, and demonstrate to this
noble Court. And that they are contemners and disgracers of holy Scripture,
what can be more manifest? when they say that the Scriptures are the refuge of
all Schismatics and Heretics, as much as if they should say, the good Laws
and Statutes of a Kingdom, and the Kings Edicts and Proclamations, are the
cause of all disorder and wickedness! withal, what is it to be contemners and
disgracers of the holy Scriptures, if this be not? to say, That they can
neither be known to be the Word of God; nor distinguished from the Apocrypha
and Profane Authors, nor to be understood and the meaning of them attained
unto for their obscurity, but by the Fathers? If this be not to contemn Sacred
Writ, then all Orthodox Writers both in ours and all reformed Churches, and
King James himself, have accused the Church of Rome most falsely, whom they
prove blasphemous against God, and disgracers of the Holy Scriptures, for the
same assertions, as all their learned writings witness with innumerable
Arguments in them for proof of the same.

The Defendant desires to know, what it is to profane and contemn holy
Scripture, if this be not to slight and vilyfie the Authority of it, and to
prefer humane authority before it, which the Bishops did blasphemously,
saying, that they could not be known to be the Word of God, without the help
of the Fathers, when every page and leaf of those Sacred monuments breath a
Divine Spirit, and they are called the lively Oracles, Acts 7. verse 38. as if
the Scripture had lost his ancient luster, life, and Divinity by its antiquity,
and were inferior to all other things both Natural and Artificial. When
notwithstanding there is such a Majesty and Splendor in the Scripture, as it
dazleth the eyes of all those that look into it, with his transcendent and
heavenly clarity, and brightness, the eyes of whose minds the God of this
world has not blinded, yea under the very law, when there was a veil before
the eyes of men, so that they could not so clearly see into them as now
Christians may, yet then such dignity and excellency was discerned in them,
that at the first reading of them, men cried out, the voice of God and not of
man, and tore their garments for very anguish and fear of the threats in them,
and never were so ungracious and impious to say, How shall we know these books
to be the Word of God? for the holy Scriptures had ever such an innate and
Domestical light, beauty, and goodness in them, and carried such testimony
and witness within themselves, ever able to declare themselves divine and
holy, and to be the very word of the everliving God, that they needed borrow no
help from without them, or fetched in humane witness for the declaring of their
divinity. There was no need to send unto the Prophets or the Church, in old
time, to enquire whether the Scriptures were the word of God, amongst any that
were but any thing acquainted with the language of Canaan, as is manifestly
evident in the 2. of the Kings 22. verse 8.10. and the 2. of the Chron. 34.
verse 14, 15, 19. where it appears, that when the Book of the Law was found
by Helchia the Priest in the house of the Lord, he knew it at the first reading
of it, to be the word of God; the same did the King, they were neither of them
told by the Church, or any Prophets or Fathers that it was the Book of the
Law; neither did the King send unto Hulda the Prophetess to know whether it
were a true and authenticke Copy; all this needed not; it needed then no
Godfathers and Godmothers to Christen and give it the name of the Law of God
and holy Scripture, as without the which it could not have been known; there
was no need of any such thing, or any humane authority for the proof of that
in those times; all that were then true Israelites knew it by its own testimony
to be the word of God, and shall any man now think, that the Scriptures are
more obscure and dark, and harder to be discerned by their own testimony to be
Divine and holy, then when they had a vail before them, and their sacred
treasuries of Divine truths were muffled up in so many tipes and mysteries
Certainly this is not only great ingratitude to Gods bounty, but very contempt
and disgrace of holy Scriptures, that their most excellent self authority can
have no credit amongst Christians without adventiciall assistance of vain man.
Is not the witness and testimony of God greater then the testimony of man? If
we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater, says Saint
John in his first Epistle chap. 5. verse. 9. But the Prelates affirm, the
testimony of man is to be preferred before the witness of God, so that we
ought not believe the Spirit witnessing, but the testimony of the Fathers: for
they say, the Scriptures cannot be known without the Fathers. Christ, who was
truth it self, says in the 5. of John verse. 36. I have a greater witness
then that of John, and what was that witness? His works, the witness and
approbation of his Father and the Scriptures. Christ here preferres the
testimony of the Scriptures before the testimony of John, which was the
greatest of all the Prophets, and the Prelates prefer the testimony of the
Fathers before the Scriptures, and is not this to contemn the holy Scriptures?
Saint Peter in that glorious transfiguration of Christ upon the mount, heard
the voice of God the Father, and notwithstanding he says in his 2. Epistle,
chap. 1. verse. 19. we have also a more sound word of prophecy. And Christ
himself to reverenced the holy Scriptures, that he seems to prefer Moses
his words before his own, saying, if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye
believe my words? And in the person of Abraham, when Dives desired one might be
sent to his Fathers house, to warn his brethren of the danger of torment that
he was in, Christ says, they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them:
and he said, nay Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead, they
will repent: and he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead. By all which
testimonies of sacred Writ it is evident, that if the Scripture of it self
cannot prevail with men, that then there is little hope that very miracles
will do them any good, for the begetting of faith in them, or bringing of them
to the truth, much less the Fathers; and this by Christ's own words is
confirmed unto us: yet the Prelates nevertheless, esteem of the Fathers
authority, more then of the sacred Scriptures. But can any man that has but
the name of a Christian think, that those that will not be moved by the
Majesty and authority of the Scriptures, speaking in the Name of the Lord of
hosts, that the authority of the Fathers will prevail with them, who are not
to be believed, but as they speak out of the holy Scriptures, and by their
divine authority? Christ denies it, and therefore we are rather to believe
that, then the fantasies and impious grolleries of a few ungodly men. Is not
the Scripture (...), and of his own and self sufficiency so able to declare
its own mind and meaning, that it has no need of the Fathers help? Without
doubt, unless profane mouths will make it a pack of nonsense. Truly one
would think that very reason might be able to convince these wretched
wranglers, if they had not hardened themselves, to fight against the truth,
yea, and set themselves to resist the holy Spirit of God; for if we look upon
very nature, art and reason, they would convince us: for there is no natural
thing but will prove and show it self what it is, and declare its own nature;
as the Sun, Moon and Stars declare their own nature, and tell what they are
to every beholder of them; fire by it self, and of its own nature and essence
is known what it is, earth and water do the same: and the same may be said of
gold and silver, and all other metals, they are able to witness for themselves
what they are, and to distinguish their own natures from each others to any
rational man. Again, All Artificial things are known what they are by their
proper forms, and so are discriminated the one from the other, every one of
them carrying a sufficient indication of it self. yea, all humane writings
show from whence they come, by the spirit they writ with, and do show, whether
the Authors and Writers of them be learned or unlearned, or be men in
authority and place or not, and there needs no Commentaries upon them to tell
whose they are.

The Proclamations and Edicts of Kings and Princes do sufficiently without
either marginall Notes or Annotations declare of themselves, that they come
from Imperial authority; and the Majesty and the Dignity of their phrase and
expression do proclaim to all men that the Authors of them are sacred
persons, and he that should call them in question without a Council or
Parliament, or the Fathers and Judges of the Laws authority, would be thought
no loyal Subject, and not worthy to live, and that deservedly: for the very
manner of their penning and writing do ever convince the readers both of the
Dignity of their matter, and of the excellency of the personages that set them
forth. And shall any in this age of light, be found so darkened in his
judgment, as to think the Word of God inferior to all natural, artificial
and humane things? Yet so it is, to the infinite dishonor of our great God
blessed for ever.

Truly, besides the sparkles of Divinity, and the Spirit of God illuminating
in the Scriptures which writ them; the excellency and goodness of their
object and matter, the purity, the perfection, the antiquity, the universal
consent and agreement of them, the Majesty, and simplicity of the languages
and speech they are writ in, the conviction that is in them of wicked and
rebellious consciences, beating down and humbling the strongest spirits, the
certain event of things foretold in them, the integrity of the Writers, being
far from all fraud and guile, setting down their own infirmities, and the
weaknesses of their families, which humane reason would never have done, the
preservation of these holy Scriptures in all ages from the fury of the
persecuters, and out of the hands of those that studied to destroy them, the
constancy of the Martyrs always that believed and kept them, and the fearful
and tragical ends of such as were enemies of them. These the Defendant says,
and many more reasons there are to prove the Scriptures to be the word of the
everliving God by themselves, without any authority of Fathers. But yet one
reason more, the Defendant thought fit to add, before he returns again to
the holy Scriptures own authority; which is sufficiently able to declare it
to be the Word of God. And that is this, All things that are men's own, whether
Counsels, Laws, Ordinances, Inventions, Polities or Projects, Orders of
Government, etc. they are agreeable ever to the corrupt nature of man, or else
to carnal reason, and men commonly hug their own devices. Now if the Religion
that is set down in holy Scriptures, or the Scriptures themselves, had ever
been the fiction and excogitations of men's brains, as some profane and
Atheistical men think, who suppose and say, that Religion was by Policy
invented to keep men in awe, then the Defendant says, that all men would
willingly and without reluctation have embraced and received them, and given
ever them admittance and free entertainment: for the world ever loves his
own. Now it is notoriously known, that no carnal men either love the
Scriptures or regard them; nay it has been always the endeavor, and the
greatest plot and conspiracy of wicked and ungodly men, and the adversaries of
the truth, either totally to extinguish them, or to vilify their authority, as
King James, of renowned memory, in his Apology to all Christian Princes,
sufficiently declares, discovering therein, the Popes double diligence in that
business. So that were there no other reason but this alone, it were of
conviction enough to prove the holy Scripture to be the Word of God, because it
so much opposes impiety, wickedness, cruelty, unrighteous dealing, errors
and darkness, which carnal and sensual men love more then light. And whereas
the Prelates with the Papists produce the authority of the Fathers for the
maintaining of what they speak, and in Court alleged that of Augustine, Where
he says, that he would not have believed the Scripture; if the Church had not
told him it was the Scripture. The Defendant for his part is sorry to see such
a profane Sympathy between the Prelates and Papists in these things, who deal
with true Christians as the Gibeonites dealt with the Israelites in the 9. of
Judges, who pretended they were Ambassadors, and took old sackes upon their
asses, and old tattered bottles, and clouted shoes, and ragged clothes, and
pretended they came from a far Country, and so the Israelites not taking
counsel of the Lord were cousened, and deluded by them: Even so the Papists
and Prelates under pretense of the ancient Writers, and with their old shoes
and moldy bread of uncouth antiquity, rob us of the truth, and take away from
us the bread and staff of life, by which we should safely, and comfortably
walk to heaven and happiness; and under the pretense of the Fathers and their
authority, they abuse and deceive the simple. But in this cause Augustine is
not very useful unto them: for his authority in this, so weighty a matter, is
to rational men of no great validity: for the Defendant demands of any, that
has but the grace of understanding, that if Augustine would never have
believed that there had been a God, without the Church had told him so, must
his infidelity make others Atheists also? This will not be thought good reason
amongst the learned; for then one man's imperfections should be a rule for
multitudes to go to hell, and unbelief should be a virtue. And yet it is not
altogether denied, but that the persuasion and report of men may be a motive to
stir up men many times to the hearing and perusal of a thing, which of it
self does not always beget says, or but very little, as daily experience
teaches us, but the thing it self seen or heard, is that that works and
effects it, and makes their faith so firm and steadfast, that although the
same parties should a thousand times after deny that to be so, yet they to the
death would persevere in that true belief. As for example, we see in the
people of Samaria that were by the woman's persuasion brought out to see Christ,
and in some small measure believed in him, from her relation, that he was the
Messiah, yet when then they had talked with him themselves, they openly
affirmed that then they believed not, because the woman had told them, but from
more excellent reasons and grounds, that they themselves had heard him. And
should the Samaritan woman a thousand times after that, have denied that he had
been the Messiah, they would never have been removed from their faith in
Christ for all that.

The same may be said of Nathaniel, in the first of John; to whom Philip said,
That he had found him of whom Moses spoke in the Law and the Prophets, Jesus of
Nazareth; and Nathaniel said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip said, Come and see. Jesus saw Nathaniel coming unto him, and
says to him, Behold an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile. Nathaniel said
unto him, Whence know thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that
Philip called thee, when thou were under the Fig Tree, I saw thee. Nathaniel
answers, and says unto him, Rabbi, Thou art the Son of God, thou art the
King of Israel. And howsoever Philip here was an occasion of bringing Nathaniel
to Christ, yet the sight of Christ and his Miracles were the things only, that
begat true faith in him, and such a faith as all the Philips in the world could
never after have removed him from it again. And so it was with Augustine
perhaps, that being a learned Infidel, or little better, a Man^^nee, through
the persuasions of learned Christians, he came to look in the Word of God, as
all faith comes by hearing; but does it therefore follow, that that was only
the cause of his faith, and perseverance in it? or if the Church had not told
him so, these had been no other means for him to come to the knowledge of the
Scripture, this does not necessarily follow. But were it granted, that had not
the Church told Augustine which was the Scripture and the Word of God, that he
had then never believed it to be the Word, must this conclusion of necessity be
gathered from thence, That all men must be like Augustine in this, or that the
authority of men is greater and above the Scripture? All these are poor and
lame consequences, and not beseeming the worthy Fathers of the Church in open
Court to publish, to the infinite dishonor of holy Scripture, and advancing
humane authority above it, which indeed is meet blasphemy against the holy
Word of God. For would not every man accuse one of folly, if another being a
stranger, and never seeing the King, and meeting him in a journey, with all his
Nobles, richly clad, as it beseems noble Peers so to be, for the honor of
their Master, and the Majesty of his Court, and in this company where there
are so many brave personages, and all so excellently apparelled, and he not
knowing which was the King; should ask some of his retinue, or some Courtier,
which of those were the King? Now does follow, because at that time, the man
should not have known the King without this information from some of the
attendants, that the King could no other way have been known unto him, or that
Kings could be known no other ways but by such informations? No rational
creatures will so conclude: at that time he in part believed from the Courtiers
relation that it was the King, but after that he sees the King in his Court or
upon his throne with his Crown upon his head, and with all his State and
Magnificence, and his Nobles in their service; with the reverence that is
yielded unto him, then he believes no longer, because the Servant told him
that it was the King, but because by his own reason he is evinced of it,
knowing that such attendance and such a guard, and so great pomp, dignity, and
State belongs to none but Kings. And it would be thought not madness only
but treason, to say, if one had not told him that it was the King, otherwise
the King could not be known, or that he that told him, was greater then the
King, or his Authority greater.

The same may be said of the Holy and ever blessed Word of God, that it is a
great madness and impiety to conclude, That the Holy Scripture cannot be known
to be the Word of God without the Authority of the Fathers, or Church, or that
the Authority of either is greater then the Scriptures; which to affirm is
without doubt blasphemy in a High degree against Almighty God, and his blessed
revealed will, and able to provoke his indignation upon us, because it is an
error against the very light of nature, art and reason, and the apparent Words
of the Scripture: where the Word of God is called the immortal seed, 1. Peter
chap. 1. verse 23. which lives and abides for ever: Now all seed by its
inward virtue sprouteth into a blade and is by it self and his own fruits
known to be what it is: So is the Scripture of it self known to be the Word
of God, and as Paul says in the 1. of the Corinthians chapter 2. verse 4. the
Word of God is in the demonstration of the Spirit and in power, and makes the
hearts of the believers burn within them, as it did to those, that went with
Christ to Emmaus, Luke the 24. verse 32. and as the Apostle says in the first
to the Thessalonians the 2. chapter verse 3. that they received the Word of God
not as the word of man, but (as it is in the truth) the Word of God which
effectually works in those that believe: and in the 4. of the Hebrews the 12.
Paul says, that the word of God is quick and powerful and sharper then a two
edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder the soul and Spirit, and of
the reins and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. So that by these testimonies and thousands more that might be produced,
it is sufficiently evident, that the Scriptures of themselves are declaratory,
and by their own native and inbred splendour do conciliate Authority, and
credit to themselves; neither have they any need of help from man or the
Fathers Authority to prove them the word of God. For before there were any
Fathers the Scriptures had their Authority, and were known to be Divine.
Neither did the Fathers or Church make them Authentic or the Word of God, no
more then a Pillar makes a Proclamation to be the Kings will and pleasure,
because it stands upon it, but the Church or Fathers declared them so to be,
neither does or can the very Synagogue of Rome deny this.

How impious then and blasphemous are the Prelates, that they dare thus vilify
the holy Scriptures, and make their authority nothing? And can any man of
judgment see any reason, why one should believe the Fathers more then the
Scriptures? Or why one should believe that these are the works of Augustine or
Ambrose, and should doubt that this is the Gospel of Luke, John, or that these
are the Epistles of Paul? Of these things the Defendant for his part can see no
reason. Neither can there any solid reason be yielded why one should believe
the Fathers more then the Scriptures themselves; when the Fathers are not to be
credited, but as they accord with Scripture, as the very Popish Canons and
Papists themselves acknowledge; for in the Canon Law thus speaks the Pope,
Patrum quantalibet doctrina and sanctitate pollentium Scripta, ex Canonivis and
sacris consideranda, nec cum cred^ndi necessitate sed cum judicandi liberate
legenda sunt. Neither is Baronius his opinion other, concerning the authority
of the Fathers, as at large may be seen in his Annals ann. 34. Sect. 213. and
ann. 44 Sect. 42. And for Bellarmine, he is of the same mind in his 2. Book
concerning Councels, in the 12. chapter, in these words, Sacra Scripta Patrum
non sunt regulae, nec habent autoritate obligandi. And when the very
adversaries do thus fully express themselves, that whatsoever authority is in
the Fathers Books and writings it is only as they harmonise and accord with the
Scripture, shall any man then think or suppose, that there should yet be more
authority in the writings of the Fathers, or in the Decrees of Councels then
there is in the holy Scriptures, from whence as the fountain, those streams do
issue? very reason will confound the fatuity of this devilish doctrine; for the
streams and brooks are never so pure nor good as the fountain; for it is ever
the fountain that gives authority of goodness, and the name of excellency to
the little sucking rivers, as men know: and they commend the waters ever from
the fountain they come, so that the Spring has ever the precedence and is of
greatest Authority, and without all controversy, as it overthrows all
reason, so it is exceedingly impious against our great God the fountain of all
good and the giver of every good and perfect gift, and they that shall speak so
contumeliously as the Bishops do of these Fountains of living waters the holy
Scriptures is they did, the Defendant will ever maintain they are contemners
and despisers of the Holy Scriptures, and in this opinion he will live and die.

Neither did they less offend in saying, that the Scriptures could not be
known from the Apocrypha, without the help and authority of the Fathers: which
point also the Defendant desires this honorable Court to hear a little
discussed, it being a thing of so high nature, concerning not only the glory
of God, but the good of every man's soul, the peace of the Church, and the
tranquillity of the whole Kingdom. And therefore he humbly craveth favor that
he may agitate it here a little: for the further Demonstration of the justness
of his accusation he charge the Prelates with. viz: that they are disgracers
and contemners of the holy Scriptures. They say, that the Scriptures cannot be
distinguished from the Apocrypha, but by the Fathers: which assertion is
against sense and reason it self, and too impious for Prelates to speak: Is not
this an essential property of the Scriptures of the old Testament, that they
were written in the Hebrew tongue, and that they did give witness of Christ,
and received Authority from him, and that they were put into the hands and
keeping of the elect and chosen people of God as a Treasury?

Now the Apocrypha had none of all this honor, Neither did ever the Jews
account of them as Scripture, yea to this day they reject them, Neither for
these reasons only are they distinguished from the Apocrypha, but for many
others, the divinity, purity, sublimity appears in the Canonical Scriptures;
the futility, folly and falsity in the Apocrypha are too too manifest: and is
there any man so stupid and blockish, to think that this age wherein we live,
cannot distinguish or discern gold from lead, without the Authority of the
Fathers? There is a vaster difference between the Apocrypha and the Canonical
Scriptures, then is between gold and lead. Every man's reason will tell him an
apparent difference between brass and beans. But if any be desirous of
Authority to distinguish them, will not Christ's and the Apostles suffice? The
very Papists that have not abjured all honesty and goodness, do freely
acknowledge and confess, that those only are Canonical Scriptures, which the
Apostles did either write or approve of. But they did never approve of the
Apocrypha. The Canonical Scriptures of the old Testament, did in shadows and
figures set forth that which the new Testament clearly speaks. They did
adumbrate, the new Testament expresses in lively colors one and the same
thing. They consent one with another, and yield each other mutual aid and
help. Now the Apocrypha do neither foretell the new, nor are by their authority
and approbation illustrated and declared. Christ commends Moses, the Prophets,
and the Psalms, as books without all exception, Luke 24. and grounds his
doctrine upon them, but never honors nor graceth the Apocrypha with his
commendations or witness. How then can the Prelates without great contumely
unto the sacred Scriptures say they cannot be distinguished and known from the
Apocrypha but by the Fathers, especially after the judgment of Christ himself
is given and has passed upon the Scriptures, for the authorizing of them to be
the word and will of God? The Fathers as the learned acknowledge, were for
their times many of them worthy of honor, but yet they were subject not to a
few errors, and often agreed not with themselves, and are ever at variance with
others, and have been indeed the original and cause of almost all the
controversies with which the Churches are now tormented. And therefore to
conclude this point, the Defendant says, that the Prelates are disgracers and
contemners of holy Scripture, when against so much light of reason and Divine
authority, they say they cannot be distinguished and known from the Apocrypha
but by the Fathers. Neither is the third Thesis and Position freer from
impudency and outrage against the Scriptures, then the two former. In that they
say the meaning of the Scripture could not be known, but by the Fathers. For
in this they do as much as plainly affirm, there is an other way to heaven,
then by the Scriptures: which, if it be not a contemning and disgracing of holy
Scripture, then there never was any. Nay, if it be not blasphemy the Defendant
knows not what blasphemy is ^and therefore all those that desire salvation
and to go to heaven, must come to the School of the Fathers, and not to the
Doctrine of the Scriptures. And how then will the poor people do, to be saved,
that never knew what a Father was? Nay, how did all those go to heaven that
dyed before the Fathers? For the Prelates say that the meaning of the Scripture
cannot be known without the Fathers, and without the knowledge of the
Scripture there is no salvation. It is most manifest by these expressions of
the Prelates, that they with their untempered mortar would put out the light of
the Scriptures, and make them not only inferior to all men's writings, but a
very pack of Nonsense, for wheresoever there is any sense, there can something
be gathered out of it, especially if it be so large a Book. And howsoever
there be many depths in Scripture, there is also great perspicuity: so that
according to the ancient saying, as an Elephant may swim, a lamb may wade there
also. But if it should be so as the Prelates say, that without the authority
and interpretation of the Fathers, the meaning of them could not be known and
found out: then the Defendant affirms, they should be inferior to all other
writings, yea to every Letter and Epistle that men pen with understanding; for
they ever carry their own sense end meaning along with them, or to what end are
they otherwise writ? If the letter that discoverd the gunpowder Treason had not
had a match and light of understanding in it, that Popish plot had never been
discovered, till by its cruel flames it had declared it self, and by the
funeral of the whole Kingdom had been made known, and left those that
survived and lived in perpetual mourning. If every Letter writing and book
then that is penned with judgment carry its own sense and meaning in it, and
the books for which the Defendant is now questioned, and if all Proclamations,
Letters and Edicts of Princes are easily to be understood, and carry their own
interpretation with them so that none after their publication may pretend
ignorance; dare any man be so bold and adaciou as to say that the Letters and
Proclamations of the King of heaven an God of the whole world cannot be
understood? when notwithstanding David says they give light and understanding
to the simple, and that by reading and meditating in the Law and Testimonies of
the Lord, he grew wiser then his Teachers; and Paul, that Timothy knew the
Scriptures from his youth, 2. Tim. chap. 3 verse 13. and notwithstanding all
this, dare the Prelates affirm, that the meaning of this Scripture cannot be
known without the interpretation of the Fathers? We have great cause to praise
and bless God that has so graciously afforded us better Masters to be taught
by. It is good ever therefore to listen unto them. Let us hear now then what
the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles have taught us concerning this weighty
matter, and of so great consequence: and let us follow their example and
instruction, which lead us into all truth: and not to listen to the contemners
of holy Scripture. They send those that are studious of the ways to heaven, to
the Law and to the Testimonies, Esai. 8. to Moses, the Prophets and the
Scriptures, not to the Traditions of the Elders, and custom of Antiquity. And
they that bring any other doctrine are not to be listened unto, neither may we
bid them God speed. The Word of the Lord is the way, light and lantern to our
Feet, which send forth sufficiently the beams of truth, and shines so clearly
of it self as it may be both known, proved, expounded, and unfolden by its own
brightness. They do as it were lend luster unto the Sun from a smoking
snuff, that from the mist of the Fathers would bring light unto the
Scriptures. God is the Author of the Scriptures, who is the original and
fountain of all light, and in whom there is no darkness. For the Prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. 2. Peter chapter 1. verse 21. We have also a more sure
word of Prophecy, says the same Apostle, whereunto you do well, that you
take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, verse 19. So that the
Scriptures were of purpose penned by holy men, inspired by God himself, for a
direction and light to the Saints, to be guided by, and so they are termed by
the holy Ghost. So that as Peter said unto Christ in the sixth of John when he
asked his twelve Disciples, if they also would go away, To whom shall we go,
says he? Thou have the Words of eternal life. Even so we may truly say,
whither shall we go for light and direction to get to heaven, but to the Holy
Scriptures, for they have the Words of eternal life in them? and this says
Christ and his Apostles; and yet notwithstanding all this excellent light, that
shines in the Scripture, the Prelates everre, they are but blind guides, and
prefer humane darkness before the splendor of these sacred Oracles the
Scriptures, and say, without the interpretation of the Fathers they cannot be
known; which is unsupportable blasphemy; and as much as to tell the everliving
God, and truth it self, he lies. It is most veritable, that they see not the
light of the Scripture, the eyes of whose minds are blinded; neither do they
see the light of the Sun, whose eyes are plucked out. If our Gospel be hid,
says Saint Paul, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the god of this
world has blinded their minds, that is, in Infidels, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ which is the image of God, should shine upon them, 2 Corinthians. chap. 4. verse 3, 4. every one knows the voice of that man with whom
he is acquainted, as soon as the sound of it comes to his ears: and shall
we not know the voice of God so clearly and perspicuously speaking unto us in
the Scriptures? Those that are taught of God, know it, the true worshippers of
him know and understand it, those that have any familiar commerce with heaven,
and in heavenly things: But worldly men and those that are given to the love of
the same, and are careless of heaven and happiness, they understand not the
divine language, nor heavenly voice: Can any hear the voice of God, and not
assent unto it without the aid and authority of the Fathers: What a contumely
is this to holy Scripture! Shall God have less authority and credit among men
then the Fathers? Shall we not believe God speaking unto us, and shall we
believe the Fathers? Shall we not give credit to Gods Word, and shall we
believe men? Let the dishonor of so great a contumacie against God be far
from Christian obedience! Truly, the Fathers being conscious of their own
imbecility and weakness, never thought themselves worthy of so great dignity
as to suppose that any honor came unto the Scriptures from their
Interpretations and Expositions, who in their Writings frequently exhort their
Readers not to listen what they say, but what the Scriptures of the Prophets
and Apostles speak in them, and no farther to receive their authority and
doctrine, then it is grounded upon the holy Scriptures, and expressions to this
purpose, the Defendant says, he could accumulate infinite out of the Fathers,
which for brevity he omitteth, fearing to be over tedious, though it be a
matter of greatest importance.

Such was the modesty of the Fathers, fearing to be wise above that which was
written, ever-making the holy Scripture the rule and measure to be guided by.
And in this moderation the Fathers imitated Christ, the Prophets and Apostles,
who ever fetch the proof and testimony of their Doctrine from the Scriptures,
and not as now the Prelates do, preposterously bringing authority to the
Scriptures from the interpretation of the Fathers, according to their own
sense. To the Law and to the Prophets, says Esaias chapter 8. verse 20.
whosoever speaks not according to that, has no light in him. And Joshua that
great Commander, is enjoined by God to order and govern himself and the
people and the whole Commonwealth according to the rule of the Scripture,
Joshua chapter 1. verse 7, 8. Only be thou strong, and very courageous, that
thou may observe to do according to all the Law which Moses my servant
commanded thee, turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou
may prosper whithersoever thou go. This Book of the Law shall not go out
of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may
observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou shall
make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have good success. And in the 23.
chapter, verse 6. he says: Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do
all that is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, that you turn not aside
therefrom, to the right hand nor to the left. And Christ himself our great
Master says, John 5. verse 38. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to
have eternal life, and they testify of me. And in the third of the Acts,
verse 22, 23. Saint Peter brings all men unto Christ to be taught by him, not
in somethings only, but that Prophet must be heard in all things, and no other
in Gods matters must be listened unto, the words are these: For Moses truly
said unto the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of
your brethren, like unto me, him shall you hear in all things whatsoever he
shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will
not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. And in the
12. of John, verse 48. our Savior says: He that rejects me, and receives
not my Words, has one that judges him: the Word that I have spoke, the same
shall judge him in the last day. And therefore does it not stand with all good
reason that we should guide and square our lives and actions by that word and
rule only, by which we shall at the last day be judged? Paul in the 2. of the
Romans verse 16. says, That the secrets of men's hearts shall at that day be
judged according to his Gospel, and shall not all our doctrines yea and our
whole Religion be squared and regulated by the same? all good reason would
dictate so. They have Moses and the Prophets says Abraham, let them hear him,
says he, Luke 16. verse. 29. We have Christ and his Apostles, we are only to
hear them in all things, not the Fathers, not the traditions of the Elders,
not the use and customs of former ages, if they dissent from the holy
Scriptures and written word of God. For the great doctor of his Church, tells
the Saduces, saying, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 12. verse 24.
and indeed from the ignorance of the Scriptures comes all error, they that
follow the Scripture for their guide, can never stray or straggle from the
right way, neither have they need to borrow the candle of the Fathers to be
directed by, so long as the glorious Sun of the word shines so clearly, and it
was the eternal praise and commendations of the more Noble Bereans that they
did daily search the Scriptures whether the things the Apostles taught, were so
or no. Acts 17. verse 11. and Paul is greatly honored with this applause in
the 26. of the Acts verse 22. that he taught no other things, then those which
the Prophets and Moses did say should come to pass. And so Christ taught his
Apostles, Luke 24. that all things ought to be fulfilled concerning him, which
were writ in Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.

So that the Scriptures alone are the Foundation of all our religion; and to
say that the meaning of the Scriptures cannot be known without the Fathers, is
an unsufferable wickedness done unto that holy book, and an infinite contempt
and disgrace of it, to say it has need of the aid of man to support it; Christ
vanquished the Devil by the Scriptures Matthew. 4. drove away the Saduces Matthew.
22. and Saint James, by the Scriptures put an end unto the great controversy
of the Churches at Jerusalem, and set the Churches of the Gentiles free for
ever from all Ceremonies whatsoever, but those God himself had appointed, Acts
15. and only by the Scriptures did Paul resolve all questions. So that
according to Gods own instruction and direction which must ever be obeyed and
listened unto, the Scriptures only and solely must be the Judge, Law, Square
and Rule of all our Religion, Words and actions. Not the authority of the
Fathers, not the traditions of men, not the practice and custom of the
ancient, and the name of Antiquity. For they that shall prefer those things
before the Word of God, or at least affirm that these holy Oracles and divine
Records cannot be understood without the Fathers, do not only blasphemously
disgrace and contemn the holy Scriptures, but neglect the great Prophet, whom
we ought to hear in all things, so that listening unto the voice of men before
the words of this great Prophet, and accusing the Scriptures of obscurity, and
saying they are the refuge of all Schismatickes and Heretics, is great
impiety against God, and most injurious to the holy Scriptures. All which the
Prelates being so highly guilty of, the Defendant will never be afraid to
charge them with it, that they are disgracers and contemners of holy Scripture:
withal, that they are very ungrateful to the King their Master, and invaders
of his Prerogative Royal; all which he shall make also evidently appear to
this honorable Court, and how unworthily, yea profanely they have abused not
only the King their now Sovereign, but his Most excellent Father of pious
memory. And that they are invaders of his Prerogative it is most certain, not
only by the Statutes and Laws of the Kingdom, but by this very information.
For by the Laws and Statutes specified before with many others, it in solemnly
inacted, That whatsoever Authority is here exercised under the King, in his
Dominions, whether it be Spiritual or Temporal, whether by Archbishops,
Bishops or any other Ecclesiastical men, it is merely in, by, and from the
King, and so ought to be acknowledged; and that all jurisdictions,
superiorities, all privileges and preeminencies spiritual and Ecclesicall,
are annexed unto the Imperial Crown, and so to be acknowledged. And whosoever
does not acknowledge, that all jurisdicton and Authority both Spiritual and
Temporal is derived and does flow immediately from the Kings Majesty as
Supreme head under Christ in these Churches and in his Kingdoms, as the
Statutes declare at large, is ipso facto in a praemunire and under his
Majesty's high displeasure. For it is the Prerogative of Princes, and the
privilege that only agrees to Kings and Potentates to be absolute in their
Dominions, and that all other jurisdictions and superiorityes exercised by any
other in their Kingdoms, are derived from them, and that of themselves they
have none, but as from the Kings. So that it is arbitrary and in the Princes
power to have or not to have such jurisdictions and preeminencies under them:
And that they may abdicate or annihilate them when they please. And whosoever
shall deny this, or claim any right of Government to themselves in Princes
Dominions jure Divino, are Delinquents against their Kings and Masters: and by
our Laws and Statutes they are proclaimed enemies of the King and his
Prerogative Royal, and that is true, the mouth of the Law has spoke it. And
therefore the Defendants book cannot be called a Libell, without the Laws
first be proclaimed such: for the Laws say, That all such persons as shall
challenge any Authority to themselves in his Majesty's Dominions but from the
King, are Delinquents against his Majesty, and invaders of his prerogative
Royal, and his Highnesses enemies, and so they are. Now that the Prelates are
such, they sufficiently declared it in the censure of the Defendant. For he
reading the Statutes at the Bar, they notwithstanding affirmed, that they had
not their Authority and jurisdiction from the King, but that Jesus Christ made
them Bishops, and bestowed their Authority upon them, and that they were jure
Divino; and that they were before Christian Kings, and held the Crowns of
Kings upon their heads; for no Bishop, no King, and all this in a public Court
of Judicature and in a most crowded assembly: So that it seems the King is
beholding to them, and not they to his Majesty. And if this be not to invade
the Prerogative, and to be enemies of it, and to be ungrateful unto his
Highness, the Defendant knows not what it is to be enemies of the
prerogative. The Laws say it; and therefore if the Defendant has erred, the
Laws have brought him into this error. Neither did the Prelates own words at
the Bar, only, declare their disloyalty to the King, and their independency on
him, but this very information which comes from the Prelates in the name of the
Attorney General, sufficiently demonstrates it. For in it, the Defendant is
accused as guilty of a great crime for writing against the Hierarchy, and
preferring a Presbyterian parity before the Sacred Orders of Bishops, Priests
and Deacons. What the Defendant has writ and the occasion of it concerning the
Presbytery, the honorable Court has been informed in part, and withal, if so
writing be libellous, and the Defendant have erred in it, the Holy Scripture is
also libellous, which were impiety to think, and has been the cause of it,
from which he varied nothing at all in that discourse: and further, the
Defendant resolves to live and die in that error concerning the parity of
Ministers and Presbyters, which he is ready to prove and make good against all
the host of Prelates, Doctors, Proctors, Commissaries, Officials, and Surrogats
this day living.

But the thing that the Defendant desires the honorable Court to take notice
of, is, the contumacy of the Prelates: for they call their Hierarchy, and the
Orders of their Bishops, Priests and Deacons, Sacred: which, if it be granted,
and so be indeed, then the Prelates are from God, and not from the King, of
whom they have no dependence: For, speaking of the King, we say, His Sacred
Majesty, because God himself has appointed him over us; for by me, says God;
Kings reign: and all Authority is from God: and Kings are called Gods, so that
Kings are Sacred Persons. But that the Hierarchy should be sacred, and that
there should be a holy Principality of Pastors and Ministers, the prime and
forman of which should have the Keys of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, and that he
should dispose of Kingdoms and Empires, and make the greatest Potentates and
Rulers his Subjects and Vassals, and should have his domineering servants under
him in all Commonwealths, and Princes Courts, to pry into their Royal
proceedings, to their revenues, riches and treasuries, to know their powers,
their allies and confederates, and be Counselors of their most secret
admission, and should have an authority and jurisdiction independent over their
Subjects, and Laws, and Canons of their own making to rule by, and by them to
persecute and undo them at pleasure, in the number of which are Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Prime-mates, Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, and
innumerable such like vermin, a member of which monstrous body our Hierarchy
is, the Defendant says this is not known in Sacred Writ, nor never came from
God, but rather from the Pope and the Devil, Diabolus cacavit illos. Yea the
Word of God is absolutely against it. And that our Archbishops, Prime-mates,
and Metropolitans, are members of that body, let not only our Martyrs writings
and speeches, and Henry Stubbridge his exhortary Epistle, but even Masons book
be looked into, concerning the Succession of Bishops, and it will be found.
That he derives their Pedigree from Rome, and so does Pocklington in his Sunday
no Sabbath, wherein he says, that our Prelates are lineally descended from
Saint Peter's Chair at Rome, they being therefore a branch of that Synagogue
and standing by the same authority the Pope pretends to stand, which is, as
they all challenge, jure Divino, they are enemies to the King, and invaders of
his prerogative, and so they are justly guilty of all those crimes they accuse
the Pope of, and as great enemies of God as he is, all which the Defendant has
sufficiently proved in his Apology. For they challenge their Authority jure
Divino, and say, That Jesus Christ made them Bishops, and the holy Ghost
consecrated them, and that they were before Kings, and held the Crowns of
Kings upon their heads, and the Pope says no more.

They call also their Hierarchy Sacred; The Pope does no more; and for the
erecting of this Sacred Hierarchy, Emperors and Kings must be thrust down, and
made vassals of, and all Kingdoms that are under their jurisdiction, made
slaves to it, and all those stinking slavelings that depend upon it, as the
whole Christian world by woeful experience daily finds. But this same term
of Sacred Hierarchy, and Sacred orders of Prelates, ought here a little to be
discussed.

That which is Sacred, is from God. But the Hierarchy is not from God. Ergo, it
is not Sacred. For the minor it is evident that which God has peremptorily
forbid to his Ministers and Servants, and is an enemy to, that is not of God
and by his institution: but he has forbid Lordly dominion to all the Ministers
of the Gospel, saying, The Princes of the Gentiles bear rule over them, but it
shall not be so among you, you shall not Lord it over your Brethren: Ergo, the
Hierarchy is not of God but of the Devil, that is the cause of all disorder
and ignorance. For God forbad his Apostles, and in them all Ministers to be
Lords over one another, and set his own example before them of service, and
commanded them to immitate him, and to be humble and meek, and told them
plainly, That the office of Principality and dominion belonged unto Kings and
Princes; and that their employments consisted in their obedience to Kings, in
praying for them, that they might live in all godly peace under them, and that
they should diligently feed the flock of Jesus Christ, committed to their
charge, in season and out of season, as they love him, and will answer it at
his last appearing; and this was all the business that Christ's ministers and
Servants were to be taken up in, they were not to be entangled with the things
and affairs of this life, not to be encumbered with worldly matters, they have
special commands and presidents to the contrary, and their charge and duty
assigned unto them, from which station they must not go, which is only to feed
the flock with all care and diligence with the sincere milk of the Word, to
preach unto them day and night, and to go before them in godly and holy
example, and to neglect this, and to be taken up with domination, and
overruling their brethren, and beating their fellow servants, is to be Rebels
against Christ, and to usurp that which belongs not unto them, and which they
ought not to meddle with: and therefore when the Prelates do not only eat up
and devour this forbidden fruit, but challenge a right unto it from God
himself, and say they have no depencie from the King, the Defendant
maintains, that it is intolerable arrogancy against God and the King, and
by which they are Delinquents in an elevated degree of contumacie against them
both. What an horrible impudency is this in the Prelates, or any Subject that
vindicates their quarrel, that they dare call the Hierarchy sacred,
especially, when they derive it from Rome? Whom King JAMES of Famous memory
calls Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist, and can any man think, that those that
are lineally descended from Babylon, and Antichrist (that great enemy of
Christ, his Kingdom and Members) can be Holy and Sacred?

Certainly, if the fountain be not holy, the streams cannot be holy; Yea King
James is very large in that his Book to all Christian Princes, in discovering
the impiety of the Hierarchy of Rome, and proves the Pope to be that man of
Sin, and all the Prelates of that Sea, to be the Frogs that came out of the
bottomless pit. For the Nature of Frogs (they being Amphibia) is to live upon
the Earth, and in the water. Now King James says, That the Prelates are the
Frogs; for they seem to be Church men and are ever meddling in States affairs,
creeping out of their stinking gutters, and are such mighty busy bodies in
other men's matters, as they trouble all the Nations and Kingdoms where they
dwell, and inslave them all. So that if the Hierarchy be sacred, and the
Prelates be the chief members of it, then they are a generation of sacred
frogs, the holiness notwithstanding of the which is such as few men's impiety
is greater or more dangerous to Church and State, and their usurpation upon
both authorities deserving severely to be punished, especially for that they so
abuse his sacred Majesty's authority in oppressing his poor subjects, and
trampling upon his Prerogative; so that to any eye of understanding it may
sufficiently appear by that the Defendant has said, that the Prelates are not
only contemners and disgracers of holy Scripture; but also invaders of the
Kings Prerogative Royal, and enemies of his Imperial Dignity.

It yet remains to prove also, that they have farther dishonored the King
their Master, and King James of famous memory, yea, our most holy Religion and
Profession, and all this in the Defendants Censure. For what any one of the
Prelates did, all the other assented to, they being one Body, and it was the
action of them all, though acted in the person of the Prelate of Canterbury,
which was this, to magnify the Church of Rome, and defend the purity of her
Doctrine, affirming openly, that she never erred in fundamental points, and
was a true Church; as much, as to proclaim the King and all his Subj cts
Schismatickes and Heretics, and that, by the mouth of the Prelate of
Canterbury: which the Defendant says, is not only injurious to the King their
Master, but to King James of famous memory, his renowned Father, with whom for
piety and learning all the Prelates together are not to be named the same year
his Royal excrements are mentioned. King James that glorious and learned
Prince in his Apology to all Christian Princes and States, proves the Pope of
Rome to be Antichrist, and the man of Sin, by many unanswerable Arguments.

He proves likewise the Church of Rome to be the Whore of Babylon for her
abominations; Spiritual Sodom for her filthiness and uncleanness. Spiritual
Egypt for her inslaving the Saints and Servants of God, and all this he
evinceth by irrefragable authority, and thus taught he the whole world, his
Royal Son, and all his subjects; and persuaded all Christian Princes, to come
out of Babylon, and to shake off the yoke of the Pope. And in this faith he
lived and died. And this faith is King Charles his Son, and our gracious
Sovereign, now Defender of, and all this is Orthodox Doctrine, which our King
did preach unto us, and our Royal King now professes; and which all his
Loyal Subjects to God and his Majesty will seal with their bloods. This
heroical King notwithstanding, and his divine Doctrine is stamped under foot
by the Prelates, to the infinite dishonor of our most pious and element
Prince, the eternal disgrace of his most incomparable Father, and the
discredit indeed of the whole Church and Kingdom, if not indangering the same:
to the great hardening of the Papists in their Heretical ways, and the
perverting of the Kings most loyal Subjects, and teaching the Papists to
rebel. And to all this the dignity and glory of the Scripture is offuscated by
their sable mouths. So that, what can any man either say or think, of this
progeny of Prelates, whose contumacie and rebellion reaches to the very
clouds, and what can men think of this degenerating offspring of this age?
The one, that they dare against God and the King openly breathe out their
blasphemies, and call evil good, and good evil. The other, that they should
out of cowardice suffer their Royal King, and his most excellent Father, to be
abused.

But this Defendant hops, that this honorable Court like that noble Nehemiah
with other true-hearted loyal Subjects, remaining about the King, will now at
last inform his Majesty of the intolerable insolence of the Prelates, of
which he believes they were formerly ignorant, or not so well acquainted, and
seek by his authority for redress, against their impudency. As for this
Defendant for his part, he is resolved, though left alone, ever to say, LET THE
KING LIVE FOR EVER. And although he should suffer a thousand torments from the
Prelates, living and dying, he will ever cry, LET THE KING LIVE FOR EVER. And
let the name of his learned and transcendent Father live to perpetuity. And let
the enemies of the King and the Gospel perish. Neither will he ever suffer, to
the uttermost of his power, That either the Kings honor, or the dignity of his
most illustrious Father, or the glory of our most holy Profession, or the
honor of the holy Scriptures, shall be contaminated, or Babylon or
superstition advanced in his Dominions, and cruelty and injustice exercised by
the Prelates over his poor Subjects, and hold his peace.

All which evidently appear in the daily proceedings of the Prelates in their
High Commission; and from their speech hourly there, and their practices
through the whole Kingdom. Some of which he desires in order to prove, that
the honorable Court may be the fuller informed that he has not causlesly in
his Apology laid any crime unto their charge, which they are not guilty of.

And now to proceed to the other things, the Defendant is charged with, viz.
that he taxes the High Commission Court of cruelty, injustice, want of wisdom
and temperance, and that they are perswaders of his Majesty to bloodshed, and
are the upholders of idolatry, superstition and profaneness; that he
scandalously defameth the witnesses produced against him, and that he has
causlesly and boldly inveighed against the Oath ex officio, and other the
ancient forms of proceedings of the High Commission Court. To all these the
Defendant answers as they lie. And first, whereas the Defendant charge
them, with cruelty, injustice, want of wisdom and temperance, he conceives he
has very good reason for that his charge, both in respect of himself and
others, and in regard both of the souls and bodies and estates of men; all
which they captive, enslave, or dissipate and scatter at pleasure, and in as
much as in them lies, seek the ruin of.

To say nothing of their daily practices, who condemn men without either
exhibiting Articles, producing of witnesses, or any legal proceedings against
them, as if a man should be hanged without evidence given, or indictment
framed, which is the height of injustice: the Defendant says, that their very
proceedings against himself, sufficiently show their cruelty, injustice, want
of wisdom and temperance, and their very speeches apparently prove all these
things. Neither is there such a president of wrong and cruelty in the whole
world, that any man, of what rank, order or degree soever he be, that shall
write a Book in defense of that Religion that is established by public
authority, for the honor of the King, and in defense of his Prerogative,
against a common enemy, that for this endeavor of his should be ruined, he,
his wife and children cast into prison, deprived first of all possibility of
livelihood, railed upon, and reviled publicly, and after all this given to the
devil, and that only for writing a book which had nothing in it but
Scripture, and in the which the Defendant thought they meant him; and that they
should still prosecute him, and seek his ears and the defacing of him, which
they threaten. Such a President of wrong and cruelty, the Defendant says,
cannot be produced in toto Macrocosmo, and therefore the Defendant in respect
of his own particular, justly charge them with cruelty injustice and
intemperance. And in respect of all other honest men, that come under their
jurisdiction, the same may be said and proved by thousands, whether one respect
their souls, bodies, or goods, for they use cruelty in regard of all, sparing
neither age nor sex, poor or rich, young or old, bond or free: but upon every
trivial occasion, or for the mean t neglect of any of their idlest and
impious Ceremonies, or for any misprision, it is enough to have him hoisted
into the High Commission Court, and brought from the remotest parts of the
kingdom, to the utter undoing of them and their families, when as the greatest
breach of any of the Commandments of the first table, is not once thought of.

And in the bringing of them into troubles, they deal with those poor men, as
they do with bears and bulls at Paris Garden: they first, by violence, and their
officers to their mighty expenses, hale them into their Courts, and then with
bands of two or three hundred pounds, they tie them to their stakes, and bait
them three or four years together, with all manner of contumelies and
reproaches, vexations, expenses, calamities and torments; till they have
wearied them to death, and made their lives tedious unto them, and after all
this, they fling them into one jaile or other, destitute of friends and moneys.
And as if this were not enough, even as the persecuters of the Martyrs in the
Primitive times, as Histories relate, dealt with the Saints, when they brought
them to the slaughter, they were wont to clothe them with the skins and hides
of wild beasts, that so they might make them the more formidable, and the
better animate their dogs and curs against them to tear them in pieces.

In like manner do the Prelates and their accomplices in these our times deal
with poor honest Christians and the true and faithful servants of the Lord,
and the Kings most loyal Subjects, they make them monstrous, ugly and deformed
unto all men, King and Nobles, by their Relations and Informations they clothe
them with: saying of them, That they are maligners and enemies of Government,
troublers of Church and State, Seducers of the Kings Subjects, making them
disloyal unto their Prince, stirrers up of sedition and faction, and a
thousand such crimes, setting all the people against them, and in their open
Courts have their Orators to blanch over their defamatory false accusations,
charging them with foul crimes, the thought of which never came into their
heads; as this present information may witness. Yea in the very Court Sermons
they incense the King and Nobles daily against those, they brand with the name
of Puritans and Sectaries, which all this honorable Assembly can witness, and
the Defendant has heard many Court Sermons with his own ears in the time of
his liberty, but never heard one where the Puritans as they term them, were
not brought up in the pulpit and most shamefully and unchristianly traduced, as
those that opposed the Kings proceedings, and such as malign his government
and trouble the peace of Church and State, and humbly besought his Majesty
that some severe course might be sought and taken against them.

These and such like sprincklings of their brotherly Rhetoric the Defendant
himself has often heard, neither can this honorable Court be ignorant of the
truth of this. And what is all this but great cruelty and injustice to abuse
thus their brethren by malicious and false accusations, to the incensing of
their Gracious King and Sovereign against them; when they are most innocent and
harmless, desiring nothing more then the life, safety, prosperity and
happiness of his Majesty and of his Royal Progeny and his flourishing
reign, and would lose ten thousand lives if they had them for the honor of
his Crown and dignity? for they desire nothing more then to be found loyal;
neither do they seek any thing more then the peace and welfare of the Church,
and the good of this Commonwealth. And therefore if there be any this is
cruelty and injustice in a high degree, to deal thus mercilesly with their too
too much already afflicted brethren, of whom they are ever making sinister
relations to King, Council and State, to the depriving of them many times of
their liberty, livelyhoods and states, to the making of them and theirs ever
miserable, and all this also they do in their Courts every day, defaming them
as enemies of government and enemies of the Church, and casting them into
prison with great Fines on their backs. And this is the cruelty they daily use
in respect of their bodies, lives and estates. But yet their cruelty is greater
in respect of their souls, for they have through the Kingdom of England and
Wales taken away almost all their glorious painful Ministers, and those that
with most diligence taught the people, and sent droanes and loyterers amongst
them, dumb dogs, that cannot bark: and is not this great cruelty to the poor
Souls of men to deprive them of the food of life and to starve them?

See what Paul says to Bariesus the Sorcerer in the 13. of the Acts, when
Sergius Paulus the Deputy of the Country a Prudent man, called for Barnabas and
Saul, and desired to hear the word of God, it is said, that Elemas the
Sorcerer withstood them, seeking to turn away the Deputy from the faith, to
whom Saul filled with the holy Ghost, fetting his eyes on him, said: O full of
all subtilty and all mischief! thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervent the right ways of the Lord?
Those then that take away the means of Salvation, and hinder others from the
hearing of the word, they are most cruel unto them, hindering of them of
salvation it self, and such are the children of the devil, the enemies of all
righteousness, and perverters of the ways of the Lord, the holy Ghost has
spoke it, and Christ himself says Matthew. 23. and the 13. Woe unto you Scribes
and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of heaven against men: for
you neither go in your selves, neither suffer you them that are entering, to go
in. And in Luke the 11. and verse the 52. he says, Woe unto you Lawyers: for ye
have taken away the key of knowledge: ye enter not in your selves, and them
that were entering you hindered. Christ himself pronounces woe here, to all such
Soul murderers as take away the key of knowledge from the people, and shut up
the Kingdom of heaven against them, which is the greatest cruelty that can be
exercised over miserable men: and yet this is the daily occupation of the
Prelates, of which the whole kingdom can witness, how that they have made
most places desolate, depriving them of the bread of life, the preaching of the
Gospel, and taking away the key of knowledge from them, and in stead of true
nourishing food, they give them the husks of Ceremonies, and vain traditions,
and idle superstitious observations. Neither do they only extinguish and put
out all their shining lights, but they severely punish those that seek it, or
go after it where it is; so that, if one do but go out of his own parish, where
he has no preaching, and where perhaps there has not been a Sermon seven
years together, as there are many such parishes in this Kingdom, he is
forthwith hailed into their Courts and tormented to death, and is not this
horrible cruelty? yea, if one neighbor do but go to another, and that but to
hear a Sermon repeated, when he dare not go out of his own parish, he is
immediately hailed into their Courts as a keeper of Conventicles, and miserably
there tormented: and is not this also great cruelty? Especially when any of
their lewd parishioners may go from year to year out of their own parishes a
drinking and quaffing, and that on the Lords day and holy days as they call
them, and have their meetings in troops and great assemblies in drinking
Schools, tippling there to the great dishonor of God, and many times to the
great mischief of others, and the prepetrating of many sins, and all such
though they never hear Service neither divine or humane, find favor in their
Courts, and serve for witnesses against the generation of the just and those
that fear God, and they are esteemed good Sons of the Church, though in all
other things they be also never so impious.

Neither is there any law against those children of Beliall: neither can any
man deny this that knows any thing, for the defenders of such fellows and
tormentors of the most godly. And if this be not also insufferable tyranny and
cruelty let every reasonable man judge. In this information his most excellent
Majesty is truly and deservedly commended, that he is an enemy to Popery and
all innovation of religion, as his Highness has often declared himself, and
that he does daily frequent the Church and is diligent in hearing of Sermons.
And this most eminent piety in our noble King and Sovereign, we his loyal
though poor Subjects, heartily rejoice at, desiring the Lord of heaven still
to inflame his Royal heart with a zeal for the glory of God and the
propagation of the Gospel, and to continue in him an increase a love unto his
holy word.

Now, all men know, that Kings examples have been ever the pattern for their
Subjects, and it is the duty of all good Citizens and Subjects to imitate their
King in all well doing, and men use commonly to say: Regis ad exemplum, the
Kings example is ever to be followed, and it is his royal hearts desire, that
his Subjects should imitate him in that his piety. Now what a great and
unexpressible cruelty is this in the Prelates toward the poor people and how
great a dishonor is done to the King in it, that they will not let his
Subjects be good; for it is good in the King and highly commendable before God
and men to hear the Word of God often preached, and to be diligent in the
hearing of Sermons, or else the Informers would not have set it down as so
singular a virtue in our Royal King: and yet they punish this good in his
Subjects, and it is a cause of the utter undoing of many of them if they go to
Sermons, and when they are found to be diligent at the hearing of the Word, and
the going to a Sermon into the next Parish when they have none in their own,
is matter sufficient to mount them up in the High Commission, which is none of
the smallest cruelties that holy and pious men groan under, to the infinite
dishonor of God and the King, and the needless vexation and molestation of
his dutifullest Subjects, who desire to follow in that their godly Princes
example. In Saint John Baptists time, it is said, That Jerusalem, and Judea,
and the Region round about, came all to hear him, running after Sermons, and
so they did after Christ: And it stands recorded in sacred Writ to their
eternal honor, and for our imitation. For all the Saints godly examples are
set down for us to imitate, and we never read that any were by the very
enemies of the Gospel in those days, the Scribes, Pharisees, and high Priests,
molested or troubled for the same; and it is said of them, that they took the
Kingdom of heaven with a kind of holy violence, and their diligence in
hearing the Word is related and told of them as a thing very honorable and
praise worthy; and so it is very well related in the Information of our
gracious King to his immortal honor and great praise, and so it is and ever
to be honored in his Majesty, and his example in this to be followed of all
his obedient Subjects. And is it not a transcendent cruelty then in the
Prelates, that poor Christians in our age may neither obey the Commandment of
God, who injoyneth us to hear in season and out of season, nor imitate the
Saints of old in their pious endeavors in building up themselves in their most
holy faith, nor follow the good paternes of their Kings and Governors, but
they must be severely punished for it, yea undone and traduced for it as evil
doers? If this be not great cruelty and tyranny it self in the Prelates, there
was never none: for they rob them of heaven and earth, and all other comforts
in as much as in them lies. Nay, which is yet more, to show their cruelty,
injustice and unrighteous dealing: the Prelates in the Baptism of infants
constrain the Godfathers and Godmothers there solemnly to promise that they
will call upon them that are baptized when they come to years of discretion
often to hear Sermons, and to this duty are also the baptized tied.

Now, when they are come to years of understanding, and in obedience of their
promise they made by their Godfathers and Godmothers, and perhaps being
stirred up also by their exhortation to this good duty of hearing the Word, if
they go out to hear Sermons when they have none in their own Parishes, they
are first punished in their purses and liberties, and then given to the Devil
for this good work, which they notwithstanding have tied them to by special
promise in their Baptism, and if all this be not unspeakable cruelty, tyranny
and injustice, there was never none in the world, and yet this is the daily
practice of the Prelates through the Kingdom, as all men know. And which is yet
more to be observed, in the same Sacrament of Baptism children promise there
by their Godfathers and Godmothers, or they do it for the children to be
Baptized; that they will forsake the Devil and all his works, the pompes and
vanities of this wicked world, and are there signed with the sign of the
Cross, that innocent Ceremony, as they call it, that he shall continue
Christ's faithful Soldier, and fight under his Banner all the days of his
life, against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, by the which promise he is
bound to the utmost of his power always to oppose all errors, wickedness,
and profaneness. Now if any in conscience of his promise either speak or
write in defense of the truth, as it ought to be defended, or if he do but put
in practice that which he has promised, in opposing of Error, Superstition,
Profaneness, Idolatry, or the iniquities of the times, the Prelates severely
punish them for it, as their daily proceedings witness, and if this be not a
daring cruelty also, and great injustice, there is none exercised upon the
earth: for what is injustice and cruelty, if punishing of men for doing their
duty, and keeping their promise, and performing that which the Prelates
themselves have tied them to by special promise, be not?

They teach all Christians in another Ceremony of standing up at the Gospel,
and at Gloria Patri, and at the Creed, to show their readiness and promptitude
in fighting for the faith of Jesus, and their holy Religion against Heresy,
Popery, and all Innovations, all which, our Gracious King declares himself,
that he will never allow of or suffer, and the neglect of this Ceremony will
cost a man an undoing. Now if any, being taught by this Ceremony, come forth
to the combat, and but oppose themselves against Popery, Errors, or
Innovations, in defense of the Faith, and the honor of their King, they are
punished most severely for it by the Prelates, both in the high Commission and
other Courts, and Bills, and Informations, and Articles are exhibited, and made
against them, as evil doers and troublers of the State, and all for doing that
they teach them by their Ceremonies, and bind them by promises and oath to do,
which is Hyperbolicall tyranny; injustice and cruelty in those reverend
Fathers. It seems they would have Christians like Saint George a horseback,
ever mounted, but never moving, and if they do chance to stir, or dare be so
bold as to move, they immediately are cast down and break either their ears,
or their noses, or their foreheads, and it may be they are also whipped to the
bargain for being so bold, some mischief for the most part follows their
endeavors, and that for doing their duty, and that which they were taught by
Ceremonies: and is not this arrogant tyranny, cruelty and injustice in the
Prelates, to punish, and that severely, both the neglect, and the doing also of
their duty, and that they are enjoined to do? Without all doubt there is no
such cruelty in the world as is daily practiced by the Prelates, and in their
Courts, of the which there might mighty Volumes be made, but the Defendant
has instanced in these few things only, because they are known to most men,
and obvious every day, and the Defendants condition, and his cause, can
sufficiently witness their unrighteous dealings, and that in diverse respects;
for they dealt with him against the very light and law of nature, and as they
would not be done by, to make him accuse himself, to admit his sworn and
capital enemies, and which first informed them against him out of mere
malice, as was proved by many, to be prosecutors and witnesses against him; yea
to speak as it is, that the Prelates themselves should be Accusers Parties,
Witnesses, Jury and Judge in their own Cause, as they were: this, the
Defendant says, is unrighteous dealing, to which may be added the defending of
the Popes quarrel, to condemn him for one thing, and putting those things
likewise in the Records of the Court, for which by the whole Court he was freed
from. As for example, the Defendant was condemned only for his book, now in
the order of the Court or Sentence, it is put in, that he was condemned for the
other things also which howsoever they were in themselves very ridiculous, yet
it is great injustice to superadde them, and so to deal with him. Neither is
that a small part of injustice to punish and condemn the innocent and justify
the wicked, both which are an abomination to the Lord.

Now they condemned the Defendant for writing against the Pope, and adjudged
his Book to be burnt, and justified his adversaries, and Cho^ny who writ in
defense of the Church of Rome; and it is their daily practice to condemn
books that are writ for the Honor of Religion, accusing them to be factious
pamphlets: but Books that are writ for the advancement of Popery and
Superstition, and in defense of the Pontificalitie of Prelates and the
magnification of the Church of Rome, to the trampling down of Regal Au
hority, and for the murdering and killing of Kings, for the bringing in of
Innovations into a Kingdom and for suppressing of true Religion, many of which
are not to be named, of these Books a man may buy shipfulls of them in Paul's
Church yard, all which tend to the ruin of the Kingdom, and perverting of
Religion, and the seducing of the Kings good Subjects. And all other Books of
Arminians, Sosinians, and a thousand such blasphemous treatises are bought and
sold publicly in every Stationers shop, with the Prelates very good liking.
And the greatest enemies of the truth, such as Bellarmine, Baronius, Tyrrian,
Cajetan, are not only publicly vented but are before the King, and in the
Universities, and indeed in every Pulpit magnified with glorious titles, as the
learned Cardinal, incomparable Bellarmine, those grand impostors and perverters
of the ways of God, and such as have abused King JAMES of Famous memory, and
blasphemously defamed our most Holy Religion; All these Authors and many more
with their Books, the Defendant says, are daily approved of, and commended by
the Prelates, and such as extol the Church of Rome patronized by them and
maintained. And what is it then to advance Popery, if all these doings of the
Prelates be not? and what is it to favor profaneness and irreligion, if the
punishing and silencing of those that write and speak against the iniquity of
the times, be not? let all men judge of this with serious reason, and they will
soon perceive, that in this accusation of the Prelates, the Defendant has no
way wronged them. And for their intemperance and want of wit, it is notoriously
also known who rail most shamefully and unhumanely upon all honest men that
come before them, as their very speeches in their censure may witness. Judges
of old were wont to give Sentence in less matters being full of compassion,
with tears in their eyes; neither do we read of any Judges since Christ's time
but of Ananias the High Priest, and Festus the Governor that they ever did
revile those that were brought before them, or give them any ill language. And
the one was a Jew, and the other a Heathen, both enemies of Christ and
Christians. But for Christian Judges and them Spiritual ones, for such
contumeliously to abuse their brethren, as they did the Defendant, and daily
do others, and to give them over to the Devil and to perpetual chains for
every trivial thing, yea even for a misprision or a very surmise, and to make
a man an offender for a word, and to ruin them, their wives, and children for
such things, and that with scoffs, reproaches, tants and mocks, this the
Defendant affirms, in the Prelates, is both cruelty, injustice, intemperance,
and want of wisdom, and so he nothing doubts but this honorable Court and
all rational men will judge.

Neither does his gracious Majesty or this honorable Court as he truly
believes, know, how they abuse his poor Subjects; neither will God take this
well at their hands, for it no way beseems those that would be thought the
Fathers of the Church so to do. For if we look upon Timothy and Titus whose
successors they would be thought to be, and the rules that they followed and
were guided by, we shall find a vast difference between them. Saint Paul in
his second epistle to Timothy chapter 2. tells him, That the servant of the
Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient in
meekness, instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth, etc. And in another
place, the same Apostle says, A Bishop must be patient and no brawler. Now
when the Prelates so exorbitantly behave themselves, trampling all Apostolical
Canons under their feet and so basly revile the good subjects of the King and
their brethren, trampling also the sacred scriptures under their feet, and hat
with as great contempt as the Papists themselves do, advancing Popery every
way, and the Defenders of it, can any deny that these are intemperate,
imprudent, unjust men, and furtherers and upholders of Popery? and whereas the
Defendant is charged in the information, That he accuses the Prelates as
upholders of Idolatry superstition and profaneness, and that he defameth the
witnesses brought against him, and has causlesly and boldly inveighed against
the oath Ex officio.

The Defendant humbly entreats the honorable Court that with patience they
would hear his answer to these things, and then he will come to the last thing
that concerns him, the Letany, and the occasion of the writing of it. What he
himself has done, he is ever resolved to seal with his best blood, and to
justify and make good whatsoever he shall accuse the Prelates of. Amongst the
which he acknowledges, that he charge them to be advancers of Popery,
idolatry, superstition and profaneness. And so they are, as has been already
sufficiently evinced, and by that which follows shall yet more illustriously
appear. For what is it to advance Popery and idolatry if that the Prelates
daily do it not? without, men will think that Popery only, that advances the
Popes Supremacy, and they Protestants only, that go no farther in opposing
that Heretical religion, when that is among many Divines counted one of the
least controversies in Theology between Papists and us true Catholics. Greater
matters I wosse, hundreds are there between us. And howsoever the King, blessed
be God, and his predecessors by the blood of their Subjects and the sacrificing
of themselves, have shaken off the yoke of the Pope: yet his poor Subjects are
under many Popes which deal worse with them then ever Popes did to Kings in the
midst of their swellingst pride and arrogance, yea every parish Priest and base
fellow that is but a Prelates Servant, can ruin and undo the honestest man
upon any information; So that for the Subjects condition it is worse, and they
are in a far more deplorable predicament then they were in under the Pope, by
this change; for now they have neither their consciences, their liberties,
their purses, their bodies, their limbs or lives in any security but as the
Prelates and their creatures please are deprived of all, who seek continually
for their blood and starve many of them in prisons, and expose them to infinite
miseries and calamityes, so that they are as sheep to the slaughter, slain all
the day long. And of their deadly cruelty against those that fear God the
whole Kingdom can witness, and how that they make the^ every where most
odious. But now to the matter the Defendant charge the Prelates with, viz.
that they are advancers of Idolatry who can doubt of it, that knows the very
rudiments of Divinity or i^ the least measure has been acquainted with the
Laws of God? For as God only is and must be the object of all Divine worship,
as the first commandment teaches, for him only we are to serve Matthew. 4. as
Christ also commands, and to worship any other or to trust in any thing else
is i^olatry in a high degree: for we must love him with all our hearts and all
our Souls and trust only in him. So likewise for the manner of his worship
that must also be as he commands, not as we vainly conceive. For he has
said, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, or the likeness of any
thing in Heaven above, or in the earth beneath, thou shall not bow down to it
or worship it. By which precept for the very manner of his worship it is not
left to our disposing, that we should after our inventions serve him. Neither
is he to be served any other way, or by any other means then he has in his
Word prescribed, which is a large commentary upon that text; So that no man
that has eyes can pretend any longer that he sees not the truth. And among
all learned and Orthodox Divines this is accorded and assented unto. That
those, that by their own inventions, as by Images, Crucifixes, Altars,
Ceremonies, or Syllables and letters, or whatsoever other means serve him,
without express command from God go about to worship him, are Idolaters; and
such worship is idolatry; and of this kind of service and adoration are the
Samaritans guilty, of whom it is said, that they worshipped the true God, and
so they did in many things, according to the Law of Moses and had Circumcision
and the Passover, and looked for the Messiah to come. But because they added
their own inventions to that worship, and brought in their own devices with it,
and set up a will worship, therefore they were esteemed the enemies of God and
proclaimed idolaters. Ye worship says Christ you know not what. So that they
that according to their own pretenses and inventions serve God, worship they
know not what, and therefore are idolaters, and all such Divine worship as is
not prescribed by God such service is idolatry, Of which kind and nature is
altar-worship, crucifix-worship, table-worship, place-worship,
ceremony-worship, bread-worship, Syllable-worship and all such like-worship,
and indeed all will worship, and whether or no the Prelates be not advancers of
Altars, and Crucifixes, and place-worship, ceremony and bread-worship, and such
trash, let all the Kingdom judge: And all these are Popery, saving the
worshipping of altars: for the Defendant yet never saw the Papists so basly
idolatrous as to worship a naked altar: indeed, where there is a Crucifix upon
an altar, they bow, but never to the altar or table alone, as he is most
confident the Papists themselves will acknowledge, and therefore so gross the
Prelates are in their Popish performances, that they exceed them in idolatry.
And so it is, that those that are most vainly superstitious amongst them, they
are in the readiest way to preferment, and others of a contrary mind, most
contemned and vilipended, which shows sufficiently what favorers of Popery
the Prelates are. Yea, for all manner of Popery, they affect it, and defend it,
and maintain it, and the Authors and Abetters of it.

And as to all other the residue of the offenses, and misdemeanors, complained
of in the said Information, and examinable in this Honorable Court, this
Defendant says, that he is not guilty of them, or any of them, in manner and
form, as by the said Information is supposed. All which matters this Defendant
is ready to aver and prove as this Honorable Court shall award. And humbly
prays to be dismissed out of the same with his costs and charges against the
Prelates, by vexation in this and his former suit in the High Commission most
wrongfully sustained.

FJNJS.

