THE STORMING OF THE ANABAPTISTS GARRISONS, With a brief discovery of the
weakness of the same, and of the inconsiderableness of the Sconces and Forts
of all the other Sectaries, in despite and contempt of all the which, any
Christian Soldier may safely march to Heaven, without the least danger;

The serious thought of the which alone, may for ever serve for the settling of
his judgment, and for his comfort in life and death, and therefore worthy of
his most deliberate consideration.

In a word, In the ensuing discourse, the vanity of all novell opinions is
discovered, the ignorance of all the which can no way hinder any man's
happiness: And the Baptism of little Children borne of Christian Parents,
whether Jews or Gentiles, is proved by the word of God, to be lawful, and
that there are both Precepts and Presidents, and as good authority for the
Baptism of little Children borne of believing Parents, as for the baptism of
grown persons, and that from the Commission and practice both of John the
Baptist, and Christ's Disciples, who Baptized both men, women, and children, as
the following Treatise will declare, which was written at the earnest desire of
a well-wisher to the truth, and in answer to the Letter following.

John 3. 22, 23. After these things came Jesus, and his Disciples into the land
of Judea, and there he tarried with them and Baptized. And John also was
baptizing in Anon near Salim, etc. And they came and were baptized.

2 Cor. 13. 8. For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

By John Bastwick, Doctor in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Joshua Kirton, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the sign of the white Horse in Paul's Churchyard. 1647.

To his much honored friend Mr. John Bastwick, Doctor in Physic, at the
Golden Ball in great Woodstreet.
Worthy Sir,
HAving read over your Book entitled, The Utter Routing of the whole Army of
the Independents and Sectaries, etc. And found in your answers plenary
satisfaction to whatsoever was objected against your arguments in your former
Book entitled, Independency not Gods ordinance; I could not so content my
self without signifying unto you the same, and r^turning you many thanks for
the great pains and indefatigable diligence you have used therein, being
persuaded if all those who are staggering between Independency and Presbyteri^,
would but read it ever with an impartial eye, it would fully settle their
judgments. Nay if those of the Congr^gations called joined Members, would but
read it without prejudice, I am confident they would not only harbor a better
opinion of the Presbytery, but see such faylings in their own way, as justly
to relinquish it. But I behold not that charity in them, that they would
persuade the world they are endowed with, nor that love to their brethren that
is to be desired in those th^^ make profession of the Gospel, and speak so
much of love and charity as they do. The time was that they bad honorable
thoughts of you to my knowledge, and spoke as much in your praises as in any
man's now living, before you declared your judgment for the Presbyters: but
since that, their hatred it sufficiently known, for their language and
practice do manifest it, not only by all shameful revi^ing of you, and by
disparaging both you and your books, by all manner of contumelies, but by
pulling down the Titles of your Books wheresoever they are set up, (...)
h^ndering the publishing of them by all their abilities, which apparently (...)
their inveterate malice against you, which dealing of theirs, as it is very
unchristian, so it shows what liberty of Conscience we might expect at their
hands, if they were once our masters. Neither may they pretend that you aid
provoke them by your writings: for before ever you had put Pen to paper, or
writ any thing against their opinion, they only understanding that you were of
a contrary judgment, did then as despightfully use you in all manner of
scurrilous language as now they do as can sufficiently be proved. It is only
your opinion, in that you differ from them that makes you odious to them, for
they liked your merry humor at other times against the Prelates: But they seem
to have some ground for it if they may be believed, for they have been often
heard to affirm, that you were once one of them, and it was told me by many,
that those women that accompanied J^hn L^lburnes Wife to the Parliament
upbraided you to your face before all the people that you had been once one of
them and called you an apostate, and persecutor of the saints. This information
makes me the more bold to request a small fav^ur from you which is this, that I
might have it under your hand whether you were ever in your opinion an
Independent, Sectary or Anabaptist, etc. that I may satisfy others about it;
for I heard they were all such that did abuse you. Now, if you were not. I
shall desire you with as much brevity as so weigh^y a business will suffer you
to use, to give me your judgment, what you conceive of all those new opinions
lately hatched amongst us: and as you have largely writ against the
Independents, so that now you would furnish me with some arguments against the
Anabaptists, which is now become one of the chief Sects, and for multitude (if
they may be credited) the greatest and most prevalent in the Kingdom; for I
know you will deal heartily in the whole business, and so good an opinion I
have of you, that you will do nothing for disputation sake, but for truth and
conscience sake. Withal, I shall desire you in the whole discourse to use no
humane authority, but as you have in all your writings confirmed your opinion
by the word of God you would still use the same weapon to defend the truth, and
oppose error, which I shall take for a singular Christian kindness, and
according to my ability, if it satisfies my expectation, I shall labor that
others may also partake with me in the truth, and be preserved from the errors
of the times. I wish from my heart, that ^^^ry family in this City, nay in the
whole Kingdom, that desires to know the state of the controversy between us
and the Independents would downplay some of th^se (...) they usually sp^^d in
their retreat (...) in the reading of your ^^st Book, (...) the Utter Routing
etc. that so both they and their (...) ^ight b^^ preserved from the cunning
craftiness of those that lie in wait to deceive. I having read no Book since
the broching of this new tenent of Independency, that comes so near and full
to the business. Neither would I disparage (...) this; but I speak according
to what I have ^xperie^ce of, and from the benefit that others have received by
perusing of it* who have acknowledged that the reading your Book did not only
seule them, but many hundreds of others that have from it. And which is yet
more some Independents have acknowledged, that they were convinced by reading
of your Book which I conceive, to be one of the principallest causes that
makes them so much malign you, and hinder the publishing of it. And others of
them upon the reading of your book, have writ out of the Country to some of
their fraternity here in London, telling them* that they had read your Book,
saying moreover, that they could witness that you had writ nothing of them and
their practices, but what they could witness to be true and therefore
earnestly exhorted them to mend their manners, and carry themselves so as
beseemed the Gospel, all this can be abundantly proved which induces me to
believe, that if that Book were but known amongst the people they would either
speedily be undeceived if they were seduced, or be preserved from the errors
of the times. All that I have now to say unto you besides my good wishes is
this; You have had great experience of Gods love unto you, who has hitherto
preserved you, and delivered you out of so many dangers and from so many
deaths, and from the fury of so many enemies and preserved you in the truth;
who with all their fury, rage, and reproaches, have never in any thing been
dismayed; I shall therefore earnestly desire you to consider that you serve the
same master still, who is the same All sufficient Jehovah, be constant
therefore to maintain his cause and truth to the death, and be not discouraged
with any thing any enemy can do unto you; which words I utter not as in the
least doubting of your resolutions, but out of my hearty desire of your honor
and happiness which your s^ability and constancy will crown with a L^^rell of
i^mortall praises manger all enemies. I pray sir, fail no^ with the s^^nest to
let me receive th^se Arguments I desire, and to hear of your health and
happiness, and the welfare of all your^, and you shall ^^ch (...) and rejoice
(...) who is

Sir, Your assured Friend in What I may in the Lords quarrel. RICHARD SMART.
From my house in Scalding Alley, at the Hand and Pen, this 25 of March, 1647.
To his Christian friend Mr. Richard Smart, at his house in Scalding Alley, at
the hand and Pen.
SIR,
IF in the very day of the Apostles, when truth was so prevalently and
powerfully taught, and confirmed with so many wonders and Miracles, errors did
then so abound, that Saint in John in his Epistle to the elect Lady, greatly
rejoiced to find any walking in the truth; It is now no wonder that in these
latter and perilous times, so many revolt from the same and embrace errors, and
therefore it is exceeding matter of joy to all the lovers of the truth, to meet
with any that continue constantly in the same; and truly it does much rejoice
me to find you, against so many temptations, persevering in the love of it,
which will ever be for your honor here, and real comfort in life and death.

For your good opinion of me, and of the Book I sent you, and for your kind
acceptance of the same, I return you many thanks, and withal, for your
farther satisfaction, I do here in the presence of the great God that shall
judge both quick and dead, profess unto you, that I never was in my judgment
and opinion an Anabaptist, Brownist, Independent, or any Sectary. And as I have
formerly in almost all my books manifested to the world, that I differed in
nothing from the doctrine of the Protestant reformed Churches beyond the Seas,
as those of France, Germany, and the Netherlands, in any dominative or
Principle point of Religion, saving in the doctrine of the Sabbath or Lords
day, which in my judgment ought wholly to be employed and kept, both privately
and publicly in all duties of piety and charity, and that with as much care,
diligence, and reverence, as ever it was amongst the Jews, saving I say, in
this point only, I speak it again in the presence of God, I never differed in
any thing concerning faith, or any fundamental point of doctrine from any of
those Churches; nor never approved of any separation from Gods ordinances
celebrated in them, or allowed of the leaving of their public Assemblies, and
therefore whatsoever either the Anabaptists or any of the Sectaries have
formerly published, or do now speak of me, intimating that I was once one of
them, it is a mere calumny and foul reproach: and what I now say, I shall be
able to prove by a cloud of witnesses, and those of their own party, who have
formerly been of my acquaintance and familiarly intimate with me, who are
ready, as they have lately told me, to witness for me, that I was ever against
their several separations from any of Gods ordinances in our public
Assemblies here in England, and that in the worst times, and therefore the
Anabaptists and Sectaries do use me very injuriously to persuade their
followers, or any others, that I was once one of them.

But before I come to declare my opinion concerning the baptism of Children of
Christian Parents, which is my theme at this time, and to prove that there is
very good warrant for it in the word of God* I think it fit in this place to
declare my judgment which you desired in your Letter I would do, concerning
all Separatists, whether Papists or Sectaries, which is this, that I am so
far from favoring their ways (especially in these times of our so happy
begun reformation) that I am able by Gods blessed assistance, ever to make it
good, that whatsoever either of them (by what names soever they are called)
hold or believe concerning Christian religion more then what is believed and
embraced in the Protestant reformed Churches, that it is either blasphemous
impious, or at least superfluous; so that a man may die either in the ignorance
or contempt of it, and yet go safely to heaven. And as for the vanity,
impiety, and falsity of all the popish tenants I have sufficiently declared it
in many Books and in that my discourse between me and Mr. Montayne, called the
Church of Englands true Church, and for all the several opinions of the
Sectaries, wherein they differ from the Protestant reformed Churches, they are
if not as impious, yet as vain and needless as those of the Papists, so that
a man may as safely go to heaven without the knowledge of them, as either the
glorious Prophets or blessed Apostles, who knew none of them, and yet were all
saved: for nothing keeps men out of heaven, but sin and the transgression of
the law of God. Now I desire any rational creature to declare unto me, what
law of God I or any man transgress, and what sin I commit, if I believe and
practice no more then the written word of God has taught me to believe and
do, and if I die in the ignorance of Independency, Anabaptisme,
Antinomianisme, etc. yea, let any of them show me what sin I commit in
rejecting all such opinions as neither Christ, not the Prophets, nor the
Apostles, or any of the penmen of holy Scripture have taught us. The Scripture
has sufficiently taught us, that this is life eternal to know the only true
God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ, John the 17. ver. 3. the knowledge of
which any may attain unto without the knowledge of them and their tenants. And
Paul disired to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, and counted
all things as dung and dross, in comparison of the excellent knowledge of
Jesus Christ the Lord, and left us for the ordering of our lives, to follow the
example of Christ, in doing and suffering, and the rule of the word, Phil. 3.
And the Scripture has abundantly declared, Acts the 2. that the City, of
people that receive the Word of God gladly, and continue steadfastly in the
doctrine of the Apostles and in breaking of Bread and prayer, are the Disciples
of Jesus Christ, and a true Church, as that of Jerusalem; yea, a true formed
Church, as the Independents themselves hold, as is manifest in their Writings,
although at that time, that they say it was a true formed Church, it had
neither Deacons nor Elders, nor distinction of Members nor officers, nor
discipline or excommunication, but they were all sed and governed by Pastors
and Teachers in common, as all the Primative Churches we read of were. Now then
what sin or error is it in me or any at this day, to believe that wheresoever
amongst any people, or in any City, the Gospel is truly and faithfully
preached, embraced, and believed by them, whether by particular Ministers set
over them severally, which incertaine freemen or bonds, or by Ministers in
Common, and where the Sacraments are duly administered, and amongst whom there
is the true invocation of God, that that people so qualified, is a true Church
or Churches, though there be amongst them neither distinction of members or
officers, nor that perfection of Discipline as is to be wished; I desire I say
any man to show me what error or sin it is in me to believe that any such
people so qualified is a true Church: for we have the prime and Mother Church,
the Church of Jerusalem for a pattern of a true Church, and so called in the
holy Scripture, and so esteemed of by the Independents themselves, at that time
when they only believed, and embraced the Gospel and were baptized, and when
they continued steadfastly in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in breaking of
Bread, and in prayers, although then they had neither distinction of Officers
or Members and wanted that part of discipline of casting out of corrupt
Members, as the Independents themselves, and Anabaptists in their writings have
taught us; Now, if the Church of Jerusalem, I say, at that time was a true
formed Church, and from the which they ought not to s^parate. I can see no
reason that it should be a sin or error in me or any other in these our days,
to believe that in what City or Country soever the people embrace the Gospel,
and partake in all those, ordinances that made them a true formed Church,
though they be forced and ruled with Ministers in common, should not be a true
formed Church or Churches, as that was, or any of the primitive Churches, where
they were all fed and governed by Ministers in common, in their several bounds
and cohabitations, as all the story of the New Testament sufficiently declare.
And I would very gladly also be informed, what sin I commit in not separating
from such Assemblies, although there should be some failings both in Members
and Discipline; then seeing we have neither Precept and President allowed o^
for any such separation in any of the Prim^tive and Apostolic Churches, nor in
the whole word of God, where we read not only of ordinary errors, but of such
heresies as razed the very foundation, and of such maliversation amongst them
in respect of manners, as we shall sc^rce read of greater in profane
histories; Now if for neither errors in doctrine, discipline, or in manners,
those glorious Christians made no separation from the public Assemblies of the
Saints, I see no warrant we have now for less matters, to make rents and
Schisms from the true Churches of Jesus Christ: neither do I believe that any
of them shall ever be able to make it sinful in any Christian now not to
separate upon such occasions: for if separations from the public Assemblies
were by the Author to the Hebrews so blamed and found fault with as a sin in
them, it is sinful now, and no virtue but a grand error; and in this faith
will I live and die, that whosoever do make needless separations from the
Assemblyes of those that are as good Christians, and as true believers as
themselves, do that which is highly displeasing unto God, and that which will
bring down his judgments amongst us, especially When they do it at such
times, as when all those things are taken away as might in any respect be
accounted scandalous or offensive unto them, and when for substance there is
nothing that they differ from them.

Again, if I or any Christian steadfastly believe unto the death, that there
were more Assemblies or Congregations of Believers in the Church of Jerusalem
then one, because we find it recorded that they met daily in several houses to
communicate, and that they were all combined together, and subordinate to one
Presbytery within that Precinct and were to be governed and ruled by them in
common, and for ever reject the opinion of Independents, who hold there were no
more Christians at first and last in that Church or City, then did or could
ordinarily meet in one place, and that their Officers did nothing, nor could
do nothing in that Church without the consent of the whole Congregation, and
that that particular Congregation was Independent, and from which there might
be no appeal. I say, if I or any man reject this their opinion, can it hinder
me or them from salvation? or is it any sin in me or them so to believe? If
they shall say it, they must first show me what law in so believing I have
transgressed, without which there is no sin.

Again, if I believe and persevere in this faith, that it is sufficient for
any that will be made a member of any Christian Church, to repent, believe and
be baptized, and reject all those novell opinions of the Independents,
concerning their walking sometime with the Congr^gation, and their making a
particular confession of their faith, and bringing in the evidences of their
conversion, and their taking of a particular explicit Covenant, and coming in
by the consent of the people; what transgression I pray is in this my belief?
or what law of God do I violate? if I peremptorily to the death persevere in
this my opinion, that faith, repentance and Baptism is all that God requires
of any for their admission into Church fellowship and communion, and if I
steadfastly to the last period of my life hold, that all the conditions of the
Independents are mere novelties and their own inventions, and that any
Christian may die either in the ignorance or contempt of them without the
transgression of the law of God?

The same may be said of all the Anabaptisticall opinions, and of all the other
erroneous doctrines of all the other Sects. Yea, the rejecting of them all is
so far from sin, or depriving men of happiness and peace of conscience here,
and eternal felicity hereafter, as it is a great virtue to contend earnestly
against them, for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Jud. 3. Yea, which is
yet more, it is a great sin in any that shall embrace any of those doctrines,
and approve of those Novelties in Religion; for they are all no better then the
traditions of men, which our Savior Christ so often warnes his Disciples to
take heed of, Math. 15. Mark 7. telling them that they worship him in vain, who
serve him after the precepts of men; and confirms that his doctrine not only
by his own testimony, but out of the holy word of God, Isa. 29. And surely,
those that offer God a vain worship, sin, and that in an elevated nature,
and greatly provoke God by it, which all the Sectaries do, that serve him after
their own inventions and traditions.

But had it been so, that I had indeed been either a Brownist, or an
Anabaptist, or any Sectary: or had I at any time been carried about with every
wind of doctrine, or run after every new light as some daily do, it had been my
sin so to have transgressed the commandments of God: but it would have been my
glory and honor upon better information, and more mature deliberation and
judgment to have renounced all those errors, and to have embraced the truth.
Yea, it has bin ever thought praiseworthy in any to change either their
manners or judgments for the better, and to relinquish the by-waies of sin and
error, and to receive the truth in the love of it, which because many have
forsaken, it is the just judgment of God to give them over to strange
delusions, according to that in the se^ond of the Thessal. 2. and this I
conceive is one of the chief causes of the great wrath of God that is now come
upon the world, and the principal occasion not only of all those miseries and
calamities we are now embroyled with, but of all those monstrous errors, and
blasphemous opinions that are now swarming every where. And therefore I say, if
I had at any time been formerly misled, and had renounced error, and embraced
the truth, and so have changed my opinion for the botter, I had in that done
nothing but what God commands, and all sollid Christians cannot but allow of,
and in so doing I should have brought glory to God, and procured peace to my
own soul, and been a good example to others of doing the like, and have given
an occasion to all such as truly fear God of praising his Name, which all
those will do that leave the error of their ways, and the bypath of sin, and
turn their feet into Gods commandments.

But I constantly affirm, God and my conscience bearing me witness, that I
never was in my judgment one of them, as they falsely calumniate me, not only
behind my back but to my face reviling me, and and that in an odious manner in
the open streets, calling me an Apostate, a persecutor of the Saints, an enemy
of the people of God, and a stirrer up of mutiny against the faithful of the
earth, all the which charges they themselves are most guilty of. But this is
their ordinary language both in private and public concerning me who never
wronged them, except to speak the truth, and in their own language be to hurt
them, with which reproaches that rabble rout of the Sectaries that were John
Lilburnes followers a year and a half since, abused me in the next chamber to
the Committee of Examinations; and with the which those impetuous women that
accompanied his wife to the Parliament with her Petition the last year, which
you heard of, most unchristianly bespattered me, where they behaved themselves
in such uncivil manner toward the very Parliament men, as the honorable
House was forced to order, that they should be kept our of that room, which
before their insolency, was common not only for all Petitioners, but to all
such as were civil, to the great dishonor of God, and the shame of their sex,
and of their holy profession.

And as they do upon any occasions most barbarously rail on me, wheresoever
they meet me, though I know them no^ by face; so they use all possible mean's
they can to disparage me by railing and fomenting calumnies against me, and
that against all the laws of God and humanity, vilifying my books, especially
the Utter routing of all the Independent Army, hindering by all they might the
publishing of it pulling down the Titles through Town and Country wheresoever
they were set up, so that in one night and day they destroyed and defaced no
less then three hundred through the City, and as often as any of them again
were pasted up, they pulled them down, to the number of eleven hundred at
times; all which their proceedings show the sinfulness^ of their ways: for
whereas it is the duty of all good Christians to contend for the truth against
error, and with all their best endeavor to propagate it, and spread it abroad,
for so we are commanded, Jud. 3. they hinder it what they can, which manifestly
proclaims to the world that they fight against the truth: for our Savior
says, John the third, That they that do the truth, come to the light, that
their deeds may be seen, and they that shun the light, it is because their
deeds are evil. This I say, has ever been the method of the truly godly, and
of the Saints indeed to publish the truth against error, and to come to the
light and touchstone the word of God for the discovering of error, and proving
and declaring the truth: but these men being conscious to themselves, that
their deeds and doctrines are evil, shun the light, and labor by all their
abilities to extinguish whatsoever glimiring of it should discover them, and
therefore have conspired together to hinder the devulging of my Books,
especially the utter Routing, and my Postscript, because they do apparently
hold forth the truth, and disolay and discover both the errors of their
opinions, and their deceitful dealings in deluding the poor people, and in
withholding the truth from them in unrighteousness, which is not only to
their eternal dishonor, but one of the most horrid wickednesses, that can be
perpetrated against God and men: for it is an open fighting against God, and a
hindering of the salvation of the people, which was one of those great sins
the Jews were guilty of, 1 Thessalonians. 2 16. by which they filled up the measure of
the wrath of God against themselves to the full, to their own damnation, as the
Apostle there speaks. And truly the practice of these men is not far from that
of the Jews it being a sin against their own knowledge: for if they were
not convinced that their ways were erroneous, they would come to the light,
and they would exhort all men to read my books, and to buy them up; yea, they
would themselves lay out their moneys as they promised, and send them freely
abroad through Town and Country to breed Independents, for they gloried
exceedingly what store of Independents I had bred, and engaged themselves in
the hearing of others, that when my last book was once printed (for they heard
it was then in the press) that they would buy fifty pounds worth of them, and
publish them every where for the increasing of Independents.

Now then, if their way be the way of God, as they pretend, and if men by
reading of my books, (as they boast) be made Independents, why do they not
publish them, and procure that they be spread abroad? why do they not bring
the people to the light? yea, why do^ they every where disgrace them, and to
the uttermost of their power hinder the publishing of them, both by pulling
down titles in all places, they dissuading all men from reading of them? These
their proceedings do sufficient^y declare unto all the world the sinfulness
of their dealings, and that they wilfully withhold the truth from the people in
unrighteousness, and by that means hinder their salvation, and keep them still
in blindness and error, in as much as in them lies: for they say my Books
breed Independents, and they are the only saints in their dialect, and yet they
will not endure the publishing of them for the breeding of saints, but let them
(as they brag) lie as wast paper. All these their actions do declare, that they
are very injurious and malicious men, and that of all men (if the power lay in
their hands) they would never grant unto the Presbyterians liberty of
Conscience, nor suffer them to enjoy a Tolleration, or an Indulgence for their
Religion: for if now in word and deed, they reproach, revile, and maliciously
abuse them, and hinder the very publishing of their Books: and if now they
spend their best abilities by slanders and all indirect means (as can
sufficiently be proved by their daily practices) to suppress the truth, and
light of the everlasting Gospel, and preaching of the same, and labor to set
up erroneous teachers in all places, and publish through the Kingdom, and that
at their own charges all erroneous and seducing Pamphlets, though distructive
to the government of Church and State, and to the disturbance of both, and
hinder as much as in them lies the publishing of all such books as may discover
their errors and juglings to the world, all these their indirect dealings
abundantly manifest, that they are not only persecutors (which they accuse
their brethren to be though falsely) but that they would never give a
Tolleration to the Presbyterians, or suffer them to use the liberty of their
consciences, whatsoever they now pretend, and howsoever they plead for it
amongst us: for all men may well gather, that if they will not endure our Books
to be read by the people in which the truth is maintained, and error confuted,
they would never suffer the preaching of it publicly.

But in all these their practices, as in many other, they are like the Papists
and Jesuits, who as the world knows, hinder the spreading of all orthodox
Books amongst the people, and make it death to all such as either divulge them,
or have them in their houses, where they have power in their hands. And where
they have not the Inquisition, there in all disgraceful manner they disparage
the orthodox Writers, and vilify their books, dissuading all their party from
reading of them, telling them that it is not only a mis-spending of their
precious time, but an animating of Heretics; yea, a very great sin, and a
tempting God: and by such proceedings as these they delude the poor ignorant
people, especially the women, devouring Widows houses, and leading captive
silly creatures to their own destruction. And therefore for my part, when I
behold the practices and dealings of all the Sectaries compare them with those
of the Jesuits and Papists, I can discern no difference between them. And
truly, they that shall read my utter routing, but with deliberation, will soon
perceive there is very little difference between them and the Papists in diverse
of their opinions as well as in their practices, so that a man may without any
sin conclude, that they are a company of Papists in a new dress, whatsoever
they pretend to the contrary, which will the better appear if things be duly
considered: for it is well known, that the holding of any one dominative or
principal point in any Religion or Sect, makes one to be called by the name of
that Religion or Sect; As for example, if any one hold that men ought to be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, though in all other points he be a
Christian, yet all men call a man this Jew. And so if any one hold but any one
principal point of popery: as that the Pope is head of the Church, and Peter's
successor, or that the Mass is a sacrifice appointed by Christ, though in all
other points he be a Protestant, yet all men will say, he is a Papist. So if
any amongst the Papists, hold but one opinion of the Protestants, though in all
other of his tenants he be a right down Papist: as for instance, if he hold
that the Pope is not head of the Church, but is Antichrist, or if he hold that
the Mass is an Idol, or that the word of God is sufficient without
traditions, or that it ought to be had in the vulgar tongue, and to be read by
the people, any one of these opinions, though in all other things he be of the
Papists judgments, is enough for ever to take away his life where the
Inquisition dwells, and for such a one to be branded with the name of an
Heretic, or a Calvinist. And so it is in all other Sects, he that holds but
any one of the Antinomian opinions, is accounted and called by all men, an
Antinomian: And he that holds that Children of Christian Parents ought not to
be Baptized, though in all other points he be orthod^x, yet he for this will be
reputed and called an Anabaptist. Now then when the Sectaries hold so many of
the Papists tenants, as that of Free Will, and falling away from grace, and
that the word of God cannot be known to be the word of God but by the testimony
of men, etc. and hinder as much as in them lies, the publishing of all orthodox
Books and further the divulging of all erroneous Pamphlets for the deceiving of
the ignorant people, by these their opinions and practices, they proclaim
themselves to be Papists, and without any injury done unto them, may so be
called if their own practice and the practice of all times and Nations may be
an authentic rule to go by, who from the holding of any one principal point
of any Religion or Sect, makes them to be denominated from that Sect, either
Papists, Presbyterians, Independents, or Anabaptists etc.

But now Master Smart to the matter in hand, for farther satisfaction to you
and all men, as I have according to your desire declared unto you, that I was
never any Sectary or Anabaptist, and what my opinion and judgment is
concerning them; So at this time I will briefly make known my opinion unto you
concerning that point of difference, passing by the rest between us and the
Anabaptists, who as you well know, hold the baptizing of Infants borne of
Christian Parents unlawful upon these suppositions, that there is neither
Precept nor President for it in all Gods word, and in regard (as they say)
there is no manifestation of faith and repentance in Infants, and in regard
also that the children of Christian parents (as they affirm) are no more
within the Covenant, then the children of Turks and Infidels, and therefore in
all these regards they assert they have no more right to Baptism then Colts
and Dogs, etc. In which their assertions I differ from them, as in all their
other tenants wherein they declare themselves diverse from the doctrine received
in all the reformed Protestant Churches.

And as for the Baptism of Infants born of Christian Parents, I not only
believe that they have as much and as good right to it, as the children of the
Jews had to Circumcision, but that they being once baptized by our Ministers,
ought not to be rebaptized, being better Christians then any Anabaptists, and I
not only believe that children of Christian Parents ought to be baptized, but
hope to prove that there is both Precept and Presidents, and most excellent
grounds for it in the word of God, (notwithstanding all the cavills of the
Anabaptists) and that not only under the Ministry of John the Baptist, and the
Apostles, and Christ's seventy Disciples before Christ's death and Ascension, but
after, and that they are all within the Covenant, as well as the children of
the Jews were. Which if I can by the word of God make good, I am confident
that those that will be guided by that rule will be satisfied: and for such as
will follow their wild opinions, I shall leave them to the righteous Judge.

But before I come to dispute this question, I will take the liberty to say
something by way of Preface to the following Discourse, which will give some
light to the whole business. Therefore I shall desire you seriously to
consider the Covenant that God made with Abraham and his seed, and not only
with Abraham, but with all such strangers as should embrace the faith and
doctrine of Abraham. And to begin with Abraham in the seventeenth of Genesis,
God there established his Covenant with Abraham, and with his seed after him in
their generations, to be a God unto him and his seed after him, ver. 7. and in
the ninth ver. he charges Abraham to keep his Covenant, both he and his seed
after him, and in ver. 10. he declares what that Covenant is, viz. that every
man-child amongst them should be circumcised, which the Lord, ver. 11. calls a
token of the Covenant, betwixt him and Abraham, which Saint Paul Romans 4. ver.
11. calls the sign of Circumcision a seal of the righteousness of the faith,
which he had being yet uncircumcised, etc. And in the 12. 13. 15. verses, God
commands that every male child at eight days old should be circumcised, he
that is borne in the house, or ^ought with money of any stranger, which was not
of his seed, and that the soul should be cut off that brake that Covenant. And
in the eighteenth chapter speaking of him, he says, Shall I hide from Abraham
the thing that I now do? for I know that Abraham will command his children, and
his household after him, to keep the way of the Lord etc. God knew well, that
Abraham would command his children and family to observe his Covenant, and
would not leave it to their own wills whether they will keep it or not.

And in the twelfth of Exodus we shall find that God gave the same law to
strangers, and those that should become Proselites, and embrace the Jewish
Religion, that he gave to Abraham himself, the words are these, ver. 48. And
when a stranger shall sojourne with thee, and will keep the Passover to the
Lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep
it: and he shall be as one that is borne in the land: for no uncircumcised
person shall ^ate thereof. One law shall be to him that is homeborne, and unto
the stranger that sojourneth amongst you. By which it is apparently evident,
that the same way of admission into the Church, that was used for the
ingraffing of those that were grown men, and converted from the heathenish
religion, should be used to those that were their children, and of their
household, and under their command, which lesson the people of God, had well
learned as we may see in Joshua 24. who for himself and his family promised,
that he and his house would serve the Lord, ver. 15. Yea, God made many laws
unto all Parents, and Masters of Families to look unto their children, and
those that were under them, that they kept the commands of the Lord, and did as
he had b^d them, as in the twentieth of Exodus, where he enjoynes all in
authority, that they and their sons and daughters, and men servants and maid
servants, should keep the commandments of God. And in the fourth of Deuteronomy. and
in the sixth Chapter of the same book, and in the eleventh chapter, and in many
other places, he commands all parents that they should teach their children at
their rising up, and lying down, and upon all occasions, the statutes and
ordinances of the Lord; And this was practiced not only by men, and people of
inferior rank, but by Kings themselves, as we may see in David, Prove. 4.
ver. 3. Who taught Solomon his son, when he was tender and young. And Solomon
likewise carefully instructed his son and family, as we may see through all the
Proverbs. And in the 22 chapter ver. 6. he gives this law to all Israel, to
train up their children in the way they should walk, showing the benefit of
such education for the future, saying that when they were old, they would not
depart from it. Yea, in many places he commands them, if their children be
refractory stubborn and disobedient to good counsel, not to spare the rod.
Yea, God made a special law to all Israel, Exodus 34. ver. 23. and Deuteronomy. 16.
ver. 16. saying, Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the
Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose: in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of Tabernacles, etc. And
this law God enjoined all his people to observe for the instruction of their
children, and bringing them up in the knowledge and worship of the true God, so
careful was the Lord, that their children should be brought up in the fear of
his name, which law of God is still in force to all Christian Parents, as is
evident in the sixth of the Ephesians. ver. the fourth, where they are enjoined to
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. And that law of God
was observed in succeeding ages to the times of the New Testament; Many
instances of the which are recorded in holy Scripture, I shall only at this
time produce a few presidents or examples by which the truth of this doctrine
may yet more illustriously appear, that in all their solemn Feasts, Fasts,
and Covenants, children were joined with their parents as actors and partakers
in them, as well as they, and that by special command from God, by all which
it will be the more evident, that their children and little ones were as well
of the family and Church of God, and in covenant with him as their Parents, and
that they had as much right to partake in all these public ordinances and
solemn assemblies, and that by the command of God, as they.

And first I shall desire you to look into the tenth of Exodus, ver. 8 9. 10.
11. where when Moses and Aaron were brought before Pharaoh: and he said unto
them, go serve the Lord your God: but who are they that shall go? And Moses
said, we will go with our young, and with our old: with our sons, and with
our daughters: for we must hold a feast unto the Lord. And he said unto them,
let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones. Look
to it, for evil is before you. Not so: go now ye that are men, and serve the
Lord, for that you did desire: and they were driven out from Pharaohs presence.
By which place alone it appears, that the Lord was as well the God of their
little Children, as of their Parents, and that he would be served as well by
them in their sacrifices and solemn assemblies, as by their Parents, as being
all in covenant with him, as their parents and consecrated to him by covenant
as well as they. Neither did Moses stir without them, as the story declares.
And if we look into the 29. of Deuteronomy. ver. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. etc. The Lord
says there to all the people, Keep therefore the words of this Covenant, and
do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do. Ye stand this day all of
you before the Lord your God; your Captains, and your tribes, your Elders, and
your officers, with all the men of Israel, your little ones, and your wives,
and the stranger that is in thy camp, etc. that thou should enter into a
covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath, which the Lord thy God
makes with thee this day, etc. Here we see that the little children were not
only in Covenant with the Lord, as well as their parents, but that they by name
entered into a covenant with the Lord as well as they. And in the second of the
Chronicles and the 20th (to omit many other instances) it is related there,
that Jehoshophat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a
fast through all Judah: and Judah gathered themselves together to ask help of
the Lord, even out of all the Cities of Judah, they came to seek the Lord.
Now, if we look but into the thirteenth verse of the same chapter, we shall
find, who they were out of all Cities, that thus sought the Lord, where it is
related, that all Judah stood before the Lord with their little ones, their
wives and their children. By all which testimonies, and many more that might be
produced, it affirms that the very little children of the Israelites, were as
well of the family of Abraham, and in covenant with God, and had as good right
to all the Ordinances as their Parents, if by the mouth of many Witnesses this
truth may be confirmed. Yea, it was the practice of the Jews into what Country
soever they were scattered, to bring up their children in the knowledge of God,
and of the holy Scripture, and that from their childhood, as we may learn by
the example of the Grandmother, and mother of Timothy, who knew the holy
Scriptures from a child, by their industry and godly care. And this was Gods
method, that after any had relinquished their Idol gods, and turned to the
living God, that God would have them to be Circumcised, and all their Males in
their family under them, after one and the same manner, ever using the same way
of admittance of their children that were tender and young, that was used for
the receiving in of their parents: professing that he would be a God of their
side, as of them, taking them all in like manner into Covenant with him by the
same way of admission.

Now God is the same God to believing Christian parents and their children,
that he was to the Israelites and their children, as I hope sufficiently to
prove in the sequel of this discourse. Neither do I ever read that God changed
his method of taking in, and of admitting them into Covenant with him by any
new law: and therefore I will not fear to believe, and for ever to conclude,
that as the Parents of the believing Jews were admitted under the new
Covenant, so were their children after one and the same manner, for they were
all equally in covenant with him, as well as their Parents: and therefore when
John the Baptist and Christ's Disciples were sent unto his people then in
covenant with him, and had all of them their Commission to Preach and Baptize,
as we may see in Math. the third, Mark the first Luke the third, and Luke the
10. and 11. John the first, and John the 3. and 4. and as they preached
Repentance and Faith in the Messiah, whom John the Baptist declared and showed
unto them to be the Lamb of God that took away the sins of the world; so
they were neither of them limited in respect of sex or age, but commanded to
Baptize all that come to their Ministry, without any restriction; for they were
all his people in covenant with him, as well the children as their parents, and
by virtue of that, capable as well as they of that ordinance of Baptism: for
they were sent to baptize all the Jews without limitation, as I said before,
as well their children and women, as men; neither do we read in all the New
Testament, that either John or the Apostles refused to Baptize Children or
Women, or any, but the Saduces, Pharisees, and Lawyers, Math. 3. and Luke the
7. which wilfully rejected the counsel of God against themselves, which is
recorded to their eternal shame and ignominy: Now I say, I read of none that
were exempted from their Baptism, but such as rejected the counsel of the
Lord, which children could not do, neither did the women, as far as I have
been taught, and therefore I may without any danger from the commission given
unto John the Baptist and Christ's D^sciples thus argue for proof of the
lawfulness of children in Baptism, first beginning with John the Baptists
commission.

He that by his Commission from God, Baptized in Jerusalem, and all Indea, and
all the region round about Jordan, and all people that followed his mnistery,
the Sadnces, Pharisees and Lawyers only excepted, Baptized both men, women, and
children.

But John the Baptist by his Commission from God baptized Jerusalem, and all
Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, and all the people that followed
his ministry the Sadnces, Pharisees and Lawyers only excepted.

Ergo, he Baptized both men* women, and children.

For the minor of this Argument it is sufficiently cleared from the concerning
the major, which places above quoted, all the doubt is being proved the
conclusion will ever stand firm, and therefore for further illustration of
this truth, I will add a few words more for the proof of that, because a
great Anabaptist not long since pretended that this was but a supposition, or
at least an argument by consequence that children were then Baptized which if
it were, it is then but an argument by consequence likewise for the baptism of
men and women, as well as of children, for there is not any mention made of any
man by name, (Christ only excepted) or of any women that were baptized no more
then there is of children, for in the third of Math. and in the third of Luke
and in the seventh chapter of the same book the text is clear that all the
people, and the multitude were Baptized, the Saduces, Pharisees, and Lawyers
only excepted. Now when the Scripture is so full in this business, that all
the people that heard him (the abovementioned only exempted, were baptized
that women and children were as well baptized as men, by John the Baptist; and
as for men the Anabaptists deny not their baptism, and I by the same Law and
Word, may as well prove the Baptism of women and children, as of men: for
Jerusalem says the Scripture, and all Judea, and all the region round about
Jordan and all the people that came unto his ministry heard him were baptized.
Now Jerusalem and Judea, and all the regions round about consisted of women and
children, as well as of men, who were included in the multitude of people, and
they were also in covenant with God and his people, and were to be brought to
the ordinances as well as men, neither is there any mention made, that any were
excepted but the Pharisees etc. yea, it is expressly said all the people were
baptized therefore what the word of God holds out unto us, that we ought to
believe. Neither will that evasion help the Anabaptists, when they say* that it
is called the Baptism of repentance* and that they were baptized confessing
their sins; which, say they, intimates they were grown persons, which is
indeed but a mere cavil: for those expressions do no more exclude children
of Christian Parents from Baptism, then the preaching of the Prophets, when
they say, Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his thoughts
Isa. 55. and turn unto the Lord, do exclude the children of such from
Circumcision, because Faith and Repentance, and confession of their sins are
required first in the Parents, of all that turn from their sins and Idols,
to serve the living God, before their admittance into the Church.

But should it be granted, that all the men and women that came to John's
Baptism did in their own persons, and for themselves make an orall and
audible confession of their sins punctually before they could be baptized,
which had been almost an impossible thing for such multitudes to do, yet it
would not follow that their children were excluded from Baptism, for they were
as well in covenant with God as their Parents, and as well his children as
they, and the Scripture says expressly that Jerusalem and all Judea and all the
region round about Jordan, and all the people were baptized, and therefore
children are as well included as they: and their Parents did as well include
their children as themselves in their confessions, (if they made any publicly)
as the Prophets and people of God under the law in their public confessions,
as well included all the people, both men women and children as themselves, and
as all the Congregations with the Ministers and their Parents now daily do at
the baptism of any, whether men, women, or children; but I speak this by the
way, not that I shall ever be of that judgment to believe or think, that all
that were baptized by John the Baptist, or the Apostles, did make each of
themselves a public confession of their faith, before their admittance into
the Church, for the Scripture is clear for the contrary both in the third of
Luke, and in the second of the Acts, where it is related, that they only came
to John and asked him what they should do? and in the second of the Acts they
said unto the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? And in both the
places it is recorded that they were all at that instant of time baptized
without making any confession of their sins severally, which such multitudes of
people could not have done without infinite toil and much time to both
Ministers and people.

But I conceive under reformation, that those expressions are set down by the
Penmen of holy writ, to show the difference between the Baptism of the
people, and Christ's baptism; for the people yielding and submitting themselves
unto the ceremony of Baptism, which was as a hand writing against them and
intimated unto them, that they were conceived in sin, (though they were not
as the sinners of the Gentiles, and out of Covenant) and that they had need of
washing and purifying in the blood of the Messiah, and that they should daily
repent and die unto sin, and rise to newness of life. I say, in this regard
by the acceptance and embracing of this ceremony, they declared and
acknowledged that they were by nature sinful, and had need of clensing, and
were for ever bound all their life long, to mortify the old man, and put on
the new man, upon which conditions Christ was not baptized and therefore for
distinction, and making a difference between the Baptism of the people, and
Christ's baptism, and for the grounds above specified as I conceive, it is
called the Baptism of Repentance, and they are said to confess their sin;
which all people tacitly do when they are baptized Christ only excepted; for
Christ was not baptized under the notion of a sinner or believer, or of one
that confessed his sins (as some suppose) for he was the Lamb of God that
took away the sins of the world, and he knew no sin, he was the holy Child,
(which is a sufficient argument also, that all that were baptized by John, did
not make an orall confession of their sin for here is an other exception) and
therefore it is manifest that Christ was not baptized under the notion of one
that confessed his sin as the rest of the people were, but only as he was of
the seed of Abraham, and borne under the Law, and being in covenant with God
(as his Genealogy sufficiently declares) he had a right unto Baptism by
virtue of that, and challenged his privilege, Matthew. 3. telling John that it
behoved him to fulfill all righteousness: for he was sent to Baptize all in
covenant with God, without any limitation, both men, women, and children, if
they refused it not and it was his work, and it had not been righteousness in
John the Baptist to refuse Christ or any of the children of the Jewish Nation
then in covenant with God: and therefore I conceive it is great
unrighteousness in all those, that now refuse Baptism to Children borne of
Christian Parents, and such as are in covenant with God: So that were there no
other Presidents of Baptism without public confession but this one example of
Christ's baptism, it may appear that all those that were baptized by the
Baptist, were baptized as well by virtue of their Covenant as any confession of
sin, and that they had right unto it as being then the people in Covenant
with God and could not be hindered from it, except they excluded themselves as
the Pharisees and Lawyers did, and therefore in that it is called the Baptism
of Repentance, and that the people are said to confess their sins, I
conceive it is for the reasons above specified.

And for my part, I shall ever believe not only that all the Children of the
believing Jews had as much right unto Baptism, the seal of the Covenant of
the New Testament, as they had unto the promises, and the Gospel it self, but
that they were really baptized as well as their Parents, the which Gospel when
they (amongst them that were obstinate and resisted the Spirit of God, as their
fathers had done, Acts the 7.) rejected and regarded not, yea* put it from them
as we may see Acts the 13th ver. 46. Paul and Barnabas turned unto the
Gentiles, who embracing the faith, they with their children were made partakers
of all and the same privileges the Jews were, as we shall see afterward and
therefore I verily believe that for all such of the Jews in John the Baptists
time as embraced the Gospel, and heard him, that both they and their children
were baptized, Matthew. 21. ver. 32. and Luke the 7. ver. 29. for any thing that
can be alleged to the contrary, for Jerusalem and all Judea and all the region
round about Jordan and all that heard him were baptized says the Scripture,
now children as well as their Parents heard John the Baptist, who preached
through all Judea, and in Jerusalem* whither all people were bound thrice a
year to bring up their children to the Feasts, at which times both Christ
himself, and all his Apostles, in regard of the great concourses of the people
that resorted thither went up to preach, taking those opportunities of
publishing the Gospel, as Christ himself declares John the 18. ver. 20.
where he says answering to his enemies, I ever taught in the Sinagogue and in
the Temple, whither the Jews always resort and in secret have I said nothing.
So Saint John the Baptist taught publicly there also, for Herod himself heard
him gladly; yea the children themselves at Jerusalem were so well instructed by
his and Christ's ministry in the mystery of the Gospel, and the knowledge of
Christ, that they cried Hosanna to the highest, and gave testimony before all
men that they were well taught, whose witness concerning Christ, when his
enemies were offended at, Christ himself ownes, and approved of, so that it is
apparent that their parents brought them according to command, to wait upon the
ordinances, and not only so, but that they had learned their lesson as well as
their Parents, and durst make a public profession of Christ, when they were
afraid, and Christ had taught them* that they that confessed him before men,
those would he confess and own before his Father in heaven; by all which it is
evident that their children were as well the children of Abraham and Moses
Disciples, and in covenant with God as well as their Parents, and by virtue of
their Covenant, had bin as well baptized as they: for says the word of God,
Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Region round about, and all that heard
John were baptized, but those children heard him, and confessed Christ as well
as their Parents Ergo. Yea, which is more, the Anabaptists do acknowledge, that
all such as can make a profession of their faith in Christ, have right unto
Baptism; now it is apparent that the little children in Jerusalem publicly
professed Christ, to the great indignation of the Rulers, therefore did not the
Scripture say, that all that heard him were baptized, which children and women
did as well as men, yet by their own confession, and according to their own
principles it is abundantly evident, that the Children in Jerusalem were
baptized as well as their Parents, for they cried Hosanna when they durst not;
but the Scripture says that Jerusalem was baptized by the Baptist. What a
wickedness therefore is it in the Anabaptists to exclude the children of the
believing Jews, from the Baptism of John when the word of God it self, and
all reason is so clear for it; seeing his commission was without limitation to
the whole Nation of the Jews to baptize them, as the people of God in Covenant
with him.

But because an Anabaptist not long since being in conference with me, seemed
to make nothing of John's Baptism, and looked only at the Apostles Baptism; I
shall now also prove that the Apostles and Disciples Baptized both men* women
and children and that before Christ's death and Ascension: for their commission
was as large as John's* who were confined within the limits of Judea, and Israel
and commanded not to go to the Gentiles, but only to the Cities of the Jews.
And it is related of them that they Baptized all that came to their Ministry*
and followed Christ, and that they baptized more then John, and this the very
enemies of John and Christ knew very well, as is evident John the 3. ver. 22
23. After these things (says the Evangelist) came Jesus and his Disciples into
the land of Judea, and there he tarried with them and baptized. And John also
was baptizing in Anon near to Salim, etc. and they came and were baptized.
Here we have this witness* that a^l that came unto the ministry of Christ and
John, none exc^uded were baptized. And in the 26. ver. the Jews say there unto
John Rabbi he that was with thee beyond Jordan to whom thou barest witness
behold the same baptizeth and all men come to him. And in the fourth chapter,
ver. 1. 2. it is recorded there When the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard
that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples then John (though Jesus himself
baptized not but his Disciples) he left Judea. Out of which places this truth
is sufficiently apparent* that all that came unto Christ and waited upon his
ministry, and that of John the Baptist, and Christ's Disciples were all
baptized, and that the Disciples baptized more then John.

And as it is apparent by these places, and those testimonies that went before
that all that waited upon John and Christ's ministry, the Pharisees etc. only
excepted, were baptized. So the Scripture in many places relates what great
concourses and multitudes of men, women, and children waited upon John's and
Christ's ministry: for there followed him says the Scripture* Math. 4. ver. 25.
Great multitudes of people from Gallilee, and from Decapolis, and from
Jerusalem, and from Judea and from beyond Jordan. And in the 12th of Luke, ver.
1. When there were gathered together an innumerable multitudes of people etc.
And to pass by many places to prove this truth, I shall only make use of two
more as that in Math. the 14th. 13. etc. where it is recorded that the people
hearing of Jesus his departure, they followed him on foot out of the Cities,
and it is there said, that when Jesus saw a great multitude, he had compassion
toward them, and he healed their sick, and fed them. Christ Preached to them
and healed the sick and refreshed them* he was their Physician for soul and
body, and the Apostles Baptized them. Now in this great multitude there were
women and children, as well as men that waited upon Christ ministry as the 21.
verse proves: for says the Evangelist and they that had eaten were about five
thousand men, besides women and children. And in the 15th of Math. which is the
other place, I shall now satisfy my self with, it is related at large, ver.
the 30th. that great multitudes came unto him* and that Christ after the curing
of an those that were diseased called his Disciples unto him and said, I have
compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days and
have nothing to eat: and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in
the way,; And in this great multitude also there were women and children, as
well as men and grown persons, for it is said ver. 37. that they did all eat
and were filled, and ver. 38. they that did eat, were four thousand men
besides women and children; from all the which places of holy Scripture, I
shall now prove that the Apostles also as well as John Baptist, baptized both
men, women, and children.

They that baptized all that came unto Christ, and waited upon his ministry,
amongst the which there were women and childrn as well as men, yea that
baptized more then John they baptized both men, women and children.

But the Apostles baptized all that came unto Christ, and followed his
ministry, amongst the which there were women and children as well as men, yea
they baptized more then John the Baptist.

Ergo, they baptized both men, women, and children.

For the major and minor of this Syllogism, they are sufficiently clear from
the places above quoted, if by the mouths of many witnesses any truth may be
confirmed; and therefore the conclusion will necessary follow: for most
certain it is, that those great multitudes that followed Christ, and waited
upon his ministry, consisted of women and children, as well as of men, and they
were as well in covenant with God as they, and Christ had equal compassion of
the women and children as of the men, and did as soon cure the children of
those Parents and Rulers that had faith in him; as he did those that did
actually believe in him themselves, as we may see in the Noble man's son, and
the daughter of the Canaanitish woman whose Parents believed: and he ever
relieved and preserved as well their children as their parents, as in the
places above cited, where it is recorded that the women and children were as
well fed by Christ, as their Parents, and that he had as well compassion on
them, and care toward them, as toward men. And the places out of St. John,
the second and third declare, that Christ's Disciples baptized all that came
unto Christ, and followed him, and the Apostles ministry, and the
forementioned Scriptures evidence also, that women and children waited as
attentively upon Christ's ministry as the men: for it is said that they had all
been attending upon him three days without eating: and therefore it must
necessarily follow, that if the Apostles baptized all that followed their
Master, that they baptized women and children, as well as men, which the
Anabaptists exclude not from their baptism.

Now, the holy Scripture being so clear in this point, it is sufficiently
evident* that they were all baptized, both men, women and children: for the
Apostles had their Commission from Christ, and were sent to Baptize all the
people of God, then in Covenant with him, without any restriction or
limitation, either of sex or age, and women and children were as well in
covenant with God as men, neither does the Scripture any where before Christ's
death record any thing to the contrary, or relate any thing of the baptism of
men more then of women and children, or exclude children more then men or women
from Baptism: therefore when the Scripture says nothing to the contrary, we
are no more to exclude the children of the Jews from the ordinance of
Baptism, because they preached Faith and Repentance to those that were of
years, then the children of the Jews or Profelites were to be excluded from
Circumcision, because Faith and Repentance were first preached to their
Parents: for God had declared in his holy Word, and by his practice from the
calling of Abraham his friend out of the Land of the Chaldeans, and all
strangers under the old Covenant, that the same way and manner of admitting the
Parents into Covenant with him, and the same law of admission was to be used in
all succeeding ages toward their children for their admittance* and for the
admittance of those that were of their household: and God changes not to be the
Father, and God of the children of believers under the Gospel, as well as he
was the God and Father of his people and their seed under the old Covenant:
neither are the children of Christians, whether Jews or Gentiles inseriour to
those of the Jews in any privileges, as I shall by and by make appear. So
that when Christ after his Resurrection, and before his Ascension, when he
instructed his Apostles for forty days in all things* belonging to the
Kingdom of heaven and when he said unto them Math* 28. 19. Go and Disciple or
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son
and of the holy Ghost, etc. And when he says, Mark. 16. ver. 16. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned, etc. By this his Commission, he does not exclude the children of
believing Parents, whether Jews or Gentles, and their families from Baptism,
any more then they should have been excluded from Circumcision, if Christ had
said, Go and teach all Nations, circumcising them in the Name of the Father
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and he that believes, and is
circumcised, shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned. Which
expression if the Lord Jesus had used, all the people that should have embraced
the doctrine of the Gospel, would have believed that all the male children
that had been borne of their Ioines, and all that had been in their several
families, ought to have been circumcised: for that was ratified by God for the
manner of their admission: neither would any have scrupled it, as is easily to
be perceived by the practice of the Jews, who although the terms of the
Covenant were changed and that in sted of Circumcising Baptising is put in the
place of it, yet many Zelots amongst the Jews, exceedingly urged Circumcision
of believers children, after the manner of Moses as necessary to salvation,
until the Council at Jerusalem, Acts 15. decreed against it amongst the
Gentiles.

Now, if they had supposed that the Children of those that were made
Christians, had not been still within the Covenant, they would never have been
so zealous for the Circumcising of them, after the manner of Moses, neither do
we ever read that any of the Apostles refused Baptism to the children of
Christian Parents, converted from heathenisme, or thought them not within the
Covenant. Yea, the contrary is evident from the counsel of the Apostles in the
15th of the Acts, where Peter in the 8. and 9. verses declares that the
be^eeving Gentiles were equal to the believing Jews in all privileges: his
words are these God made choice amongst us, that the Gentiles by my mouth,
should hear the word of the Gospel and believe. And God which knows the
hearts, hear them witness, giving them the holy Ghost as he did unto us: and
put no difference between us and them: purifying their hearts by faith. And in
the second chapter of the Acts the same Apostle speaking unto those that had
crucified Christ* and exhorting them to repent, believe, and be baptized, that
they might be saved, uses this argument unto them for their encouragement to
embrace the Gospel saying, that the promise is made unto you, and to your
children and to all that are a far off even as many as the Lord our God shall
call. By which we may see, that as many of the Gentiles as should believe, to
them and to their children the Promises as well belonged and all the seals and
privileges thereto annexed, as well as they did to the Jews and their
children, as by their Baptism is sufficiently manifest: for God said he put no
difference between us and them: and therefore whatsoever prviledges the
children of the Jews could challenge, the same may the Children of Christian
Parents, and they are by the law of God due unto them* as well as the promises.
And Saint Peter writing to all the believing Gentiles in their dispersion for
the comforting and strengthening of them in all their persecutions, says in his
first Epistle. Chap. 2. ver. 9. Ye are a chosen generation* a royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation a peculiar people, etc. confirming it from Exodus 19.
ver. 5. 6. where the Lord says unto his people; Now therefore if you will obey
my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then you shall be a peculiar treasure
unto me above all people, for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of Priests, and an holy nation, etc. by which testimony of Peter for
the comfort of those distressed Christian Gentiles that were scattered here and
there, he proclaymes them equal in privileges with the Jews, and that they
and their seed were in Covenant with God, as well as they and were as chosen a
generation to him as they, and as royal a Priesthood, and as holy a Nation,
and as peculiar a people as they. Now they that are equal by Peter's witness
to the Jews, and between the which Nations if they believed God had made no
difference, then their children are equal in privileges, and no way inferior
to the children of the Jews and therefore as the parents of believing Jews
and Proselites, and their children and families were admitted after one and the
same way and manner of admission into the Church of God, so ought the children
of Christian parents under the Gospel, and their children ought as well to be
baptized as they. And Saint Paul confirms the same doctrine in many places, as
in his Epistle to the Romans chap. 3. ver. 2. Where occasionally speaking of the
privileges of the Jews above the Gentiles, in respect of their Circumcision,
and being within the Covenant, he says they are very great every way, chiefly,
because unto them were committed the Oracles of God. And in the ninth chapter
of the same Epistle, ver. the fourth, he says unto them, did pertain the
adoption, and the glory and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the
service of God, and the promises, etc. which were all exceeding great
privileges above the Gentiles then out of covenant. Yet after the Gentiles had
received the Gospel, he equalizeth the believing Gentiles with them in all
privileges, for he says in the eleventh chapter of the same Epistle verse
seventeenth, that the believing Gentiles were ingraffed in among the believing
Jews, and with them did partake of the Root and fatness of the Olive tree. So
that by this he declares that they were equal in privileges, and were
inferior to them in nothing. Which he further confirms in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, the second chap. ver. 11. saying, wherefore, remember, that ye being
in times past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called uncircumcision, by that
which is called circumcision in the flesh made by hands; that at that time ye
were without Christ being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers
from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world:
but now in Christ Jesus, ye who were sometimes far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ: for he is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken
down the middle wall of partition between us* etc. saying ver. 18. that
through him we both have access by one spirit unto the Father, and that we
are no more strangers and forraigners, but fellow citizens with the saints, and
of the household of God, etc. In which words again with saint Peter, he makes
no difference between the Christian Jews, and Christian Gentiles, saying that
Christ has made both one, and therefore as the Jews, and their children had
right to the Covenants of promise, which were the seals of the covenant, so
now the believing Gentiles and their children had right unto the Covenants of
promise, and were equal in all privileges unto them as being made both one:
and therefore as the parents of the Jews and Proselites and their children
were admitted after one and the same way by circumcision into the household of
God, so ought the Christian Gentiles and their children to be admitted after
one and the same way into the Church by Baptism: for if they partake not in
the same privileges, then there is a great difference between them, and they
are not made both one, which overthrows the doctrine of both Peter and Paul,
and gives the Spirit of God speaking in them, the lie. Yea, Paul to the
Galathians, chapter the second* ver. 15. saying, We who are Jews by nature and
not sinners of the Gentiles; sufficiently declares that they by being
Christians lost nothing of their pri^iledges, but that they were in covenant
still with God, and Timothy was circumcised by virtue of his mother being a
Jewesse; and Titus might have bin by the same law, if it had been thought
convement: Neither was it yet ever supposed by any well grounded Christian,
that any of the converted Jews lost any privilege to themselves or their
children by embracing the Christian Religion and if the Jews should have lost
that privilege to their children, that by becoming Christians, they must have
been out of the covenant, the Gospel had not been good tidings to them, and
they would very hardly have been induced to embrace the faith; but they knew
very well, that they by receiving the Word should better their condition both
to themselves and their children, if either of the parents were believers, for
in this doctrine they were sufficiently instructed by all the Apostles, and
Saint Paul 1 Cor. chap. 7. ver. 15. affirms, that the unbelieving husband is
sanctified by the believing wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the
believing husband, else were your children unclean, but now (says he) they
are holy; Which is not to be understood of Matrimonial cleanness or
legitimation, as the Anabaptists groundlesly pretend, but of a faederall and
covenant cleanness, which must necessarily be understood of some spiritual
prviledge to the child; for the Apostle there does not speak to the Saints of
any earthly privileges who only instructs them about divine and heavenly
matters and of the great benefits they enjoy by being Christians above the
other men of the world, which is sufficiently evident by that he says, that by
either of the Parents believing, their children are holy and clean, and
therefore fit to be consecrated, and offered unto God, which the children of
the unbeleeving Gentiles were not, no more then unclean beasts, neither could
they be, for they were by Christ called dogs, which was in regard they were
without the Covenant, not in regard of Matrimony, or their Marriage; for the
same Apostle had taught his Country men, Heb. 13. saying, that marriage was
honorable amongst all men, and the bed undefiled Whether they were Jews or
Gentiles; and their children begotten in wedlock, were both by the law of God,
and Nations, as well legitimate and lawfully begotten, and had right to their
fathers inheritances and estates as well as Christians children; And if Paul
should have taught such doctrine to the people, that all children that had not
been born of Christian Parents had been bastards or had no true right to their
fathers inheritance, he would have gained the hatred of the world against
himself, and taught contrary doctrine to himself, who said that Marriage was
honorable amongst all men, therefore it made not their children illegitimate,
which was a dishonor unto them, yea, he should then have taught against all
the Prophets, and the whole law of God, which gives to all people a propriety
and lawful right, to that they had lawfully gotten, and forbids all men to
covet it, and therefore there was no such pollution in their Marriages, as made
their children illegitimate, though they were heathens, or Infidels, as the
Anabaptists fondly imagine: from all which it must necessary follow, that by
that expression calling their children holy, his scope and intent in this was,
to show the difference between the children of believing parents, or either of
them, and unbeleeving parents, and that in respect of spiritual and heavenly
things, proclaiming the children of unbeleeving parents unclean as without the
Covenant, and the children of believing parents clean and holy, as fit to be
offered up unto God, as being then within the Covenant, by which expression he
does equalize the believing Gentiles, with the believing Jews in all
privileges, for the comfort and joy of all such as were then unequally yoaked,
who might otherwise have had many sad thoughts and doubts conce^ning their
children, as if they had not been within the covenant: therefore I say, the
Apostle for the consolation of all such Christians, whether men or women, as
were joined to unbeleevers whether Jews or Gentiles, he says unto them, that
the believing husband sanctifies the unbeleeving wife, and the believing wife
sanctifies the unbeleeving husband, so that their children are clean and holy;
Now that which God calls holy and clean, none may call common or unclean*
for so said the vision to Saint Peter, Acts the 10. ver. 15. What God has
cleansed, that call not thou common, etc. And Saint Peter by this vision
sufficiently defended himself against those that were of the C^^cumcision, and
contended with him, that he went into men uncircumcised, and did eat with them,
Act. 11. telling them, that the Spirit of God bad him go with the men that
came from Cornelius, nothing doubting, and related unto them farther, that when
he spoke unto Cornelius, and those that were with him, the holy Ghost fell on
them, as on the Apostles at the beginning: forasmuch therefore (says he) as
God gave them the like gifts, as he did unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus
Christ, what was I that I could withstand God? when they heard these things
(says the Scripture) they held their peace and glorified God, etc. And in the
15th chapter, ver. 9. says he, God put no difference between us and them,
purifying their hearts by faith. And therefore they were within the Covenant as
well as the Jews, and were pure, and their children pure, holy and clean,
according to that of Saint Paul Romans 11. Who affirms if the first fruit be
holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root be holy so are the branches. Now
these were the first fruits of the Gentiles that Saint Peter was sent unto, and
they were graffed in amongst the Jews, and with them did partake of the root
and Olive tree. And therefore were as holy as the Jews, and their children, as
holy as their children, as being branches of that holy root, and within the
Covenant as well as they, which doctrine is confirmed in many more places of
holy Writ, as in that above cited out of the 1 Cor. 7 ver. 14. where the
Apostle tells them, that if either of their Parents be believers, their
children are clean and holy. Which manifests clearly to all men of
understanding, that the children of Christian parents, are not only within the
Covenant, as well as the children of the Jews, but that they also are to be
consecrated unto God, as well as the Jews children were, as being holy and
clean, which was by the Sacrament or right of Circumcision amongst them, and
therefore ought to be by Baptism amongst us, the Seal of the Covenant of
admission: For the same way of admission of the Father into the family and
household of God was used to their children before the Law, and under the Law,
therefore the same way of admission of the Parents is to be used of admitting
their children under the Gospel, which is by Baptism: they being as well in
covenant and holy, as well as their Parents; But for farther proof that
children of Christian Parents, are still as well in covenant as the Jews were,
I shall desire you to learn what Saint Paul writes in his 1. Epistle to the
Thessalonians chap. 4. ver. 13. where he says unto them that did overmuch
sorrow for the death of their Christian friends and Children, I would not have
you to be ignorant brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow
not, even as others which have no hope, Meaning those that were without, that
were not in covenant with God: asserting by these words, that the Thessalonian
Christians were in a blessed condition, as being within the pale of the Church,
and in covenant with God: for such as were without the Covenant, were without
hope, and without God in the world, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. ver. 12.
which believers and their children are not, and therefore equal in all
privileges with the children of the Jews, and in Covenant as well as they
were, with the which words he greatly comforted the Thessalonians, and animated
them against the immoderate sorrow and grief for the death of their friends.
What a great wickedness is it therefore in the Anabaptists to affirm, as they
daily do, that the children of Christians are no more within the Covenant then
the children of Turks and Infidels, which is a mere fighting against God, and
a giving the Spirit of God the lie, and an overthrowing of the Scripture, which
proclaims them clean and holy, and within the covenant, which might be enough
for ever to satisfy any soberminded Christian, should I not add a word more
to what I have spoke. But because that it is a received opinion amongst all the
Anabaptists, that children of believing parents are no more within the Covenant
then Turks or Infidels, and that they have no more right to Baptism then catts
or dogs: for so they have been heard speak, I shall add an argument or two
more to the former, for the preserving of those that are yet in the truth from
their wicked errors, and for the confirming of others, and for the convincing
of all gainsayers, and for the comfort of all Christian parents and their
children: that they may all see, that they are equal in privileges with the
Jews and their children and thus I argue.

Those that are undr a better Covenant, and more sure promises by being
Christians whether Jews or Gentiles then they were before by being Jews, they
and their children are inferior to the Jews and their children in no
privileges belonging to heaven and happiness, but far above them.

But the Christian Jews, and believing Gentiles are under a better Covenant,
and more sure promises by being Christians, then they were before by being
Jews.

Ergo, They and their children are inferior to the Jews and their children in
no privileges belonging to heaven and happiness, but far above them: And
therefore if the Jews and their children were within the Covenant under the
old Testamen^, and received the seal of the Covenant, which was Circumcision
for the admission into their Church, then all the Christians and their children
under the Gospel, ought likewise to receive the Seal of the Covenant, which
is Baptism for their admission.

For the conclusion of this Syllogism, and the consequence from that, they
will stand undeniable, if the major and minor be proved: and they are
sufficiently evinced by the Aposile, writing to his Countrymen, in his Epistle
to the Hebrews, where he laboring to set forth their d^gnity now they were
Christians, and to show they lost nothing in any of their privileges by it,
and comparing them together, proves by many arguments through the whole
Epistle, that they being now Christians were in a much better condition, then
when they were Jews, and therefore that they should not be discouraged, or
think themselves in a worse estate then they were before, and in express
terms asserts, they were under a better covenant, and more sure promises. His
words are these, Heb. 7. ver. 20. 21. 22. And in as much as without an oath, he
was made a Priest (meaning Aaron) (for those Priests were made without an oath,
but this with an oath *mearing Christ) by him that said unto him, the Lord
swear, and w^ll not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech) by so much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament. And
chapter the 8. ver. 6. But now, says the Apostle, has he obtained a more
excellent ministry, by how much also he is a Mediator of a better Covenant,
which was established upon better promises. Here we find the words twice
reiterated for the more sure ratification of this truth. And what Saint Paul
writes to them, he writ to all other Christians, as we may see in the second
Epistle of Peter, chapter the third, ver. 15. 16.

Now then, if the believing Jews and their children were all in covenant with
God, and had equal right with their parents to the Seal of the covenant which
was Circumcision in their admission to the Church, and if the Christians
whether believing Jews or Gentiles are not with their seed still within the
covenant, and have not right to the Seal of the same, which is Baptism, in
their admission; then they are inferior to the Jews in Privileges, and under
a worse covenant, and not under a better and more sure promises, which is to
give the Spirit of God the lie, and to overthrow indeed the doctrine of the New
Testament: for the whole Scriptures of the New testament, witness that in all
respects they that embrace the faith are in a far better condition then the
Jews were, whose necks were under such a yoke (by Saint Peter's testimony Acts
the 15th, ver. 10.) as neither they, nor their forefathers could bear: whereas
Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden light, ^f Christ himself may be
believed, Math. 11. ver. 13. and therefore being Christians, they are now in a
far better cond^tion, and under a better covenant, and more sure promises
then they wre before, which is yet more evident from the Apostle Paul in the
second of the Cor. chap. the third, who says, God has made us able ministers
of the New Testament, not of the letter* but of the Spirit, for the letter
kills (says he) but the Spirit gives life. And then comparing the Covenants
together, the Old and New, though they were both glorious, as he asserteth, yet
he affirms that the covenant of the New Testament is far more glorious,
that being the ministration of the Spirit, the other the ministration of death,
and concludes in the ninth verse, if the ministration of condemnation be glory,
much more does the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory, and in the
18th verse he says, We all (now) with open face beholding, as in a glass the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as
by the Spirit of the Lord. So that if we did but duly consider the whole scope
of the Apostle in this chapter, and in all his other Epistles, we should find
that he labors to set forth the great honor and dignity of Christians above
the Jews, not only in regard of the more clear manifestation of the will of
God under the Gospel, and freeing them from all those burdensome and painful,
yea, and costly ceremonies, but in that they are in many respects preferred
before them: for whereas before the male children only and the males in
families were to receive the Seal of Circumcision, and that at a limited time:
Now by being Christians that difference is taken away, and all the families of
Christians both young and old, men, women, and children are to be admitted
after one and the same way, according to that of Saint Paul, Gal. the 4. ver.
27. 28. 29. For as many of you (says he) as have been baptized into Christ,
whether young or old, have put on Christ, there is neither Jew nor Greek,
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female; for ye are
all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the promise. Out of which words it is easy to gather, not
only that the believing Gentiles exceed the Jews in many respects, but that
they are still in covenant with God, and Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
promise. That is, they have right to all the promises, and are in covenant with
God, as well as Abraham's children were, and therefore in all the former
respects, and from the very testimony of Saint Paul, it is most evidently
manifest, that Christians and their children are under a better covenant, and
more sure promises by being Christians then the Jews were: but if according to
the doctrine of the Anabaptists, the children of Christians are not in covenant
still with God* and are not to be baptized, they are inferior to the Jews and
their children, who were all baptized into Christ by Moses in the cloud, and
in the seas, as Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 10. ver. 1. 2. 3. asserteth, whose words are
these; Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our
fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all
baptized by Moses (into Christ) in the cloud, and in the sea, etc. Now that
children were there as well as men and women (which some of the Anabaptists
lately denied) it is apparent from the first of Exodus, and from the 10th
chapeer of the same Book, where it is related, that Moses told Pharaoh, that
they must have their child^en as well as their men, to go to sacrifice in the
Wilderness, and would not depart and leave Egypt, without their children which
from many more places may be proved: as in the 14th of Numbers ver. third,
where the people said, Wherefore has the Lord brought us to this land, to fall
by the sword, that our wives and our children should be a prey etc. For which
their wicked and rebellious murmuring against God, in the 30th verse, the Lord
says unto them, Doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I
swear to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Iephunnieth and Joshua
the son of Nun. But your little ones which ye said should be a prey, them
will I bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised, etc. Out
of all the which places it sufficiently appears that their little children
were in the sea, and in the cloud, and were baptized by Moses as well as their
men and women, which the Anabaptists stiffly deny Withal, it may here be taken
notice of, that Baptism or washing does not always signify a dipping over
head and ears; For all our fathers were baptized into Christ by Moses in the
Sea, and yet they passed through the Sea on dry land, as the story at large
declares, the which also might be proved from many other witnesses of holy
Writ, but this I speak only by the way. The maine thing in hand is to prove,
that Christians whether Jews or Gentiles and their children, are in no
privileges inferior to the Jews and their children, which was ratified by
all the places above quoted and that of Saint Peter, Acts the 15th, where he
says, God put no difference between the believing Jews, and the believing
Gentiles, and that of Saint Paul Cor. 1. chap. 7. where he asserteth, that the
children borne though of but one of the believing Parents, are clean and holy
and out of the places in the 7th and 8th chapters of his Letter to the
Hebrews, where he says, they are under a better Covenant and more sure
promises; better therefore every manner of way, which it could not be, if
Christians and their children were not still in covenant with God as well as
they, and if they had not, they and their children equal right to Baptism as
the Jews and their children had to Circumcision and if they did not indeed
exceed them in all privileges, which to deny, is no better then to deny the
Scripture, and give the Spirit of God the lie, for the Scripture says, that
Christians and their children are within the Covenant and are both made one,
are holy and clean, and that there is no difference between the believing
Gentiles and the very Apostles, yea that Christians are under a better
covenant, and more sure promises, all which truths the Anabaptists stiffly deny,
and spend all their strength to fight against. Now I appeal to any
understanding Christian, whether it be not great flattery in any man to style
the Anabaptist a harmless people? If any amongst us should but rob his
neighbor of a Calfe, or a Sheep, or of some of his Lambs or should but cause
his cattle to wander and stray to their destruction, or should but raze the
names of his children and progeny out of his evidences, and assert they had no
right to their fathers estates, or say they were unlawfully begotten or were
bastards, or should really endeavor to rob their Parents of their children or
steal away the affections of their wives from their husbands, or the husbands
from their wives and their children, or servants from their Parents or Masters,
is there any man, I say, of sound understanding that would think such a
generation of people, a harmless company of men, much less call them the
harmless men, when they do all the in^ury to people that men possibly can
do? How therefore can any man call the Anabaptists a harmless people, when
they not only thrust the children of Christian parents out of covenant with
God, and raze out their names out of the divine records, telling them, that
their children are no more in covenant with God then Turks and Infidels* and
that they have no more right to Baptism then catts and dogs, proclaiming them
to the world, an unc^eane and unholy generation* laboring to seduce the
people, and to lead them into damnable errors, and b^ that means rob the
Parents and Masters of their children and servants, and steal away the
affections of those that are joined together in most relations, and that
against all the laws of God and Nations, which is indeed the greatest robbery
and unrighteousness that can be perpetrated against God or men, for it not
only robs God of his honor and glory by making nothing of his holy Word,
but parents likewise of their children, and the comforts of their children whom
their parents according to the doctrine of the Anabaptists cannot look upon,
but as on a company of Infidels, and when they dye, can have no more hope of
their eternal happiness then of the happiness of a heathen, which must needs
sad the hearts of all such as bear any real affection to their children when
they cannot behold them, but with such thoughts as that dying without the
Covenant they are damned.

If when Christ came toward Jerusalem, he wept over it, foreseeing their
misery, how must those Parents that dearly love their children, weep over them
when they die, of whom they have no hope? Yea, it must needs exceedingly sad the
hearts of such Parents, and make them greatly to mourn, and be over-sorrowfull
at the death of any of their children, if they have any tender affections
toward them, if they believe the principles of the Anabaptists, who account
children of Christian Parents no better then Infidels and Heathens. But Saint
Paul in the first of the Thessaloniaxs and the 4th, has taught all Christians
not to mourn as those without hope, knowing that they and their children are
within the Covenant, and therefore all these tenants of the Anabaptists make
them not only an hurtful people to all good Christians and their children, but
a company of fighters against God, and such as must one day give a dreadful
account (if they speedily repent not) for all these their unchristian, and
unrighteous proceedings.

But say ^ste Anabaptists, these are arguments by consequent, which are not
binding. But had we only arguments by consequence they would be sufficiently
binding, being grounded upon the holy Scripture, and divine authority and taken
from Presidents of the like nature: for Christ himself has taught us so to
argue, who in the 22. of Matthew, to prove one of the greatest points of the
Christian says against the false teachers of his time, viz. The Resurrection
of the dead, he evidenceth it from this, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were
living* and therefore by consequence that there should be a Resurrection: which
the Saduces excepted not then against, alleging that it was but an argument by
consequence, and therefore not binding, they poor ignorant souls were not so
learned as our Anabaptists.

Saint Paul also in the first of the Cor. and the 15th chap. proves the
Resurrection of the dead with many arguments by consequence, as is there to be
seen at large. Now if arguments by consequence will stand good from both
Christ's and Paul's example and doctrine to prove the fundamentallest point of
religion, without which all preaching is vain, and our faith is vain, as the
Apostle affirms, had we no better arguments, they upon the same grounds would
ever hold good for the confirmation of our faith in any point of religion of
less consequence. But we have not only arguments by consequence to prove that
the children of the believing Jews were Baptized and therefore that the
children of believing Gentiles ought also to be baptized, but express
Scripture, as I proved before from the Commission of John the Baptist's and
Christ's Disciples, before Christ's death, and from their practice who were sent
to baptize the Jews without distinction or limitation, either of age or sex,
and who as the Scripture records* Baptized all that came unto their ministry*
they only excepted that rejected the counsel of the Lord against themselves)
which neither women nor children, nor none of the people did but the Saduces
Pharisees, and Lawyers and their accomplices, who neither entered into the
Kingdom of heaven themselves, nor would suffer others to enter, by their good
wills* though the Publicans and harlots believed John and were saved, Math. ^1.
ver. 31. 32. and all the other people were baptized, both men, women and
children for Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan
were baptized by the Baptist, and all that waited upon Christ's ministry, and
the world that followed him were baptized, for the Disciples baptized more then
John, and all that attended upon their ministry, for we read of none that were
exempted but the abovenamed, amongst which women and children are not included.

And even after the Ascension of Christ, we read that in the City of Samaria
Acts the 8th, from the greatest to the least, both men and women were baptized;
and we read that Cornelius his whole Family, and all his friends there with
him, were baptized, Acts the 10. ver. 48. and of Lydia and her household Acts
the 16. ver. the 15th and the Jailer and all his household ver. 33. and of
Stephanus and his household* 1 Cor. the 1. ver. 16. who were all baptized; which
is more then if they had said, that they baptized all the men and women in
those families, for Household includes all, young and old, of all sects and
ages, and therefore all the children as well as grown persons in the several
families of those that then embraced the Faith were baptized, and made
partakers of the Seals of the Covenant, and of the Promises according to the
old manner of admission under the Old Testament as well as the Parents, and
masters of those families. Seeing therefore we have such pregnant proofs out
of the holy Scripture, and such a cloud of witnesses for the confirmation of
this truth, that children of christian Parents are as well in covenant as their
Parents, and that they were also baptized; for their whole households were
baptized with them, it must needs be a great fighting against the truth, and an
exceeding wrong to all Christian Parents to exclude their children, not only
from the Seals of the Covenant of Grace, but from the Covenant it self, which
the Anabaptists most impiously and injuriously do, affirming they are no more
now in Covenant, then the children of Turks and Infidels, nor have no more
right to baptism then catts or dogs, which if it be not the greatest
unrighteousness that can be committed. I know not what unrighteousness is:
for if we compare the children of those that are in covenant with God, with
their Parents and the Privileges that both God in his Word grants unto them,
and Christ himself did afford unto them, with those that are given to their
Parents, we shall find no difference between the children and their Parents,
but that they are all equal in favor with God, and equal in privileges, and
we shall find also as many significations of Gods and Christ's love unto them,
and as many ways to express it, as to their Parents, and therefore they are
as dearly beloved of God, and as well in covenant with him, and have as much
right unto the Seal of the Covenant as they, and equal every way in
privileges with them: and for proof of what I now say, I shall briefly
declare it by some instances, I will begin with the covenant of God made with
Abraham Genes. the 17. where God equally ingages himself to the children of
Abraham, as to Abraham himself, promising that he would be his God, and the
God of his seed, and enjoynes him to Circumcise all his children, and those in
his family, as well as himself, and makes it a Law for ever with him, and with
all strangers, Exodus the 12. ver. 48. that should embrace the doctrine of
Abraham to do the same, and commands through all generations, that the male
children should as well be circumcised as their Parents, they being as well in
covenant with him as their Parents. And God has in all Ages as equally
preserved their children from the fury of their enemies as their Parents, and
kept their little children from destruction and drowning in Pharoahs time,
Exodus 1. as well as their Parents, and so in all their Perigrinations in the
Wilderness. Yea, he destroyed their Parents and saved their children, calling
their children his children, though their Parents were rebellious: Now
therefore when God shows equal care and affection to their children, that he
did to their Parents, and equalizeth them equally in their Privileges, what a
madness is it in any to make a difference between them?

And Christ himself reproves his Disciples for hindering little children to
come unto him* and commands them, to suffer them to be brought unto him, and
gives reasons why they should be brought unto him, saying, that they were of
the Church as well as they, and that they belonged unto the Kingdom of heaven
as well as they; The words are these, Matthew. the 19th, ver. 23. 24. 25. Then
(says the Evangelist) were there brought unto him little children, that he
should put his hands on them and pray: and the Disciples rebuked them: but
Jesus said, suffer little children, and forbid them not to come unto me: for of
such is the Kingdom of heaven and he laid his hnads on them. And Saint Mark
chap. the 10. ver. 14. says, that Christ was much displeased with his
Disciples because they forbad them, and adds more-over, ver. 16. That he took
them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them. Greater
significations and testimonies of favor, Christ showed to none: which is a
sufficient argument to prove that he loved them with equa^l love to their
Parents, as being as well in covenant with him as they. And if it be duly
weighed and considered what Christ there speaks concerning them, and what he
does to them, it will be a sufficient confirmation to us, that they had a right
to the Baptism of water as well as they had to circumcision: for he blessed
them with a spiritual blessing, and showed as much love to them as to any that
came to him: for he took them up in his arms and laid his hands upon them,
and blessed them: Now this was a spiritual blessing, which argues they were
sprituall persons; neither were ever any cursed that God blessed. Baalam had
learned that lesson, Numb. 23. ver. 19. 20. Yea God told Abraham that he would
bless them that blessed him and curse those that cursed him therefore those
little children that Christ blessed, they were blessed for ever: and that it was a
spiritual blessing that Christ bestowed upon those little children, it is
evident, for they were not brought unto him as sick or weak, or lame, or
blind, or as laden with any infirmities, but only that he should put his hands
on them, and pray for them, which was a spiritual favor, and the childrens
bread which he bestowed upon them, laying his hands upon them, and blessing
them, reproving his Disciples for hindering them of his prayers, and commanding
them for ever after to suffer little children to come unto him, saying, that of
such are the kingdom of heaven, that is, that they were spiritual persons,
and that they were as well of the Church as themselves, and belonged to heaven,
and were of the household of God as well as they they being members of the
Church, and of the family of Abraham as well as themselves, yea, Christ putting
his hands upon them and blessed them, which are childrens bread and the
peculiar priviledgs of his people. Now, when Christ himself the Mediator of
the New Covenant graces little children with as much favor, as he did any that
came unto him, and blesses them with everlasting blessings, and with blessings
of the highest price and rank, it sufficiently declares that they had right to
blessings of inferior a^ay, and that they had right to the Baptism of Water
as well as their Parents, as being the children of Abraham, and his people in
covenant and holy persons. And for ought any thing can be said to the contrary,
those little children might formerly have been baptized by the Disciples, as
others were, and therefore they being no way infirm, the Disciples might
think they had no need to come to their Master, and therefore forbad them:
but, I say, how ever it were, that Christ reproves his Disciples for it, and
commands them to suffer little children for the future to come to him, and in
that he prays for them, and bestowed a spiritual blessing and favor upon
them, saying, that theirs was the kingdom of heaven, it abundantly proves to
me that they had a right unto Baptism, and being as dearly beloved of Christ,
as any other of the Nation. Which a great comfort to all Christian Parents and
their children, when they consider Gods and Christ's love toward them.

But if we consider other passages and duly weigh Christ's actions, and
expressions toward little children at other times, and what he says and
testifies of them* the truth will yet more perspicuously appear, viz, that
children of Christian parents have a right to Baptism, and that the children
of the Jews as well as their Parents were equal in Privileges, and were as
well baptized as they. When our Savior Christ reproved his Disciples for their
dispute, which of them should be greatest: it is related Mark the 9. ver. 36.
37. That Christ took a child, and set him in the midst of them, and when he
had taken him in his arms he said unto them: Whosoever shall receive one of
such children in my Name, receives me: and whosoever shall receive me,
receives not me, but him that sent me. And ver. 42. he says. Whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it is better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and and he were cast into the sea. And in
the 17th of Matthew. it is recorded there, that when there was a dispute amongst
the Disciples who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven, Christ to discide
this controversy, ver. 2. called a little child unto him, and set him in the
midest of them, and said, except yea be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, whosoever therefore
shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the
kingdom of heaven. And who so shall receive one such little child in my name
receives me, but whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in
me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that
he were drowned in the depth of the Sea, and ver. 10. speaking unto his
Disciples, he says unto them take heed ye despise not one of these little
ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven there Angels do always behold the
face of my Father which is in heaven, etc. These words of our blessed Savior
concerning little children borne of the Jewish Nation, then his people in
Covenant with him require a deep consideration; and truly if they be rightly
weighed* they may be an excellent means, if not to put an end to the
controversy between us and the Anabaptists, yet of convincing many gainsayers*
who have mean and low thoughts of little children: for Christ in these words
does greatly magnify the dignity of little children, where he proclaims the
same blessings to such as shall in his Fathers name receive them, as he does to
any that shall receive his Disciples or a Prophet: affirming that they that
received them, receive himself, and him that sent him, and they that shall
offend any one of them, it were better that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were cast into the midst of the Sea. And he pronounces no
greater judgments against the greatest enemies of his Church. Moreover, Christ
in terminis says, they believe in him. If any shall ask me how that can be
that little children believe? I answer that Christ has said it who is the
author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. the true witness who cannot lie,
and who can as well work faith in little children, who does whatsoever he will
in heaven and earth Psalm, 115. as to put into the heart of good Josiah when he
was young* and but eight years of age* to seek after the God of David his
father, and to do that which was right in the sight of the Lord, 2 Chro. 34.
ver. 1. 2. 3. And who found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel in
the little child a wicked Jeroboam* 1 King. the 14. ver. 13. Which good God
himself wrought in him. And all reason will dictate unto any man, that God can
as well work faith in little children, as fill John Baptist with the holy
Ghost, even from his mothers womb, Luke the 1. ver. 15th. according to that of
Christ, John the 3. ver. 8. The wind blows where it lists; the Spirit of
God can as well work his graces in little children, as in grown persons, who
has ordained strength out of the months of babes and sucklings to still the
enemy and avenger, Psalm. 8. ver. 2. and as Christ says to perfect his praise,
Matthew. 21. ver. 16. I say therefore in regard of the great power of God, and in
regard of so many Presidents of his wonderful working of grace and good in
little children, and in regard that Christ himself has said, that the little
children of the Jews did believe in him, I do believe that they had faith in
Christ, and by virtue of that had right unto Baptism, as well as their parents.

But which is yet more, Christ says not only little Children believe in him,
but that the offending of the least of them, not only exceedingly displeases
him, but excludes the despisers of them out of heaven; and for further terror
to such as should offend them, he says, that their Angels behold his Fathers
face in Heaven, intimating that little children have a guard of Angels, to
protect and defend them, and to punish their enemies; so that whatsoever can
make any of the most eminent servants of God, to be in esteem amongst men, and
whatsoever Privileges they are graced with* the same things are to be found in
the little children of believing Parents, and such as are in covenant with God:
for they by Christ's testimony, have humility and faith, and a guard of Angels
to attend them, as well as men and women, and God is their Father as well as
theirs, and Christ is their Redeemer as well as theirs, Who says ver. 11. that
he came to save those as well as they; asserting moreover they that received
such little children, receive with them Christ and God, and they that offend
them are accursed. Now then when little children partake in all the eminentest
privileges, which the ancientest believers are graced with, and are in as high
esteem in Gods account as they, by all reason they are not only capable of
Baptism, but have a right unto it as well as their Parents, as being in the
covenant as well as they. And truly it may not be passed over slightly, which
adds something yet to the dignity of little children, Jesus Christ sends his
Disciples to school to those little children, and makes them his Disciples
masters, and from them bids them learn their first ^esson of ^u^ility and
selfe-denyall tell^ng them that unless they become like one of them, they
should never enter into the kingdom of heaven; which is as great a dignity as
can almost be conferred upon the sons of men, to be made, the masters and
teachers, to those that were to teach the world: for in some respects Christ
equaliseth those little children with himself, for Matthew. the 11th. ver. 28.
he says unto all such as would be saved Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly
of heart. And here he so dignifieth little children, that he sends his
Disciples to school to them, which I affirm is as eminent a favor as he
showed to any men, when he was upon eatth: and therefore doubtless those that
Christ so graced in all respects are worthy of Baptism, and have a right unto
it: and all such as despise little children borne of Christian parents, and
count them Infidels highly offend.

Yea there are other passages yet not to be passed by concerning little
children. It is related Math. 21. ver. 14. 15. 16. That the blind and the lame
came unto Christ in the Temple, and he healed them: And when the chief Priests
and Scribes saw the wonderful things that he did and the children crying in
the Temple, and saying Hosanna to the Son of David; they were sore displeased
and said unto Christ, hear thou what they say? And Jesus says unto them,
yea: have ye not read out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, thou have
perfected praise? Here we see, that when Christ's enemies were offended at the
acclamation of the children, Christ allowed of their witness, and confirms it
by Scripture, teaching all men that they did well, and their duty, and that God
was honored by it, and that in all ages God would be glorified by the very
mouths of babes and sucklings, who should set forth his praises as they did:
so that by the words of Christ, it is sufficiently manifest, that they
confessed him before men, and were not ashamed of him, and he had taught his
Disciples and all men, that they that confess him before men, he would
confess them before his Father in heaven, and here he approved of them, and
owned them as his witnesses, which is also as high a dignity as is conferred
upon any of Christ's followers, and therefore I will never doubt to conclude,
that those children had right to Baptism that Christ so honors, and that they
were baptized by John and Christ's Disciples amongst the other people, and world
that followed Christ; for Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the regions round
about Jordan were baptized, and Christ's Disciples baptized more then John, and
children by Christ's testimony believed in him, and confessed him as well as
others, Ergo, they were baptized. And therefore in all these regards, I may use
the same words to all the Anabaptists that Saint Peter used, when the Holy
Ghost fell on them in Cornelius his house. Can any man (says he) forbid water,
that these should not be baptized, that have received the holy Ghost as well
as we* Acts 10th, 47. I say in all these regard* I may say unto the
Anabaptists, Who can forbid water, that the children of those that are borne of
such parents as are in covenant with God as the Jews children then were, and
Christians children now are should not be baptized, God having graced them
with such eminent significations of his favor, and owning them so often to be
his children, and having put no difference between the Christian Jews and
their children, and Christian Gentiles and their children; yea, they being now
under a better Covenant, and more surer promises? Surely all those that do
forbid water, that the children of Christian Parents should not be baptized,
are such as withstand God, which Saint Peter durst not do, Acts 11. ver. 16.
and for my part I never will do, who by Gods assistance shall live and dye in
this faith, that children as well as women and men amongst the Jews, had not
only right to Baptism as well as their Parents, but that they were really
Baptized: and that the children of the Christian Gentiles were as well baptized
in their several families as their Parents, and that they ought still to be,
till the coming of Christ, and in this faith by the grace of God I will live
and dye.

This Mr. Smart, to gratify your desire. I thought fit to write unto you, whom
I truly love in the Lord that you may know not only my opinion concerning this
point of controversy, but have by you my reasons for the same. All that I have
now to say unto you, is this; The times in which we live are perilous times,
in respect of the many dangerous and desperate opinions that are now abroad
destructive to the life of godliness, which our Baptism ties unto, and
tending to the ruin of Christian Religion, and disturbing of Church and State
if the Lord from heaven by his mighty power does not rebuke this spirit of
error that is now gone out into the world, yea, it is sad presage that great
Judgments hang yet over this Land for the preventing of the which, we ought
cortinually to be put upon the duties of fasting and prayer, and all
watchfulness in them, the means that God himself has appointed for the
diverting of his wrath, and to these duties we ought to the uttermost of our
power to join a godly life, and a holy conversation, as we have covenanted by
our baptism, that so we may set forth the praises of him that has called us
out of darkness into his mavelous light; knowing that the grace of God, that
brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world, looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing
of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, which that you and I, and all
such as fear his Name may do, and for ever persevere with all constancy in
the truth, is the daily prayer of him

April this 27. 1647. That loves you for our Masters sake, JOHN BASTVVICK.

Errata.
PAge 6. line 33. for Mountain, read Mountague. P. 7. l. 32. for which
incertaine freemen and bonds, r. within certain Precincts and bounds. P. 8.
li. 16. for forced, r. fed. P. 8. l. 24. for and, r* nor. P. 14. l. 24. for a
man this, r. this man a. P. 20 l. 27. for in Jerusalem, r. Jerusalem. P. 20.
line ult. for the concerning, etc. read, the places above quoted all the doubt
is concerning the Major which being.

FINIS.

