Basilius Valentinus, Monk, of the Order of St. BENNET: His last WILL and
TESTAMENT.

Which being alone, He hid under a Table of Marble, behind the High-Altar of
the Cathedral Church, in the Imperial City of Erford: leaving it there to be
found by him, whom Gods Providence should make worthy of it.

WHEREIN, He sufficiently, declares the ways he wrought to obtain the
Philosophers Stone: which he taught unto his fellow Collegians, so that they
all attained the said Philosophers Stone, whereby not only the leprous bodies
of the impure, and inferior Metals are reduced unto the pure and perfect body
of Gold and Silver, but also all manner of diseases whatsoever are cured in the
bodies of unhealthfull men, and kept thereby in perfect health unto the
prolonging of their lives.

A Work long expected.

LONDON, Printed by W.B. for T. Davis, and are to be sold at his shop in St.
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bible over against the little North door,
1658.

To the Reader.
gratis, even such diseases, which humane learning judged to be incurable: and
if he got any riches, he supplied the wants of the needy.

Let not the vicious hearts and hands presume to meddle with it, lest in stead
of a blessing they should meet with a curse. Therefore, Procul hinc, procul ite
prophani.

In this book are contained these following heads.
1. THe nature, condition, and property of Myne-works, in which Minerals and
Metals do grow; of their first seed, birth, quality, and property, and of their
exhalation and inhalation, how they are supported in their growth and
augmentation.

2. The occasion of Oars, Stones, Rocks, Marbles, of their passages and Clefts,
their Liquors, Juyces, Energies, and operations, viz. of Gold, Silver, Copper,
Iron, Tin, Lead, Quicksilver, and of Minerals.

3. A plain literal expression of that Universal Elixar, whereby a healthful
life is prolonged, all diseases expelled, and abundance of riches obtained:
with a perfect Declaration of the XII. Keys.

4. A particular Description of Metals, whereby their several endowments are
declared, how they serve to keep man in perfect health, with many Manuals for
the working of them to serve man to live more comfortably in outward means; and
how Metals and Minerals in particular are brought to their highest preparation,
whereby is procured that men may live in this World without wanting things
necessary.

5. A transcendent, most precious wonderful Medicine of Metals and Minerals,
and of other things, which the Creator of heaven and earth, and all the things
contained therein, ordained for the good of man.

PREFACE AND ENTRANCE UPON BASILIUS VALENTINUS His last TESTAMENT.
WHereas the time is come, that by the good pleasure of Almighty God my
Creator, and his dearly beloved Son JESUS CHRIST, my Laboratorie in this
corruptible World draws to an end, and am to approach from this earthly
Laboratorie unto the heavenly, and am creeping daily and hourly nearer to the
end, and am to close according to the appointed time of my dear Savior, aiming
at the true Manna, or heavenly food of Eternal bliss, sighing continually
after the enjoying of such riches, which have a fullness of everlasting joys I
thought it my duty in conscience, to be reconciled i^ a Christian way to my
fellow Members that are aliv^ at the present, and with those, which are to
succeed i^ future ages, so that my Soul may be at rest, patient waiting for the
Lords call, and to become an inhabitant of that heavenly Paradise, and to be
matriculated into the book of life, and stand in readiness da^ and night to
look for my Lords coming. At the consideration hereof I call to mind my
writings, which set down to paper, as other ancient Philosophers have done
before me, publishing all such mysteries of nature, whereby Artists, and such
that bear an affection and love unto such mystical truths may be benefited, and
the same I lovingly and readily leave t^ them, as much as the highest
Spagyrick, and heavenly Physician has granted and revealed unto me; My
conscience further has pressed me, in the pursuance of a Christian love, and
performance of my promise, dictated by nature, to make a larger relation,
because it is a thing meet and necessary to set forth the Manuals which are
belonging hereunto, and ought to be described circumstantially, to inform the
judgment of such men, addicted hereunto to the full; namely how natures bolts,
which she several ways thrusted forward, to lock strongly her secrets, are to
be thruste^ back, that the doors of worldly Treasures might be unlockt, that
the knowledge of transcendent mysterie^ may be attained unto, and upon serious
continued prayers unto the Creator, men's judgment and understanding might the
more be egged on.

I am not put upon either by force or indigencie, nor by a vain-glorie, or
self-end to set down any letter; and to leave it to posterity; only a mere
consideration of the frailty and, of the miserableness of this world where the
Children of darkness are almost quite lost in their groaping ways, has
caused me to do so. I am not able to express how much my mind is perplexed,
when I think on the folly of this frail world, and consider the Cymmerian
darkness of its Children, which think themselves of deep understanding, when
they have heard some fopperies of their University Chair-men discoursed of,
thereby supposing to be much enlightened in their understandings. Where is that
high and precious Medicine of the ancient Philosophers, which lived before any
University was talked, or heard of, who received their Revelations upon an
earnest pious prayer unto God, joining thereunto their daily searchings into
natural things, and laying their hands to the work. Whither I say, is fled
their painfulnesse and industry? Surely to no other place, than to the horrid,
impure, and sordid Apothecaries shops, deeply precipitated and buried in the
earth, and sunk so deep, that the ringing nor sounding of bells, and beating of
Morters are able to rouse it: thus their praise and the glory of the highest
is at a stand! and who produces any good of it? Thus much am I persuaded, that
if my writings shall be produced to light after my death, and the judicious
posterity, the Apostles and Disciples of them do rightly read, meditate, nnd
understand them well, and do out of a Christian intention seek, dive, and work
the same only to the glory of God, and the love and charity of their fellow
brethren and Christians, than by means of their actions and works, that depend,
from such good and proper fundamentals, will be discovered and laid open to the
public view, all those fopperies and forgeries, which these great mouthed
vainglorious fellows, and high conceited fools, which proclaim themselves to
be the sole Physicians and Masters of both Medicines, that is of the inward and
outward, and arrogate to themselves great dignities and worths in the world,
when there is no cause for it. Their intentions are set upon no other
foundations, but to live in great respect, to haunt after vain-glorie with a
seared conscience, to deprive their fellow Christians of their moneys by
cheating, all they look for, is to be talked of, and live in reputation; they
stick full of diabolical pride and vanity up to the ears, these in the end, in
great woe and misery have their poor Souls drowned most lamentably! woe, woe,
to you Children of Satan! Here I intend not to use any prolixity of words, nor
to bring in any such matters, which are heterogeneal to my purpose; at the
closing of my book I will be more large in my expressions, as far as the
heavenly Prince shall enable me to do, where, as for a final Corollarie to all
my writings, I shall annex things with that proviso and entreaty, that all
those, which intend to be real, and conscionable in their Medicaments, may aid
and cure their oppressed fellow Christians, and to search and inquire into such
things, which God for such purposes has ordained, and implanted them into
nature.

This present book of mine deserves to be called [A light unto darknesse] for
other things, which in my former writings I have discoursed of by way of
parables, which style I made use of the rather, because it is proper to
Philosophers, are declared in this my last information, where I deal in plain
and clear words, describing, and naming the matter openly, showing the
preparations from the beginning, to the middle and end, demonstrating, and
setting before the eyes of men the matter in general and particular,
confirming, and justifying the truth thereof, and making a distinction betwixt
the ground and no ground, in so plain terms, that the very Children may
understand, and feel it with their hands. And because this book affords
another knowledge, differing from others of my writing, wherein I have not
written so obscurely, nor made I use of such subtilties, as the ancients did,
who lived before me, and ended their days happily, therefore does it require
another place also to be laid up in, and kept secret from the perverseness of
men in the world. I do not desire it should be buried with me, to be a prey,
and food for Worms, but it shall be left above ground, and kept secret, from
wicked men, and my purpose is, that it shall be laid into a secret place, where
none shall come near it, but he, for whom God has ordained it, other writings
of mine shall sooner see the public light.

But know thou, whoever thou art, into whose hand this my last Testament comes,
which contains the Revelation of heavenly and earthly mysteries, it will happen
to thee by a divine providence, to whose custody, at my devotion then
performed, I committed it, depositing the same into that secret place together
with other things, not enforced upon any grounds of necessities, or
straightnesses, to leave it there, only for him, whom Gods goodness shall
appoint to find it. For it is not good for me to let God's Creatures and
mystery, which are too abstruse already, and stepped from the light into
darkness, by reason of the malicious perverseness of the wicked world to die
with me, as envious men are with to do with gifts, they are entrusted withal;
but even leave a glimpse of truth and of the clear heaven, thinking befitting
to discharge my conscience in putting forth the talent to usury, let the will
of the Lord be done in him, whom he deemeth to be worthy of it, into whose care
and diligence I commit it from henceforth and for ever. For I a Cloyster-man,
and an unworthy Servant of the Divine infinite Trinity confess, and
ackowledge, that I should never have come so far in my knowledge of these
endless mysteries, in the Analogy of natural things, in the melioration, and
changing their qualities, for a sure and strong upholding of this profound
knowledge of the true Medicine, according to this Ordinance (whereby I am ready
to do good to all and every one, which desires my help herein) which as I have
done hitherto, so my desire is that God would enable me to do the same to the
last of my breathing I say I should never have attained unto it, if by God
special goodness, grace, and mercy, several books had not come into my hands,
written of ancient Masters which departed this life a long time before me,
causing great joy to me, stirring up in me a return of hearty thanks to God,
who so graciously was pleased in his providence to bestow them on me in the
Cloister before any of my Fellows.

I do speak it without any vain-glorie, I have done so much good thereby to my
Fellow Christians, as ever was possible for me to do, which next to God,
returned thanks for it, even to the end of my days.

Now whereas I can be Steward no longer, I have done according as my abilities
would give leave: let others also be industrious, and not defective in their
Stewardship. I return mine into the faithful hands of God Almighty, and
deliver up to his Divine power and glory, instead of the Keys for the house,
all the allotted mysteries set down here in my writing; leaving them to his
disposing, to bestow them after my death unto him, whom his Divine will shall
choose thereunto, to be for the knowledge of his praiseworthy name, the good
and help of such, that stand in want of necessaries and health, for the
avoiding and shunning of all worldly pomp, pride, wantonness, luxury,
rashness, pleasure, covetousness, and spightfulnesse, or contempt of others.

O Lord God Almighty, merciful, Gracious Father of thine only begotten Son
Jesus Christ, who art only the Lord of Sabbath, the principle of all things
that are made by thy Word, and definite end of all Creatures above and below; I
poor miserable Man, and Earth-worm, return thanks with my babbling tongue from
the innermost Center of my heart, who have been pleased to enlighten me with
the great light of thy heavenly and earthly wisdom, and the greatest mysteries
of the created secrecies and treasures of this World, together with thy Divine
saving word, by which I learn to know thine Almighty power and wonders. To thee
belongs eternal praise, honor, and glor^e, from eternity unto eternity, that
thou have bestowed on me health and lively hood, strength, and ability, to be
helpful to my fellow Christians in their necessities and inflicted infirmities
with those mystical healing Medicines, together with such spiritual comforts,
to raise the drooping spirits. Lord, to thee alone belongs power, might, and
glory, to thee is the praise, honor, and gratefulness, for all the mercies
and graces thou have bestowed on me, and have preserved me therein till to this
my great age, and lowest weakness. O! thou God of all graces, and father of
all comforts, be not angry with me, that I deliver up to thee, mine eternal
Creator, the Keys of my Stewardship, wrapped up in this Pergamene, according to
the duty, my calling and conscience calls for: with these thou suffer'st me to
keep house the most of my time, till now, thou have called, and foreseen me to
be thy servant and Steward, and have graciously afforded, that I should enjoy
the noble sweet fruits, which were gathered in thy Almonarie to my last instant
end, which now, O Lord, lies in thy power. I beseech thee for the dear merits
of Jesus Christ, come now, when thou please, enclose my heart, receive my Soul
into thy heavenly Throne of grace, let her be recommended unto thee graciously,
O thou faithful God, who have redeemed her on the holy Cross with the most
precious Tincture of the true blood of thy holy body: then is my life well
ended on this earth, grant to the body a quiet rest, till at the last day,
body and soul join again, and are of a heavenly composition: for now my only
desire is to be dissolved, and to be with my Lord Christ, The which thou
Almighty, Holy, and Heavenly Trinity grant to me, and all good Christian
believers. Amen.

That I may come to the work intended, and make a beginning of the work in
hand, if God be pleased to let this book come to thy hands, before all things
uncessantly you return hearty, and unfeigned thanks for it: in the next place
I beseech him to bestow on thee also grace and blessing, a healthful body,
succesfully to accomplish all the points set down here, which tend to the
welfare and benefit of thy Neighbor, and to prepare them according to the
Manuals, which to that end I set down, and prescribe them, that you may happily
and succesfully begin the work, that the middle and end be correspondent
thereunto. Then be not flap-tong'd, and resolve absolutely in thy he^^t, not to
entrust with these mysteries any malicious, ungrateful, and false men, much
less should thou make them partakers thereof: for if Almighty God would
bestow it on others, he could do it immediately, and grant the same by other
means and ways without thee. Therefore look to it, tempt not the Lord thy God,
for he will not be mocked. Be silent and reserving; be meditating on Gods
punishment, which no your is able to outrun; keep a good intention; let not
man greedy mind run on how you may get abundance of Gold and Silver riches,
and vanity, but before all things, which are written herein, let that be your
chi fest aim, how you may appear helpful in word and deed to promote the
health of thy Neighbor Christian: Then have you given, and brought an offering
of thanks and God will bestow more upon thee, and with such Revelations will
come to thee, more than ever you would have believed.

Therefore instead of a perfect Physic book I have annexed at the end those
precious Medicines; with which even to this hour, I have cured succesfully many
d fficult Symptoms, and diseases, held by others to be incurable: which I
recommend unto thee with the rest of the things contained in these writings, to
thy conscience to be wary, and not to abuse any of them, as much as thy life
and Soul is near and dear unto thee.

If thou receivest this faithful admonition and wa^ning, which I give unto
thee here and there at the beginning, middle, and end, and in other places
also, and do accordingly, then thou can not be too thankful for these
things, which through Gods permission shall be intimated and made known to thee
out of this book

But in case thou will strive against my faithful warning and fatherly
admonition, these mysteries, which were hid from the learned, and thou sufferst
to come into strange hands! look to thy self, blame not me, think not that
there is any reconciliation for thee, being cut off from all those, which live
and die in Christ.

Thus I let it rest, committing execution to the Highest, which dwells in
Heaven, who punishes and avengeth all manner of sins, vices, iniquities, and
covenant-breakings. Whereas I thought it necessary thus to describe this my
Declaration before my other Writings, and to prove the same with examples, that
every one, whom God shall judge to be worthy of, may conceive, understand, and
fathom the true beginning, the true middle, and the true end of all created
things. Thereupon I purposed to make a beginning of it with a necessary
relation of the Original, beginning, and existencie of Minerals and Metals,
from which arises this most noble and precious Medicine, whereby is procured a
healthful long life, and abundance of riches are obtained: Namely from whence
Minerals and Metals have their original, how they be brought to light, that
searchers into Natural things may know the whole Nature in her circumference,
before ever they lay hand to the work, and acquaint themselves well therewith:
then still the one will stream and run forth the other, one Art will produce
the other; at last all what is sought for, will be overtaken in joy, and that
which has been longed for, will happily be enjoyed.

This my book I divide into five parts, each of them is subdivided into certain
Chapters and Parts. A^ for the style used here, it ought not to be expected to
be any other than is meet for a Miner, after the condition of Mine-works,
waving all Rhetoric, and Poetical^ manne of eloquent expressions.

I. In the first part of my intended work I will describe chiefly the manner
nature and properties of Myne-works, in which grow Minerals and Metals, of the
first sperm, nativitie, quality, and property, as also of the exhalation and
inhalation.

II. The second part shall be a kind of recapitulation of the first part,
where shall be contained also a relation of the condition and occasion of
Mines, Oars, Stones, passages and Clefts, with their coherent liquors, powers
and operations, as of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Tin, Lead, Mercury, and the
rest of Minerals.

III. In the third part is declared in manifest, and literal expressions
without any defect and obscurity, the Universal of this whole world, how all
Philosophers before me, with me, and after me, have made that most ancient
great stone, whereby health and riches were obtained, of the possibility, how,
and of what it may be done, together with a perfect Declaration of my XII.
Keys, with the names of our matter.

IV. In the fourth part I describe all the particulars of Metals, which the one
is endued with, before the other, out of which may be had perfect health, and
an advantage unto the getting of great riches, with all the Manuals in general
and particular, belonging thereunto: this fourth part I have entitled, the
Manuals of Basilius Valentinus, wherein is showed how all Metals, and Minerals,
fitting thereunto, may be brought to their highest preparation.

V. In the fifth part I have annexed the transcendent, most dear wonderful
Medicine of all Metals and Minerals, and of other things, which God Almighty
had ordained, and graciously granted for men, who in the Valley of misery are
subject to sicknesses and poverty, that they may have a remedy to help
themselves against both.

God the Father, of mercy and salvation, who lives from eternity to
eternity, being above all the Creatures, grant grace and blessing to this my
purpose, that I may write so, that every one may understand, and Gods infinite,
mercy and that it together with his gracious goodness, redemption may seem
known, acknowledged, and continually meditated upon, and every one may call on
the Great Creator day and night; granting to them fervent hearts so to direct
all their thoughts, that they may make no otherwise of this noble Creature of
God and transcendent great mystery of Nature, together with the Automie
thereof, but only to the great honor of God, and the good of all good
Children. The same grant this Father Son and Holy Ghost in his mercy. Amen.

TABLE.
The Contents of the first part of the book.
THe first Chapter treats of the aetherial liquor of Metals. page 1. The 2.
Chap. treats of the seed of Metals page 4 The 3. Chap. Of Metalline nutriment
page 6 4. Of the shop, or officine of Metals page 9 5. Of the egression and
ingression of Metals page 11 6. Of the dissolution and reduction of Metals page
14 7. Of the ascension and descension of Metals page 16 8. Of the respiring
Metal, or quick Oar page 18 9. Of the expiring, or dying Metal. page 21 10. Of
pure and fine Metal page 22 11. Of the impure Metal page 25 12. Of the perfect
Metal page 27 13. Of the imperfect Metal page 30 14. Of the Soap Metal page 32
15. Of the inhalation, or inbreathing page 34 16. Of the exhalation and
outbreathings page 36 17 Of coruscation, adhalation, or glittering page 38 18.
Of folium and spolium, shimmer and glower page 39 19. Of the fuliginous,
vapors and ashes page 40 20. Of the Metalline water, or lie page 42 21. Of the
seed, and of the hull of the seed page 44 22. Of the shining, or fire rod page
45 23. Of the glowing rod. page 47 24. Of the leaping rod page 48 25. Of the
furcilla, or striking rod page 50 26. Of the trembling rod page 52 27. Of the
falling, or nether rod page 53 28. Of the superior rod page 55 29. Of resting
vapors, or sediments page 57 30. Of the weather salt page 58 31. Of the stone
salt page 59 32. Of the Subterranean Pools page 60 33. Of the Metalline Gold,
or of the Metalline bed page 61 Chap. 34. Of Metalline streams page 62 35. Of
Chalk, or stone Meal page 63 36. Of the blast page 64 37. Of the brittle stuff
page 65 38. Of the blank fire page 66 39. Of the Mine glue page 67 40. Of
corroding stuff to eat stones through page 68 41. Of having materials used for a
sledd, or dray page 70 42. Of the frost in the Mine-works page 71 43. Of the
flaming fire page 72 44. Of the roasting fire page 72 45. Of the corroding fire
page 73 46. Of the glowing fire page 74 47. Of the Lamp fire page 74 48. Of the
cold fire page 75 49. Of the warm fire. page 76
The Contents of the second part.
1. Chap. OF Mines and Clifts, what the middle works of Oars are page 81 2. Of
the general operations of several Metals. page 82 3. Of stones, rocks, flints
of Gold, and their striking courses page 84 4. Of the oar of silver, and its
running, or striking passages page 86 5. Of Copper oar, its stone, and striking
passage page 88 6. Of Iron oar, its stoks, floats, fallings and striking
passages page 92 7. Of Lead oar, its Mine and striking passage page 95 8. Of
Tin oar, its stoks, floats, fallings and striking passage page 98 9. Of
Mercurial oar, and its passages page 100 10. Of Wismuth, Antimony, Sulphur,
Salt, Salpeter and Talk page 101 11. Of a comparison between Gods word and the
Minerals page 102 12. How Jewels are wrought, the blessings God bestows on
Miners page 107 13. Of the essence of Gold page 108
The Contents of the third part, being a Declaration of the XII. Keys.
The first is declared page 119 The second Key declared page 120 The third Key
declared page 122 The rest are declared according to the course going on in
that part page 125
The Contents of the fourth part, concerning the particulars made of the 7.
Metals, how they may be prepared with profit.
First of the Sulphur of Sol, whereby Lune is tinged into Gold page 151 The
particular of Lune, of the extraction of its Sulphur and Salt page 158 Of the
particular of Mars, how its Sulphur and Salt is extracted page 161 Of the
particular of Venus, how its Sulphur and Salt is extracted page 161 Of the
particular of Saturn, how its Sulphur and Salt is extracted page 163 Of the
particular of Jupiter, how its Sulphur and Salt is extracted page 169 Of the
particular of Mercury, of its Sulphur and Salt page 170 Of the Oil made of
Mercury, and its Salt page 171 Of the particular of Antimony, its Sulphur and
Salt page 172 A short way to make Antimonial Sulphur and Salt page 173
The XII. Keys follow next. The Contents of that book are inserted at the
beginning of it.
Next to this is the repetition of the former writings, with an Elucidation of
them, touching the Philosophers stone, and a true information annexed,
concerning the preparations of Mercury, Antimonie, Vitriol water, common
Sulphur, unslak'd Lime, Arsenic, Salpeter, Tartar, Vinegar, and Wine.

The next are the conclusion and experiments.
THe first Section treats of Sulphur, and the ferment of Philosophers page 1.
2. Section. Of the Philosophers Vitriol. page 2 3. Section. Of the Philosophers
Magnet. page 3 An allegorical expression betwixt the holy Trinity, and the
Philosophers stone page 5 A treatise of Sulphur page 6 Of Sulphur of Jupiter
page 7 Of the Sulphur of Mars and Venus. page 8 Of the Sulphur of Sol page 8 Of
the Sulphur of Mercury page 9 Of the Sulphur of Lune page 10 Of Antimonial
Vitriol page 10 Of the Sulphur of Vitriol page 11 Of common Sulphur page 11 Of
Vitriols, first of the Vitriol of Sol and Lune page 12 Of Vitriol of Saturn and
Jupiter page 13 Of Vitriol of Mars page 13 Of Vitriol of Venus page 13 Of
Vitriol of Mercury page 14 Of common Vitriol page 15 Of the vulgar Magnet page
16 A Philosophic work upon Vitriol page 17 To bring quick Mercury to a Lunar
fixation: page 21
The contents of the fifth and last part.
Treats of the great Medicinal virtue of the Metalline and Mineral Salt page
1. A description of the fine Tartar page 6. Of the Salt of Tartar. page 7.
THE FIRST BOOK,
Wherein are showed MINE-WORKS, from whence they have their Existence, Natures
and Properties: divided into the ensuing Chapters.
CHAP. I. ^f the Aetherial liquor of Metals, or of the metal Ferch.
GOd has created things under ground as well as the things above ground: By
the things under ground, I understand Metalls, Minerals, and into whom there is
implanted also a fertiltie to their seed, without which the seed could neither
grow nor in^ase. Seed which is barren, has not that fertiltie: by ^ich it is
collected, that there is some distinctnesse betwixt seed and fertility, If we
will enquire narrowly wha^ fertility is, the best and surest way is, to
consider life an^ death of creatures, how they hold together; for death i^
barren, but a living life is fertile, because it stirs and moves.

It is seen by all the works that are undertaken about metals, that there is
nothing so volatile as metal is, and so nothing stirs and moves more subtly
than it; but this stiring and moving I will call here the Ferch of metals, by
reason of its continual proceeding, and uncessant moving and because the same
is not visible in metals, and does i^ in a twofold way, therefore I will let
the old word stand and call its stirring a Lubricum, and its Ferch a Volatile;
for with the virtue and power of both these, it performs a^ that, what it
needs for the perfection, purity and fixation o^ its work.

Seeing Ferch is a perpetual living and forthgoing thing one might admire and
say, of what condition is metal the^ which we behold with our eyes, and feel
with our hands which being thus hard and coagulated, whether the same b^ alive
or dead; and whether the life or Ferch in meta^ may be destroyed, (which is
impossible) what is the cond^tion of it, or how comes i^ so to pass? I answer,
that a metal may be alive when it rests, as well as when it grows or
stirs; and here a distinction must be made again betwixt the death of
metals, and their rest and quietnesse^ For death touches only the bodies; when
they perish; b^ the life it self, or Ferch cannot perish or cease: therefore
(...) a metalline body be extant, then is it at hand visibly tw^ manner of
ways. The one is in liquido, and is discerne^ in its moving too and fro, and
if it be forced by a strang^ dangerous heat; then it turns to a volatility, and
flies away. The other way is, when it is at hand in coagulat^ wherein it
rests so long, till it be reduced into its liqu^dum, and that is done in a
twofold way, and lasts so lon^ as the body lasts, but as soon as the body
is destroye^ or gone, and is come or entered into a more, either noble^ ignoble
body, men its Ferch or life is gone also: therefore if you will reserve and
keep a body, then take good notice of i^s Ferch or life; for if you once stir
it, and hunt it indiscreetly, you do it with the loss o^ d^minu^ion of the
body, wherein it is, for that life never goes away empty, but still carries
along one life or Ferch after the other, carrying it away so long, that at the
last it leaves none. But what the condition is of the moving and quietness of
that life, and how Nature brings it to a rest, must be exactly considered.
For an accurate knowledge demonstrateth, that there is a diff^rence betwixt the
life of the seed and of the body; for deal with the seed which way you will,
you cannot bring it to a volatilitie, because it is against its kind; and so
the body also is of the same condition; but the Ferch alone may be brought to
it. For if you provide food for the Ferch, then you strengthen its whole work,
even as a mother does her child, which she feeds and cherishes well, and
brings the same the better to its rest; so ^s it also with the Ferch.
Therefore all such which gaze and view only the seed and body, and know not the
fundamentals about the Ferch, lose the body, because they ob^erve not Natures
progress and proceedings, putting the ^art before the horse, or the foremost
they put hindmost. This rest and sleep of the Ferch serves for that use,
because ^t preserves the body from destruction, or co^^umption being once come
into its perfection. For as long as it awaketh, so long it consumes, but when
it is at rest, then it ^andeth close in a lastingnesse, and when it has
nothing ^o feed upon, then it corrodeth and seizes on its own bo^ie, consuming
it quite, at last it stirs and moves to another place. Hence is it that
treasures, or pag^ment, which ^e buried, awaken at last, consume their own
bodies, re^cing them to dust, so that nothing of them remains but there a mere
stone or flux, as in many places is to be ^n.

CHAP. II. Of the seed of Metals.
ALl those Authors which have written about the metaline seed, agree in that,
when they say sulphur is the masculine seed of metals, and Mercury is the
foeminine seed; which saying must be taken in its genuine sense; for common
Sulphur and common Mercury are not meant thereby. For the visible Mercury of
Metals is a body it self out of bodies, and so it cannot be a seed: and being
cold, its coldness per se cannot be a seed, and the Sulphur of metals being a
food, how can it be a seed? Yea, a seed consummeth sulphur, how can one seed
destroy the other? if so, what body should it produce? It is therefore an
error, if that should be taken in the common sense: if the Mercury of bodies
is in a work, and has taken food, then all the sex Mercuries protrude one
body, as the one of the sex is in its predominancy, so the body rises.

Seeing there are seven of these Mercuries, it happens, that when the seed of
Mars and Venus has the predominancie, they produce a masculine body of Sol,
but if the seed of Saturn and Jupiter does predominate, then is produced a
soeminine body, which is called Lune; Mercury is an assistant on both sides.

The same happens unto other bodies: but these are always and in every and
each work together; for they are indivisible, as it is meet also, what manner
of body could be produced else? For Nature has perfect bodies, though in
themselves they must be dissolved again, yet are they perfect for, and in their
time. For what manner of seed could that be, if it should be defective in any
of its branches?

Therefore every body has its perfect seed, hence the trasmutation has its
ground in the ascension and descenti^^ of metals, which otherwise could not be,
if they were not homogeneal in their seed. For if any man says, that silver is
not gold, clowns believe that also, because they have not fundamental knowledge
of the seed, how it is to go out of one body into the other, or else it wants
its fertility, neither can it be naturally without a body, wherein it reste^h.
There belong seven distinct parts to an unformal body of metals, to bring it by
nourishment into a form, viz. 1. An earth. 2. A stone. 3. An earthash. 4.
Earthly streams. 5. glass or subterraneal metal. 6. The subterranean tincture.
7. The subterranean fuligo or seed, (fume) All these are the materials of the
body; and as earth is man's matter, out of which God made him, unto which he
must return again: so all other bodies also at last return to earth, that
Myner which is judicious and knowing herein, him I judge to deserve the name of
a Miner. For there are but few of them which are rightly informed herein, or
has any fundamental knowledge of it, though they are daily employed about it:
though some might say, they could not but be knowing in their profession, yet
it is not so really; if so, what right use can they make of them? They put
wrong names upon them, are ignorant of their utility, and this is the reason
why they many times run them waste upon heaps, where after some time they turn
to goodness, and the longer they lie there, the better they are: this
instruction deserves no hatred, but rather a grateful aknowledgment.

Why should Philosophers be believed to know any thing? But where is it
written, that men should seek and find mercury of the body in a subterranean
fume, stone, glass, ^ut in their books? Where are learned artificial finings
in^liginations, incinerations, nutritions but from them? The ^ed of metals as
it is perfect, so is its Ferch, or life invisible. Where do those men stay,
which will work according to na^re, and know none of these, neither do they
know where (...) get it: yet fall upon Artists, exclaiming upon them to be ^se,
and all such as are employed in their ways: but we see and hear how ignorance
runs on. It is impossible to get a body without seed, it were as much as to
say, a seed is without fertility. Therefore peruse it exactly in its
dissolution, the reduction of it will afford its body: work cheerfully.

But it is none of the meanest work, as some of the most ancient Philosophers
have said, which called it a double work: for thus they say, the metal must
first pass through the M^lters hand, afterward it must come into the hands of
the Alchymist, if so be the seed shall be known in the artificial work: they
mean or in imate by this saying thus much, that there is a twofold
dissolution, the one is, when the expert Melter brings the frangible body ex
naturali conductione into a malleablenesse, whereby its impurity is gotten off.
Then comes the Alchymist, reduces the body into cinders, calxes, glasses,
colors, fumes subterranean, in which the seed of metals rests, and the Ferch
or life is found fertile in the body, and is reducible into a spiritual water
or prima materia, according as the quality and property of the metal is, and
is divided artificially into its natural principles, according to the process
of the Chymick art, of which more in another place shall be spoken, when I
shall treat of the Minerals.

CHAP. III. Of the Metalline Nutriment.
ALthough it belongs not to this place, how mineralia fossilia are made under
ground, however I will give a hint of it, how nature makes them out of
subterranean moist liquors and Myne-crescencies, which afterward serve to be a
food to metals; not such liquors which are decocted above ground; therefore if
you should add here above ground, decocted ones to metals, undissolved in
their corporeal form, your work would be in vain: and where there are such
mineralia fossilia there are Myne-works also if not with it, yet are they not
far off, as is seen in many Mines. As in Hungary are dug the fairest and
best sulphur-alloms and Mineral or Mine Victriol. And about Harcynta are dug
salt Victriol. About Goslar, Mansfeld, Zellerfeld, and at Etshland in Helvetia
is dug Mine-salt, and at Hall there is great store of it, where there is
found also very curious sulphur. But you must note, that these minerals are not
used thus grossly, but are prepared first, which is a curious work to bring a
mineral thus high by subliming into flores, which are half metalline,
especially if made with metal, the metal being reduced into a mineral, from
that the flowers are made: thus you see natures forwardness, and how she is
reducible to her first water, sulphur and salt. Many make these flowers without
metal, which are not so good though, as the former way. For an oleum made of
vitriol or copper, and is distilled, is more eff^ctual, yea a thousand times
more precious in its operation, than that is, which is made of common vitriol,
whom nature has not yet exalted. Its true the Hungarian Vitriol in its
efficacy and virtue is found wonderful and sufficient enough, because Nature
has graduated it to a greater siccitie, and ^rought it to a ripeness more
than others were, and is more ^xcellent than the rest. By this preparation they
can make ^se of the minerals, strengthen and increase their pleasure ^hereby.
If any thing is to be made, meet for metalls, then it ^ust be done out of
metals, with metals, and through or by ^etals, which is the real and only
manual whereby may be hit ^he hardness of the mineral flowers, always take from
them, (...) add nothing to them; this is the Art, which asks great ^ondering
and deep meditation. Thus you must learn to go to ^ork, for these flowers are
found often closely compacted, which Myners very seldom know, especially in
Hungary and Wallachia, they are as fair as ever any red glowing oar ^ay be,
they are of a crystaline transparent redness, are ^od gold and silver
according as they are tinged, this is a rare knowledge, an art worthy the best
consideration, which is to make glass of a hardness, from thence it is, that
the subterranean glasses make up the metal, thereby they come to their form.

The preparation of these flowers have their great utility in physical ways,
if their excrements be taken from them, and their ordours: these excrements are
the feces of minerals, are naught for metals, stirring up evil sediments, which
bring damage unto metals; a twofold evil comes from the mistaking of mineralls:
for decocted ones are a dangerous poison, and corrosive unto metals, as we see
above ground, when aquafortis is made of them, which corrodeth, teareth,
divides and parts metals, and the other which are fair to look on, sticking
unto metals, and their worst poison, for as soon as these approach, they
kindle and cause the dangerous sediments, all avails nothing unto them,
though they have and keep their form. As an infected man has still the form
and face of a man, though he be infected, and infecteth others also, and in
case it turn all to one metal, yet it is but an empty one, and nothing in it.
This is a very necessary observation for Miners and Laborators; for if they
regard it not, they obstruct not only their work, but endanger themselves also;
because the metal is not only turned into a volatilitie, if any feces or
excrements be added thereunto, and that also which stays, comes to be
unmalleable, and suffers continually diminution, as long as it is under the
hammer. Those that works them, have cause to look to it, if they fall on them
with any fire, their reward surely is some mine disease, which experimentally
is known how their poison does stick and hang on the top of the furnace and in
their chests, turning to arsenick and such poisonous fumes and seeds, and do
hurt every way, as woeful experience evidenceth.

CHAP. IV. Of the metaline shop, Officina metalorum.
ALl natural works have their special convenient places in which they work;
where there is any such place or shop, in which some glorious and precious
thing is made, and sometimes though the instrument be very horrid and
monstrous, and its matter unknown, yet they are extant in that officine.

First touching the glory and praise of this officine, it is likned to a
Church, in which the seed and the Ferch are married to the body, therein they
eat, rest, and work, thither they carry all fair and pleasant materials under
ground wherewith they are clad, and they have another kind of fire, water,
air, and earth, for the things that are accomplished and perfected therein,
the same can hardly be parted again, no not with the help of the nether air,
if so be, that it must be parted asunder, then see and make trial of it on the
mercury of metalls.

Again, the things made so hard, and fixed cannot be parted, as may be seen by
gold, how firm and fixed is it in the fire? the cause whereof is the
subterranean heat and cold which it imparteth unto metals, and makes them firm
thereby, for it is a stony firmament of the earth, and giving to metals their
stony power, it grows hollow and spongie, full of pores, which at last are
filled up with metals, even as Bees do fill their hives with honey, and in the
end (...) parts and is carried away in the slick or (Scobes.) For the
Earth-stone is not consumed under ground, because it is a sediment not
suffering any thing to come in or out. Hence ^s that difference betwixt the
Earth-stone and the terrestial-firmamental stone, which is one of the
mineral-works. Let no man gainsay that a stone should have together both heat
and cold at once, to afford the one now, and then to hide the other, for when
it works the highest metals, it hides its heat, and when it works upon
inferior metals, then it hides its coldness, and so it helps every way,
this is its tract and instrument, heat and cold of the subterranean fir^ stone.

The modern Chimists which are ignorants, not knowing Nature aright, and do
not take notice of her ways, use strange instruments, and then they make or
cause to be made all manner of vessels, according as every one of them has a
fancy to, but in natures ways they know little, she regards not the variety
of forms, and instead of the^e, she takes a fit and lasting instrument, which
holds in the work, and every form follows or accompanies the seeds
precedencie. The folly and ignorance of workmen is aggravated in that, because
they despise the knowledge of minerals.

The instrument she uses hereunto I should make mention of it here, but wave
it at this time, and will do it in another place, where you may seek for, and
take notice of it. Those which think themselves to be the wisest do say, that
it is a vanity to observe mathematically the stars above, and to order any
work after seaso^able days and hours, it is something said, but not so well
grounded. But this is most certain, that if you work according to common
course, otherwise than we do, following only your own fancies, then is you^
labor in vain. There is a difference to be made betwixt the upper stars, and
the metallin stars, which shine and have their influence into the bodies.
Touching the stars above, they in their light and motion have a singular
in^^uence; and the stars below have their influence also upon their metals,
thus each heaven has its peculiar course and instrument, where the stars
situation may be apprehended. An opacum corpus stellatum compact astrall body,
differs in its condition from a corpus lucidum, if you intend to learn here
something, then you must be industrious and grudge no pains, it would require
a huge volume, if I should describe particularly the whole ^ircumference of
subterranean Mine-works: it would not ^uffice to nominate the things only, but
must demonstrate also, that all that, which I attribute to them, to be true, I
say (...) would ask a great deal of writing, to dispose the brains of
misconceited men to a belief: what should I say of such materials, on whom I
could not impose fitting names, though I k^ew them, for who is that man which
has done learning (...) our School? Here I must needs speak as belonging
properly to this place, that no volume in this world can be written, in which
could be set down all and every particular manual, as Laborators sometimes
might ask; therefore an Artist having given him some hints of things, must
endeavor to order his work, and manage the same ju^iciously, must put his
hands to the work, and get knowledge by his own practice. I direct such men in
their work to Natures process under ground, let them search there, and take an
honest Myner along to show him her instruments, and matters (for prating, lying
and ignorance avails here nothing.) Every one wishes ^o get riches, but the
means ^or the getting of them are not respondent: if I were the best ^imner,
and could set forth in colors the form of any instrument, then men would
understand it; it would help in this case, they would see it, and feel it with
their hands, and undertake the work, if all were set down. I know what, and how
much ought to be put in a book, I put things fitting in, and did it faithfully.

CHAP, V. Of Egression and Ingression of Metals.
THe work of metals evidenceth a perpetual going in, and coming out; for hereby
the Egression is understood not only the Egression of the whole work, that in
some place a whole metaline tract comes into decay, when it wants food to be
nourished any further, and has devoured all its bodies, but also a partial
egression; for still the one seeks he other, and follows at the heel. This we
see by the mercury of metals, being poured forth, it is scattered into
thousands of little quick corns, all of them return to their body; in the same
condition is volatile and Lubricum; and the Ferch also goes forth in small
bits, at last it joyneth in a body somewhere, even as Bees met together: it
receives no more than it has need, the overplus swarmeth to another
Myne-officine, which parting and distributing, affords many and several
Mine-works, according to the disposition of the officine and nourishment, and
according as it is infringed in its work in the egression; the Ferch and the
seed go on in their volatilitie, and if they had wings, that Volatile is so
thin, that it can hardly be discerned, yet is it foliated like a heap of atoms;
thus subtly it flies away, and the Ferch must still have its seed, the seed
its body, and that its thin atoms. My meaning is not, that its egression is
from or out of the earth into the air, to fly about there and then to come
into ground again; which is not so, nor can it be, because its natural work is
not in the air, unless men bring it forth purposely, then is it of another
condition; of that egression I do not speak here, because it is done by day;
but this goes through the earth. Which stands in the furnace, not apprehensive
or visible to us, and runs through clefts and passages; For if the earth gives
way to the ingression and egression, even as the water does to fishes, and the
air to birds, as long as metals come to their stone-firmament, which stone
firmamet differs from the earth-firmament, when it meets with that, it goes
about, looking out for another passage, like as water that flows about a
stone and not through it, yet it stays in its own stone, and receives
strength of it, and turns there to a body: and as it goes in its egression
from one metaline firmament or stone-firmament to another, if through eaten or
soaked, be it at what distance it will, and atracteth the Lubicrum, even as a
bird draws its feet up to its body in its flight; for if they touch any where,
then they loose somewhat of the body, and the Lubricum in its ingression
suffers it to come again to a strength of operation: for when both are joined,
then the metal increases, and attracteth its food in a wonderful way and
nourishes it self; and it is to be admired, that in this ingression, when
that Lubricum comes more and more to its officine, how it increases and
strengthens it self so long, that at last the work is made firm in the
officine. This strengthening can not be learned to be any other, than the
metaline mercury does make it, for in the first place it turns it there into a
liquidum, where afterward it receives all, does coagulate and congele,
according as the bodies are either masculine or foeminine, at last it is
brought to a solid fixed body of Sol. This ingression makes that subterranean
place ^oble and fruitful, and is singular, when it has an ascending oar in
work, that air is very wholesome, and if the air above with melting be not
infected with arsenick fumes, then it affords a saluber air to dwell in.

This is a manuduction unto the whole after-work, how the same ought to be
proceeded in, that the ore may stand and not awaken, but turn to its stream,
and still abide in its bodies company, it is loath to make an egression, if
once it made a true ingression, and settled it self to the work; for it rests
not in its place, neither does it rest in its whole ^ract, but works
continually, and is well seen, what its fixing or flight is, and where it
sets to a fluid body, or earth-salt, which it stirs and rouleth so long,
yea, it pants and moves in it so long, till it gets a liquid body, then
turns it to a terrene body, and is still brought on to a further height and
hardness: and that is the right coagulating, congealing liquidating and fixing
of mercury; which if ^one accordingly, then it affords something.

CHAP. VI. Of the dissolution and reduction of metals.
It is apparent, that natural heat is the cause of the fluidness of metals
dissolution, because the seed of metals in it self is very hot, and the fluide
matter of metals is ho^ also, as being oliginous, and its heat increases, when
i^ comes to its officine, or shop, because that also being ho^ increases the
heat the more, hence it is why it is hot i^ the work, and has need of it, for
at first it would bring no more into its body, unless it were soluble and
soft, i^ brings nothing into it, unless it be passed through these three
heats, and fixed by them: then examine it, and add another fluid thing to it,
which did not pass through the three heats: see whether the metal will receive
it, or no^ Secondly they must be dissolved that they may be cleansed; the
condition of liquid things is to produce to the outside things fitting the work
it has in hand. This solution i^ distinct from other artificial dissolutions,
where the body is only melted, as by the Melter when he seperateth the
excrements from it; for n^aure does not melt the earth as men do, bu^ as corn
grows above ground, so she leaves corn and husks together; there is a great
difference betwixt our melting and the dissolving of Nature; if we could
observe that distinction in our dissolutions and meltings, we should not be at
so great losses and damages as we are: I must needs mention about aurum
potabile, how men do busy themselves about it, as many heads, as many ways
they choose to the making of it. Some take that which is not yet separated from
the metal containing yet the cinders o^ excrements, or worse things. They take
corrosive waters, acetum aquavitae, and the like; pray tell me, what does
Nature take, when she is about the dissolving of a congealed water? She takes
none of these things, only makes use of ^heat. You must do ^he ^^k^, if you
will take a metalline ^ody, which Nature has perfected, and through melting
and fining is come to us, if you will dissolve and reduce it (...) its first
matter, then rou^e the Ferch, thus you may make ^y metalline body potable,
being made pure and super^e, then its excrements are gone, made not with
additi^nals of corrosive things: the fluxing of such matters rather ^ake the
metals harder: if a body shall be fixed, we fix (...) from whithout, which
Nature does not, for she fixes the ^ed, then the flour sets and turns to
such a fixation, that the dissolving above ground cannot master it. A wa^er,
which congealeth, has at first a little crust, going on (...) it till it be
quite congealed, but here it congealeth from ^ithin to the outside, hence you
may guess at that glori^us foundation of projection, on mercury of the body,
ma^ing a natural stratum super stratum, thus are the metals ^yned, according to
which the artificial work is ordered: ^e have a hint given how mercury of
metalls is clipped and ^layed, and its lubicrum is catched. Conceive not of this
^xation, to be as when iron is hardened to steel, and then ^duced to a
softness as Tin is of; this is called only a ^ose hardness, which keeps the
body in a malleablenesse, ^^d keeps it so close together, that the fire above
ground ^nnot hurt it, all hardness above ground may be mollified (...) fire,
but not the other; because it holds all fiery trials: therefore as the
hardness made above ground hardneth ^odies in the water, so on the other side,
the water, which (...) in metalline bodies must be taken out, then it
congea^th. The subterranean air hardneth the earth, earth ^emaineth earth, and
turns not to stone, and the same ^eeps the water from running together, or
congealing: ^eeping it from turning to pearls and precious stones, and ^ch may
be made of that water. To get the internal fire ^ut of metals, though it be
most high skill, however it is ^aseable, and found in its place, where I write
of the like, (...) a more ample manner. I give a hint of it in this places, as
Myners ought to do, of whose expressions I borrow now: The rest which wholly
extracteth this fire, which lies betwixt the project, leaving nothing behind,
that i^ where the Lubricum and Volatile is together, leaves it produces it,
and excerneth it. The Mansfieldian slat^ makes it appear, that its Volatile is
gone, and its Lubricum also, where its impurity is yet betwixt the project, an^
is not a fair pure work, but a compound one.

CHAP. VII. Of the ascension and descension of metals.
THis new kind or manner of speaking and writing of metals is caused by
experience, for the first perpetua^ ingression of the Ferch increases and
strengthens at first in the officina and Matrix, the Mercury of bodies,
bringin^ it on to its perfect and full strength; being made wholly effectual
and potent, then it begins by degrees to cloth i^ self with a body, at first
he attracteth and receives the meanest, which he puts off again in the first
place, which i^ done the easier; for no body amongst them all is soone^ put
off. For the body of Saturn is so thin, that it appears to the eye like as a
fair body does through lawn^ or tiffenie; its spirituality appears through
its body; it^ spiritual body is the metal of Mercury, or as I should rather
call it, its proper, near, and special body, which work gives a manuduction
unto many other fair works; for i^ makes a garment for Saturn out of the
subtilest earth, after he rises higher, puts a harder and better garment o^
him, which is not so easily put off as that of Saturn, or a^ least not with so
small a work, which is caused by the work of the Mercury of bodies. For the
Mercury of bodies by reason of its fluidnesse is the hottest, as he makes it
appea^ in Saturns ascension, putting a cinereal body on him ou^ of earth, hence
is it why Saturn is so full of cinders incli^ing to a britleness of ashes, and
begins to sound by reason ^f the metal, though it be not very firm, however yet
it (...) at the next place for incorporation: its sound is more ^eaf, is
further off from iron, and nearer unto mercury by ^eason of heat. Observe now
at the ascending of this metal, (...) lies near the ashes, cleansed by the
Saturnal water, but ^bove ground it turns not to be glass out of the ashes, out
^f salt or earth-water, or Saturnal-water, or out of sand ^r stone. But what is
that pure subterranean Earth-glass, which if it sounds breaks not: it is a
matter which Nature thrusts upon a heap together, which if you touch, (...)
sounds, and is very clear, of a great compactness, ^d very firm, in this work
it does mingle with ashes and ^lt water, and turns to a glass of earth, or to a
dark glassey ^rm iron. Nay tell me, if a metal or Earth-colour, yea a ^ood
sound metal be dissolved to a color, and is brought ^to a glass, does it not
look of a copper-colour? yes truly. therefore iron may soon be turned into
another thing, which is done naturally, where such metalline iron color
reduced in Hungaria into a Lixivium, and is turned into very good copper,
however it retains the glassiness, ^ough the color has exicated it somewhat
through the ^ercurie of bodies: for the liquidness it has still, and is
obilitated further to a malleablenesse and fixation, there^re take notice of
this tincturing matter, which you find ^epared by this body in this afficina,
it reduces the iron (...) copper with abundance of lucre.

Put these colors away and behold, how the mercury of ^odies is passed through
many white bodies, and has still fair white fuligo, and that very fixed, how
finely is it clad it, and makes a fair and pure body of Luna, into which (...)
clads himself so strongly that it can not be taken from ^ence by burning,
because it passed seven times thorough ^e greatest subterranean heat, which
destroys corrupti^e bodies, unless they be closely and compactedly
incor^rated to the mercury of bodies; nothing goes beyond that fire, neither
of the upper, ne^her, or middle-fires. Therefore behold how neatly Nature
worke^h and rises calcining the whole body of Luna, which ^alx is no hin^ else
but the body of Sol, its tinctu^e and tinging quality i^ takes from the
perfection and depth, which is in the fire and can afford it, that color must
keep so long till i^ descends again: there is nothing which can master ^^i^
fire; the descending may soon be perceived by this asc^nding, and the
difference of it is this, at the ascending i^ geteth the tincture first, before
it gets the body, but here i^ loses it sooner: and this is the reason why
descending oars are more perf^ct, then the ascending ones.

CHAP, VIII. Of respiring Metal, or of Quick oar.
BEcause with and by Myne-works an obstruction (...) made upon Nature, which is
the cause that several m^tals are gotten, and distinctions put on them, that
damage and losses might be the better avoided in the working (...) them. For as
each received a particular name and proper^ in or at the work, so in the
digging of them, several man^als are invented for the finding of them, and
hereunto (...) was made of the Rod. To distinguish metals by colors a curious
skill, as Red gold glass, Mine green, black oa^ however their working is not so
exactly known that wa^ That I may loose nothing in or at their melting, I use
t^ means; first, I must certainly know the property of t^ oar, before it be
beaten our, whilst it is yet under grou^ in its breathing: for oars and metals
breath only und^ ground, though they breath in some sort above, y^ the same
breathing is very weak, not going far ho^ the body; and the rod also sticks
only upon the upp^ metals, which is the greatest advantage we have: for (...)
causes metals to breath into a flame, and the fire-crates and pit-diggers
cause only a volatility and closing compactness, where a threefold damage
ensues. First, there flies away, not only much of the metal, but that also
w^^ch ^taieth turns to be volatile, and in the several meltings of it, ^lwayes
something goes amiss. Secondly, the remainder of it grows unmalleable, which
hardly can be helped. Thirdly, elevated minerals are burnt to a compactness,
which if not done, would prove very advantagio^s in the After-work, and chiefly
they would be very useful in Me^icina, being naturally prepared thereunto,
which is the reason why many in their After-workings labor in vain, taking
^ther improper minerals thereunto. For that fossile Vitri^lum at Goslar, where
neither silver nor l^ad grows in that Mineral, where it is prepared highly,
copper may be made of it without any other addition: that Vitriol affor^eth an
oil also, which perfectly cures the Gout: if all ^hese good qualities should
be burnt away with the silver, ^ere it not great damage? Therefore I take such
a metal which attracteth breath, and when the unbreathing or ^dhalation is
stronger, then is it a living metal, because a ^ively quality is in it: for
breathing things are alive, and ^reathing is compared unto life, such metal
like a breath, ^roveth as a child from ten years to ten years, even so this
^etal grows, till it come to its perfect state and body, af^erward it gets
another name, and consequently ^here must needs be observed a great difference
in their ^orking, and are asunder as much as a live thing differs ^om a dead
one, which ought to be taken into considera^ion, because this distinctness
being observed, affords a neat and pure work. Hither belong all mixed oars,
which at se^arating are parted asunder and not before, (as the usual ^ustome
is.) As in Hungary there is had every where gold-^ilver (that is, in it there
is gold) which in its color and ^onderosity is pure, has lost nothing, and is
still in its wor^ing quality, and if it had not been interrup^ed, and dug
^p unseasonably, then that silver would have been turned to pure gold; that
silver may easily be brought to a solar perfection, and in it self is it better
to be used for pagament, and is of better use for cementation. In like manner
the copper at Mansfeld is good for it, and proves much better in the work,
than other copper, for it wanted but a little, it had been burnt quite into
silver. The best quality of such copper is that they are of a deep color; they
have not lost that, as usually electrum's do. But this is to be noted, such
oars are of that quality, that the bigger part of the body hides the lesser
part in melting, it is not seen, nor felt, except at the washing and parting,
there it is seen: whilst it is yet among the earth, it is a breathing oar, and
is of such a compound, as you heard: you may confide in it without a proof,
though the cake of it be of silver color or of a copper color, This is it
apparent, how Nature augmenteth a metalin body, protruding it upward from
below, and that which is neathermost, is thrusted toward that which is
uppermost, in a mavelous subtle way: for dead bodies bring still more to it,
making it heavier in the mercury, then joyneth the nourishment also, which are
the prepared minerals, affording their tincture, like good food, which breeds
good blood: hence flores mineralium have their existence: if you cannot learn
their offspring in tha^ way, there is no other nor better way for it. For this
is the true tincture, and not that moldy or gross album or rube^um so called,
where such highly mingled oars or transparent Veins break, they may be cried
up for an Electrum^ but improperly called so: for the colors glitters so
purel^ therein one among another, like in a Chrysolithe or trasparent Amber.

CHAP. IX. Of expiring metal, or of dead metal.
MEtals have their set time as well as all other creatures, they decay and dye
when their appointed ^ime comes. For when Nature has brought the metalline
^ody unto Sol, then by reason it wants nourishment, and is starving, then it
comes down, gets a stronger exhal^ing, and the attractive breathing turns to an
expiration, and ^erial breathing brings it to the fires-breath. If the
expira^ation grows stronger in a metal than its adspiration is, ^hen it
descends by degrees, and decays, and then is ^t called a dead oar or metal;
for still one external body or ^ther departs from it, at last in one place or
other it ^aketh a total egression with its breath, life and seed. This
^reathing is known by the particular Rod of each; this al^o asks a particular
place and work, because great gain (...) afforded both by this and by the
living one. Consider ^t well, a metal, which descends from its perfection,
into another body, it is like when a man loses his lively co^our, and at last
his body, that is its ponderositie, and ^hen the gold turns, not to a goldish
silver, but to an Ele^rum that is, to Sol, which has lost its tincture. This
is great piece of proof, to discern such silver-gold from ^rue silver; in its
gravity it is found heavier than other ^lver, retaining the body, and losing
only its color, or ^ncture.

It is a greater skill to restore a tincture to a dead and de^ayed color, and
to make it fix. At separating it keeps ^he quality of Sol. The like condition
is red silver in, which has lost its color, making an incorpo^ation and ^nion
with copper, so that it quite dies in its body. To ^et this silver out of the
copper, and restore its peculiar ^lour, is a great skill, which Melters are
ignorant of, belongs merely to (...) Chymick Ar^ and its Laboratorie. How
many such Electrums are bought for silver and copper? the Buye^s thereof have
great gain in it. Of the same and the like condition are other metals of* Is it
not so, all iron in Hungary is brittle, what is the reason? because copper is
in it: if that be gotten ou^ in that artificial manner, as it ought, that iron
proves so hard, that no steel is comparable to it? Out of that iron are made
Turkish swords, (sabels) mayles, which no weapen or bullet can enter or break;
^he^e mayles also are not very heavy.

Note, the lu^ricum at the descending of mercury, must have room, from slippery
things easily somewha^ may be gotten s^oner than from hard things: slippery
things leave always somewhat behind; the same they do with their tinging
bodies, putting them off still so, that in the ascending in their Volatile they
assume the body, and elevate it.

Note, if you have any material in hand, and in your Afterwork you would know
whither you must keep to the Lubricum or Volatile (these two must be thy help.)
The^ your stuff must be prepared either the slippery or volatile way: if you
will have a body either ascend or descend, take notice of the flux in the
metal: slippery ones are more open than the hand ones. When tinctures begin to
depart* which are a strengthner to, then the stuff grows more fluid, comes
closer together than in the quick metal.

CHAP. X. Of pure or fine Metal.
WHen a Metal, be it in the ascension or descension, is i^ its seven System's
or constitution, then it rest^^h o^ en^u^^^h, till it comes into another body.
If you mee^ with such oar, it yields the purest metal, that may be ha^ (...)
the world: our Mel^e^s call this Super-fine. But our ^uper-fining, which
hitherto was in u^^, is an impure work (...) regard of this: for in the
clarifying, if it misseth but the ^ast grain, then is it not yet right. Such
metals, as may ^asily be conceived, is pure good and malleable, loses nothing
in any work whatsoever: though all metals may be ^ade super-fine, yet none can
be made finer than gold is, which no element is able to touch, to take any
thing from (...), or to turn it to a Glimmer (Spolium) or cats silver, of (...)
glittering quality.

Silver at Marychurch in Lorrayne is more fine then others. ^uper-fine is
called that, when a metal is pure and rid of ^s excrements or dross, which may
easily be taken off, and ^indereth it not in its fining. In silver Myne-works
there ^re often found such natural proofs of pure and fine oar, that it might
speedily be dug and broken, though it ^ust be melted again by reason of its
Spolium, or by reason ^f strange colors and flowers it has robbed, yet it
easily ^ay be performed, which serves afterward for an instructi^n, how
Mineral-colours must be obtained, as Azur, ^hrysocolle, though they stand in
the Mineral-glass: such co^ours love to be in such pure oar, bu^ are not so
soon inocu^ted, unless it be in the Sude or coction, in which the metal (...)
very pure, and yields more naturally the mercury of the ^ody, be it in the
ascension or descension, assumeth then another body. Hence is it apparent, how
the same ought ^o be proceeded within the artificial After-work, out of ^ne
body into another, how the body, in which it is, and ^om which it must be had,
ought to be prepared, namely, ^t must be made pure and Super-fine. It appears
in the ^talian Gold, especially in that of Wallachia, in which it is ^ost pure;
how that mercury of metals puts off his body, and the mercury of the body come
from the mercury of the ^etal, puts the gold together into a close body and
regu^s, and it is seen in the gilding, how firmly and closely (...) stick^th,
wants but a small matter of an augmenting ^uality, its Spolium is only
obstructive thereunto: it is of a transmuting and elevating quality, if the
other body b^ awakened also: for a body which is between awaking an^ sleeping
effects nothing, it must be awakened w^olly if at the on boiling of a metal,
as of that Italian gold, b^ but the least impurity, that is, a heterogeneal
p^^^, it could not be brought to a compactnesse, which is seen at gi^ding
Therefore you must give an exact attention to learn to understand what the
prima materia of metalline bodies is, an^ how their Elevation is either
obstructed or augmented how homogeneal things are brought to a body. It is
apparent in the mercury of metals, how close and compact i^ stands together in
the flux, which flux cannot be taken from it: purity is the reason or cause of
that compactnesse being there is no other metal mixed with it: as soon as any
metalline body joyneth with it, then is it disjoined, be i^ what metal or body
it will. Hence it does appear, how metals are brought to rest from their
labor, namely, if the^ be first pure; for into pure matter may be brought what
i^ intended for it; which appears in the mercury of metals, its purity is the
cause why it does not appear to the eye, but only in its flux or hardness.
The mercury o^ metals is the flux of the mercury of bodies, that is, when
water comes to it, or the mercury of metally bodies is com^ into the water
instead of the air, which otherwise is in the water: take it into
consideration, what manner of skill i^ required to get wind or air out of the
water, and to brin^ another mercury into that place, if you get the air, which
i^ in the earth, out of that earth, and in its lieu you get in the mercury of
metalline bodies, then you have a Mercury i^ Coagulato; endeavor now how you
may coagulate it, bu^ not in the ordinary, common, and vulgarly known way Bring
still another mercury of bodies instead of the Marin^ water into that water,
then you have a fair pearl, take tha^ same mercury of bodies, reduce it to an
earth, which mu^ be pure, instead of the air then you have a pure jewel a^ pure
as may be had from that, earth is in its color, or yo^ may put one to it,
which you please, it is a thing feasabl^ These and the like pieces are afforded
by purity, all which ^e work of nature is a leader unto. (Men that cast so ma^y
foul aspersions upon Philosophers are unworthy and not (...) be regarded) nor
credited, what they can foame against ^eir rare and glorious inventions about
the three princi^es, from whence all these things have their Original, ^ake
trials of it, you will affirm to be true, what I have ^id.

CHAP. XI. Of impure Metal.
THere is found store of metalline ores, but few of them are pure, and few
there are that break or grow one by the other; therefore these must be
separated and spoken of apart: The great work and expenses which their
cleansi^g requires from their grossness let Melters speak of: ^eparating
has been invented, at which some good things of the oars do stay, the rest
flies away, and their fining is useful, especially when oars or metals are in
their ascension, though it be chargeable. But to find Electrums, and bring them
to good by seperating, differs from the former fining, and requires a singular
way of melting. Cunning and subtle Artists may pretend to get silver out of
iron, (I believe they may, if there be any in it) as they do in Sweedland.
Osemund always contains silver, which is only off driven, and calcine away
the iron, and thus they cheat people: can they do the like with the iron which
breaks in Styria? no such matter. Therefore take heed of such cheaters, and
take notice that nature loves to keep her own ways orderly, and keeps
together two and sometimes three sorts of oars in their ascension and
descension, whereby she intimates a way unto the After-work; but men in their
fancy think upon other means, though to no purpose. View all the Mines which
are in Europe, you will find no other oars but impure ones, that is, a mixture
of them, for their nature makes them, as much as I ever could learn; if you
can show me the contrary, I will assent unto thee, And this is the second
Argument, that metals are in their ascension and descension unto perfectness:
if each had its peculiar work and instrument, then men needed not to take so
much pains in melting, to separate them. For it is a difficult work to join
weeds and stones, because these are heterogeneal, and are of differing ma^ters:
but the other joining soon together, require special w^rking to be separated;
therefore view exactly the bodies two manner of ways, which is no small
instruction. First, in what manner you separate the ashes from the fumes or
food, this ministers already a twofold separating of metal, the earth from the
tincture, there you have a twofold separating, and so forth. Secondly, take
notice of the Flux, to drive the cold fire with the warm, and the warm with the
cold, the^ you will be able to separate the bodies from Mercuries, then you
have already separated the metals without loss and damage, use thy self
exactly to it, and be careful in observing their names, not regarding the
Miners expressions and terms, for the names they give to oars are false: for
those, which build and dig after clefts and passages, have their names of their
bodily matters after the sorts of the minerals, and are distinct therein. But
you must call them after the sorts of the seven bodies, and learn to prepare
them; this work is of greater utility. Men are at great expenses to get
corrosive waters, to get asunder these metals, they do it also by way of
melting and casting; but such waters add great poison to the work; it is a
better way to do it with Lixiviums or sharp waters, which are not so poisonous,
learn their preparation. There is another kind of impure oar, of which I made
mention here and there, which contain Myne-slacks, you may read of in the
Chapter of the Cinders, but there is a difference betwixt the cinder and the
slack, for slack are more corny, yet that also turns at last to cinders. These
slacks are the cause of the cold fire, (...) cenders cause the warm fire, or
the uredines metallorum: ^se cold slacks are hardly got ^^ off from the metal,
be^se they come from the cold flux fi^e of mercuries alti^e: for as the cinder
comes from bodies; so are these ^cks of mercury; it is seen, when you will have
slacks of ^er matters then usually they belong thereunto; then the ^rcury of
bodies is rouzed, which by the work is no^ing else but a closure and stream;
for if you can conve^ntly get away the slacks, then you may perform and
ac^mplish something else with the fire of mercury, and it is either usual not
artificial to deal much in cold fire: some ^iners call it Mispuckel, Nodus
aeris, that Latin name they ^t upon: it is true, it is very hard knit
together, it is dif^ult to dig it, and to make its oar to good, and Antimony so
is hardly gotten from other metals (except from Sol) without damage: however,
with advantage it may be done ^riously, only you must be expert in Antimonie's
quali^es. For they belong together and are joined, as tin and ^ad, Wismuth or
Magnesia among or betwixt iron and cop^er. This is a good direction, and is
sufficient for such, ^ho know what belongs to melting.

CHAP. XII. Of perfect metal.
WHo could tell what gold and silver were, if they were not known in their
perfection, for when they are per^ect, it appears, when they have their
color, their weight* their malleablenesse, their flux and hardness: and this
perfect metal nature has produced compactly and purely (...) ^uch perfect,
pure, and compact gold is found in Hungary, ^n the white marble, which
presently may be broken; as ^lso silver, copper: the difference betwixt the
perfect and pure is, because metals are not pure before they are p^fect; and so
there may be a perfect oar, which is not pu^ which defect is found in many of
our metals, which co^ to their perfection as soon as in any other Foreign parts,
b^ in their perfect purity they are defective sometimes. The is to be noted by
this metal; a body must first be perfe^ or brought to its perfection, before it
can be sixth; and is of great concernment to know rightly what fixedne^ means.

A body which has its due tincture, weight, and grad^ation, yet it has mixed
other obstructive impurities, he^ comes the work, and nature begins to copulate
these two tincture and gradation brings the metal into a purifying this
purifying is fixation: for pure is as much as fix. An^ note, that the ground of
the first is the body, which is (...) secret, into that I must bring the
tincture and gradation a^ well as I can, and take the tincture from Sol, which
is (...) thing feasible: then is it an Electrum, which is a water; for in water
it abides, then I take its ponderosity for it, and bring it into an Oleum or
into a Sulphur, the body remains still, for in the ascension Mercury lies
the foundation of the body, as an Embrion, to it comes ponderosity, which
makes it formal, then comes Lubricum, after that comes the Volatile with the
tincture, and perfecteth all the rest it has need of to its perfection. Why
does reason play the fool in despising the ways of nature, not observing her
course? For behold how wonderfully she brings redness into copper, turning
it into brass, but is not fixed, because it was not her intent; it is a mere
color which all other oars easily embrace, but is not fixed, which color is
easily driven away with wood and coal-fire. Therefore is it a thing of great
concernment to learn rightly to know the bodies; for at dissolutions the
property of a pure metal is known, what its tincture, body, salt and
ponderosity is, especially if exactly be considered the anatomy of all bodies
after the Chymick way, how curiously and properly are they anatomized: we call
the immature spirit a spirit of mercury; the perfect tincture we call an ^na or
Sulphur, the ponderosity is called the salt or bo^ for the after-work
confirms the same, that that fixa^ does not only hold in the fire, and all
corrosive wa^ especially that of Saturn, which is a precious one, ^e then other
aqua forts, but better in the malleablenesse ^hout the Quart; it holds also
in the cement, because ^omes out of it. Therefore it is to be admired, why
(...) talk so strangely of it, when they know nothing of it, ^m whence it is,
or what the cause of it is! But it is so, (...) one hearkeneth to the tale of
the other, and know no ^re then they have from hear-saying; for they know not
^at to say, nor how to help what the work aileth, if out tune and disordered;
and if any fix and lasting medi^e is to be made, then that metal is best, even
as a vegeta^ which is come to its maturity. This process must be served, else
all labor is in vain. For how can ye destroy ^e body of a thing that has no
body, much less can you ^e the tincture of it, before it comes into the body:
a ^cture may be gotten from it, but not all the colors of ^at tincture: here
exactness must be used, because it is ^e greatest skill to do so. One thing
more I must needs ^eak of, those that aim merely with a great and deep ^ging
at riches should view Gods mysteries every where, they compare the Scripture
rightly, will find an instru^ion, that a spiritualty is held forth in an
earthly thing: if a ^etal be brought out of the earth, and out of its Officina,
^ke a man that is set into another life, it abides and lives without food, is
not dead, but is alive; though it does not ^t, yet it rests, and may soon be
awakened: thus we ^ope also, that in the other eternal life, where there is
Sab^athum and Sabbotho, things will be done in a more glorious ^ay. God makes
use of us here for his praise, to make use ^f metals in that kind: it will not
be for our misuse and ^isgrace, but rather put greater honor upon us, more
then ^ver we put upon metals.

CHAP. XIII. Of imperfect metal.
THe imperfect metal is the wildest among all the re^ because it contains all
impuri^ies with a confus^ mixture. Usually there is set in a work of many piec^
which no man yet knows what they are, in which y^ find matters joined, which
are prepared and unprepar^ of many bodies. Now if you will reduce that matter
a^ cleanse its metal, then the unprepared matter must first (...) washed away,
and regard not the matter so much as the m^tal, which is yet tender and young
in it, you must not c^cine it but another fire belongs to it This perfecti^
consists in nine several pieces, which must be well con^dered; each must be
handled as it ought; if so be, the m^tal shall not suffer any w^ong and damage,

First, consider well, whether the oa^ be in ascension (...) descension, then
you may help its color and whole bod^ for that metal, which is in its
ascension must be aided in i^ folium, but the metal, which is in its descension
must b^ helped with Spolium, else it; ^i^th away, because it is n^ perfected in
its due place and Officina; and that metal is i^ a form accordingly. Thus make
your proof, and be in yo^ After-work the more encouraged.

Secondly, you must take notice of the nourishment (...) food, which, as I may
say, is not fully digested, further the same in its concoction, else the
excrements cannot well b^ gotten off, which would be the cause of
unmalleablenesse.

Thirdly, you must take notice of the flux, that which i^ fluid must be fried:
for if both fluxes should be opened they would hardly be congealed again. For
to dissolv^ ^ew running Mercury of bodies, which per se are run^g, would prove
a mere dust and atome.

Fourthly, remember the hardness or fixation of it, in ^at degree of ascension
or descension it is, that you may ^de thereunto an equal fire of its body: for
cinders re^reth on^ sort of fire, and fuligines requires another kind (...)
fire, and calcination must have a due fire: then your ^oceedings will be right,
if you know the proper condi^n of such bodies, else you wrong them, by making
it ^ttle, and flies off at a second casting.

Fifthly, make a true distinction betwixt the two imper^ctions: from thence
this metal has its name; the one is (...) the body, the other is of the
instrument: first, take in and the instrument, and endeavor to help the body
in ^e preparation, and stay its flux or running into another, ^d you drive the
^chwaden or the cuticle of the seed; ^en goes the cuticle of the seed, and the
Ferch or ^e,

Sixthly, consider that fire, which nature has, that you (...) not incroach or
entrench too far upon the bodies: direct ^d order all you^ work upon the
Uredines or soap, join it ^ith your fire to the instrument of the body.

Seventhly, you ought to be instructed well about the ^ncture of the Electrums,
that you put not off Sol instead ^f Luna, because you are not experienced
enough in the ^eeping tincture or colou^, which you are to awaken in the
^escension, or when in the ascension you are to strengthen and to keep them.
Painters have a term in their profession which they call elevating and
shadowing, the same you ^ust apply here to bodies, when they are in their
perfection: therefore anatomize the bodies.

Eighthly, we ^ee Limners to mingle their colors with water and oil, and so
carry them on, you must ^earn a due preparation of the water, to imbibe the
color, which is a metalline water, whereby you corrode with not ^estroying the
colors, which you intend to have, if you make use of any other water besides
this, then all your labor is in vain; cool with oil, then it remains pure,
a^ thus you have much strengthened the Folium.

Lastly, take notice that the metal be straightened so, the it look for no more
food. All such things belongi^ thereunto you find enough by this instrument,
or not (...) off from it; or else you may bring it easily thereunto: (...) will
be but imperfect, therefore put your help to it, y^ have natures half work for
advantage, with great pity has often been beheld, how such noble and precious
i^struments have been consumed in fire, which could ha^ been for several good
uses, the workmen in their carele^ness not regarding them. All other metals
belong un^ this: for very seldom is found a whole perfect meta^ which should
not want one help or other. He that is a^quainted with these will perform these
works with great advantage and more utili y. For there must be extant
perfectness, if any thing shall be purged, so that another pure or fix thing be
brought in, be it the color or pond^rosity.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Soap-metal, or Metallum Uredinum.
IF our upper Elements could not make a metal to be manifest and apparent to
us, who would have undertake^ to work any metal. The great heat and cold which
is under the ground is the cause of the body of metal, according to the
pr^dominancy of that heat and cold which is in the body. The deeper the heat or
cold is in that body, the fairer is its tincture; this is a true saying, But
what this heat or cold is above, and what is attributed to the Planet above,
understanding men must know it.

At first when the Ferch goes forth, and goes along through the earth with
the seed in its firmamental officina, ^en it comes forth sometimes, as far as
its breathing may ^ach before it be infringed and allayed; it still carries
^me of the purest metal, and the superior elements af^rd their virtue for
their joining: for where the elements ^e in a conjunction, there they make a
body, and force ^mething from the Ferch, then it rises and falls, as it
^lls, so it lies still, this is the reason why the corns are so ^rangely
fashioned, they are either round or oval, and so ^me to the metal accordingly,
and is found: sometimes falls into the water, where it was caught and
overtaken, ^t most of all it loves to be in the Uredines or soap, hence ^t
that name. Soaps are mineral springs, where the metal ^eth to lie, these spring
from below, and these are found ^metimes wholly gilded over, and they cast
upward taps of ^ch color. In this Country such springs are near Rivers the
foot of Mountains, but in the Almen they are on the ^p of the soap as it were
upside down, on these sticks ^e Ferch which passes by it, or the air which
forces it ^m it. The whole business lies in the metalline waters they are
dissolved in their salts, thus they easily embrace ^e Ferch, or the metal of
that Ferch and seed which it ca^^th forth, and that goes for the best Tin
which is on the ^p, being of an iron shot, which iron is of several different
^grees, but here in this place it is not energetical, as being ^structed by two
parties.

First, the water is an obstruction unto it, for oar must give ^y to water, it
is carried away: such soap oar is seldom and by the Vredines, or in the soap.

Secondly, this Scobes powder or dust is not in its right ^cina, because it is
not in this subterranean air and element ^ere the singular officina of metal
is, and in this manner of ^dition are almost all the soap-metals in Europe, but
in her Countries where there are none, or very few of these ^ther metals, if
there be found any of them in the Dam ^th of the highest or uppermost metal,
then is it another ^tter, needs not to be related here, because it serves not
for our work. Such metals are the best, because they li^ deepest at the metal;
and if you entrench too nigh unt^ them with the fire, then they fly away with
the Ferch, by reason of their transcendent superfinenesse: therefore when this
ponderous Ferch and seed is grown very hot in bot^ heats of his work,
especially in the descension, then is i^ mightily strengthened, in the
consuming it grows more homogeneal to the upper Mercuries of the earth and
its instrument, therefore it does associate thereunto, and obtains a going
again, and this is the ground of ascending an^ going upward, besides or without
of the officina as much a^ is known.

CHAP. XV. Of inhalation or inbreathing.
IT is a curious work to build after-clefts and passages, for it seems a
thing to be credited, that in them the brea^hings have more their going in and
out than through the whole earth besides, but it is not advisable to take suc^
fetches about, because there is a nearer way unto it, namely, unto the metals,
as if one would go to the well, and goes all the streams down, through and by
all the springs whereas there is a nearer way to go the foot-path, the sam^
condition it has with the halations and breathings, because the fumes and
vapors lie therein, and are obstructive rathe^ to the breathing, than helpful.
Therefore look not so much upon clefts and passages, but rather upon the
halations o^ breathings, which keep their stroke throughout the earth because
the same does not hinder its course, as men man deem. For we must know that the
oars do breath only under ground, and these breathings are orderly
distinguished This is a remarkable thing, that oars breath from belo^ where
they are, and this is the difference betwixt the hala^, vapor, fume, or
breath, which goes oblique, the ^fs way, lateral way, or afar off. Therefore
here is to be ^ken of that inhalation, when it goes in its own strength, ^at
it shows and signifies, the fume is sent unto the me^ from the superior
solar rays, from thence she may ^e what she will, and what she has need of
for her susten^ion, that brings the nourishment, and drives all down^rd to
the metal and the lower planets, but no farther than on the earth, but though
the Dam earth per cutem terrae, ^re the oar or metal receives the inhalation,
which arises ^m the work, makes use of it: for it is manifest that the ^ments
cannot reach deep into the ground. Seeing the ^ations are invisible, whose
being cannot be seen in them, ^ans breath can sooner be discerned and seen,
than the ha^ion may; which may be known by a Rotten, when a me^ works, then
it breaths, which breath it draws a^n, and so forth: then the Sun must come
in to help, for the Systeme is at the inhalation, which must be known
ar^cially, there is the purest earth, from whence man is ta^, as some ancient
writers do conceive, which earth con^eth many hidden virtues in the afterwork
of Metals. ^is inhalation serves chiefly for that purpose as you heard, draw,
swallow, and take down the food into the body. For (...) must not think, that
she lets it lie in the body, after she ^th brought it in, but it is a Vis
retentiva to keep that fast, ^ich it drunk in, and to that end she prepares in
that ^ole journey from that place where she receives or bor^weth of the Sun,
which drives down all ponderous things, we see by all such juyces and saps
which are driven down^rd; in this drawing down it has this quality, what saps
juices it takes, the same sink down deeper more and ^re, and sublimeth them
the more highly into its flores^ ^t this I call flores, when it cannot sublime
any further, ^d brings it at last to a garment or body of a metal.

He that knows these flowers rightly, he has learned ^mething of nature, and
he that knows of what they are made, he is come yet further; but such flowers
are mad^ naturally of mean stuff, which works by a threefold fire, among
which the inhalations fire is not the meanest, but the chiefest, because it is
the next unto perfection. But thi^ breathing is more a fiery aerial heat, than
it has of any fire, because it flameth without any kindling, otherwise i^
would combure the nutriment in the officina, she concealeth rather, keeps
things together, and strengthenet^ them, it expels humidities and vapors;
and consequently it causes those evil vapors, fumes, and breath^ which poison
the whole earth below, and are the cause o^ many dangerous diseases, as it has
been known.

CHAP. XVI. Of exhalations or out-breathings.
SEeing, stirring, and moving, must be continually at the metalline work as
long as the metal attracteth, and especially the in moving or taking into,
hence the next inhalation of the living oar must be stronger, therefore Nature
affords so, that because the halations can come no further in the metal,
because metal is the end of the work under ground, that then the exhalations
must draw on, and must turn into the metal, the return of that metals breathing
from below into a true natural breathing of metal grows so strong, that it
kindles, yet without a light o^ flame, but gloweth without a flame or light,
and purget^ that which is to be purged in the work, not only in the work in
the officina, but in the whole matter, till she heaveth and protrudeth the pure
atoms of the earth, which the Sun gloriously dissolveth again into juyces; for
the atoms are the flowers of the terrene-salt, she cannot indur^ them, neither
are they useful in the earth, but must be dissolved again in the upper air; but
this exhalation, thoug^ ^t be always about the metal, yet is it apparent in
its Rot^en, or Rubedo, what the oar does, then the breathing seizes on the
Rotten or Rubedo, and kindles them, then is the metal in its decay or
decrease, and is a dead metal, and most of the fire goes forth, which kindles
this Red, and the ^old stays by the nether metal, which grows predomi^ant;
hence we see what Uredines are able to do, when ^hey are predominant in metals,
then the cold gets the up^er hand, and disgraceth the oar, bringing it as low
as lead; ^ut if heat get the upper hand, then the metal grows ^igher and
higher, and more lively. This is the difference ^etwixt the heat of fires,
which is called Vredines, the ^ehicle of that heat is the instrument or matter
which af^ordeth the place of it. For Uredines are the cause of some^hing, but
fire destroys it, and the uredines may be without the fire, and above the
fire. The most ancient Philoso^hers call it coelestes and infernales vires; for
it is apparent in ^old, that fire cannot prevail against it, but only against
^he flux of it, and cannot consume it, and the Mercury cannot hurt neither,
only he brings hardness unto it, which (...) good, but to what purpose? for
he is not turned to any ^lver; both these breathings, upper and nether, in and
^ut breathing comes all to one, and is not only its quality ^o show and make
known the metal and oar, but passes through the earth also, to keep them from
turning into ^ones, to stay and keep them porous one upon another, and to make
them pure: for it purges the earth, as the so^r breathing above does the air,
and as the same breathing ^bove brings and causes wind, mist, rain, hoar
frost, ^ow, even so the subterranean breathing causes vapors ^mes, breaths,
saps, minerals, soaps, etc. and brings forth ^old out of their seed. He that
understands these ne^her, upper, and other meteors, he may make all manner of
^uick After-works; For Art treads into the footsteps ^f Nature.

CHAP. XVII. Of corruscation, or of adhalation, or to breathing or glittering.
MIners seeing this breathing ascend by night, like (...) flame, they count
that only a breathing, and none else which per se is not a true breathing, but
only a corruscatio^ for it burns away the excrements, not wholly, only suc^
things that are naught and poisonous, purges the air from the same stink; for
where should the cuticle of the seed get out, if it should not be carried
forth, partly by this flame of fire, and partly by the water? For this stink
weakeneth the oar mightily, especially it spoils its color, whereas i^ may
easily be burned or washed away, before it grows to such a stink, be it in
fossils or liquours. This breathing o^ glistering strengthens the cenders, it
touches them no^ in a way of heat, but in a way of fire, and is not an
upboiling, but a burning unto.

Seeing this stuff which this corruscation seizes on, is found often in a
place where no metals are, therefore is i^ very deceitful, however commonly and
for the most part o^ a metalline breath. For note the metal never affords or
casts any flame, neither does it consume in burning, bu^ flies away and
vanishes, you cannot know which way i^ is gone; therefore these exuviae
spermatis, or husks of the seed, is a greater infection, and plainer evidence,
that there is an oar at hand; because it makes many glorious things apparent,
which the fire seizes on, it must not quite be melted from, its outgoing is a
sign that it does no good by the metals, neither can it stay with it, unless
it stick close* Here you may observe again, that fire does not good to metals,
but a warmth which does not come from fire, as a natural heat is in man without
fire; for where are the coals which nature uses for oars, yet is it hot? where
is there any better blast to make things congeal? A cold without a frost is
another matter, as it appears in Pearls. I call it Vredines, as a warmth
without an heat, yea, this heat and frost causes a food unto fire, it cannot
endure it any where about it; therefore if you bring a metal into its heat and
cold, then you have already a ground for the Afterwork; you have little
learning or skill, if you do not know so much.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Folium and Spolium; or of the Schimmer and Glimmer.
THe second or other thing which apparently shows and distinguishes metals, is
the color. The condition of color is this, that they are not so discernable,
by reason of their darkness, in which they naturally are, they are elevated
and brought to a Folium, or are exalted through a Folium, as an obscure and
untransparent folium does the same in a lucidum and translucidum corpus, the
same must a transparent folium do in a thick body, as metals are an opacum
corpus, shining like the moon with a borrowed light into the body, and the
folium gives it forth out of that body.

Such a folium or glitter may be made artificially, but nature shows that it
may be had from a Volatile; though it be true, that that Volatile may not be
had, unless in its seed and body; yet it is soon extant with the body; for he
that knows not the condition of the folium, he can neither in the flux nor
congelation bring any oar or metal into its true tincture; the condition of
this Folium is, that it is as thin as any leaf in the world can be, of these
leaves is composed a metalline body.

Counterfeit Chemists busy themselves very much with their Stratums,
Superstratums, but here is it naturally thinner than beaten gold, and this is
called opaca perspicuita, an in brought leaf, not gilded in, or silvered. Here
lies a curious skill for tinging, with this leaf, if brought into the Glimmer;
one knowledge is the cause of another, and as it is seen in a glowing and
glittering splendor, that there is no exuviae spermatis, or hull of the seed
at hand, neither may it be known in any folium or spolium, by its speculum's or
night lights, to prepare that leaf and spolium, which soon does losen and free
it self, and this is the chiefest thing, for it goes off with the worst
poison, and comes on also, and must settle and rest.

CHAP. XIX. Of fuliginous vapors and ashes.
TOuching the white soot of metals, which is a precious garment to silver, if
only brought into Mercuries, wonderful to behold, that the corruption of
metals and of the first bodies should afford the highest and the uppermost turn
to be the lowermost, where these soots are found surely there is metal at hand
also; but fair and more natural is hardly seen, than there is in Styria, where
they make good steel of it. In Wallachia it breaks or is found near silver,
and this is the surest thing in the metalline work, as well in the Natural, as
in the Afterwork, which seems most incredible unto the people; and again,
that which is most uncertain proves to be most certain; the reason of it is,
because they know and understand it not better. Miners have in their clefts and
passages things hanging and lying, in which great matters might be had and
found, but require great toil, and is a dangerous work by reason of their
poison. Though the Halation and breathing goes ^long, yet it carries many
things with it, which hardly ^ay be gotten from it, neither does it quit the
pain and expenses. Miners call the matter after their way indiscreetly and
inconsiderately, as the greedy Alchymists suppose, that when men speak of the
mercury of bodies, to be the mercury of metals; or the salts of bodies, to be a
^alt like other common salt; Ashes of Saturn are seen here ^eetly, before they
come or go any higher, and before ^hey do turn unto silver, for soon do they
embrace Antimo^y; the same the congealed water or coagulated Saturn has
likewise, and is a pure proof to all metals, and grows deep.

Then there is a pure Wismuth, which is gross, contains a congealed water of
Saturn, which is found also with great gain about metals, when they are reduced
to their first matter, then it ascends into a glass metalline work, and the
ash-work cease. Chemists in old times, and now also made themselves very
busy with their salt, to make all bodies potable thereby, having reduced them
first into salts: but here is an album out of ashes, which ashes afford salts,
which is but in vain; for ashes are garments, intimating and pointing at the
thing which is clad, and the oar cloatheth it self with it, when it is coming
near the day. The condition of Potabilia is otherwise, they must be brought
into potablenesse, and is done in a clean contrary way than they go to work
with. But these are served well enough, that hoe for nothing but for gold;
Nature gives to such these garments; it gives the slip before men are aware
of, I mean the body, therefore look well unto bodies.

CHAP. XX. Of Scobes and metalline water, of the Schlich and lie (Lixivium.)
NAture in her work must still have an increase and decrease, some things are
coming, and others are going; and as above ground at the melting, and at the
hammer metals do lose somewhat, so it is under ground. But how these
subterranean decreases are discerned, which like crumbs of bread should be
preserved, Nature being provident keeps them together also, bringing them unto
the day light, that they might be brought to good, and that metal is known also
to be under that ground by the Scobs or alkali which it excerneth, namely, the
rocks, stones, flints, which sucked nature dry in her work, these are the
offals, if empty of metals, and if some good oar be in it then that may well be
called Schlich or sliding, because it slideth away from the work, it steals
away, where such sliding is, take notice of it, for it breaks off from the
matter in the officina, wherein metals are in their work, and perform their
office, and that Schlich or sliding is a sure sign that metals are in that
place.

So the Lixivium also, or metalline water is a sure forerunner of metals, and
it dissolveth still in the work, and looseneth somewhat from the metals, in
which there is a Schnede and virtue: for as I have said, when I made mention of
minerals, where there are fossilia mineralia, there is sure a Mine-work. And
where such minerals are, they soon dissolve into a water or lixivium: and this
is the difference betwixt the water and the lixivium; water affords only the
mineral, and the metals allow the flowers thereunto, out of these comes a
lixivium: the effect of this water and lixivium is well known, for they carry
in a hidden way flowers or tinctures of oars. The cement or lixivium at
Schwelnitz in Hungary corrodeth iron into a Schlich or sliding; and if that
iron sliding is taken again out of the Dray, and is cast, then is it good
mercury. There are more of such lixiviums, but men regard them not, that water
also is a sign of a very pure mineral; for let us consider the water at Goslar,
does it not yield pure white and red vitriol? and in several other places there
is found good copper, silver, and lead: out of these waters may be had again
minerals, as you please or intend to have them, without any great pains-taking.
For if a mineral is exsiccated, then it has no more the strength to run forth,
but grows tough, and is dried up sinking into the ground. There are waters in
Hungary, savouring of sulphur and allom, which afford store of gold and copper;
alluminous water in Misnia afford silver and copper; the waters in Bohemia
which taste of saliter or iron, afford several sorts of metal, except gold. The
Mines in Styria have their special metalline waters and lixiviums, besides
other excellent Mine-works, insomuch that the whole Mines are of mere steel,
copper, gold, silver, quicksilver, and other things men's hearts may wish for.
The salt waters at Franckenhouse, do they not signify that there are curious
Mine-works there? which if the inhabitants took more notice of, and were more
known, what gains could they not make of them? The more these waters are
running, the better they serve for many uses; if they are standing, it is a
sign that there are evil and bad minerals at hand? and that there are cide,
matters, and minerals that were gone and left behind in abundance, of sediments
and fumes. Take heed of these.

CHAP. XXI. Of Scoria and Exuvium, of the seed and hull of the seed.
THe utmost, and last decrease, and diminution of metals is cinder, which is
very good and harmless. I mean that cinder which metals put off by their
Uredines or soapes. For the exuvium or husk which the corruscation or
by-breathing leaves behind, and is like unto a cinder, is another sort of
cinder, like unto that which comes from the forges of Smiths and Melters; for
besides that they weigh their bodies, they cleanse them also, though the lie
does purge the Minerals and colors, yet themselves also do purge, as is seen
by the cenders which every metal leaves behind in the fire, which however are
not like unto this. By this cender it is seen also, that there are metals at
hand; for the cenders of Minerals, which the corruscation causes, are
palpable, known, and visible: Understanding Miners know the same; There is a
metalline cender among the slacks, but not known, which is the reason why
slacks are so brittle, else they would be malleable, or else they could be cast
compact; some have undertaken that work, but they could not get off these
cenders.

Touching the Schwaden or husks, these do fairly intimate the departing of the
seed, and of the work of all bodies: for when the hull cease to work, and
has no more food, neither of the minerals, nor of the bodies, and now the
Folium is gone into Spolium, then it is at separating, and breaks the band of
the leaf and seed, which is called the Swaden or husk; it is an extreme poison,
it destroys all that lives, especially breathing things; for it is its
intent to return thither again; therefore to what place soever it comes,
finding things that move and stir, the same it destroys, and it self also;
and at last, it returns to the ^ficina of the seed, helps to glue on and
imbibe, and turns (...) be a band again. Where such poison is, be sure that
^ere was silver and metal there, but never in that place, where it went forth,
and is turned into another thing; for after the decay of each body, and of its
leaf, and after the ^ff plucking a singular husk, the last it makes is the
fierest; for there it lies like a Speculum upon the water, and ^asily turns
into nourishments, which is the reason why (...) turns so soon to the metals,
and so the nourishments ^re infected contrary to their quality, that it
wandereth so up and down is the reason, because it contains some of ^he seed
and of the life, and is the untowardness: for the ^eed must have something in
which it may lie, which if it be not one of the bodies of the seven metals,
then is it such poison or husk, this is the skin wherein it contains it self,
^o long till the corruscation forces it away, which then ^s death unto it

CHAP. XXII. Of the shining rod, or of the fire rod.
HE that intends to meddle with rods, must not follow after his own fancy, nor
bring novelties unto Mine-works out of his suppositions. For nature indureth
not to be curbed in her order, but men must be regulated according to nature.
Concerning the rod, good notice must be taken of the Breathing, and this Lucens
virgula, or fire-rod is ordered upon the operative and attractive breathing;
for if it were strong, though it does not kindle, yet it does its office,
through and by a heat appropriated to its quality. A great heat in a furnace
puts out a small heat, light, or fire, the same effect has this breathing upon
this Rod, which being kindled and stuck in, is put out, no upper air or wind
can hurt it; for our upper fire cannot live or burn under ground, for if a
light or candle be hit against a stone or earth, it is put out, because it
cannot fall in. It attracteth the nutriment, which makes this Rod burn, and
sucks it dry. This is remarkable in the matter of this Rod, that it has an
unctuosity which does not burn, as the seeds husk is, whose poison put out
lights under ground in an extraordinary manner. And the breathing above ground
does the same in a peculiar manner. Few miners know this fire, and is the only
means whereby the inhalation is known. This fire-work, thus extracted, is of
special use in Mines, and then in the After-work is of several use for metals;
of the which more in its due place: to descry fire by fire is no mean skill,
and the subterranean fire can in no other way be mastered. Ancient Philosophers
have written much of it: how superior elements make their juncture with the
nether, intimating also that by the means of the middle, Elements must be
learned the emergy of the superior and subterranean. For they are spirits
which join the souls above with the grosser bodies below, else nothing could
have any success wit^in the earth, and for their operation there must be a
medium, a gluten: to tie and bind fire with fire, is a strange maxim, but is a
true one: hence comes a reserve of fire, which never burns; all three must
be together: for the upper is the light fire, and the metal is the flame-fire,
and the nether is the burning fire. This we shall know at the great day in the
other life, where God will separate the burning from the flame, when it
flameth; then will the burning consume Hell, and Hell will soon be burned away;
neither will there be any clearness, but darkness, because God bestows the
light upon his chosen ones, which is neither a flame nor a burning; here these
must stand together. Be acquainted with its friendlinesse and friendship, make
it thy advantage, which is abstrusely hid, and goes invisibly.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the glowing Rod.
BEcause the stirring of the Rod is fallen into abuse among many people;
however it is a fundamental way know and to bring forth the metals, if duly
and natu^ly used. It is an undeniable truth, as I made mention of ^fore, that
metals do breath, and the same breathing is in^ible; the best means to learn it
is the Rod, this is the ^ason why I call this Rod the glowing Rod, because it
re^aleth and shows the exhalation of metals, which ex^lation is of a fiery
heat, though it casts neither flame ^r sparks, yet it is of such an heat,
that it gloweth in its ^anner, and brings the Rod into a glowing, which is an
^fallible sign that there is a living metal at hand. This ^od, if it should be
more glowing without a flame, there ^ust be used special matter, which
receives that fire, else cannot be done with any utility. Concerning that Rod;
is a stick or staff, of the length of half an ell, of hard ^ood, as of oak,
unto it is fastened the matter, even as a ^rch or link is made of pitch or wax:
this matter must be ^f an unctuous matter, either of an animal, vegetable, or
^mewhat else, which is upon or above ground; it must ^ot be too strong,
otherwise it sets the breathing on fire; ^o talk, wax, pitch, or resein is fit
to be used, nor any mi^eral, otherwise that breath, mineral, or metal would set
its ^od on fire, and consume it; it must be a calx of earth, which catches
that heat suddenly, and smothers in a heat ^s calx does above ground, being
moistened, it falls thus ^ot off from the rod. This lime, burnt above by
breath^ng, is good for several uses. But this breathing does not ^eize on the
unctuosity or Mine-wax; else how could the ^ourishment of minerals prosper?
Miners call it a Spath, a true calx of the earth. It is not corroded and seized
o^ under ground, because it has too much of humidity Some call it a Mine
Mermel or subterranean Mermel, bu^ is no such matter, because he does not
endure the weathe^ above ground, exsiccateth, and by breathing is kindled a^
last.

The huge Mountains in Norway, the ores in Swedland, seize on it and corrode
it, they are full of Spath or calx, i^ their glowing they grow hollow; if they
were in a flame, that land had been consumed long ago. For as soon as tha^
Earth-water comes forth from this Spath, and the exsiccating earth comes forth
also, then the hidden fire falls into their places.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the leaping Rod.
WHilst metal is in its purification, that it neither rises nor moves, then
it has its breathing the same as it is of a singular condition, must be
discovered and led forth by a singular Rod; which Rod is of two sticks held
together with both hands: where there is such a breathing, it lies close on
that Rod, no man is able to hold these sticks together, if that breaths on
them: and if it were a single stick, it would break in two, the inner side
where this Rod is laid together must be anointed with Marcasite, that breathing
draws it downward, even as the Magnet is of an attractive quality, to draw
iron; so draws the breathing of this oar, the Marcasite; because the
condition and property of the Marcasite is to strengthen the breathing of the
purification. There is not a better way of Refining, as to use to each metal
its peculiar Marcasite; there is a twofold Marcasite, one above of the
Uredines, or upper elemental heat, and the other of the nether, of this
Marcasite ^chlich or small dust is put to the point of the Rod, the ^etals
breathing causes the Rod to leap asunder. At mel^ng of oars and metals there
must be added a double slack, (...) upper and a nether, that the metal may
bleak the bet^r; the like must be observed here at this purifying and ^efining.
The Marcasites, because (especially those above, ^ot those under ground) carry
soap-metal, and are pure, ^elp the purifying very much; pure ferment put to
dow, ^rmenteth the same quickly; the same condition is in oars, small addition
will further their Refining. There is a ge^eral complaint, that Marcasite
requires a great deal of ^bour, before it can be brought to any good, what is
the ^ason? the true manual is unknown. A Manual, what it is.
call that a manual, when Nature can ^e assisted with advantage and skill. ^dde
to any metal or oar calcined, which you intend to re^e, that is fit to be
added, you will quickly see the effect. could speak of the several Marcasites,
of the several oars ^d metals, but it is needless for the after-works; I would
^t willingly have perverse men be acquainted with these ^rets; they have it
often in their hands, but they do ^t know what they have; for what the
Marcasite of iron? The Marcasite of iron is the Magnet or Lodestone.

The Marcasite of gold is the Lapis Lazuli.


it is not the ^gnet? and what is it of gold? is it ^t Lazul? and so forth of
the rest. ^e down into the mine, take this rule ^ng with thee, then you will
come ^t of it more wise than you went ^wn, and be thankful for it.

CHAP. XXV. Of Furcilla, or of the striking rod.
AS man's natural breath goes in and out, so is the hala^i^n also, and it
carries all the rest. Man's breath when h^ drinks wine, smells not little of
it, or after any other ha^ sented food, this carries this breath in and out
all other senting-breaths out of man's body; even so do I compa^ this halation
also, with a natural quick breath, which ca^rieth all the rest, that come in
the Ferch and seed. So ther^ is no other stricking rod for it, but what is of a
years growt^ which otherwise is called a Sommer-lath, this the Mine^ cut off
after the usual way, and so in the Name of God the^ go: if it strikes in, then
is it good; if not, then his u^lucky hand and misfortune is blamed, which is
fallen upon him, and thinks that his handy-works are not blessed; the out of a
false conceit men suppose their own aptness a^ disposition either hinder or
further them therein, not cons^dering Gods gift and blessing; and the most of
them do not know, after what and at what these rods do strike, the wear it
under their girdle, or on their hat-band, keep it in devotion, as their
superstition leads them unto, to g^ their bread according to their necessity:
God has bestow^ enough on them, if they knew how to manage their thin^
judiciously.

There is one thing to be noted also, that the several a^ or breathings have
their several operations, especially up^ aerial things. For Astronomers
appropriate some tre^ and fruits to the ^ir. The upper air has the upper part
the trees and their fruits, the nether air possesses the ro^ milketh and
atrracteth the juice they yield, because it their allotted part as well as the
upper part is allotted f^ ^he upper air, where it effects the juice, leaves,
fruits, ^s it is seen, that the blessing comes from above at first, which is
palpably seen in propt twigs, they make the ^wig and the fruit twistingly firm,
and this sap sinketh in due ^ime, which is drawn up by degrees by a hot air
from below, which is their food, their work, matter, and all aeriall things.

Therefore if you take such a rod, especially of a Hazel, ^r of a Kray tree,
whose sap is full, and bears a pleasant and sweet fruit, it draws the same
downward, that the ^od must sink and strick, it will suck out the juice when
^he rod stands right on its passage, this holds from above unto this station,
where the rod stands still, that place they all the oars station, standing as
straight as a line.

This rod draws the Halation naturally after the sap so ^rongly, that the rod
does bow to the Halation and to that ^arth, unless it were so strongly pinned
that it could not ^ow. It does not draw obliquely, and stricketh neither at ^e
upper nor the lower, but at the middle part, which is ^lled the wind, and is
good neither for the one, nor for ^e other, neither does it breath, thrusting
together the ^eams, making their outer rind, according as it is either ^ood or
bad, so it hurts or furthereth the upper and low^ breathing. This distinction
must be well observed; the ^eams and oars run that way also. Hereunto are used
the ^ps of Almond trees, and of such fruit trees as do consist ^f a mere
kernel, and an hard shell; for such shells and the ^hes of such trees, and all
that they have, are much aeriall ^d fiery, which serve best for the metalline
work, and the ^est kindling coals are made of them, and are very ^ght.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Virgula trepidans; or of the heaving or trembling Rod.
THe breathings driving the fumes together above and below, you must conceive,
that it requires great skill, to discern other breathings from this: the
breathings o^ the upper element are jovial, and the nether breathings are
jovial also, the same is apparent in their work. The win^ also is Jupiter, he
fumeth these together, and that breathing can hardly be discerned by the rod:
this skill is of a^ high strain: This heaving rod does show the way, it mu^ be
made of a metalline lamine, as of steel, which must be thrusted below the dam
earth, at the end of that eart^ these breathings and halations come together,
and the ro^ stirs, quaketh, which it does not, unless at such a time The
rays of the inferior and superior bodies may not be stayed, but only at the
work they do stand; for at their breathing they have their ascension and
descension, are no^ held in their life's going, unless by the matter of this
rod, there is a knot on that stick, and it is hollow like a Cane; this matter
of the rod is made of an Electrum, drawn from the best thin lamins of Luna and
Sol, put into a glass head which hinders not the breathing, because it will
not b^ hindered, as a vessel may, made above ground; therefore look how you
thrive, if you drive it in too deep, if you tak^ not matter out of the
inferior earth matter, as has bee^ mentioned before.

The strength you perceived of the stricking rod, if ther^ be an aerial
halation at hand, you see how that rod quaketh for the inferiout ascends and
touches, and the superiou^ descends and touches likewise, which rouzeth as
it we^ the Ferch, or life and seed of the metal. The like appea^ ^eth in the
clouds, how they move to and fro, before any snow or other weather comes, and
before the vapors be digested, which ascended; the same process have the
halations subterranean, before they can mingle with the superior halations,
they must be plucked off, emalged: if any of them ascend yet higher, they
dissolve either into ^ain, or congeal into snow, dew, and hoar-frost, before
they part asunder.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the falling rod, or of the nether rod.
THat there is a peculiar and vehement moving quality and power in the
breathing and halation upward and ^ownward, which may not be stayed by any
opposition, the ^ame is apparent in all the vegetables of the world. Rain and
great thick mists may keep from us the solar shine, but nothing can stay this
breathing, because it strikes directly through, but if it proves weak in its
fertility, it is the fault of the mild air; a shot out of a gun, if it is to
go a great way through the air, is cooled. This is the reason why the ^olar
beams have not that operation under ground, as they have above it, and hence
also it is that the metalline matter ^s not so fertile, however they do what
they can, descend ^o the metal, where they rouse a fire and preserve the same.
Thus the Sunbeams must effect all in a magnificent and glorious manner, not
only above to preserve with its lu^tre the lights of all the stars, but by day
also to impart un^o the world and men the day light. By these beams it ^asts
into the earth a dispersed fire, which is advantageous ^o the preservation of
subterranean things; they thrust together homogeneal things, and bring metals
to a compactnesse, that they may be had pure above ground, they ^elie and lean
on them; from hence has the rod its original. For at some certain time you see
the Sun draw water (as the vulgar speech is) so the beams have that quality,
they comfort metals by stricking downward. There is used a stricking rod, above
at its twist is left a part of the stick of three thumbs length, at the
off-cutting take out the pith, put super-fine Sol into the halation which goes
in, pulls the rod in, where the oar is. The reason of it is, because the nether
breathing of the air is there, and goes against, draws this breathing,
carries it down, and the metal within the rod is pulled downward, as if it
would join the same with the rest of that body. Thus the breathings and
halations are copulated; the beam must conceive on the earth, in which it is to
operate, it brings no rain to the earth, but the vapors of the earth which
rise, the same make or cause the rain, snow, and hoar-frost, bring the same to
the earth, imbibing the same therewith; the same operation it has on the
subterranean vapors, caused by the breathing of the metals within; in their
ascension it makes them heavy, so that they are able to fall unto Sol, helping
the same in its fertile work. Having accomplished its fertility of the work,
then such metalline rain falls also on the metal, makes it ponderous, moves
its Ferch in the Lubricum, and draws the rod down also more vehemently than
it does to the stricking rod, which touches not the metal, but merely the
breathing, which is not yet nobilitated through or by the halation. This
breathing might very well be called a fruitful rain, which thus comfortably
refreshes them; it is not a running rain, but only a breathing which by the
deep glittering Sol is made noble. I^ is not sufficiently expressed when
ignorant simple Miners usually say, that the Sun in her influences works gold
not telling the manner of it (as I made mention of bu^ now) themselves may go
yet to School, and learn their lesson better.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the superior Rod.
AS the Planets have not their fixed and certain volution in the firmament, for
the which they are called er^atick stars, the lesser remain in their fixed
stations: the metalline bodies are of the same quality; for they do not ^tick
close unto bodies, but rise and fall; for that reason I compare them to the
various motions of the stars above, their body is rolling and voluble, led and
tinged by the Ferch and seed, which is for the most part of the Suns condition.
Planets with the Sun are of a special agreement in ^notu and lumine, and their
body may be said to be Lubricum and Volatile.

This Rod is appropriated unto planets which hang their bodies to the seeds as
long as the great breathing of Sol holds still, and suffers himself to be
obscured, and he must suffer in giving his luster to the earth by rain, mist,
and snow, so long till he breaks through them. So the bodies also are
corruptible in this upper fire more than the lower in their work. Therefore
such a rod must be applied which I call an upper rod, that the opposite
breathing of the reflecting metalline beams which were received of the Sun, and
strengthened again may be returned from the bottom to the Systeria, be it as
high as it will.

This Turco or Rod is a twisted tender branch of a Hazel, which from that twist
on the bulk is hollow three fingers length, for its pith must be out of it, and
the mercury of metals must be put in, the weight of three barley corns or
grains: this Rod stirs the halation from below upward, this is the condition
of this Rod, whereby is known that that metal is of an infirm body, wanting the
influence of ^pper planets, being defective of the Solar heat, and not of that
below, and is the cause why Mercuries-lubricum i^ the rod is stirred, making it
rebound; intimating, that it is unfit for his work, and that another body is
fitter. The planets with their influence work more on imperfect metals, than on
perfect ones. For the Sun does not put a garment on mercury of the body, but a
certain constellation does it, the rest joining in the work, and are found next
to it, except Sol and Luna, these meddle not with this Rod. Though these also
are planets, and belong to a perfect breathing, and have their particular rod,
as others have theirs, which press toward their several work, they are fitted
for not aiming at the works matter, which makes its principle as the mercury
of metals.

There must be had a sufficient instruction for to know it. It is thus; a metal
is known before it casts any crust, and how deep the oar lies, and how it may
be wrought upon, if I would know whether there be a sufficiency in that oar,
the same I learn by the leap of this Rod; if it be a Saturnal oar, the Rod
leapeth the more, more than the condition of the body of Saturn is. For this
Rod does not stir the body, but that which is the most in that body, namely,
the mercury of the body: for it yields good store of it, and may put on easily
another garment, and be a mercury of metals, and so forth.

If in that place be Tin and Wismuth, the rod applied leapeth not so quick, but
more slowly than it does where Saturn is: where a copper or iron oar is, there
that rod moves more slowly yet: But this must be observed, that there is no
breathing about metals, unless they be under ground; for when they are there,
then are they in their works, whither they be increasing or decreasing, they
cannot be without breathing then. Thus much of these Rods.

CHAP. XXIX. Of resting vapors, or of their sediments.
MIne-works meet with many natural obstructions, as all other worldly things
are subject unto. For all things sublunary are in subjection unto
corruptiblenesse; ^he same happens also unto metals; they suffer by their
^old and hot fires, that they quite evaporate and expire. ^s when their vapors
and fumes grow ponderous, cannot ^apour away upward: where such vapors are,
Miners cannot brook under ground.

In a Cellar, where new wine, or new beer is on work^g, that vapor suffers no
candle to burn, by reason of the ^onderous Kho or fume, which cannot so soon
enter the ground, unless these fumes be extenuated in their ponde^osity. This
fallen matter lies on close, is like warm meal, I call it Caries, which differs
from an Ostiocollum, for that ^s in the Rocks naturally, and dissolves at last
into a fire. This does not so, and keeps still a dry powder, and is hea^ier
than Mine-ashes, which are light, and dissolve into ^alts, which this meal does
not, but abides a constant ^ediment, which is like an unwholesome stinking
vapor, choking the oars, turning them to a rottenness, being ob^tructed in
their driving above and below.

These fumes are caused, when there are hard rocks, to which fire must be
applied, which causes ill fumes, which being weakened in its rising, lie down
in a place, grow ponderous, and increase; for evil and poisonous things will
soon gather to an heap. It is seen in gold, being dissolved in water, let it
stand a while, and the impure minerals separate from the essence of gold, and
settle to the bottom. Excrements of metal are soon brought to that posture;
for being brought to a glowing by a small heat, they cast such a malignant
fume, which choke men immediately.

CHAP. XXX. Of weather salt, halitus Melusus.
THe Malignant breathing, as it is generally so called, is a pestilent salt,
which indangereth not only the Miners, but hurts the oars also: for it allayeth
or makes the breathings fall, which are in the oar, being thereby obstructed
in their natural working. The manner of the settling of these breathings are
worthy to be noted. It may be compared unto an Eclipse, though the beams which
ascends keeps its course, yet the breathing stays it, and will not let it
go about that place; being in that stay and condition, its Ferch and seed
parts; at last, through its sides or walls it suffers fluid oars to come in;
thence is the original of such fluid oars, of which there are several sorts.
But this is to be noted; That weather is called a weather, because it is not of
such clear air, as it is above ground with us, still carries something with
it, which is grosser and hurtful unto man more than the air above with us: for
men are not commanded to dwell and live under ground, but if any ones
employment lies that way, he must be contented to do so, commit his condition
to God almighty; because he must endure and suck in ill fumes, and get
Mine-diseases.

This subterranean air growing ponderous, by reason of the fume and
water-stone, which stop and corrupt the cross passage, then is it called a
Weather-salt: this is apparen^ when a burning candle is brought in, these
ponderous fumes do quench it like water; at last, they choke the men also.
Therefore when that is seen and felt, let Miners come out again, for they can
do no good there.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Cos metallicus, or stone-salt.
THe air, being of one piece of pure earth, at last turns to a stone. There
are several sorts of stones, as ^ere are several bodies in the earth, though
all of them are ^ut an earth. The longer the matter lies, the harder and ^tter
it will be. Such stones cannot be stirred or heaved, ^lesse by fire, which
seizes on the earth, and consumes (...), and turns it to a terrene firmament,
as scales are in fish^s, and bones in beasts. These also the Lord will have in
^is good time with fire. This moved the Ancients to ^onsume their carcases with
fire; though flesh soon comes ^o rottenness under ground, yet the bones do not
con^ume so soon, the fire consumes them being turned to earth-^shes.

This salt is hurtful unto metals, taking from them their working, without it
they cannot continue in their life, but ^ust expire and die, because nothing
can penetrate it. The difference betwixt the stone-salt and the stone-meal is
this; ^he salt heaveth it self, when the stone grows to a hardness, which
formerly has been a precious stone, and the air could penetrate it, but now it
begins to turn into a horn-stone, when this meal comes to the highth of its
age, it turns to a dust.

Here is it requisite to relate the difference betwixt the nether and upper
stone, which partly is obstructive, and partly a furtherance to the Mine-work;
they may increase under ground, but in the Afterwork no stone is good, because
they have no nutriment, and therefore must perish and be famished for want of
food.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the subterranean pooles.
THere is a most heavy case which befalls clefts, passages and structures,
called water-pools under ground. For it is a truth undeniable, that clefts and
passages under ground have their waters, both the day-water and the
night-water, if once opened, then are they made passable, which prove the utter
ruin of Mine-works. Therefore my counsel is, not to make passages navigable
to come to the oars. It is just as if one would dig a man's heart out of his
body, and he would begin to dig at the pulse, and so along all the way to the
heart, would it not be an horrid butchery? There is a nearer path to the well,
what needs to make far fetches about. There is a twofold water under ground;
the day-water, and the ground-water; the day-water is not hurtful unto the
structures, but rather helpful, soaking away many things, and takes away many
times from the stages the ground-water. Let the ground-water be kept out as
much as possible may be, for it does hurt, if it cannot pass away, neither let
it spring from below out of its Catharacts. Keep out the fire also; for both
are hurtful to metals, and to all things in the world, if they play the masters.

CHAP. XXXIII. ^f Aurum metallicum; of the metalline gold, or of the
Metalline-bed.
THere is another fatness under ground, where metals (...) grow, neither is it
the hull of the seed, nor the stone ^um Petroleum, or Naphta, but is like unto
an Uredo or ^ne-soap. It differs much from soap; soap does not ^n, because it
contains a hidden Sulphur, not a com^stible one, but an incombustible one;
this is the reason ^y it does not burn in a flame, neither does it seize on a^
other thing but only on the pure metal, if that should ^t continue with it,
the metal could not come neither in^ ascension nor descension, it consumes
first of all in the ^etal, even as grease does in the animals. This fatness is
^t far from the oar; when it is predominant it consumes ^e metal quite, and
evaporateth. Oil is of that virtue, put on the top of a drink, be it what it
will, it keeps in (...) strength and coolness: this fatness shuts up the oars
^dy that no breathing can pass. Fatness has a great ^finity with iron, and
is one of its next kind; of the which great volumes could be written.

In the County of Schwartzburg, at Wackersberg there is ^ore of such fatness,
looks like quick silver, and swimeth and tinctureth red, like Bole, this color
it took hold on, and it may be extracted from it, some call it a Mercurial ^ody
or a Tin-glasse, Lead-glasse, Wismuth or Antimony; (...) seizes on all those,
and when this fatness does ^ot turn to a fatness of such metals, where the
seed ^s predominant, then it turns to a volatility, and to a great Robber.
This fatness is a greasy earth, glit^ering like a salve, of a red and brown
glowing, as if it were Quicksilver or beaten Talk, or glass strew into. In
the Rocks of Bohemia and Transsylvania there great store of it at Goslar and at
Slackenwald, even as qui^ silver or lead oars are; many of them are found here
a^ there.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Metalline streams.
When Ferch and seed must part from their work (...) reason of the sediments,
be they what they wi^ and expire not naturally, then the oars turn to stones,
whi^ Miners call Fluxes, though they know not from when^ they come, nothing can
be made out of them, they are f^sible or fluid, when melted in fire, but
nothing can (...) brought into them, because they are not porous, or no (...)
can get into, which makes them more noble. It is strang^ in Nature if any good
thing be driven out of the body, will not return thither; for if life be gone
from man, the body receives it no more; but these are things possible (...)
God alone. My intent is not here to write of miraculo^ things, but only of
things natural; I wave the former. (...) is to be admired that the body of dead
metals is so fai^ whereas other bodies which are dead consume away (...)
nothing: metals also come into a corruption, but in a lon^ time their death is
like any glass, keeps its color, especiall^ if it was of a Marcasite, hence
are learned the colors o^ Marcasites, for green, blue, white fluxes are found
therein as metalline flowers have been, which are generated (...) three bodies.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Creta, Chalk or stone meal.
WE see in this our air that no fume or wind ascends in vain, it dissolveth
again into one thing ^^other, thither resort many meteors; the like meteors ^h
the earth under ground: For the fume which ascend^ from the fire-halation of
the oar, or of the metal, and ^ords the stone meal (Creta) wherever it falls or
lights, grindeth more, and increases abundantly, having a dan^rous salt,
whereby it hurts those places, where metals (...), especially when they are in
their ascension, hindering ^eir color. It is apparent in the slat at
Mansfield, where ^ieth betwixt the spoaks of the ores, and can hardly be ^tten
from thence, it robs and consumes Folium and ^olium: The stone-meal makes
a Kuff with stone-mar^w, turning it to a kind of marble, called the Potstone or
^^lit, a double stone, and is dark and very firm, it strikes ^e, being for the
most part of fire.

Hither belong the ^alks, but intending to make mention them in another place,
I wave them here; however they so are such a meal, and differ from others
herein, because inclines more to a cold fire, wherein it melts like ^ow, as
the others do, and dissolveth sooner into water ^an into meal, and this turns
sooner to meal than to wa^r; if it be of less matter than it has of the
stone-^arrow, then it affords a fair ice or crystal, called Vitrum
^lexandrinum, or Mary's Ice, which cannot be mastred in ^ot fires, but it
melts in cold fires, is very hurtful unto ^etals; insomuch, that by reason of
it Mine-works fall to ^ine, as it happened at Stolberg.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Spiro, or of the Blast.
THe Spiro or blast in an instrument which brings (...) right the weather or
obstructed air, otherwise all wou^ turn to stone, where it is, and would be at
a stand there, the lower fire should enter instead of the air, and exic^teth,
though it does not kindle, if a piece be beaten off (...) it, then it appears
so, and this piece which flies thus (...) side gives to understand, how it
makes the stone, and ho^ Nature frames the oar and metal: but jewels and
precio^ stones are from another offspring out of sweet waters.

In this instrument there dwell together fire and air, which take their power
and matter from the malignant weathe^ where they consume all ponderous matters
through fir^ inlightening the remaining matter it has. Make that Spiro or
blast into a ball of copper, of an heads bigness, s^der it bright and light,
let no air get into it, leave a sma^ hole, where a needle may enter, attracting
the water which purposely must be made and set for it: there must be had pan of
coals at hand, which must be kindled, and the ba^ laid into it, turning the
little hole toward the coal-fire, an^ it will blow the fire forcibly; which
being done, it grows hot, and makes the water boil in the ball, which fumeth
and carries it forth with a great fierceness, blowin^ on the coals strongly,
and thus it maintains the fire by breathing strongly in the manner of a pair
of bellows, driven from without: hereby several good things are effected and
the condition of this ball is, that it shows what may be done above ground
with the like, no use can be mad^ of it behind that place, because Nature
herself has suc^ a blast for her fire.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Pulfa, or of the Break-stuff, or brittle matter.
THis salt is engendered usually by a malignant fume, which the Mine-fire should
have; And when the ^nes be very hard, then there must be made a fire of wood,
^here the fume draws to the stone-fire, and grows ^ick, and if the fumes of
Succinum, and of other things are ^yned, it turns then to such poison, that
the oar must be ^ed, else it perishes, for that fume lies on the oar fuli^ous
Kobolt which corrode and consume the oar; there a ^ll must be applied, which is
round and hollow, having ^ole at a bigness at which a quill may enter, it must
be so ^se, that no air may either enter or get out, this ball must (...) filled
with gunpowder, cover the same with cotten^ol boiled in Salpeter, then dip it
in melted pitch, which mixed with some Sulphur, kindle that ball, let it go
down a box, or fling it on a Stolln or chamber, when the ball ^eth asunder, it
expels that fume, not only by that ^oak, but with the blow or report the
gunpowder makes. ^ch a ball may be applied also to water, and be sunk in an
^strument under water, in which noisome fishes are feared; (...) crack will
kill the fishes that are there; there is a past, which gives no report, but
only burns, and destroys, ^d heaveth this salt; but have a care what past
you make ^e of, and have a respect to the upper Scaffolds, whither ^ey be old
or new, that they be not imbezled, and your ^st must be mixed, so that it may
do no hurt.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Clathrum, or of the blank fire.
THis fire needs nothing for its food, shines in darkness is a special fire
for Mine-works, quitteth the charges, i^ applied, more than the expenses do,
bestowed upon Ta^ or Bromith work; For oil in some places may be had che^
enough, casts no smoke, destroys fumes; it is put into glass ball which is
put into a basket, to keep it safe from water and sand, which affords a light
to the workmen Miners ought to know how to enter their ground for the hight or
metalline Speculum, which is a singular manual for the metalline breathings,
and after-halations join an^ come together, require special instruments whereby
they may be known; for where these do join, and the diurna^ breathing is
predominant, then it exhaleth by day, shinet^ out of the earth; Miners call
this a metalline breathing true it is so, but they leave out something, so it
is but half breathing; if the after-breathing is predominant, then i^ appears
by that Speculum and light wherein it makes it self known. She is in work with
something, and there is at hand such a metal; metals do shine, though it does
no^ appear so to our eyes, like as rotten wood does: by day they are not quiet,
as long they are working, but there mus^ be a reflection of their work, which is
this light. It casts no beams, as the daylight or rotten wood does, by night
it receives one from such a dark or duskish shadows light.

Fair and curious breathings are seen therein, and tha^ light of darkness is a
light you may see by it, he that is distant from it five or six yards sees it
not, nor can tho^ neither, for it is such a light as is in the eyes of Cats,
dogs and wolves, which can spy thee, though thou c^nst not se^ ^m, for there
is a light at night as well as by day, which ^pparent in these bodies, which
receive their light from Nocturnal light, for if that power were in themselves
(...) would ejaculate beams, which they do not, and ex^ence evidenceth it, that
there is a subterranean ignis dis^s, a scattered fire.

^his light is twofold, the first lights, being thus pre^d in a ball of some
fishes or worms, of juyces of herbs, ^saps of wood, being distilled, and the
distilled water be^ put into it. Take a pure Crystalline glass, it casts a
cu^s light under ground, if mercurial water be put into it, ^aduateth the
waters made of worms and of woods ve^ighly in this darkness, which is called
the Light; ir be done and used also by day, but much better in sub^nean
darkness, in which the fire lies hid, and must be ^ed and awakened by such
material and instrumental (...).

^he second light is Speculum, which receives that light, gives an intimation
of such hot or cold fires, which every Clown or Miner understands: for as it
shines in Speculum, so kindles this fire, and is the oar. In ^s body they are
discerned well enough, from whence diseases have their several names, but are
not searched (...). The difference betwixt the ball and the Speculum is same
with that which is above ground, I can view all members of my body, but not my
face, I can behold ^ight, but what the Sun of this light is, which mini^h the
luster unto it, the same I cannot behold or discern

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Gluten, or Mine-glue.
^He best help and remedy which may be applied to subterranean pools, are
wells: for where these break forth, they carry that water away: a better and
nearer is not tha^ the Gluten, to dam up or keep out the day water, that the^
do not run any farther; this damning has great utility it makes the water not
only slimy and tough, but it dr^veth it backward, that it be served for some
other issue, a^ be rid of it in that place, where it is naught, and meer^
obstructive.

If the day-water be thus stopped by a Gluten, that cannot run and gather at
the sink, then that ground-wa^ may soon be drawn away at the sink; the deeper
the sin^ are cleansed, the more these ground-waters or springs a^ diverted, and
at last are turned also to day-waters, or m^ be dammed up, and made run another
way, where the may not be obstructive to the Scaffolds; and where D^vings of
mils are not had at the same places, the Glut^ may be used, then the Scaffolds
and Structures in the pass^ges, clefts, and Mines may be seen, the dams and the
Gl^ten are the best helps hereunto.

CHAP. XL. Of TRUTA, or of a Past for to corrode the st^^^ through, or through
eating.
THere is almost nothing which is a greater hinderan^ unto Mine-works, than
water is, and where the Glu^ is not sufficient to keep it out, and in places
where it is (...) in, and must be drawn away with lower buildings, as wi^
Stolen, or beams and pipes: it is an huge and dangero^ work, to make these
thorow-breathings good and holdi^ it costeth many men's lives, and great
expenses must made, therefore ways and means must be thought upon make ways
through with burning, to make such a f^ which corrodeth the rock, and grinds
the stone, ea^ing small and thin, that the water may get through, and run a^ay,
that the Miners may not lose their lives in that water, (...) usually it
befalls them at such works. This fire corro^eth great stones in running waters
or rivers; it is a corro^ing fire, a Gluten being made, which is lined or
covered ^ith combustibles, poured or cast down through a channel ^r pipe,
guarded from water, that Gluten may be effectual, ^ough it be under water many
fathoms deep, it still cor^deth further, gathering strength by that, it eats
upon ^d burns, and presses still lower, it does not smoke, ^eing a running
corrosive fire.

There are some saps and gums, which if boiled to a hard^esse, and mingled with
unslaked lime, kindle and burn (...) strongly, that they corrode the rock, make
an hole into, (...) big and as deep as you will have it, so that the water ^ust
sink away, there must be set a pipe of wood or of ^ther materials, as deep as
the water rose, and must be ^t and sunk to the very bottom, and of this
Gluten, ^ast or stuff must be put into, let the hole of the ^ipe be closed with
pitch, to keep out the water, make ^all bullets of this Past, kindle them, it
cateth down ^en out at the Stoll, or beams end, the bigness of the hole ^ust
be according to the Pipes mouth below, which must ^e equally wide with that
above, when the Pipe is clear^d, and way made for the water to run out at the
^ole, then all that water-pool under ground will sink a^ay, and clear the
chambers below. This is a cu^ous skill for to break through rocks, if well
con^ived and well ordered with exact manuals.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Traha, or heaving materials used instead of a dray or slead.
IT is known, that breathing, and halation, and the weather uphold all both
artificial and natural things: it is apparent in great Edifices, that the
things exposed to weather cannot hold, if neither water nor wind tied; the
great reparations in such structures signify so much.

There is a place in Zips or Sepusium, called the Toh^schaw, where firm steel
ascends by day, and in that place there is no Mine of steel, no instrument
can get any scale from it, but lying in the weather one winter and summer, it
gets a scale of two fingers thick. Thus it is apparent, that the weather
heaveth also a stoll, or the great beam or metalline body, why should it not
lift and heave a stone. This appears further at the falling down of great
snow-bals from Mountains about Saltzbu^g, and in Styria, where great pieces of
rocks fall down with such snow bals, as big as an house is, which heat and cold
has thus corroded and loosened. Hannibal making the Alos passable for his
army, poured warmed vinegar on the Rocks, whereby he made them so brittle, that
they soon could be wrought through; oil does the like, if well prepared.
Acetum's made of vegetables of wine, beer, fruits, are precious for such
purposes. Cistern-waters may be turned into Acetum's, if cocted with honey,
being made warm first; this drives the fire back, which is in stones, for
there are commonly Horn-stones and Fire-stones, which are made brittle by such
means. There is made a Petroleum also, ^o that you need no fal^er-oil, nor any
other; no, not Naphta neither, drawn from Osteinmark, or calcined flints, such
water- acetum's being poured upon, and other frighting waters, whereby the
hardest ^ints are terrified and made brittle. It stands upon natu^al reason,
that such stones must be dealt withal in this manner; For behold the Gluten
and Aquafort, of what ef^icacie these are? Does it not corrode the Pumice-stone
like Beeswax, and the Top-stone like a marble of diverse co^ours. Consider well
the white marble, and the sliding ^and, in which the Pumice is, you will find
what manner of lixivium's may be boiled from them.

CHAP. XLII. Of the frost in Mine-works.
THe greatest troubles that Miners are put unto is to pull and draw up all the
filths and stones that are naught out of the Mine-works, that a way be made to
come deeper in. Above ground they call it an heap of rubbish. It costeth ^o
great matter to cleanse, dissolve, and void these rub^ishes with corrosive
wares; it costeth little, if rightly ma^aged and handled, to dissolve first the
lightest things, these being made riddance of, the rest may easily be voided.
That earth under ground must not be looked upon, as that is above with us,
adorned with grass, for under ground there is least of the earth, there is a
mixture of all manner of things, as salts, juyces, minerals, stones, the least
part is earth, and yet that part is the noblest; for our of it are made all
manner of metalline bodies: There are sharper things, all of which must not be
used at once; and must be effected with these, when that which is above cannot
be applied to that which is beneath: juyces also are easy in their uses for to
corrode and make brittle. Sulphur alone performs the work, which is a poison
unto juyces and saps. Miners and such that are employed about such works must
have knowledge of such things, and exercise themselves herein by way of
practice: for all particulars belonging to these manuals cannot be set down
upon white and black: experimental knowledge must be joined hereunto, not only
a depending from things written.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the flaming fire.
WHereas there is occasion for great and small fires in Mine-works, which must
be learned and applied according to the several sorts of metals, and not after
the manner of their several meltings and finings, and the condition of such
necessary fires must be known also. To set down these in their particulars
would require great pains, and the writing thereof would rise to a great
volume.: it is the duty of understanding Melters and Finers to order and
regulate themselves in their fires, according as each metalline condition
requires, to further and not to hinder their work; and so I commit these to
their further and serious thoughts, and to take these things into a fuller
consideration.

CHAP. XLIV. Of Ignis torrens, or of the roasting fire.
THings inclining to ashes, and soot, and excrements of metals, and the
exuviums or hulls of bodies melters suppose may be taken and gotten off safely
in a roasting or calcining fire, they make a great fire of wood under them,
roast, or calcine the metal, that as they suppose they retain nothing thereof,
or of such offals you heard of now, they ^eld their exuvium, and copper yields
cinders and slacks; ^ut if frightened, then it rubbeth and consumes iron;
^erefore nealing is more commendable, as they do at ^ansfield, a great heap of
oar is laid together, which they ^dle, let it stand in a gentle glowing heat,
and burn a^ay that which should come off in that glowing. Metals (...) Swedland
are healed thus at the heat of the Sun in Som^er, there it runs finely
together, and purges it self so ^atly, insomuch that it would be refined, if
it staid its me in that heat. This nealing I do better approve of ^an of the
calcining in a fire-flame. There is a twofold ^owing fire, and metals require a
twofold glowing or nea^ng: one sort of it is used at Mansfield, they kindle
with ^undles of straw the heaps of slats, let them glow of their ^wn accord,
and they do it like an heap of coals, and the ^r is nealed, which is put in for
that purpose. Secondly, ^ealing is good also for bodies of stones, reducing
them in^o calxes; but those that made metalline calxes in an in^osing heat. or
glowing fire, they got only the calxes of ^e bodies exuviums. Therefore
neither themselves, nor others have any cause to marvel, if they do no good
(...) that way.

CHAP. XLV. Of the corroding fire.
THis fire ought to be set among the coal fires, being of a consuming nature,
and their corrosivenesse (...) in the cold fire, and it has the same qualities
which ^he burning fire has; it shines and burns; its burn^g is corroding,
in that it is better than the other, because it does not burn it to ashes, but
brings the bodies to dust or sand, which would be toilsome, if by filings it
should be brought to stars: the next neighbor to this fi^ is the glowing fire,
of the which I will give only (...) hint.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Ignis candens, or of the glowing fire.
THis fire is purposely ordered upon metalline bodies, (...) consumes them,
being their matter is naturally inclined thereunto: This fire is of great
concernment, making their bodies very malleable, their exuvium's stay on the
Float, and is the best quality they have, that they put off i^ that glowing the
thing which will be gone, and the good thereof remains. Things now adays are
slighted, the world supposes to have skill enough it wants no further
knowledge, Quot capita tot sensus; every one thinks his wit best, though some
have scarce begun to know any of these things; which is the reason why men are
sti^ kept to their rudeness. Men may suppose, I mean by this corrosive water
an Aquafort; it is no such matter: how many runs of precious Aquasort is used
in vain at Goslar on the Hartz, which would serve for better use, and the
expenses laid out for wood might have been saved.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Ignis incubans, or of the Lamp-fire.
THis fire serves when metals are wrought openly, and not luted in, then the
metal does not fly away in a dust, nor does its best run away; for you heard
that a flaming fire is hurtful, for to work metals withal. Lamp-di^es are
commonly of glass, set in an earthen pan, filled ^ith ashes or sand, kept in a
sweating, in that sweat many ^ppose the metal receives its body, or the one
changes ^o the other: I leave this transmutation in its worth, and ^not
approve of it. Touching this warmth, I cannot ^prove nor find fault with it,
and all metals indeed should (...) dealt withal in this manner.

These two fires of oars and the Lamp-fire, if they were ^de use of in
medicinal ways, would do better than the ^cining or flaming fire can do, where
these are of no use, ^d the long fire must orderly be kept in an equal heat, if
^y good shall be done. Some kept the lamp fire in a Stove-^rnace, where all
things were spoiled in the working; it ^s either too hot or too cold: it was of
no equal heat, which the work in the end did show, because it was not ^ell
governed.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the cold fire.
THis is a strange fire, little can be said of it to those which cannot
conceive of it; whether it was not ^ken notice of, or whether they did despair
of it I know ^ot: this is it which elsewhere is called coagulating; it ^nnot
consume the other fire; it can melt the work, but (...) consume it is
impossible; it works in the air as well as in ^e fire, where it shows its
efficacy, and is the sole proof ^f its fusiblenesse; metalline mercury is of a
cold fusion, ^l other fusions are hot; if you believe it not, feel it; ^e
fixation of the warm flux is called coagulation, there ^e one opposes the
other; the one congealeth, the over keeps in a liquidnesse: this difference
must be known by those which are employed about melting of metals, an^ their
fluxes.

It is of concernment, to govern this fire well, or ho^ stones are to be
weighed, and things that are excessively cold are a death to a tempered body:
what animals do li^ either in too cold or too hot a fire, and to speak
precisely of life, it is impossible to do that, as to speak really o^ God:
therefore gaze not upon definitions, what human^ reason is able to conceive of:
Philosophy is strangely conditioned, and it appears by this fire also, a
thing which i^ very cold, may contein a life however.

When it is in its highest degree of ascension, then it come down again, it
turns to silver, then to copper; if the nether hot fire does it not, then
surely the cold fire must do it, for it dissolveth again into its mercury,
which is the flux of the cold fire, if it lays hold on it, then it must ru^
to all bodies, in its running it puts off not only the nethermost but the
uppermost body also; take this into further consideration.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the warm fire.
OF this I have spoken already; it can be made and governed several ways,
coals, wood, pitch, oil, and other combustible things are fit for it. There I
would only speak of an heat, which is good for the flux of metals, whereby
they are purged, as you heard above: needless to be repeated here.

Thus much of this first Part; where I infirmed about the nether work, or
fore-work, governed and observed by nature, whereby she holds forth unto us
metals and minerals in their forms. He that conceives aright of this work ^d
considers it, works with advantage and utility, and is great help to proceed
successfully in Alchymie, which ^itateth and treads into her steps. I wish
hearty suc^sse to all such, which bear an affection and love thereun^.

^raise, Honor, and Glory be unto the Supreme Master of Mines, by whose word
and will all things are made, ordained, and brought to their forms, Amen.

End of the first Part.
THE ^ECOND PART Of the Last TESTAMENT OF BASILIUS VALENTINUS, Friar of the
Order of St. Benedictus.

Wherein are repeated briefly some principle Heads of the first Part, what
course Nature observes under ground, and how metals are generated and produced
to light; as Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Tin, Lead, Quicksilver, and Minerals.

(...) like manner of precious Stones, and of tinctures of Metals, how they are
discerned, and what relation they have to the Holy Scriptures.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLVI.

THE SECOND PART OF BASILIUS VALENTINUS,
CHAP. I. Of Mines and Clifts, and what manner of middle works and second in
oars are.
IN the first place there lies a necessity upon every Miner, to know how to
search and dive into metalline passages, how they strike along, and they must
be well acquainted with all their occasions and conditions; and if at any place
he intends to fall to work, (...) must know how to use the Magnet of the
Compass, ^here East, South, West, and North lies, and learn the ^ayes of this
and that oar, and where their issue is, and (...) w^ll informed of the long and
short strokes of metalline ^ss^ges, and where they d^aw together to a metalline
^m. The forms of metalline oar are several; some car^ Talk slats, an oar which
contains silver and lead; o^ers are very brittle, having little of slate and
Talk, and these are discerned by their firmness: there are other stones in
which appear Copper, and the flowers of Zwitter* there are others also which
have flat floats and slate-stone, in which is wrought Copper oar: hence it may
be gathered, that by reason of these several forms, are produced several
fruits; and in Mines toward the South better oars are found, then there are
some toward the West called after-oars; between which there is always ordered
or placed a center of perfection.

CHAP. II. Of general operations of several metals.
ALmighty God for his eternal honor and glory has held forth to mankind
innumerable wondrous works, which he as the sole Mediator and Creator has set
forth i^ natural things, the same he has showed also in his omnipotency under
ground, in metals and minerals, of them w^ may learn, as the twelve Sybils
prophesied of the bright true, and only Son of Righteousness and Truth, in
which do rest after the twelve ports and gates of Heaven, and after the twelve
months, moveable and unmovable, visibl^ and invisible bodies, the seven Arch
Angels standing before the Throne of God; after these the seven Planets, Sun
Moon, Mars, Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, Saturn, and the re^ of the stars, and the
seven metalline oars in their prope^ties, as gold, silver, copper, iron, tin,
lead, Mercury, the Vitriol, Antimony, Sulphur, Wismuth, Kobolt, or bras^ oar,
allom, salt, and other mineral growths.

That the true center may be comprehended and conce^ved of, God has made the
first separation according to h^ word; The Spirit of the Lord moved upon the
water, the whole elemental body of the earth has been water, b^ the Spirit of
the Lord Zebaoth has divided it, and fashion^ the earth from the muddinesse of
the water, and therein all metalline fruits that ever were created and
generated under ground, all these were first water, and may be reduced again
unto water: all other creatures, be they animalls, vegetables, mineralls, all
these are produced from the first water, the several kinds of beasts, fishes,
and sea monsters, after the Lords spirit, and after the first eternal breathing
Essence, which brought forth and shaped things tinged and untinged, soft and
hard, small and great creatures; after the twelve stones in the breast plate of
Aaron. He created man after his own image, the holy Spirit was infused into
Adam, who had a fullness of eternal wisdom, and that according to the order of
Melchizedeck. Almighty God, who is the first and last, the first principle and
end of all things, has set his gifts into times and hours, days and years,
which according to his eternal Decree have their revolutions; he has blessed in
his most holy means Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Aaron, Melchizedeck, and others he
has infinitely blessed, according to his good will and pleasure from eternity,
puts several periods unto them; and in his unsear^hable decree and will he
has laid the foundations also for Minerals and Metals, a help for the
supporting men in their ^eccessities in this miserable life; thus has he
meliorated and exalted the earth in her goodness; men have reason ^o return
hearty thanks unto the Creator for it.

God in his gracious providence, next unto the knowledge ^f himself, and of his
holy word, can bestow no better gift to man, than to indue him with the true
knowledge of Metals and Minerals: Jews thought themselves wise men ^erein: but
as little some Miners know Minerals and Me^als, as little knew the Jews their
Messiah and Gods word (...) its true sense. Therefore from that blessed and
promised Country the knowledge of precious stones, minerals and metals are
come to us, as by an inheritance, as being the ^st, and are become the first,
and they the last; but (...) the end Heavens gate will be opened unto them
again, ^ternal and external gifts and means will be bestowed on them, and the
true use of metals will be none of the meanest.

Where there are fertile stones, be they rocks, flints, peebles, marbles, in
their central points is found what they are in their operations. The several
gums and rasoms, the one excelling the other in beauty, transparency,
hardness, or liquidnesse, are known and discerned by their fragrancie and
taste: Miners ought to endeavor incessantly, and in simplicity, how the nearest
way may be chosen to find out the Mineral-passages and veins into which God and
nature has laid direct courses.

CHAP. III. Of the stones, rocks, and flints of Gold, its operation, condition,
and striking courses.
GOld is wrought in its proper rocks and marbles, and in the purest matrix of
the firmest earth, of a most perfect salt, Sulphur and Mercury, purged from all
feces, and impure spirits, with the conjunction of a natural highly clarified
Heaven, of white, yellow, and red sulphurous earth, after the fiery nature of
Sol, in a deep fixation; insomuch that none of all other metals has an higher,
compacter, and more ponderous body of a goldish matter, in which there is no
humidity; all the elements are equally in it bound up, which in their unity
have wrought such a fixed body, tinged the same throughout with an everlasting
citrin color, with the deepest tie and uniting of its pure earth, Sulphur and
Mercury; and with its Vitriol essence it does all, what the Sun among the Stars
does operate. Naturally, all is gold, what cleaves thereunto in and at all
sides; and it is found in the best and closest stones and passages, and the
power of Sol works merely upon that oar, and in its quality is comparable
unto Sol. This noble gold stone and oar is sometimes mixed, and on its outside
^here sticks some obscure and dark matter, having annexed to it some slats
and other spermatick matter, which de^racts from the goodness of its own
nature; and though ^he Creator has endued it with great Virtues, yet does it
^umble it self, and suffers it self to be found in despicable Mineral-stones,
where it loses much of its tincture, as is apparent by the Touchstone, where
the mixture of Copper, Silver, Tin, and others is seen; all these mixed
impurities can be separated from it with artificial Manuals, and with little
ado it may be brought into a perfect state. Gold oars naturally are wrought
thus, that the gold stands in it close, compact, firm, and good, which is found
sometimes in the cross passages. Its fixednesse is found in the deepnesse
under ground, where it has its greatest power, and it is found also sometimes
in a speckled jaspis, full of eyes, and mixed with flints in its passages,
where many times Vitriol flint is found abundantly, which Vitriol is the best
among all other sorts of Vitriols. The Hungarian Vitriol has the precedence
before all the rest, which is sufficiently known in their proves and exemines,
as may be demonstrated to the eye. In its passages are found sometimes fluxes
of several colors, which are interlined with gold, and must be forced with
fire. To that purpose, it is requisite that it be dealt withal with such fire,
as you heard in the first part, commonly Zwitters and Zirn stones are such,
which must be stamped and beaten, and drawn to a narrowness, and fined.

Gold is wrought also in standing passages, and on level ground, the oars and
such passages are yellowish, rocky, and of an iron shot-sand in clifts is it
on-grown compactly, and generally is it found near Flint-works, sometimes it is
found in a flint, or in a liver-coloured jaspis, sometimes in white peebles,
that gold which is in it is of a white color, like silver, or in white copper
oar, where it sticks hoary and rugged: it is found also in brittle
Lime-stones, where it stands curled with black specks unsprinkled, is
granulated, like drops found in the subtilest firm stones, spotted wi^^ iron
moals or spots, and are protruded in fair yellow flowers and are a black
exhalation thrust out. It is found also i^ streaked slat-works in pure
passages, mixed with a ble^ Horn-stone and slat; in flinty glittering passages
it is foun^ hoary, and compact wrought. There are found also fla^ marble
floats, wherein in all your clifts is wrought inheren^ gold, mixed with green
grit, and iron spots; sometimes i^ is found also in square iron shots, or
porous marble Marcasites; but for the most part in grits, sometimes gold oar i^
found also compact and firm in black passages: some gold oa^ and gold passages
are found also to be of Minerals and o^ Vitriol, and Miners in Hungary
especially can discourse of it, because gold oar is found in that manner in
those parts.

CHAP. IV. Of silver oar, of its Mine, operation, condition, and striking
passages.
SIlver oar is wrought in its own stone, of a perfect nature and most noble
earth, and of a fix clear Sulphur, salt and mercury, which with a mixture does
join in a fix and firm uniting, and appears of a degree lower than the gold
is, and is the best metal next to gold, and in the fining of it it loses very
little, and is separated per se, or with other metals joined in the fire, its
natural fitted stone causes the silver oar, following its heavenly influence,
and the nocturnal influences of the Moon. In Northern parts the most silver
passages are found; for as Luna borrows her light from Sol, even so the
Silver-passages and silver stones have at their right side Gold-passages, and
with that noble Queen Lunaria is compared a root, whereby the Gold passages
acquire strength, and get the more power in that mixture, and get their oars
from their roots. Ancient Philosophers wrote ^rangely of her Virtues, to be a
fertile yoak-fellow of Sol, which may be applied to the upper and nether
metalline ^ork, because nothing is so fix, next gold, then silver is in ^s
perfection, and is the reason why silver-passages are ac^ompanied with white
fluxes and Mineral-veins, next ^ereunto are such passages, in which are
generated red Mineral-sulphur, and red yellow juices of the noble gold.

Silver metalline oar is wrought many times in a red gold-^h^esse, and comes
forth better than the other; a proof whereof may be had, if well ordered. White
gold oar (...) naturally thus tinged of white copper glass, which ^ause such
oars and passages, by reason of the food of their perfect Minerals, and with
the glass oar black fumes are exhaled, and feed upon Wismuth, Lead and Tin
oar, wherein Minerals that strike near upon the Lunar passages, ^re greedily
refreshed; thus grows the fi^mest and compactest silver oar of its pure,
proper, and unmixed stone, meliorating the bad places and instruments which
silver oar has many remarkable virtues next unto gold, from the heavenly
influences, changing several sorts of silver stones, descending from the
originals of their highest finished unity

They carry and produce also, not only mixed chambers and Mine chists, but also
several hard and sturdy mixed oars in whole flint-works, and other copper
flowers, yellow and black oar, and are found different in their nature, form,
and tincture, so that the one is more hard, sturdy, flatty, broader, narrower,
whiter, blewer, in its color thus qualified and natural in its end, middle,
and beginning. This is the reason why these silver-fruits and oars are found
differing in their colors and forms, the one being more compact, fairer, and
of a better glass, than the other. Sometimes there is found in such a vein or
passage firm and compact gold, silver, and copper, so it is found sometimes at
Krenach.

There are found and seen also in a certain vein and passage in mixed
Lime-stones, lead, iron, and copper oar in one union and juncture. And in one
Mine is found copper oa^ in another is found silver oar, and in another Mine
there i^ found an iron stone; why should not such remarkable distinctions b^
taken notice of, which Nature from Gods imagination has h^ld forth so
gloriously unto Miners, and se^ these before them to be discerned by them. Some
silve^ passages are found also in their natural Zachstones, which either are in
the hanging or lying on^s. Silver passages show themselves also with blue
gritty flowers, in hollowed fluxes, in sprinkled Marbles, and c^rry flint-work^
of several colors, and these passages and clifts are full of pleasan^ silver
colors, of yellow and green, of a color of Goslings, the more they are
mingled with such colors, the mo^e they have wrought.

There are some silver passages and veins, which carry three distinct colors
after the manner of a rainbow, where the one color works in nature either
more closely, or more mildly than the other, in a curious order, and the one
may be discerned before the other in their passing strokes and shootings,
together with their Chamber-colours and floats, as they fell severally and
apart in each Mine-oar.

CHAP. V. Of Copper oar, of its stone, operation, and striking passages.
COpper oar is wrought in its own and proper stone, of good pure salt and
over-hot burning Sulphur, through an heavenly impression into all its parts,
tinged red throughout, not quite freed from a superfluous humidity, in an
affinity with iron, because copper and iron are nigh kin one to another,
because their dwellings and houses are set one by another, and is the reason
why the one may easily be ^ransmuted into the other.

This metalli^e oar is much wrought i^ slat float-works, which are green
fl^n^y; many times it appears in a red (...) b^w^ form, and is seen also like
limestone in black and e^^w sl^^ works, like unto coals in green flinty
passages, (...) a ^wo^^^d manner, either current, or in a manner of a oar:
sometimes it is red and brown, mixed with a green ^^ou^, some are of a lazure
colou^, some of a copper ^^sse, flinty and iron shot, or of a white ^ood. The
cop^er oar in its passage is sometimes rich of gold, and of sil^er, as it is
accompanied with curiou^ Zach stones, and in^osed with passable stones* if so
be that other metals and ^inerals do not entrench upon them, which corrode and
con^me them: And copper oar is a slat work also, mixed with ^liated earth, and
the m^^curial copper is hardly brought ^ut of it at or in an ordinary mel^ing,
affords store of iron, and no ripe copper-food, which rub very much the copper
(...) roasting, and make it unmalleable: the richest copper ^ars are found in
Hungari^, Bohemia, Silesia, Thuringia, ^assia, and Voigtlandia; the like is
found also about Trau^enau, where it breaks every where in a manner of (...)
float, mixed with sand oar, and where it breaks ^ehemently in the slat work,
they call that slat of ^lifts, they are poor in silver, and such must be
roast^d or calcined, in some places it breaks in a fair blue and brown color,
or it looks ruddy, of a copper ^lass, and like unto green oaker, and sometimes
it is white ^oldish, which is called white copper oar: it grows white at an
effectual mixture, because at its uniting it ^ssumeth or takes in much of
silver and of lead: it ^reaks also of a yellowish and l^zure like color, green
^^inted upon floats and moving passages, in lime and spongeous ^tones. It
breaks also of a blue color like blew oaker, is ^opper, glassy, and flinty, in
great and huge rocky and marble ^assages, being mixed with a white marble: they
are rich in ^ilver, in green slat stones which are clear and brittle; it ^ieth
dry and green in clifts, open caves, and passages, like green frogs insprinkled
one in another, in a strange manner, distinct, or parted with strange pleasant
colors, which graduated works are losers in half their worth; in the^^ rocks
are strange clifts of Marble, and of white veins, ye^low flint is insprinkled
and mixed with copper passages which yield much silver, have few flowers, are
of a p^^derous form, break very flinty, of a red glass, of a gree^ color mixed
with yellow flowers, these flints are joyne^ with white gold marble, of a green
color, besides the rocky passage.

There is found also copper oar which is rich of silve^ flinty, and not white
goldish, is of a white shining glass mighty in dry hollow slat-Mines, some
whereof a^e mixe^ with iron, or sorts of Wismuth or fire-stones. At the o^^
hanging of some passages is wrought the Chrysocolla an^ copper oar; on the
other hanging of the Mine is wrough^ pure flint, all according to the quality
and condition of the oar. And it is to be observed, seeing that copper oar are
usually mixed with Sulphur, easily unite with the neither metal, and join with
their stones, therefore green flinty copper oar which carry in the dry lead,
slatty passages a black Molben are Minerallish, and are not rich in silver nor
rich in species, encompassed with immature iron and perfect copper oar, and
some are free of it, if far separated asunder, from dry mineral slats, are
richer in gold and silver according as the stones take, in a good natured oar,
they usually entrench upon gold and lead rocks, or antimonia^ oar, as also upon
iron and silver stones. There are found also flinty passages, that have their
Mineral juices of Vitriol and Sulphur; some whereof partake of allom, and
alum^^ plumosum.

These commonly have the best and most copper passages^ which are least mingled
with other metals, as lime, and tartareous stones, in which black flo^ts and
sl^ts do break are enclosed with green, and are of mild quality; at Eislehe^
and Mansfield Miners put their several proper names to i^ very exactly,
according unto their nature. Miners in Misnia know least how to distinguish
these, the upper part o^ clay-earth they call Pistredo, in which the true earth
is al^ and when they came to the stones, they call it the Day-^^rk, because
they cover all the rest, and turn quite to stone. ^^e third place they come
unto they call Night-work, be^^use it is easily lifted and heaved one after
another, and is ^re, then they come to the Cave or Hole-work, which must (...)
hollowed and set, here are the stones which must be ^oken, then they came unto
the sl^t, and below that flat ^ey come unto the sand oar, though sometimes it
be on^^ ^own at the Lochwerg, or hole-work above the slat, then ^ey turn unto
the dead earth again. Slat and richest cop^^r oar at the silver breathing lies
also on the rocky, horn^ony combustible oars, which have their gold and silver
^ssages of your special kind, among which there are found ^veral forms how each
of them is discernable. In Hun^^ry and Carinthia the passages yield copper
oars, which ^^pper is very malleable, and is at a dearer rate than any is (...)
the whole Europe, as their Minerals also, and especially ^e Victriol there is
held to be the best: as also their An^^mony is counted the best. That Vitriol
has the best and ^rest virtues, which is known to true Naturalists, and
ex^erience has proved the same to be true. I speak some^^ing now, which if
Reason and Understanding were an^^erable, many expenses, hard work, and good
time could ^e saved, and it comes only from hence, because Gold ^reaks so near
to it, and at the same oars is found, where that earth is impregnated with
goldish seed, and make use ^f the same food in many subtle unitings. Minerals
in their ^enerating qualities are better supported among perfect me^als, where
they are higher, and more effectual, and are best ^sed for both such perfect
metals, in case Nature be rightly ^mitated, the ancient Philosophers have bad
experience of, and made trials of it. There is a remarkable difference ^ound
among Minerals, which have their descent from gold and silver oars, and partly
from copper oars; they are Mi^erals and metals, each have their particular
nature and being, among which some oars look green, and bleach at the day, and
grow near other metals; but their stones are m^ like unto lead-stones, some
whereof are grosser, softer (...) harder than others, and some are more
obscure, dark, m^^dy, and some more green, and so forth.

CHAP. VI. Of Iron-oar, its Mine, operation, stocks, floats and passages.
IRon-stone and iron-oar is wrought in its Mine-stone, a^cording to the
heavenly influence of Mars; For he (...) Trinus magnus, the great Lord of war,
and an instrume^^ whereby others are forced and compelled; of an har^ earthly,
impure sulphur of putrified salt and gross Me^cury, which three principal
pieces in their juncture mi^ much of earthlinesse, therefore is it a difficult
labor (...) mollify iron with or in the fire, carrying much of impurit^ by
reason of its sulphur, and above other metals it has deep red quick spirit,
which if it be taken from Mar^ then is the iron gone also, leaves again a
putrid earthl^nesse. Iron is not easily mixed or joined with other me^tals, or
united in the casting. Iron has a threefold partition, and several parts in
its earthly oar, namely, a Magnet a quick metalline oar, which has its quality
from quic^ Mercury, and must hold communion and assinity with iron must be
quickened and renewed with iron filings, in which he lies like an Hedgehog,
and is endued of Sol in nature with glorious gifts and Adamantine virtues; at
on^ place and side it attracteth, and at the other side it refuses which
virtues may be augmented and increased in it* A true type of just judgment
shows after the Sun the true hour in the body of the Compass, by water and
b^ land.

Secondly, steel, the hardest and purest most malleabl^ it (...), of its proper
light drayning place, wherein it lies ^^e, tied and knit together, in all its
parts most compact^y, which in all iron-works is usually put to the edge (...)
point.

Thirdly, there comes the common iron-oar, ordered to^her by its earthly
Sulphur, which three ministered good ^^ughts to the first expert Naturalists,
that Master of ^ne-works Tubat Cain, who made his three principles in things,
and made his dimensions in the Mines in three ^tinct parts, in which such
metalline oar, he found at first ^e iron stone wrought in several ways,
namely, upon stan^^g passages and floats, fallings and proper pieces ring'd,
^er the four Elements and colors of the Rainbow. ^en he considered exactly
its flowers, according to the ^^ndition of each stone-work, how and out of what
the ^n stone may most conveniently be melted, and what man^r of instruments may
be used thereunto, where it may ^st and most firmly be wrought; for its oar
affords a three^ld ferocity and wildness, which are useful, as namely ^lasse
heads, which are like a sharp boodstone, breaking (...) the manner of a
skull, are scaly, and brown spissie, some ^hereof are white thorns, like the
wood upon which A^^aham purposed to offer his son Isaac. Secondly, the
^rown-stone, out of which is made glass and iron color. ^hirdly, granulate
iron-filings in the float-work, which is (...) hard, that it can s arcely be
forced to be gotten off, or ^e brought to right, and when the iron-stone is
come to its ^erfectnesse, then it breaks off by piecemeal through ^^e stone
and rock, that there are found whole Mines of ^^on stone, such is the iron oar
in Styria. The best iron-^tone is black, or red brown, sometimes it inclines
to a ^ellowishnesse, some is of a cherry brown in the floats and stocks, some
are black and small spissie, some yellowish, which glittereth among the rest,
like a copper stone of a ^rown black marble, and of a fair glass, some looks
like s^pa^ated float-work, throughout the whole Mine, some is c^o^^y (...)
hoary in clayish fields, which only is called the Driving, is as the sand
stone, most hurtful unto gold, because it aff^^eth most of the slacks, and very
little of iron. Some sti^^ in the gray clay, which affords most malleable iron,
b^^ of a brownish color. There breaks also good iron stone tartareous and limy
Mines, and the most running is on ^^standing passages, in eristy sandy
Dalkstones. The gr^ clift stones break some in their slats. It usually breaks
a^ in the fore and after Mine-works, where some of it li^^ off-washed among the
Roasts, like a brown arch; and (...) the day there is no oar so common as the
iron-stone, beca^^ it assumeth and takes in other oars, and sets it thoro^
thus often it changes its color and nature, after it th^^ insues Glassheads,
Emasites, brown stone, Osemund, Bolus, together with the red oaker and iron
shell, all those assu^^ the Nature of iron, and the iron stone receives the
high^^ metals, Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, whereby it grows untoward,
but gold and silver are not hurtful unto i^ they make it malleable; that which
is mixed with copper, or with other poor metal easily falls asunder, (...)
brittle, of the same condition is iron-flint, producing out of many passages an
huge flint, partly porou^ like unto a black slat, which besides the iron stone
yields another grosser or subtiler iron. By this exchanging Tubat Cain, the
great and first Mine-master did perceive, that the stones have their activity,
he looking about, and finding that the Lime-stones, which contain iron oar, are
of such mixtures, which may be burned to lime or calx, to raise walls with
them; and how other sorts of Tapff-stones, as also calx stones are fit for to
be burnt, and found them to be helpful for his melting. Thus the iron stone is
associable unto other stones, be they metalline, or mineral. At Musbach there
is copper shot iron, which has a lead joining thereunto; Founders must be
expert to deal with such oars in their melting, and Magistrates do wisely that
train up their subjects in such ways, for the good of the public. Thus is the
iron the first and last Mine-work, a chief metal which many creatures cannot
want it, being of most necessary use, whereby things within and above earth can
be forced, no man is able to remember all the (...) it may be employed unto,
for every day things fall out, which there is need of the use of iron: iron
easily re^eth a malleablenesse in a transmuting way, of which ^e of the ancient
Philosophers have spoken; our iron ^awn from the Magnet, performs many useful
works ^he affinity with copper, which it is near kin unto, as al^ unto the gold
and lead, for thereby are made the most ^rious Alcali, which appear helpful in
many things unto ^er creatures, as Poets write of, and attribute many ^ange
qualities by way of parable unto iron; and if in ^^ing all the virtues thereof
should be comprehended, it ^uld rise to a great Volume; its stones have in many
^untreys decreased, all other metalline stones are upon ^^ir decay, only gold,
silver, copper and lead keep their ^l iplying condition all the world over.

CHAP. VII. Of Lead oar, its Mine, condition, and striking passages.
THe lead oar is wrought under that heavenly impression of the black and cold
Saturn, by an undigested water^ Sulphur, impute metal and salt. First,
generally there is ^rought a brittle glittering lead-colour in that oar which
(...) called Glass, breaking in many rocks, contains gold and silver, yield
gross and lasting Mine-works. Some lead ^tones are very broad, because glasly
oars are mixed with it, ^ith flints or ma^casites, partly they are glassy, red
goldish, white goldish, silvery, copper glassy, and of copper. Some ^ead oar
tutn to a blue color, mixed with a white transpa^ency, like unto a shot Bolus;
some is like unto the stone-salt and allom; some are of a dark green, like unto
green floats, which lie gritty in a yellow or glue-coloured cla^ some are of a
brown black, some are yellow red, like ^^nium, some is pu^e and compact, some
is insprinkled (...) moving, some is mixed with iron, some with silver and
lea^^ some are mixed with marbles and flowers; some brea^ also upon standing
and level moving passages, and some (...) wrought in pieces here and there
in^sla^e-mines, when black lead lies along through the whole Mine; some (...)
glassie in Lime-stones, and some is very rich of silver i^ huge marble
passages. There is a twofold Marble; the silver passages have an earthly mixed
gross marble, white red goldish, red glassie, and ponderous. But the Lead
passages have a sub^ile ligh^, and glassie brittle Marble, which looks like the
glass^ upon gold Mine works, is of a curiou^ white glittering quality.

Lead oar is wrought several ways, and the color of i^ changes after the
manner of the oars, especially in the sorts of glass oars. For if Satuan lies
below, or is i^ subjection unto others, then the glass has no power to bring
Saturn unto Saturn, an imperfect mineral, which either is too hard, or else
unroward, and the Nodus of Venus is a mispuk^l, or a mixture of lead and
silver, which is knitted very hard, but if soft, then it is water lead-^lasse,
of the which are found in gold juyces and tin-oars a kind of iron glass, by
reason mole, but is heavier and mote brittle than iron glass, by reason of its
terrestri^y or earthlinesse, which keeps in the metal, and is neither ^oo soft
nor too hard, and is glassie, white goldish, red g^^dish, and falls into the
best metalline oars. True lead g^asses and oars afford half or the third part
of lead, mixed with some other metal, and if one of the other metals be found
in the glass, which keeps the predominancie, then lead-passages are simply
good, and lead is united with gold, and these are mixed stones; for the stones
of Mine oars are more wonderful in their singular accidcents.

Thus is here the lead also in i^s fall, and bleak, after the heavenly
impression which the Highest has so endued, that it subject to other metals,
and is the supreme Finer in the ^^tial Fruits of others. It easily mingleth
naturally (...) other metals, and the qualities of other oars, toge^^ with the
leaves, bulk and roots into other stones of (...): And Saturn in his degree and
power is the Highest, (...) singular division of all his works, in which he
shows ^elf in a clarified transparent soul, runs into Anti^y with its
sweetness, which should merely embrace gold; this is done so, not without a
cause; for in its derosity it yields the lightest remedy to all melan^ly and
heavy blood. As heavenly astrals are several, (...) clouds under them are of
all sorts of colors; so the (...) lead is purer and more malleable than
others, as that ^ngland and at Villach it is seen in the Lead-stones also. ^or
lead-oars which are mixed with other stones, espe^^ly with such as contain
silver, iron, copper, yield much ^ight stones, and lead work, which are picked
out for se^ting, and the rather if they are rich of gold. Such wor^ metals
there are in Hungary, less pains are taken about ^m in their fining. Mineral
flints with their unripe juy^^ in the weak joynings of Lead oar unite the
Saturnal ^sse; if without any mixture affords to Potters a green ^zure, if all
be not melted into lead: but if you get a ^ttle mixed flint, there the glass
is half upon iron, and ^h that are most pliable afford melting glass for
fining (...) such sturdy wild oar, which will not melt. Artists ^y prepare such
Saturnal glass, mingling with it a small ^ntity of metalline flower, which
will look as fair as if were a natural one. There may be extracted from lead
effectual medicine for man's health.

If slate oars are found with another mixture, there are ^netated most fix and
firm copper, Vitriol and calamy al^^, as they are at Goslar in Harlynia. The
best lead is in En^nd and at Villach.

Man cannot well be without any of his members; me^lls, according to Gods
ordinance are of the same quality, (...) man knew to make good use of them, for
nature has provided richly for him in that way: if men work t^^ ignorantly,
what utility can they have of them? Of metalline soul is made a chain, which
linketh togethe^ junctures of gold and silver: these are endued with a ^cial
spirit, which is distilled into a water through a tr^parent head; Nature
congealeth under ground in the ^^sages such water unto ice, for a sign, that
there is at h^^ a vein of lead, and silver, or of pure lead, and if thereb^
mixture of other metal about it, it is the better.

The best lead passages are such waters, blew, scaly, T^^slate-stones, and
fluid streaked marbles at length, or ^^led insprinkled ones, and not wrapped or
wound about, (...) moving passages, almost not unlike unto silver oars. So^
lead-oars are of a white, scaly, Talk-slate, full of wi^ gar^ats, in which
Lead-oar does appear, which is rich silver.

CHAP. VIII. Of Tin, its oar, operation, mist, stocks, floats, fallings, and
striking passages.
TIn oar is wrought in a sand-stone, having its influenc^ from Jupiter above,
wrought of a dark brown, purpl^ colored, grayish, black shining mercurial
salt, and some sulphur mixed with it, interlined with an unkind gross^
sulphurous fume, all these incorporate together, makin^ up the body of Tin:
this unkind fume is the cause of the brittlenesse of Tin, and makes all other
metals that ar^ melted with it unkind and brittle. This Tin or Q^i^^ grows
or breaks in a threefold manner, viz it slideth it is full of fumes, and it
grows in pieces: It has (...) threefold wildness also, as Shoel, flint, and
iron-mould which causes Lead-work; their colors are black, slate, brown, and
yellow. These sand and Qwitter oars are invi^ned, or enclosed in mighty broad
standing passages, which ^^pear to the day with Qwitters; some contain also
rich ^int work; some of these flints must be calcined, some ^e mixed with store
of Talk and Cat-silver, which is a food to Qwitter, and loves to stay there,
some there are which ^oweth in a Glimmer or Cat-silver, and is iron-moul'd,
o^ers also do strike in a fire stone or flint, so that fire must (...) applied
thereunto, others are in a soft stone, and as it ^ere swimmeth along. Some are
richer than others. That which grows pure, and in black small stones, and
heap^^ together that natural work, that gives the greatest ^in. And because
Jupiter is the potent Lord of it, there^^e it has a mighty throne and seat,
that is, a mighty huge ^^ne-oar, out of which Tin is made by heaps, and is of
^^t nature and property that it presses outward, and ^ossometh to the day,
thrusts off Soap-work, whence ^me the wash work of Tin-soap: For Qwitter does
not ^ow in the sand of earth, besides in its body it is removed ^^her from the
seat of its throne to the footstool, ma^th for itself a twofold dominion, in
one it bordereth and ^^cheth to slates aad other stones that lie about it;
inso^ch that his dominion increases, in which is not a little, ^t much, on the
blue stones, fallings, floats, passages, ^ools and clifts, which incline one
upon another, and do ^n; many times a mighty Tin-stone is wrought, which ^^keth
down among its own cinder and slate, and at its ^king purges it self, and
there come other fumes like ^uds, which at all sides shoot into, and then
breaks a^^n as good as ever it did before; and it is of that good ^^ndition,
that it despises no lodging, nor passes by any, ^t as poor and as despicable
the stone is in that place, be ^ed, brown, fresh, or stale, broad or small, it
will press ^o, and mingle it self with it, and will not be forced out (...) it,
making it self great, little, gross, mild, fame, sub^^e and pliable, even as
the rest will have it, and all this, in natural way; it loves to border upon
silver and iron-stone, that Tin and iron be united in a mighty fix silver and
copper oar; all which are found at their several marks. Tin oar is in this
place better and malleable, if found afar off from flint-passages, and are less
mingled with iron mould, especially of copper stones, which in calcining can
hardly be separated, proves Lead-work, without any fair glass.

Some of it is so mild and soft, that when they are cleared and calcined, still
lose something, for flints and sulphurous matters, which are volatile, and
cannot endure any great heat, co^^ode somewhat of the metalline Tin, which
appears by the white thick fume at the calcining: they are calcined thus hard
by reason of Bake-iron, else they might yield as much again; for they lose
extremely in calcining. It is strange to some, why they shrink together to so
small a quantity, being they get a greater quantity of lead with good Qwitter,
at first brought out of the Mine.

CHAP. IX. Of Mercurial oar and its passages.
MErcurial-oar is wrought in its proper Mine-stones, by the quality of its salt
earth, and its nimble volatile earth, in a moist, greasy, slimy, waterish
oleity, which is mixed with a most subtle, red, sulphurous digested earth,
with a most weak slow binding, like an unripe pleasing fruit of all particular
metals.

Mercury shows its virtue in many things admirably, and works effectually
upon Minerals and Metalline sulphur, and upon such which border upon Antimonial
stones or oars; it loves to be in such places where the Tin-oars lie higher
than silver passages. It requires many iterating effectual operations unto
other oars, and is multiplied upon other strange stones, and is drawn through
the juyces of Minerals and metals, which are in affinity one to another,
sever^^ produce many strange miscreants; this is the reason ^y it is so
pleasant unto metals, Goldsmiths amalgame and (...) with it.

It is used also for metalline colors, and is prepared to ^oil and water for
man's health, and is sublimed for to cor^le the worst of poisons, and is a true
Robber, takes a^g what ever costs have been bestowed on him; but if (...) can
be catched in his nature, then is he in subjection ^d obedience unto quick and
dead. He is very effectual in ^edicina, especially for outward sores; he is
naught to ^ught, and good to good, and is not every bodies friend, ^ough he is
willing to do what you put him upon His me^line stones are of the same nature
with pure white slate ^rth, inclined to a water-blew, in fresh intermingled
^hite marbles, in a glassie grayish and porous Glimmer or ^ar-silver] which lie
beneath betwixt the slates, in a float ^ay, which are mingled in their
metalline passages with a fled Ma^casites, and with the subtilest small
streaked ^hite Talk, and are thorough grown with two sorts, ^anding and
float-striking passages, in which is wrought a ^^rious red shining quicksilver
oar, not unlike unto red ^^ine-sulphur, and sometimes flows purely out of the
^ifts and caves of the passages, stands in a sink or puddle together like
water, which its natural quick substance suf^ciently evidenceth.

CHAP. X. Of Wismuth, Antimony, Sulphur, Salt, Salpeter and Talk
WIsmuth is wrought in its own Mine-stone, not quite freed from a protruding
silver, or Tin stone, of an imperfect pure quicksilver with Tin-salt, and
fluid silver-sulphur of a brittle immiscible earth, partly of a crude fluid
sulphur, partly of a mixed much exiccated s^^phur, according as it has gotten
a matrix, after it was c^^ceived: then it turns a bastard of a brittle
nature, ea^^ uniteth with Mercury, and is wrought naturally in a tw^fold form,
the one is fluid and metalline, is melted with (...) wood, being mixed wi^h
clay, yields much of white A^^nick. The other is small streaked, or spissie,
remains (...) unripe substance, yields a fix sulphur instead of Arsenic^ both
these are silver Wismuth.

Antimonie comes from perfect Mercury, wrought of ^^tle salt and a waterish
fluid sulphur, though it shines bl^^^ naturally, and its outside is of an
antimonial form, yet graduateth and purifieth the noble nature of Gold, a^ does
much good unto man, being artificially prepared (...) its several ways:
notwithstanding its color, it keep^ its high and mighty praise and virtue: For
meeting with (...) Master, which can clarify it, and gets its natural Gold c^^
of it, and extracts a blood red Oil from it, that serves against many
Chronical diseases; it must be reduced to (...) transparent glass: this black
evaporated unripe metal represents to us Gods Majestic glory, who is not a
regarde^ of persons, bestowing upon poor despised men rarities (...) virtues
and knowledge!

The red mine sulphur, which is found in T^rol, T^^^witz, and Engadin, and
grows in a black blue slat-stone, (...) has singulas innumerable good
virtues, wherein lies h^^ a mighty purifying quality, lies on with its color
(...) the red goldish silver oar, o^ Cinober oar, and looks almo^^ like unto
it, whose redness shines forth most pleasantly.

Salt has its special virtues to penetrate and to preser^^ from putrefaction,
contains a noble spirit: and it we^^ very necessary, that men would not be so
careless and neglectfull in their seasoning with salt, suffering matters
^^stinck and corrupt, considering too slightly, and taking (...) small notice
of the noble gift put into good mineral work (...) peter lying on their hoary
old vvalls.

Talk is an ingrown sulphur, shines incombustibly like ^ld and silver, closes
and boweth, is transparent like ^^sse, is called Sulphur, Lutum, keeps in the
fire incom^^stible, like Alumen plumosum, lies in Rocks and stone-^orks,
serves for graduating of metals. Every metal, ^ineral and salt in particular
is good to be used, each is ^^stinguished in its particular name: even as those
that ^ake glasses, put their several names upon them, and put ^^eir several
forms upon them, making them into drink^^g glasses, flagons, bodies, bolt
heads, helmets, recei^ers, pellicans, jar-glasses, wine-glasses, funnels, all
^^ese he frames after his own fancy, either into ^^all, great, long, or round
forms, even as he plea^eth.

CHAP. XI. A comparison between Gods word and the Mineralls.
LIke as the heavenly glorious God in a spiritual way, in his most dearest Son
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, at his redeeming of mankind for the good of man
appeared a Sun of righteousness, which glory the Prophet Esaias has
prophesied of in the Lords spirit many years ago: How two Cherubims and
Seraphims having six wings, moved and sung before the Lord: Holy, holy, holy is
the Lord Zebao^h, of whose glory all the world is full, which Prophet has seen
the most omnipotent Lord of Lords, knowing him a God in a Triple essence, and
that out of that noble Chaos of Jesus Christ should flow the fountain of life
of mercy and righteousness, which the Lord God made apparent on the Tree of
the holy Cross, where out of the side of his dearest Son did run blood and
water, to which the Lord in the Revelation of St. John adds, fire, smoke, and
fumes this union according to the Divine Word is grown at the beginning in all
creatures, and what ever God the Holy Trinity has ever created, consists in
a Trinity, even as the Deity is in an eternal Trinity; As the Deity is
indivisible in the Humanity, a and o, in the water and blood for an eternal
remembrance, that is, the first and the last letter: as in the Heavenly, even
so in the earthly, the perfect Alphabet must not be cut asunder, all must stand
from the beginning to the end; and Christ Jesus purges his dear friends still
unto eternal life through water and blood, saying to their hearts, all thy sins
are forgiven thee, thy faith does save thee. No man is saved, unless he be
first born again, that is, through water and blood, which thoroughly purges not
only men and the sons of men, but also the whole Limbus upon earth; for it is
not the metalline blood and water, neither is it Mercery and Sulphur that does
it, neither in the body under ground is any goldish silver wrought to any blood
red oar, the blood out of Christ side shed for the good of man, is that great
evidence for thus all Mineral stones, that are in the plain element of earth,
and the spirit of all oars and marbles and stones come from the divine essence,
as also the heavenly spirits for the throne of God, with the heavenly Angels
and Sp^rits are furnished for the praise of God: thus the earth also is created
is her stones, oars, ve^ns, passages, for the honor of God, and the welfare of
man, which imitateth Gods wisdom, filled with infi^ite and uncessant
forth-bringing of fruits.

Whence should be the decay of metals? surely even as the eyes of the holy
Apostles and Disciples were held, that they could not know the Lord in his
clarified spiritual body and essence; no more can men see these things in
metals.

Why does Saint John in his Revelation speak of smoke and of fume? Surely he
did not mean the fire, smoke, and fume of Bakers ovens, or Kitchin-chimneys,
but there was revealed unto him the heavenly fire, the mist, vapor, and fume,
which is exhaled from the moisture of earth, and ^^ated to the clouds: so in
the subterranean works the ^^e and spoil, or outside of the oar are sublimed,
and the (...) of the frost which rouzeth the effectual powers, va^rs and
spirits makes them come to a perfect unity in ^^alline bodies. Now if there
were not a fire and vaporous ^^e in the earth, how could they produce their
fruits, ^ich are the minerals and metals under ground?

As the fiery element is covered with the airie, and the ^ven with clouds, and
the earth is filled by them, and ^ether with the fire was enclosed as one
element with (...) other two. In like manner, at the first Creation, the
^erranean passages and veins were laden with oars, as ^s were with fruit, which
the Lord God in Paradise (...) implanted into them. This effectual fire, vapor
and ^e is likened unto Mercury, Sulphur, Salt, and Sea-wa^ wherein earth lies
enclosed and hidden, even as the ^eamest throne of God is encompassed by other
thrones (...) heavenly habitations.

^s the four Evangelists are witnesses of the New Testa^^t and Covenant; so
they are a type and sure testimony ^he four elements, that the earth is created
after the ho^^eaven; thus are we taught in the Lords prayer, as it is ^eaven,
so in the earth, in which, and beneath, and under (...) is every where. This is
in action still, King David ^d confess, that he could not hide himself from
the (...) any where.

^eeing the holy and blessed God has laid the creatures ^^e earth with the
four elementall qualities, therefore ^ational Miners open their eyes, and learn
judicially to ^w the passages and clifts of oars, metals and minerals, (...)
they will get a lasting name with great praise, and will ^ke the noble gold,
which in a glory and beauty appea^^ when it comes from the Quart, and can be
then redu^^ into an oil, which preserves man in a lasting health, and any
balsom, and is become a vegetable, which is ^ble.

It is feaseable, that of gold may be prepared a singul^^ Medicine for the good
of mankind, because man is cre^ted of God from Limus terrae, and the whole
earth is (...) Limus, such another Medicine all the Doctors are not abl^
produce, which is of a curious sweet fragrancy, standi^^ distinct in two
lights, and must needs be in rerum nature because it was brought on God his
Altar, for an offering b^ man's art prepared, and suffered it to be extinguished
None knows what it is, neither we literated Docto^ know the preparation of
it, who when their Confectio^ Syrups, Herbs and Potions will do no good, and
are in d^spair, then they might willingly run to Metals, which f^^merly they
made conscience to make use of them in the Oyntmenis and Plasters; of this I
make mention in a r^verend remembrance for true rational myners. Out of go^^
and silver are joined not only gold and silver moneys a^ other plates for man's
use, but they serve for man's use in many other things: and after the first
metals virtue, there co^^ others also more and more very effectual, even to the
l^^ of metals.

Such virtues there are in minerals also, as in vitriol, a^timony, allom, salt,
and the like. All these are a nouris^ment unto metals, even as Manna was to the
Israelites (...) the desert. As they are easily withdrawn and taken from
metals, so it happened to them also: Heathens and Christian received that Manna,
together with Mines and Kingdom^ they are set and shot at the heap of rubbish,
where the^ still worship the Calf; of this I have spoken more in th^^ book
where I treated of Fossilia.

CHAP. XII. How precious Stones and Jewels are wrought, and how God has
bestowed blessings upon those that work the Mines.
^Ewels are wrought out of the substance of the most perfect, transparent, and
noblest earthlinesse, with mixture of the noblest Mercury, Sulphur and Salt,
^^thout any fume, or moist matter: are of a dry coagula^^n, and commonly are
engendered in a round form in ^eir dwellings, lodgings, stocks, and passages,
fixedly ^und together: some are of a transparent luster, o^ers are more dark;
and they have their several co^^rs.

Not many oars are found, in which these noble genera^^d bodies are brought to
any perfectness, neither are (...) it strikings along in a way of passage,
here and there ^ey have their Centers, unto which are joined tender and
^^aculous accrescencies, where they are guttatim lapida^d, falling into the
hardest, purest stones concavities, ^^wing in several cuticles, as we see the
animal stones do ^ow. The more precious the Jewels are, the fewer there ^e of
them; and the grosser their mixture is, the more store ^ere is found of them,
which is apparent in Garnats; who ^th hitherto searched into the quick spirits
of such noble ^eatures, the Lord has created for man's benefit?

Pygmees, or Homunculi, which in former times lived in ^llow oars of Mines,
these could not want skill in ^th ways, having traversed and traveled up and
down (...) these slippery corners and ways The places and ^uation of such
Jewels lying somewhat nearer unto ^^aven, in the Eastern Countries, bordering
on Para^ce, so there must needs be abounding in Gold and Jewels, and such
precious vegetables, which our thoughts hard^ may reach unto. God requires no
more of man, whom (...) intrusteth with these things, but to be faithful and
just, an^ is an argument for us to think that for the same cause pic^^ Kings
and Princes, and the old wise Partiarchs were gift^ from above to bear a love
to search into Mine-works, a^^ did it with an uprightness and judgment. Let
hon^^ godly Christian Miners choose the better part, and learn (...) know the
pearl, the spirit of the Lord proceeding out (...) Gods own mouth, and let them
consider well their eternal fixation, to return their love again to him that
has love them first, bringing all things to their subjection, he impa^^eth all
unto them abundantly in grace and mercy, and by the innocence and merit of his
only son, bestows on the^ temporal and eternal blessings, and puts more
glorious o^naments on them, and better than ever gold, silver, jewe^ and pearls
were adorned withal.

CHAP. XIII. Of the essence of Gold, which is abundantly found, not only in the
metal, but Mineral also, whose energ^ is showed most rarely, and a short
closing of my first and second Part of Minerals and metals (...) annexed.
THis Chapter is a breviary of all mineral colors and form^ how they after an
heavenly operation are daily clad i^ the metalline prime matrix, and set forth
in their sever^^ works, whereas there shines forth unto us the eternal lig^^
of the lustrous Sun, the deity, of the day of joys, and (...) the eternal most
fixed and fairest Sol, as also of a most ye^low, pure, red, and fixed citrin
color of heavens etern^^ lightning, and the most glorious paradise of all the
Sta^^ a natural created light for all creatures, besides the bea^^ and Aurora
of Mineral Earths, and of their subtilest, com^t, and best binding enclosed,
speaking to all other white ^inged Metals; I, Sol, of an essential being am
Lord of ^rds in power, might, and perfection, I overcome all, and ^vercome and
bring them into subjection, and none of ^m can master me, but I do conquer them
all, they are ^ject to me, and to my Being, for my Kingdom is esta^hed with
infinite and invincible Power and Dignity; by (...) all metals, minerals,
animals. and vegetables are strength^ed and rectified; for I give to every one
that knows (...) in my green, blue, and red Nature, all what I have, (...)
all what he desires, I cause to drop down after the ^r cardinal streams of
Pison, Gihon, the noblest substance (...) Mercury, in the form of a most pure
transparent crystal^e water, and the most noble substance of Sulphur, of Hi^el
and Phrath the clearest fairest Astral salt from a Vitri^ salt, which through
all Mines flew upward very fruit^ly, and penetrates all the mineral stones. I
alone gradu^e and exalt the silver, unto Lune I give light and luster in (...)
righteousness, of my virtue do spe k all Magi, Natu^ists, and Scribes all the
world over, from the East to the ^est, I am the Lord over the heavenly
clarified garments ^d colors, I adorn the firmament, the weather, I cloth ^e
Rainbow after Gods will, I exalt all jewels, all such ^owths and creatures, and
what I cannot inwardly walk ^rough and reach unto in my course, I leave it to
be per^cted with my friend and lover the Lune, she receives the ^^st part of
me, and of the subtilest an abundance, the In^^s, Hungary, Carinthia
testifies the same, for all what is (...) live, and is to receive a life,
rejoices in me, and next ^od, in none else, for to him honor and glory
belongs ^ely after him, I find no higher Lord and Commander^^ for my part I do
not rest, neither do I desire any rest, do ^y office readily into which my
Creator has placed me, (...) my plyablenesse be found gloriously, like a wax
in ^ones, which have by reason of hardness fire enough, if ^ed.

I am hid from unwise men, and am ready to be discern^ by men of understanding.
I am predominant abundant^ in a well known Mineral, as also in Mars and Venus
which are of low degrees: in them I lie hid also, all these have (...) double
spirit, well known unto Lune, pleasant to her, an^ next unto her. Hence God
suffered Moses to erect a bras^ Serpent, in the desert after my color, in
harkening un^^ the people, at the mount Sinai. My best and fairest c^lour
appears in transparent juyces, as vitriol, which af^^^ my condition in due
time penetrateth Oars, whereby the^ grew rich in lust, and are trained up in a
pleasant form con^ded into a greenness, like sealing wax, green like Goo^
dung, blew like Saphir, and so forth, sometimes of the color of a water flint:
my red and while color is the best which are heartily wished for. I love to be
kindled i^ vitriol, and further is after descension in its green food, unto a
deep red spirit, after whose laxative purging comes that expected aqua
Saturni, the true a^ide-Well: from whence I my self and all other Metals,
animals and vegetables have my offspring and life. For Metals and Minerals
rise only from thence, have their beginning and original from it, for it is
that quickening water, which ordinary Myners do not know of, is known only to
Philosophers. It works Minerals and Metals in several ways, in form of taps
which did skept, pure, white, compact, found like purified Suggar, in a blue
slate-work. An extraordinary pleasant Mineral for all colors. Salt Oars are at
a farther distance, which by my attractive changing, are found in floats,
blocks and passages, which in many places bring the water unto the daylight,
so that it often is found a pure and dry Salt above ground, of glassie light
flames, o^ in a great frost like unto flocks of snow, there shoots a brittle,
glassie light stone, wrought in great pieces: in the same order are all other
Jewels according to mine enlightened heavenly stone, distributed among their
operations, worths and virtues, and clarified in a most fixed transparency, and
indewed with an everlasting spirit, distinct i^ s^^^ral colors, as Diamond,
Smaragds, Carbuncles, Saphirs, ^^ies, Chrystals, Chalcedonian, Jaspis, Berill,
Chrysolith, ^^x, Carmel, Turkois, Lazur-stone, Margarits, Coralls, ^ra Lemnia,
Terpentine-stones, and Garnats, of deeper (...) colors, each in its heavenly
colors order is transpa^^, and naturally is created, and preserved in its own
of^a: Hence it may be argued, that all these together with ^^d fruits serve for
man's good, both for his body and spi^^ for nothing is hid from my transparent
power, my splen^^ and luster over-shadoweth all these, and are held to ^ir
growing unto maturity: let no creatures marvel at ^^se several distinctions
from whence they all should ^ne, for all have their principle from me, and from
my spirit, ^ich is hidden in me, which none can dive into, save the (...)
creator of all things, from whom it proceeded as out ^his Divine mouth. Thus I
close up my speech, and my (...) startle at so great a mystery, and attest in
truth for a ^ewell, that I am not only the Gold and present Sol, but ^e also
strength and power to all the inferies terrene spi^^: for Aristeus and Onizon
is in subjection unto me, for I (...) a and ^, God be praised for ever.

Thus I conclude the second part of my Mineral book, ^erein I have showed
faithfully as much as I know, and ^^ld in my industry apprehend: let others do
their en^avours also, let them produce their knowledge also, that (...) light
of the noble nature may still be supplied in her ^^nitude, and may not go out,
whereby cause would be ^^en to the enemy and envious men, to be outrageous
^^inst such truths. Let God still and uncessantly be im^^tuned with prayers and
thanksgiving. For these ends ^ave written these my two Treatises, and annexed
the ^nuals at the beginning (which otherwise needed not to (...) done) that by
earnest prayer and thanksgiving, and con^^ued earnest worshipping of God, every
one might care^^ly exercise himself therein, and be convinced in his ^^ason,
how gloriously almighty God has created, or^^ined and held forth nature, to
perform her operations under ground, and to produce unto the day light form^^
their Nativities and fruits, that we may reap thereby (...) only our
sustenance, but may acknowledge Gods infin^ mercy and goodness, for which none
can return sufficie^ thanks. However let every one do his duty, and as mo^ as
he is able to perform with his heart and tongue, pray God is sincerity for his
grace, blessing and wisdom, t^ conceive by his spirit of truth and
righteousness of his great and wonderful Creature, that the honor of God
maybe exalted above the Heaven, and be proclaimed with infinite praise
throughout all the World.

End of the second Part.
THE THIRD PART OF BASILIUS VALENTINUS His last TESTAMENT, Treating of the
Universal work in the whole World, with a perfect Declaration of the XII.
Keys: wherein is significantly expressed the name of the great matter.

There is an Elucidation also of all his former writings: published for the
good of the posterity, and such, that are lovers of wisdom.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLVI.

THE THIRD PART IS A Declaration of the XII. Keys.
HEre follows the third part of my intended writings, wherein is truly
showed the original and prime matter of our Philosophic stone, which is a
perfect instruction to the practick part, which shows the direct way to the
inexhaustible foun^ of health, and of the abundance of riches to provide man's
necessaries: and this is a Declaration of my former ^itings, which is left for
a love-token to all those that lovers of Philosophy.

My friend you must note, that by this intended work ^ching the Minerals, I had
reason to prefix the two parts Minerals, and Metals, and their Oars, holding it
a neces^y to hold forth a light unto the ignorant, how that one (...) it from
above frames all such Oars, Metals, and Mine^s, taking their original under
ground for to generate ^ereby. For earth is always ready and covetous to at^ct
and to retain that spirit, which proceeds from Hea^ns powers, which it
presents in process of time in a ^mality and perfection. The manner of it
has been spo^en of sufficiently in my former writings, which is the rea^n why
I give only hints of them in this place.

Note, that all things proceed from a heavenly influenc^ elementall operation,
earthly substance, from this mix^^^ arise the 4. Elements, water, air, earth,
which engender h^^ the help of fire, hid therein, in a warm digestion,
produci^^ a Soul, Spirit, and Body. These are the three prime pri^ciples, which
in a coagulation come to a Mercury, Sulph^ and Salt, these three being in
conjunction, according to the nature of the seed produce a perfect body; be it
in the Kingdom, either of Minerals, Animals, or Vegetables. A^ things in the
world, that are visible and palpable, are d^^vided into these three Kingdoms:
the Animal which co^tains such that have a lively breath, composed of flesh an^
blood, as men, beasts, worms, fishes, fowls. The Vegetables which contains
trees, herbs, seeds, roots, fruits, an^ all such things that are of a growing
quality, the Minera^ contains all manner of Oars, Metals, Minerals, Marcas^^
Calxes, Zincks, Lobol's, all sorts of flints, peebles, wismuth^ stones,
precious ones and others.

Animals have their special seed, a spermatick substance which after a
copulation generate flesh and blood, which iced is their prima materia, from a
heavenly influence, created of God of the 4. Elements, wrought by nature, which
formerly were quoted in my writings.

Vegetables also have their proper seed which God bestowed on them, according
to their several qualities an^ forms by a heavenly and sideral influence, and
receive the^ elemental fruitful growing from the earth, with an orde^ thereby
to generate and augment.

Minerals and Metals also have their original seed from God, by the heavens
influence in a liquid aereall substance, by a Mineral spirit, sulphurous Soul
and earth^ Salt in one body joined: of these I have spoken in my s^mer writings.

Note further, if any of these Metalli^ and Mineral kind^ shall be brought to a
farther propagation and augmentat^on, it must first be reduced to its first
seed and prima m^teria.

If you will transmute Metals, augment them, bring ^em into a tincture, or
Philosophic stone, you must first ^derstand, how you may destroy by a
spagyrick Art, the ^etalline and Mineral form and separate it into a Mercury,
^^lphur and Salt, these three must be purely separated, and ought to their
first principles.

This separation is done in, and by a Mercurial spirit, sul^ureous Soul and a
white Salt. These three in a due or^ring of a true manual must be joined again,
that they ^ay be brought to the highest and most perfect purity.

In which conjunction must exactly be observed the ^^antity: after this
conjunction the whole substance is ^eerly a liquid substance and philosophic
water, in which ^l the Elements, first the heavenly then the elemental and
^^sly the earthly qualities are shut up and lie hid therein.

For the Mercurial spirit is cold and moist, the sulphurous ^oul is warm and
dry, and this liquor is the true prima ma^ria, and first seed of Metals and
Minerals, which by Vul^^ns Art is brought to a plusquam perfection, into a
transcen^ent fixed Medicine, out of which is generated the true ^hilosophick
stone, and must be produced in that way.

Therefore observe and take notice, that all Metals and Minerals have only one
root, from which generally th^^r ^^escent is, he that knows that rightly,
needs not to de^^roy Metals, to extract the spirit from one, the Sulphur ^^om a
second, and the Salt from a third. For there is a ^^earer place yet, in which
these three, Spirit, Soul, and Bo^y lie hid in one thing; well known; and may
with great ^raise be gotten, it shall be nominated afterward in several ^erms.

He that learneth to know exactly this golden seed, or ^his Magnet, and
searches thoroughly into its properties, ^^e has then the true root of life,
and may attain unto that, ^^is heart longs for. In my former writings, as
also in the XII. Keys from the first to the last I ordered thus my style (...)
writing, wherein I held forth unto posterity the ^ractick, how the great stone
of Philosophers, or the best purified gold may be made out of Sulphur and Salt,
with (...) help of the spirit of Mercury, which must be drawn from crude
unmelted Minera, according to the Tenor of my fi^^ Key set down in a
parabolical manner.

Why I laid the work of the Philosophic stone upon t^^ Gold Metal, this is the
reason, that the simple Laborato^^ to whom is unknown the other body, or
subjectum, which contains all the three principles: though it be a thi^ well
known, yet is it stranger to their brains, may le^^ hereby more wit and
knowledge. Many of the ancie^^ Philosophers, which lived long before me, have
in the sa^^ manner with me obtained the true universal stone of a mysteries and
health, as their books, which are extant, gi^^ evidence thereof. The first time
I took great pains a^^ made great expenses, and consumed much time about the
purified Gold, alleged in the first Key, this heavenly sto^^ I prepared in the
Cloister I lived in, and happily obtaine^ it. The highest in heaven bestowed
his further grace (...) blessing upon me, that I took into further
consideration the tinging 2 animated 1 spirits placed and planted into their
several bodies. Let no man be ashamed to learn, to ^dd more (...) his learning,
and to dive further into that, which was hi^ from him, notwithstanding his
knowing ways. Natu^^ reserveth many things in her secrecy, which men's dull
understanding and shortness of life cannot reach unto.

Whereas God in his great goodness has bestowed th^^ great gift upon me, for
an improvement of that talent, I have imparted the same to my fellow Christians
in the said XII Keys.

Those that are endued with deeper wits and knowledge, and in their hearty and
careful endeavors strive further to dive in the Art, will meet in the same
place with a more easy and more known matter, which almost w^^ named and set
down, of an effectual quality, out of which in like manner, as the ancients
before me, in their exac^^ speculation and practick have in the end better
known the only scope and drift, which has been practiced several ^^s by me
also, in a shorter time, and less pains taking, (...) they and I have obtained
health and riches: in this ^wn and despicable matter and Mineral substance is
^^d a sulphur and tincture more effectual, and more wor^^ than the best Gold
can afford, which is fluid and open, ^^its Mercurial spirit also, and its
mystical Salt is free and ^^n, whose virtues may with less pains in a visible
man^^ be drawn from it.

^e that has considered exactly my XII. Keys, fre^^ntly perusing the same,
must needs conceive, and that ^rein is held forth the whole preparation of our
stone, (...) the beginning to the end, without any defect, yet so ^t it only
should be prepared of Gold fitted for it. But (...), according to Gods
ordinance in nature, have pointed at ^old, which is much better, and requires
to be taken in^^ deep consideration, which being unknown and strange Novices,
for some reasons I forbear to give them any di^^tion thereunto, with a
resolution to write and to point at ^^h matters, as themselves are inclined to
seek for their ^^d in them.

At the beginning of my XII. Keys, according to the ^^nner of Philosophers, in
a parabolical way I made rela^^n of the property and work of our stone and
balsam, how was made by Artists, which as by an inheritance is come (...) me
also, wherein I spoke as much as was meet of the ^vernment of the fire,
chargeable appearance, and of the ^^iefest planetical colors, and the final
end thereof. After ^^e accomplishment of these peruse well the XII. Keys, for
^^ch contains a particular work.

The first Key informs you, that if you seek for the ^^ed in a Metalline
body, as in the Gold, then before all ^^ings it must most exactly be purged
from all its impure ^eprosie, and that nothing must be mixed with our Foun^ain,
but such, which is of a pure spermatick quality. This ^urifying is performed
with Antimony, which stands in a ^ear relation, and affinity unto Gold, which
is the reason, why antimonial sulphur purges the Soul of Gold, gradu^ting the
same to a very high degree. On the other-side, (...) Gold can meliorate in a
short time the Soul of Antimo^ and can bring it to a firm fixation, exalting
Antimony (...) Gold to an equal dignity and virtue, and can be broug^^ not
only unto a white Metal of Lune, but also to a tra^scendent Medicine for man's
health, of which you sh^^ have a further direction hereafter, when I shall
treat in p^^ticular of Antimony. Al^hough Antimony has promise unto Saturn a
sociable brotherhood, because Antimony qualification does rest in some sort on
the quality of Satur^ in an equal concordance, yet after the fixation of the
exalted Sulphur of Antimony, his next friend Saturn cannon get any prey from
him, because the King received him into his golden Palace, and make him
partaker of his triumphing Kingdom. This is the reason, why he can endur^ now
heat and frost, and overcomes it, and stands with the King a Conqueror in
great and transcendent glory.

The purifying of the Gold is performed thus: Laminate^ the Gold-thinly, after
a due manner, cast it thrice through Antimony, afterward the Regulus which is
set at the through casting must be melted before the blast in a strong fire,
and driven off with Saturn, then you will find the purest, fairest, most
lustrous Gold, pleasant to behold, as much as the luster of Sol is. This Gold
is now fitted to surrender its innermost, being first brought from its
fixednesse into a destructive form, and pass through the Salt-Sea of its
corruptiblenesse, is drowned therein, escaped again, and appeared visibly.

The second Key.
MY Friend, note, and take that into a serious consideration, because the
chiefest point lies herein; cause a Balneum be made, let nothing come into it,
which should nor be there, that the noble seed of the Gold fall not into
^estructive and irrecoverable opposition after its destru^on, and take an exact
and careful view of such things, ^^ich my second Key informs thee of, namely
what mat^^ you ought to take to the Kings Balneum, whereby the ^ng is
destroyed, and its external form broken, and its ^^defiled Soul may come forth,
to this purpose will serve ^^e Dragon and the Eagle, which is Niter and Sal
armonick, ^^th which after their union are made into a Aquafort, as ^^u shall
be further informed of in my Manuals, where I ^^all treat in particular of
Gold, of other Metals and Mine^^ls, into which Balneum the King is thrown,
being first, (...) in the quoted place you shall hear, brought into an Amal^me
of Mercury and of Sulphur, which presently seizes on ^im, corrodeth all his
members, and is dissolved, and is ^resently mortified of this Salt water into a
most splendent ^ransparent Oil. You must note, that this dissolution is ^ot
sufficient, and the King is not minded as yet to let go ^is Soul out of his
fixed body, which you can see when you ^eparate the water from the dissolved
body of the King, where you shall find fixed powder of Gold, out of which you
will hardly get his Soul that is therein. Therefore follow my counsel and bear
the yoke, which I bore before ^ye, and learn to know exactly in pains taking,
further thus, as I shall inform you. Having dissolved your Gold wholly in the
said water, and brought it into a pleasant yellow Oil, then let it stand well
luted for a day and night in a very gentle Balneum Mariae, the feces which are
settled, must be separated from it, then take this pure dissolution, put it into
a well coated body, or Retort, apply a Helmet to it, with a receiver, in the
best manner luted to it, set it into a sand Capel, drive the Gold with the
water over the Helmet, iterate this a third time, then abstract the water in
Balneum Mariae, you will find a fair Gold-powder, keep this in a glass for an
hour in fire, let the remaining humidity be drawn from it.

The third Key.
THen take of good spirit of Sal-niter one part, and of d^^phlegmed spirit of
ordinary Salt, three parts, pour the^ spirits together warmed a little, into a
body on the for^ written Gold-powder, lute a Helmet and Receiver to i^ drive
the Gold over as formerly in sand several times wi^^ an iterated distillation,
the oftener the better, let the Go^^ come to be volatile more and more, and at
last let all co^^ over. By this repeated driving over, its fixed body is
divided, all its Members are torn asunder and opened, an^ leaves willingly its
Soul to a special Judge, of which m^ third Key will give sufficient information.

Note further, that after this work those salt spirits mu^^ be abstracted from
the Gold, which was driven over, very gently in Balneo Mariae, let nothing of
the tincture of the Gold come over, that the body suffer not any diminution:
then take that Gold, or rather these Chrystals of Gold, from which you have
separated the water, put it in a reverberating pan, set it under a Muffle, let
its first fire be gentle for an hour, let all its corrosivenesse be taken away,
then your powder will be of a fair scarlet color, as subtle as ever was seen,
put it in a clean viol, pour on it fresh spirit of ordinary Salt, first brought
to a sweetness, let it stand in a gentle digestion, let that spirit be deeply
tinged and transparent, red like a Ruby, cant if off, pour on fresh, extract
again, iterate the work of canting off and pouring on, till no more tincture of
it appears, put all these extractions together, separate them in Balneo
gently from the Sulphur of Sol, then that powder is subtle and tender; of
great worth; this matter is such, which in a short process transmuteth Lune in
its tincture to the highest perfection, according to the direction of my XII.
Keys.

He that has some knowledge herein, may make this quere: whither this
extracted dry Soul and Sulphur of the ^^g be just that Soul, of which
Philosophers have this ^ng: the Philosophic work for the preparation of the
^^t precious stone requires three things, viz. a wet vola^ Mercury, or a
Mercurial spirit, a wet volatile sulphurous ^^l, and a dry astral Salt, which
after its dissolution toge^^ with the two first must be apparent and known in a
^erish form; which way comes that about, because in (...) process nothing is
spoken of any Mercurial spirit and ^atile Soul, but the Soul of the King
appeared in a sub^^ form of powder? The answer hereunto I delay so long (...)
the Querist learns better to understand the distinction in ^s book, and I will
perform my promise, and set his ^xious and entangled mind at liberty, which is
so much ^ubled about this doubt, and will deal with him as a ^od father may
deal with his son; in and with this scope, ^herein our Mastery lies; have been
fooled most of the ^its, leading them captive in their erroneous ways, being
^^d about in a desert of mislead ways, because in their ^^pposed deep wits,
they had not conceived so much of the ^anner, how all things of the world are
generated, and that ^very spirit must have a Soul, and every Soul a fit spirit,
and that both spirit and Soul are spirits and spiritual, which must ^ave a
body, in which they may have a dwelling.

Gold and Silver, but chiefly Gold is brought to the highest fixednesse, by
such degrees as nature did afford, insomuch ^ts nature is found very hot and
fiery, freed from all phlegmatic humidity, of which Lune is not so wholly
freed, though she has obtained a sulphur-fixed degree, and stays for the
King, to warm her cold body with his hot seed, which concerns the particulars,
and belongs unto them, which in that place shall be plainly demonstrated. In
Gold there is no waterish humidity at all, unless it were reduced again into
Vitriol, which would be but an useless and unprofitable work, and would
require huge expenses, in case the Philosophers stone should be of Vitriol of
Gold, of which there must be had great store; indeed in that Vitriol there
would be found a convenient spirit, which natu^^ would desire, of a white
quality, as also a Soul and Salt of glorious essence.

But what Countries, Goods, Lands, have been dilapi^ted this way, I wave to
discourse of only, this warning (...) give to my Disciples, nature having left
a nearer way (...) keep and to imitate that, that they also might take heed
(...) fall into such extreme and inex^ricable poverties.

The solar Mercury Sol, being never brought so far undestruction, neither did
the ancient Philosophers ever mak^ use of that way, as being a thing clean
contrary unto nature, contains indeed an humidity, but it is a mere Elemental
waterish humidity after its dissolution, and good for nothing, water and other
principles do not stand in the Elements, but the Elements rest in the
principles and seeds o^ Metals, of the which I have spoken formerly. Therefore
let none be so over witty, as to make our stone only of dry and fully digested
Gold: because its phlegmatic humidity is entered into a dry fixednesse and
fixed coagulation, which is not found so in other Metals, though they also are
subject to a hard coagulation and passed through the fire, yet are not wholly
digested, nor brought to a full maturity from the natural original root: which
ought to be taken notice of; and be not offended at my former writings if they
seem to run contrary against this.

Though I have showed, that the spirit, Soul, and body come all from one
Metalline essence, and must be prepared thus, among which I held the Gold to be
the best, however I dealt herein as it seemed fit for a Philosopher, the like
the ancient Philosophers have done before me, but I hope you took notice of my
protestation, that I gave special cause thereby to your speculation, to take
the better notice of nature and her principle, and to consider the original,
because it was not meet for me to inform all men, how the doors are bolted
within, and especially at that time, when I never intended to write thus
plainly of these things, which are hid even from the best of men, but when my
heavenly Prince commanded, at the changing of my mind, not to bury the ^^rted
talent, but to do the like to those, whom God ^ks worthy, to leave it to them.
One rule more I must (...) to thy remembrance, of such points, which formerly I
^e set down, of which I spoke now, that you may the ^e blame me, as if I did
refuse these things now, which I ^merly wrote of.

Peruse all such which since the beginning of the world ^^e written of Metals,
you will find, that they were all (...) one mind, and that I make use of
their sayings: that the ^^t and the last Metal is a Metal, because the first
Metal ^^h already obtained, and gotten the forth-going seed of ^etals in a
Metalline quality, which does nothing else, but ^^t it goes on uncessantly in
the Metalline generation, as ^poke of in the first and second part of Minerals
and Me^^s, and in this part also I have spoken of it in several ^aces.

Many have called Gold Lead, and Lead they called Gold, because it was found
not only of the same ponderousness, ^ut because three deep glittering stones
have solely gotten ^^om this Planet their transcendent perfection, and many
^ther causes besides, which to relate here, would fall too ^ong and needless.
And this is it which asks wisdom ^o distinguish in this and in other things,
and exactly to ^earch into Gods mysteries, and natures laid before us. But man
through Adams fall being brought to a deep blindness, therefore men's
understanding are so eclipsed, that they can hardly conceive of this, and of
other mystical matters in nature.

The obduration being so great among the covetous, that for the most part they
search and dive into such mysteries out of mere covetousness, pride, and
ambition, made the ancient Philosophers upon command and inspiration of the
highest aim at that, as to put a certain stay to their hands, and to write of
such mysteries in such a manner, that unworthy men should not understand it,
and but worthy men only in their illumination might perceive it: and writing
often one thing, have mingled other among, understa^ing still the one and the
same. In several places t^^ showed, that the Philosophers stone is, and comes
from (...) animal, others from a vegetable seed, and a third sort sai^ it comes
from a Mineral seed: others write that stone made of an animal, vegetable, and
Mineral seed togeth^^ All this is only understood of the Mineral and Metalli^
seed, and consists not in any plurality of seeds. Hence t^^ Art grew
eclipsed, insomuch that scarce one among man thousands hardly attaineth unto
the knowledge thereon and for that reason is it held for an Art, because not
eve^ Booby should bring it into his Beetle-head, and why shou^^ it? For if this
Art were as common as brewing of Beer, a^^ baking of Bread, then any one may
judge what good cou^^ be looked for, would not all manner of vices be practise^
publicly without any controlling.

Therefore such men, which in their lofty mind a^^ merely for Pomp and Pride,
must be clipped in their wing^ and these things ought not to be put into their
mouth^ things are clear enough for these, on whom God intend^ the bestowing of
them.

I return now to the thing I intented, which is to teac^ a desirous Scholar,
how to proceed further with the extracted Soul of Gold: Truly it is much to
discover such mysteries: I warn every one to make good use of them; and note,
that if you have the purple Cloak of the King, a^ the sulphur of Sol, then be
thankful unto God for it, bea^ no evil mind against thy neighbor, unlock
your golden seed according to the Tenor of the Key, turn it to water; for in
our Art there must be body, Soul, and Spirit, which run together in the
innermost root, the one lays hold on the other, meliorateth the same
throughout in its whole quality, insomuch that there is a new created world and
earth, which afterward is illuminated by the Soul, and is exalted into a
transcendent efficacy.

Therefore it is requisite that you know, how to infuse your golden seed into
the new body, and to bring it to a fluid substance: look about thee, and see
where you may ^e it: if you find none, despair not, but be of good ^fort,
think upon means, and ask counsel of god Saturn, ^ill not let thee go without a
resolve, he will put into hand a deep glittering Minera for an offering, which
in Mine is grown of the first matter of all Metals, if this ^era after its
preparation, which he will show unto thee, (...) into a strong sublimation,
mixed with three parts of ^e, or tyle meal, then rises to the righest mount a
noble ^imate, like little feathers, or alumen plumosum, which due time
dissolveth into strong and effectual water, ^^ch brings thy seed in a little
putrefaction very sudden^ unto the first volatility, if so be there be added to
it a (...) quantity of water, that it may be dissolved therein, there (...)
twig with the bulk does unite, that they are able to ^end above the highest
mountain, and stay inseparably ^^ether a Soul and Spirit, or a Spirit and Soul.

It is requisite, that you be stored with water for the body (...) Salt to
dissolve the same also, and coagulate the same in^ a new clarified body, which
will never part asunder, nei^^r in love nor woe, because they are of one
nature, nati^y, and original, and have been so from the beginning. ^^r they all
have their beginning and birth from the power (...) this volatile bird. But
remember well that these Mineral ^irits are in other Metals also, and are found
effectual in ^^e Mineral, from whence with more ease and less charges (...)
may be had: the business is only herein, that you learn to ^ow, what this
Mercurial spirit, Mercurial Soul, and astral Salt (...) that the one may not be
taken in stead of the other, which ^ould cause a huge error. You will find,
that the nature ^f the golden sulphur consists only in all Metals, which ^^e
comprehended among the red, and have a fellow domi^ion with other Minerals, by
reason of the fiery tinging ^pirits, but the magnetic power and its quality
rests in ^s white Mercurial spirit, which binds the Soul, and dis^olveth
the body, therefore the Astrum of Sol is found not ^nely in Gold, that with the
addition of the spirit of Mercury and the Solar Salt only the Philosophers
stone c^^ be made, but may in like manner be prepared artifici^^ out of Copper
and Steel, two immature Metals, both w^^ as male and female have red tinging
qualities, as wel^ Gold it self, whither the same be taken out of one al^^ or
out of both, being first entered into an Union. Besi^^ this Mineral in our
Mothers tongue is a Mineral, called ^^per water, and of broken, or dug
Verdigreece, or Cop^^ there can be made a Vitriol, in all which is found
glori^^ly a Soul of the best Gold, and come well to pass very p^fitably many
ways, no Country clown can believe^ Therefore note here, what you ought to
observe, into thy thoughts, and give not over, unless you be come^ far, that
you know natures mystical conjunction and her (...) solution, then you will
find, what is requisite for you (...) know, and return thanks unto thy
Creator, make use of^ for his glory, and be beneficial to the needy.

This white spirit is the true Mercury of Philosophe^ which has been before
me, and will be after me, with^^ which the Philosophers stone, and the great
mystery can (...) made, neither universally nor particularly, much less a
pa^^cular transmutation. And this spirit is the Key to the ope^ing of all
Metals, and their locking in again. This spirit is (...) sociable unto all
Metals, because they have their desce^ from his sanguinity, as you heard often.
For he is that tr^ primum mobile, sought of many thousands, and found (...)
none, and yet all the World is greedy of it, is sought (...) far off, and found
near at hand, he is and moves befo^ the eyes of all men, for if this spirit be
fed with a Metalli^^ sulphur and Salt, of these three there will be one matt^
made, not much unlike to the Philosophers great ston^ however duly must be
proceeded in, and a true proces^ from the beginning to the end must be
observed: for th^^ corporal Salt must be dissolved into this spirit, dissolve^
turned, and brought into its prima materia, as the spirit hi^ self is: then
both these of one equal descent and birth b^ means of fire with coagulating of
the spirit may be gen^rated a third time to a firm fixation, and to a pure
trans^rent white clarified body, the^ after this accomplished al^o the Soul,
which is dissolved, must seek for her rest again, ^netrate such a pure body,
unite with the same, and rise (...) dwelling therein, that these three be
permanent and ^iding constantly in one body eternally clarified.

And that you may be informed, how in this manner both ^ur dissolved seeds, as
the spirit of Mercury, and the Soul the Gold be made again fix and corporeal,
note that it is ^ne only by the proper Salt of Sol, which in this Art is ^^led
a body. Now observe here, that you take no hetero^neal thing in stead of it.
What manner of process is here ^ed, read my fourth Key, where the truth of it
is held ^^th with singular examples, and proves; but you are ^^cially to
observe, (in case you do not understand that ^y) this plain and true
information, look upon the body (...) Gold, not as if no other benefit could be
reaped of it, ^t only his Soul; not so: impute no such weakness unto ^^t
body, but after you have drawn forth its Sulphur, there yet in it the Salt of
glory, and of the triumphant victrix, ^thout which your spermatick seed cannot
be brought un^ any coagulation. And even this Salt now, of which I ^ade so long
a discourse, how you ought to bring it our of (...) corporeal form through
means of the spirit of Mercury ^to its prima materia, is afterward turned again
into a deeply ^^rified and exalted body.

Therefore take your Solar earth, out of which you drew ^ur seedr, or the true
Lions blood, and reduce it by rever^^rating to a fixed powder, and subtle
impalpable ashes, ^^tract from thence a very subtle Salt, as bright as Ivory
(...) hereafter I will teach you in the Manuals, how the body (...) Sol is
anatomized by the particulars, and to bring it into Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury.
Then proceed unto the pra^^ck and conjunction, and have a care, that you be
pro^dent therein, that at their conjunction you do not too ^^ch to the one, and
too little to the other, take notice (...) the quantity, and observe exactly
the division of the seeds, hereunto minister a certain measure, and mark (...)
sixth Key, then proceed in the begun process, accordin^ to the order of the
seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth K^^ as formerly I had informed you about it,
go on with it (...) the appearance of the Kings honor and glory, to (...)
highest purple garment, and pure golden piece, who is c^^led the Triumphing
Lord and Conqueror over all his su^jects, from the East to the West; which if
you have attain^ unto them, return thanks to God, be fervent in praying, (...)
mindful of the poor, be a student unto sobriery, temp^rance, abstinence, and
above all unto taciturnity: for it the greatest and most heinous sin, to let
unworthy m^^ know of it.

The augmentation of this heavenly stone, as also the f^^mentation is needless
to be spoken of in that place, as b^ing described in my two last Keys, and
held forth to the fu^ not doubting if God grants so much blessing, and imparte^
this stone, the sense of these two Keys will be more co^ceived of: for no
heterogeneal things must be broug^^ to our Metalline substance, neither at the
beginning, mi^dle, or end, but the Mercurial spirit and the digested Me^^cine,
spoken of in my eleventh Key.

To be further as good as I promised, concerning oth^ things, quoted in my
Keys, know ye, that no Philosopher tied wholly unto the Metal of Gold, of
which I spo^^ largely hitherto, and disclosed the true fundamentals the^of, and
as you heard before, the whole mystery lies here^^ viz. in the tinging of red
fiery spirits of Metalline Sou^ and all what is tinged red, and is known to
have a fierc^ sulphur, all such are kind to the Solar Astrum, and wh^^ the
Mercurial spirit is joined with, then the proceed: (...) may go on
universaliter and Particulariter, that a tincture obtained from them, whereby
Metals and vulgar Merc^^ can be exalted, and be ordered according to the tenor
the process.

Such Souls and goldish Sulphurs are found most effect^ in Mars and Venus, as
also in Vitriol, and both Venus a^^ ^^ars can be reduced into a most effectual
Vitriol, in which Metalline Vitriol afterward all the three principles, as
Mer^ury Sulphur and Salt are found under one heaven, and with ^^tle pains and
short time each can be taken out of it apart, ^s you shall hear, when I shall
make further relation of the Mineral Vitriol which is dug in Hungary, of a
high gra^ation. Now if you have wit and understanding, art in^lined and
heartily desires to conceive of the true mean^ng of my Keys, and of my other
writings, thereby to un^o^k the locks of Metals for our store, then you should
have taken notice and observed, that in all these I have written ^ot only of
the Metal of Sol, of its Sulphur and Salt, but I ^ave interlined and mingled
also, and made uniformal other ^ed Metals, from whence may be had the mystical
Masterie: therefore men ought to iterate often the reading of Philosophic
books, then a true sense and meaning may be drawn from them, which without
divine illumination cannot be neither, etc.

But hoping that those, who are fully and really resolved ^o incline their
hearts unto wisdom, will give more atten^ion thereunto, than the other madd
worldlings, for whom ^hese my writings were not intended: for I spoke as
plainly ^s ever possibly I could, and this kindled light shall further ^e
purified, so that true and sincere Novices may have a ^ull light without an
eclipse from their beginning to their ^nding. To which end I took these pains
to disclose that, which all the World was silent in, and concealed it to their
^ast end, and buried it in silence to their very graves.

The scope I aimed at in so doing, was not to hunt after any ^ain glory, but
rather, that Gods gracious provident goodness might be held forth unto
posterity, that the future ^^ges might become seeing, and some of the
posterities eyes might be kept open, and be helpful unto their needy fellow
Artist, and make them partakers of Gods graces and gifts. Though my mind be
mightily perplexed, when I think ^^on what I have done, because I write so
plainly, not know^ng into whose hands after my departure these my writings may
come: However, I hope, let them be what they will that they will remember, and
lay to heart my faithful warnings inserted in my former and these present
writings, tha^ they deal with this book, and use it so, that they may giv^ good
account for it to Almighty God.

Touching further the Vitriol, I should make mention o^ it in my Manuals, where
I treat and write generally of Minerals: But it being such a singular Mineral,
whose felio^ whole nature does not produce, besides, Vitriol before a^^ others
is of great affinity unto Metals, and is next ki^ unto them, for out of all
Metals there can be made a Vitriol, or Crystal (Crystal and Vitriol is taken
for one) therefore I would not bereave it of its own praise, and put it^
commendation too far off, but rather prefer it, as ther^ is just cause,
before other Minerals, and the first place, nex^ to Metals should be given unto
it; for (setting aside all Metals and Minerals) this is sufficient to make the
Philosopher^ stone of it, which no other in the World can do the like though
some particulariter are a help to further that work and Antimony alone is a
sufficient Master hereunto, as i^ its due place more shall be spoken of.
However, none i^ thus much dignified in its worthiness, that the said
Philosophic stone could be made of it as this Vitriol is. Therefore ancient
Philosophers have concealed this Mineral a^ much as ever they could, and would
not reveal the same t^ their own Children, that they should not divulge it in
the World, but be kept secret, though they published, tha^ such preparation is
made out of one thing, and out of on^ body, which has the nature of Sol and
Lune, and contains also the Mercury, wherein they said true enough, because
it is so. But here I must admonish you, that you man turn this argument, and
settle your thoughts wholly upon Metalline Vitriols, because I entrusted you,
that out of Venus and Mars there can be made an excellent Vitriol, where in are
found the three principles for the generation of o^^ stone, but you must
further note also, that nevertheless^ these three Metals, as Spiritus, anima,
corpus are buried an^ ^^d in a Mineral Vitriol, as in a Mineral it self.
Understand ^is according to the distinct natures of Vitriol. For the ^est,
which according to my experience showed it self most ^ffectual, herein is that,
which is broken, and dug in ^ungarie, of a very deep degree of tincture, not
very unlike ^^to a fair blue Saphir, having very little of humidities, and
^ther additionals, or strange Oars: the oftener it is dissolved ^^d coagulated,
the more is it exalted in its deep tinging ^olour, and is beheld with great
admiration.

This high graduated Vitriol is found crude in those places, ^here Gold,
Copper, Iron, is broken and dug, and is ^bundantly transported from thence
into foreign parts, in^ much that sometimes there is great scantnesse of it in
those ^^rts, and elsewhere.

Though the vulgar people can afford no better name to (...) calling it only a
Copper-water, however, ancient Philo^^ers by reason of its unspeakable virtue
and dignity ex^ll'd it, and called it Vitriolum, for that reason, because its
^iritual Oil contains all the three principles of all the ^iumphing qualities.

If you get such deep graduated and well prepared Mine^^, called Vitriol, then
pray to God for understanding and ^^sdom for your intention, and after you have
calcined it, ^t it into a well coated Retort, drive it gently at first, then
^^rease the fire, there comes in the form of a white spirit of ^^riol in the
manner of a horrid fume, or wind, and comes ^o the Receiver as long as it
has any such material in it. ^d note, that in this wind are invisibly hid all
the three ^^ciples, and come together out of that dwelling, therefore ^s not
necessary, to seek and search always in precious ^^ngs, because by this means
there is a nearer way open ^^o nature's mysteries, and is held forth to all
such, which (...) able to conceive of Art and wisdom.

Now if you separate and free this expelled spirit well and ^ely, per modum
distillation is, from its earthly humidity, ^n in the bottom of the glass you
will find the treasure, (...) fundamentals of all the Philosophers, and yet
known to none, which is a red Oil, as ponderous in weight, as eve^ any Lead,
or, Gold may be, as thick as blood, of a burning fiery quality, which is that
true fluid Gold of Philosophers which nature drove together from the three
principles wherein is found a spirit, soul, and body, and is that philosophic
Gold, saving one, which is its dissolution, during the fire, and not subject to
any corruptiblenesse, else it flie^^ away with body and Soul, for neither water
nor earth ca^^ do it any hurt, because it received its first birth and
beginning from a heavenly water, which in due time is pou^^ down upon the earth.

In these together driven goldish waters lies hid that tr^^ bird and Eagle,
the King with his heavenly Splendour together with its clarified Salt, which
three you find shut up i^ this one thing and golden property, and from thence
yo^ will get all that, which you have need of for your inte^^tion.

Therefore set that golden body you have obtained, which in dignity and virtue
is exalted beyond all other Gold, in^^ its due and lawful dissolution, its due
time, then the A^gel of the highest will appear unto thee, and tell thee th^^
it is the Resolver of all the mysteries in the World, receiv^^ it with joy and
keep it safe, for its quality is more heavenly than earthly, therefore does it
heartily incline to striv^ after that, which is above, from whence it had its
Original.

If you have separated this Prophet from his matter which remained, then you
need not to undertake any further process, you were taught parabolically in my
XII. Keys. For even in his remaining formal substance you may find, an^
expect from thence a pure immortal Soul, together vi^^ the glory of the Salt,
both which are obtained by means (...) the spirit, and must be had from thence,
and no impure, o^ contrary thing must be added thereunto. And it is do^ in the
same manner as I told you in my Keys, with the S^^ and Salt of the Gold by the
saturnal water, in whose pla^^ this spiritual Mercurial spirit might be used
with better a^vantage.

Observe only this difference, that the Salt must be drawn forth from the
Mercurial body, as it happened unto the Soul, with the spirit of Mercury; whereas
on the other side the Salt of Gold must not be drawn forth with the saturnal
water, because it is too weak for the body of Gold, but with a water, which
has been expressed in the description of particulars.

This distinction must be exactly observed, being of great concernment, because
the Salt of Vitriol is not so strongly guarded, and is not in so fixed a body,
as the Gold is, but is still an open body, which saw no coagulation as yet, nor
passed it through any melting fire, therefore that body never came as yet to
any compactnesse, there is room left for its own spirit to enter into, can
embrace, and unite with its like, and a snow white extraction of Salt may be
had, whereas on the other side a sharper matter must penetrate Gold, as you
shall hear, when I shall speak more of it in its due place.

Behold now, my friend, whatsoever thou art, what mind I bare toward thee,
and how I am affected unto thee in my heart, the like I never durst look for
from thee. Consider it well, how sincerely and faithfully I disclose unto thee
all the locks and bonds, whereby the whole Philosophic wisdom is shut up,
which hitherto never entered any more ^houghts, much less that ever it was
practiced, or discovered; and nothing caused me to do it, but only Gods
infinite mercy, my good will and love toward my Neighbor, which my
Predecessors have not done so completely, and was put off unto me to do it.

Having thus separated your three Mineral bodies, and ordered them into certain
divisions, and put away the dregs, wherein they lie hid, then look to it, that
you neglect none of it, by the diminishing of the quantity, which would prove a
great fault to your work, and keep each in its own and due quantity, otherwise
in your work you cannot come to a happy end.

This is the thrift which so many have missed, and have written great volumes
about it: for all what comes from our Philosophic Gold, and has divided it
self into three parts, the same must be brought into one, without any loss and
diminution, which is to enter into a new form again, and become a meliorated
substance, and nothing of it must be done away, but only the feces terrae in
which the glorious Salt had its dwelling. Therefore do that I told you of, and
join the spirit with the body, bring the body also into a spirit, dissolve and
exalt it into the highest spiritual power, i^ that dissolutio^ the body turns
to a spirit, and the spirit with the body uniteth and joyneth into one
substance, that after the exchanging of all manner of colors, there comes a
white body like snow, transcending all whitenesses. This is the greatest
mystery of this world, about which among the learned and supposed wits, such
disputings in the world have been, that a palpable thing, and a visible one
could be reduced into its prima materia, and out of that may be made again a
new clarified and better substance, by the bountiful nature leading the way
thereunto.

Thus you have made and brought into the world the Queen of Honor, and the
first born daughter of Philosophers, which after her due perfection is called
the white Elixir, of which great volumes are extant. Having brought your work
thus far, then you have deserved to be received into the Turba of Philosophers,
and you get more Art, wisdom, and understanding than all Sophisters, which
prate much of these mystical things, and yet know not the least thing of it.
Therefore it is just that you should be preferred before them, and let them sit
below thee in shame and disgrace, and in their darkness of misunderstanding,
so long till nature does enlighten them also.

That you may bring and lead that new Philosophi^^ Creature by the means nature
afforded, unto the highest perfection, after which your heart with all her
endeavors does strive, then remember that neither man nor beas^ without a
living Soul can neither stir nor move: and as man here in this life, through
temporal death loses his Soul, offering the same again unto the Almighty God,
from whom (...) had it first, into his mercy and merits of Jesus Christ, ^here
after the departure of the Soul the dwelling, as the ^^dy of it, is left quite
dead, which is buried in the ground, ^here it rotteth, and must return unto
dust and ashes, being (...) duly stipend, which the fall of our first parents
in Paradise ^we deserved, and from them, as by an inheritance is fallen upon
us: after which putrefaction there are raised again on ^^e great day new and
clarified bodies, and the departed ^^ul takes her dwelling up again in that
new body; after ^at, there is no more parting of body nor spirit, nor soul: ^^t
because the Soul finding a clarified body, then with the ^^me she makes an
everlasting Union, which neither De^^l nor death can destroy and disjoyn any
more, nor bring it ^to any corruption, but from henceforth into all eternity ^e
are and shall: be like unto the best Creatures of God, which before our
mortality and departure of the spirit, of ^^e soul and the body could never be,
God help and grant unto us all a blessed resurrection. Amen.

This high and mighty example having its foundation, ^ot in humane thoughts,
wit, or pride, or in an ungrounded ^ating, but in the great Creatour's true
word, which he ^ath revealed unto us through his servant and holy Prophet
Moses, does inform you, what you ought to do further with our new begotten
Creature, that you may get a perfect ^^rth without any defect, to the praise of
the Highest, the ^ather of lights and mercy, from whom we receive all per^ect
gifts which he graciously bestows on his Children, ^or which we are not able
to return sufficient thanks unto ^im.

Now if you will proceed well in your work, then join ^he new body with his
Soul, which you formerly drew ^^om, that the compound in its virtue be
complete, and ^here be apparent in the end a plusquam perfection of it: ^hen is
begotten the Red King of all glory in a fiery sub^tance, and highly clarified
body, exalted above all powers upon earth, from thence arises the golden
fountain, he that thinks of it is renewed in all his Members, and there is
rised wholly a new life: for the which God be praised for ever more.

The augmentation of this huge treasure together with the fermentation thereof,
for the transmutation of Metalls doubtless you have taken notice of exactly
before, where I wrote of Gold how it must be handled, and what direction I have
given you, thereunto, the same you must observe; for here is all one process,
from the middle to the end, the beginning only asks alteration, by reason of
the two distinct matters: for the which God be praised whom we beseech, to give
us his grace and blessing, that we may make good use of this treasure, and
after this life we may enter into the heavenly Kingdom.

The love to my Neighbor has moved me to write of these things, which in my
long experience I found to be true, following the steps of bountiful nature,
which made me a Sooth-sayer in natural things, and I am assured, that if these
my writings are made public after my death, and my other books sharing in the
same fortune, that they must undergo many censures. For some will extremely
condem^ me, delivering me unto Satan, because I have written so plainly: Others
there will be, which will quite overthrow my writings, crying out to be Lies,
Superstition, and Diabolical works, the like censure other illuminated men
before me have undergone, which they feel to this day; for men are so
incredulous in these points, that so mighty an operation should be found
against all manner of infirmities, besides the transmutation of Metals in so
despicable a mat^er, (over which the Iron Man with his espoused Wife Venus
together with the deep glittering Sol, is, and must have the ^redominancie) and
with incredible profit it should by ^rt ^e brought to such perfection. The Art
being great, and ^he matter so contemptible, it procures the more doubt and
unbelief: these unbelieving men I let understand one^y this notable example,
whereby the eyes of those, that ^re going unto Emaus, shall be opened, and
thereby shall ^^owledge that I have written no untruth, but disclosed (...) a
truth very plainly. And note, that the ancient Phi^^phers endeavored to
describe the preparation of the ^^e under a notion of distilling of wine and
the spirit ^^eof, which in their work are almost like one to an^er. For I they
taught out of the best wine to make a ^it, without any strange phlegm, which
to this day ^^ng vulgar Artists must be, and is called the right and ^e
mystical spirit of wine, whereas it may soon be proved, ^r this supposed spirit
of wine contains much invisible ^midity, or phlegm, in an insensible manner,
which is thing else, but its vegetable Mercury: for the fiery spirit wine is
the true fire and soul of the wine. Every Sulphur ^^taineth secretly its
original and principal Mercury: Ve^ables in their kind, the Animals in their
kind, and (...) Minerals also after their kind. 2. They taught how ^s spirit
of wine must be separated in two distinct parts, ^mely this spirit of wine be
poured upon white calcined ^^ar, and be drawn over in a gentle distillation. In
this ^^illation is separated the secret and true spirit of wine ^m his
Vegetable Mercury, as I faithfully informed you (...) my Manuals. From the
remainng earth they taught a ^t be drawn, to be added to the rectified spirit,
whereby (...) is fortified and strengthened in his substance, and at last ^e
Philosopher stone should be generated! It is mightily ^ainst Gods ordinance,
that a Vegetable should produce (...) Animal, or an Animal produce a Mineral.
By way of ^parable, the practice part is held forth under the notion (...) this
preparation. Now as they taught of the wine, so in ^^e manner also through a
short way our Gold can be pre^red, (not the usual and common Gold) and may be
dis^lved, divided, separated, and brought into its first prin^ple.

But you must note, that this dissolution and separation ^as never described
plainly by any of the ancient Philoso^hers which lived before me, and knew the
Magisterium, ^hy I do it, the love to my Neighbor has moved me thereunto,
which I bear from the Center of my heart to those, which overcome this mystery
without falsehood, (...) mingling vices with a faithful heart, in a sincere
kn^^ledge and real piety. In the first place be informed, (...) our Gold (so
much spoken of hitherto) must never be ^^ken for such Gold by any of our
Disciples, which has b^ melted, and fully digested by nature, for herein such
^rour is committed, that men dilapidate all what they h^^ and loose both the
beginning and end of all their wo^^^ Although not only from Gold, but from
other Metals (...) this Clenodium, and Jewel may be had, in the prepara^^^^ of
it, particulariter much profit and advantage may be ^^ten in that, which
concerns man's health, as has be formerly told; however, without the spirit
of Mercury (...) Universal of the World to be gotten merely from the b^^ of
Sol, is impossible, and will be impossible, unless* Creator of all things
produce another ordinance, to cha^^ and alter his Creature after his own will.
But as that impossible, so it is impossible also, to deal against G^^ Creature
in that kind, as to find out that wholesome p^^fit, which to your longing
desire you expect. You m^^ believe it for a truth, as Christ himself is, that
the Philo^^pher's stone would not be so strange, rare, and unkno^^ a thing, it
would be common to Kings and Potentates, (...) God would permit to be made of
Gold alone, and the th^^ Jewels of infinite fixed virtues hid therein, could be
(...) out of it!

My intent is not in this present Treatise to use any p^^lixity in writing;
those that are not quite blind, and ha^^ their eyes open, have enough already
to attain unto (...) knowledge, and command both his mind and hands, ^o to
pass by the weightiest, and esteem high things that i^ unworthy, and to fall
with the blind into the pit, ma^^ for them. Those that are real in their
desire for to atta^^^ unto art and wisdom, and intend to propagate the sa^^
without sophistication, and desire in reality to glory i^ that honorable
truth, you may show a real proof of it i^ this manner.

(...) tell thee really for the highest truth, that you may dis^e our Gold,
naturally driven together, in a short way, to ^ng it to its prima materia, and
is done thus: take the ^wn Mineral Spirit, in which our Mercury, Sulphur, and
(...) is shut up, containing that Philosophic mystical Gold, ^^r that guttatim
upon white calcined tartar, these two ^^trary qualified matters will be
tissing, let them stay toge^r till their contention and strife be ended, and
our Gold ^e it self invisible in the vegetable Salt acre, or in the bel^ of
tartar: lute a Helmet to it, distill it at first gently in ^neo, then increase
your fire, then Hermes his volatile (...) will fly away from our Gold in that
sublimation, and sit (...) the highest pinnacles of the Temple, looking about
^ich way to betake himself, but soon is caught in the ^ceiver, which must be
pure and very dry: when you see ^t his flight is but slow, then take the glass
out of the ^^ny, set it in ashes, increase your fire, then will she fly ^re
nimbly, keep that fire so long till all is come over; ^d her brother the Red
Dragon, hiding his redness under a (...) color in a whitish fume, will begin
to follow after his ^ing brother. Then cease with the fire, the drops being
fallen from the Helmet, take it off, that which you ^de in the Receiver, you
are to keep as a treasure of my^ries. In this manner you have gotten wisdom,
under^^nding, and skill, the fundamentals also, and desires of Phi^^ophers: by
this short witty proof you learn and get that ^owledge, how this water may be
sought after, found, and ^^ted on, and is not to be esteemed a common water,
but is ^at real infallible heavenly water, of which at the begin^^g I have
written, and repeated the same the oftener; which in a spiritual manner from the
heavens power is ^ured down upon earth, begins and accomplisheth ^e
generation of all Metals, for that reason the ancient Phi^^ophers called this
water Mercury, but I call it the Spirit of ^ercury.

Now if you proceed right in this work, and you know that food and what drink
^o give to this bird, viz. Sulphur and Salt of Metal, then you may attain unto
the end of (...) great work, which is almost like unto the Philosoph^^ great
work, and you may get profit infinitely partitu^a^^ many ways; you must note,
that this is not the true Phi^^sophick dissolution, but only one, which
particula^^ performs strange matters, and is a speculum, in which (...)
Mercury, our Sol, and our Lune is seen bleaking, which i^ present confuting of
unbelieving Thomasses, discover^^ the blindness of ignorantment. The
dissolution of t^ three principles I have described unto you formerly, whi^^ is
of a slower pace, requiring time and patience, and (...) exact attention to
make, or bring three into one, which w^ is done in it self per se, without
mixing of any heterogene^ matter, only that which lies hid in it, must do it.
F^ the Fountain of salvation is the illumination of the So^^ and the Salt of
the clarified body, are all in that one thin^ existent from one, two, or three,
which must be brought a^^ reduced to one, which is the golden virtue of all
Metals, ^alted above all powers, together with the Eagle and whi^ body, which
are no where together, but only in this one found, and in that which is next
kin unto it, which kno^ing Philosophers always held in great esteem, but
ignora^^ and blind men despised and disgraced the same. But tho^^ whose eyes
are once opened, love to stick unto truth, co^^ to hide the matter from wicked
men, and study day a^^ night how the ignorant might be kept from it. Thus I
clo^ this third part.

And before I begin the fourth part, concerning Partic^laria, I must needs
speak something of the Philosophers V^triol, Sulphur, and Magnet.

My friend, you must note, that this description I ma^^ now of the essence of
Vitriol rests only upon try^^ made, the victorious triumph of the highest
wisdom c^^ by inheritance from the most ancient Philosophers un^ me, and comes
now unto thee, wherein experimenta^ it is found, that there is a subterranean
Mineral Salt, call^ Vitriol, which for dying of Clothes, and many other us^
(...) cannot well possibly be without it, for it carries and eats through,
by reason of its sharpness, ^^h is distinct from other Salts, in respect of
their qua^^: for the Mineral of this Salt is strange, of a very and fiery
quality, as apparent in its spirit, and con^^th a twofold spirit, which is
miraculum naturae, ^is not found the like in other Salts; and this Salt is a
^^aph^odit among other Salts, it is white and red, even ^^u will have it, it
has an extraordinary medicinal qua^^ performing things in an incredible
manner. This Salt ^^ineth a combustible Sulphur, which is not in other (...).
Therefore in Metalline affairs touching their trans^^tion, it performs more
than others, because it help-^ot only to open some, but helps the generation
of ^^rs, by reason of its innate heat. When Vitriol is sepa^^ by means of fire,
then its spirit at first comes in a ^^e form, after that there comes from its
earth a spirit of (...) condition, staying in the earth, the Salt being united
(...) its expelled Mercury and Sulphur, can sharpen them: ^emainder that
stays behind, is a dead earth, of no ^^acie. Let this suffice for your
learning, and consider (...) what the Creator holds forth unto thee, in nature
by ^ow kindled ternarie: for as you find in Vitriols body (...) distinct
things, as Spirit, Oil, and Salt, even so you expect from its own spirit again
(which without the ^^ling of its Oil, is driven from its matter) three distinct
^^gs, even as you did formerly from the body of Vitriol, ^^h deserves very
well the name of Speculum sapientiae ^^ae, held forth purposely to man to view
himself. For (...) can separate this spirit of Vitriol as it ought, then that
^ds again unto you three principles, out of which only, out any other
addition, since the beginning of the ^d the Philosophers stone has been made:
from that have to expect again a spirit of a white form, an Oil of ^uality,
after these two a Christalline Salt, these three ^^g duly joined in their
perfection, generate no less (...) the Philosophers great stone: for that
white spirit is merely the Philosophers Mercury, the red Oil is the S^^ and the
Salt is that true Magnetic body, as I told you (...) merly. As from the spirit
of Vitriol is brought to light ^red and white tincture, so from its Oil there
is made V^^ her tincture, and in the Center they are much distinct a^^der,
though they dwell in one body, possessing one lo^^ it matters not, for the will
of the Creator was so, to h^^ that mystery from unworthy men: observe and
conside^ well, if so be you intend to be a true follower of Ph^^sophers: In
this knowledge lies hid an irrecov^able error, worldly wits cannot conceive
of it, (...) the spirit of Vitriol, and the remaining Oil should be of great
distinction in the virtue. Touching their proper^^ the spirit being well
dissolved, and brought into its th^^ principles, Gold and Silver only can be
made by it, and (...) of its Oil only Copper, which will be apparent in a
pr^made. The condition of the spirit of Vitriol, and its maining Oil is this,
that where there is Copper and Iron, (...) Solar seed commonly is not far from
it, and again wh^^ there is seed of Gold at hand, Copper and Iron is not (...)
from it, by reason of its attractive Magnetic quality (...) love, which they,
as tinging spirits in a visible manner c^^tinually bear one to another.
Therefore Venus and M^^ are penetrated and ringed with the superabounding
tinct^ of Gold, and in them there is found much more the (...) of the red
tincture, than in Gold it self, as I made further ^lation of it in my other
backs, unto which there belong (...) also the Mineral of Vitriol, which goes
beyond these* many degrees, because its spirit is mere Gold and rubed^ crude
indigested tincture, and in very truth (as God h^^self is) is indeed not found
otherwise.

But this spirit, as you heard, must be divided into ^^tain distinct parts, as
into a spirit, soul, and body, the sp^^ is the Philosophic water, which though
visibly parted sunder, yet can never be separated radically, (because their
unavoidable affinity they bear, and have one to (...) other) as it appears
plainly, when afterward they (...) joined, the one in their mixture embraces
the other, even (...) Magnet draws Iron, but in a meliorated essence, bet^^
than they had before their dissolution. This is the ^ift, beginning, middle,
and end of the total Philosophic ^^sdom, affording riches and health, and a
long life; it may ^her be said, and really proved, that this spirit is the
es^ce of Vitriol, because this Spirit and Oil do differ so ^^ch, and were never
united radically, because the Oil ^^meth after the spirit, each can be received
apart; This ^^y spirit may rather and more fitly be called an essence, ^^phur,
and substance of Gold, and it is so, though he lies ^king in Vitriol as a
spirit.

This golden water, or spirit drawn from Vitriol, contains ^in a sulphur and
Magnet, its sulphur is the anima, an in^^bustible fire, the Magnet is its own
Salt, which in the ^^junction attracteth its Sulphur and Mercury, uniteth ^^h
the same, and are inseparable Companions. First in ^entle heat is dissolved the
undigested Mercurial spirit, (...) this is further extracted, after a Magnetic
quality, the ^^phurous anima, in that earth sticks the Salt, which is tracted
also in a Magnetic way by the Mercurial spirit, still the one is a Magnet unto
the other, bearing a Mag^^ick love one to another, as such things, where the
last ^^ether with the medium is drawn forth by the first, and (...) thereby
generated, and thus take their beginning. In ^s separation and dissolution the
spirit, or Mercury is the ^st Magnet, showing its Magnetic virtue toward the
sul^^ and Soul, which he quasi Magnes attracteth, this spirit ^^modum
distillationis being absolved and freed, shows a^^ its Magnetic power toward
the salt, which he attract^^ from the dead earth; after the spirit is separated
from it, (...) the Salt appears in its purity: if that process be there
followed, an^ after a true order and measure the ^^unction be undertaken, and
the Spirit and Salt be set ^^ther into the Philosophic furnace, then it
appears (...), how the heavenly spirit striveth in a Magnetic way ^^tract its
own Salt, it dissolveth the same within XL. days, brings it to an uniform
water with it self, even the Salt has been before its coagulation. In that
dest^^ction and dissolution appears the hugest blackness a^^ Eclipse, and
darkness of the earth, that ever w^^ seen. But in the exchange thereof a
bright glitteri^^ whi^enesse appearing, then the case is altered, and (...)
dissolved fluid waterish Salt turns into a Magnet; for that dissolution it
lays hold on its own spirit, which is t^^ spirit of Mercury, attracteth the
same powerfully like Magnet, hiding it under a form of a dry clear body,
brin^ing the same by way of uniting into a deep coagulation a^ firm fixednesse
by means of a continued fire, and the cert^^ degrees thereof.

The King with the white Crown being thus generate^ and by exiceation of all
humidities being brought to a fix^ state, then is it nothing else, but earth
and water, thou^ the other Elements be hid therein insensibly; howev^^ both
these keep the predominance, though the spirit (...) to earth, and can never be
seen in a watery form, and t^^ double new born body abides still in its
Magnetic qua^ty; for as soon as his departed Soul is restored after white
fixation, then like a Magnet he attracteth the s^^^ again, uniteth with it,
then are they exalted to their high^^ tincture and rubedo, with a bright
transparentnesse a^^ clarity. Thus in brief you have a short relation of
Vitrio^ Sulphur, and Magnet. Pray to God for grace, that you m^^ conceive
aright of it, put it then to good use, and be min^full of the poor and needy.

At the closing I annect this briefly, to hold forth u^ to you a natural proof,
that you presently fling and thro^ down the Sophister, and take his Scepter
from him. No^ that from all Metals, especially from Mars and Venus, whi^^ are
very hard and almost fixed Metals, of each apart can made a V^triol; this is
the reduction of a Metal into a Mi^^ral: for Minerals grow to Metals, and
Metals were at fi^ Minerals, and so Minerals are proxima materia of Metals, b^
not prima: from these vitriol may be made, other reduc^ (...), namely a spirit
is drawn from them by the virtue of (...)

This spirit being driven over, then there is again a re^ion of a Mineral into
its spiritual essence, and each ^it in its reduction keeps a Metalline
property: but spirit is not the prima materia. Who is now so gross absurd,
that should not be able to conceive further believe, that by these reductions
from one to the other ^^re be a way to prima materia, and at last to the seed
it (...), both of Metals and Minerals: though there be no ne^^ry to destroy
Metals, because their seed in the Minerals ^^und openly fixed.

O good God, what do these ignorant men think! is not (...) a very easy, and
Childrens like labor? the one begets other, and the one comes from the other,
is there not ^ad baked of Corn, upon distinct works? But the World ^linde and
will be so to the end of it: Thus much at this ^e, and commit thee to the
protection of the Highest.

End of the third Part.
THE ^OURTH PART OF BASILIUS VALENTINUS His last TESTAMENT, ^he Manuals wherein
he treats, how Metals and fitting Minerals may Particulariter be brought to
their highest preparation.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLVI.

THE FOURTH PART,
Of ^articulars from the seven Metals, how they may be prepared with profit.
First of the Sulphur of Sol, whereby Lune is tinged into good Gold.
TAke of pure Gold, which is three times cast through Antimony, and of well
purged Mercury vive, being pressed through leather, six parts, make of it an
Amalgame, to the quantity of this Amalgame grind twice as much of common
Sulphur, let it evaporate ^n a broad pan in a gentle heat under a Muffle,
stirring it ^ll with an Iron hook, let the fire be moderate, yt the mat^er do
not melt together, this Gold calx must be brought to ^e color of a Mary-gold
flower, then is it right; then take ^e part of Salpeter, one part of
Salarmonie, half a part of ^^inded peebles, draw a water from it. Note, this
water ^ust be drawn warily and exactly: To draw it after the ^ommon way will
not do it; he that is used to Chymick pre^rations, knows what he has to do;
And note, you must ^ave a strong stone Retort, which must be coated, to hold
^he spirits closely: its upper part must have a pipe, upward ^f half a spans
length, its wideness must bear two fingers ^readth, it must be set first in a
distilling furnace, which must be open above, that the upper pipe may stand out
di^ectly, apply a large receiver, lute it well: let your first fire ^e gentle,
then increase it that the Retort look glowing hot: put a spoonful of this
ground matter in at the pipe, close the pipe suddenly with a wet clout, the
spirits come rushing^^ into the receiver: these spirits being settled, then
carry i^ another spoon-full: in this manner you proceed till yo^ have distilled
all. At last give time to the spirits to be se^led, to turn into water: this
water is a hellish dissolvin^ strong one, which dissolveth instantly prepared
Gold cal^^ and laminated Gold, into a thick solution, of which I mad^ mention
above in the third part. This is that water, which mentioned in my second Key,
which dissolveth not only Gold, but brings it to a volatility, carrying it
over the helmet, whose anima may afterward be drawn from its to^^ body.

Note, the spirit of common Salt effects the same, i^ drawn in that manner,
which I shall speak of afterward. (...) three parts of this Salt-spirit be
taken, and one part of spiritus nitri, it is stronger than Salarmonick water:
and is better because it is not so corrosive, dissolveth Gold the sooner
carries it over the helmet, makes it volatile and fit to pa^^ with its soul;
you have your choice to use which you think^ best, and may easier be prepared,
thus: Take one part o^^ the prepared Gold calx, and three parts of the water,
which you make choice of, put it into a body, lute a helmet to it, set it in
warm ashes, let it dissolve, that which is not dissolved, pour three times as
much water upon, that all dissolve: let it cool, separate the feces, put the
solution into a body, lute a helmet to it, let it stand in a gentle heat day
and night to Balneo Mariae, if more feces be settled, separate them, digest them
again in the Balmy nine days and nights, then abstract the water gently to a
spissitude, like unto an Oil in the bottom; this abstracted water must be
poured on that spissitude: this must be iterated often, that it grow weary and
weak: remember you lute well at all times. To the oleity on the bottom pour
fresh water, which was not yet used, digest day and night firmly closed, then
set it in a sand Capel, distill the water from it to a thickness: make the
abstracted water warm, put it into a body, lute it, ^^stract it, iterate this
work, and make all the Gold come ^er the helmet.

Note, at the next drawing always the fire must have one ^gree more: the Gold
being come over into the water, ^stract the water gently from it in the Balmy
to the oleity, (...) the glass into a cold place, there will shoot transparent
^ystals, these are the vitriol of Gold, pour the water ^om it, distill it again
unto an olei^y, set it by for shooting, ^ore Chrystals will shoot, iterate it
as long as any do shoot. ^issolve these Crystals in distilled water, put to it
of purged ^ercury three times as much, shake it about, many colors ^ill
appear, an Amalgame falls to the ground, the water ^eareth up, evaporate the
Amalgame gently under a muffle, ^irring it still, with a wyar, at last you get
a purple co^^ured powder, scarlet like, it dissolveth in Vinegar into a
^loud-rednesse. Extract its anima with prepared spirit of ^ine, mixed with the
spirit of common Salt, entered together into a sweetness; This tincture of Sol
is like a transpa^ent Rubie, leaving a white body behind.

Note, without information you cannot attain unto the spirit of Salt, if it be
not sweet, it has no extractive power; to the attaining hereof, observe these
following manuals: ^ake good spirit of Salt, dephlegmed exactly, driven forth,
in that manner, as you shall hear anon.

Take one part of it, add half a part to it of the best spirit of wine, which
must not have any phlegm, but must be a mere Sulphur of wine, and must be
prepared in that manner, as I shall tell you anon: lute a helmet to it, draw it
over strongly, leave nothing behind; to the abstracted put more spirit of
wine, draw it over, somewhat stronger than you did the first time, weigh it,
put a third time more to it, draw it over again, well luted, putrify this for
half a month, or so long as it be sweet, and it is done in Balmy very gently:
thus the spirit of Wine and Salt is prepared, lost its corrosity, and is fit
for extracting.

Take the Ruby-^ed prepared Gold powder, put of this prepared spirit of Salt
and Wine, so much that it stand two fingers breadth over it, set it in a gentle
heat, the spirit w^^ be red tinged, this red spirit must be canted off, pour
(...) new spirit on that, which remained on the bottom, set ^^luted into a
gentle heat, let it be tinged deeply, then cant (...) off, this work must be
iterated, that the body of Sol remain on the bottom like calx vive, which keep,
for therei^ sticks yet more of the Salt of Gold, which is effectual i^ ways
of Medicine, as shall be showed anon.

Those ring'd spirits put together, abstract them gently i^ Balneo, there will
be left a red subtle powder in the bottom, which is the true tinctur animated,
or Sulphur of Gold, dulcifie it with distilled rain water, it will be very
subtle, tender, and fair. Take this extracted Sulphur of Sol, as you were
taught, and as much of Sulphur of Mars, as you shall hear anon, when I treat of
Mars: grind them together, put it in a pure glass, pour on it so much of
spirit of Mercury, let it stand over it two fingers breadth, that the matter in
it may be dissolved, see to it that all dissolve into a Ruby-like Gold water,
jointly drive it over, then is it one, and were at first of one stem, keep it
well, that nothing of it evaporate, put it to separated silver calx, being
precipitated with pure Salt, and afterward well edulcorated, and dried, fix it
together in a fiery fixation, that it sublime no more: then take it forth and
melt it in a windoven, let it stream well, then you have united Bride and
Bridegroom, and you brought them unto Gold of a high degree: Be thankful to
God for it as long as you live.

I should give further direction, how this extracted Soul of Sol should be
further proceeded in, and to make it potable, which ministers great strength,
and continued health unto man. But it belonging unto Medicinals, I delay it to
that place, where further mention shall be made of.

At this present I will speak only how the white Solar body shall further be
anatomized, and that by Art its Mercury current, and its Salt may be obtained.
The process of it is thus:

Take the white body of Sol, from which you have drawn ^nima, reverberate it
gently for half an hour, let it be^e corporeal, then pour on it well rectified
hony-water, ^^h is corrosive, extract its Salt in a gentle heat, it is ^e in
ten days space, the Salt being all extracted, ab^ct the water from it in
Balneo, edulcorate the Salt with ^^ted distillings, with common distilled
water, clarify it ^n spirit of wine, then you have Sal auri, of which you shall
^r more in its due place, of the good qualities it has by ^y of Medicine upon
man. On the remaining matter ^^r spirit of Tartar, of which in another place,
because it ^ongeth unto Medicinals: digest these for a months ^^e, drive it
through a glass, Retort into cold water, then ^n have quick Mercury of Sol,
many strive to get it, but (...) vain.

There is one mystery more in Nature, that the white ^lar body having once lost
its anima, may be tinged again, and brought to be pure Gold, which mystery is
revealed to ^^ry few: I shall give a hint of it, that you may not grum^^e at me
to have concealed any point in the work.

I hope you have considered and taken to heart, what I ^ave entrusted you
withal about the universal stone of Philosophers in my third part, namely how
it rests meer^y upon the white spirit of Vitriol, and how that all three
principles are found only in this spirit, and how you are ^o proceed in, and
to bring each into its certain stare and ^order.

Take the Philosophic Sulphur, which in order is the second principle, and is
extracted with the spirit of Mercu^ry, pour it in the white body of the King,
digest it for a month in a gentle Balmy, then fix it in ashes, and at last in
sand, that the brown powder may appear, then melt it with a fluxing powder made
of Saturn, then will it be malleable and fair Gold, as it was formerly, in
color and virtue nothing defective.

But note, the Salt must not be taken from the Solar body, of which I made
mention formerly, in a repetition of the xii. Key, where you may read of. There
may be p^pared yet in another manner a transparent Vitriol, (...) Gold in the
following manner.

Take good Aqua Regis made with Sal ammoniac, 1. po^^ id est, dissolve four
ounces of Salmiac in Aquafort, then y^ have a strong Aqua Regis, distill and
rectify it often o^ the helmet, let no feces stay behind, let all lascends
(...) transparent. Then take thinly beaten Gold rolls, cast f^merly through
Antimonie, put them into a body, pour o^^ Aqua Regis, let it dissolve as much
as it will, or as you (...) dissolve in it: having dissolved all the Gold, pour
into so^^ Oil of Tartar, or Salt of Tartar dissolved in fountain wa^^ it begins
to tisse, having done tissing, then pour in again (...) the Oil, do it so long
that all the dissolved Gold be fallen (...) the bottom, and nothing more of it
precipitate, and the Aq^^ Regis clear up. This being done, then cant off the
Aq^^ Regis from the Gold calx, edulcorate it with common water, eight, ten, or
twelve times: the Gold calx being we^ settled, cant off that water, and dry the
Gold calx in the air, where the Sun does not shine, do it not over a fire, for
as soon as it feels the least heat it kindles, and great damage is done, for
it would fly away forcibly, that no man could stay it. This powder being ready
also, then tak^ strong Vinegar, pour it upon, boil it continually over the fire
in a good quantity of Vinegar, still stirring it, that it may not stick unto
the bottom, for xxiv. hours together, then the fulminating quality is taken
from it: be careful you do not endanger your self: cant off that Vinegar,
dulcifie the powder, and dry it. This powder may be driven per alembicum
without any corrosive, bloud-red, transparent and fair, which is strange, and
uniteth willingly with the spirit of wine, and by means of coagulation may be
brought to a Solar body.

Do not speak much of it to the vulgar: if you receive any benefit by and from
my plain and open information, be thus minded, to keep these mysteries secret
still to thy dying day, and make no show of it, else thou art naked and lie
open to the Devils temptations in all thy ways: before pray give attention to
what I shall tell thee, for I impart unto thee this Arcanum also, and entrust
thee (...) thy conscience with it.

Take good spirit of wine being brought to the highest ^^ee, let fall into it
some drops of spirit of Tartar, then (...) thy Gold powder, put to it three
times as much of the (...) and subtilest common flowers of sulphur, grind
these ^ether, set it on a flat pan under a muffle, give to it a ^tle fire, let
the Gold powder be in a glowing heat, put ^hus glowing into the spirit of wine,
cant off the spirit of ^^e, dry the powder against a heat, it will be porous.
^ng dried, then add to it again three parts of flores sul^^ris, let them
evaporate under a muffle, neal the remain^ powder in a strong heat, and put it
in spirit of wine: ^^ate this work six times, at last this Gold powder will be
^oft and porous as firm butter, dry it gently, because it ^lteth easily. Then
take a coated body, which in its ^^der part has a pipe, lute a helmet to it,
apply a re^^ver, set it freely in a strong sand Capel, let your first fire
(...) gentle, then increase it, let the body be almost in a ^^wing heat, then
put in the softened well dried Gold ^^wder, being made warm, behind at the
hollow pipe, ^ot it in nimbly, there come instantly red drops into the ^^lmet,
keep the fire in this degree so long, till nothing ^^re ascends, and no more
drops fall into the Receiver. ^ote, in the Receiver there must be of the best
spirit of ^ine, into which the drops of Gold are to fall.

Then take this spirit of wine, into which the Gold drops ^d fall, put it in a
pelican, seal it Hermetice, circulate it (...) a month, it turns then to a
bloud-red stone, which ^elreth in the fire like Wax, beat it small, grind
among (...) Lunar calx, melt them together in a strong pot, being ^own cold,
put it in aquafort, there precipitateth a black ^lx, melt it, then you find
much good Gold, as ^^e Gold powder and the spirit of wine together with the
^oyery, as the added Lunar calx did weigh, but one moiety of the Lunar calx is
not tinged, the other is as good a^ was to be used. If you hit this rightly,
then be thankf^^ to God: if not, do not blame me, I could not make plainet unto
thee.

Now if you will make this Vitriol, then take the pow^^ formerly made, boiled
in Vinegar, pour on it good spi^^ of common Sal^, mingled with Salpeter water,
and the s^^rit of Salt of Niter, this Salpeter water is made, as aq^^ Tartari
is made with Salpeter; Gold is dissolved in t^^ water: which being done, then
abstract the water to^ thickness, set it in a Cellar, then there shoots a
pure ^^triol of Sal, the water which stays with t e Vitriol m^^ be canted
off, distill it again to a spissitude, set it in the C^lar, more of the Vitriols
will shoot, iterate this work (...) long as any Vitriol shoots. If you are
minded to ma^^ the Philosophers stone out of Solar Vitriol, as some pha^tastick
men endeavor in that way, then be first acquaint^^ and ask counsel of thy
purse, and prepare ten, or twel^^ pound of this Vitriol, then you may perform
the work ve^^ well, and the Hungarian Vitriol, and others dug out (...)
Mines will permit thee to do it. You may extract from this Vitriol also its
Sulphur and Sal^, with spirrt of win^ which being all easy work, it is
needless to describe it.

Now follows the Particular of Lune, and of the extraction of its Sulphur and
Salt.
TAke of calx vive, and common Salt, ana, neal the^ together in a Wind-oven,
then extract the Salt pure^ from the calx with warm water, coagulate it again,
put to (...) an equal quantity of new calx, neal it, extract the Salt from it,
iterate it three times, then is the Salt prepared.

Then take the prepared Lunar calx, stratifie the calx wit^ prepared Salt in a
glass Viol, pour strong water on it, mad^ of equal quantities of Vitriol and
Salpeter, abstract the aqu^fort from it, iterated a third time, at last drive
it ^^ngly, let the matter well melt in the glass, then t^ke ^orth, your Lune
is transparent and bluish, like unto an (...) a marine. Having brought Lune
thus far, then pour on ^^rong distilled Vinegar, set it in a w^rm place, the
Vine^^ is tinged with a transparent blue, like a Saphir, and at^cteth the
tincture of Lune, being separated from the Salt, which comes from Lune goes
again into the Vinegar, ^^ich must be done by edulcora ion, then you will find
(...) Sulphur of Lune fair and clear. Take one part of this ^^lphur of Lune,
one half part of the extracted Sulphur of (...), six parts of the spirit of
Mercury, join all these in a ^^dy, lute it well, set it in a gentle hear, in
digestion, that ^^uor will turn to a red brown color; having all driven ^^er
the helmet, and nothing stand in the bottom, then ^ur it on the matter
remaining of the silver you drew the ^^lphur from, lute it well, set it in
ash^s for to coagulate, ^^d to fix it xl. days and nights, or when you see the
Lu^^r body be quite dry, brown, and nothing of it does any ^ore rise, or fume,
then melt it quickly with a sudden ^^x-fire before the blast, cast it forth,
then you transmit^^d the whole substance of Silver into the best most mal^^ble
Gold.

Of this particular of Silver, I have made mention in ano^^er place, namely in
the repetition of my 12th Keys, where wrote that the spirit of Salt also can
destroy Lune, so that (...) potable Lune can be made of it: Of which potable
Lune in ^^e last part mention shall be made of. You must note, that ^^rther
must be proceeded with Lune, and a more exact ^^atomy must be made upon Lune,
thus:

When you perceive that the Sulphur of Lune is wholly ^xtracted, and the
Vinegar takes no more tincture from her, ^^or the Vinegar does taste any more
of Salt, then dry the ^^maining calx of Silver, put it into a glass, pour on
it ^^rrosive Honey water, as you did to the Gold, yet it must be ^^ear, and
without any feces, set it in a warmth, for four, or ^^ve days, extract Lune's
Salt, which you may perceive, when the water grows white. The Salt being all
o^^ it, then abstract the Honey water, edulcorate the corros^^nesse by
distilling, and clarify the Salt with spirit of w^^ the remaining matter must
be edulcorated and dried, p^^ upon it spirit of Tartar, digest it for half a
month, the proceed as you did with the Gold, then you have Mercu^^ of Lune.
The said Salt of Lune has excellent virtues upon man's body, of which I shall
speak in another place. T^^ efficacy of its Salt and Sulphur may be learned by
this f^^lowing process.

Take of the sky-colored Sulphur, which you extract^ from Lune, and is
rectified with spirit of wine, put it in a gla^^ pour on it twice as much of
spirit of Mercury, which (...) made of the white spirit of Vitriol, as you
have heard (...) the same place. In like manner take of the extracted a^^
clarified Salt of Silver, put to it three times as much (...) spirit of
Mercury, lure well both glasses, set them into gentle Balmy for eight days
and nights, look to it th^^ the Sulphur and Salt loose nothing, but keep their
quant^ty as they were driven out of the Silver. Having stood the^^ eight days
and nights, then put them together into (...) glass, seal it Hermetice, let it
in gentle ashes, let all be di^solved, and let it be brought again into a clear
and whi^^ coagulation, at last fix them by the degrees of fire, t^en the matter
will be as white as Snow, thus you have the whi^^ tincture, which wi^h the
volatile dissolved anima of Sol yo^ may animate, fix, bring to the deepest
redness, and at las^ ferment, and augment the same in infinitum, the spirit o^
Mercury being added thereunto. And note, that upon Gold a process is to be
ordered, with its Sulphur an^ Salt.

If you understood how their primum mobile is to (...) known, then is it
needless in this manner, and to tha^ purpose to destroy Metals, but you may
prepare every thing from, or of their first essence, and bring them to their
full perfection.

^f the Particular of Mars, together with the extraction of its Anima and Salt.
^Ake of red Vitriol Oil, or Oil of Sulphur one part, and two parts of ordinary
Well-water, put those to^her, dissolve therein filings of steel, this
d^ssolution must (...) filtred being warmed, let it gently evaporate a third
part ^^t, then set the glass in a cool place, there will shoot ^^stals as
sweet as Sugar, which is the true Vitriol of ^^rs, cant off that water, let it
evaporate more, set it ^^in in a cold place, more Crystals will shoot, neal
them ^^tly under a muffle, stirring it still with an Iron-wyar, (...) you get a
fair purple colored powder, on this powder (...) distilled Vinegar, extract
the anima of Mars in a gentle ^^my, abstract again the Vinegar, and dulcorate
the anima. ^^s is the anima of Mars, which being added to the spirit Mercury,
and united with the anima of Sol, tingeth Lune ^o Sol, as you heard about the
Gold.

(...) the Particular of Venus, what mysteries there are hid therein, and of
the Extraction of its Sulphur and Salt.
TAke as much of Venus as you will, and make Vitriol, of (...) it, after the
usual and common practice: or take good (...) digreece, sold in shops, it
eff^cteth the same^, grind it ^^ll, pour on it good distilled Vinegar, set it
in a warmth, (...) Vinegar will be transparent green, cant it off, pour on
(...) ^^^^ning matter on the bottom new Vinegar, iterate (...) work as long as
the Vinegar takes out any tincture, (...) the ^^^er of the Verdigreece on the
bottom lies (...) black; put the tinged Vinegar together, distill the Vinegar
from it to a dryness, else a black Vitriol (...) shoot, thus you get a
purified Verdigreece, grind it sm^ pour on it the juice of immature Grapes, let
it stand i^ gentle heat, this juice makes a transparent tincture, (...) green
as a Smarag'd, and attracteth the red tincture of ^nus, which affords an
excellent color for Painters, L^mers, and others for their several uses.

When the juice extracts no more of the tincture, t^^ put all the extractions
together, abstract the moiety of (...) juice gently, set it into a cool place,
there shoots a v^ fair Vitriol, if you have enough of that, then you have
m^ter enough to reduce the same, and to make of it the Phi^^sophers stone, in
case you should make a doubt to perso^^ this great mystery by any other
Vitriol. Of this preparat^^ I have spoken already Parabolice in the book of the
Ke^ in the Chapter of the Wine-vineger, where I said, that (...) common Azoth
is not the matter of our stone, but (...) Azoth, or materia prima with the
common Azoth, (...) with the Wine, which is the out-prest juice of unt^^
Grapes, and with other waters also must be prepared, the are the waters
wherewith the body of Venus must be b^^ken, and be made into Vitriol, which you
must observe v^^ well, then you may free your selves from many troubles a^
perplexities.

But especially note, that the way of the Universal w^^ this Vitriol is
understood in the same manner, and is the conditioned, as I told you in the
third part of the Univers^ and pointed at the common Hungarian Vitriol, and
even well out of Mars, put Particulariter to be dealt upon w^^ Venus. Therefore
know, that it may be done with g^^^ profit, if you drive forth the red Oil of
Vitriol, and disso^^ Mars in it. And Crystallise the solution, as you were to
(...) when I treated of Mars. For in this dissolution and coa^^lation Venus and
Mars are united, this Vitriol must be nea^^ under a muffle unto a pure red
powder, and must be e^tracted further with distilled Vinegar, as long as there
is a^ redness in it, then you get the anima of Mars, and of V^^^s doubled, of
this doubled virtue after the addition of ^^e anima of Sol, which you made in
the before quoted ^^antity take twice as much of Silver calx, and fix it, as
^^u heard when I spoke of the Particular of Mars and of ^^l.

But note, that there must be twice as much of the spirit (...) Mercury, then
there was allowed in that place, but in ^^e rest the process is alike. The
Salt of Venus must be ^^tracted when the juice takes no more of the green
^^ncture, then take the remaining matter, dry it, pour Ho^y water upon it, then
that Salt goes in that heat for ^^e, or six days, and clarify it with spirit
of Wine, then is ^^e Salt ready for your Medicine.

Of the Particular of Saturn, together with the extraction of its Soul and Salt.
MOst men hold and count Saturn an unworthy and mean Metal, and is abused most
basely in several ex^editions, whereas, if known in its internals, more
laudable ^xploits would be performed with it, and many excellent ^edicines be
prepared of it. Being it is my intention to ^ut an Elucidation to my former
writings, to leave it after ^^e for a legacy unto posterity, that simple men
of ordinary ^^pacity might know and conceive also of the things I for^erly
wrote of, which after the resurrection of my flesh my ^^lf shall bear record
unto, that I have written more then (...) meet, which others before me have
purposely conceal^^; it being my purpose to declare fundamentally all such
^^rticulars, which formerly at large I discoursed of in a ^^ilosophick manner,
thus: that this my Declaration made (...) any decrepite age be noted
conscionably by those into those hands it comes, that this my Revelation, which
in ^ods providence will be disposed of, to be a lamp of truth (...) all the
world, may not be imparted unto unworthy men of Gods mysteries, which
acknowledge not the Cr^^tor of them in a pure humble and penitent heart,
per^vering conversation, and a fervent purpose to incline u^^ and toward him.
This present writing I leave as a p^^cious badge with an earnest p^oviso, that
men would lo^ and observe carefully every letter contained in this, a^^ others
of my writings, which in all fidelity I hold for unto them: And begin now with
Saturn, who in all pr^bability after Astronomick rules is the highest and
chief^ Lord in the celestial spheres, by whose influence the s^^terranean
Saturn has its life and coagulation, putting the black color on it, the rest
from the best to the worst fo^low after, whose splendor enlightneth that whole
firm^ment, and is incorruptible.

I should speak something of Saturns Nativity, from whence he takes his
offspring, but in this place I (...) not hold it requisite (being there has
been mention ma^^ of it in several places in my other books) because it is
(...) no purpose for Novices, and to repeat all, would increa^^ the volume,
which I do not intend, purposing only to el^^cidate such things, which
formerly have been delivered i^ obscure terms.

Note, Saturn is not to be thus slighted by reason of i^ external despicable
form, if he be wrought in a due process after the Philosophers way, he is able
to requite a^^ the pains the Art-seeking Laborers bestow on him, and will
acknowledge him rather to be the Lord, and not the servant: a Lords honor is
due unto him, not only in respect of man's health, but in respect also of
meliorating o^ Metals: the preparation of it is thus:

Take ^ed Minium, or Ceruse, these are of several worths the one is better
before the other, according to their several examinations, those that are sold
in shops are seldo^ pure, without their due additionals: my advise is, that
every Artist undertake himself the destruction of Saturn, th^^ process of it
is several, of the best I give this hint*

Take pure Lead, which yields to the hammer, as much as you please, laminate it
thinly, the thinner the better, ^ng these lamins, or a large glass filled with
strong Vine^^, in which is dissolved a like quantity of the best Salmonie,
sublimed thrice with common Salt, stop the glas^^ mouth very closely, that
nothing evaporate, set the glass (...) ashes of a gentle heat, otherwise the
spirits of the Vine^r and Salarmonick ascend, and touch the Saturnal lamins;
(...) the tenth, or twelfth day you will spy a subtle Ceruse ^^iging on these
lamins, brush them off with a Hares foot, (...) on, get enough of this Ceruse,
provided, you buy good ^ates, if sophisticated, you labor in vain. Take a
quan^^y of it, if you please, put it in a body, pour strong Vine^^r on it,
which several times has been rectified, and was ^^tified at the last
rectification with a sixtienth part of ^^irit of vulgar Salt, dephlegmed, and
drawn over: stop ^^e body well, or which is better, lute a blende head to
(...), set the body in ashes to be digested, swing it often ^^out, in few days
the Vinegar begins to look yellow ^^d sweet, as the first, iterate it a third
time, it is sufficient. ^he remnant of the Ceruse stays in the bodies bottom
(...) shapely, filter the tinged Vinegar clearly, that is of a ^ansparent
yellowness: put all the tinged Vinegar toge^^er, abstract two parts of it in
Balneo Mariae, let the third ^^rt stay behind, this third part is of a
reasonable Rubedo, (...) the glass in a very cold water, then the Chrystalls
will ^oot ye sooner, being shot, take them out with a wooden ^oon, lay them on
a paper for to dry, these are as sweet as ^^gar, and are of great energy
against inflamed symptoms: ^^stract the Vinegar further in Balneo, in which
the Chry^^als did shoot, set that distillation aside, for the shoo^ing (...)
more Chrystals, and proceed with these as you did for^erly.

Now take all these Chrystals together, they in their ap^earance are like unto
clarified Sugar, or Salpeter, beat ^^em in a Mortar of glass, or iron, or
grind them on a (...) Marble unto an u^palpablenesse, reverberate it in a
^entle heat, to a bloud-like redness: Provided, they do not turn to a
blackness. Having them in a Scarlet color Put them in a glass, pour on a
good spirit of Juniper, abstracted from its Oil, and rectified several times
into (...) fair, white, bright manner, lute the glass above, set it in (...)
gentle heat, let the spirit of Juniper be ring'd with a transparent redness
like blood, then cant it off neatly from the feces into a pure glass: with
that proviso, that no impu^^ thing run along, on the feces pour other spirit of
Juniper extract still, as long as any spirit takes the tincture: kee^^ these
feces, they contain the Salt.

Take all these tinged spirits together, filter them, abstrac^ them gently in
Balneo, there remains in the bottom (...) near Carnation powder, which is the
animae of Saturn, po^^ on it Rain water, often distilled, distill it strongly
severa^ times, to get off that, which staid with the spirit of Juniper, and so
this subtle powder will be edulcorated delicately: keep it in a strong
boiling, cant it off, then let i^ go off neatly, let it dry gently, for
safeties sake, reverberate it again gently for its better exiccation, let all
impurity evaporate, let it grow cold, put it in a Viol, put twic^ as much of
spirit of Mercury to it, which I told you of i^ the third part of the
Universal, entrusted you upon you^ conscience with it, seal it Hermetice, set
it in a vapor o^^ Bath, which I prescribed at the preparation of the spirit of
Mercury, called the Philosophers fimus equinus, let i^ stand in the Mystical
Furnace for a month, then the anima^ of Saturn closes daily with the spirit
of Mercury, an^ both become inseparable, making up a fair transparen^ deeply
tinged red Oil: look to the government of the fire, be not too high with it,
else you put the spirit of Mercur^ as a volatile spirit to betake himself to
his wings, forein^ him to the breaking of the glass: but if these be well
united, then no such fear look for, for one nature embraces and upholdeth the
other.

Then take this Oil, or dissolved anima of Saturn out o^ the Viol, it is of a
gallant fragrancie, put it into a body, apply a Helmet to it, lute it well,
drive it over, then sou^ ^d spirit is united together, and fit to transmute
Mercury ^rcipitated into Sol.

The precipitation of Mercury is done thus: take one (...) of the spirit of
Salt of Niter, and three parts of Oil of ^^riol, put these together, cast into
it half a part of quick ^rcury, being very well purged, set it in Sand, put a
rea^^able strong fire to it, so that the spirits may not fly ^ay, let it stand
a whole day and night, then abstract all ^e spirits, then you find in the
bottom a precipitated ^^tency, some what red, pour the spirits on it again, let
it and day and night, abstract it again, then your precipi^^e will be more red
than at the first, pour it a third time ^^n it, then abstract strongly, then
your precipitate is at (...) highest rubedo, dulcifie it with distilled water,
let it ^^ongly be exiccated. Then take two parts of this preci^tated Mercury,
one part of the dissolved Saturnal Oil, (...) th^e together, set it in the
ashes, let all be fixed, not ^e drop must stick any where to the glass. Then
it ^ust be melted with due additionals of lead; they close ^^gether, afford
Gold, which afterward at the casting ^ough Antimony can be exalted,

I have informed you hereof where I treated of Mercury ^ut. But note, that
Mercury must not be precipitated, ^lesse with pure Oil of Vitriol, or Oil of
Venus, with (...) addition of the spirit of Salt of Niter: Albeit such ^ercurie
cannot be brought to its highest fixation, by way ^f precipitating, but its
fixed coagulation is found in Sa^^n, as you heard.

Be it the abovesaid Mercury small, grind it on a stone, put (...) in a Viol,
pour on it the dissolved Saturnal Oil, it enters ^^nstantly, if so be you
proceeded right in the precipitation, (...) the Viol Hermetice, fix it in
ashes, at last in sand, to its ^ighest fixation, then you have bound Mercury
with a true ^^ot, and brought him into a fix coagulation, which ^rought its
form and substance into a meliora ion, with an ^bundance of superfluous riches,
if you carry it on a white ^recipitate, then you get only silver, which holds
but little ^f Gold.

One thing more I must tell thee about this process that there is yet a better
way to deal upon Saturn, wi^^ more profit, you seeker, that you may not have
any caus^ to complain against my not declaring, take it thus: tak^ two parts of
the abovesaid dissolved Oil, or of the Saturnal Soul, one part of Astrum Solis,
and of Antimonial Sulphur, whose preparation follows afterward, two parts
half as much of Sal of Mars, as all these are, weigh the^ together, put all
into a glass Vial, let the third part of i^ be empty, set it in together to be
fixed, then the Salt o^ Mars opens in this compound, is fermented by it, an^
the matter begins to incline to a blackness, for ten, o^ twelve days it is
eclipsed, then the Salt returns to its coagulation, laying hold in its
operation on the whole compound, coagulate it first into a deep brown Mass,
(...) it stand thus unstirred in a continued heat, it turns to (...)
bloud-red body, increase the fire, that you may see Astr^^ Solis be
predomi^ant, which appears in a greenish color, like unto a Rainbow: keep
this fire continually, le^ all these colors vanish, it turns to a
transparent re^ stone very ponderous, needless to be projected on Mercury, but
ringeth after its perfection, and fixation all white Metals into the purest
Gold. Then take of the prepared fixed red stone, or of the powder one part, and
fo^^ parts of any of the white Metal, first let ye Metal melt half a^^ hou^,
and let it be well clarified, then project the powde^^ upon it, let it drive
well, and see that it be entered into the Metal, and the Metal begin to congeal,
then is it transmute^ into Gold, beat the pot in pieces, take it out, if it
has any Slacks, ^rive them with Saturn, then is it pure and maileable. If you
carry it on Lune, then put more of the powder to it than you do upon Jupiter
and Saturn, as half an ounc^ of he powder tingeth five ounces of Lune into Sol,
let t^^ be a miracle, ^o^l not thy Soul with imparting this mystery unto
others, that are unworthy of it. Proceed with S^lt o^ Saturn, as you were
informed about Mars and Venus, only distilled Vinegar p^^formeth that, which
Honey wa^^er did by the other, and clarify it with spirit of ^^e.

^f the Particular of Jupiter, together with the extraction of its Anima and
Salt.
TAke Pumice-stones, sold in shops, neal them, quench them in old good Wine,
neal them again, and quench ^^m as you did formerly, let this nealing be
iterated a third ^^e, the stronger the Wine is you quench withal, the ^tter it
is, after that dry them gently, thus are they pre^^ed for that purpose.
Pulverise these Pumice-stones sub^^y, then take good Tin, laminate it,
stratifie in a cement^^g way in a reverberating Furnace, reverberate this
matter ^r five days and nights in a flaming fire, it draws the ^^cture of
the Metal, then grind it small, first scraping the ^in lamins, put it in a
glass body, pour on it good distil^^d Vinegar, set it in digestion, the
Vinegar draws the ^^ncture, which is red-yellow, abstract this Vinegar in
Bal^^^, edulcorate the Anima of Jupiter with distilled water, ^^xiccate gently,
proceed in the rest as you did with the ^nima of Saturn, viz. dissolve
radically in, or with the spi^^t of Mercury, drive them over, pour that upon
two parts of red Mercury precipitated, being precipitated with this Venerean
sanguine quality, then coagulate and fix: if done ^uccesfully, you may
acknowledge Jupiter's bounty, that gave leave to transmute this precipitate
into Gold, which will be apparent at their melting. It performs this also, it
transmuteth ten parts of Lune into Gold, if other Sulphurs be added thereunto:
force no more upon Jupiter, it is all ^he is able to do, being of a peaceable
disposition, he told all what he could do. The process about this Salt, is, to
extract it with distilled Rainwater, clarified with spirit of Wine.

Of the Particular of Mercury vive, and of its Sulphur and Salt.
TAke of quick Mercury, sublimed seven times, lib. a ba^ grind it very small,
pour on it a good quantity of sha^^ Vinegar, boil it on the fire for an hour,
or upward, stirri^^ the matter with a wooden spatule, take it from the fir^
let it be cold, the Mercury setleth to the bottom, and the Vinegar clears up:
if it be slow in the clearing, let some drops of spirit of Vitriol fall in the
Vinegar, it does precipi^tate the other, for Vitriol precipitateth Mercury
vive, Sa^ of Tartar precipitateth Sol, Venus and common Salt dot^ precipitate
Lune, and Mars does the like to Venus, a lixivium of Beech-ashes does it to
Vitriol, and Vinegar is for common Sulphur in that way, and Mars for Tartar,
and Sal^ peter for Antimony. Cant off the Vinegar from the precip^taete, you
will find the Mercury like a pure washed Sand pour on it Vinegar, iterate this
work a third time, then edulcorate the matter, let it dry gently.

Take two ounces of Anima of Mars, one ounce of Anima of Saturn, one ounce of
Anima of Jupiter, dissolve these in (...) ounces of Mercurial spirit, let all
be dissolved, then drive it over, leave nothing behind, it will be a Golden
water, like a transparent dissolution of Sol, your prepared and edulcarated
Mercury must be warmed in a strong Viol, pour this warmed water gently on it, a
tissing will be, stop the Viol, then the tissing is gone; than seal it
Hermetice, set it in a gentle Balmy, in ten days the Mercury is dissolved into
a grass green Oil: set the Viol in ashes for a day and night, rule your fire
gently, this green color turns into a yellow Oil, in this color is hid the
Rubedo, keep it in this fire and let the matter turn to a yellow powder, like
unto Orpiment; when no more comes over, then set the glass in Sand for a day
and a night, give a strong fire to it, (...) fairest Ruby-rubedo appear, melt
it to a fixednesse (...) a fluxing powder made of Saturn, it comes now to a
^ablenesse, one pound of it contains two ounces of (...) Gold, as deep, as
ever Nature produced any. Be^ber the poor, do not precipitate thy self into an
infer^abysse, by forgetting thy self in not doing the duties ought to perform
in regard of the blessing,

An Oil made of Mercury, and its Salt.
TAke quick Mercury, being often sublimed, and rectified with Calx vive, put it
in a body, dissolve it in a heat, in strong Nitrous water, abstract the water
from the corrosivenesse which stays there, must be extracted ^h good Vinegar,
well boiled in it: at last abstract this ^egar, the remainder of it must be
dulcified with distilled ^ter, and then exiccated. Afterward on each pound ^^st
be poured lib. 1. of the best spirit of Wine, let it and luted in putrefaction,
then drive over what may be ^ven, first gently, then more strongly, from that
which is ^me over, abstract the spirit of Wine per Balneum, there ^yeth behind
a fragrant Oil, which is Astrum Mercurii, (...) excellent remedy against
Venereal diseases.

Seeing the Salt and Astrum of Mercury is of the same Me^cinal operation, I
hold it needless to write of each in ^articular, and will join their operation
into one, and declare ^f it in the last part about the Salt of Mercury, because
^hey are of one effect in Medicinal operations. Take the ^ade Oil, or Astrum
Mercurii, which by reason of its ^reat heat keeps its own body in a perpetual
running, ca^ing it on the next standing earth, from which you former^^ drew the
Oil. Set it in a heat, the Oil draws its own ^alt; that being done, put to it
a reasonable quantity of spirit of Wine, abstract it again, the Salt stays
behind, ^^ssolved in the fresh spirit of Wine, being dulcified by cohobation:
Then is the Mercurial Sal ready, and prepa^^ for the Medicine, as shall be
mentioned in the last pa^ Mercury is able to do no more, neither
Particulariter, (...) universaliter, because he is far off from Philosophers
M^cury, as many are deceived in their fancies to the contrary.

Of the Particular of Antimony, together with the extraction of its Sulphur and
Salt.
TAke good Hungarian Antimony, pulverise it subtil^ to a meal, calcine it over
a gentle heat, stirring it st^^^ with an Iron wyar, and let it be albified, and
that a last it may be able to hold out in a strong fire. Then p^^ it into a
melting pot, melt it, cast it forth, turn it to a tran^parent glass, beat that
glass, grind it subt^l^y, put it in (...) glass body of a broad flat bottom,
pour on it distille^ Vinegar, let it stand luted in a gentle heat for a goo^
while, the Vinegar extracteth the antimonial tincture which is of a deep
redness, abstract the Vinegar, there remains a sweet y^llow subtle powder,
which must b^ edulcurated with distilled water, all acidity must be taken off,
exiccate i^; pour on it the best graduated spirit o^ Wine, set it in a ^^^tle
heat, you have a new extraction, which (...) and yellow, cant it off, pour on
other spirit, let it ex^^^ a^ long it can, then abstract the spirit of Wine,
exi^^te, you find a tender deep yellow subtle powd^r of an admirable
Medicinal operation, is nothing inferior unto po^able Sol.

Take two parts of this powder, one part of Solar Sulphur, grind th^se small,
then t^ke three parts of Sulphur of Mars, pour on it six parts of Spirit of
Mercury, set it in digestion well lu^ed, le^ the S^l^^^ur of Mars be dissolved
to a^y, then carry in a s^u^^^ part of ^he ground-matter of of the Sulphur of
Antimony, and of Sol, lu^^ and digest, let all be dissolved, then carry in more
of your ground Sul^rs, proceed as formerly, iterating it so long till all be
^olved, then the matter becomes a thick brown Oil, ^^e all over jointly into
one, leave nothing behind in (...) bottom, then pour it on a purely separated
Lunar calx, it by degrees of fire, then melt it into a body, separate ^ith an
Aquasort, six times as much of Sal is precipitated ^n above the ponderosity the
compound did weigh, ye re^inder of Lune serves for such works you please to
put unto.

The Antimonial tincture being extracted totally from its ^^rum, and no Vinegar
takes more hold of any tincture, ^^n ex^ccate the remaining powder, which is of
a black ^^lour, put it into a melting pot, lute it, let it stand in a ^^sonable
heat, let all the sulphurous part burn away, ^^de the remaining matter, pour
on it new distilled Vine^^^, extract its Salt, abstract the Vinegar, eduleorate
the ^dity by cohobation, clarify so long, so that the water be ^^ite and
clear. If you have proceeded well in your ma^als, then the lesser time will be
required to extract the ^^timonial Salt, as you shall hear of it. Whereby you
may serve, that the Antimonial Sulphur is extracted in the ^lowing manner, and
is of the same Medicinal opera^^n, but is of a quicker and speedier work, which
is a ^^tter of consequence, and worthy to be taken notice

A short way to make Antimonial Sulphur and Salt.
TAke good Vitriol, common Salt, and unslaked Li^e, of each one p^und, four
ounces of Sal ammoniac, bear them small, put them in a glass body, pour on it
(...) pound of common Vinegar, let it stand in digestion ^^^'d for a day, put
it afterward into a Retort, apply a receiver to it, distill it, as usually an
aquafort is dis^^^ Take of the off drawn liquor, and of common Salt, (...)
pound of each, rectify them once more, let no muddi^^ come over with it, all
must come clear: then take (...) pound of pulverised antimonial glass, pour
this spirit (...) it, lute it well, digest, and let all be dissolved; then
^stract the water in Balneo Mariae, there remains in the b^tom a black, thick,
fluid matter, but somewhat dry, lay on a glass Table, set it in a Cellar, a
red Oil flows h^ it, leaving some feces behind, coagulate this red Oil ge^ly
upon ashes, let it be exiccated there; then pour (...) best spirit of Wine on
it, it extracteth a tincture which (...) blood red, cant off that which is
tinged, pour other spi^ of Wine on the remainder, let all redness be extract^^
thus you have the tincture, or Antimonial Sulphur, which (...) of a wonderful
Medicinal efficacy, and is aequivalent ^^potable Gold, as you beard in the
former process. A^ in preparation serves now to proceed with it Particula^
^ter, as I showed in the former. This black matter, whi^ stayed behind after
the extraction of Sulphur, must be (...) exiccated, extract its snow-white Salt
with distilled V^gar, edulcorate it, clarify it with spirit of Wine, observe
i^ virtues in Medicina, of the which in the last part.

Thus I conclude my fourth part also. Other mysteries (...) Nature, and some
augmentations might be here annected but I wave them, mentioning only the
chiefest of the^ and are such, which may be wrought easily, and in a sh^^ time,
and whereby good store of riches may be gotten The rest, which are not of that
importance, and may easil^ draw Novices into errors, bringing no profit for
the pr^sent, may in good time by careful practice be found o^ and obtained.

If you only know those, whereby health and wealth (...) obtained, then these
metalline Sulphurs in their co^pounds may bring great profit unto you, to write
of a^ these circumstantially, is impossible to one man, it is of a^ infinite
labor. Call upon God for grace and mercy: A^ fundamental Theorie affords the
practick part, from ^nce flow infinite springs, all from one head. If you go
^^erwise to work, than I entreated you to do by the Crea^^ of heaven and earth,
then all your actions will be retro^^de unto a temporal disaster.

I should annex here the efficacies of other Minerals, ^^ich are next unto
Metals: but seeing they are of no abi^ty unto transmutation of Metals, but are
only Medicinal, and are qualified to do their work to the admiration of those
that make use of them, I leave them at this time. The Almighty has put
wonderful virtues into Metalline Salts, which have been found approved several
ways.

End of the fourth Part.
BASILIUS VALENTINUS HIS XII. KEYS, Which is A Treatise about the great stone
of Philosophers.

In which many thousands, since the beginning of the World have wrought.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLVI.

THE PREFACE.
HVman fear coming upon me, I fell to consider out of natures frailty the
miserableness of this World, lamented within me the sin, which our first
Parents had committed, and how little of repentance ^^e was for it, men still
growing worse, an eternal ^^ishment being set upon all impenitents: it made
(...) to make haste to outrun evil bid farewell to the ^^rld, vowing my self
to become Gods servant only. ^^ving spent some time in my Order, after I had
done (...) appointed devotions, to draw my self from idlensse (...) sinful
thoughts, I took in hand for to employ my ^^cessive hours to some purpose, to
anatomize na^^al things, to dive into Natures mysteries a thing ^^t the
spiritual ones I found most comfortable and ^reshing. Having found many books
in our Mo^stery, which Philosophers had written a long time ^^ore me, which had
dived very deeply into Na^re's secrets, it encouraged me the more to learn ^^t,
which they knew, though in the beginning all (...) very difficult, however upon
my earnest prayer to God, the Lord blessed me in my underta^^^gs.

In our Monastery there was one of my Fell^^ who was mightily tormented with
the stone, was ^^ten bedridden, sought after many Physicians, but (...) was able
to cure him, was left hopeless, taking refuge to Gods omnipotency. Then I
began to a^tomize Vegetables, extracted their Salt and qu^tessences, but none
of all these would, or could (...) my sick fellow; made trials of many of them,
but (...) were too weak to dissolve the stone: I took his case i^ further
consideration, and intended to know fun^^mentally, what efficacy the great
Creator had (...) into Minerals and Metals; the more I sought i^ them, the
more I found, still one secret issuing for from the other: God blessed me
herein, opened m^ eyes, that I saw mavelous virtues in the Nat^^ of Minerals
and Metals, the great Creator had i^ planted into them, insomuch, that it is a
hard mat^^ to believe it.

Among these I happened to get one Mineral, comp^sed of many colors, which had
many and rare ve^tues in Medicine, I drew its spiritual essence fr^^ it,
whereby in few days I cured my diseased Col^^giate. For this Mineral spirit
was very strong, a^^ strengthened the weak spirit of my brother, and liv^ a long
time after that cure. He prayed daily a^^ hourly for me as long as he lived,
even to his dyi^^ moment; his, and other men's prayers availed so m^^^ with the
great Creator, that by his blessing and mi^^ endeavors were revealed many
great matters unto me, which he did not reveal unto worldly (...) men.

This Philosophic stone for man's health and su^itation of him in this valley
of misery I reveal ^o posterity, as much as is meet for me to do, fol^^ing
herein the steps of my predecessors, these Phi^^phick informations are
aenigmatick and short, ^^t are a rock on which Truth may firmly be builded.
(...) wish good success and blessings from above to the ^^dertakers herein.
Amen.

The Contents of this Book are
I. OF the great stone of Ancient Philosophers. II. The XII. Keys, whereby the
doors (...) the Philosophers stone are opened and the deep Fountain of health
an^ wealth flows from thence. III. A short repetition of his writings about
the Philosophic stone, wherein is plainly held forth the true Philosophic
light: whereunto is annexed an information of Quicksilver, Antimony,
Vitriol-water, common Sulphur, Calx vive, Arsenic, Salpeter, Salmiac, Tartar,
Vinegar, and Wine. IV. Of Microcosme, or Man's body, what it contains, of what
it is composed, the whole contents thereof, and of its issue and end. V. Of the
great mystery of the World, and its Medicinals belonging to man. VI. Of the
Magisterium of the VII. Planets, their essence, properties, virtues, operation,
and revolution, and their admirable hidden mystical qualities.
Of the great Stone of the Ancient Philosophers, written by BASILIUS VALENTINUS.
DEar friend, and well wisher unto Art, in my Preface I promised to such, which
are desirous to learn, and to dive into Natures condition, to show, and to
speak of that corner stone, as much as I am permitted from above to do out of
what the Ancient Philosophers have prepared their stone, whereby they prolonged
their lives in a continued health, and whereby they got their riches also, to
live comfortably in this miserable world. For the performing of my promise, not
leading you into any tedious sophistick labyrinths, but disclosing the very
head-spring of all goodness, you are to note and to take into serious
consideration my following expressions, if so be your intent is to learn any
thing concerning this Art; I do not purpose to use any prolixity in words, for
that were to no purpose: I do love few words, which are full of pith.

Note, it is given but to few men to attain unto the mastery of this Art;
though many strive, and endeavor to work upon that structure, yet the true
knowledge, and the attaining thereunto the great Creator has made common, but
bestows it only on such, which hate lies, and love^ truth, and intend
seriously and groaningly to get this Art^ and chiefly such men are fit for it,
which love God unfainedly, and pray earnestly unto him for such a knowledge.

Therefore I tell you for a mere truth, that in case you intend to go about the
making of this stone, you be a follower of that I inform you of, and before all
things pray (...) the great Creator, to bestow his blessing upon you herein,
and if you have sinned, confess unto him, with a full resolution never to do
evil again, but lead a godly life, and that your heart may be enlightened in all
good things, and remember, when ever you are preferred to any honor, to be
helpful to the poor and needy, to deliver them out of their misery, making
them glad with thy helping ^an^, that the Lord may bestow the greater blessings
upon you, and you may thereby be confirmed in faith, that there is a Throne in
Heaven prepared for such a one, hereafter to live in eternal bliss.

My friend, despise not to read good, and real writings of such men, which had
the Philosophic stone before us, for from them I had it, next unto Gods
revelation: the reading of their books must be frequently iterated, then the
fundamentals thereof will the better stick to the memory, and truth, like a
burning Candle, be not extinguished.

Be industrious in your careful working, search into Scriptures continually,
be not prepossessed with opinions, follow after the unanimous concurrence of
Philosophers: a wavering man is easily brought into wrong ways, and such men
which have wavering minds, seldom build firm houses.

Seeing the stone of the most ancient Philosophers does not come, or spring
from things which are combustible, because this stone is freed from all
dangers, fire may put him unto; therefore trouble not thy self to seek for it
in such things, where Nature would not have thee to seek for. As for example,
if one should tell thee, this stone is a vegetable work, because a growing
quality is in it, but it is not: For if our stone were of a condition, as other
vegeta^^es are, it would easily be consumed in fire, nothing ^ould stay, but
only its Salt. Though there were men, ^ho have written great volumes of the
vegetable stone, yet ^^y friend you must note, that it will be very difficult
for ^^e to conceive of it, for they call our stone a vegetable ^^e, because a
growing and augmenting belongs there^nto.

Note further, irrational beasts have their increase of their own kind: so you
strive nor to seek for, or to make ^his stone but only of his own seed, from
whence it has (...) beginning and being. Neither ought you to look out ^or any
Animal soul, for the making thereof: flesh and ^loud, which the great Creator
has bestowed upon Ani^als, belongs properly unto animals: God composed them
of flesh and blood, whereby an Animal is made: but ^^r stone, which from the
ancient Philosophers came as by ^n inheritance upon me, is made of one, and of
two things, which contain a third; this is the naked truth; and it is rightly
spoken: for the ancients understood by man and wife, one body, not in respect
of the outward appearance, but by reason of their innate love, which they got
at the first working of their Natures, in that respect it is acknowledged that
they are one: and as both propagate and increase their seed; even so the seed
of that matter, of which our stone is made, can be propagated and augmented.

If you be a true lover of our Art, you will take this expression into
consideration, to keep thy self out of the pit, into which erroneous Sophisters
usually fall, which their enemy dug for them. My friend, that you may know
further from whence this seed comes, then enquire first of thy self, to what
end you intend to seek after this stone: Reason then will dictate unto thee,
that it must needs spring from a Metalline root, which the Creator has
ordained for Metals to generate thereby: if you will know the matter of it,
then note; First, when the spirit moved upon the water, and the Universe was
encompassed with darkness, then the omnipotent and eternal God, who i^ without
a beginning and end, whose wisdom was from eternity by his insearchable Decree
created heaven and earth, and the things contained therein, be they visible, or
invisible, by what name soever they may be called. But of ^he manner of this
glorious Creation my intent is not now to Philosoph^ze much upon: let Scripture
and Faith be impartial judges herein!

The great Creator has given in the Creation to every Creature a seed, whereby
it should generate and increase, whereby Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals
might continually be preserved. Man has no power bestowed on him, to make, or
bring forth a new kind of seed according to his fancy against Gods ordinance,
there is granted unto him a propagation and increase, God reserved for his sole
power to make seed, else man could play the Creator also, which does not beseem
him, and belongs merely to the highest Creator.

Conceive thus of the seed, which works Metals; there is a heavenly
influence, according to Gods good pleasure and ordinance, from above it falls,
and mingleth with sydereal qualities. When such conjunctions happen, then these
two beget an earthly substance, as a third thing, which is the beginning of our
seed, its first original, whereby its first descent is proved: from these three
the Elements have their off spring, as water, air, and earth, which work
further by an Ae^nick fire to the bringing forth of a perfect thing, which
Hermes and all those before me (for I could find no more) have called the
three principles, and were found to be an internal Soul, an incomprehensible
spirit, and a visible body. These three being together in one dwelling, in
process of time, yet by Vulcans help, to be a comprehensible being, as a Me
cury, Sulphur, and Salt; these three, by an uniting be^^^ ^rought into a
coagulation, according to Natures miraculo^s operation, there is brought forth
a perfect body as Nature would have it, and the Creator had ordained the seed
for it. He that purposes to seek after the fountain of our work, and hops to
get the vi^tory in this warfar, to him I tell this for a truth, that where
there is a Metalline Soul, a Metalline spirit, and a Metalline form of body,
that there must needs be there also a Metalline Mercury, a Metalline Sulphur,
and a Metalline Salt, these must needs produce a perfect Metalline body. If you
do not conceive of it now, then surely you are not adapted for Philosophy, and
in brief it is thus, it will not be possible for thee to reap the benefit of
any Metalline body, unless you have joined completely the forenamed three
principles. Note further; Animals are composed of flesh and blood, there is in
them also a living spirit and breath, which dwells in them, but they are
destitute of a rational Soul, which before them, man is endued withal. This is
the reason, that when Animals lost their lives, they are gone, no more hopes of
them for ever. But man, who offering his body to his Creator in time of death,
has a Soul, who at the day of ^esurrection is to receive a glorified body to
his Soul, and are to dwell together, and so Soul, Body, and Spi^i come together
again i^ an heavenly clarification, which in all eternity will never be
separated again, etc.

Therefore man, by reason of his Soul, is acknowledged to be a fixed Creature,
because he is to live for ever after this life (though in his body he is
subject to a temporal death,) For death is unto man only a clarification,
according to Gods ordinance, by certain degrees is delivered from a
sinfulness, and transplanted into a better condition, which does not be^^ll
other Animals, therefore are they esteemed to be unfixed Creatures, for these
being once gone by death, cannot expect nor look for any resuscitation, because
they want a rational Soul, for which the sole Mediator Jesus Christ has
suffered, and shed his innocent blood. A spirit ^^^y have a dwelling in a body,
but it is not consequent, ha^ he must abide there constantly, though the body
and that spirit be at rest, and that body with that spirit does not contest
about any controversy: because both do want the strongest part, which
upholdeth and binds together s^ul and body, protecteth and keeps them from
dangers, namely the tender, noble, and fixed Soul: for where the Soul is quite
gone and lost, there is never any redemption hoped for: for a thing which has
no Soul, is not perfect, which is one of the highest mysteries, which seekers
ought to know, and upon conscience I am commanded not to conceal this mystery,
but to make it known to those, which seriously love fundamentals of truth. And
take carefully notice of what I say: Spirits hidden in Metals are not alike:
some are more volatile, and others more fix: their souls and bodies are not
alike neither: that Met^l, which contains the three fixednesses, that is
blessed with a power, to hold in the fire, and so overcome all its enemies,
which only is found in Sol. Lune contains a fixed Mercury, and is the
reason, why she does not fly so soon in the fire, as other imperfect Metals do,
but stands out her examens in the fire, and shows the same victoriously,
because the devouring Saturn can rob nothing from her.

That arch-wench Venus is clad, and possessed with an abounding tincture, the
most part of her body is a mere tincture, like unto such a tincture, which
dwells also in the best Metal, and by reason of the superfluity thereof, is
^ing'd upon red, and because her body being leprous, that fixed tincture cannot
have any abiding place in her unfix'd body, but must vanish together with her
body: for the body being consumed by destruction, or death, that body cannot
subsist neither, but must give way and fly, because the habitation is
destroyed, and consumed with fire, so that her place is not known, nor may any
other dwell there from henceforth. But in a fixed body she willingly dwells
constan^ly.

Fixed Salt has bestowed on valorous Mars a hard sturdy and gross body,
whereby the gallantry of his mind is proved, and is not so easily gotten from
this warlike Prince, because his body is hard, and is not easily mastered, or
conquered. But if his valor with Lune's fixation, and with Venus her beauty in
a mixture does harmonize spiritually, then a curious and melodious Music may
be made, whereby some Keys may be advanced, and the needy labourer may get a
piece of living Particulariter, if he got up to the uppermost step of that
ladder: for the phlegmatic quality or moist Nature of Lune must be exsiccated
through the hot blood of Venus, and her great pains must be allayed by the
outward Salt.

There is no necessity to seek for seed in the Elements: because our seed is
not put so far back, but there is a nearer place, in which our seed has its
sure and certain habitation, if you only rectify and regulate the
Philosophic Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, so that of their soul, spirit, and
body there be made an inseparable union, which may never be separated again,
then the Band of love is perfectly made, and the dwelling is well prepared for
the Crown.

And note, that this is only a liquid Key, like unto a heavenly property, and
a dry water, addicted to an earthly substance, all which is but one thing,
proceeding and growwing from three, two, and one: if you can hit it, then you
have overcome the mastery, and make a copulation betwixt Bride and Bridegroom,
let them feed and cherish one another with their own flesh and blood, let them
increase and multiply infinitely by their own seed. I could willingly
communicate and disclose more unto you, but the Creator has forbidden it, and
is not meet for me to speak any further of it, for fear the gifts of the
highest should be misused, and I should be the cause of committing of great
sins, and load Gods wrath upon me, and fall with the rest into eternal
punishment.

My friend, if these expressions give thee no content, to conceive of the
thing, and I lead thee unto the practick part of mine own, how I have attained
by Gods assistance unto the Philosophers stone, I pray consider the same well,
peruse diligently my XII. K^yes, iterate their reading frequently, and then
proceed according to my instruction, which I set down fundamentally by way of a
parable.

Take a piece of the finest Gold, anatomize the same by such means, as Nature
has afforded unto Artists, even as a Physician anatomizeth man's body, whereby
he is inquisitive into the condition of man's internal parts: reduce thy Gold
unto that, what it has been at first, then you will find the seed, the
beginning, middle, and end, out of which our Gold and its wife is made, namely
of a penetrating subtle spirit, of a pure, tender, and undefiled Soul, and of
an Astral Salt and Balsam, which after their uniting is nothing else but a
Mercurial liquor, the same water was brought to School to its own God Mercury,
who examined the water, having sound it without deceit and falsehood, he made
friendship with it, and took the water into a Matrimonial state, and both
became an incombustible Oil. For Mercury grew so proud upon it, that he knew
himself no more, he flung away his Eagles wings, himself swallowed the smooth
t^yl of the Dragon, and offered a battle unto Mars: Mars gathered his Champions
together, and gave command, that Mercury should be taken Prisoner, and be kept
closely imprisoned, Vulcan was commanded to be Jailer so long, till a Female
kind came in to his deliverance. This rumor being noised abroad, the other
Planets had a meeting, where they consulted, what further was to be done in
that business, and the proceedings might wisely be prosecuted. Then Saturn
made a speech, in this manner: I Saturn, the highest Planet in the firmament,
protest before this honorable Assembly of my Lords, that I am the meanest and
most contemptible among you all, of a weak corruptible body, of a black color,
subject to many infirmities in this miserable World, and yet am an examiner of
you all: for I have no abiding place; and take along with me such, tha^ are
like unto me: I cannot lay the fault of this my misery to none but Mercury, who
by his carelessness has pu this evil upon me: Therefore, my Lords, I beseech
you, to be pleased to revenge my quarrel on him, a^^ ^ei^^ (...) ^^st already
into prison, there to take his life aw^y (...) s^^m ^ot there, that not one
drop of his bl^^d Saturn having ended his speech, Jupiter rose up, made a ^tch
upon his knees, bowing his Scepter, began to com^^nd Saturns proposals,
commanding all those to be pu^shed, which should neglect to put in execution
that, which Saturn would have done unto Mercury. After him ^ose Mars with his
naked sword, which was full of strange ^^d admirable colors, glittering like a
fire-glasse, casting ^^ange rays, put ye sword into Vulcans the Jaylors hand,
to ^^t in execution all that, which the Lords had resolved upon: killed
Mercury, burnt his bones with fire, and Vulcan did (...) Office very
carefully. This Executioner having done (...) duty, there came a white shining
woman in a long garb (...) a silver piece, of several water colors, being well
viewed, ^^hold it was Lune, the wife of Sol, she fell down upon her ^ce,
entreated heartily, and weeping, that her husband Sol ^ight be set at liberty
out of prison, Mercury had cast him ^to, by force with deceitfulness, where
both he and Mer^^rie, upon your honors command were kept imprisoned. ^^t
Vulcan gave her a flat denial, because he was com^anded to do so, and went on
to do his office in executing ^^e sentence. At last the Lady Venus came in a
deep red ^obe lined with green, of a most beautiful countenance, ^leasant
speech, and amiable gestures, bearing fragrant ^owers in her hand, which were a
most refreshing pleasure (...) the eyes to behold, by reason of variety of
colors: she ^ade intercession in the Chaldaean language unto Vulcan, ^^tting
into his remembrance, that redemption must come ^^om a womankinde, but his
ears were stopped. These ^wo conferring together, Heaven opened it self, there
came ^^rth a huge beast with many thousands of young ones, de^^oyed the
Executioner, opening his jaws wide, devoured ^he Lady Venus, which made the
intercession, crying with a ^^ill voice: My descent is of women, my seed is
scattered ^^r and near by them, thereby they replenished the Earth: their Soul
is kind to mine, therefore my desire is to feed ^^d to drink of their blood.
The beast having spoken thus ^^oud, it went into a room, shut the door behind,
all its young ones followed it: where more food must be pro^ded for them, and
they drunk the first incombustible O^ that meat and drink they easily digested,
whereof mo^ young ones were bred, which was continued long, so the all the
World was filled by them.

All these things thus happening, there was a meeting of ^veral learned men,
which endeavored to interpret (...) declare, what happened, and what had been
spoken, that the might the better understand these mysteries: none of the^ was
able to perform that business, for all of them had ^^veral thoughts concerning
these things: at last there sto^^ up an ancient man, as white as snow in his
hairs, clad (...) purple from top to toe, on his head he had a Crown, in (...)
midst of it was set a precious Carbuncle, he was girt wi^^ the girdle of life,
and went barefooted, spoke with a sp^cial spirit, which was hid in him, his
speech and sayi^^ went through his body and life, his Soul felt it to the i^
most. This man stepped on high, desired the Assembly to (...) silent, and to give
diligent attention unto him, because (...) was sent from above to declare unto
them these writing and to make it known unto them in a Philosophic expre^sion.
The Assembly being silent, he began to speak thus Awaken, O man, and behold the
light, that darkness m^ not mislead you, the Gods of Fortune, and the great
God have revealed unto me in a deep sleep; How happy is tha^ man that knows a
God in their wondrous works, an^ happy is he, whose eyes are opened to behold
the ligh^ which formerly was a darkness unto him. The Gods h^^^ granted two
Stars unto men, to lead them unto great wi^dom, O man, view them exactly,
follow after their Iustre^ because wisdom is found therein. The swift Bird of
the South devoureth the heart of the huge beast of the Eas^ Make wings also
unto the beast of the East, as the (...) has of the South, let them be equal
one to another, so this Eastern beast must be bereaved of his Lyon-skin, an^
his wings must vanish again, for both must enter into the great Salt-Sea, and
come forth again in beauty: sink you^ disciples spirits into a deep Fountain,
which is never with^^t water, that they also may be like unto their mother,
which lies hid therein, and she came from three into the World.

Hungary has first begotten me, Heaven and S^a^s pre^^ve me, Earth gives suck
unto me: Though I must die and be buried, however the God Vulcan begets me a
se^ond time, therefore Hungary is my Native Country, and ^y mother compasse^h
the whole earth.

This being hearkened unto by the Assembly, he spoke ^^ther thus: make that
which is highest to be lowest, that which is visible to be invisi^le, and that
which is compre^ensible to be incomprehensible, and provide, that the (...)
most become to be the uppermost, m^ke the invisible ^^come to be visible, make
the incomprehensible a pulpa^e thing. This is the whole Art, and very perfect,
with^^t any defect: but therein dwells death and life, dying ^^d rising: it
is a round Globe, on which the goddess For^^e lets her Chariot roll about, and
brings salvation of ^isdom unto men of God, its true sense is, ALL in ALL;
^^t the highest is Judge, which judges things eternal.

He that desires to know, what ALL in ALL is, let (...) make great wings for
the earth, put her into a great ^^guish, let her soar upward, make her fly
through the ^^e, and be exalted to the highest place of the uppermost ^^eaven:
then burn her wings with a forcible fire, that the ^^th may fall into the Red
Sea, and be drowned therein. ^^en command the Sea to stand, exiccate the water
by ^e and air, reduce it unto earth again, then I say, you ^^e ALL in ALL, if
you cannot find this, then feel (...) thine own bosom, and about thee into all
things, that (...) in the World, then you will find ALL in ALL, (...) is of an
attractive quality of Mineral, and Metalline (...) desc^^^ing from Sal and
Sulphur, twice begotten of (...): More is not meet for me to speak of ALL in
ALL, (...) ALL comprehended ALL.

This speech being made, he said further: Beloved men, I hope you have by
harkening unto my voice learned wisdom, how, and in what you are to seek for
the great ston^ of ancient Philosophers, which heals Leprous imperfec^
Metals, reveals unto them a new birth, preserves me^^ in health, prolongeth
their lives, and by his heavenly power and operation has kept me alive so
long, that I a^ weary of life, and wish for nothing but death.

Thanks be to God for his grace and wisdom, which h^ has granted so graciously
unto me so long a time: blesse^ be his holy name for ever, Amen. Thus he
vanished awa^ before their eyes,

After the finishing hereof, every one returned ho^^ meditating seriously on
these things day and night, and every one wrought according to their several
gifts they received from Gods bounty and goodness, etc.

Hereupon follow the XII. Keys of BACILIUS VALENTINUS.
Whereby the Doors are opened unto the Ancient stone of Philosophers, where is
found that everlasting Fountain of health, and of wealth.
The first Key.
MY friend, you must know that impure and defil^^ things are not fit for our
work. For their Lepro^^ is no help for furtherance of our work: good things
(...) hindered in ways that are unclean. Wares out of Mines (...) worth their
money: but if sophisticated, they are ma^^ unfit, being adulterated in their
former and original op^^^^^n.

As Physicians cleanse and purge by means of Physic the ^^ard parts of the
body, expelling all impurities from ^^nce: thus these bodies also must be
purified from their ^urities, that perfection may be operative in our birth.
(...) masters require a pure undefiled body, which must not (...) mixed with
any spot, or strange matter. For strange ^^itionals are a Leprosy to our
Metals. The Kings Crown ^^st be of pure Gold, a chaste Bride must be married
unto (...). Therefore if you will work through, or upon our bo^^, then take the
greedy gray Wolf, which by reason of ^ame stands in subjection unto valorous
Mars: but ^^hing his descent, he is a Child of old Saturn, found Valleys and
Hills of the World, is very hungry: cast be^^ him the Kings body, let him feed
upon it: and when he (...) devoured the King, then make a great fire, cast the
^lfe into, let him be quite burned, then the King will be at liberty again:
This being done thrice, then the Wolf ^onquered by the Lion, finding no more
on him to (...) upon, then is our body perfect for the beginning of (...) work.

^ote, that this is the only true way convenient to ^ge our bodies, for the
Lion is cleansed by the Wolves ^^d, and the tincture of that blood rejoices
mightily ^he Lion's tincture, because they are near kin one to ^ther. When the
Lion is satisfied, then his spirit is, and eyes cast proud rays, like the
lustrous Sun, his internal ^^nce is of great ability, and good for all such
things you ^^d to apply him unto: and being brought into its due ^^ration, then
the sons of men are beholding unto him, ^ch were laden with the falling
sickness, and other dis^s: the ten Lepers run after him, and desire to drink
of blood of his Soul, and all such that are diseased rejoice ^^^ly in his
spirit. For he that drinks of this golden ^^^ain, feels himself thoroughly
renewed in his Na^^, all evil things are taken away, the blood is strength
(...) the heart receives strength, and all the Members are (...) full vigor,
it opens all Pores and Nerves, expelling their malignities, that goodness
may come into the places.

My friend, you must have good care that the Foun^^ of life be kept from
muddinesse; no strange water must (...) mingled with our Fountain, else a
miscreant will be broug^ forth: and a wholesome fish will be turned into a
Serpe^^ if by a Medium a Corrosity be joined, whereby our bo^^ is broken, then
let that corrositivenesse be washed awa^ because Corrosives are not to be used
for internal disease^ because acidities are rather destructive; engendring
diseas^^ our Fountain must be without poison: however poison ^^pelleth poison.

A Tree that brings no good fruit, is cut off at t^^ bulk, better twigs are
propp'd into, which proppings u^^ted with the Tree, then its Root, bulk, and
twigs bri^^ forth better fruits, which are more ^holesome.

The King in the heavenly firmam^nt walks through (...) places, but in the
seventh he keeps his seat, for there (...) kingly Throne is hanged with Golden
pieces.

If you conceive aright what I do speak, then with t^^ Key you have opened the
first Lock, and you have driv^^ back the bolt: but if you cannot find any
light in the^ then no glass eyes will help thee, nor any natural eyes w^^
enable thee to find out the last, which you wanted at fi^^ Further I will not
speak of this Key, as Lucius Papi^^ taught and bid me.

The second Key.
IN Courts of great Potentates, several sorts of drinks (...) found, and none
like the other in smell, taste, and ^^lour, because they are of several
preparations: however (...) of them are drinkable, because they are fitted for
seve^^ places, and are necessary for the keeping of the Co^^ When the Sun
ejaculateth her rays, spreading th^^ ^^der the Clouds, then the vulgar speech
is, the Sun draw^^h water, and it will rain: which being done often, that ^^at
proves fertile.

To raise to an altitude a magnifick Palace, several Arti^^ers and workmen
must be employed, before that stru^^ure and the rooms thereof can be finished.
For where ^ones must be used, there wood is of no use.

The daily ebbing and flowing of the Sea, out of an in^^^ed love, which it
receives from above out of the starry ^^aven, is to that end, that Countries
are enriched there^^: at every return it brings great good unto Man^^de.

A Virgin, which is to be espoused, is set out gloriously (...) several
Garments dress't in the best manner, that she ^^y please her Bridegroom: And
the band of love may (...) the deeper root by a hearty looking one upon the
^^^her: and the Bride joining with the Bridegroom after (...) usual manner,
these Garments are put off, and the ^^de keeps only that, which at her
Nativity she had re^^ed of the Creator.

Even so, when our Bridegroom Apollo with his Bride (...) is to be married,
several Garments must first be made (...) them, their heads and bodies must be
well washed with ^^er, which waters must be learned to be made by several
^^^^llings. For these waters do differ very much: some (...) high; some are
poor, according to the several uses they (...) employed unto; which I
intimated, when I spoke of (...) several sorts of drinks used in Princes
Courts. And (...), when the humidity from the earth ascends, and (...) s^^ne
is drawn up, they conglomerate on high, their ^^^derousnesse makes them fall
down, thereby unto the ^^th is restored her lost humidity, which refreshes the
^^ath, gives unto her a nourishment, whereby the vege^^^les do spring up.
Therefore some waters in their pre^^ation must be often distilled, the
abstracts must be of^^ restored to the earth, must be drawn off again: Even as
Euripus does often disgorge it self to a cer^^ period.

The Kingly Palace being by several Artificers a wo^kmen raised and adorned,
and the glassy Sea has ^^nished its course, and the Palace is furnished with
goo^ then the King may safely enter into, and keep there residence.

My friend, no^e this very well, that the Bridegroom w^ his Bride must be naked
espoused, and therefore the O^^ men^s prepared for their clothing and
necessary attires their hea^s and faces, must be taken from them again, (...)
must possess the grave in the nakedness, as naked the were born, that their
seed might not be destroyed by (...) strange mixture.

At the closing of this I tell thee in good truth, yt the m^ precious water, of
which ye Bridegrooms Bath must be m^^ must be of two contrary Fencers, or
contrary materials p^^pared very carefully, and wisely. For one Fencer must
(...) the other, must be fitted for the fight, the one must co^q^^ the other.
For what avails it unto ye Eagle, that she ke^^ her nest alone in the Alps,
where her Chickens by rea^ of the snow are destroyed by frost, which is on the
tops these Mountains.

But, if you add unto the Eagle the cold Dragon, wh^ had his dwelling a long
time in stone clifts, and Subte^^nean caves, where he crept in and out, both
these be^ placed on that Hellish stool, then Pluto will so stron^ breath upon,
expelling a fiery volatile spirit out of (...) cold Dragon, whose great heat
will burn the Eagles feath prep^ring a sweating-bank, that the snow on the
hig^^ tops of the Mountains do dissolve and turn into water, t^^ the mineral
ba^h be rightly prepared, and riches and hea^ be bestowed on the King.

The third Key.
WAter destroys fire, quenches it quite: if abundance of water be poured
into little fire, then fire must yield unto water, giving way for the victory
unto it. Thus our fiery Sulphur must with water be prepared, by Art must be
conquered, if so be that after the separating of the water, the fiery life of
our Sulphurous fume shall get the triumphing victory. But here no victory can
be obtained, unless the King have bestowed strength and virtue unto his water,
and have delivered unto it the Key of his Court color, that be be destroyed
thereby, and be made invisible: however, at this time his visible form must
appear again, but with great diminution of his simple essence, and great
melioration of his condition.

Limmers carry yellow on white, red upon yellow, or a purple color: though all
these colors are at hand, yet the last is predominant, being the uppermost in
its degree. The same order must be observed also in our Magisterium, which
being done, then you have before you the light of wisdom, which shines in
darkness, and yet burns not.

For our Sulphur does not burn, yet gives a light afar off, neither does it
tinge, unless it be prepared, and tinged freely with its own tincture, to give
a further tincture unto weak imperfect bodies of Metals. This Sulphur has not
a tinging quality, unless the tincture be given to it in a fixation: for a
weak one cannot victorise, the stronger keeps down the weaker, and weak
things must yield unto strong ones. The conclusion herein is this: a weak and
mean thing cannot help another, which is in the same frailty, neither can it
import any furtherance to the operation of it; can one combustible protect
another which is of the fame condition! A Protector must have a greater power
than he, wh^m ^e intend^ to protect: so thing combustible must ^e defended by
^u^h, which in their fixation are incombustible. He that will prepare our
incombustible Sulphur of Philosophers, m^st be circumspect t^ seek our Sulphur
in a subject, wherein it lies incombustible, which cannot be, unless the
Salt-Sea have first swallowed the body, and cast it up again freely, then ^xalt
it to ^^s degree, that it excel with its ^ustre all other Stars in H^aven, and
be in its substance as rich of blood, as the Pelican is a^ the opening of her
breast, nourishing many of her Chiek^ns without the weakening of her own body.
This is the Rose of our Masters, of a Scarlet color, and the red blou^ of the
Dragon, of which so many have written, and is th^^ Purple mantle of the highest
Commander in our Ar^, wherewith the Queen of salvation is clad and covered, and
thereby all needy Metals may be wa^^'d.

Keep this honorable Mantle with the Astral Salt very car^fully, which
follows after this heavenly Sulphur, let not any mischance befall it, impart
to it the birds volatile quality, as much as there is needful, then the Cock
will d^vour the Fox, which is drowned in water, or reviveth by fire, and is
devoured again by the Fox, where like is requited with the like, (or like is
reconciled unto unlike.)

The fourth Key.
ALl flesh begotten of earth, must be destroyed and reurn to earth again, which
it was at first: then that terrestrial Salt affords a new birth by heavenly
resuscitation: for if there be nor first an earth, there cannot ensue any
resurrection in our work. For earth contains that natural Balsam, and is the
Salt of those, which sought for it by a knowledge of all things, (or universal
knowledge) the final judgment of the world will be by fire, which the great
Creator at first made of a nothing, must by fire he turned to ashes again, out
of these ashes the Phoenix bring^^ forth again her Chickens; For these ashes
contain real^^ the true Tartar, which must be dissolved, after its dis^^lution
the firm and strong lock of the royal room is ^^ened.

New heaven and new earth are made after that great ^ombustion, or burning, and
the new man will appear more ^^loriously, than he was in the first world,
because in the ^^ther he is clarified.

If ashes and sand be well ripened and digested by fire, ^^en the Artist
turns it into glass, which afterward ^oldeth in the fire; in its col^ur it
is like unto a transparent ^^one, an^ looks no more like any ashes: this is a
huge mystery unto ignorant men, but not so to knowing men, for they found it to
be so by their daily experience and Manuals.

Men burn Lyme of stones, to make use of them for a Cement in buildings; before
the fire prepares it thereunto, it is a stone, and cannot be used for a
Cement, as long as it is a hard stone: fire brings stones unto a maturity,
and receives from the fire a very hot degree, whereby it is strengthened, and
grows so potent, that there is almost nothing comparable unto it, the fiery
spirit of Lyme.

Every thing being reduced into ashes, affords by Art a Salt, if you at the
anatomizing of it, are able to keep apart its Sulphur and Mercury, and make
restitution thereby unto the Salt, according to A^^, ^hen fire will bring it to
that again, which it was before its Anatomy and destruction: worldly wise men
call this a folly, counting it mere lies, call it a new Creature, which to do
man has no grant of God, themselves understand it not, that this Creature has
been formerly so, and the Artist shows its increase only by the seed of
Nature.

That Artist, which wants ashes, cannot make any Salt for our Art: because
our work cannot be made lively without Salt, for the coagulation of things
works merely the Salt. As Salt preserves things from putrefaction, even so
the Salt of Philosophers protecteth Metals, that they cannon be reduced to a
nothing, unless their Balsom die, and the natural Salt spirit be gone, then
their body would be dea^ and nothing further could be effected with it, because
the Metalline spirits are gone, and at their natural departin^ left a dead
dwelling, into which no more life can b^ brought again.

Note further: you that intends to learn this Art, that the Salt out of ashes
is of great eff^^cie, many virtues are hi^ therein: Yet the Salt avails
nothing, unless his innermost be turned to the outside. For the spirit alone
is it which affords power and virtue, the naked body is abl^ to do nothing
here; if you know to get that, then you have the Philosophers Salt, and their
incombustible Oil, o^ which many have written before me great Volumes.

And if of these Artists were never so many,
Whose aim at me is directed only,
Yet few of them in their success were blessed,
To fathom all virtues that lie in my breast.
The fifth Key.
THe life of earth makes spring up Vegetables, and he that says that the
earth is dead, tells an untruth, for a dead thing cannot impart any livelynesse
to another, and the increase is at a stay in dead things, because the spirit of
life is fled: The spirit is the life and soul of the earth, which dwells in
her, receives its efficacy upon earthly things from heavenly Astrals: for all
Vegetables, Metals, and Minerals receive their power, increase, and nourishment
from the spirit of the earth. For the spirit is the life, which is fed by
Astrals, which further imparts a nourishment unto growing things: as the Child
lies hid in the Mothers Womb, and is fed there by the Mother: so the earth
feeds Minerals also, which lie hid in her belly by a spirit, which she
receives from above: the earth does afford no power per se, but the living
spirit, which dwells in her does it, and if she should want her spirit, then
she were dead, and could afford no nourishment, because from her Sulphur, or
fatness, the spirit is taken away, which preserves living powers, and drives
forth Vegetables, and other growing things by a nutriment.

Two contrary spirits may dwell together in one subject, but are still at
variance, as in Gunpowder, which being lighted, these two spirits fly asunder,
making a great noise, fly in the air, are no more discerned, no body can tell
whither they are gone, or what they had been, if it were not known
experimentally, what manner of spirits they were, and in what subject they
dwelled.

From hence you may learn, that life is a mere spirit, and all these things,
which the ignorant world counts to be dead, must be brought into an
incomprehensible visible spiritual life, and must be preserved therein, if so
be that life shall work with life, and the spirits, which are fed and nourished
by a heavenly dew, are born of one elemental, heavenly, and earthly substance,
which is called materia informis.

And as there belongs unto Iron a Magnet, which by reason of its own
wonderful invisible love is of an attractive quality: so our Gold has a
Magnet also, which Magnet is the prima materia of our great stone. If you
conceive aright of this expression, then you may be blessed with riches in this
world.

One Declaration more I must hold forth unto you in this Chapter: Man that
looks into a glass, sees a reflection of his image, but is not palpable,
save the glass, the party looked into: so from this matter must be expelled a
visible spirit, which is incomprehensible, the same spirit, I say, is the root
of the life of our body, and the Mercury of Philosophers, out of which the
liquid water in our Art is prepared, which in its composition you must make
again material, and must prepare it by certain means, from the lowest to the
highest degree into a transcendent Medicine. For our beginning is an up-shut
comprehensible body, its middle is a volatile spirit, and in the goldish water
there is no corrosivenesse at all, whereby our Philosophers prolonged their
lives: but the end thereof is a superfix'd Medicine for humane, and metalline
bodies; this knowledge indeed fitteth Angels better than man: True, men attain
unto that knowledge also, obtaining the same of God by their earnest prayers,
who are thankful unto him for it, and beneficial to the needy.

At the closing I tell thee for a certain truth, that one work must beget the
other: for our matter at the beginning of our work must in the best manner be
purified, then opened, broken and destroyed, and reduced to dust and ashes. All
this being done, then make of it a volatile spirit, as white as snow, and
another volatile spirit, as red as blood, these two spirits contain a third,
and yet are but one spirit; these are the three spirits, which preserve and
increase life, join these together, minister to them their natural necessary
meat and drink, keep them warm in the bed of wedlock to their perfect birth,
then you will see and find what the Creator and Nature has allowed for you to
know. And know, that I never made so plain a revelation: God has incorporated
more operation and wonders into Nature, than thousands may give credit
thereunto. There is a Seal and Lock set before me, to say no more, that others
also may write of mavelous things, which naturally are permitted by the
Creator, which ignorant men count to be supernatural. For natural things have
their first beginning from supernatural ones, yet both together are found to be
merely natural.

The sixth Key.
MAn without a woman is but half a body, and so the woman without the man is
but half a body neither, ^or each apart can preduce no fruit: but living
together in a matrimonial way, then is their body perfect, and by their seed
they may expect an increase.

If too much seed be cast on a ground, that that Acre i^ over-burthened, no
firm fruit can be expected, and if there be too little of the seed, then is the
fruit thin also, the weeds grow then abundantly, from thence also no great
goodness can be expected.

He that will not burden his conscience with any sins in selling of wares,
then let him be just in his dealing, having just measures and just weights,
then he avoideth men's curses, and gets the prayers of the poor. In deep waters
men are easily drowned, and shallow waters are soon dried up by the heat of the
Sun, and are good for nothing.

For the obtaining of a wished aim and scope care must be had, that a certain
measure, or quantity be taken in the conjunction of the Philosophic liquid
substance, that the greater quantity do not over-lay the lesser part, and be
suppress't thereby, and the increase and growing of it be obstructed. Let the
lesser be not too weak for the bigger, let there be an equal domination. Too
much rain spoyleth the fruit, and too great drought hinders true maturity.
Therefore if Neptune has prepared a perfect water-Bath, then take a just
quantity of your aqua permanens, have a great care, you do neither too much nor
too little. A double fiery man must be fed with a white Swan, these must kill
each other, and both must revive again, and the a^^^ of the four corners of the
World must possess three parts of the up-shut dwelling of the fiery man, that
the Swans song may be heard, when she harmoniously sings her farewell; then the
roasted Swan will be a food for the King, and the fiery King will be in great
love with the pleasant voice of the Queen, and embrace her friendly out of a
great love, and take his fill of her, both will vanish, and enter into one body.

They say, two men can master a third, especially if they have elbow room to
vent their malice. Hereupon you are to know from a true ground, that a double
wind must come, called Vulturnus, then a single wind, called Notus, these
come rushing from the East and South, and will keep a stir, being robbed, and
their blowing, or motion allayed, and the air is turned into water, then you
may confide, that a spiritual one will become a bodily one, and that the number
by the four seasons of the year in the fourth heaven will predominate, after
the seven Planets have finished their ruling, and will finish its course in the
neathermost dwelling of the Palace, and will hold in the highest fiery examen,
then the two, which went forth, suppressed the third and consumed him.

Here in our mastery is requisite an exact knowledge: for the division and
conjunction must be rightly hit, if so be you intend to get riches by your Art,
and the Scales must not be falsified by unequal weights. This is the Rock
spoken of in this Chapter, that you must finish it without any defect, by the
artificial heaven, with air and earth, with the true water and sensible fire,
setting in equal weights, whereof I inform you really.

The seventh Key.
NAtural calidity preserves man's life: for when natural heat is gone, then the
life is at an end. Natural fire, being moderately used, is a defense against
cold: but an immoderate heat is destructive. There is no necessity that ^^e Sun
should touch the earth corporally with her whole substance, it is sufficient
that the earth be strengthened by (...) rays, which she ejaculateth unto the
earth, and does that way her duty, for in that way she is of a sufficient
^^cacy, to perform her office, bringing things unto matu^^^ by her digestion:
for the distance of the air brings (...) solar rays into a temperature, so
by means of the air (...) fire does work, and the air works by the help of
(...).

Earth produces nothing without water, and water ^^thout earth can rise
nothing neither: now as these two ^^nnot be one without another in the
generating of ^its, neither can fire be without air, nor air without ^e: fire
is livelesse without air, and without fire the air ^^nnot show its due
calidity and dryness.

The Vine at its last ripening has need of a greater solar ^^at, than it has
at the beginning of the Spring: and if ^e Sun has a good operation in the
Harvest, then the Vine ^elds a better and stronger sap, which it does not, if
the ^^ns heat be defective. The vulgar counts all things ^^ad in Winter,
because frost has locked up the earth, ^^at nothing can spring up: but when
the Spring-season ap^^oacheth, and the Sun in her ascending breaks the frost,
(...) things turn to life again, Trees and Herbs appear in the ^^elinesse, and
the Animals, which hid themselves from ^^e frost, creep forth again out of
their caves and holes, ^egetables afford their new fragrancy, their operation
is ^pparent in their pleasant blossoms of several colors. ^hen the Summer
works further, brings these blossoms (...) further ripeness into fruits,
upon which ensues a rich ^^rvest; for the which thanks are due to the Creator,
which ^et these periods unto Nature.

Thus one year works after the other, so long till ^he Architect thereof
pulls them down, and the Inhabitants ^f the earth be exalted by the glory of
God, then all earth^y. Nature will be at an end in her working, and in its
place ^^ere will be an infinite eternal one. When the Sun in Win^^r goes
further off from us, she does not dissolve so well the great snow, but
approaching nearer to us, th n (...) air grows warmer, and the snow is
easily melted, a^ being turned to water, it is gone: for the weake^ must g^^
way unto the stronger: The same order must be observed the government of the
fire, that the moist liquor may (...) be exiccated too suddenly, and the
Philosophic earth (...) not to soon mel ed and dissolved, else your wholes^m
fis^^ would turn into Scorpions: and if you intend to be a ri^^ minister in
your office, then ^ake first your spiritual wa^^ on which the spirit moved at
the beginning, shut the do^ of the strong hold upon him, because this heavenly
pl^^ will be besieged by earthly enemies, your heaven must (...) guarded with
three Bull-warks, only one entrance m^^ be strongly guarded with a watch. All
this being finish'^ then kindle the light of wisdom, and look for your pen^^
you lost; let the light be of that bigness, as you see the^ is occasion for.
For you must know tha^ creeping b^^^ and worms have their dwelling in a cold
and moist e^^^ their condition and no are leads them thereunto: h^mans
habitation is upon earth, according as his temp^^^ and mixed condition
^^quireth, but Angelical spirits ^^ving not an earthly, but an Angelical body,
not being i^ subjection unto a sinful flesh, as man is, are placed into higher
station, are able to endure both heat and cold in t^^ upper and nether Region,
without any molestation: an^ when man is clarified, then will he be able to do
like the^^ heavenly spirits: God rules heaven and earth, and worket^ all in
all.

If we prove good governors of our Souls, then we sha^^ be Gods Children and
Heirs, to accomplish that which i^ impossible for us to do now: which cannot be
done, unless^ all the water be exsiccated, and heaven and earth togethe^ with
the men, be judged by fire.

The eighth Key.
NO flesh, be it of man's, or of beasts, can bring any further increase, or
propagation, unless it come first into putrefaction. So all Vegetables,
unless their seeds be brought into putrefaction, cannot be augmented: Many
beasts and worms are generated by putrefaction, this mystery in Nature deserves
admiration! Nature permits this, because this living increase is for the
most part found in the earth, which with other Elements are so raised by
spiritual seeds. To prove this with examples, women in Villages know to give
instances in that particular: for these cannot hatch any Chickens, unless they
put the Eggs into putrefaction. If bread be put into honey, then the Ants are
bred, which is one of Natures mysteries! It is seen ordinarily that Maggots do
breed in flesh, in men, and horses, and such like Carcases, in Apples, Pears,
etc. and who is able to relate all the kinds of worms, which are generated by
putrefaction.

Some Vegetables also grow in certain places, where never such grew formerly,
nor were they sowed in those places, only by putrefaction they were produced,
the reason of it is, that the earth in such places it inclined thereunto, and
is impregnated thereby, which the syderial qualities have infused, and wrought
a seed into, especially, which seeds putrify in the earth, and by the
elemental operation do generate a corporeal matter, according to that matter's
quality. Thus the Astrals together with the Elements may raise a new seed,
which was never before any, which seed by a further putrefaction may be
increased. But unto (...) is not so much granted, as to stir up a new kind of
seed, because the operation of the Elements, and the ^^stral substance he has
not at command, to fashion what (...) ple^^^^ th^^ several sorts of Herbs are
generated merely by putrefaction: And whereas the Country people holding it a
mere custom, do not take it into a further consideration, nor imagine they any
cause for it; therefore among the vulgar is it become merely a customary
business. Bu^ you, which ought to know more than ordinary people must consider
further of it, and learn to know the caus^ and ground thereof, how, and from
what these living Creatures are generated by putrefaction; not to know i^
because it is usual; but rather to know, it is a mystery i^ Nature, because
every life comes from pu^^efaction.

Every Element per se has its corruption and generation. Let the Artist be
informed, and learn the sufficient ground, why in every Element the other three
are hid: for air^ contains fire, water, and earth, which though it seemet^
incredible, yet is it a truth: and fire contains air, water, and earth: and
earth contains water, air, and fire; els^ they would not generate; water
also contains air* earth, and fire: though every Element is per se, yet ar^
they mixed: all which is found true at distillings, where these Elements are
thus separated.

To make this appear to the ignorant, which may cr^ out, that I speak merely
lies: if you intend to learn the Anatomy of natural things, and to separate the
Elements I tell thee for a truth, that at the distilling of earth ther^ comes
first the Element air, being the highest; then a a certain progress, there
comes the Element water; the fire lies hid in the air, because both are of a
spiritua^ substance, love and embrace one another entirely; the eart^ remains
in the bottom, in which lies hid the gloriou^ Salt. When you distill any water,
air and fire comes ove^ at first, then the water; the body of the earth
abides i^ the bottom.

The El^ment fire, if it be driven into a visible substance by extraction each
may be received apart. In like manne^ in the air the other three Elements do
dwell. For non^ of these can be without air; earth can produce nothin^ without
ai^e, fire does not burn, nor has it any life wit^out air; neither can water
produce any fruit without air. Neither can air consume any thing, nor
exsiccate any moisture, unless it be done by a natural heat, which is ^n the
air: being heat and warmth is found in the air, therefore needs must the
Element of fire be in the air. For all hot and dry things are proper for the
fiery substance ^f things: he that denies this truth, understands nothing in
Natures mysteries, neither does he know any ^round of their properties.

You must conceive if any thing shall be generated by ^utrefaction, it must be
in this manner: Earth is brought ^y a secret moisture into a corruption, which
is the begin^ing of putrefaction; for without moisture, which is the Element
water, no true putrefaction can happen: Now if any breed shall come from
thence, it must come from a ^arm quality, as the Element fire must kindle, and
spread (...) self; for without a natural heat nothing can be gene^ated: and if
that breed shall have a living breath and mo^ion, the same cannot be without
air: for if air should ^ot be cooperative, then the first composition, out of
which ^he breed should come, would be choked and perish, by ^eason of want of
air. Thus you see plainly, that perfect Creatures cannot be without any of the
four Elements, the ^ne showing its operation in the other, which they pro^nce
in and at putrefaction; for from henceforth nothing ^an be brought to life
without the same. To make this ^ppear to be true, that to a perfect birth and
generation, ^^re are requisite all four Elements.

Then note, that as Adam the first man being created by ^he Creator of a Limus
terrae, there appeared not as yet ane ^^sible life, before God had breathed on
him; then a lify ^ppeared in that clod of earth, in that earth was the Salt,
^^at is the body, the inbreathed air was Mercury, the spi^^, by this
inbreathing the air presently afforded a due ^^d convenient calidiry, which
was Sulphur, that is, fire, ^^en it stirred; Adam showed by this stirring, that
there was ^^^sed into him a living Soul. For fire cannot be without air, the
water was corporated in the earth, because this must be together of necessity,
else no life, and must stand in an equal proportion. Thus Adam was first
builded and begotten out of earth, water, air, and fire, of a soul, body, and
spirit, raised of Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt. So Eve^ the first woman, the
Mother of us all was of the same composed, being taken from Adam; thus Adam and
Eve were builded, which you must note very well.

To come now again unto putrefaction, the seeker in Philosophy is to know, that
in like manner no Metalline seed can work, nor be augmented, unless that
Metalline seed be first in, and of it self without any strange addition, or
mixture may be brought into a full putrefaction, no more than the seeds of
Animals and Vegetables can bring their increase without putrefaction. The same
Metals also must reach unto their perfect operation by the help of the
Elements; not that the Elements are the seed, but the Metalline seed, which had
its descent from a heavenly astra^^ Elemental substance, and is come to a
corporality, and m^^^ by the Elements be further brought into such corruption
and putrefaction.

Note this also; wine contains a volatile spirit: a^ whose distilling its
spirit comes first, and its phlegm at last: but wine being by a continued
heat turned into Vinegar, then its spirit is no more so volatile as before, and
at the distilling of Vinegar its phlegm and aquosity comes first, and its
spirit at last, though the same matter be in the Vessel, yet its condition is
altered, being no more a wine, but by putrefaction is transmuted into Vinegar,
and that which is extracted from wine, is of another nature and operation, than
that which is drawn from Vinegar. For i^ Vitrum Antimony be extracted with
Wine, or spirit o^ Wine, it causes many stools by purging, and vomits also,
because its venom is not yet quite broken nor destroyed: but if Antimonial
glass be extracted with distilled Vinegar, that extraction is of a deep
color, this Vinegar being abstracted in Bal^e^ Mari^, and the yellow remai^^^
powder being well dulcified with distilled water, to get off all its accrosity,
then you have a sweet powder, which causes no more any stools, but is a rare
Medicine of admirable efficacies, may well be held for miraculum Medicinae.

This wonderful powder in a humide place does dissolve into a liquor, which in
Surgery is of great use, and efficacy, curing symptoms without causing any
pains at all unto the parties, of which enough at this present.

At the closing of this note this principally, that there are heavenly
Creatures begotten, whose lives are preserved by Astrals, are fed by the four
Elements, afterward they die, and putrify, which being done, the Astrals, by
means of the Elements infuse into these putrified bodies again a life, which
may turn again to a heavenly one, which sets up his habitation in the highest
place of the firmament: which being done, you shall see that the life and body
of the earthly is consumed by the heavenly, and that earthly body is entered
into a heavenly one.

The ninth Key.
THe highest Planet of Heaven, Saturn by name, has in our Magisterium the
least authority, and yet is the chiefest Key of the whole Art, and is se^ on
the lowermost step: though he swinged himself by a nimble flight to the highest
altitude beyond all lights, however, at the clipping of his feathers he must be
brought to the lowest ^^^^re, and his corruption must be the way for his
meliora^^on, black must be turned into white, and white must be brought into
red, and must pass, and run throu^h all the colors of the other Planets, and
to attain in the end to the Court color of the triumphing King.

And I say thus much: though Satu^n looks of a despicable condition, and is in
great contempt, yet does he contain all virtues and strength, ^f his glorious
substance which is of an extraordinary coldness, be driven into the running
fiery Metalli^^ body, to b^reave that of its running life, and bring it to a
pliable body as Satu^n himself is however of a far better fixation; which
transmutation has it is original, and certain period by Mercury, Sulphur, and
Salt. Some may hold this to be hardly understood, and i^ is a hard saying:
seeing the matter is mean, men mus^ stretch their was in this point: an unequal
state must be in the world, ther^ must be a difference betwixt master and
servant and must be distinct in their service.

Saturn contains several sorts of colors brought forth by Art, as black,
gray, white, yellow, red, and others besides: so the Philosophers matter must
overcome and pass through many colors, before ye great stone can be exalted
unto it is perfection: for as often as there is opened unt^ the fire a new gate
for entrance, so often it affords a new fashion for a Garment as for a booty,
so that at last the poo^ Labourer attaineth unto riches, needs no more to go
borrowing of his Neighbors for a livelihood.

When Lady Venus possesses her Kingdom, and according to custom observed in
Royal Courts, distributeth the Offices, as is fitting, then they make
appearance in their glory: Musica bears a flag of red color, on which is
painted Charity beautiful in a green Garb: in her Cour^^ Saturn is in the
place of the Steward: when he is in his Office, then Astronomy carries a black
flag before him; o^ which is painted Fides, in a yellow and red Garb. Jupiter
with his Scepter is Marshal; Rhetorica bears before him a flag of gray
color, on which is painted Spes curiously set out in colors. Mars is expert
in warlike affairs, bears sway in a fiery thirsti^^ss^; Geometry bears
before him a bloody flag, on which is painted Fortitude, in a red Garb:
Mercury is Chancellor, Arithmetica bears a flag before him of all manner of
colors; on it, is painted Temp^rantia, dress't in colors. Sol is Viceroy of
the Kingdom, Grammatica bears a yellow flag before him, on it, is painted
Justitia, set out in a Golden piece: this Viceroy, (though there is more
loyalty showed unto him in the Kingdom) yet Queen Venus in her transcendent
illustrious splendor overcome's him. Lune has her luster also; Dialectica
bears before her a Silver colored white glistering flag; on it, is painted
Prudentia in an Azur-Garb. Because Lune's husband died, she got the Office by
inheritance, will not suffer Venus to bear sway any longer, called her to an
account of her Stewardship; into whose aid and assistance comes in the
Chancellor, and a new government is established, and both bear sway above the
noble Queen; the meaninng is, one Planet must dispossess and displace the
other from his glory, office, place, and power, that the best at last may rise
to the highest power, and in their best fixed color, bestowed on them by their
first mother out of an innate constancy, love and amity may get the victory.
Then is the old world past, and a new world is come in it is place, and one
Planet has consumed the other spiritually; only the strongest hold out by
means of the food which others afforded, and so two and three are conquered by
One.

For a final closing you are to understand, that you must pull up the heavenly
Scales; put into the one Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Scorpio, and Capricorn: into
the other you must lay Gemini, Sagittary, Aquarius, Pisces, and Virgo; then
procure that the Gold-rich Leo do leap into the lap of Virgo; then the Scale
will weigh down the other: then let the XII. Signs of Heaven with the
Septemtriones come into an opposite Aspect; then after the appearance of all
manner of colors, there will happen a conjunction, and the greatest will come
to the meanest, and the meanest unto the greatest.

If there stood all the worlds nature
Merely in one only figure,
And Art could not mend that form,
Then the worlds wonders were forlorn,
And natures qualities could not be showed,
But it is otherwise, for which God be praised.
The tenth Key.
IN our stone which I have made, and others also along before me, are locked up
Elements, all mineral and metalline forms; yea, all the properties and
qualities of the world: for in it there must be found the greatest and most
forcible heat; for by its great internal fire the cold body of Saturn is
warmed, and by that kindling and heating is transmuted into the best Gold.
There must be found in i^^ also the greatest coldness, because it being added
to Venus, it allayeth the degree of her heat, and does coagulate quick Mercury,
and in that coagulation also is he transmuted into the best Gold. The reason of
it is, because nature has infused all these qualities into the matter of our
great stone, which qualities must be digested and brought unto maturity per
gradus ignis, and attain unto the highest perfection, which comes not to pass,
unless Mount Ae^na in Sicilia be consumed by its fire, and no more cold be
felt on the supposed high Mountains, Hyperboreis, which place may be called
also Filictus.

Fruits being plucked off before they be fully ripe, are naught, and shrink, and
are unfit for use: if a Potter does not sufficiently burn his Potters wares,
what use can these be put unto? The same condition is our Elixar in: it must
have allowed a due time, it must not be shortened in its welfare, no false thing
must be imposed upon, else an aspersion of unworthiness will be cast upon it.
For if blossoms be plucked off, we are sure that no fruits will grow on such
Trees. Therefore making haste in our Magisterium is not good, a hastening man
seldom does any good work in our Art, because by making haste good things are
spoiled. Let no seeker be deceived by greediness, either to take out or to
pluck off things before their time, that the Apple ^^p ^^t out of his hand, and
the steel of it stay in his hand: for (...) good troth, if our stone be not
sufficiently ripened, then that matters can it produce to any ripeness?

In water the matter is dissolved, and is united by putre^^ction, in the ashes
it gets blossoms, in sand its super^^ous humidity is exsiceated: a constant
fire produces a ^^ed ripeness, it does not follow from hence that Balneum
^ariae, hors-dung, ashes, and sands must needs be used, but ^^ely the degrees
and regiment of fire must in such a man^er be observed. For the stone is made
in an empty Fur^^ce, of a threefold guard, firmly closed and locked up, and
^^ested by a continued fire, so that all vapors and fumes ^o vanish, and the
Garment of honor appear in a rare ^^lendour, abide in a place in the
neathermost part of hea^^n, and its running come to a stand. And when the King
(...) lift up his arms not any longer, then the glory of the ^orld is
conquered, the King is come now to an everlast^^g fixednesse, nothing can
endanger him any more, be^^^se he is become invincible, unto which I say thus:
your ^^th being dissolved in its own water, must be exficca^ed (...) a mere
heat, then the air will in breath a new life into (...), that being made
lively, then you have a matter, which ^^st needs go by no other name, than by
the great stone of ^^e world, which penetrateth humane and metalline bo^^, like
a spirit is an Universal Medicine without any ^e^^t: it expels evil things,
keeping and preserving the ^^od ^ones: it is also a transmutation of bad things
unto ^oodnesse, its color draws from a transparent redness ^^to a dark
brown, from a ruby-red to a garnate: and it (...) of an exceeding
ponderousness, and over-weighty.

He that gets this stone, let him return thanks unto the Creator of all
Creatures, for such a heavenly Balsa^, let him (...) the good use of both
toward himself and toward others, so that his needs being served here withal,
may fare well also (...) the other world: God be praised for his unexpressible
^enefits for ever more. Amen.

The eleventh Key.
THis Key intimates our great stone's augmentation, which I hold forth unto
thee by way of comparison* There dwelt in the Orient an excellent Champion,
called Orpheus, which was mighty rich, and had great Dominions, he took in
marriage his own sister, by name Eurydice, mad^ use of her as his wife. Because
he could not get any issu^^ by her, the cause whereof he thought to be the sin,
he committed in choosing his own sister to be his wife: he besough^ the Highest
constantly in great earnestness, wrestling with him for a blessing in that
kind.

Being one time taken with a deep sleep, in his dream there came a flying man
unto him, by name Phoebus, he touched his feet, which were very warm, and said
to him* Thou noble Champion, thou have traveled over many Kingdoms and
Countries, many Cities and potent Dominions, and have undergone great hardness
at Sea, and hazardedst many battles in War, which made thee to attain unto that
gallant state, and were chosen before others to be dignified with honor, and
gottest many applaudings by reason of thy valiantness thou shewedst in those
warlike actions: therefore the father in heaven has commanded me, to show unto
thee that thy prayers were heard, and have obtained this grant; thou art to
take the blood out of thy right side, and the blood of thy wife's left side,
and the blood which did stick in the hearts of thy Father and Mother, these are
but two by natures right, and are but one sort of blood, unite these together,
and let it enter again into the globe of the seven wise Masters closed nakedly,
then is the mighty one fed with his own flesh, and drencht with his own blood
of honor. If thou proceedest well herein, then have thou a great inheritance,
and begettest an infinite multitude, descending from thine own body. Yet know,
that the last seed, in the eighth revolution of the ^^me, the first seed out of
which thou art made in the begin^ing, will bring its course to an end: if thou
do this oftener, and beginnest always de novo, then thou shall see thy
Chil^rens Children. A Macrocosme g^nerated by Microcosme, is ^lentifully
filled, and the Kingdom of the great Creator is ^^lly possessed.

This being ended, Phoebus fled away, the Champion a^akened, who arose from his
bed, and having done all, as ^^e was commanded, the Champion in all his
undertakings ^ad not only good success and prosperity, but God bles^^d him
also in his wife with many Children; these also by their fathers Testament grew
great and famous, and that ^obility remained in that generation, and they were
bles^ed with great riches for ever.

Seeker of this Art, if you have understanding and wit, ^ou need not any
further interpretation of it; if you want that wit, blame not me, but thine own
ignorance: for I am ^orbid to open the lock any further, I must, and will obey.
^t is set down plain enough for such, whom God intends to ^lesse in it: And it
is so plain, that men will hardly believe ^t. The whole process I have set
down figuratively after that manner, which my Predecessors have observed before
^^e, and I have done it more plainly then they did, because (...) concealed
nothing: if you have pulled away the veil from ^our eyes, you will find that,
which many sought for, and was found of very few. For the matter is named
altoge^her, the beginning, middle, and end of the process is showed also.

The twelfth Key.
A Fencer who knows not well how to use his Weapons, must needs be beaten by
him, that knows better how to use them; he that learned in the Fencing School
perfectly how to use all manner of Weapons, (...) will get the Garland in that
School.

In like manner he, who has obtained by Gods bless^^ a tincture, but knows
not how to use it, be is in the ^a^^ condition with the Fencer, which is
unskilful in the use (...) his Weapons.

This being the twelfth and last Key, tending to the ^^nishing of this my book,
I will not lead thee any longe^ by Philosophic allegorical expressions, but
will reve^^ unto thee the Tinctur's Key in a full real process. Therefore
follow this my ensuing Doctrine: which is thus;

The Medicine and well prepared Philosophers stone being made of the true
Virgins milk, which was fully p^^pared, then take one part of the best and
finest Gold, ca^^ through Antimony, laminate it very thinly, as possibly (...)
may be beaten, put these together in a Vessel, or meltin^ For, at first let
your fire be gentle for xij hours, then let (...) continually be in the melting
for three days and night^ then the purged Gold and Stone is turned into a mere
Medicine, of a subtle spiritual penetrating quality; for without the ferment
of Gold ye Medicine, or Stone cannot wel^ make the tincture, being too subtle
and too penetrative (...) but being fermented with its like, then the made
tinctur^ has gotten an ingresse to work into the other. Then take one part of
the prepared ferment to thousand parts o^ melted Metal, which you intend to
tinge: I tell you for (...) certain truth, all will be transmuted into perfect
fixed Gold^ for the one body willingly embraces the o her, though it be not of
the like, yet joyneth with it by force, and must be like unto it, and like must
be gotten of like.

He that makes use of this means, to him are revealed all fixations: the
porches at the ends have their issues; no Creature comparable unto this
subtility: it is ALL in ALL, according to its Natural descent contains and
possesses all what may be found under the Sun.

O! beginning of the first beginning! consider the end (...) O! end of the last
ends consider the beginning: forget not to ^emember the middle in all fidelity:
God the Father, (...), and holy Ghost grant unto you things needful for ^^r
Spirit, Soul, and Body.

Of the first matter of the Philosophers Stone.
THere is found a stone, which is not deer,
Out of it is drawn a flying fire,
Of which the stone it self is made
Of while and red togeth'r joined.
It is a stone, and not a stone,
In it Nature work'th alone,
Out of it springs a Fountain clearly,
Which drowns its fixed Father fully.
His life and body is both devoured,
At last his Soul to him is restored.
To whom his flying Mother is become
Like, in his own Kingdom.
Himself also in quality and might
Has gotten a greater strength,
The Son in old age does excel
The Mother, which is made volatile,
By Vulcans Art, but first however
By the Spirit must be born the Father
Body, Soul, Spirit, consist in two
The whole business goes too and fro.
Comes only from one, which is merely
A thing that fix^ to flying matters sully.
They ^^e two and three, and ye but one
Con^ ive of it right, else you hit none*
Set Adam into a water Bath,
In which Venus her fellow has
Which the old Dragon has prepared,
Wher'of his strength could not be 'stored
Is nothing else, says one Philosophus,
But a duplicate Mercurius.
I say no more, you heard its name,
Blessed is he, to whom it is well known.
Search into it, spare no pains
In the end you will find the gain's.
FINIS.
A short way and ^EPETITION Of former Writings of BASILIUS VALENTINUS.

With an Elucidation thereof, touching the Philosophers Stone.

Wherein is plainly demonstrated the true light unto Philosophy.

Whereunto are annexed real informations of the qualities, and preparations of
Mercury, Antimony, Vitriol-water, common Sulphur, unflak't Lime, Arsenic,
Sal-peter, Tartar, Vinegar, and Wine.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLVI.

(...) be sure to find the true way unto the sheepfold. I have written no
more then I shall bear record unto, and own a^ the day of Resurrection

This short way is faithfully showed in the following instruction, in a plain
dealing expression, waving an el^quen^ style.

I have told you formerly, that all things are composed o^ three, viz. of
Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, and it is so, as (...) told.

But note also, that the Stone is made of one, two, three four, and fi^e: by
the word five, I mean the Quint-essence by the word four, are understood the
Elements: by three are meant the principles: by two is meant the double
mercurial substance: by one is meant the first principle of a^ things, which
proceeds from the word at the first Creation, Fiat, Let there be.

Some may hold these expressions to be very intricate as if there were no sense
nor ground for it what has bee^ said: for the clearing these doubts, I will
speak briefly o^ Mercury, secondly of Sulphur, thirdly of Salt; for these a^^
the principles of the matter of our Stone.

In the first place you must note, that common Mercu^^ does not avail here; but
our Mercury is made of the be^^ of Metals, by the spagyrick Art, as pure,
subtle, clear, a^ any Well-water of a Crystalline transparence, without an^
impurity: make of it a water, or incombustible Oil: for Mercuries first
beginning was a water, as all Philosopher bear record unto my saying: in this
Mercurial Oil must be dissolved it is own Mercury, out of which that water wa^
made: this Mercury must be precipitated with it is own Oyl^ then you have a
double Mercurial essence.

Note, I hold in my second Key that Gold after it is pu^^fied according to the
Tenor of the second Key, must be reduced into a special water, and then reduced
into a subtle Calx, of which the fourth Key does speak, this Calx must b^
driven over through the Helmet by a spirit of Salt, and precipitated again, and
by reverberating must be brought to powder; then its own Sulphur may enter the
better into its own being and essence, will be friend with it; for these love
extremely one another: thus you have two substances in one, which is called the
Philosophers Mercury, and is but one substance. This is the first ferment.

Now follows Sulphur to be spoken of.
FOr this Sulphur you must look in the like Metal; that Metal must be purified,
destroyed in a reverberating fi^e, extracted from its body, not leaving any
corrosivenesse in it, of which I gave a hint in the third Key: this Sulphur
must afterward be dissolved in its own blood, from which it self had a
fixednesse, intimated in the sixth Key, after a due quantity; which being done,
then you dissolved and fed the true Lion with the blood of the green Lion. For
the fixed blood of the red Lion is made of the unfixed blood of the green Lion:
these are of one Nature; the unfixed blood makes the fixed one to be volatile,
and the fixed one makes the volatile to be fixed, even as it was before its
dissolution, let it stand together in a gentle heat, that all the Sulphur be
dissolved; then you have the second ferment, feeding fixed Sulphur with an
unfixed one; all Philosophers agree with my saying: the same is driven over
with spirit of wine, and is as red as blood, being called aurum potabile, where
no reduction to any body can be expected any more.

Now I declare also, what the Philosophers Salt means.
SAlt causes fixation and volatility, according (...) ^^lered and prepared.
For the spirit ou of Salt ^^d ^artar, if the same be drawn forth without
additionals, by means of dissolution and putrefaction makes all Metals
volatile, opening them into a true quick Mercury, according to the Tenor of my
Manuals. The Salt of Tartar per s^ fixes mightily, especially if the heat of
Calx vive be incorporated with it, for both are of a high degree for fixation,
The Vegetable Salt of wine has this fixing quality and according to a special
preparation, brings fixed things to a volatility: which is a mystery in
Nature, and a miracl^ in the Philosophic Art.

If there be a Salt made of Man's Urine, which drinks nothing but wine; this
Salt being volatile, brings fixed things also to a volatility, brings them
over, but does not fix them. Though that party had drunk nothing but wine, out
o^ whose Urine the Salt is made, yet that Salt differs much from that, which is
made of Tartar, for man made in his body one transmutation, namely, he turned
the V^getabl^ Salt into an Animal spirit of Salt, making flesh, fatness, etc*
as horses and other beasts do feeding on grass, hay, etc.

Item, Bees make Honey of the best flowers and Herbs so it is with the rest.
The reason of this Key lies in putrefaction, from whence this separation and
transmutatio^ has its Original.

Ordinary spirit of Sal^, being driven over in a special manner, makes Gold
and Silver volatile, if a small quantity o^ Dragons spirit be added thereunto,
dissolveth them, brings them over through the Helmet, the like does the Eagl^
with the Dragon spirit, which creeps in and out at the stone clifts: but if
any thing be melted with Salt, before i^ spirit be separated from the body,
then it fixes rather than it makes volatile.

I say thus also, if the spirit of common Salt be unite^ with spirit of wine,
and both are drawn over a third time* then he loses its tartness, and grows
sweet. This prepared sp^^^^ does not corrode the Solar body, but being poured
on a subtle prepared Gold Calx, it extracteth i^ highest red tincture, which
being made right, can brin^ white Lune into that color as its former body was,
from which it was first taken: the former body can recover i^s ^olour, if the
enticing Venus be moved, as being born from that sanguinity and descent, it is
needless to speak of this any further.

Note further, that Salt-spirit destroys Lune also, bring^th her into a
spiritual substance, according to my instru^^ion, after it is prepared, out of
which afterward potable ^une is made, which spirit is appropriated unto the
spirit ^f Lune and Sol, as man and wife, by means of the conjun^tion of the
Mercurial spirit, or his Oil.

The spirit sticks in Mercury, seek for the tincture in ^ulphur, and for the
coagulation in Salt, then you have the ^^ree principles, which can beget a
perfect body, that is, ^^e spirit in the Gold fermented with his own Oil,
Sulphur ^ound abundantly in the noble Venereal quality, inflameth ^^e fixed
blood gotten of her: the spirit of the Philoso^hers Salt affords victory unto
coagulation; it is true, the spirit of Tartar, and the spirit of wine, and the
true acetum ^^e able to effect much; for the spirit of acetum is of a cold
^uality, and the spirit of Calx vive is very hot, these are of ^ontrary
dispositions. Now I spoke according to Philoso^hers custom: it is not fit for
me to be more plain, and to how to the world, how the doors of wisdom are
bolted.

For a farewell, take this in sincerity; seek f^r your mat^er in Metalline
substances, make of them a Mercury, fer^ent with Mercury one Sulphur, ferment
that with its ^wn Sulphur, bring that into an order with Salt, drive them over
jointly, join all proportionably, all will become ^ne, which at first came from
one, coagulate, and fix it in ^ontinued heat, augment, and ferment a third
time, ac^ording to the Tenor of my two last Keys, then you will ^inde the end
you look for, how this tincture is to be used, ^et the twelfth Key satisfy you
with its certain process.

Thanks be to God.
FOr a final upshut, be certified, that our of black Sat^^^ and bountiful
Jupiter, there can be driven over a spi^i^ which is afterward brought into a
sweet Oil, as the nobles^ part of it, which in particular takes away the
running quality in Mercury, making him fix, and bringing him into a
melioration; of this I told you in my other wri^^ngs.

Additionals.
HAving thus your matter, then look well to the fire and govern it
artificially: for that is of the greates^ concernment at the end of the work.
Our fire is not a common fire, and our Furnace is not a common Furnace* Though
Philosophers before me have written, that our f^^^ is no common fire: however,
I tell to thee in good earnest, that according to their custom they kept secret
all mysteries, because the matter is con^emptible, and the worl^ is of a
facility, which by a government of fire is furthere^ and accomplished;
therefore they forbore to tell the plai^ truth.

Lamp-fire made of spirit of wine avails nothing, the exp^^ces ^^^reof would
moun^ ^xceedingly. Ho^s dung i^ bu^ a spoiling, which cannot finish the work by
any perfect or certain degrees.

Furnaces of several sorts are useless: for in our three fold Furnace are
observed certain degrees: let Praters no^ pr^vail of thee with such F^rnaces:
for our Furnace is (...) plain one, our fire is ^pl^^^ fire, and our matter is
a plai^ matter, the gl^sse is likened to the circumference of the ear^^ly
Globe, you need not to look any further for more informa^^on concerning the
fire, its government, and the Furnace.

For he that has the matt^r, will soon find a Furnace; (...) that has Meal,
will soon meet with an Oven; needs not (...) take further care for baking of
bread.

There is no need to write more books of it, only look ^ell to the government
of the fire, learn to distinguish be^ween cold and warm; if you are expert and
exact herein, ^hen your work will be well finished, and the Art brought ^o its
end. The Creator of nature be praised for ever. ^men.

Of Mercury.
THere are several sorts of Mercury. Me^cury of Animals and Vegetables is
merely a fume of an incompre^ensible being, unless it be caught, and reduced
to an Oil then is it for use. But Mercu y of Metals is of another ^oncition, as
that also of Minerals: though the same also ^ay be compared wi^h a ^u^e, yet is
it comprehensible and running. One Mercury is better and nobler than the other:
for the Solar Mercury is the best of them all; next unto that, is the Lunar
Mercury, and so forth. There is a difference also among Salts and Sulphurs:
among the Mine^al Salts, that carries away the Bell, which is made of
Antimony: and that Sulphur, which is drawn from Vitriol, is preferred before
all others. Mercu^y of Metals is hot and dry, cold and moist, it contains the
four qualities.

There are Medicaments prepared of it, of a wonderful efficacy, of several
sorts and forms, which is the reason, why there is such a variety of virtues
therein: in Mercury lies hid the highest arcanum for man's health, but is not
to be used crude, but must first be prepared into its essence. He is sublimed
with Copper-water, and is further reduced into an Oil. There is an Oil made of
it per se, without any corrosivenesse, which is pleasant and fragrant: several
^orts of Oils with additionals can be made of it, good for many things. It is
prepared also with Gold, being first made into an amalgame there is made a
precipitate of it in w^ter, wherein it dissolveth green, like unto a smarag'd,
Chrysolith: the volatile Mercury serves for outward u^ if a separation is made
by some means, and is brought i^ to subtle clear liquor, and then to a red
brown powder, a^ its received corrosivenesse is separated, then it may dow^ for
other uses.

The mixed Mercury serves for inward use.

Mercury being purged, is precipitated with the blood Venus, is well digested
with distilled Vinegar, and thus (...) corroding quality is taken off: Have a
care what quanti^^ you minister, if it being given in a true dose, then it does
(...) part very well: but for its operation, it is not equally su^limed unto
the fixed, its coagulation is sound in Satu^^ his malleablenesse is apparent,
when he is robbed of h^ life: he contains his own Tincture upon white and re^
being brought in his fixed coagulation unto a white bod^ is iug'd again by
Vitriol-water, and being reduced un^^ Gold, is graduated by An^imony. Though
that blou^^-thi^sty ^^on Captain with his Spear assaulteth Mercuri^ ve^^ much,
yet he alone cannot conquer him, unless co^^ Saturn come in to hide him, and
Jupiter command t^^ peace with his Scepter. Such process being finished, the^
the Angel Gabriel, the strength of the Lord, and U^iel the light of God has
showed mercy un^o humble Michael, the^ Raphael can make right use of the
highest Medicine, nothing can prevail against ye Medicine. Thus much be spoken
of Mercury: now I winge my self from hence, and f^^ to a place where frost and
heat can better be tolerated, an^ endured.

Of Antimony.
IT falls very difficult to Mechanics, to have done learning with their
compasses: because that great Architec^ JEHOVAH has reserved many things for
his ow^ power. In the same condition we find Antimony, it is ^ery difficult to
find out all the mysteries that are hid ^^erein; its virtue is miraculous, its
power is great, its ^olour hidden therein, is various, its crude body is
poyso^ous, yet its essence is an antidote against poison, is like unto
Quicksilver, which ignorant Physicians can neither ^omprehend, nor find; but
the knowing Physician belie^eth it to be true, as having made many experiments
with it.

This Mineral contains much of Mercury, much of Sulphur, and little of Salt,
which is the cause why it is so ^rittle and applyable: for there is no
malleablenesse in it, by reason of the small quantity of Salt, the most amity
it bears unto Saturn is by reason of Mercury; for Philosophers Lead is made
out of it, and is affected unto Gold, by reason of its Sulphur: for it pu^geth
Gold, leaving no impurity in it; there is an equal operation in it with Gold,
if well prepared, and ministered to man Medicinally: it flies out of the fire,
and keeps firmly in the fire, if it be prepared accordingly. Its volatile
spirit is poisonous, purges grievously not without damage unto the body; its
remaining fixednesse purges also, but not in that manner, as the former did,
prov^keth not to stool, but seeks merely the disease, where ever it is,
penetrateth all the body and the Members thereof, suffers no evil to abide
there, expels it, and brings the body to a better condition.

In brief, Antimonie is the Lord in Medicinals, there is made of it a Regulus
our of Tartar and Salt, if at the melting of Antimony some Iron-filings be
added, by a Manual used, there comes forth a wonderful Star, which
Philosophers before me, called the Signat-star: this Star being several times
melted with cold Earth-salt, it grows then yellow^sh, is of a fiery quality,
and of a wonderful efficacy: this Salt afterward affords a liquor, which
further is brought to a fix incombustible Oil, which serves for several uses.

Besides, there are made of common Regulus of Antimony curious flowers, either
red, yellow, or white, according (...) the fire has been governed. These
flowers being ex^^^ed, and the extract, without any addition per se being
dr^ven into an Oil, have an admirable efficacy. This extraction may be made
also with Vinegar of crude Antimony, or of its Regulus; but it requires a
longer time, neith^^ is it so good as the former preparation.

And being reduced into a Philistaea, there is a glass^ made of it per se, of
which I made mention in my eig^^ Key, which is extracted also; then abstracted,
there remains a powder of incredible operation, which may safely be used,
after it has been edulcorated. This powder being dissolved, heals wounds,
sores, etc. causing n^ pains: this powder being extracted once more with spirit
o^ wine; or driven through the Helmet, with some other matter, affords a sweet
Oil; to speak further of it is needless.

Antimony is melted also with cold Earth-salt, dissolved, and digested for a
time in spirit of wine, it affords a whit^^ fixed powder, is eff^ctua^ against
morbus Gallicus, breaks inward Impostums; it has sever^l virtues besides. You
must learn to prepare Antimony your self, lay hands on, dive into it is inward
qualities, you will meet with wonderful matters ^for my conscience will not
suffer me to discover all it is qualities: I desire not (...) lo^^ the
Physicians curses upon me, which were at great expenses, and toyled much in
burning of Coals about its preparation, if I should rob them of their
livelihood. Therefore learn thou also, as thy predecesso^^ did; seek as I have
done; then you will find also, what others have told of.

There is made an Oil also of Antimony, the flyi^ Dragon being added thereunto,
which being rectified ^^^ice, then it is prepared: t^^ugh a Cancer were never
so b^d, and the Wolf never so bit^^g, yet these with all their fellow^, be they
Fistula's, or ol^ Ulcers, must fly and be g^ne; ^^e little powder of the flyi^g
Dragon prepared with the L^ons bloud^, must be ministered also, three, or four
Grains for a Dose, according to the parties age and complexion.

A further process may be made with this Oil with the ^^dition of a water,
made of stone Serpents, and other ne^^ssary spices, not those which are
transported from the In^^s: this powder is of that efficacy, that it radically
cures any Chronical diseases.

There is made a red Oil of Antimony, Calx vive, Sal ar^oniac, and common
Sulphur, which has done great cu^es (...) old Ulcers: with stone Salt, or with
common Salt, there (...) forced from Antimony a red Oil, which is admirable
good (...) outward Symptoms.

There is made a sublimate of Antimony, with spirit of ^^tar and Salmiac, being
digested for a time, which, by ^eans of Mars, is turned into quick Mercury.
This Anti^^onial Mercury has been sought of many, but few have ^^otten it:
which is the reason why its praise is not divulged, ^uch less is it is
operative quantity known: if you know ^^w to precipitate it well, then your
Arrow will hit the ^ark, to perform strange matters; it is qualities ought not
(...) be made common.

It is needless to describe it is combustible Sulphur, how that is made of
Antimony, it is easy and known: but that which is fixed, is a secret, and
hidden from many. If an Oil be made of it, in which it is own Sulphur is
dissolved, and these be fixed together, then you have a Medicine of rare
qualities, in virtue, operation, and ability, far beyond Vegetables.

Quick silver being imbibed with quick Sulphur, melted with Antimony for some
hours in a Wind-oven, the Salt of the remainder being extracted with distilled
Vinegar, then you have the Philosophers Salt, which cures all manner of Agues.

There is an acetum made of Antimony, of an acidity, as other acetums are; if
it is own Salt be dissolved in this acetum, and distilled over, then this acetum
is sharpened, which is an excellent cooler in hot swellings, and other inflamed
Symptoms about wounds, especially if there be made an Unguent of it together
with anima of Saturn.

The Quintessence of Antimony is the highest Medicin^ the noblest and subtilest
found in it, and is the fourth p^^ of an Universal Medicine. Let the
preparation of it (...) still a mystery, its quantity, or Dose is three Grains,
the (...) belong four instruments to the making of it, the Furnace the fifth,
in which Vulcan dwells, the Manuals and the government of fire afford the
ordering of it.

You Physicians, if you be wise, seek out this Medicine i^ that subject, where
it lies in, and may be found best, an^ most effectual. I forbear to speak
further of Antimony, l^ Justinian judge of the rest.

Of Copper-water.
IF I could prevail with Apollo to be merciful, and to giv^ liberty to his
Muse to be my assistance in the describing of Art and wisdom, then would I
bring in an offering unto Minerva, whereby the Gods of wisdom might take notice
of a grateful mind for their gifts they had bestowed; and I would write of a
mineral, whose Salt is set forth in the highest manner, whose great and good
qualities are of that transcendency, that reason is not able to comprehend, or
to conceive of them. It went generally by the name of Copper-water, to make the
meaning and sense of it plain; let men know, and be thus informed of it, that
Vitriol contains two spirits, a white, and a red one: the white spirit is the
white Sulphur upon white, the red spirit is the red Sulphur upon red; He that
has ears let him hear!

Observe it diligently, and remember every word, for they are of a large
extent, every word is as ponderous as a Centner stone. The white spirit is
sour, causes an appetite, and a good digestion in a man's stomach. The red
spirit is yet sowrer, and is more ponderous than the white, in its distilling a
longer fire must be continued, because it is fixer in its degree. Of the white
by distilling of Sulphur of Lune is made argentum potabile. In the like manner
the ^ld, being destroyed in the spirit of common Salt, and ^de spiritual by
distilling, and its Sulphur taken from it, ^^d joined with a red spirit in a
due Dose, that it may be ^^ssolved, and then for a time putrified in spirit of
wine, to (...) further digested, and often abstracted, that nothing ^main in
the bottom, then you have made an aurum po^bile, of which great volumes have
been written, but very ^w of their processes were right. Note, that the red
spirit ^ust be rectified from its acidity, and be brought into a ^eetnesse,
subtly penetrating of a pleasant taste and sweet ^agrancy.

I have told, you now great matters, which slipped from ^e against my
intention, the sweet spirit is made of Sul^hur of Vitriol, which is
combustible, like other Sulphur, before it is destroyed: for the Sulphur of
Philosophers, ^^ote it well) is not combustible; its preparation needs ^ot to
be set down, being easy, requires no great pains or great expenses, to get a
combustible Sulphur out of ^itriol.

This sweet Oil is the essence of Vitriol, and is suc^ a ^edicine, which is
worthy the name of the third pillar of ^he universal Medicine. The Salt is
drawn from Colchotar, and is dissolved in the red, or white Oil, or in both,
and is ^istill'd again, if it be fermented with Venus, it perform^^ its office
very well: for it affords such a Medicine, which at the melting tingeth pure
Iron into pure Copper.

Colchotar of Sulphur affords true fundamentals unto ^ealing of perished
wounds, which otherwise are hardly ^^ought to any healing: and such sores,
which by reason of (...) long continued white redness will admit of no
healing, ^olchotar affords an ingresse thereunto, setting a new foun^ation;
that quality and virtue is not in the Colchotar, but ^he spirit together with
the Salt are the Masters, which ^well therein.

There is made of Copper and V^rdigreece a Vitriol of a ^igh degree, and is far
spread in its tincture: There is a Vitriol made of Iron also, which is of a
strange quality: Iron and Copper are very nigh kind one to another, bel^
together, as man and wife; this mystery should have b^ concealed, but being it
is of great concernment, I could forbear but to speak of it.

Vitriol corroded with Salmiac, in it is sublimation the arises a combustible
Sulphur, together with it is Mercu^^ of which there is but little, because it
has most of S^phur. If the same Sulphur be set at liberty again by (...)
Eagle, with spirit of wine, there can be made a Medicine it, as I told you
formerly of it. Though there be a nea^ way to make a combustible Sulphur out of
Vitriol, as of precipitation upon a precedent dissolution, by the Salt, liquor
of Tartar, as also by a common lixivium made Beech-ashes; yet this is the best
reason, because the b^^ of Vitriol is better, and more opened with the Key of
ye Eag^^ There are other mysteries hidden in Vitriol, which in y^ operative
quality are excellent, and are known apparent as Venus and Mars bear real
record in their spirits, the sa^d^th knowledge Sol and Lune: but I do not
intend at t^ time to write a perfect book of Chirurgerie: and to ma^^ rela^^o^^
of particulars, in commendation of Vitriol: I ha^ already written too much of
it, you are to learn and sear^ also; you will find that Vitriol needs no
Proctor to spe^ for it, and it will sufficiently inform you of an absolu^
Chirurgick book, contained in its nature as a third part (...) the universal,
against all manner of diseases.

In the closing hereof I tell you thus much, that there not found in its
nature, neither cold nor moist quality, b^ is of a hot and dry substantial
quality, and is the reason, w^ by its super-abounding calidity it heateth other
things digesteth them, and at last it brings them to a full m^turity, the
fire being continued for a certain time.

The things I w^ite of Vitriol, I have not begged nor bo^rowed from other men's
writings, but found them so in (...) long continued practick, whereby nature
enabled me become a Sooth-sayer, by permission of the Highest Creat^^ that that
nobly inplanted quality might be avouched b^ a ^^thfull and true evidence of
one of her devoted Disci^es.

And I speak thus much for a memorandum, that if Paris ^n keep safely Helena
without troubles, that the noble Ci^ of Troja in Greece be no more ruined and d
stroyed, and ^riamus together with Menelaus be no more afflicted and di^racted
thereby, then Hector and Achilles will agree well ^ough, to obtain that roya^
Race, without going to war ^t it, and be Possess^rs of ^ha^ Monarchy in their
Chil^^ens Children, and their off-^pring and posterity for the ^^nlarging of
their Dominions, by increasing their riches ^finitely, against which no enemy
dares stir.

Of common Sulphur.
THe usual common Sulphur is not so perfectly exalted in it is degree, and
brought unto maturity, as it is found in Antimony and Vitriol. There is made of
it ^^er se, an Oil against putrid stinking wounds, destroying and killing such
worms, which grow in them; especially if ^at little Salt in it be dissolved
from its Sulphur.

There is made of it a Balsam with Sallet Oil, or Oil of ^^uniper, in like
manner with the white spirit of Terpen^^ne, and is of a red color, is made
thus: take flowers of ^ulphur, made with the Colchotar of Vitriol, digest them
^r a time in hors-dung, or any other way; this Balsam may ^afely be used for
such, that are in a Consumption of the ^ungs, especially if rectified several
times with spirit of ^^ne, drawn-over, and separated, that it be blood red.
This Balsam is a preservative against corruption and rotte^esse.

The Quint-essence of Sulphur is in a Mineral, where a ^ulphureous flint is
generated: this beaten peebles being ^^t in a glass, and on it be powered a
strong Aquafort, made of Vitriol and Salpeter, and let dissolve what may (...)
dissolved, abstract that water, the remainder must be w^^ dulcified, and
reverberated to a redness, pour on th^^ spirit of wine, extract its tincture,
afterward circulate (...) a time in the Pelican, let all the essence of
Sulphur be ^^parated, it stays below the spirit of wine, like far Sall^ Oil,
by reason of its ponderousness: its Dose of six Grai^ is found to work
sufficiently. If y^u dig^st in this essen^^ of Sulphur, Myrrh, Aloes, and
other Spices, it extrac^ their virtues, and makes it into a Balsam, which
suffers (...) flesh, or other parts that are subject unto putrefaction, (...)
fall into rottenness, for which cause the Ancients have p^ this name to it:
Balsamus mortuorum.

Thus I close to speak any further of combustible Sulphu^ There may be made an
Oil of it, which is found very us^full, the Sulphur must be sublimed in a high
instrum^^ with a good heat, which sublimation in a long tim^ changes into a
Liquor, or Oil, standing in a humid place^ but being I do not intend to use any
prolixity of words, (...) let it rest so. There may be cocted a Liver out of
common Sulphur, which is turned unto milk: and it may also (...) changed into a
red Oil, with Lin-seed Oil; many other M^dicinals may be made out of Sulphur:
Its flowers, essenc^ and Oil, are preferred before the rest, together with the
white and red fixed Cinober, which are made of it, becau^^ in them is found a
mighty virtue.

Of Calx vive.
THe secrets of Quick-lyme is known to few men, an^ few there are, which
attained to a perfect knowledge of its qualities: but I tell to you a real
truth, that thoug^ Lyme is contemptible, yet there lies great matters therein,
and requires an understanding Master, to take out of (...) what lies buried
in it; I mean to expel its pure spirit which collaterally stands in affi^ity
wi^h Minerals, is able to bind, and help to make fix the volatile spirits of
Minerals: for it is of a fiery essence, heateth, concocteth, and bring^th unto
maturity in short time, when in many years they could not be brought to it: the
g^osse earthly body of ^t does not do the fear, but its spirit does it, which
is drawn out of i^: this spirit is of that ab^li^y, that he binds and fixes
other volatile spirits. For note, the spirit dissolveth Oculi Can^rorum,
dissolveth Crystals into a l^quor^ these two being duly brought into an ^^^ite
per monum distilla^^onis (I will say nothing (...) this time of Diamonds and
such ^^ke stones) that wa^er dissolveth and breaks the stone (...) the
bladder, and the Gou^y T^^t^r settled into the ^oyn^s of hands and feet, suff
rs not any Gout to ^ake roo^ (...) those parts, this rare s^^r t l taught one
of my faithful Di^ciples; and the great Chancellor of the invinci^le Caesar ^s
still thankful unto me for it, and many great persons ^esides.

Quick-lyme is strengthened, and made more fiery, and hot. ^y a pure and
unsoph^st^cated spirit of wine, which is often ^oured on it, and abstracted
again, then the white Salt of ^artar must be grinded wi h i^ together with its
additio^^ls, which must be dead, and co^tain nothing, th^^ you ^^ll draw a very
hellish spiri, i^ which great mysteries lie (...). How this spirit is gotten, I
told it, observe it, keep it, ^^ke it for a farewell.

Of Arsenick.
ARsenick is in the kindred of Mercury and Antimony, as a Bastard in a Family
may be: its whole substance is ^bysonous and volatile, even as the former two,
in its ex^^rnal color to the eye, it is white, yellow, and red, but ^^wardly
it is adorned with all manner of colors, like to (...) Metals, which it was
fain to forsake, being forced thereunto by fire. It is sublimed per se, without
addition, and also in its subliming there are added several other matters, as
occasion requires. If it be sublimed with Salt and Mars, then it looks like a
transparent Crystal, but its poison stays still with it, unfit to be joined,
or added to Metals; has very little efficacy to transmute any Metal.

The Subterranean Serpent binds it in the Union of fire, but cannot quite
force it, that it might serve for a Medicine for man and beast, if it be
further mixed with the Salt of a Vegetable stone, which is with, Tartar, and is
made like unto an Oil, it is of great efficacy in wounds, which are of a hard
healing; it can make a Coat for deceitful Venus to trim her handsomely, that
the inconstancy of her false heart may be disclosed by her wavering servants,
without gain, with her prejudice and damage.

When Antimony and Mars are made my companions, and am exalted by them to the
top of Olympus, then I afford a Ruby in transparence and color to that, which
comes from Orient, and am not to be esteemed less than it: if I am proved by
affliction, then I fall off like a flower, which is cut off and withers:
therefore nothing can be made (...) me, to fix any Metal, or tinge it to any
profit, because (...) forsook my body totally, and distributed my Coat, to play
and lot to be cast for it: therefore let no man neither prais^ or dispraise me,
unless he have for very hunger taken (...) pound of me into the body; though
if he gets an Antidot^ to save his life; however, he shall get nothing out of
Metals by it: in other things he may have a Treasure in it, unto which few are
comparable to it.

I Arsen^c say of my self at the closing hereof, that it is (...) very
difficult thing, to find my right and due preparation^ my operation is felt
exceedingly, if made trial of, and it i^ a great danger, if ignorant men make
use of me: he tha^ can be without me, let him go to my kindred: and if yo^ can
equalize me with them, that I may share with them i^ the inheritance, then all
the world shall acknowledge, th^^ my descent is from their blood: but it is a
very hard ta^^ for any man, to set a shepherd into a royal seat to make him
King. But Patriarchs being descended from shepherds, and were preferred to
royal dignities, I will therefore prescribe no limits, nor p^sse any judgment:
For wrong and right may be found in this leaf.

However, take you notice, that I am a poisonous volatile bird, have forsaken
my dearest, and most confiding friend, and separated my self as a Leper, which
must live aloof off from other men. Cure me first of my infirmity, then I shall
be able to heal those, which have need of me, that my praise may be confirmed
by poison, and my name for an everlasting remembrance, to the honor of my
Coun^rey, is nothing inferior unto Marcus Curtius, and it will be found in the
end, in what manner Hannibal and Scipio were reconciled.

Of Salpeter.
TWo Elements are predominant in me, as fire and air, the lesser quantity is
water and earth; I am fiery, burning, and volatile. There is in me a subtle
spirit, I am altogether like unto Mercury, hot in the inside, and cold in the
out side, am slippery and very nimble at the expelling of mine enemies. My
greatest enemy is common Sulphur, and yet is my best friend also, for being
purged by him, and clarified in the fire, then am I able to allay all heats of
the body, within and without, and am one of the best Medicaments, to expel,
and to keep off the poysenous plague.

I am a greater cooler outwardly than Saturn, but my spirit is more hot than
any, I cool, and burn, according as men will make use of me, and according as I
am prepared.

When Metals are to be broken, I must be a help, else no victory can be
obtained: be the undertakings great, or small. Before I am destroyed I am a
mere Ice, but when I am anatomized, then am I a mere hellish fire. If Pluto ca^
master Cerberus, to make him ^ake his dwelling again in the Isle of Thule, then
he may snatch a piece of love from Venus, then Mars must submit, and may live
richly with Lu^^ which may equally be exalted to the Crown of the honorable
King, and be placed with him in equal honor and dignity.

If I shall happily enjoy my end, then my Soul must b^ driven out cunningly,
then I do all what lies in my power of my self alone I am able to effect
nothing. But my love (...) a jolly woman, if I am married unto her, and our
copul^^lation be kept in Hell, that we both do swear well, the that which is
subtle, flings away all filthiness, then w^ leave beinde us rich Children,
and in our dead bodies (...) found the best Treasure, which we bequeathed in
our la^ Will and Testament.

Of Salarmoniac.
SAlarmoniac is none of the meanest Keys, to open M^tals thereby: therefore
the Ancients have compared with a volatile Bird, it must be prepared, else you
can do (...) seats with it; for if it be not prepared, it does more hu^ than
good unto Metals, carries them away out at (...) Chimney-hole: it can elevate
and sublime with it is f^^ wings the tincture of Minerals, and of some Metals,
to t^^ very Mountains, where store of snow is f^und, usually ev^ at the
greatest heat of the Summer, if it be sublimed wi^ common Salt, then it purges
and clears, and may used safely.

He that supposes to transmute Metals with this Sa^ which is so volatile,
surely he does not hit the nail on t^ head, for it has no such power: but to
destroy Meta^ and make them fit for transmutation, in that respect it ha^
sufficient power: for no Metal can be transmuted, unle^ it be first prepared
thereunto. My greater strength which lies in me, may be drawn from m^ by
subliming and cementing. The greatest secret in m^ you will find, when I am
united with Hydra, which is to devour and swallow me, that I also may turn with
her to be a water Serpent, then have I prepared a Bath for the Nympha, and have
gotten power to make ready a Crown for the King, that the same may be adorned
with Jewels, and may with honor and glory be set on his head.

Of Tartar.
THis Salt is not set down in the book of Minerals, but is generated of a
vegetable seed, but its Creator has put such virtue into it, that it hears a
wonderfu^l love and friendship unto Metals, making them malleable* it purges
Lune unto a whiteness, and incorporateth into her such additionals, which are
convenient for her, being digested for a time with Minerals, or Metals, and
then sub^imed and vilified, they all come unto a quick Mercury, which to do,
there is not any vegetable Salt beside it: is ^ot this a wonderful thing! That
Orator is yet to be born, which shall be of that ability and eloquence as to
express ^ufficiently all the mysteries hid in it. But to make out of ^t the
Philosophers stone, is no such matter: being it is a ^egetable, and that power
is not given to any of the v^ge^ables. It is in Medicina a very good remedy, to
be used ^^wardly and outwardly; its Salt being made spiritua^l and ^weet, it
dissolveth and breaks the stone in the bladder, and dissolveth the coagulated
Tartar of the Gou^, s^tled unto the joints, or any where besides. It Is ordinary
spirit, which is used for opening of Metals being used and applied ^utwardly,
also lays a foundation for healing of such Ul^ers, which admit hardly any
healing, as there are ^^s^^^'s, ^ancers, Wolves, and such like. I know nothing
ni^^ ^o write of Tartar, for having separated it self, and left it is nobl^st
part in the wine.

Of Vinegar.
IN Alchimy and Medicina, nothing almost can be prepared, but Vinegar must set
a helping hand to it. Therefore I thought it convenient to let it have it is due
praise and commendation, especially to insert it here in th^s treatise. In
Alchimy it is used to set Metals and Minerals into putrefaction. It is used
also for to extract their essences (...) tinctures, being first prepared
thereunto, even as the spirit of wine is usual to extract the tinctures from
vegetables.

In P^ysick it deserves its praise also, for it takes the pure from impure,
and is a separator, and takes from the Miner^l M^dicaments their sharpness
and corrosivenesse, fixes that, which is vola^ile, and is a great defendant
against poison, as I told you, when I spoke of the Antimonial glass.

Vinegar is used inwardly also, and both men and beast are benefited thereby:
outwardly it is applied to hot inflammations and swellings, for a cooler.
Spirit of wine and V^negar are of great use, both in Alchimy and Physic, both
have their descent from the Urine, are of one substance; bu^ differ in the
quality, by reason of putrefaction, the Vinegar got there, of the which I told
you formerly.

I must acquaint you with one thing, which is this, tha^ this is not the
Philosophers V negar; our Vinegar, or acetum is another liquor, namely a matter
it self: for the stone o^ Philosophers is made out of Azot of Philosophers,
which must be prepared with ordinary dist^ll'd Azot, with spirit o^ wine and
with other waters besides, and must be reduced u^^^ a certain order.

N^^e this for a memorandum, if distilled pure Vinega^ be poured upon destroyed
Saturn, and is kept warm i^ Marie's-Bath, it loses it is acidity altogether, is
as sweet as any Suggar, then abstract two, or three parts of that Vinegar, set
it in a Cellar, then you will find white transparent stones, like unto
Crystals, these are an excellent cooler and healer of all adust and inflamed
Symptoms. If these Crystals are reduced into a red Oil, and poured upon
Mercury, precipitated by Venus, and proceeded in further as it ought; if that
be hit rightly, then neither Sol nor Lune will hinder thee from getting riches.

Of Wine.
THe true vegetable stone is found in Wine, which is the noblest of all
vegetables: it contains three sorts of of Salt, three sorts of Mercury, and
three sorts of Sulphur.

The first Salt sticks in the wood of the Vine, which if burnt to ashes, and
a lixivium made of it to have it is salt drawn forth, which must be coagulated.
This is the first Salt.

The second Salt is found in Tartar, if that be incinerated, then draw its Salt
forth, dissolve and coagulate it several times, and let it be sufficiently
clarified.

The third Salt is this, when the wine is distilled, it leaves feces behind,
which are made to powder, it is Salt can be drawn out with warm water, each of
these Salts has a special property: in their Center they stand in a harmony,
because they descend from one root.

It has three sorts of Mercury, and three sorts of Sulphur. The first Oil is
made of the stem, the second Oil is made out of crude Tartar, the third is the
Oil of Wine. There is a strange property in the spirit of Wine: for without it
there cannot be extracted any tr^e tincture of Sol, nor can there be made
without it any true aurum potabile: but few men know how a true spirit of Wine
is made, much less can it is property be found out wholly.

Several ways have been tried to draw, and to get the spirit of, Wine without
sophistication, as by several instruments and distillings with metalline
Serpents, and other strange inventions, of Sponges, Papers, and the like* Some
caused a rectified aqua vitae be frozen in the greates^ frost, expecting the
phlegm thereof should turn to Ice, the spirit thereof to keep liquid, but
nothing was done to any purpose.

The true way for the getting of it, I told you of a^ the end of my Manuals:
for it must be subtle, penetrating, without any phlegm, pure, aerial, and
volatile, so that air in a magnetic quality may attract it, therefore it had
need to be kept close in: it is o^ a penetrating and effectual^ operation, and
its use is several.

There are three, which are the noblest Creatures in the world, these three
bear a wonderful affection one to another. Among Animals it is man, our of
whose Mume is made an Animal stone, in which Microcosme is contained. Among
Minerals Gold is the noblest, whose fixednesse is a sufficient testimony ol
it is noble off spring and kin^red. Among Vegetables there lies hid a Vegetable
stone. Man loves Gold and Wine above all other Creatures, which may be beheld
with eyes. Gold loves man and Wine, because it lets go its noblest part, if
spirit of Wine be put to it, being made potable, which gives strength to man,
and prolongeth his life in health.

Wine bears affection to man also, and to Gold, because it easily uniteth
with the tincture of Sol, expels melancholy and sadness, refreshes and
rejoices man's heart. He that has these three stones may boldly say, that he
has the stones of the Universal, much of it is talked and written: but what
eye has seen it! not one amongst many hundred of Millions.

These stones renew men and beasts, cure Leprous Metals, cause barrenness to
become fertile, with a new birth, humane reason is not able to comprehend it,
no^ conceive of it.

If a rectified Aqua vitae be lighted, then Mercury and ^^e Vegetable Sulphur
separateth, that Sulphur burns ^ight, being a mee^ fire, the tender Mercury
betakes him-^mself to his wings and flies to his Chaos.

He that can shut up and catch this fiery spirit, he may ^oast, that he has
got^^^ a great victory in the Chemical ^^^le: for this Vegetable fiery Sulphur
is the only Key to ^^aw the Sulphur from mineral and metalline bodies.

Thus I close my book, the things contained therein are ^ot grounded on
opinions, as most Physicians rely on the ^uthors, that such and such Herbs are
cold and moist, dry, ^^d warm, in the first, second, and third degree: because
^hey heard their Authors affirm it, themselves neither ^aw (...) nor made trial
of it: making mere collections from other ^ens writings, patching up volumes.
The things I wrote ^f, I know by a long experimental knowledge to be true; ^his
my experience I hope will take place, and get the vi^tory as the Amazons did in
their prudence.

The eternal heavenly spirit refresh our Souls, that we may ^^lk in heavenly
streets, forsaking all false and erroneous by-ways. Amen.

FINIS.
^ONCLUSIONS AND EXPERIMENTS OF BASILIUS VALENTINUS. PREFACE.
I Basilius Valentinus write a short clause upon my former writings, and this
treatise is instead of a declaration thereof. But my Son and Disciple, you are
to remember that you lift up your eyes to ^he Mountain of God, and of the
Philosophers, from ^hence you expect a help: namely, Sulphur, Vitriol, and
Magnet of Philosophers must be a great help un^o you. For Philosophers Sulphur,
Vitriol, and Magnet ^s celestial, from whence comes that Universal and
Philosophic Lapis, vulgar and ordinary Sulphur, Vitriol and Magnet afford
merely Particulars and Medicaments.

In the Treatise of the Philosophers stone I have set ^own expressly in a
parable the Philosophers Sulphur ^n the XII. Keys: but the Philosophers
Mercury, or ^he true Philosophic Magnet I gave a hint of in few words:
however, I treated of the same in the XI^ Keys, and of the prima materia I
spoke in my Rythm^ or Verses.

I leave a light for a farewell unto the seeking Di^ciples, whereby they may
see the clear day in a da^^ night: and do describe the virtue and operation of
the vulgar Sulphur, Vitriol, and Magnet, the rest yo^ may find in the
Treatise, which follows next the XII. Keys: which if you find the true way
of working, you may get sufficiently of health and wealth i^ this world.

Make use of in the name of God, and unto his glory, and do good unto the
poor, and be helpful unt^ them, otherwise thy earthly Paradise may be turned
i^ the end into a damnable Hell, from which, O Lord, deliver all good people.
Amen.

The First TREATISE, Of Philosophers Sulphur, Vitriol, and Magnet.
First Section. Of Sulphur, and ferment of Philosophers.
LOving seeker of Chemical mysteries, I have written a Trea^ise about the
Philosophers stone, and have set down expressly the materia of the Philosopher^
Sulphur in the first Key, and taught you in the second Key how you ought to
distill our water of the Eagle and cold Dragon, who had his dwelling a long time
in Rocky Clifts, and crept in and out in Subterranean concave and hollow
places: pour this spirit, or aqua upon purged and fined Gold, lute it well, and
set it into a dissolution, in fimo for 14. nights to putrify it, then draw it
over the Helmet, pour the water upon Gold Calx whole, make all the Gold come
through the Helmet: set this again under a Helmet, abstract the water gently,
leave a third part of it in the bottom, then set it into a Cellar, let it
coagulate and Crystallize, wash these Crystals with distilled water,
precipitate them with Mercury vive, eva^^rate the Mercury gently, then you have
a sub^ile pow^^ put it in a glass, lute it, reverberate it for three days a^
nights, do it gently, thus is the Philosophers Sulphur w^ prepared for your
work, and this is the purple mantle, (...) Philosophic Gold, keep it safely in
a glass for your co^junction.

The second Section. Of the Philosophers Vitriol.
I Have told you plainly how Philosophers Sulphur (...) made, which loco
masculi, is to make the King, or man now you must have the female, or wife,
which is the M^^curie of Philosophers, or the materia prima lapidis, whi^^ must
be made artificially: for our Azoth is not comm^^ Vinegar, but is extracted
with common Vinegar, and the^ is a Salt made of materia prima (this Salt is
called the P^losophers Mercury, which is coagulated in the belly of t^^ earth.
When ^his matter is brought to light, it is not de^^ and is found every where,
Children play with it: it is po^^derous, and has a sent of dead men's bones,
for two G^^ders you may buy this matter for the work: Therefore ta^^ this
matter, distill, calcine, sublime, reduce it to ashes: for an Artist want ashes,
how can he make a Salt, and he th^^ has not a Metalline Salt, how can he make
the Philos^phers Mercury?

Therefore, if you have calcined the matter, then extra^^ its Salt, rectify it
well, let it shoot into the Vitriol, which must be sweet, without any
corrosivenesse, or sharpness o^ Salt. Thus you ge^ the Philosophers Vitriol,
or Philoso^phick Oil, make further of it a Mercurial water, thus yo^ have
performed an artificial work: this is called the Phil^sophers Azoth, which
purges Laton, but is not yet washed For Azoth washes Laton, as the Ancient
Philosophers have (...) two, or three thousand years ago. For the Philosophic
(...), or Laton must with its own humidity, or its own Mer^^al water be purged,
dissolved, distilled, attract its Magnet, (...) stay with it. And this is the
Philosophers Mercury, or ^^curius duplicatus, and are two spirits, or a spirit
and ^^r of the Salt of Metals. Th^n ^his water bears the me of succus
Lunariae, aqua caelest^, acetum Philosophorum, ^^a Sulphuris, aqua permanens,
aqua benedicta. Take ^^t, or ten parts of this water, and one part of your
^men^, or Sulphur of Sol, set it into the Philosophers Egg, ^^e it well, put it
in the Athanar, into that vaporous, and ^t dry si^e, govern it, to the
appearance of a black, white, ^d r^^ color, then you get the Philosophers
stone, and ^u enjoy this noble, dear, and blessed Medicine and Tin^^re, and you
may work miracles with it.

The third Section. Of the Philosophers Magnet.
HErmes the father of Philosophers had this Art, and was the first that wrote
of it, and prepared the stone our (...) Mercury, Sol, and Lune, of the
Philosophers: whom ma^y thousand labora^ors have imitated, my self also did the
^ke: and I speak r^ally, that the Philosophers stone may be ^^mposed of two
bodies, the beginning and ending of it ^ust be with Philosophic Mercury.

And this is now prima materia, alias praeda: materia pri^a belongs only to
God, and is coagulated in the entra^s ^f the earth, first it turns to
Mercury, then to Lead, then (...) Tin and Copper, then to Iron, etc. Thus the
coagulated Mercury must by Art be turned into its prima materia, or water, that
it, Mercurial water. This is a stone and no ^^ne, of which is made a volatile
fire, in form of a water, which drowneth and dissolveth its fixed father, and
its vo^tile mother.

Metalline Salt is an imperfect body, which turns Philosophic Mercury, that
is, into a permanent, or bless^ water: and is the Philosophers Magnet, which
loves Philosophic Mars, sticks unto him, and abides with hi^ Thus our Sol
has a Magnet also, which Magnet is the fi^^ root and matter of our stone: If
you conceive of and u^derstand my saying, then you are the richest man in t^^
world.

Hermes says; you must have three speciesies for the wor^^ first a volatile,
or Mercurial water, aqua coelestis, then vir^dis Leo, green Lion, which is the
Philosophic Lune, third^^ aes Hermetis, or Sol, or ferment.

Lastly note, Philosophers had two ways, a wet on^ which I made use of, and a
dry one: herein you must proceed Philosophically, you must purge well ^he
Philosophers Mercury, and make Mercury with Mercury, addin^ the Philosophic
Salt, ferment, or Sulphur of Philosophers and proceed therein, as you heard
formerly, then you have the Philosophers Magnet, that is, the Philosophers
Mercury. Secondly, the Metalline Salt, or Philosophic Salt. Thirdly, aes
Hermetis, or Philosophic Sulphur.

Thus I have deli^eated the whole Art, if you do not u^derstand it, then you
will get nothing, nor art thou predestined thereunto.

Allegorical expressions betwixt the Holy Trinity and the Philosophers stone.
DEar Christian Lover, and well wisher to the blessed Art: how graciously and
miraculously has the Holy Trinity created the Philosophers stone. For God the
Father is a spirit, and yet makes himself known under the notion of a man, as
he speaks, Genes. 1. Chapter: let us make man, an image ^ike unto us. Item,
this expression in his word speak of his mouth, eyes hands, and feet; so
Philosophers Mercury is held a spiritual body, as Philosophers call him. God
the Father begets his only Son JESUS CHRIST, which is God and Man, and is
without sin, neither needed he to die: but he laid down his life freely, and
rose again, for his brethren and sist^rs sake, that they mi^ht live with him
eternally without sin. So is Sol, or Gold without defect, and is fix, holds out
gloriously all fiery examins, but by reason of its imperfect and sick brethren
and sisters, it dies, and rises gloriously, redeemeth and tingeth them unto
eternal life, making them p^rfect unto good Gold.

The third person in the Trinity is God the Holy Ghost, a comforter sent by our
Lord Christ Jesus unto his believing Christians, who strengthens and
comfort them in Faith, unto eternal life; even so is the spirit of ma^erial
Sol, or of the body of Mercury, when they come together, ^hen is he called the
double Mercury, these are two spirits, God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost:
but God the Son, a glorified Man, is even as our glorified and fixed Sol, or
Philosphers stone; since this La^is is called Trinus, namely, out of two
waters, or sp^^i^s of Mineral, and of Vegetable, and of the Animal of Sulphur
of Sol: These are the Two and Three, and yet but one: if you understand it not,
then you are not like to hit any. Thus by way of a similitude I delineated unto
thee sufficiently the Universal. Pray to God for a blessing, for without him
you are not like to prosper at all.

The second TREATISE Of vulgar Sulphur, Vitriol, and Magnet.
The first Section. Of Sulphurs.
Chap. I. Of Sulphur of Saturn.
1. THere is extracted from calcined Saturn with distilled Vinegar a
Crystalline Salt, which is distilled with spirit of wine unto a red Oil. This
Oil cures Melancholy, fiery Pox, old Ulcers, and many other infirmities
besides.

2. This Oil coagulateth and fixes Mercury, being first precipitated with Oil
of Vitriol, for all powders and Medicaments, which are to make Sol and Lune,
must be made fix, holding in all fiery trials.

3. Out of this Oil is made a glorious Tinctur, if you take three parts of
Mercury of Mars, and one part of this red Oil of Saturn, joining, coagulating,
and fixing them: this work may be accomplished in a months time, or somewhat
longer. This Tincture may be augmented with Mercury of Mars, usque in
infinitum; projecting one part of it upon three parts of Sol, to make thereby
an ingresse for the Tincture: one part of this Tincture transmuteth thirty
parts (if so be it be well prepared) of Mercury and of Lune into good Sol.
Remember thy Crea or, and be mindful of the poor, then the Lord will be
mindfu^l of thee also.

Chap. II. Of Sulphur of Jupiter.
1. THere is made of Jupiter a minium, the like is made of Saturn, from thence
is extracted and distilled a red sweet Oil: this Oil tingeth Saturn, being
first calcined with Salmiac into Sol.

2. The Limature of Jupiter being calcined with Calx vive for a day, and the
Calx being w^sh'd from it, then you have a fixed powder, if you can reduce it
again into a fluidnesse, and drive it wi^h Sa^urn, then you may get a
reasonable part of good Lune and Sol, whereby a needy Laborator may get
sufficient livelihood.

3. There is a calcination made of Tin and L^ad with common S^l^, but better is
it, if made with Salt of ^he c^put mort of Vitriol and Peter, the Oil of
Vitriol being added unto Calx of Jupiter and Saturn, and made one mass of it,
lu^e it well, ^et it stand for eight days and nights in warm Sand, and then to
drive it: one Centner of Lead affords in this manner six Mark and a half of
fi^e Lune: one Ma^k of such Lune yields one Ounce of Sol.

This has been my first piece to make Lune and Sol withal Note, these six
Mark and a half of Lune, afford six Ounces and a half of Sol, this Sol and Lune
amounts to 208. Gildors, or 20. pound and 16. shillings.

Chap. III. Of Sulphurs of Mars and Venus.
1. TAke some pounds of Verdigreece, extract its Tincture with distilled
Vinegar, let it shoot, then you have a glorious Vitriol, out of which you may
distill per retort a red Oil. This Oil dissolveth Mars turning into a Vitriol,
which is reduced in a long time in a great fire unto a red Oil, then you have
together Sulphur of Mars and Venus, add somewhat of Sulphur of Sol, coagulate
and fix it, then you have a Medicine, which meliorateth Men and Metals.

2. Lune is graduated with the Oil, and a good part of the Kings Crown is
gotten.

3. Two equal parts of laminated Sol, and Lune melted together, putrified in
this Oil for a day and a night, turns them into good Gold. In this Oil you
will find many strange affects and virtues. Laus Deo.

Chap. IV. Of Sulphur of Sol.
1. I have formerly told how Gold is made spiritual unto the purple mantle. Now
if you are about to make aurum potabile, then you may dissolve with the Oil of
Vitriol that spiritual Gold, extract, and draw it over with spirit of wine:
this is a Medicine, which cures many difficult diseases, and is wonderful in
its efficacy.

2. This Solar Sulphur tingeth prepared Calx of Lune into good Gold, but you
heard in my former expressions, that the King has only an honorable Garment,
and must raise his Rents and subsidies from his subjects, must be bathed in his
buddying blood and swear, must be destroyed and gloriously renewed; then is he
able to make his poor brethren and sisters to be Kings also, and legitimate
the^r bastards.

Antimony is a bastard of Saturn, as much of Mercury and of Regulus it ha^h, so
much is it turned into Sol; its due Dose of Tincture being first added
thereunto. Wismuth, ^^r Marcasite is a bastard of Jupiter, is turned to Sol
also, ^y means of a Tincture. Oil of Vitriol is a bastard of Ve^us, it has a
Metalline Mercury, as much it has of it, so much is it tinged into Sol.

3. If you add the Solar Sulphur unto Sulphur of Vitriol, Venus and Mars, and
you have fixed artificially, then you have a Tincture for Men and Metals,
expelling all manner of diseases: and this fixed powder tingeth Particulariter
Lune into Sol. Laus Deo,

Chap. V. Of Sulphur of Mercury.
MErcury is a Mother of all Metals, and is a spiritual body, and a fugitive
servant, when he comes into ^he fire, then he flies into his Chaos. But he
that can ^^tch him, he gets then the Sulphur of Mercury, or wa^^r of Sulphur,
or aqua benedicta, the Key of the Art, which ^peneth Metals Philosophically.
The Philosophers Mer^^ry and not the vulgar, being reduced unto water,
dis^lveth the Philosophic Salt together with the purple ^antle, by
putrefaction and distillation, for it is Mercurius ^plicatus.

Chap. VI. Of Sulphur of Lune.
1. THis Lune is made spiritual by means of a water, expressed in our second
Key, and may easily be made into potable silver, where by many diseases are
cured.

2. If you take one part of this spiritual Lune, and you feed it with three
parts of Virgins Milk, and bring it unto fixation, then you have an augment of
Lune, which breeds monthly young ones, these are taken forth, and their
places are supplied with Mercury vive, etc. This powder is reduced with Boras,
then you have an augmentum perpetuum.

Chap. VII. Of Antimonial Vitriol.
1. THere is made out of Vitriol of Antimony with distilled Vinegar a sweet
extraction, its acetum is separated from it: on the remainder is poured spirit
of wine, must be extracted, and the pure from impure separated. This sweet
extraction is drawn over, the spirit of wine by cohobation is often drawn from
it, and that powder is reduced to a glorious Oil of Antimony.

This Oil cures all manner of diseases, being ministered in a convenient
Vehicle; This Medicinal Oil is a great arcanum.

2. Further, take one part of this Oil, and two parts of the M^rcurial water,
in which is dissolved a fourth part of Sol (purple Mantle) then join them, lute
Hermetically, coagulate, and fix. This Tincture tingeth Lune and Mercury into
Sol. This is that pure Sulphur of Antimony: the Vitriol of Antimony must be
made per se, without any addition of Salpeter, Salt, and Borras.

Chap. VIII. Of Sulphur of Vitriol.
1. THere is made of Vi^riol a lixivium with ashes of Beech-wood, and a Sulphur
is drawn from this Vitriol, and is precipitated with Salt of Tartar; Further,
the Oil of Sulphur is ex^racted with Juniper Oil, t^us you have a red Oil,
putrify the same with spirit of wine, abstract the spirit of wine from it.
This glorious Oil of Sulphur is good against ma^y diseases, it is to be used
against Consumption, Dropsi^, Plague, Gravel, and Scabbinesse.

2. Vitriol is sublimed with Salmi^c also, but better is it, if done with a
lixivium, whereby the body of V^t iol is better opened and dissolved. This
sublimate is dissolved into an Oil, whereby c^ude Mercury can be coagula^ed and
fixed, of the which I shall write more anon, when I treat of Vitriol.

Chap. IX. Of common Sulphur.
1. THere is a Liver made of yellow Sulphur with Linseed Oil, boiled in Lie,
with Sol (...) pu^rified, and then distilled: pour this water on Tyle^, which
newly came out of the Oven, imbibe them the^ewith, distill it per retortam, you
have a yellow water of it like an aquafort, which tingeth Lune. Take one part
of i^ ^s water, and one part of Luna^ calx, let it sta d (...) d^y^^ and nights
in warm Sand, the fou^th part of it tu^^e (...) unto Gold, being reduced,
separated, purged, with Saturn and driven.

2. Further, Sulphur with the anima of Saturn, being often driven over and
fixed, may then safely be used inwardly for a Medicine: but projected on Lune,
in the flux ^t afford good Gold in the Qua^t.

3. Of the Gray powder, and Calx vive, equal parts, one pound, a fourth part of
Salmiac grinded among, and driven over per retortam, affords a glorious red
Oil, which is of (...) fixing and graduating quality.

4. Lastly, I tell you, take of this Oil of Sulphur, of Venus, and of Mars, add
thereunto the Oil of Antimonie's Sulphur, bind these together with the Oil, or
Mercurial water, fix it, then you have a Medicine for men and Metals, viz. to
ringe Mercury and Lune into Sol.

The second Section. Of Vitriols.
Chap. I. Of Vitriol of Sol, and of Lune.
IN the first place you must have our water of the cold Earth salt, and of the
Eagle, whereby Gold and Silver is made spiritual, let it shoot into Crystals:
this is that Metalline Vitriol, out of which is distilled together with spirit
of wine, and Oil of Sulphur, to be used after the manner of Metals.

Chap. II. Of Vitriol of Saturn, and of Jupiter.
CAlcine Saturn, or Jup ter, ex^ract its anima with distilled Vi^egar, let it
pu^rifie 14. days and nights, let ^he Vitriol shoot. This must be drive^ over
with spirit of wine, it affords a sweet Oil, and it is the Su^phur of Saturn
and Jupiter. This Oil coagulateth Mercury, and being first precipitated with
Oil of Vitriol, it fixes him.

Chap. III. Of Vitriol of Mars.
TAke the filings of Mars and of Sulphur equal parts, calcine them in a
Brick-kill to a purple color, pour on it distilled water, or Vinegar, it
extracteth a green color, abstract the third part of that water, let it shoot:
thus you have an artifiical Vitriol, distill from it a red spirit, or Oil. Take
half an Ounce of it, add to it Mercurial water, in which is dissolved Sol (take
of this Oil but a fourth part of an Ounce) fix this Tincture, then you have an
excellent Medicine to project upon Lead Silver, and Tin, which are transmuted
thereby into pure Gold.

O! thou Christian heart, return thanks to the Creator of Minerals, Metals, and
other Creatures!

Chap. IV. Of Vitriol of Venus.
I Have told you already of the transparent Vitriol to be extracted out of
Venus, and to distill of it a red Oil. This Oil dissolveth Mars, turns him
into a Vitriol, bei^^ once more distilled per retortam forcibly, then you have
a^ excellent Tinging-oyl, called Salt of Mars. This is the Kings excise man,
which brings in his Rents, and enricheth the King. This Oil dissolveth the
spiritual purple ma^tle, and draws it over the Helmet. Now you have se^mented
the Celar Sulphur with i^s own Sulphur, which Philosophers before me have not
done, they took only calcined Sol, or S^lar Calx, set the same to the
duplicated Mercury (instead of the fermen^) and attai^ed unto the en^ they
wished for, as well as I. But according as men do work, so is the operation of
their Tincture, transmuting more, or less, according to the efficacy of the
Tincture.

2. Out of the Oil of this Martia^ Salt, is Mercury of Antimony precipitated,
is added to the sweet Oil of Vitriol, and fixed; this Medicine next unto the
Philosophers stone is the best, and highest Univ^rsal upon man's body, and
tingeth Lune, Saturn, and Jupiter into good Sol, holding in the exame^ very
well.

3. There is made also a mass out of Honey, Salt, and Vinegar, and lamins of
Venus, which are stratified and calcined. This calcinate of its own accord,
turns to a Verdigreece, which must be extracted, crystallized, and distilled to
a red Oil; which is used as you heard above.

Chap. V. Of Vitriol of Mercury.
VItriol of Mercury is easily made, distilled in aquafort made of Salpeter and
Allome being dissolved therein: Crystals do shoot, which are very like unto a
Vitriol: these being washed with rectified spirit of Wine, with Salt of Tartar,
then putrified and reduced into a sweet Oil; this is an excellent Medicine
against the French disease, old Ulcers, Chollick, windy ruptures, Gou^^,
expelling many other diseases out of man's body.

2. This Oil is joined also with Martial Tinctures. For ^er^ury is the bond of
other Metals, and may be well used ^ticulariter. The chiefest color of Mercury
is red, as ^^u find in my other writings.

Chap. VI. Of common Vitriol.
^. TAke good Hungarish Vitriol, dissolve it in distilled water, coagulate it
again, let it shoot into Crystal^: ^erate it five times, then is it well
purged, and the Salts, Allums, and Niter are separated from it. Distill this
purged ^itriol with spirit of wine unto a red Oil, ferment it with ^piritual
Sol, add to it a due Dose of quick Mercury of Antimony, coagulate, and fix,
then you have a Tincture for men, and it tingeth Lune also into Sol.

Visitando Interiora Terrae,
Rectificandoque,
In venietis occultum Lapidem,
Veram Medicinam.
2. VItriol is calcined also to a red color in a close Vessel, on which is
poured distilled Vinegar, and is set in putrefaction for three months, there
is sound in a strong distillation, a quick Mercury, which you are to keep safe.
Wonders may be effected therewith, upon Particulars and Universals.

Take three p^^ts of this Mercury, and one part of Sol, join these, being
fixed, it affords a Solar augmentum. Make your supplies with its Mercury. Laus
Deo.

3. This calcined red Vitriol is sublimed also with Salmiac, the sublimate is
dissolved into an Oil. This Oil fixes C^^obar, whereof may be had Lune and Sol.

4. There is made a fixed water also, Salmiac and Allo^ being added thereunto.
This water being poured upon Su^phur of Jupiter, which before was precipitated
in^o a re^ powder, imbibed, and coagulated, and an ingresse be ma^^ with Sol,
then you have a Tincture, whereby c^ude Antim^ny is transmuted into good Lune,
which may be transmute^^ into Sol.

5. Lastly, I tell thee, if you extract the Salt out of Vitriol, and rectify
it well, then you have a work which i^ short, and tingeth Lune into Sol, this
metalline Salt coagulateth vulgar Mercury, and being transmuted into Lun^, i^
may be graduated higher through, and with Antimony.

Thus you have my operations and experiments, which may he very profitable unto
you. Make a good Christian use of it, help the poor, cure the diseased, then
God will bless you. Amen.

Sulphur is Vitriol.
Antimony is Mercary.
The third Section. Of vulgar Magnet.
1. MAgnet contains that, which common Mars has. Common Iron may easily be
wrought, needs not to make many words of it. Magnet has an attractive quality
to draw Iron.

2. There is made an Oil of Magnet and Mars, which is very effectual in deep
wounds.

3. With Magnet and Antimony is made Lune fix, which with the Oil of Mars and
Venus is graduated, and made to Gold: it may be performed also with Antimony
and Mars.

Thus I finished my course, and found many things in my working. My fellow
brethren turned Alchymists, all had the Philosophers stone. I was the beginner,
took great ^^us, before I attained to any thing, if you read my wri^^gs
diligently, you will find the XII. Keys the prima ^^teria, or Philosophers
Mercury, together with the Philo^phick Salt: the Philosophic Sulphur I
delineated ex^^sly.

Now I close, committing you to God, and accept in ho^^sty of that you are
informed.

Medium Tenuere Beati. FINIS.
Jod. V. R. A Process upon the Philosophic work of Vitriol.
HAving gotten this Process in the foresaid year, and and afterward, as you
shall hear, with mine own hands elaborated and wrought the same, no man
^ver-looking me, I was heartily rejoiced, even as if I had ^een new born, and
returned hearty thanks to God^: its ^ractick at the first I have not plainly
described, because I ^ad erred in the composing of it, and was fain to begin
the work anew. I having missed in my work, I begun in the ^ear 1605. because
the matter of the Earth, and the spirit ^f Mercury was not sufficiently purged,
therefore the earth ^ould not perfectly be united at the composition with the
water, I let that quite alone, and began a new Process at ^he end of the year
1605. in the City of Strasburg, used ^ore diligence and exactness, then my
work (God be prai^^d) prospered better, for the which I am still thankful to
God for it. In the name of the H^ly Trinity, the 1^ October, Anno 1605. I took
ten pound of Vitriol, diss^^ it in distilled Rainwater, being warmed, let it
stand (...) day and a night, at that time many feces were settled, I^trated the
matter, evaporated it gently, ad cuticulam us^^ I set it on a cool place to
crystallize, this on shot Vitri^^ exiccated, dissolved it again in distilled
Rainwater, l^^ shoot again, which work I iterated so long, ti^l the Vi^^ go^ a
celestial g^een color, having no more any feces a^^ ^, and lost all its
corrosivenesse, and was of a very plea^^ taste.

This highly putrified Vitriol, thus crude, and not ^^cined, I put into a
coated Retort, distilled it in open f^ drove it over in 12 hours space by an
exact government fi^e in a white fume, when no more of these fumes ca^^ and the
red corrosive Oil began to come, then I let the (...) go out, the next morning,
all being cold, I took off the ^^ceiver, poured the gift in the receiver into a
body, a^ some of the l^^e being fallen into, I filtered it, and had a (...)
menstrual water, which had some phlegm, because I t^ that Vitriol uncalcined,
which I abstracted in a Balmy, (...) leaving one drop of water in it.

I found my Chaos in the bottom of a dark redness, v^ ponderous, which I
poured into a Viol, sealed it Herme^^ set it on a three-foot into a wooden
globe into a v^porous has made of water, where I left it so long, till (...)
was dissolved, after some weeks it separated into two part into a bright
transparent water, and into an ear^^ which settled to the bottom of the glass,
in form of a thi^ black corrosive, like pitch. I separated the white spi^^ from
it, and the fluid black matter I set in again to be d^^solved, the white spirit
which was dissolved of it, I separat^ again, this work I iterated leaving
nothing in the botto^ save a dry red earth. After that, I purged my white spi^^
per distillationem very exactly, it was as pure as the tear th^^ falls from the
eye, the remaining earth I exiccated under Muffle, it was as porous, and as dry
as dust, on this I pour^^ again my white spirit, set it in a digestion, this
spirit ex^^^ct the Sulphur, or Philosophic Gold, and was tinged of a (...)
yellow, I ca^^ed it off from the matter, and in a body ^bstracted the spirit
from the Sulphur, that Sulphur stayed ^^inde in form of an Oil, very fiery,
nothing like unto its ^^t, as red as a Ruby: this abstracted white spirit
^ou^ed on the earth again, extracted further its Sulphur, ^^d put it to the
former. After this that Corpus terra looked (...) a paler color, which I
calcined for some hours under ^uffle, put it into a body, on it I poured my
white spirit, ^^racted its pure white fixed Salt, the remaining earth ^^s very
porous, good for nothing, which I flung away, ^as these three principles were
fully and perfectly sepa^^ed.

After all this I took my astral clarified Salt, which weighed ^^lf an ounce,
after the weight at Strasburg, and of the ^^ite spirit, which weighed four
ounces, of Mercury one ^^nce, and a quarter of an ounce, these I divided into
two ^^ts, whose quantity was half an ounce and one dram, I ^^t this Salt to one
part of the water in a Viol, and nippd it, (...) it in digestion, there I saw
perfectly how the Salt dis^^ved it self again in this spirit, therefore I
poured to it the ^^her part, which was half an ounce and one dram, no sooner
^^is was put to it, then presently the body together with ^^e spirit turned as
black as a Coal, ascended to the end of (...) glass: and having no room to go
any further, it moved (...) and fro, sometimes it settled to the bottom, by and
by it ^^e to the middle, then it rose higher, thus it moved from ^^e fourth of
July, to the seventh of August, namely 34. ^^ayes, which wonderful work I
beheld with admiration; (...) last these being united, and turned to a black
powder, ^^ying on the bottom, and was dry, seeing that it was so, I ^^creased my
fire in one degree, took it out of the we, and (...) in ashes, after ten days
the matter on the bottom be^^n to look somewhat white, at which I rejoiced
heartily, ^^s degree of fire I continued, till the matter above and ^low,
became as white as the glittering Snow. But it was no^ yet fix, making ^ryal of
(...), set it in again, increased (...) fire one degree higher, then the matter
began to ascend a descend, moved on high, stayed in the middle of the g^^^ not
touching the bottom of it, this lasted 38 days a^ nights, I beheld then as
well, as formerly at the 30 daye^ variety of colors, which I am no^ able to
express. (...) last th^s powder fell to the bottom, became fix, made p^jection
wi h it, putting one Grai^ of it to one, and a qu^^^ of an ounce of Mercury,
transmuting the same into very g^^ Lune. [Now it was time to restore unto this
white tinct^^ her true anima, and imbibe it, to bring it from its wh^^nesse
unto redness, and to its perfect virtue.

Thereupon I took the third principle, namely the anim^ which hitherto I had
reserved, in quantity it was one ou^^ a quarter of an ounce, and one dram,
poured to it my r^served spirit of Mercury, whose quantity was one cu^^ and a
quarter of an ounce, drew it over several times (...) alembicum, so that they
in the end united together; th^se divided into seven equal parts; one part I
poured on m^ clarified earth, or tincture, which greedily embraced (...) anima
together with its spirit, and turned to a ruddines^^ in twelve days and
nights, but had no tinging quality (...) yet, saving Mercury vive and Saturn,
it transmuted in^^ Lune, which Lune at the separating yielded three Grai^^
(...) Gold. I proceeded further with my imbibition, and carrie^ all the seven
parts of anima into; at the fourth imbibi^^o^ one part of my work tinged ten
parts of Copper into Gold at the fifth imbibition one part tinged hundred
parts, at the sixth it tinged thousand parts, at the seventh it tinged te^
thousand parts: Thus, God be praised, my work ended succesfully, with great joy
of my heart: at this time I got o^ the true Medicine four ounces half an ounce,
and one dram. The two last in the ponderosity were almost equa^ unto the first,
out of this my work I paid for Land and Ground, to that Noble Gentleman O. V.
D. 48000 Gilders. Actum^ 1607. These things I set down for a memorandum, tha^ I
should not forget any of the manuals, and of other things necessary for the
work. God be praised for evermore. Amen.

An exact work, how Mercury vive is coagulated and brought unto a Lunar
fixation which Lune holds Sol also in the trial.
TAke of Mercury vive two ounces, of pulverised common Sulphur six ounces,
grind these in a wooden dish with a wooden Pestil, set it on a Coal-fire in a
melting pot, stirring it about continually, ler all the Sulphur evaporate: then
take forth the Mercury, grind an equal quantity of Sulphur with it, proceed
with its heating as formerly: iterate this work five times; then sublime this
Mercury per gradus ignis: take out ^his sublimate, break it in pieces of the
big^esse of a small Nut, or bean, imbibe them in the white of Eggs, then take a
comenting pot, put ashes into it, in the midst of it set an Iron box, stratifie
into it this sublimate with refined silver, fill up the box, then lute an Iron
lid to it, put ashes on the lid, lute an earthen lid upon that, set this pot
into a sand Capel, let your first fire be gentle for twelve hours, then
increase your fire for twelve hours more, at last make a forcible fire for 24
hours, then break open the Pot, you will find a black gray matter, carry it on
Lead, of four ounces you will get three ounces of fix silver: separate this
fine silver in aquaefort, you will find a good deal of black Gold Calx,
reserve the silver Calx apart, you may stratifie with it another time. Thus far
I went in my experience.

The fifth and last part Of the last TESTAMENT Of FRIAR BASILIUS VALENTINUS.

Treating of the transcendent, and most precious and wonderful Medicine, which
the great Creator has put into Metalline and Mineral Salts, for the benefit of
man; to keep him in perfect health continually.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini* MDCLVI.

The fifth and last part Of the last TESTAMENT Of FRIAR BASILIUS VALENTINUS.
BEfore I begin to speak of the Salts of Metals and Minerals, and declare their
volumes and other precious and noble growth under ground, in the first place I
will prefix the preparation of aurum potabile, because therein lies the Corona
of Medicinals, Universaliter, and meriteth the first place, because Salts of
other Metals and Minerals in their innate virtues are for particulars only,
and are ordained for to preserve man in health; and there is just cause to
begin with the making of au^um potabile without sophistication, and will speak
of the distinction of it, that it may be judged infallibly to be the true one.

This being my last part, and my intention is to make a perfect relation of
aurum potabile, for the benefit of good and understanding men, whom God after
my death will rejoice with this my book, which upon tedious and laborious
experience I wrote, wherein I speak not by hearsay, but the things I do write
of, I know experimentally to be true.

Therefore if G^d does bl^sse th^e with a true knowledge hereof, that you would
keep this secretum in silence and privacy, least you turn Gods blessing into a
curse: because the pr^paration of this, and of the stone is one, both have
their original, and first generation and birth from the true seed, and
Astrologick primum mobile, called the spirit of Mercury, of which formerly I
have written more largely. For I speak the highest ^ru^h unto thee, that
neither the U^iversal ^or Particular Tincture, neither aurum potabile, nor
other Universal Medicine, without this heavenly and spiritual essence, which
has its original from the starry heaven, takes and receives the same, from
thence may be had and prepared, therefore be silent till death, at your
departing lay down again your talent, as I have done; for if I had not informed
you faithfully, you would know but little of that mystery, and continue still
with the vulgar in folly, blindness, and madness, and you would have sent a
Recipe into the greasy and salvy shops of Apothecaries, but whither would thy
Soul have gone after thy departure? into Galen's l^p, to ^he utmost depth of
darkness, where the D^vils have their dwelling places, even thither, both thy
soul and body would have been sent, in case thou should have divulged a^y of
th^se secrets.

To ^urn to my intended business, I will in the first place inform you, what
is that true and highest aurum potabile, and Universal Medicine, after this in
order there follows another aurum potabile made of the fixed red Sulphur, or
Soul of the corporeal Gold, most highly purged, and is prepared with the
conjunction of the Universal Spirit of Mercury. After this there follows
another Particular Medici^e, which is half an aurum potabile, showing its
efficacy and power in many trials Then I will add thereunto a descr^ption of
aurum potabile, because it traceth the steps of Gold, and it shows
wonderfully its great energy and ver^ues.

The highest and chiefest aurum potabile, which the Lord God has laid into
nature, is the excocted, prepared, and fixed substance of our stone, before it
is fermented. A higher, greater, and more excellent Universal Medicine, and
aurum potabile cannot be found nor had in the circumference of the whole World;
for it is a heavenly Balsam, because its first principles, and original comes
from heaven, made formal in earth, or under ground, and is afterward, being
exactly prepared, brought into a plus quam perfection, of which first principle
and Nativity of this heavenly substance I have already written sufficiently,
and count it needless to be repeated here.

Now as this excocted and perfect substance is the highest, chiefest, and
greatest Universal Medicine unto man, even so on the other side the same matter
after its fermentation, is a Tincture also, and the chiefest, greatest, and
most powerful Universal Medicine upon all Metals whatsoever, and thereby may
be transmuted into their highest melioration and health, namely into the purest
Gold. This is the first, chiefest and greatest aurum potabile and Universal
Medicine of the whole World, of which alone great volumes could be written:
whose preparation was set down circumstantially in the third part, needless to
be repeated here again; At this present I will speak of the true and full
process, how a true aurum potabile is to be had, and prepared from Gold, which
in ye best manner is most exactly putrified. Take the extracted Soul of Gold,
drawn forth with the sweet spirit of common Salt, as I informed you about the
Particular of Gold, where the body of Gold appeared very white, abstract the
spirit of Salt from it, edulc^rate the anima of Sol ten, or twelve times, at
last let it be purely exiccated, weigh it, pour on it four times as much of
spirit of Mercury, lute it well, set it in the vaporous Ba^h, putrify it
gently, let the anima of Sol be quite dissolved, and be turned into water, or
its prima materia, both will turn into a blou^red liquor, fair and transparent,
no Ruby on the earth comparable unto it.

But thus much you must note, when the anima of Sol begins to be dissolved, and
brought into its prima materia, that at the first, on the side round the
glass, where the matter lies, there be seen a green circle, on it a b^ue,
the^^ a yellow, afterward all the colors of a Rainbow, join, and make
appearance, which do last but a little while. The anima of Sol being wholly
dissolved into the Mercurial spirit, and nothing is seen in the bottom, then
pour to it twice as much of the best rectified spirit of wine, brought to its
highest degree, the glass must be luted exactly, digest, and putrify gentle
for twelve, or fifteen days together, then abstract per alembicum, that matter
comes over in a bloud-red transparent color: this abstracting must be
iterated, nothing must be left in the bottom, which is corporeal, then you have
the true aurum potabile, which can never be reduced into a body.

But note, the Gold before its destruction and extraction of its Soul must be
purged in the highest degree. There is made another aurum potabile, and
artificially prepared, which though it cannot be said, or set down in writing
to be the full and true potable Gold, yet is it more than half an aurum
potabile counted, because it is transcending effectual in many diseases, in
which nature might have stood in great doubts. This half aurum potabile is made
in a twofold manner, where the latter is better and more effectual than the
former, and asks more pains and time than the former.

Take this extracted Soul of Gold, drawn forth with the sweet spirit of common
Salt, edulcorate it most purely and exactly, at last exiceate it, put it in a
spacious Viol, or body of glass, pour on it red Oil of Vitriol, which was
dephlegmed, and rectified per reto^tam, that it be transparent clear and white,
and you may see, that it seizes on the Gold and dissolveth it, and is tinged
deeply red.

Put so much of this Oil to is, that in it may be dissolved Sulphur, or the
Soul of Gold, let it putrify in Balneo Mariae, put a reasonable fire to it,
that you may see that the Soul of Gold is quite dissolved in the Oil of
Vitriol: the feces, which it has settled, must be separated from it, then put
twice as much of the best rectified spirit of Wine to it, which rectification
you shall be informed of in this part, seal the glass, ^et no spirits of the
Wine evaporate, set it again in putrefa^^tion in the Balmy, let it be there for
a month, then the ^upresse of Vitriol is mitigated by the spirit of Wine, and
^oseth its acidity and sharpness, both together make an excellent Medicine,
drive both over, let nothing stay behind in the bottom, then you get more than
half an aurum ^^tabile, in form, and color of a deep yellow liquor. Note, that
some Metals in this manner may be proceeded withal, first a Vitriol may be
gotten out of the Metal, then a spirit is for her driven from it, and joined in
this manner with the Soul, dissolved, and further digested with spirit of Wine,
all must enter together into a Medicine, as I told of formerly, which have
their special efficacy.

The second way to prepare this half aurum potabile, which though it be but
half an aurum potabile, yet in virtue and efficacy is far preferred before the
other now spoken of, and is done as follows:

Take the extracted Solar Soul, spoken of above, put it into a Viol, pour on it
the extracted Philosophic Sulphur, which is the second principle, which is
drawn with spirit of Mercury from the Philosophic earth, and Mercury, or the
spirit of Mercury, unto an Oleity, which now is Sulphur again, and must be
abstracted gently per modum distillationis.

Of this Philosophic Sulphur pour on it as much, that the Solar Soul may be
dissolved, let it stand in a gentle Bath, let the dissolution be made, then
pour more of the best spirit of Wine to it, digest gently, draw these over, let
nothing stay behind in the bottom, then you have a Medicine, which does not
want above two Grains of the right and true ^urum potabile.

These are the chiefest ways to make the corporeal aurum potabile, this I
close, and proceed further with a short, but true process, how the Silver,
which is the next to Gold, concerning perfection, is made potable also; this
process must be done in the following manner.

Take the sky colored Sulphur, or spirit of Lune, which was extracted with
distilled Vinegar, as I informed you i^ the Particular of Lune, edulcorate it,
rectify it with spirit o^ Wine, exsiccate it, put it in a Viol, pour to it
three time^ as much of spirit of Mercury, which is prepared from the white
spirit of Vitriol, as I faithfully taught you in tha^ place, lute the glass
firmly, set it in putrefaction in the vaporous Bath, let all be dissolved, and
nothing more seen i^ the bottom, then put to it an equal quantity of the bes^
spirit of Wine, set it in digestion for half a month, driv^^ all over, let
nothing stay behind, then you have the true potable Lune, which in its
efficacy is admirable, and dot^ wonders when it is used.

A description of the fiery Tartar.
DIstill of good Wine a spirit of Wine, rectify it with white calcined Tartar,
let all come over, put that which is distilled over into a Viol, put four
ounces of well sublimed Salarmoniac to one quart of spirit of Wine, set a
Helmet upon, set a great receiver into cold water, drive the volatile spirits
into, gently in Balneo Mariae, leave but a little quantity of it behind. Note,
the Alembic must always be cooled with wet clothes, then the spirits will be
dissolved, and turn into a liquor. Thus is prepared this hot spirit of Wine.

Of the Salt of Tartar.
FIrst you must note, that the Philosophers Tartar is not the vulgar Tartar,
wherewith the Lock is opened, but it is a Salt, which comes from the root, and
is the only m^st^cal Key for all Metals, and is prepared thus: make a sharp
lixivium of the ashes of Sarments, or twigs of the Vine, boil away all its
moisture, there stays behind a ruddy ^^tter, which must be reverberated for
three hours in a fla^ing fire, stirring it still, let it come to a whiteness,
which ^^hite matter must be dissolved in distilled Rain water, let ^^e feces of
it settle, filter, and coagulate them in a glass ^^at the matter in it be dry,
which dry matter is the Salt of ^artar, from which the true spirit is driven.

Note, as I told now of the virtue and qualities of preci^^s stones, so there
are found also many despicable, and ^^oble stones, which are of great virtues,
and experimen^^lly are known to be of rare qualities, which ignorant, and
^^expert men will hardly give credit unto, neither can they ^^nceive of it in
their dull reason and understanding: the ^ame I will demonstrate with the
example of Calx vive, which in men's judgment is held of no great value, and
lies contemptibly in obscurity, however there is a mighty virtue and efficacy
in it, which appears, if application be made of it to the most heaviest
diseases, seeing its triumphant and ^^anscendent efficacy is almost unknown for
the generality, therefore for the good of such, which are inquisitive into
natural and supernatural mysteries, and to whom I disclose these mysteries in
this my book, I will for a farewell discover also this mystery concerning the
Calx vive, and will show in the first place, how its spirit is driven from it,
which work indeed requires an expert Artist, who is well informed aforehand of
its preparation.

Take u^sluk'd Lyme as much as you will, beat, and grind it on a well-dried
stone, to an impalpable powder, put on it so much of spirit of Wine, as the
pulverised Calx is able to drink, there must not stand any of that spirit upon
it, apply a Helmet to it, lute it well, and put a receiver before it abstract
the spirit gently from it in Balneo, this abstracting must be iterated eight,
or ten times: this spirit of Wine strengthens the spirit of Calx mightily, and
is made more fiery hot. Take the remaining Calx out of the body, grind it very
small, put to it a tenth part of Salt of Tartar, which is pure, not containing
any feces.

As much as this matter weighs together, add as m^^ of the additional of Salt
of Tartar thereunto, namely (...) remaining matter, from which was extracted
the Salt (...) Tartar, and it must be well exiccated, all this must be mi^^led
together, and put in a well coated Retort, three p^^ of the Retort must be
empty, take a great receiver, or b^^ to it, very strongly. Note, the body into
which the R^^torts nose is put, must have a pipe of a fingers bread^h, unto
which may be applied another body, and a quantity (...) spirit of Wine in it:
then give a gentle fire to it, at fi^^ there comes some of the phlegm, which
falls into the f^^ applied body: the phlegm being all come over, then i^crease
the fire, there comes a white spirit to the upper pa^^ of the body, like unto
the white spirit of Vitriol, which does not fall among the phlegm, but slideth
through the pipe into the other body, draws it self into the spirit (...)
Wine, embracing the same as one fire does join with th^^ other.

Note, if the spirit of Calx be not prepared first by the spirit of Wine, and
drawn off and on, as I told, then he dot^ ^ot so, but falls among the
phlegm, where he is quenched, ^oseth all its efficacy. Thus difficult a
matter is it, to^ ^^arch nature thoroughly, reserving many things unto herself.
^his spirit being fully entered into the spirit of Wine, then ^^ke off the body,
put away the phlegm, but keep care^^lly the spirit of Wine, and spirit of
Calx: and note, both ^^ese spirits are hardly separated, because they embrace
^osely one another: and being distilled, they come over ^y^ntly.

Therefore take these mixed and united spirits, put them ^o a Jar-glasse,
kindle it, the spirit of Wine burns away, (...) spirit of Calx stays in the
glass, keep it carefully. ^^is is a great arcanum, few of other spirits go
beyond its ^^cacy, if you know how to make good use of it. Its quali^^ may
hardly be set down in any way of abridgement.

This spirit dissolveth Oculi Cancrorum, the hardest Cry^^: these three being
driven over together, and often iterated in that distilling, three drops of
that liquor being mi^^ed in warm Wine, break, and dissolve any Gravel and ^^e
in man's body, expelling their very roots, not put^^g the patients to any pain.

This spirit of Calx at the beginning looks bluish, being ^^tly rectified,
looks white, transparent, and cl^^r, leaving (...) feces behind. This spirit
dissolveth the most fixed ^^wels, and precious stones. On the other side he
fixes all ^^ti^^ spirits with his transcendent heat.

This spirit conquereth all manner of Podagrical Symp^^s, be they never so
nodose and tar^^rous, dissolveth and ^^^els them radically.

To the omnipotent Trine God, Father, Son, and Holy ^^ost, be returned hearty
thanks for all his benefits, which (...) has bestowed on man, and discovered
those secrets, I ^^ought on in his name. To him be eternal praises. ^men.

All that has breath, praise the Lord. Allelujah!

End of the fifth part.
BASILIUS VALENTINUS HIS TREATISE CONCERNING MICROCOSME, OR, The little World,
which is Man's body.

What it does contain, and of what it is composed, what it does comprehend, and
its end and issue.

A thing most necessary, and meet for the knowledge of such, that love, and
embrace wisdom.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLVI.

BASILIUS VALENTINUS HIS TREATISE. CONCERNING MICROCOSME.
THose that s^ek Art, and have a desire to attain to wisdom, are to note, that
the Highest, upon my continued prayers has granted unto me a Clergyman, to
make known the many and great mysteries of nature: among which man's body is one
to be considered, how that is governed in imitation unto Microcosme. For it is
^^et that the lesser should imitate the greater, and the smallest and meanest
ought to be governed by the greatest and most potent.

Microcosme, or the great World contains three things, as the most principal,
the rest, which come from these, are merely accidentals. In the first place is
to be considered the matter and form of this World, which matter is made form
(...) out of a non-shape, or a nothing, and the great Creator presently
prescribed an order for this matter, what government it should keep, as soon as
it came to a life, or motion. This matter and form is water and earth. For at
the Creation by a separation of the water from the earth, there was finished
the matter and form, as two things belonging one to another, from these all
Animals and Vegetables have their beginning, and other two things, as air and
fire, which belong one to another, have wrought life therein. The matter and
form is earth, the Salt in that earth, the body: even so is with man's body,
which is Microcosme. The matter was n^ perfect without the form, these joining
into one, by God ordinance, the form being become quick, came then to
perfection: the matter and form got life by motion, air w^ the first causer of
that motion, and perfect maturity was ca^sed by a convenient heat, moveably
enclosed in the ai^e, thu^ the earth was brought to a fertility by the air, it
was opened, and became porous by motion for generation. The earth being
impregnated, made her seed apparent by he aquosity, then air and heat in the
nether and upper Regi^on of the Astrals caused that a Birth was brought forth,
the blossoms were produced, and the appointed fruit was ripened by concoction
of heat.

Calcidity is a Sulphurous hot spirit, which like a Medicament exiccateth the
superfluous gross aquosity and phlegmatic matter, which in the generation at
the beginning abounds too much in the earth, before the air could have a
fellow dominion at the joining with it, carrying the same along in the
superfluity of her birth.

The second principal part of Microcosme is inobility, for the matter in it
self was without life, which by hea^ was stirred up, then the vital spirit
became to be sensible, which is in man a Sulphurous spirit, kindling the body
by a heat, exiccateth the superfluity of the earth by the subtility of its
substance, and governs the body in a constant motion. For after the heat is
gone, then coldness gets the dominion, the spirit of life being gone, no
sensiblenesse felt in the pulse and arteries, and a dead body is found instead
of life, at the departing of the warm spirit of Sulphur; rational men ought to
take this mystery into consideration.

The two first Elements, the matter and form, being apparent, and having gotten
a mobility by the two last Elements by light, Microcosme was not yet perfect,
the Creator allotted further an increase to the seed of the earth, as well as
he did to Vegetables and Animals. God allowed unto earth an imagination for all
sorts of seeds, and to bring them forth after their several kinds. Then the
earth was impregnated by imagination which God allotted, and the ^aith brought
these seeds forth in Man's presence, and the ^eat digested them to a maturity
even till hi herto.

Matter and form of Microcosme being extant, consisting of earth and water,
then the Creator caused a life into them ^y an inbreathed warm air, heating
the cold earthly sub^tance, giving a heat u^ o life and mo^ion, which was the
^oul, which is the true Sulphur of Man, spiritual in compre^ensible; sensibly
felt by its own operation. All this being ^^nish'd, ^^en God allowed an
imagination unto good, in the ^erfect understanding of Man, that by his
imagination he ^uld judge of all the beasts, and impose on each a proper ^ame,
and by that imagination he learned to know his ^ife also, that she had flesh
and bones of his body. Then ^in appea^ed perfect, and that matter was made into
a ^hape, of a sensible body. This form being made alive by ^he Soul, had
allowed further a sub^ile spirit unto imagi ^^ion and knowledge, which is an
invisible, and in^^^pre^ensible form, like a work master, who frames (...)
things ^n the mind, which has its habitation in the upper Re^ion of
Microcosme, according to his volatility, and deser^eth the name of Mercury, of
the invisible spirit of man's ^ody. Form and matter is earthly, the life
sticks in the ^otion, and the knowledge of every understanding unto ^ood and
bad stands in the sharp speculation of Micro^^sme, the overplus found besides
these three, nature ca^eth off as a Cadaver, and is as a Monster, which by
the^^ ^hree is found to be a separation, and a Cantit mort.

If glorified Elias were present, and the A^^^als could ^peak, and silent
nature had a tongue to express hereof, ^hen I needed not to bring in any
further evidence to per^wade the incredulous, who considered not judiciously
this ^y saying: for a man possessed with blindness cannot pass ^y judgment
upon my writings: b^^ understanding ^udgeth impatience, and wisdom separateth
herself from fol^^ by her own experience.

This Vital spirit nourishes, feeds, and preserves h^self by the Ole^^y of
man's Sulphur, which is predominan^ the blood, and with, or through it does work
in ^he wh^ body, that the substance may be perfect. This Vital s^ is Mercury,
which is found in man, and is preserved by Oleity of its likeness; besides
these two, Mercury and S^phur, there is a third thing in man, namely Salt,
which h^ in the flesh, body, and bones.

The Salt ministers its noblest spirit for a nourishm^ unto the blood, which
saltness is found therein by taste, and disperseth it self ^hroughout the
body, pre^veth man's body like a Balsam from pu^efaction, and is the band and
copulation, whereby Me^cury, or the V^ spirit continues the longer with the
Balsam in the fl^^ and dwells together in one. For in the Salt there lies a
s^rit, which must protect all other Balsams in their worth a dignity. The
remainder found in the flesh, if these the be taken from it, is a dead thing,
as I told formerly, and good for nothing, nor can it be used for any thing.

As this Union, Dominion, and Government is in Man the like are in Metals,
Minerals, and Vegetables, wh^ make up their perfect body, do live, keep, and
are preserv^ in the like manner, as man is. As the one follows up the other
in Man, according to order in the like conditi^ are other Animals after their
ki^de and property. As a C^ is an Animal, her food, as grass, is Vegetable,
this Veg^table by the heat of the Cows body is putrified, in that p^trefaction
is made a separation, which is the Key of all d^solutions and separations,
separation being made, then goe^ the subtle spirit, the subtle Sulphur, and
the subtle Salt the Vegetable's substance of the grass into all Members the
whole body of the Cow, the spirit rules the beast, t^ Sulphur nourishes it,
and the Salt preserves it.

This being done, then nature distributeth her gifts fu^ther, making a new
separation; as of the superfluou^ness^ which the Cow does not assume by way of
assimilation, a^ must part with it, and distributeth the same further, and the
(...) Milk, this Milk is an Anim^l substance, transmuted from the Vege^able In
this Milk is made another separation by fire, which must be kept gently. For
the subtilest spirit of the Milk together with the Sulphu^ sublimeth, is taken
off, and turned to a coagulated far^^sse, which is butter. The ^est is
separated by other means, and precipitated, and ^^hereby is made another
separation, this is a second coagu^ation, out of which men make their food: of
the overp^us ^s made another separation by fi^e, not so far as the former ^wo:
at last there rem^ineth an aquosity, and is of no great ^s^fulnesse, because
the spirit and its nutriment ^s taken from it by the s^veral separations.

After this nature makes to a further putrefaction another and gross
excretion of a Sulphurous and Salt ^ubstance, which generateth afresh a living
spirit, which is the ^xcre^ent, this serves for the earth to be manured
withal, ma^ing the earth fertile by its Sulphur and Salt, as being of a ^osse
and fat substance, whereby new fruits are produced, ^ere is another nutriture
from an Animal into a Vegetable. ^his makes Wheat, and other Fruits, and
Grains to grow, ^roducing again a nutriment from the Vegetables unto A^imals.
Thus one nature does follow after the other, by ^ulgar people not so much
comprehended, or searched into, ^ot caring to learn natures qualities so much,
which m^xeth ^ach natural things seem to be incredible.

To return again to the structure of Man, the noblest spirit ^f life has its
dominion and seat for the most part, an^t ^ost strongly in the heart of man's
body, as in the noble ^art: and the Sulphur of man ^iveth unto tha^ spirit a
nu^iment, and spiritual access for its preservation by the a^re^or if air be
taken away from man, then spirit of li^e is hoak'd up, departs invisibly, and
death is at h^^d. The noble Salt spirit is a conserver of both, its nobl^st
spi^t penetrateth throughout, the grossest matter of (...) Sa ^ is ^ast into
the bladder, and that has a spirit of a pe^ial ^peration. That which goes
from the Salt throu^h^ the ^adder, is wrought upon by a hear, ministers a n^w
^^cesse, or increase, so that this increase of Salt in man is i^ exhaustible,
unless it die qu^te, and the body be burn^ to ashes, and the remainder be
extracted. As for an e^ample; Take the Salts from Minerals, let these grow
again coagulate, and extract the Salt again by water, the like seen in nitrous
earths also, and other common Salts, a^^ there needs not to quote any further
examples.

The spirit of life has its process into other Member from the heart, into
bones, arms, and the rest of the bo^ that are stirring; In diseases and
symptoms he is wea^ and man by reason of such symptoms, cannot perform h^
business in that full strength as at other times, when he in health, feeds
and cherishes his body with Veget^ble spirits, which come from feeding on
bread, mea^ and drinking of wines, then his body grows stronge^ and his Vital
spirit grows potent by such nutriments, i^ his superfluity disperseth himself
into all Members, an^ shows his operation. If the heart grows faint, the^
is it a sign that the Vital spirit is not nourished, upon which there ensue
speedily deadly diseases; because tha^ fire is not at liberty, and falls into
an extinction, or choal^ing.

The fire in the heart, and the natural heat is preserve^ and supported by the
air, of that air the Lungs stan^ most in need of: the Liver also must have
air, else it cannot laugh: the Spleen must have air, else it will be
oppress't with stitchings and great pains: the true seat for the most part o^
^^^aire is necessary for the Lungs, if these fa^ into any we^k^ess^, the cause
thereof is, because the Sal^ does no^ show its true, and meet help, and must go
into rottenness casting up blood and matter: then there is a^ hand a
corruption of the air, from which the Vital spirit cannot find any true
nourishment, but must be starved because the Salt does not effect its
conserving quality, the Sulphur, and the increase of the nourishment is
obstructed, and is not perfect, whereby are caused Consumptions, witherings of
the body, consuming of the flesh, and exiccation of the blood, and of the
marrow. The substance of Salt, o^ the Salt spirit, which preserves the body,
has its ^eat for the most part in the bladder, where all humidities have their
issue, the rem^ining gross Salt is separated, and excerned by Urine, as you
heard already. I repeat it here again for that end, because the most noble
spirit, which does preserve man, does copulate, and makes friendship with the
Vital spirit and its nutriment, which is Sulphur, and so they make the body
perfect, and if any informity be incident, either from the operation, or
defective quality of the Stars, or from a disorderly life in eating and
drinking, and many other inconveniences, and any corruption be present, then
nature is not in her perfect condition. Here the knowing Physician must enquire
into the cause, from which of these three the Symptom does arise, and cure the
same with convenient remedies, and not with any contrary Medicines: as heat
must be cured with heat, cold with cold, pricking with pricking: for one heat
draws the other, one cold draws another, even as Iron is drawn by a Magnet;
and so pricking simples may cure stiching diseases, and poisonous Minerals can
heal, and bring to right poisonous Symptoms, if they be duly and well
prepared. And although sometimes externally a cooler be supplied, however I
speak as a Philosopher, and one that is experienced in nature, that like must
be cured and expelled fundamentally with the like, otherwise true Medicaments
are not applied, and the Physicians deal not really in their profession. He
that is not fundamentally learned herein, or does nor observe these things, he
is not a true Physician, neither can he really say that he has learned any
truth in Physic, because he is not able to discern cold and heat, dry and
wet: for knowledge and experience, and a fundamental inquiry into natures
mysteries make a good Physician next the knowledge of the Creator, from whom
all, and every wisdom does descend, and is the Author of the beginning, middle,
and end thereof.

Next the invocation of the Creator, there follow nat^ral means and
Medicaments, as they are found in themselves in their highest degree; I make no
further mention here of other Animals: Metals and Minerals follo^ next, for in
Gold, Silver, and other Metals, even to t^ seventh and last Planet, are hid
excellent things, Mercu^ being predominant in all, in some more than in other
and Minerals also are not without their virtuous Med^cines, and the former
seven Planets were in their beginnin^ only Minerals.

The Tincture of Sol together with the potable Gol^ and Silver are of great
efficacy. Mercury rules Microcosme: that, which is found in the best Metals
and mo^ precious stones may be drawn also, if need be from Minerals. For
perfect Metals are grown, or have their de^scent from Minerals, as from
Vitriol, Antimony, and the like. Vitriol is Sulphur, Antimony is Mercury, the
Sa^ which is the copula, or binder, is found in both, if these are made fix are
like unto the best Metals, for they a^ generated by them: Minerals come from
the three principles, as well as Metals: the three principles come from their
prima materia, called primum Ens, which is nothing else but a watery substance
found dry, is not likened to any matter which is grown, and is preserved by the
fou^ Elements, and these are cherished, or nourish't by Astrals. The Creator
has ordained all these out of (...) naught, because man should not gaze only
upon earthly matters, but consider heavenly ones also, and ought to know things
supernatural, that faith may over top the rest, and have the prerogative in
things seen and felt, and be preserved therein.

If Physicians do not understand these things, they ought not to be held for
Physicians, for the knowledge of God and of nature make a Physician, as I told
of it formerly, and not great prating without true knowledge; Good writings of
expert men may conduce somewhat hereunto.

In brief, humane reason in Physicians is not able to compr^^end sufficiently,
much less are they able to decide, fathom, and fully learn, what manner
Medicaments there may be made of Microcosme, for he contains a perfect
Medicine for all diseases, like with like must be expelled and cured. Mercury
of Microcosme is a living, incomprehensible, and volatile spirit, as I have
told.

Man's Balsam dries up a Dropsy, and the clarified Salt of it cu^eth
Consumptions; in Epileptick fits it does excellent well, and being prepared
into a fragrant spirit, all corrosivenesse being taken from it, is nothing
inferior unto aurum potabile, to preserve man's health; it is very excellent
for curing Leprosy: Passing by such diseases, which are of a lower nature and
degree, it breaks the stone in the bladder, and cures all Salt Rheums, if
the Ar^ist prepares it well, and knows how to make use of it afterward.

Thus I close with Microcosme, contained in few lines, much more could be
spoken of this matter, or form, mobility and imagination, how they were brought
unto perfection. For if these stand together in a true middle, will make up a
sweet Harmony: for without the matter, or form of the body, without the moving
of the powers, and defect of perfect thoughts Ortheus will not please the
Dolphin with any harmonious melody: as it is with man, so it is with Metals:
Mercury is the mobile in Gold, if the body be anatom^zed: Sulphur is hot, being
driven from a Mineral and fixed, dries the phlegmatic Lune, warmeth her,
makes her Soul equal unto himself. In the matter and form there lies a Salt,
which affords the coagulation of the body: the remainder in the Gold put away,
for separation will afford a further revelation.

Vegetables also show the form of their three principles, the visible matter
contains the Vegetable Salt, which is its conse^vative, the fragrancy of the
Vegetable is the Balsam, which ministers a nourishment unto its perfect growth,
the odor, or smell of any Herb is of a volatile quality, and spiritual, and
the spirit for the most part shows it self in the frangrancy, and penetrateth
the Balsam, and its odor, be it pleasant, or not, is the essence, whereby men
in their senses learn the condition and properties of Vegetables. For other
things I have written, I praise the Lord, which dwells on high. Thus closing
I wish to every one the grace and blessing of God the Creator of all Creatures,
that they may be blessed, wise, and rich, both in this temporal and corruptible
World, and in the other World attain to an eternal bliss. Amen.

Of the Mystery of Microcosme, its Medicinal parts belonging unto Man, written
by BASILIUS VALENTINUS.
TO make use of the heavenly Revelation, about two Luminaries, and of the
mysteries of the whole Medicine, which lies in that mavelous instrument of
Microcosme, within and without, that is, in the body, and without, as ordinary
wounds, Sores, Ulcers, that have their cause from within, have their descent
from one root, however, must be severally prepared and dress't. For that within
is not like to that which is without, in respect of their operation; but in
respect of their form and matter they are under one judgment. And that I may
rightly inform my fellow Christian, I must needs acknowledge and confess, that
there are two Medicines, which heal all diseases and symptoms, be they
whatsoever, and are made of one, the one is called PHALAIA, and is for inward
use, the other is called ASA, is for external cures: both may be called to be
only One, they differ only in their preparation; how both must be brought to
their operative quality, the way unto it is showed in my Manuals. For they must
first be rightly known, and their nature must be searched into. Their matter is
One, which by that exp ession I purposely h^ld it forth least it should be made
too common, I after ^he manner of Ancient Philosophers before m^, hiding
secrets under dark sentences, hoping by the prayers of others to have their
Souls saved, and received into that Garden, in which our first Parents were
created.

No^e, both Medicines are made of one matter, as I have already informed you.
If used inwardly, it takes away all manner of informities: the matter is
putrified, separated, and in a spagyrick way purged in the best manner, and
brought to a Medicine of the highest degree, by fixing its own nature, which
must brought to pass in the fire. Its fo^mer poisonous volatile quality must
be rectified, by being prepared to an everlasting fixednesse, which expels,
purges, and rectifies all malignant spirits, that a good nature may live
quietly in a pure habitation. For this prepares Medicine, keeps that course,
wherever it ^^eetheth with any malignity, it will be revenged on it, and
striveth to expel it, and will solely keep possession there: for she cannot
endure any contrary things about her, which are defiled wi^h the least impurity.

PHALAIA is the Universal Medicine to be used inwardly, and ASA is the
Universal remedy for outward uses: it put fieth man's blood, takes away all
impurity, strengthens the brain, heart, stomach, and all other parts, causes
good blood, strengthens the memory, repaireth the d^fects, which are befallen
the three principles, restore^h all lost things: it is the very Key, whereby
the body is opened: for it chaseth away Leprosy, Dropsy, Consumptions, Gout,
and all other diseases generally; for no sinful Creature is fallen so totally,
but she may have a com^^^t unto salvation in a spiritual way, and a Medicine
unto health, appointed thereunto by the Creator, which is had if nature be
anatomized by an expert Artist, to be prepared for that use.

Here I speak of such diseases, which by some are called incurable: for
ordinary diseases there are ordinary means, which here are not mentioned, the
uses of them are mentioned in a special Treatise.

But of my PHALAIA I say thus much, according to my long experience, that
nothing can conceal, or hide it self from her, being a penetrating searcher
into all infirmities, she penetrateth the body spiritually like a fume,
penetrateth the Arteries, Muscles, and all the parts of the body like a Balsam,
restores strength which was lost by her Salt spirit. Further, I cannot speak
in the praising of my PHALAIA, she being a praise to such that make use of her.
He that gets this PHALAIA tightly, to him is she sufficient for to cure all
diseases. No tongue is able to express, and set forth fully her virtues.

As diseases do differ, which are incident unto the body, so there are means
for their cure: but this Medicine cures all diseases in general, being of an
heavenly fidereal quality, descended from the Elements, and generated by the
three principles, coming from the very heart of its Center of the whole
circumference of the Globe performs all, affording to Microcosme a perfect
Medicine found so really, according as the name imports her virtue, but if
rightly made and prepared, the use of it will prove it sufficiently.

ASA is found in ye operation, for external Symptoms, as old Ulcers, Fistulaes,
Cancers, which made many Chirurgians doubt whether ever they may be cured; but
this ASA has made the cure: it consumes all bad blood, which was fallen into
corruption, and may be inwardly used, because it will then exiccate, and dry up
the fountains, from whence spring all manner of Sores, Fistulaes, Cancers,
Wolves, noli me tangere, running Legs, Worms, and the like, be it on what part
of the body, where Plasters, Pultesses, and the like cannot help, and are not
strong enough, this alone will do it. For fresh wounds, be they made by
stobbing, cutting, slashing, it needs not to be administered, being too strong
for such wounds, gentler means are fitter for them; Balsams, Oils, Plasters,
may heal^nes^, either outwardly, or inwardly; Powders and potions may be
prepared. Symptoms in wounds, having their causes from within, must be cured
by searching into them, and the means for their cure must be prepared of that
strength, that they may reach home. As in this matter, things must be united,
and be taken from the generation of ABIHAIL, being joined in their principles
of the first essence, by nature's means, its brought to the highest perfection,
whereby such Sores, U^cers, etc. are fundamentally cured. For ordinary wounds
there is no need of it, if no Symptoms are at hand, and the party endangered,
a Balsam only will perform the deed, mollifying the flesh, and nature will
further, and promote the cure

Be thankful next God to me, that has taught you inward and outward
Medicines, and are such, which others before me have concealed, they can cure
fundamentally any Symptoms, be they within, or without on the body, such
virtues are not found in Outlandish woods, drugs, or herbs: Forrainers have
their proper climates, under which they have convenient Physical Vegetables:
our climate affords unto us proper Medicinal Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals
for our constitution; only Doctors are not expert to make their Medicinal
preparations out of them. I hold with my Physic PHALAIA and ASA of one name in
their descent, whereby nature has made me to be a Physician; it keeps good
to the last, preserves man in health and strength all the time the Creator
has appointed for him: virtue it has showed triumphantly in many parties,
obtaining victory against all its enemies, and it was apparent to the world,
that these two Medicines PHALAIA and ASA of one kind, and of one matter made
and prepared: and it is found daily, that in the generality they can set all
into a perfect degree, as being descended from the Center, can preserve the
Center as the Root, and can bring things to right within and without, tending
to that end, for which it is prepared.

Thus I wish the Reader, to whom I f^ithfully intimate the Manuals of it,
prosperity and success in the preparation of it, that it may be unto his
health: the work will praise the Master, upon Oath I further inform you t us,
that four things are required to make a perfect Philosopher and true Physician.

First, he must be importunate and fervent in his devotion to God, as the
highest heavenly Physician, to ask of him grace, wisdom, understanding, and his
blessing upon his undertakings, that it may appear unto the world, that God
grants things for the good of men, that he may be p^aised and magnified for
such benefits: and is to show himself in his life and conversation godly and
honest.

Secondly, a Physician ought to know the diseases, and to distinguish the one
from the other, and what proper remedies he is to use against these diseases:
for without the knowledge of diseases a Physician is not perfect: man's
complexion must be discerned, the cause of the disease searched into, and the
means well considered, that no contraries be applied, whereby further troubles
are caused* proper remedies fitting the disease must be applied, that
restitution be made unto former health.

Thirdly, it is requisite, that he read frequently the writings of ancient
Philosophers, and read them over and over, and take notice in what they do
concur and agree, and where they aim all at one mark, then he that has
understanding will discern the good from the bad, Sophistry from truth: the
ancients knew many good things, for mine own part I must confess, that I
borrowed the foundation of my knowledge from them, which made me to lay it to
heart, and am thereby moved to leave for others also a cornerstone, that truth
may further be confirmed, and the grounds of it be made easier, clearer,
plainer, and more manifest by a further knowledge of my writing.

Fourthly, a Philosopher must learn to Anatomize things in nature, to know what
they contain within and without, to separate the poison from the Medicinal
quality. Hereunto belong several Manuals, how to dissolve, separate, exalt, and
prepare fully Metals, Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals. He that ha^h learned
all these, he may discourse wisely of things, confirm their grounds in truth;
but others, which are ash^med to work herein, cannot glory in any truth:
because by the receipts found in other men's writings, are these men led, and
made a trade of other men's wri^ings, not endeavoring to learn more in their
own experience: I am not ashamed to learn daily, because nature is ^ound and
endless, cannot be comprehended fully, by reason of the shortness of man's
life, and none can say that there is nothing left more for him to learn. No
such matter. Thus you see, that Gods blessing must be obtained by fervent and
frequent praying unto God, the causes of diseases must be known, their cure
must be ordered according to the direction of Philosophic writings, ^djoyning
an experimental knowledge thereunto. He that does, and knows ^hese four
things may glory in his ways, confirming things in deeds, and not to exercise
a trade upon other men's receipts. My Medicaments, if well prepared and duly
used, will by Gods help make known, that they received their strength from God,
the mavelous Creator to perform these things, which ignorants, and men of li
tle faith cannot comprehend: by daily experience faith gets strength, that
man may praise the highest, who has put such ve^^^^s into natural things, for
the which mortals are not able to return sufficient thanks. As much as lies in
my power I will praise the Lord day and night, and is not possible to require
him in any other way. At the closing observe thus much; in School long
discourses are made of the three principles of all things, of the matter of
heaven, what it is made of, and on what the earth does rest, how the Elements
were made, and of the beginning of the Firmament, and of several opinions they
are about the original causes of Metals Minerals, Vegetables, of their
qualities and proper^ies, o^ the original of man, and of other A^imal^,
s^^^ching in their conceits into their lives, virtues, etc. Bu^ my Son
hearken unto me, and take notice of what I say: all their pretended sayings are
a mere nothing, they speak ignorantly without any certainty: because they have
no experimental knowledge, having laid no foundation, nor have they learned any
true decision in their demonstration^ Thoughts pay no Custom, or Toll, they fly
into heaven, descend to the neathermost parts of the earth, if experience and
their thought do not concur, then their though^s are found a mere opinion,
then they must confess, I d^d not think it could be so! Man's thoughts are
fi^ly compared with a dream, because nothing follows upon an imagination;
Natures secrets must be studied exp^rimentally. If Artists, or Mechanics would
imagine to work such, or such things, be it Watches, or other curious Metalline
works, but does not invent fit instruments, whereby to make that work they have
in their fancy, what can they produce by that imagination? An empty opinion,
and no Art. So in the knowledge of Na^ural things, their secrets require a^
greater exactness to be searched i^to, which to lazy unexpert men seem strange
and impossible. I tell you there is required an exact diligence to find that,
which lies ^i^^ in them, it must be done by separation. Nature must be
anatom^zed, good and bad in it must be discerued, what is contained in each in
its Center, for the general, and what comes from it in particular.

Therefore Macrocosme and Microcosme, yea, the things which grow and are found
therein, are compared to a round Circle, in whose middle there is a Center, let
the Circle be turned which way it will, it keeps round every way, and its
Center stays unremoved. A Philosopher also must know rightly the Center of
each matter, which must stand unremoved in every substance, but the substance
may be turned any way he pleases, and make of it several forms, according as
it received its power from above. (...) speak now to be taken notice of thus: I
take in hand any natural thing, dissolve, or open it by a Key, which is the
means of the unfolding, and search therein by a fire's proof, which is the
master of all proofs, what may be made of it: Here I find as many wonders and
qualities, which I never ^hought of, much less had I experience of.

Of natural things are made Powders, Oils, Water, Salt, volatile spirits and
fumes: In these preparations are beheld wonders upon wonders, witness the
distillations, digestions, and putrefactions. There are found and seen many
spiri^ual and corporeal colors, which appear black, gray, white, blew, green,
yellow, red, Azure color with a re^^exion of all manner of insprinckled
colors, which cannot well be described, and unexpert men hardly believe it.
from these preparations are several qualities felt, the one (...) corrosive and
sharp, the other is pleasant and mild, the ^ne is sour, the other is sweet,
according as they are pre^ared, so they yield good and bad, poison, or physic:
for good thing can be made the worst poison, and the worst ^oyson can be turned
into the best Medicine: which is not (...) great a marvel, because all lies in
the preparation of ^^ings: though every one cannot conceive of it, yet it is
so, and will be a truth for ever, because nature has manifested ^^r self thus
by experience.

A blind man cannot tell how the inward parts of man's ^^dy are conditioned,
but the seeing Physician, who ana^^mizeth the body, he can judge of the
situation of the ^eart, Brain, Liver, Lungs, Reins, Bladder, of the Entrals,
^^d of all the Veins, and knows in what form and condi^on they are. But
before he has made this anatomy, all ^ese were hid from him, a Myner which
seeks so Oars, (...) does not know what riches he may expect from Metals,
^^lesse he open the Oar, and so fine it: what he finds in (...) by fire, then
he may know really in his calculation, what ^^hes he may expect from it. So
other things must be pro^^ded in, which true Naturalists will endeavor to do,
and not prate of things only without experimental knowledge, disputing of
colors with the blind man; learn to know the ground with your own eyes and
hands, which Nature hides within her, then you may speak wisely of them with
good reason, and you may build upon an invincible Rock. If you do not so, then
you are but a Fantastic prater, whose discourse is grounded on sand without
experience, and is soon shaken by every wind, and ruined in the end. The
ground of this knowledge must be learned as you heard, by anatomizing and
separating of things, which by distillation is made known: where every Element
is separated apart, there it will be made known what is cold, or moist, warm,
or dry. There you learn to know the three principles, how the spirit is
separated from the body, and how the Oil is separated from the water, and how
the Sale is drawn from the Caput mort of each matter, and is reduced again into
a spirit, and how these three are afterward joined again, and by fire are
brought into one body. Further is here learned, how each after its separation,
and afterward in a conjunction may profitably and safely be used for their
several uses they are prepared for: all which must be done by a medium. At the
first Creation man is earthy and gross, but his Soul, Spirit, and Body, being
separated by death, putrifieth under ground, and when the Highest comes to
judgment, he is raised again, his Body, Soul, and spirit comes together,
according to Faith and Scripture; that body is no more earthy, as it was
formerly, but is found heavenly and clarified, glittering as the Stars in the
East, and like the Sun is seen, when all the Clouds are past. So it is here,
when earthinesse is broken, divided, and separated, then the three principles
of the dead substance are made apparent, the dead one is forsaken, the living
power comes to her perfection, because her obstruction is laid aside, that the
virtue in the operation may be manifested; In this separation and manifestation
is then known what these three principles are, which are so much discoursed of,
namely Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, according to the condition of the subject.
He that does not think it to be true, let him go to the end of the World, where
he shall feel all what in his dumb capacity he could not comprehend: if any one
should intend to teach me any other with a prolixity of words, he may fill me
with words, but he must prove it really also, for without that I am not bound
to believe his words, but desire some sign as Thomas, one of the Twelve, who
looked for an Ocular demonstration: I might have left out Thomas, but being
there is a clift between a spiritual and worldly unbeliever, I gave liberty to
my mind to speak it, for there is a great difference in heavenly and worldly
matters, touching faith and things comprehensible, and there is that difference
found also in fidereal and earthly things: for fidereal things are comprehended
by sharp imagination, and Arithmatick rules, but to the finding out of earthly
things there belongs speculation and separation: with speculation must be
joined an intention, and an apprehension is annexed to speculation, the former
is done spiritually, because the spirit of man does not rest, desires to
apprehend more qualities of the spirit in things natural: every spirit still
draws its like: the rest is earthy: for an earthy body separateth by manuals
the earthly body from the spiritual part, and so the one may be discerned
before and from the other. Whereas the soul in both shows her self really,
therefore is she in all really, for she tieth the heavenly and earthy together
like a bond, but when the heavenly is ^^^arated from (...) ^^^rthy, that the
soul also must forsake her body, then you (...) ^^^arated and received the
three, each apa^t, which a^^^^ (...) true knowledge and conjunction can afford
such a trium^^ing and clarifyed body which is found in a better degree of many
thousand times, because the grossest is laid aside from the earthy.

For when heaven and earth come to be refined by the great Creator, then the
greatest part will be consumed by fire, and by that purging it will be exalted
to the same degree with the heavenly, and set into the same line, for each all
is created by one, each all is ordained by one, and though through sin by one
man all was corrupted unto death, yet all is by one brought to a better State
of life: and the only Creator intends to judge all by fire, and all must again
become one, which will be that heavenly essence, to which the earthl gave way
by means of the fire: the eternal glory leaving a room for devil and death,
from whence they shall look on the elect, admiring the great Majesty and glory
of God, which in a divine essence of three distinct persons is all in all: and
has created all.

Thus the three persons in the deity have held forth in us their invisible
essence, giving thereby to understand by an insearchable wisdom, what their
creature and order is: we men are too weak to come higher; God is and will be
God, and we men must be content with such gifts aff^^ded unto us: hereafter
shall be accomplished that which is prophesied of by Prophets and Apostles, and
now are conceived of only by way of faith, therefore we ought now to be
contented, what by Nature is intimated in a visible way: other things
incomprehensible unto us, and matters of faith, will appear better to be
understood at the end of the world, God grant unto us all a true knowledge of
^^mporal goods and of the eternal.

At the closing of this I say, that this is the whole Art and whole foundation
of all the Philosophic speech in which is that sought; which many desire,
taking great pains, and making great expenses, namely to get wisdom and
judgment, a long life, health and riches of this world comprehended in few
words; as for example. First you must know, that I wi^^ show unto you such an
example of th^^ (...) ^^nals, which in the appearance is a mean and poor on^
(...) ^f a mihgty consequence, if rightly considered, The (...) ^ayeth an egg,
the same egg is by heat brought to a hard (...) or coagulation; by a further
heat it is brought to a putrefaction, where it it corrupted: in this
putrefaction the egg receives a new Genus, wherein is raised a new life, and a
chicken is hatched, This chicken being perfect, the shell opens making way
for the chichen to creep forth, this chicken coming to a further ripeness and
age, increases further in her kind. Thus Nature furthereth her own kind, and
augmetteth Usque ad infinitmm. True, the egg is not prima materia of the Cock
or Hen, but the prima materia of their flesh is the first seed, out of which
the egg is gone into a form, which by the equal nature of the motion of both is
driven together and united, from thence by a further heat it went to a
putrefaction, from thence into a new birth, which new birth still propagateth
and increases.

So it is with man, for one man alone cannot produce a new birth, unless both
seeds of male and female be united, for after this conjunction through the
Nutriment of the body, and continued natural heat of these two seeds, which in
the Center are known for one Nature, get a new life, and more men are begotten,
which propagate further by their seed, by this means the whole world is filled
with men. This seed of man is the noblest subtilest blood of a white quality,
in which dwells the vital Spirit, which is driven together by motion. If
these seeds of both kinds by their desire of lust are together united, and
their Natures be not corrupted, or else are contrary one to another, then there
is preserved a life by a heat, and brought to perfection in the mothers womb,
and another man is brought forth, Thus much be spoken of the seed of Animals.

The vegetable seed is made palpable and visible which from each kind of herb
is separated and propagated in the earth for an increase, which seed must first
putrify in the earth, and then must be nourished by a temperate moisture, at
last this seed by a convenient warm air is brought to a perfection, thus
vegetables are increased, and in their kind preserved: but the first beginning
of a vegetable seed is a spiritual essence or astral influence, whereby in the
earth was gotten an imagination, and became impregnated with a matter, out of
which by the help of the Elements it came to be something: what form of seed
the earth was desirous of after the heavenly impression, that form it received
first, and brought it to a kind, which brings a further increase by its
palpable seed in the generation, hereby man may try his futher skill: but he is
not able to create a new seed, as Nature does by an influence from above only
he is able to increase a formed seed.

Of Metals and Minerals I inform you this, that there is one only Almighty
Being, which is from eternity, and abides unto eternity, which is the Creator
of heaven and earth, namely the eternal Deity in three distinct persons, which
three in the Deity are a perfect divine being: and though I confess and
acknowledge these three persons, yet I confess only one God in one Being. This
I do now speak as a Type of the first seed of the three principles, that the
first beginning, to beget Metallin seeds is wrought in the earth by a fideriall
impression, which quality presses from above into the nether as in the belly
of the earth, and works continually a heat therein, with the help of the
Elements; for both must be together: the earthy affords an imagination, that
the earth is fitted for conception and is impregnated, the Elements nourish and
feed this fruit, bring it on by a continued hot quality unto perfection, the
earthy substance affords a form thereunto; thus at the beginning the Metallin
and Mineral seed is effected namely by an astral imagination, Elemental
operation, and terrestrial form: the astral is heavenly, the Elementary is
spiritual, and the earthy is corporeal, these three make of their first Center
the first essence of the Metallin seed, which Philosophers have further
searched into, that out of this essence there is become a form of a Metallin
matter, p^^pably joined together of three, of a Metalline Sulphur ^eavenly, a
Metalline Mercury spritual, and a Metalline salt bodily, which three are found
at the opening of Metals: for Metalls and Minerals must be broken and opened:
Minerals are of the same sanguinity, of the same quality and nature, as Metals
are, only they are not sufficiently ripened unto coagulation, and may be
ackowledged for unripe Metals, for the spirit in them is found as mighty
Metalline as it is in the perfectest Metals. For Metals may be destroyed and
easily reduced unto Minerals, and of Minerals are prepared Medicaments, which
ripen and transmute Metals, which must be noted; and it is done, when Spirit,
Soul and Body are separated and purely reunited. The remaining terrestrity
being put off, then follows a perfect birth, and the perfect ripening by heat
performs her office, that Spirit, Soul and Body at the beginning in their first
seed have been a heavenly water, which begot these three, out of which three is
become a Metalline Sulphur, a Metalline Mercury, and a Metalline salt, these in
their conjunction made a fix, visible, palpable body; first began a Mineral
one, then a Metalline by an astral imagination, digested and ripened by the
Elements, and by an earthly substance are made formal and Material.

Now when these bodies of Minerals and Metals are reduced to their first
beginning, then the heavenly seed does appear and is spiritual, which
spiritual must become an earthy one by the copulation of the Soul, which is
the medium and middle bond of their Union to make a Medicine out of it, whereby
is obtained health, long life, wisdom, riches in this mortal life: this is the
true sperme of Philosophers, long sought after, but not known: whose light was
desired of many to be seen, and is even the first matter, which lies open
before the eyes of all the world, few men know, it is found visibly in all
places, Namely Mercury, Sulphur and Salt, and a Mineral water or Metalline
liquor, as the Center, separated from its form, and made by these three
principles.

The Heavenly Phisician, the eternal Creator and inexhaustible fountain of
Grace, and the F^^^^^ ^f all wisdom, Father Son and Holy Ghost in one Dei^^
(...) us to know really in a due gratefulness his wond^ (...) ^orks, and make
us coheyres of his everlasting goods, (...) we after a temporal revelation may
in a true light seek for heavenly treasures, and may possess them eternally
with all the elects, where there is unspeakable glory without end, which is
attained unto by faith in our Savior, by bringing forth good fruits, by loving
of our neighbors, and helping the needy, which must be made evident with an
unblameab^^ (...) and due obedience to God. Amen.

FINIS.

