THE WATERS OF MARAH SWEETENED.

A Thanksgiving SERMON.

Preached at Taunton, in the County of Somerset, May 11. 1647. for the gracious
deliverance of that poor Town from the strait and bloody Siege.

By T. B. Master of Arts, and a Minister of the Gospel in that County.

EZEKIEL. 24.2. Write thee the name of the day; even of this same day. --

DEUTERONOMY. 4.32, 39. For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee
since the day that God created man upon the earth, and ask from one side of
the heaven to the other, whether there has been any such thing, as this great
thing is, or has been heard like it?

Know therefore this day, and consider it in your hearts, that the Lord he is
God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath, there is none else.

Keep therefore his statutes and his commandments --

LONDON, Printed for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold by George Treagle
in Taunton. 1648.

To the Right Worshipful the Major, with all the faithful and well affected
(to God and his Cause) Inhabitants of the Town of Taunton.
Honored Friends,
YOur importunities drew me to an undertaking the duty of May 11. 1645. Being
the day of their deliverance.
That Day: A day set apart for (...) vi. Tit. Psalm. 38.
calling to remembrance the day, as of your enlargement, so the Kingdoms
dawnings toward deliverance. Your incessant restless desires (after much
self-strugling) have hardened me against the conscience of my weak abilities, to
offer unto yours and the public view, this Sermon from the Press, which, when
delivered, you were pleased with patience to attend; and readiness of
affection to embrace. Jts not self-overvaluing, or forwardness of mine own,
that carries these lines abroad: 'twas enough in my apprehension, that such
sudden and broken conceptions were taken in by so judicious an Assembly.
However, if its publication may minister occasion of perpetuating the memory of
Gods great goodness to Taunton, by remaining its M. Newton, the reverend
Pastor of Taunton, having preached the first Anniversary Sermon in memory of
that Towns deliverance.
second remembrancer of that unparalled deliverance of yours, (the only
ground of your solicitations to me; as for the then preaching, so for the now
printing of this Sermon:) may it contribute the least mite toward the
quickening of your hearts that way, its my expected recompense and glory. And if
its homely dress may render it low, or unsatisfying for so knowing an age as
this, be pleased to consider, J intended not in this (or any other) with
excellency of speech, or (...). 1 Cor. 2.4.
perswasible words of man's wisdom, to Court the fancy; my desire being to
speak a word in season, and to preach not my self, but Christ Jesus the Lord,
and my self

Your Servant for Jesus sake, T. B.

The waters of Marah sweetened, etc.
EXODUS 15.23, 24, 25. And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the
waters of Marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called
Marah.

And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?

And he cried unto the Lord: and the Lord showed him a tree, which when he had
cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet.


WE are met here to solemnize this day in a religious acknowledgement of those
mercies and unparalled deliverances, which the great God (who is the hope of
Israel, and their Savior in the day of trouble) has reached forth to you of
this place, in crushing the cruelty, blasting the hopes, and defeating the
projects, of his, yours, and his Churches enemies. Indeed, God has given to
you abundant matter of thanksgiving; you have whole stories of wonders, enough
to fill your hearts and mouths with eternal praises; and if your natures
could be content to smother these favors in silence, the lepers of Samaria
would condemn your ingratitude, and tell you to your faces, you did not well
to hold your peace; seeing this day is a day of good tidings, 2 Reg. 7.9. In
furtherance therefore of your piety, I have made choice of this Scripture:
which though it may seem unsuitable both to the Auditors and occasion; yet I
doubt not, but you may meet with something in it, that may both refresh your
memories, and quicken your devotions. I must confess, the greatness of this
work, and the insufficiency of mine own abilities, might have been a
sufficient plea, to have waved this task; but that I might not seem wanting to
Gods glory, or your desires, I have adventured to appear in this place, before
this Assembly, upon this occasion. Let me beg this, that I may find you
attentive, leave you thankful.

Israel was now on their journey again for Canaan: their songs are scarce
ended for their deliverance from Pharaoh, and their cruel taskmasters, but
behold another rub in the way: a new trouble assaults them: they were not (in
their own apprehensions) in more danger of perishing formerly by the hands of
their enemies, then now they are for want of water; they had gone three days
journey, and could find none. Here was a sharp misery, clapped upon the heels of
a sweet mercy. When God delivers us from destruction, he does not secure us
from affliction. Though we are not condemned with, yet we may be chastned in
the world.

In the words we have 1. The peoples expectation. 2. The disappointment of that
expectation, with the reason of it, They could not drink, etc. 3. Their
carriage upon that disappointment, They murmured against Moses. 4. Moses his
practice, or the course he takes upon that carriage, He cries to God. 5. Gods
return to Moses his prayer, The waters were healed.


For the opening of the words.

First, what is meant by the waters of Marah. Two or three things held forth in
it. 1. Afflictions. Jer. 23.15. They shall drink the water of gall: Afflictions
are bitter waters. So Lam. 3.15. He has filled me with bitterness, he has
made me drunk with wormwood. Fer. Annot. in Exodus cap. 15.
2. The Law, with the curses and terrors of it: it is very bitter. Sin never
kills, until the Law put life in it. The strength of sin is the Law, 1 Cor.
15.56. 3. The heresies, errors, and schisms in the doctrine and worship of
God, Apoc. 8.11.

Secondly, what tree this was, that Moses cast into the waters, that made them
sweet. Some think it was some sweet tree, that had a natural virtue in it to
produce sweetness. Others, that it was a very bitter tree, and so likely in
its own nature to make the waters more bitter. So that the changing of the
water was not natural, but divine, miraculous, as is evident from the
smalnesse of the tree; from the abundance of the waters; as much as sufficed
600000. men; the suddenness of the change, and the shortness of it; they were
sweet but for the present: This God could have done without any external
sign, Fer. Annot. in Exodus cap. 15.
but he was pleased to use this means for the manifestation of his own power,
and that it might leave the deeper impression upon their spirits, who were so
dull and hard to believe.

Thirdly, what this tree points out. It intimates to us, Christ and his Gospel.
Gal. 6.14. The Gospel has a cross that goes along with it: yet it is such a
cross, as sweetens all other crosses to us. Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus, etc. Let the Law come thundering out all its
curses and terrors, it can never trouble a gracious spirit: here is a tree
that sweetens all.

From the coherence observe,

Crosses oftentimes lie near our choicest comforts: God usually does mingle
his favors with afflictions: see it here in these Israelites, after their
joyful melody of songs, and instruments of music, they are exercised first
with thirst, and then that thirst is tortured with bitter water: See it in
Abraham, Genesis 22. Sampson, Judge. 16. the Church, Act. 12. what ever our
comforts may be, yet crosses will follow, and trip up our heels. A Believer
here in this world, is half in heaven, and half out; Satan may come to
buffet him, as well as Christ to comfort him: A Christians life, is but an
intercourse of peace and trouble: God has his ends in it.

First, that he might drive us to the throne of grace: times of distress are
praying times: I doubt not but you of this place can seal to this truth, Lord
in their trouble they have visited thee: they poured out a prayer, when thy
chastning was upon them, Esaias 26.16. their prayers did but drop before, now
they are poured forth. And that of Hosea 5. ult. In their afflictions they will
seek me early. Dant animum ad loquendum libere ultimae miseria. Live. l. 9.
Extremities are not only an incentive, but a warrant to importunities: a
storm will bring a very heathen upon his knee, Jonah 1.5. God knows that his
children are never so fuly disposed to servency in prayer, as when the Cross
is upon their shoulders.

Secondly, that he might keep us from carnal security. A man is never more apt
to grow secure, never a fitter prey for Satan, then after some great mercy
received: as men are more drowsy after a feast, then upon an empty stomach; so
we after a feast of mercies: and therefore God will exercise us this way, that
he might keep us waking. No sleep so dangerous as that in sin.

Thirdly, that we might set the higher price upon his favors: we usually love
that best, which we sometimes want, are likely to loose one years peace now, is
better then 80. heretofore: Abraham's Son at seventy years, was better then if
he had been given sooner; and the same Isaac had not been so precious to him,
had he not been as miraculously restored, as given; his recovery from death
made him more acceptable, then if he had never been in danger.

to live? and can you then expect a continuance of your undervalued mercies,
which you have so evilly improved, so horribly abused? Oh tremble to consider
what may yet become of you; and fear, lest your habitations that are yet
remaining, be made a desolation; lest a provoked God, cause you with weeping
and amazed eyes to read this lesson, Oh that we had known, even we (who have
been partakers of such a deliverance as this in this our day, the things that
did belong unto our peace! But now -- You may weep out the rest. But I proceed.

And when they came to Marah, they could not drink, etc. Observe that

They are like Jobs deceitful brooks, Job 6.15. that will make men ashamed in
the Summer, when they turn aside for water to refresh them, and find none.
There are five particulars wherein this truth appears.

1. In regard of their entitie, and substance; they have not that in them,
which we expect they should yield: What Solomon speaks of dainties, is true
here; Desire not his dainties, for they are deceitful: there is abundance of
falsehood in creature comforts.

2. In regard of their quantity; there is not enough in the creature to supply
our wants. See Hag. 1.6, 9. You have sown much, and bring in little, etc. Ye
looked for much, and lo, it came to little: the Creatures are too poor, too
beggarly to content or satisfy us.

3. In regard of their quality. Men think in changing their condition, to find
waters of life, but they meet with waters of death. There is that in them will
poison, when relied on.

4. In regard of the efficacy. There is little efficacy in any creature we
can fancy, little virtue of their own, to convey any comfort, they are but
like a dead man, no way useful, till God put life in them: the strength they
have, they do receive from heaven. Man lives not by bread, etc.

5. In regard of their duration: Riches take Eagles wings and flee away, Prove.
23.5. swiftly, suddenly, irrecoverably. All dependence upon outward comforts,
in outward excellencies, is uncertain, dangerous; if a man rest on them, he
may outlive his trust, his prop may be taken away, and then down he falls.

Nulla res longa mortalium est, omnisque foelicitas seculi, dum teneiur
amittitur. Hier. All the excellency of all creature comforts, is but like an
impression of a seal upon water, which does vanish ere you see where, or what
it was: or like a picture drawn upon ice, that melts away with it. The fashion
of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. The Apostle shows, how unbeseeming a
thing it is for a Christian to set his heart upon things that are so vain,
rather shadows then true substantials. When Alexander saw that he was wounded,
and by that wound likely to die, he did then perceive the vanity of those
flatteries, who did persuade him, that he was a god: So when you shall see those
comforts, after which your spirits have been let out, and on which your hearts
have been so mightily set, as if your chiefest good had been locked up in them,
when you see them wounded, and the impression of death upon them; learn to see
the vanity of your flattering thoughts, and to work off your hearts from such
things, as are composed of such fading principles: Look upon them, as upon the
wing, ready to fly away. Jacob served Laban twenty years, and his wages was
changed ten times. Thus the world deals with them, who serve her. Oh that the
consideration of it might cause you to abate the edge of your desires, and
learn you to let out your affections after none but Christ! he deceives none,
fails none, never dies, but is still the same; able, willing to help, to
satisfy. Remember that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 36.8. Thou shall make them drink
of the river of thy pleasures. While we seek after creature comforts, we seek
to drink in puddles; but when we seek to Christ, we shall have rivers of
pleasures, which are both sweet and sure: and the less you take of that, the
more you shall receive of these. -- For the waters were bitter.

Whosoever will walk in Gods ways, must look for bitter things, not from foes
only, but friends. Call me not Naomi, but Marah, for the Lord has dealt
bitterly with me. So 2 Reg. 14.26. God saw the affliction of Israel, that it
was bitter: And Job complains, that God had written bitter things against him.
Well then, if you resolve for Canaan, resolve to meet with the waters of Marah
in your journey; yet let not that discourage you, for God can, and will lend a
tree to sweeten them.

See it here in Israel; the people want water, and instead of seeking to God,
they murmur against Moses; as if he had dried the wilderness, or imbittered
the waters. How mad is Man when he wants his natural desires! Cross but his
will, and you shall quickly see and know what is in him. One would have thought
that nothing could have opened their mouths to have spoken ill of Moses; even
the best in authority are subject to be murmured at, reviled. If people fare
well, they applaud themselves; if ill, they repine against their Magistrates,
their Governors. Some natures are so squeamish, that (as one said) God himself
can scarce please them.

Murmur not, as some of them did, and were destroyed, 1 Cor. 10.10. your
deliverance is enough to make you thankful, though what you expect be yet
denied you. If God answer you not in every thing, will you take pleasure in
nothing? will you slight his favors, because in one thing he crosses you? his
least mercy is beyond your best merit. Be silent before the Lord, lest he
answer you again in fury. And to help you in it, take these following rules.

1. Use a holy silence, not of tongue, but of spirit. When Aarons sons were
stricken dead with fire, he held his peace: And David, Psalm. 39.9. I held my
tongue, because it was thy doing; I was dumb, because thou did it. Thus
Hezekiah, Good is the word of the Lord, when he had received that sharp
message, Esaias 39.8.

2. Adore what we cannot fearch the reason of: as the mysteries of salvation,
and Providence, the Well is deep, we cannot fathom it; therefore with Paul, let
us adore it. Romans 11.33. O the depth! Gods ways are past finding out.

3. Seek after a great measure of self-denial: the greatest enemy of our
conformity to Gods will, is our Self, self-love, self ends, self-will; oppose,
subdue these, and that will help you against this sin. And he cried to the
Lord, etc. From hence observe, That Be we where we will, we may use this; and
it is the best means to help us out of trouble: it is Gods prevailing ordinance,
and it is that great engine that has carried on things so prosperously for us:
Luther calls the prayers of the Saints so many guns; and the Fathers call them
the Churches Artillery; which, if sent from the heart, they pierce the very
heavens, and wound the Lord of Hosts with pity: it overcomes him; Let me alone
Moses, Exodus 32.10. it is the golden key which unlocks heaven, and fetches all
from God: Whatever is in Gods power, is a Saints by prayer; and what ever we
want there, we may fetch it: if soule-strength, Psalm. 138.3. if strength
against enemies, Psalm. 109.4. For my love they are mine adversaries, but I give
my self to prayer: q. d. That is my refuge, I will not rail as they do, I
will make my moan to my God. It Is a sign of a gracious spirit to lay the
burden upon Prayer. And though the strongest arguments we can use cannot alter
God, yet they change and move our hearts: and God is pleased to be so indulgent
to us, and to suffer us thus to plead with him, and then he usually answers:
but yet it is 1. when it is in faith, that is one of our chiefest strengths, Genesis
32.9. Where there are but words, they vanish, but where there is faith, that
makes it prevalent. Jan. 1.15.
2. When you can appeal to God, that we are in his way he set us in: when a
soul can say, Though there be such a difficulty, yet Lord thou know I am in
thy way. 3. When we can plead a particular promise: the more faith there is to
plead a promise for what I have in hand, the more assurance to prevail. 4. A
sense of our own unworthiness: When a soul comes to see his vileness,
emptiness, and so comes with humility, etc.

this remedy in their distresses, who want both words and hearts to go to God:
When you speak to men, you are full; but when to God, you have nothing to say:
But consider; is not God a Father, and can Children want a tongue to speak to
their Father? Is not God a Husband, and can a Wife want words to speak to her
Husband?

2. Is it so? Let wicked men take heed how they wrong the Saints, who have such
a powerful means to help themselves: If they complain, the Lord is bound to
hear, Exodus 21.23. and if he take the matter into his hands, woe be unto ye,
Psalm. 2.

3. Is it so? You then who have had experience of this powerful ordinance, and
have found God to be a prayer hearing, and a prayer answering God in his
gracious returns of mercy: Bless this God, for his favors thus conferred,
get enlarged hearts to set forth his mercies according to their merits. Indeed
the tongue of Men and Angels can never do it as they should; but will not you
therefore do as you may? His mercies have not failed you, and shall your
acknowledgements fail him? should you not find your tongues to praise him for
his favors enjoyed, as well as pray for them, wanted? As miseries are removed
by prayer, so mercies are to be welcomed with songs: Sacrifices of thanksgiving
did always follow Sacrifices of pacification. Lev. 3. Could you pour out
petitions in time of need, in the day of your distress; and will you not drop
forth a few thanks, when you have what you would, more then you expected, then
ye prayed for? No, let your right hands forget their cunning, your tongues for
ever cleave to the roof of your mouths, rather then forget, neglect to set
forth his praises, who has given you such a deliverance. And the Lord showed
him a tree, etc.

Did you ever know the Sun want light; the Sea, a Fountain, Water? God is a
sun, a sun of righteousness; a Sea, a Fountain, a Spring of living Water; and
though you may, yet he is never empty; there is still an overflowing fullness
in him, he is never at a stand, but knows how to comfort, to deliver his,
Psalm. 84. Psalm. 18.2. Jer. 2. Eze. 11. Esaias 33.21 and 27.3.
2 Pet. 2.9. I might bring a cloud of witnesses to make good this truth; scarce
a page in the book of God but proclaims it. Hence you shall find, he is
compared to whatsoever may be requisite, for the comfort and defense of his
people: Sometimes he is styled a Sun, a shield, a sanctuary, a refuge, a rock,
a fountain, a light, etc. to teach us, whatever our condition, our wants be,
there is that in God will answer, will supply all. Hence is he called an all
suf-ficient, an Almighty God; a God to whom nothing is hard, Genesis 18.14.
Infinite in wisdom, that knows all our wants, and the way to supply them;
knows them, not only objective, but affective; being touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, as the Apostle phraseth it, Heb. 14.15. he knows how to
clear every channel to convey, and seasonably to dispense comfort: he is
infinite in power, and is able to do whatsoever he will; there is nothing can
reach beyond his power: he is infinite in goodness, in love, which lays an
engagement upon him, to let out and act these for the good of all afflicted
ones: so that be our straits never so great, there is wisdom enough to see
them, and to bring out of them; be our enemies, our weakness never so
powerful, there is strength enough to sustain, to rescue us; be our
backslidings never so many, there is goodness and love enough to heal them,
faithfulness and truth enough in God to perform, what ever he has promised.
In many places he is styled The Lord of Hosts; he is one that has the command
of all the creatures both in heaven and earth: and if they cannot afford help
enough, he can create more; he can do it without them, by, and from himself;
he can change the very course of nature for his childrens good. See it in
Jonah, Isa. 59.10.
in the three Children, in Daniel. As no means can save where God will ruin;
so nothing shall hinder where God will help. I might be particular in the proof
of this truth, and show you the fullness that is in God to supply us. 1. In
respect of all our necessities, both for soul, or body, or both: there is that
in him that will supply every want, make up every defect: God is a general, an
universal good. 2. In respect of all times and seasons: It may be said of
creaturecomforts (as one speaks) as 'twas of David, he served his time; but God
is such a help, to whom there is no time, wherein he cannot do good: Nullum
tempus occurrit regi: no season is out of season with him: he is as able now,
as then, then, as at any other time: All times are alike to him, who never
wants power, nor a heart to do good to his. But I am confident you of this
place have seen, and can speak as much of God in this particular, as ever did a
people; (oh that you had hearts to render unto him according to all the good
that he has shown ye!) and therefore I shall hasten to the Application, and the
main Use shall be to provoke you unto thankfulness.

them to his dishonor. Friends, consider what God has done for you; the
mercies that you have received, do enjoy; But tell me, where are your books of
remembrance? where is your Jehovah now, Exodus 17.15. wherein you have
proclaimed God to be your salvation? what is become of all Gods wonders among
you? wonders that might even fill a Volumn, and give life to a story that
should outlive the world? whither is the memory of all your deliverances fled?
deliverances When the Castle was first taken by the Park forces.
from cruelty and oppression within, when they that hated you, ruled over you;
from the teeth and sury of those barbarous wretches At the raising of the first
and last Sieges.
without? have you forgotten this? Again, what is become of the destroying
pestilence; that within these few years had taken up its habitation among you?
has your present health and jollity put to silence all those dying groans,
which so lately sounded in your affrighted ears? shall such mercies as these
are, lie raked up in the dust of time, without any monument set over them, to
tell, once they were? But to pass over these, this day alone has matter
enough of an eternal gratulation, being the center (as it were) wherein all
mercies met upon your heads. Oh what an evidence of love, and wisdom, and
power was here, that when so many potent and malicious enemies had environed
you, were so near you, had brought destruction within your walls, even to your
thresholds; enemies that were high in blood and rage; that had all the helps
that either Rome or Hell could afford; when you were even ready to be swallowed
up of them (and in your own apprehensions, a lost, an helples, hopeles people)
that God should then, even in the very nick of time, when your necks were on
the Altar, and under the sword, that he should then step in, and find means for
your escape, defeat them, deliver you! -- surely no strength, no Armies shall
prevail to ruin them, whom God resolves to protect, to deliver: if he be with
us, no matter who is against us. Oh, that you would therefore praise the Lord
for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he has done for you! May not we
say of Taunton, as once Balaak said of Israel, Number. 23. what has God wrought
for you! oh, how solemnly festival should this day be to you, and your
posserities for ever! Let me therefore speak to you in the words of the Lord to
Moses, Exodus 17.14. write it for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it to
Josuah: so do you; set up a monument of this deliverance, a monument, that may
eternize Gods praises, and procure him honor, by those that are yet unborn:
that you may sing of the mercies of God for ever, and may make known his
faithfulness to all generations: take up the expressions and resolutions of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 118.24. This is the day which the Lord has made, we will
rejoice and be glad in it. Sure I am, had your enemies prevailed, it would have
been an high feast in Gath, a day of Jubilee in Ascalon; the daughters of the
uncircumcised would have made it a day of triumph: be not you behind them, but
show as much joy, express as much thankfulness for your deliverance, as they
would certainly have done for utter desolation. Think seriously on it; (I
cannot but speak it again) has God bestowed such favors on Taunton, and shall
Taunton forget them? there is an Emphasis in that word; much Rhetoric in it;
Taunton? a place that has been freed from so many judgments, and that so often;
the sword, the Pestilence, and the famine? that does enjoy so many blessings,
and those so precious; health, prosperity, plenty, and the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ, etc. a place for which God has wrought so many (even miracles
of) mercies for its preservation, in its deliverance; shall such favors be
heaped upon such a people; and should they die in their thoughts? but for two
or three motives, if this serve not, to stir you up.

1. Consider the misery you were in before you were delivered, that is the way
to exalt God in your praises: represent to your selves your sad condition, your
fears, your wants, your dangers: contraries illustrate one another, as
prosperity and adversity. The misery of a Saint formerly, sets forth the mercy
of God in Jesus Christ: one years peace now, is more prised then ten before:
the want of things do much commend them: As the wickeds troubles are mightily
aggravated, by the mercies went before; so the Saints deliverances, by the
miseries preceded. You that have deliverance by Christ, look to the misery you
were in, begin with that: what darkness and shadow of death did you sit in? in
what bondage to sin and hell? how irrecoverably lost and undone in your selves?
when we were sinners Christ died for us; when ungodly, when enemies, when dead,
Romans 5. Ephesians. 2. look to this mercy of God in Christ: alas! what praise will
ye else give to God this day? we can never praise God aright unless we look
upon the perfection of all misery we were in, to the perfection of all
happiness that by Christ God has brought us to: to study misery out of
Christ, is to dig to hell; but to study misery and Christ, is to build to
heaven, so for the business of this day: remember from whence you were
delivered; take the rise of the misery there: the way to value a mercy, is to
see a misery: look back to the beginning of your troubles, and see the wonders
God has wrought; what seas have been divided for you to pass through:
remember how nigh you were to the enemies hands, what enemy 'twas, what their
threats, their malice, their bloody resolutions: look on the straits you were
in for Ammunition, Provision; and with what a mighty hand and stretchedout arm
God did supply you, and has rescued you; look upon all the ways of God
toward you, that you may return to him according to his working, and rejoice
in him: it is a poor thing to have such a strong hold preserved, such a cruel
enemy subdued, to be matter of your joy: but let this, that the Lord of hosts
is with you; let that be the matter of your joy, of your praise: Let temporal
deliverance stir up within us a war against our lusts, our pride, our
self ends, our loosenes, etc. oh, these are provoking things, which of
themselves will work our destruction; they are graves of Sodom, vines of
Gomorrah; Fight against these, but let God be your joy, let him be matter of
your praise.

2. Consider your demerits, how little you deserved, how justly you might have
perished, and been both the prey and scorn of your bloodthirsty enemies: he
that thinks himself unworthy of any thing, will be thankful for every thing,
content with the smallest mercy; much more for such a concerning one.

Thirdly, Look upon the worth, the excellency of the mercy vouchsafed you; nay,
how many mercies you enjoy, how many miseries you have escaped by it: the
consideration of your condition with such mercies, will set an high price upon
what you now enjoy, and provoke you to thankfulness: how sad, how truly
miserable would your lives have been, without Wife, Children, houses, friends,
estates, without the presence of God in his ordinances: and is not the
enjoyment of all these (and more) worthy of thanks? what was your bitterness
when every moment you expect either death, or a prison? and can you not thank
God, who has wrought so happy a change?

4. Confider it is the way not only to continue, but increase your blessings:
unthankfulness forfeits all we have received, undoes all: dries up the
channel, and stops the passages through which mercies should flow; but this
lays all open: I know you use to sow your seed, where you may have most
increase; so God his favors where he has most praise: But then remember in
your return of praise it must be,

1. A free praise, not pressed or wrung out; the willingness of the mind is ever
the fat of the sacrifice: God gives, delivers freely; therefore do you praise
him freely.

2. Full and complete: not of the face only to show, nor the tongue only to
proclaim it, but of the heart too: that is true praise, when the heart as well
as the tongue sounds it forth, Psalm. 103.

3. Holy: they were merry that kept the Kings day, Hos. 7.5. by taking bowl
after bowl, till they were sick again: ours must not be such: It must begin at
Hosanna: I will make them joyful in my house of prayer: the stream of our
praise, must come from the spring head of religion. And then

4. Lastly, it must be constant, continued in our conversations: we must live
thankfully as well as speak so: you all seem to congratulate the joy of this
day, but if you would approve your selves truly thankful to your God, in whose
favor is life, and so be gainers by all your former losses; Live down your
sins, your formality, your security, etc. part with all your gainful, your
plausible evils: be more holy, more humble, more temperate, spiritual,
fruitful, etc. renew your holy covenants with your God, and keep them for
ever: oh, how memorable a pattern of mercy would you then be! and what a famous
trophe of victory might then be erected in Taunton, over all your enemies! And
you that are Magistrates, rouse up your spirit, awaken your Christian courage,
bear not the sword in vain; but set your selves zealously against the sins of
your Town to root them out, which else will betray your happiness; and the Lord
be with you. One observation more, and I have done.

He is the tree that must be thrown into the waters; he sweetens the law,
afflictions, prosperity, adversity; that turns all into gold. Let our condition
be what it will, if Christ be there, it cannot but be comfortable: see it in
David, how many Psalms did he begin in fear; which he did end in joy? at first
you shall find little, but anguish, despair; yet after a sharp conflict nothing
appears but joy: what, did there a messenger of good news come in whilst he was
writing; as Elisha sent to the King of Israel, whilst he was rending his
clothes: 2 King. 5. No but as he grew more inward and familiar with God, his
soul became lighter and lighter, arising from the burden with abundance of
comfort. Nothing can trouble or darken that soul where Christ is pleased to
shine: thy favor is better then life: Psalm. 63.5. and Christ to Paul, my grace
is sufficient, 2 Cor. 12.9. Satan's buffets can never hurt, where the grace of
Christ is our strength: as no plaster can cure where he wounds, so no sorrows
shall overcome where he is the comforter.

get such an estate; as such, or such a man has, and be content if God should
give thee thy portion in this life? oh, the baseness, the blindness of men!

Esa. 51.11. it is said, that the redeemed of the Lord shall come with singing
unto Sion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain
gladness, and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away: there is matter of
joy, of triumph in Jesus Christ; and though you should meet with bitter waters
at first, yet you shall find sweet at the last; though you drink of the waters
of Marah here; yet you shall arive at Canaan in the end, where you shall not
only drink off, but sweetly bathe your selves in never-ending rivers of glory
and pleasure for evermore, and help make up that heavenly consort, in singing
Hallelujah; glory, and honor, and praise to him that sits on the throne, who
lives for ever and ever.

FINIS.

