The DOCTRINE OF Self-posing, OR, A Christians Duty of putting Cases of
Difficulty to himself.

Being the Sum of some Sermons Preached at Vpton upon Seavern, in the County
of Worcester.

By B. Baxter, late Minister of the Gospel there, but now removed.

Acts 20.24. But none of these things move me.

Psalm. 4.4. Commune with your own hearts upon your Beds.

London, Printed for Peter Parker, and are to be sold at his Shop under
Creed-Church near Aldgate. 1666.

To my much honored Brother, Mr. Anthony Nicholetts of London, Merchant.
SIR,
THe Psalmist speaks of those that go down to the Sea in Ships, that they not
only see the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep, (Psalm 107.23,
24.) but also that they meet with dangers and difficulties in that Deep. As
they see something that causes Wonder and admiration, so also something that
causes Fear and Consternation. St Paul speaks of his perils in the Sea. And
as it was the saying of one, Qui nescit orare, discat navigare, thereby
intimating that at Sea men shall meet with such dangers and difficulties that
will put them upon crying every man to his God, as it did those Mariners, Jon.
1.5. Dangers I know you meet with at Sea, and although you are safely arrived
here, yet dangers and difficulties are to be expected. You and all Christians
(while on this side Heaven) are still upon a Sea; so is this World said to be
(Rev. 15.9.) a Sea of Glass mingled with Fire.

Sir, I present you with this small Tract, the Scope of which, is, To teach you
and all Christians, the Art of bearing troubles without much troubling of
themselves. It is only to show us (if we must fall into trouble) how to make
our fall the easier, viz. Forward, and not backward, into troubles foreseen,
and not into troubles that were not forethought. And this is by putting cases
of difficulty to our selves, till God bring us to our desired Haven, which is
Heaven.

So wishing you all Happiness Temporal, but especially Spiritual and Eternal,

I am Your most affectionate Brother, Ben. Baxter.

To the Reader.
READER,
THe Reverend Author, (and my special friend and lately my neighbor Minister
in that Country where we are both cast out) here commends to thee a duty so
agreeable to thy Rational Nature, and thy christian profession, and so much
tending to thy safety, peace and comfort, that I may suppose it has thine
approbation; and therefore thou art the more to be blamed if it have not thy
practice. Foresight by Reason upon natural proof, is it that differenceth a
wise man from a fool, if not a man from a brute: Foresight by Faith upon
supernatural-Revelation, is much of the difference between a Christian and an
Infidel. He that foreseeth not the good that is attaineable, will never seek
it; and he that foreseeth not the evil that may come, will not prevent it; and
he that foreseeth not the evil that will come will not be prepared so to
entertain it, as may preserve him from the malignity and turn it to his
advantage. Most of our sufferings are matter of great temptation to us, and
call us to great duty; and both require serious preparation.

There is scarce any Temptation that prevails notably against us, but upon
review we may observe where our cautelous foresight might have prevented it.
And scarce a duty that we neglect, but we are forced upon review, to blame our
neglect of prevision and preparation. We seldom do any great work aright upon
the sudden; and seldom well escape an enemy that surprizeth us unexpectedly;
or a snare that we did not foresee or fear. But we must see that we put cases
but as they are, and that we pretend not to foresee that which is no the object
of foresight, and that we understand the right use of such pre-vision. There
are some things that will certainly come to pass, but are not necessary to be
foreseen, because they concern us not, or call not for our duty. There are some
things that will certainly come to pass, and the foresight of them, is
absolutely necessary to salvation; as the resurrection of the body, the day of
Judgment, the salvation of the sanctified, and the damnation of all that dye in
an unsanctified state. Here are the great cases to be put; Am I ready to dye?
or to give up my Accounts? What if this night my soul be required? Am I assured
of my salvation, or not? And here are the necessary Resolutions to be made, as
ever we will see the Lord with comfort, viz. I am resolved in the strength of
grace to be a new Creature, and to redeem my time, and spare no care or pains
or cost for my salvation. For want of putting these certain necessary cases,
and taking up these necessary resolutions, it is that so many thousands perish.
But there are also some things that are to us of uncertain futurition, that are
but possible or probable as to our foreknowledg: To conclude that such things
will come to pass, is error and not duty; but to conclude that they may come to
pass, or that they are likely so to do, is our duty in case they be matters
that call for our pre-vision and preparation. A great deal of miscarriage is in
the World, by the false stating of such cases: some, that have not light enough
to be acquainted with their darkness, nor humility enough to save them from
overvaluing their understandings or conceits, are putting their uncertain
Expositions of some obscure Scripture Prophesies (of Daniel, the Revelation,
etc.) among the Articles of their faith; and thence taking up resolutions for
practice, and taking the rule for the ordering of their other epinions and
their lives; and so they must find at last that they have erred in that
exposition, at the dear rate of finding also that thence they have erred in
much of the greatest actions of their Conversations Some are presuming
groundlesly to conclude, that the times will be good, or that they will be
evil, that we shall have prosperity, or we shall have persecution, and how long
these are like to continue, and what will come next; what party will stand, and
what will rise, and what will fall; and accordingly they resolve and practice
in the worship of God and in much of their deportment unto men: When Faith
should tell them, and late experience will tell them, if faith do not, that it
were wiser not to be wise above what is written, nor to feign our uncertain
conjectures to be certainties, nor to be too busy about Gods part (what shall
or shall not come to pass) when we should be employed about our own part, even
our certain duty, and should leave matters of future event more to God: and
that things revealed belong to us, and secret things are reserved unto him,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. And that the Law and Testimony are indeed our Rules.

Some out of melancholy fearfulness or unbeleif, are always perplexing
themselves with suppositions of things that will never come to pass; and
saying, what if this should befall me, and what if that should overtake me?
what if this friend should suffer? or the other friend be taken from me? what
if I be cast into poverty, or prison? or called to bear witness to the Cause of
Christ? or to suffer death for him? And they put such eases only to disquiet
and torment themselves, and gratify their mis-giving and distrustful hearts;
and not quietly to resolve and make their preparation. And thus they fill their
minds and lives with self-created troubles, that are made of nothing but spun
out of their own depraved imaginations: And if they can but say such an evil is
possible, or that one of a thousand or ten thousand has been overtaken by the
like, they afflict themselves more about it than they should do if it were
probable; and if it be probable, they are more troubled about it than they
should be if it were certain. And when experience has told them that most of
their fears are from vain imagination, and few things that they feared come to
pass, yet take they no warning, and be not ashamed that they have so long
tormented themselves with dreams, but go on as if they had never had
experience of their own mistakes. This is not the putting of cases, that the
Reverend Author here inviteth you to.

But there are too many that err on the contrary, (more dangerous though less
troubling extreme) that will not see the snare till they are taken in it, nor
the trouble till it is upon them; nor take the alarm till the enemy is within
the Gates; nor buy oil for their lamps till the bridegroom is at the door; and
so must be taken unprepared, and in vain cry, Lord, open to us, when the Door
is shut: Or in case of temporal afflictions, they are to seek for due
provisions, when its time to use them. And thus when a prudent man foreseeth
the evil and hides himself, the simple passes on and is punished, Prove. 22.3.
and 27.12. These are the men that are startled at difficulties when they
occur, and look so strangely and timorously at the Cross, because indeed they
never did expect it; but gave up their names to Christ upon supposition that he
would be better to them than his word: They could endure to read or hear of the
Cross, but never believed that they should have been put to take it up indeed,
nor called to the trial of parting with all, if they will have a treasure in
Heaven; and therefore they go away sorrowful, when they find they cannot serve
God and Mammon, and secure the world, and then have heaven as a reserve when
they can keep the world no longer, Luke 18.22, 23. And many of Gods servants
were so little serious in their expectations of sufferings personal or common,
as that they think them strange, as if some strange thing happened to them, and
look on them with a sadder face, and speak of them with much sadder language,
than beseems believers, that by Covenant renounced the World and flesh, as
expecting to suffer with Christ, that they might reign with him: and should
rejoice that they are partakers of the suffering of Christ; that when his Glory
is revealed, they may be glad also with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13. Matthew.
5.11, 12. Romans 8.17, 18. But I Will not anticipate the Discourse which here
fullier acquainteth thee with these needful truths, but commend it to thy
Reading and Obedience, as very useful to man that is born to trouble, and to
Christians that look through many tribulations to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Acts 14.22. Job 5.6. and 14.1. The Lord bless it to thy spiritual
confirmation: which is the end of his recommendation, who desires to be

A helper of thy Faith and Joy. RICH. BAXTER.
May 13. 1661.
THE CONTENTS Text, Hab. 3.17, 18.
THe Chapter is a Prayer, wherein you have, 1. The Preface. 2. The Prayer it
self. 3. The Conclusion.


The Text is part of the Conclusion.

Where you have, 1. A Supposition employed. 2. A Resolution expressed.


Doct. It is necessary for Christians to put cases of difficulty to themselves,
and having put them, to lay down settled resolutions.

1. The Doctrine explicated.

First, What is meant by cases of difficulty.

1. Such as concern us as men. 2. Such as concern us as Christians.
1. As men, so evils Privative. Positive.


2. Such as concern us as Christians: they are difficulties

Of 1. Faith. 2. Hope. 3. Joy. 4. Sincerity. 5. Obedience. 6. Patience. 7.
Dependency.


Secondly, What is meant by putting cases of difficulty to our selves: that is
showed, 1. In General. 2. In particulars.


Thirdly, What is meant by laying down settled resolutions.

The Doctrine vindicated, and an Objection answered.

The Doctrine confirmed.

1. By Scripture. 2. By Reason.
Our preparedness for sufferings lies in, 1. Acquaintance with our own
strength to bear them. 2. Acquaintance with them. 3. Preparation for them. 4.
Acquaintance with those means by which others have borne them. 5. Taking a
true measure of them. 6. It prevents our being surprised. 7. It will inure us
to bear them.


5. Applycation.

First, Information of 4 sorts reproveable.

1. Some that put no cases of difficulty to themselves. 2. Some that resolve
without putting cases of difficulty. 3. Some that put cases, but lay down no
resolutions. 1. Some remain unresolved. 2. Some grow more unresolved.
4. Some that lay down resolutions, but fall from them.
Secondly, Exhortation. Where you have,

First, The Causes why men do it not* 1. The Unpleasantness of such thoughts.
2. A fancied unchangeableness of their condition. 3. Carnal confidence.


Secondly, Directions.

1. General. 2. Particular.

1. General.

First, Put your Cases right. Secondly, Look your Arguments be above your
difficulties.
2. Particular.

1. Be not overhasty in your resolutions. 2. Be selfe-denying. 3. Get safe
ground for your resolutions. 4. Observe others in their resotions. 5. Get
answers to those Objections that are most like to hinder Resolution. 6. Compare
your disadvantages and advantages together. 7. Nourish Resolution by Prayer.
3. Motives, which are Nine.

1. Look upon your selves as Men. 2. Look upon your selves as Christians. 3.
Consider the mutability of Times and Conditions. 4. It is your wisdom to do it
in respect of. Provision. Prevention.
5. It does not hasten, but fit for difficulties. 6. It will help
perseverance. 7. It will keep us humble in Prosperity. 8. It will keep us from
fretting at cross providence. 9. Not putting cases of difficulty to our
selves, will make us doubly miserable.
Habak. 3.17, 18. Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit
be in the Vines: the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield
no meat, the stock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd
in the stalls:

Yet I will rejoice in the Lord: I will joy in the God of my salvation.


THis Chapter is made up of a pithy and powerful prayer, composed by the
Prophet Habakkuk for the use and comfort of the Faithful in the time of their
captivity and affliction. It was for this end composed, that by their mediating
of Gods former mercies, and that power he had showed in delivering them out of
Egypt, they might be encouraged to wait upon God for dehverance out of Babylon.

Verse. 1. It is called a prayer of Habbakuk upon Sigionoth. The old Translation
renders it for the Ignorances. Expositors differ about it.

First, Some take it to signify the Ignorances and errors of the people of
Israel. So he prays that God would not impute them; that he would not
remember them in this day of their captivity.

Secondly, Others by Sigionoth understand a musical instrument. So we find it
in the Title of Psalm. 7. understood by most Expositors. And so this prayer
being composed by way of a Song, this was the instrument on which it was sung.

Concerning the Prayer you have considerable 1. The Preface. 2. The Prayer it
self. 3. The Conclusion.


First, The Preface. That is verse the first.

Secondly, The Prayer it self; from verse 2. to 17.

With Petitions. Motives.


Thirdly, The Conclusion in the three last verses.

My Text falls under the Conclusion; so the Prophet concludes with

A Confident Persuasion. Comfortable Resolution.


First, With a confident persuasion of the Churches deliverance, verse. 16. That
though he trembled to think of the Judgment coming, yet he was confident the
Church should find rest from trouble, when God should invade Babylon with his
Troops: That is, they should find rest in the day of Babylons trouble, when
Cyrus should surprise it. And this was fulfilled when Cyrus having taken
Babylon made Proclamation that none should be hurt that spoke the Hebrew or
Syrian Language, as Zenophon relates.

Secondly, You have the Prophets comfortable Resolution, verse. 17, 18. Although
the fig tree shall not blossom, (i. e.) come what will come, or what can come,
( verse. 18.) yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my salvation.

In the words you have two things observable:

A Supposition. Resolution.


First, The Prophets Supposition; this is employed. He had put the Question to
himself concerning the miseries that he and others faithful ones might live to
see, such spoiling and desolations that they might be stripped of all, they may
have no fruit, nor corn, nor cattle, neither flocks nor herds.

Secondly, You have the Prophets Resolution: It is this. Although it should be
so, that the fig tree should not blossom, etc. Yet all this should not put out
his Light of Joy and Comfort; He would rejoice in the Lord; The Lord should be
to him instead of Vines, and Fig Trees, and Flocks, and Herds; he would rejoice
in the Lord, etc.

The Conclusion is this:

Doct. It is necessary for Christians to put cases of difficulty to themselves,
and having put them, to lay down settled and serious Resolutions.

In handling of this Point I shall proceed by way of Explication. Confirmation.
Application.


First, For Explication. So.

1. What is meant by Cases of Difficulty. 2. What is meant by putting Cases of
difficulty to our selves. 3. What is meant by laying down settled resolutions.
First, What is meant by Cases of difficulty. So in general this; all those
troubles, lesses, crosses, dangers persecutions, and afflicting evils, to which
all are subject as men or Christians, with which others have been, and with
which we may be (for ought we know) exercised, the suffering of which is hard
to flesh and blood.

So Cases of difficulty may be referred to two Heads.

1. Such as concern us as men. 2. Such as concern us as Christians.
First, Those that concern us as men, and those difficulties include two
things.

1. Evils Privative. 2. Evils Positive.
First, Evils Privative, which stand in the loss and privation of those good
things that are necessary for our use, and suitable to our natures, and beings;
as loss of friends, loss of husband, wife, children, estate, (viz.) houses,
lands, livelihood, loss of liberty, loss of credit, and in a word loss of
every outward enjoyment that is comfortable. These are privative evils.

Secondly, Evils Positive, which stand and consist in the sense and feeling of
those things which are troublesome to our natures, and bitter to our spirits;
as hunger, thirst, nakedness, poverty, imprisonment, banishment, shame and
reproach, these our natures account difficulties and hard and bitter things.

Thus for the difficulties that concern us as men, it being the faying, Job
5.7. That man is born to troubles.

Secondly, there are difficulties that concern us as Christians, difficulties
which attend our Profession and our graces, which make the exercising of them
hard and difficult. So I shall name seven.

There are the difficulties.

Of 1. Faith. 2. Hope. 3. Joy. 4. Sincerity. 5. Obedience. 6. Patience. 7.
Dependency.


First, Faith has its difficulties. Luther speaks of three difficulties of
Faith.

1. Credere impossibilia rationi, to believe things seemingly impossible to
reason. 2. Sperare dilata, to hope for things that are deferred, and not yet
seen. 3. Amare Deum cum se praebet inimicum; to love God when he seems an
enemy.
Those are the difficulties in relation to faith that make believing hard; as
that Abraham should have a Son, when he was so old and his Wife old also. That
Abraham should kill his Son, and yet believe that God would make his seed as
the Stars of Heaven for number; these are difficulties of faith. For a
Christian to believe that God loves him when he afflicts him, when he frowns
on him, nay, seems to kill him; this is a difficulty relating to faith. For the
Church to believe when God is pulling down that he intends to build up better,
that when he is Overturning, Overturning, Overturning, Ezekiel. 21.27. that he
intends settlement. That when he girds himself with weapons of war, that he
intends to speak peace to his people. These are difficulties relating to that
of Faith.

Secondly, Hope has its difficulties. To sit in darkness, and yet hope for
light; to lie in the grave, and yet hope for a Resurrection; to be in trouble,
and yet hope for a good day of renewing and reviving; these are some of the
difficulties of hope. To see the Church trodden under foot, and yet to hope to
see it glorious; this is a difficulty in relation to a Christians hope.

Thirdly, Joy has its difficulties. The Apostle says, Rejoice always, Phil.
4 4. And yet at some times there are some things that make it hard for a
Christian to rejoice. To lose friends, to want outward comforts, to want
liberty, to suffer banishment, imprisonment, spoiling of goods, yea, loss of
life it self, and yet rejoice, this is hard. And these are some of the
difficulties that attend Christian joy.

Fourthly, Christian sincerity has its difficulties. There are those things
that make it hard for a Christian to keep a good conscience. To live in evil
times, and among a wicked Generation, and yet for a Christian to hold his
integrity, to suffer for a good conscience, and yet to keep a good conscience;
this is hard. Tertullian spoke of some times, when says he, Ingeniosum est
esse Christianum, it is a witty thing to be a Christian. To be reproached, made
a byword, persecuted, and suffer what the Devil can invent, or men execute for
righteousness sake; and yet to be righteous in our Generation, and to walk with
God (as Noah did) notwithstanding all this; this is hard.

Fifthly, Christian Obedience has its difficulties. There are those things
that make obedience to the will and laws and commands of God difficult. Abraham
was commanded to leave his Country, and to go he knew not whither; he was
commanded to sacrifice his Son: these were difficult commands. Obedience to the
commands of the Gospel have their difficulties. For a man to deny himself, to
forsake wife and children, houses and lands for Christ's sake; for a man to
cross his own desires, crucify his own lusts, mortify his own members; in a
word, for a man to cut off his right hand, and to pull out his right eye; this
is hard.

Sixthly, Christian patience has its difficulties. There are those things that
sometimes make it hard for a Christian to exercise that grace. To be dealt with
as Job was, stripped of all to a shoe-latchet, to suffer in our bodies, names,
estates, to suffer from men and that wrongfully, to have evil requited for
good, and yet to be patient, this is hard. To be in Job's case, Job 1. and yet
to bless God: to be in David's case, Ps. 39. and yet to lay our hands upon our
mouths; to have the Lord deal with us as he please, and yet to say as Eli did,
It is the Lord, let him do what he will; this is hard.

Seventhly, Christian dependancy has its difficulties. There are things that
make it hard for a Christian to trust and depend on God. To see means failing,
to see the fig tree blasted, the Vine without fruit, the fields without corn,
the folds without flocks, the stall without herds, and yet to depend on God for
being fed; this is hard.

Thus for the difficulties that concern us both as men and Christians.

Secondly, We are to show what is meant by a Christians putting cases of
difficulty to himself.

In general; it consists in a Christians serious consideration of all
difficulties, to which all are liable and subject as men or Christians; and
then proposing them to himself as those things that not only possibly but
probably he may encounter with; and that what has been the case of others as
men and Christians, may be his. So it stands in two things.

First, In a serious consideration of those evils and difficulties to which as
Men or Christians we are liable. The which consideration arises from the
meditation of these four things.

1. The nature of all outward things, that they are all changeable and
uncertain. Solomon says, All is vanity; vanity implies brevity, mortality,
mutability. 2. The condition of man, that is changeable. All the children of
men are children of change, not only in respect of their disposition in
relation to their intentions, purposes, resolutions, but also in respect of
their outward condition, as it respects health, wealth, and all outward
enjoyments, as we see in the case of Job, etc. 3. The condition and state of
times. Times may present difficulties to our consideration; times of war
present to our consideration loss of peace, life, livelihood, liberty, etc.
Times of persecution present to our consideration the like difficulties. 4. The
difficulties that others have met with both as men and Christians, do present
to our consideration the difficulties that we may encounter with. Some have had
their flocks cut off from their solds, and the herds from their stall, etc.
Some have seen the spoiling of their goods, and have suffered (for the sake of
Christ) all those miseries, tortures and torments, of which read Heb. 11.35,
36, 37, 39. Which one calls a little Book of Martyrs.
Secondly, putting cases of difficulry to our selves stands in this, in a
Christians making it his case, by putting the question to himself concerning
those difficulties; may they not befall me? and what shall I do if they do
befall me? It is a man's examining himself about his resolutions concerning those
difficulties, when he has propounded them to himself. The Question is; put
case it should be my case to see what others have seen, and to suffer what
others have suffered? What if the fig tree should not blossom, etc. What if the
case of those that have suffered in their liberties, estates, etc. come to be
my case? Nay, what if it come to resisting to blood: what in these cases shall
I do? This is a Christians propounding cases of difficulty to himself.

Thus for the second thing.

Thirdly, We are to show what is meant by laying down settled resolutions. So we
mean those deliberate answers the soul makes to it self upon good grounds, in
relation to those cases of difficulty propounded.

Consider, In putting cases of difficulty, there is a putting the question to
ones self; as the unjust Steward did to himself, Luke 16.2. My Lord takes away
the Stewardship; what shall I do? He puts the question, and comes to consider
of the resolution, which you find in the verses following.

So then, settled resolutions are those answers the soul returns to those
questions that it puts to it self concerning difficulties. Thus in the text,
the question is, what if the Fig Tree should not blossom? (for such a question
is employed, that the Prophet had put to himself) and the answer and resolution
is this, I will rejoice in the Lord, etc.

It is an answer returned upon good grounds; the resolution of Habakkuk was
built upon a strong foundation, (viz.) the power, love, and alsufficiency of
God, when he said, Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, etc.

So then, when upon good grounds a Christian takes up such resolutions as
these; that come what will come, yet I will hope, and believe, and obey, and
hold fast my integrity, I will be patient and rejoice in the God of my
salvation. This is laying down settled resolutions.

Thus for the third thing.

Secondly, for the vindication of the Doctrine.

Some may object that of the Apostle, Phil. 4.6. In nothing be careful. The
question is, whether this Doctrine of self-posing about troubles and
difficulties, do not cross this precept?

It is answered, it does not. By that Scripture, all care is not forbidden; not
a care of diligence or providence, but of distrust and diffidence. The words
are (...) which signifies such distracting and doubtful cares as tear and
torture the heart with carking thoughtfulness and fretfull impatiency. Now when
we tell you of putting cases of difficulty, we mean not that Christians should
be distrustfully careful, but should settle their spirits by casting their care
on God, as Habakkuk did in the text, Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, etc.

Thirdly, For Confirmation.

By Scripture. Reasons.


First, by Scripture; so we shall find it has been the practice of Saints to
put cases of difficulty to themselves. Psalm. 3.6. I will not be afraid of ten
thousand, etc. Where.

1. The case is employed; What if ten thousand should beset me round about? 2.
The resolution is expressed; I will not be afraid.
Psalm. 23.4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, etc.
Where 1. The case is put: What if I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death. 2. There is his Resolution laid down; (viz.) I will fear none evil.


You may consult those places, Psalm. 27.3. Psalm. 46.2, 3.

I shall add only one place more: Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him. Where you have 1. The case of difficulty put. 2. The resolution
laid down, yet will I trust in him.


Secondly, For the Reasons. So the chief is this: our being prepared for
sufferings, hardships, and difficultielyeth in this putting of cases of
difficulty to our selves. You know our Savior was much in propounding them to
his Disciples; he told them they must be hated of all men for his name sake;
that they must be brought before Kings and Rulers. And all this was by way of
preparing them for the sufferings they were to meet with.

So consider what advantages a christian has by putting cases of difficulty to
himself, in order to a preparation for difficulties.

1. It makes a Christian acquainted with his own strength, and what ability he
has to encounter with the said difficulties. A Porter, before he carries a
great burden does use to poise it; so this putting cases of difficulty to our
selves, is but pondering and weighing the afflictions that we may suffer,
before we come to bear them; It is examining our selves what we can say to
such a Cross, and such a misery, if it befall us: It is like the Question that
Christ put to Zebedees children, Mark 15.22. Are you able to drink of the Cup
that I must drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am to be
baptized with? and they said, we are able.

2. It makes us acquainted with difficulties before they come; and acquaintance
with difficulties and evils makes them easier. Unacquaintance with them causes
fear, horror and amazement; whereas on the contrary, acquaintance with evils
causes courage and boldness. Tacitus says of one, that he was ambiguarum
rerum sciens, ideoque intrepidus. He was acquainted with difficulties, and
therefore feared them not. The first sight of a Lion renders him terrible; but
after frequent views of him he is less feared. It is unacquaintance with evils
that makes them so dreadful to us: So that putting cases of difficulty to our
selves is the only way to make the evil the less terrible, when it looks us in
the face. Job calls Death the King of Terrors, Job 18.14. And the
Philosopher says, that of terrible things, it is the most terrible: And yet
the Aposth by his dying daily, 1 Cor. 15.3. became so familiarly acquainted
with death, that he tells us, Acts 20.24. That his life was not dear to him: he
could play on the hole of the Cockatrice. And withal tells us, 2 Cor. 11.23.
That he was in Deaths often, i. e. he had been in so many dangers that
threatened death, and presented him with the face of death, that he was so well
acquainted with it that he was above the fear of death.

3. By this Christians come to furnish themselves aforehand with those things
that may help them to encounter with difficulties when they come. It will put
them upon having those things in readiness that will help to succor them in a
day of affliction. He that considers the craziness of his own body, will
always have those things in readiness that may relieve him when fainting Fits
come. Putting cases of difficulty to our selves will put us upon Providing
those things that are useful when difficulties come. What is the reason that
many in suffering times have suffering Graces to seek, but only this, that they
did not put cases of difficulty to themselves? It is reported of Doctor Butler,
who was a Physician famous for the curing of Consumptions; yet he himself dyed
of a Consumption; and being asked by a friend, how it came to pass, that he
who was so eminent for curing of consumptions, yet he should dye of that
disease and not cure himself; he replied, I never feared it. How many
Travelers meet with storms which wet them to the Skin, by reason of their not
forecasting what weather they might meet with; had they done it they had been
provided for them. How many men have been robbed of their moneys and goods by
riding unarmed? Putting cases of difficulty to our selves will put us upon
getting conflicting Graces for conflicting times: it will make us do as Joseph
did, lay up for the years of famine.

Fourthly, By this we come to be acquainted with those ways and means by
which others have encountered with and conquered difficulties. This putting of
cases of difficulty to our selves, will put us upon an inquiry how others did
bear their sufferings, and how they encountered with those difficulties they met
with in their, way to heaven. What were their supports and comforts? what was
their behavior in the day of their affliction, and how they overcame? It will
put us upon inquiring how Job and others bare their afflictions when their
flocks were cut off from the fold, and their herds from the stall: How the
Martyrs in the primitive and latter times bare theirs. It is a great
encouragement to us when we are to pass over deep waters; to consider they are
such deeps that others have passed through; which renders them fordable and
passable. The Roman General when he was to fight his enemies, thus encouraged
his Soldiers; Cum iis vobis pugnandum est quns priori bellow terra marique
vicistis; You are to fight with those that both by Sea and Land you have
overcome. So it is a great encouragement when we consider, that there are no
difficulties that we can meet with, but other Saints have encountered with and
conquered.

Fifthly, This is the way to gage difficulties, and take a true measure of
them. We are many times much mistaken about difficulties, and the reason is,
because our apprehensions are not rectified concerning them: We pull not off
their vizzards, and that makes them seem terrible. Serious consideration of a
difficulty puts us upon measuring the length, and fathoming the depth of it.
Thus the Apostle Paul did when he made that reply to those that dissuaded him
from going to Jerusalem, Acts 21.13. What mean ye to weep and break mine
heart? I am ready not only to be bound, but also to dye for the name of
Christ: q.d. I have considered of these things, and am so far from fearing
bonds, that I fear not death.

Sixthly, This is the way for Christians to prevent a surprise; this will keep
a Christian upon his watch and guard, that evils shall not seize on him at
unawares, and before he expected them: It will help him to fall forward, when
others fall backward into troubles. Such a Christian falls into troubles
foreseen, when another comes in in the day of affliction with his non putarum,
I never thought of these evils. It is an expression of Job, Job 3.25. The thing
that I feared is come upon me. It seems that good man in the days of his
prosperity thought of trouble and adversity. So the Christian that put cases of
difficulty to himself may say when an affliction be falls him, This is no
more but what I forethought and expected. It was the saying of a Heathen when
he heard of the death of his Son; Scio me genuisse mortalem, I knew I begat him
mortal. It is sweet when trouble comes, for a Christian to be able to say,
This is no more than I looked for.

Seventhly, It is the way to inure our selves to bear sufferings. That is born
easily that a man is used and inured to. The saying is, Marti arma non sunt
onora, Weapons are no burden to Mars. As they say of Milo, he could carry a
Bull, and the reason was, his carrying of him when he was a calf. There is an
expression, Lam. 3.27. It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth; i.
e. to inure himself to bear afflictions.

By way of Application.

1. By way of Information: So it informs us of four sorts that are reproveable.

First, There are some that put no cases of difficulty to themselves. Some
there are that have no thoughts of troubles, dangers, difficulties. The Prophet
Amos tells of such, Amos 6.3. who put the evil day far from them. And the
Prophet Isaiah tells us of some who make a Covenant with death. This is the
case of most sinners, that they will not remember the days of darkness,
danger, and misery, that are coming upon them. That sinners should put cases of
difficulty and danger to themselves, God is pleased himself to propound cases
to them in his Word, which we find frequent (viz.) Isa. 10.2. What will ye
do in the day of visitation, etc? Jerem. 5.31. What will ye do in the end
thereof? Beside many other places, to convince sinners of the folly of their
fancied security, when death and hell, and misery and desolation are at their
backs. It was the saying of King James when he heard one Preach a powerful
Sermon before him; This man preaches as if death were at my back. But thus it
is with many, when their Ministers Preach to them of wrath and judgment at
their backs and heels, they never take notice of it. How many are there that
never put the question to themselves concerning the day of desolation, what
they shall do when it comes; concerning the day of death, how they shall be
sitted for it; concerning the day of Judgment, whether they can stand in the
Judgment. They never put that question that is put Job 31.14. When God rises
up, what shall I do? and when he visits, what shall I answer? But say as
Babylon did, I sit as a Queen, and shall never be in adversity.

Secondly, There are some who resolve, but it is without putting cases of
difficulty to themselves. These are like the foolish builder, that resolves to
build, but considers not beforehand what it will cost him. We read Matthew.
13.20. of those that received the word with joy, but when persecution did arise
they were offended. There are many that resolved to be religious, till they
found the difficulties that did attend Religion. So their goodness was but as a
morning cloud, Hos. 6.4. It is with some as it is with a man sitting by the
fire in a stormy winter day, that resolves to take a journey, but when he
comes forth and sees what weather it is, alters his resolution. Thus did
Peter, who resolved to dye before he would deny Christ. We read of one that
came to Christ, and told him, Master, I will follow thee whither soever thou
go, Matthew. 8.20. But when Christ answered him, The Foxes have holes, and the
Birds of the air, nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head:
Although we hear his resolution, we hear no more of him after this answer given
by our Savior.

Thirdly, There are some that put cases of difficulty to themselves but lay
down no settled resolution. These are of two sorts.

1. There are some that put cases of difficulty to themselves, and yet remain
unresolved. Tell them of sufferings approaching, they say with the unjust
Steward, What shall I do? they are persons of no resolution; they cannot tell
if such and such times should come, such and such cases should happen, what
they should do. Not only ask them, what if the fig tree do not blossom, as it
is in the text, etc. But what if it come to fire and faggot, and resisting to
blood, mentioned Hebrews 12. they are not resolved what to do.

2. There are some that put cases of difficulty to themselves, but thereupon
grow more unresolved. As the Kinsman, Ruth. 4.6. was willing to have redeemed
Elimelechs Land, till he heard the condition, which was the marrying of Ruth.
Thus it is with men that cry there is a Lion without, Prove. 22.13. And that
that makes others resolute makes them fearful; their resolution is to sleep in
a whole skin, and they will never burn for their Religion.

Fourthly, There are some that put cases of difficulty to themselves, and lay
down resolutions, but fall back and apostatize from them. Their resolutions are
not serious and settled; they are like the children of Ephraim, of whom the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 78.9. That being armed, and carrying Bows, turned their
backs in the day of battle. Thus did Peter, who resolved he would dye before
he would deny his Master, and yet for all that did deny him: he did put cases
of difficulty to himself in relation to his owning of Christ in his troubles,
as you may see, Luke 22.33. I will go with thee both into prison and to death;
yea he said, though all deny thee, yet will I never deny thee; yet his
resolution failed. Some resolutions are built upon sandy foundations; and it is
with them as with that house of which our Savior speaks, Matthew 7.27. That
the waters rose, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell.
Remember, Self is a sandy foundation for any man to build resolutions on;
Self-confident men are the first that recoil and turn their backs; and it is
just with God to leave such to themselves that confide only in themselves, and
not in God. There are some that are over-confident, and some that are too
timorous; both are to be blamed: and as for the latter, Luther (a man of
extraordinary courage and spirit) did chide Melancthon and other friends of his
for it. But for my part, I had rather be of the number of timorous Christians,
than of those that are over-confident. The timorous Christian, doubting of his
own strength, and being convinced of his own inability to undergo sufferings
when they come, looks out of himself, and fastens upon a rock that is higher
than he; when the over-confident Christian builds and bottoms himself upon his
own strength. You know the story of Mr. Saunders and Dr. Pendleton. Pendleton
was the confident man, Saunders was the timorous man; but the timorous man
suffered at the stake, when the confident man returned this answer, that He
could not burn.

2. Use is by way of Exhortation, and it is to put us upon the duty of putting
cases of difficulty to our selves

Here we shall do three things.

1. Show whence it is men do it not. 2. Directions concerning it. 3. Arguments
and Motives to move us to it.
1. Consider why some do it not. So among other causes of it take these

First, The unpleasantness and bitterness of such thoughts; they think it is
tormenting them before their time. Every man naturally desires to fancy to
himself ease and quietness when the evil day of wrath and judgment is near. And
when they are told that such a day is drawing near, how ready are they to put
it far from them, as those in Amos did, Amos 6.3. As Peter said to Christ, Be
it far from thee Lord, this evil shall not be unto thee, When Christ foretold
his sufferings. How many are there that love not those Sermons by which they
are called upon to the exercise of this duty, and are ready to say of Ministers
that preach such Doctrine, as Ahab did of Micaiah, he speaks no good to me;
And as he said to Elijah, Have thou found me, O mine enemy. And when the
discourses of difficulty are so unpleasing to men, much more must the thoughts
of them be to them: what we love not to hear of, we less love to think of.

Secondly, A kind of unchangeableness that some groundlesly fancy concerning
their present condition. They think their mountain is so strong that it cannot
be removed: they think not that times may change, that winds may turn; and that
that wind that now sits upon their backs to blow them forward, may quickly turn
and blow in their faces to drive them backwards. Thus said Babylon in her
prosperity, I sit as a Queen, and shall never be in adversity. Yea thus said
David in his prosperity, Psalm. 30.6. That he should not be moved. The truth is,
men look not upon outward things with right considerations, of their brevity,
mortality, mutability. Most say as those in Isa. 56.12. To morrow shall be as
this day. Most men look only upon the outward wheel of Providence, but consider
not the wheel within the wheel, as the expression is Ezekiel. 1. And there was a
wheel within the wheel. When men are in a prosperous condition, they grow
confident, that their mountain is so strong they shall not be moved; but this
is by reason of their looking upon the outward wheel, but think not of the
wheel within the wheel, how that may move. The outward wheel of providence, as
to Haman, moved to his honor and advancement; but the inward wheel moved to his
ruin and destruction. As on the contrary, in the case of Joseph, the outward
wheel of providence seemed to move to his ruin and destruction, when the
inward wheel moved to his honor and advancement. So then, this is one cause
why many put no cases of difficulty to themselves; they only look on the
outward wheel, but think not of the wheel within the wheel.

Thirdly, carnal confidence. Some think, come what will come, we have something
to trust to. As the Prophet Amos tells those, Amos 6.1. That they did trust
in the Mountain of Samaria; and then see verse. 3. They put the evil day far
from them. When others make God their refuge and Rock, and strong Tower of
defense; these make their barns, and their bags, and their friends, and (in a
word) the creature, the rock of their confidence; and upon this account think
themselves so safe that they need not fear. Solomon says of the rich man,
Prove. 10.15. That his wealth is his strong City. Thus some look upon friends as
their rock; some upon riches as their rock; some upon their present worldly
enjoyments as their rock. And this is the reason why such put no cases of
difficulty to themselves.

2. Consider the Directions concerning putting cases of difficulty to our
selves; and so to put them that we may with the Prophet Habakkuk, lay down
settled resolutions.

The Directions are of two sorts.

1. Some more general, 2. Some more particular.
The general Directions are these.

First, In putting cases of difficulty to our selves, we must be sure to put
them right; we must neither put them above nor below what they are. Some look
upon difficulties through multiplying-glasses, and magnifying-glasses, which
represent difficulties to them, more and greater indeed than they are. A wise
man discourses them, and gageth them, he fathomes them, and makes them neither
greater nor less than they are. Some there are that put vizzards upon their
difficulties, and make them look worse than they are, and seeing them so
disguised fly from them. We read of one, who when he came in armed, and with
his Headpiece on, his own child fled from him as being afraid, though he was
his Father; but the Armor being put off he ran to him and owned him. It is the
wisdom of Christians to pull the vizzards off two things.

1. Sin, to see the ugliness of it. 2. Sufferings, that there is no such
terribleness in them as some imagine.
And as Christians are not to put cases of difficulty to themselves above what
they are, so they are not to put them below what they are; if so, there will
either follow non-resolution, or very weak and slight resolutions; the end of
which will be but a surprizal. How many have perished for want of giving an
Alarm to themselves concerning evils approaching. We read of a City that had
enemies, and diverse times some came in and told them the enemy was approaching;
they finding these alarms false, at last proclaimed that none upon pain of
death should come with such tidings: at last the enemy came indeed and took the
City, and this was said of it, Silentium perdidit, silence has destroyed it.
Thus it is with many who do not alarm their own souls concerning approaching
difficulties; it may be said, silence has destroyed them.

Second general direction. He that will put cases of difficulty to himself, and
lay down settled resolutions, must find his arguments to be above his
difficulties. This is the great cause why Christians stagger and waver in
suffering times, because they find their troubles and difficulties to be above
their arguments. We read of Elisha's servant, when he saw the great host of the
Syrians, 2 Kings 6.15. He cried out, Master, what shall we do? His troubles
were above his arguments, and by reason of that he was at his wits end: but his
Master Elisha's arguments were above his troubles, who answered, there are more
with us than against us. He saw more power in God to help, than in the enemies
to hurt. Thus Christians must see their consolations to be above their
tribulations, and their encouragements to surmount all discouragements. They
must be sure to furnish themselves with arguments drawn from the consideration
of the truth, and goodness, and power, and all sufficiency, etc. of God.

2. The particular directions.

First, Be not overhasty in your resolutions. Let there be a through and
serious consideration of difficulties before you come to resolution. Take the
counsel of our Savior, Luke 14.28. concerning building and going to war, there
should be a sitting down first, to consider whether one is able to build such a
house, and to manage such a war. This was Peter's oversight, he was too hasty in
his resolution. Do as Porters do, ponder and weigh your burden before you
carry it.

Secondly, Be self-denying. Presume not upon your own strength. This was Peter's
failing. Go not forth in your own might, for in the might of the Lord shall
every one be strong. 1 Samuel 2.9. By strength shall no man prevail. And in God
David found his strength, when he tells you how it was with him in the day of
trouble, Psalm. 73.26. My heart and my flesh fail me, but God is the strength of
my heart.

Thirdly, Get safe grounds for your resolutions to be built upon; build not
upon a sandy foundation. Remember a good cause and a good conscience will make
a man resolute. Let me tell you, it is an interest in God, and an interest in
Christ, that will make us resolute in the midst of the greatest difficulties;
as you may see, Psalm. 46.1. Psalm. 23.1. etc.

Fourthly, Eye and observe others in their resolutions. Look back upon those
that have gone before you, and see what steps they walked in. Take our Savior
himself for an example, who tells us, John 9.4. The night comes when no man
can work; and therefore took up this resolution, that he would work while it
was day. Put the same cases to your selves as the Saints have done, and lay
down such resolutions. It was the saying of Chrysostom when Eudoxia the
Empress threatened him; What will she do to me? Will she saw me asunder? I will
remember Isaiah: Will she cast me into a fiery Furnace? I will remember the
three Children: Will she cut off my head? I will remember John the Baptist:
Will she stone me? I will remember it was the case of S. Stephen: Will she
banish me? I will remember it was the case of S. John, who was banished into
the Isle of Patmos.

5. Strive to find out answers to those doubts and objections that will be most
like to hinder resolution. The Martyrs met with many in the day of their
sufferings (viz.) Is not life sweet? will you destroy your self: will you undo
Wife and Children? will you obstruct your own honor and preferment in this
world? Thus Christians should make these and the like objections. This is to
sit down and consider what it will cost us to encounter with difficulties when
they come, and will put us upon laying down settled resolutions against they
come.

Sixthly, To make you resolute when difficulties come, compare and weigh your
disadvantages with your advantages. When the day comes when there is a day of
suffering come upon you for bearing testimony to the Gospel of Christ, you
should consider as what will be the loss, so what will be the gain. Thus the
Apostle Paul did; to strengthen his resolution he weighed both, 2 Cor. 4.17.
He put his afflictions in one scale, and says, they were light; he put glory
in the other scale, and found it exceeding weighty; and so concludes, that his
afflictions here were not to be compared with glory hereafter. The same
Apostle does the same, Romans 8.18. For I reckon, that the sufferings of this
present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us. The word in the Original is (...), I compute. The Apostle had
cast up the account of the loss and gain that might come by suffering for the
sake of Christ; and he puts this at the foot of the account, which is
mentioned verse 18. It is good for Christians when they have forecast
difficulties, to look and see what is beyond them. It is the expression of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 66.12. Thou broughtest us through fire and water, but thou
have brought us forth into a wealthy place. When you look upon fire and water
before you, upon the putting of cases of difficulty to your selves; by the eye
of faith you may see a glorious and wealthy place beyond that. When you see a
Mountain of difficulties in your way, remember there is a pleasant and
delightful Valley beyond it. There are two things christians should consider of.

First, What is on the other side the evil of sinning, and that is Hell.
Secondly, What is on the other side the evil of suffering, and that is Glory.
And therefore the Saints of God have chosen the evil of suffering before the
evil of sinning. We read of the Prince of Condy, who being brought Prisoner to
the Louvre in Paris that night that the Massacre was in France under the reign
of Charles the ninth, he had these three proposals made to him; either to go
to Mass, or to lose his Head, or to suffer perpetual imprisonment: To the
first he answered, it was an evil of sin, and he would not choose that; for
the two last, they were but evils of suffering, and as for them he did submit
himself to his Majesty's pleasure. Christians should remember that the greatest
evils of suffering are to be preferred before the least evil of sinning. It
was the saying of Chrysostom when he heard how the Empress threatened him, Nil
nisi peccatum timeo, I fear nothing but sin. I shall close this with the answer
that a Father returned to an Emperor, who threatened him with imprisonment, if
he conformed not to his way of worship, Tu Carcerem, ille Gehennam, Thou
threatnest me with a Prison, but, God threatens me with Hell.

Seventhly, When you have laid down settled resolutions, nourish them by
prayer. Remember in whom your strength lies (viz.) in God. David tells us,
Psalm 73. when his heart and his flesh failed him, God was the strength of his
heart. Be much in holding communion with him in whom your strength lies; That
as David says, Psalm. 121.1. I will lift up mine eyes to the Hills from whence
comes my help. Some think David in the sudden looked to the Creature, (viz.)
the Mountains by which Jerusalem was made strong; But he presently recalleth
himself, and says, verse 2. My help comes from the Lord. Christians, you may
resolve upon your putting cases of difficulty to your selves, but remember,
that your enablements to perform those resolutions lie in God, without whom you
can do nothing. Solomon says, Prove. 21.31. The Horse is prepared for the day
of battle, but salvation is of the Lord. So Christians may make preparation for
sufferings by way of resolution, but they are to remember that strength to
perform them is from God. How many are there that have gone forth in their own
strength, that have fallen before the tempter, and returned ashamed.
Christians, it is good for you when either you put cases of difficulty to your
selves, or see difficulties approaching, to draw near to God, and to set the
Lord always before you. David as a Type of Christ, and the Apostle Peter in
his Sermon, Acts 2.25. says, he spoke it concerning Christ, I have set the
Lord always before me: This is not to be understood as if Christ did set the
Lord always before him to keep or overawe his heart from sin (he was
infinitely above that) but it was to support his heart in suffering. But to
Christians it is useful both ways, not only to keep us from sin, but to help
and support us under sufferings. It is good than to hold constant communion
with that God in whom all our strength lies.

Thus for the Directions.

3. The Motives to move us to the duty of putting cases of difficulty to our
selves.

First Motive, You should all do it if you but look upon your selves as men. I
told you before the expression in Job, Job 5.7. Man is born to trouble. It was
the saying of a Heathen, I am a man, and therefore shall think nothing strange
to me that may befall a man. Man is born to all sorts of miseries, to hunger,
thirst, nakedness, poverty, sickness, and all sorts of diseases. The
consideration of this should move all to forecast those evils to which as men,
they are all subject.

Secondly, Look upon your selves as Christians, and as such you must expect to
encounter with many difficulties. It is indeed a mercy when God is pleased to
turn those troubles to which we are subject as men, into sufferings for his
name sake, and for righteousness sake. Remember, the Psalmist tells us, That
many are the afflictions of the righteous. And the Apostle tells us, that
through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of Heaven.

Third Motive is drawn from the consideration of the mutability

Of Times. Conditions.


First, Of times, they have their changes. All days are not Halcyon days; all
ages are not golden.

2. For conditions, they are changeable. How many are there, who with David,
said in their prosperity, Their Mountain was strong, and could not be moved?
And as Babylon in the height of her Pomp, said, I sit as a Queen, and shall
never be removed. But Christians, know all worldly conditions are mutable.
There is an expression of Solomon, Eccl. 7.14. That God has set prosperity and
adversity one over against the other. Thus God is pleased to set the Mountains
and Valleys together, that when a man is set upon the top of a Mountain of
Honor and wealth, and all that the World can bestow upon him, yet then he has
a prospect of a Valley before him, into which he knows not how soon he may
descend from his high Mountain. It is good for Christians to do as Job did, who
in the day of his prosperity thought of adversity; and tells us when his
afflictions fell upon him, that the thing he feared was come unto him. History
does sufficiently furnish us with instances to make good this truth. I could
tell you of an Emperors General (viz.) Bellisarius, who was reduced to such
poverty, that he begged of Passengers for an halfpenny. And of a Duke of
Exeter, who married Edward the fourths Sister, who followed the Duke of
Branswicks Coach, barefoot and barelegg'd in the low Countries, begging, as
Philip de Conines tells us, who was an eye witness. But these are known
Stories, worn threadbare by frequent relating. What need we go farther for
instances in this case than what our present times afford. We have seen
servants on horseback walking on foot again; men underlayed with Honor, Power,
Wealth; men that stood upon a Mountain so strong in their own eyes, and of
others too, that it seemed unremovable; yet now where are they? How many that
not long since were upon Mountains of Honor and worldly Prosperity, are now
come down into the Valleys of poverty and adversity. We have seen some
trembling, who once made the Nations to tremble; and some under hatches who
once sat at the Helm. Some have seen those standing at the Bar, who once sat
upon the Bench; and those lying at the mercy of others, who once seemed to have
us all at their mercy: some have seen those sentenced to dye, who once had the
power of life and death in their own hands, and did exercise it, not only over
the lives of inferior persons, but of Kings and Nobles: All this and much more
have we seen in these our days, which sufficiently speaks the mutability and
changeableness of outward conditions. Seneca speaks thus of a City consumed by
fire, Unadies interest inter maximam Civitatem and nullam, there was but the
space of one day between the greatest City and no City. So how little a space
has there been, between some men's being honorable and contemptible, being
high and being low; being great and being mean; being rich and being poor;
being on the throne and sitting on the dunghill; in a word, between their
shining gloriously, and their being hidden in obscurity.

Fourthly, It is your wisdom to put cases of difficulty to your selves. Our
Savior intimates so much to us Luke 14.28. where he speaks of the wise
builder, sitting down and forecasting what it would cost him, etc. Those that
put to Sea, prepare for a storm, be the Sea at present never so calm. It is
good for Christians to put that question to themselves that the Lord puts to
sinners, Isaiah 10.2. What will ye do in the day of visitation? Your wisdom
in putting cases of difficulty to your selves, will appear in two things, which
it will put you upon.

1. Prevention of them. 2. Provision for them.
First, Prevention of them. If there be any way to prevent evils that are
coming, it is by forecasting and giving troubles the meeting. We know, that
that falls from on high, hurts least when the hand meets it, and by that means
the force of the stroke is prevented. Thus putting cases of difficulty to our
selves, preventeth the hurt the difficulty may do us by our catching at it
before it falls with its full weight upon us. So forecasting of difficulties
puts us upon the use of those ways and means by which troubles and judgments
have been averted: When Nineveh heard of approaching judgments, King and People
fell to humble themselves, and by that means prevented it: It is true, it was
upon a denunciation of Judgment by a Prophet; but Christians should be
Prophets to themselves in the case of difficulties, and should say to
themselves as God does to Israel, Amos 4.12. Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
So putting cases of difficulty to our selves will put us upon the way of
preparing to meet God in the way of his Judgments, which is the way to prevent
them: However this will make christians provide hiding places, as Solomon says
of the prudent man, that he foreseeth the evil, and hides himself. This will
make Christians get into their Chambers, and shut their doors about them, as
the expression is, Isa. 26.20.

Secondly, Provision for them. This advantage you have, though you fall into
troubles, yet you fall not under them. Evils foreseen hurt least; those fall
heaviest that were never feared. It is reported of the Cockatrice, that if it
see a man before the man see it, the man dies; but if the man see it first,
the Cockatrice dies; for the truth of this I refer you to the judgment of Dr.
Brown: but the moral holds true concerning difficulties and troubles: If
they come upon us before we foresee them, they undo us; if we see them first,
we are provided for them. Every trouble and difficulty that was not before
thought of, finds us unprovided, and so has the advantage of us.
Preparedness for an evil makes us valiant to encounter it: Fitness to die makes
us not to fear death; whereas unfitness and unpreparedness does. There was an
Officer under General Vere, who had fought many Duels, and was looked upon as
eminently valiant, who at the siege of a Town, in the Walls whereof a breach
was made, being commanded to enter the breach with a party assigned him,
refused; the General calling him by his name, asked him, whether he were now
turned coward? his answer was, He that enters that breach must die, and I am
not fit to die. Now putting cases of difficulty to our selves will put us upon
making preparation for the evil and difficulty before it come, and so keep us
from recoiling and giving back when it comes. There is an expression in Jer.
14.19. We locked for peace and healing, and behold trouble. If they had looked
for trouble, it may be they had found more peace and healing.

Fifth Motive. Putting cases of difficulty to your selves, does not at all
hasten the difficulty, but only fit you for it when it comes. There are some
men that think they must presently die if they once make their will, whereas
doing that, does but make more fit to die, not more subject to die. The truth
is, we are never fit to live, until we are fit to die; and the way to enjoy the
comfort of a good day, is to forecast evil days, and to resolve what to do when
they come.

Sixthly, It will help perseverance. The reason why many great pretenders to
Religion have apostatized in the day of trouble and persecution, was a non
putaram, I never thought of this. Our Savior tells us, Mat. 13. of some that
received the Gospel, but when trouble and persecution arose, they were
offended. It is not probable (I had almost said impossible) that a Christian
should be a persevering Christian, who did not with the wise builder, Luke
14.28. sit down and consider what it would cost him. The truth is, it is with
some that profess Religion, as it was with David when he put on Saul's Armor to
go against Goliath, of which we read 1 Samuel 17.39. that he put it on, but he
could not go in it, for he had not proved it. So will it be with all those that
embrace the profession of the Gospel, and consider not the difficulties that
attend that profession; they will be like the children of Ephraim, of whom I
told you before, and of whom the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 78.9. Who being
armed, and carrying Bows, turned their backs in the day of battle. Christians,
it is good to forecast the trials that your graces may meet with, especially
those two of faith and patience. We read, Revel. 13.10. Here is the patience
and faith of the Saints. These are the two hands by which you are to lay hold
on eternal life, which is the Apostles counsel, 1 Timothy 6.12. Lay hold on
eternal life. It is the great endeavor of Satan to weaken both these hands,
that Christians may let go their hold.

First, That of Faith, by errors, heresies, and false Doctrine.

Secondly, That of patience, by troubles, afflictions, and persecutions.

Christians, that you may hold fast and strengthen both these hands with which
eternal life is to be laid hold of, and of which the Apostle speaks, Heb.
6.12. Who by faith and patience inherited the premises; It is good for you to
forecast those difficulties that attend the exercising of both these graces.

Seventhly, Putting cases of difficulty to our selves, will keep us humble in
prosperity; It will make us carry a low sail when our outward condition seems
best, and most prosperous; it will keep us from saying as Babylon did in the
day of her prosperity, I sit as a Queen, and shall never be in adversity. And
from concluding as David did, that in his prosperity he should never be moved.
It is good for Christians to keep themselves humble when their worldly
condition is highest. And there is nothing that will more further it, then
serious meditation of the mutability of the best of worldly conditions. We read
of Job, that though he said, Job 29.18. He should die in his nest, yet he
tells you withal, Job 3.25. The thing that I feared is come upon me: Which
shows, that when he was in the height of his prosperity this kept him humble;
as you may see how he speaks of his humility in the day of his prosperity,
Job 20.13. etc. I speak but briefly to this, having before spoke of the
mutability of worldly conditions. Solomon tells us, Prove. 31.30. Favor is
deceitful. An Ambassador highly favored by his Prince, had this sentence
engraven on his VVatch, which he read every day, Favor may turn into
disfavour, and grace into disgrace.

Eighth Motive. It will keep us from fretting at cross providence; it will
help us to suppress those fumes of passion which will be ready to arise and
distemper us in a day of trouble and affliction; it will help us to possess our
souls in patience, and to prevent those indecencies of passion that in a time
of affliction may shame our Christian profession. He that puts cases of
difficulty to himself, is one that proclaims a liberty to the Lord, to do with
him what he will, and to deal with him as he pleases, with a resolution, that
what pleases God, shall please him; it will make him say with holy Bradford,
Lord, I will bow, and thou shall beat: It will bring a Christian to such a full
resignation of himself to God, and to such a full submission of his will to Gods
will, that nothing that falls out shall offend him, because it being Gods will,
it is his, his will being melted into Gods will. You have heard of Luther's
bold Petition, Fiat voluntas mea, Let my will be done; but then presently adds
that which takes off all mis-interpretation, mea quia tua, mine because it is
thine. It is said of godly men, Psa. 119.165. That nothing shall offend them.
There is nothing that offends a godly man but what he sees done against God,
and wherewith God is offended; but nothing does offend him in relation to Gods
dealing with him: Let the dispensation be never so sad, he can bid it welcome;
welcome loss of friends; welcome loss of goods; welcome loss of liberty;
welcome death it self. And upon this account he does it, that whatsoever comes
is of Gods sending, and is what he expected, and therefore bids all welcome;
This (says he) God sends, and this is that I looked for, therefore welcome, and
blessed be the Name of the Lord. That that makes men fret, and vex, and trouble
themselves when trouble falls on them, is this, that by these cross providence
their expectations are crossed. This they looked not for, this is that they
dreamed not of; they looked for good, but behold evil; they looked for peace,
but behold trouble; they looked for light, but behold darkness. Let me tell you
Christians, this is one great thing that will help to quiet your spirits in a
day of evil, that nothing has befallen you but what you foresaw and expected.
You read what answer Elisha returned to the sons of the Prophets at Bethel and
Jericho, 2 Kings 2.3, 5. who said, Know thou that the Lord will take away
thy Master from thy head to day? His answer was, Yea, I know it, hold you your
peace. So it should be with Christians when times of trouble come, they should
be ready to give this answer, when they are asked, did you know of this trouble
and difficulty? did you know of these afflictions and persecutions? yea we knew
all this, and are at peace within our selves; therefore hold you your peace.
We read of Latimer's three Petitions: That God would bring the Lady Elizabeth
to the Crown. That God would once more restore the Gospel to this English
Nation: And that God would give him to seal the Gospel with his blood. He was
heard in all these; and the last speaks what he did expect, that it would come
to resisting to blood, and that he should be called to seal the Gospel with his
blood. Let me tell you, as Christians in a night of trouble espy day at a
little hole by the eye of faith: so in a day and a seeming noontide of peace
and prosperity, they foresee a stormy night of trouble approaching, when it may
be the cloud arising is but like Elisha's, no bigger than a man's hand.

Ninthly, Not putting cases of difficulty to our selves, will make us doubly
miserable, when the difficulty and affliction comes. This is a double misery,
to fall into trouble, and to fall into trouble unthought of, and for which we
are not at all provided. It is sad at any time for a man to meet with a storm,
but for a man to meet with a storm when he is naked, and altogether unprovided
for a storm, this makes it sad indeed. Remember Christians, you are not to pray
absolutely against afflictions, but you may lawfully pray absolutely against
being surprised by them, so as to be made doubly miserable. Let this be your
prayer, that if ever God bring you into darkness, he would be a light about
you; if ever he put you into the Furnace, he would stand by while you melt.
Christians, pray that you may never be led into any temptation, out of which
God will not again bring you; and that God would bring you into no affliction,
under which he will not support you.

FINIS.

