A DESCRIPTION Of a PREROGATIVE ROYAL.

SHEVVING How far a SOVEREIGN may according to the Word of God require
service of his Subjects by his PREROGATIVE.

Also How far a Subject is to give true obedience unto his SOVEREIGN.

By M. B. wishing happy prosperity unto the King, Parliament and Kingdom.

Acts 2 17. And it shall be in the last days, says God, I will power out my
Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shall prophesi^, and
your young men shall see visions, and your old man shall dream dreams.

Psalm 119.46. I will speak of thy testimonies also even before Kings: and will
not be ashamed.

London, Printed for T. B. 1642.

The description of a PREROGATIVE ROYAL.
WHereas it has been and is a great question about a Prerogative Royal, and
the liberties thereof by Papists, Atheists, Newters, or men of no religion,
that seek after preferment and authority by cogging flattering and lying and
not by christian upright dealing, and thereby do abuse the King our Sovereign,
pulling and stretching out his prerogative until it be rejected of all true
subjects, and do not only abuse the King under pretense of his Prerogative
Royal, but do thereby falsify the truth of it, for they do describe the
Kings Prerogative in this manner saying:

That his Majesty may by his Prerogative, command the goods, the Chattells, and
the lives of any his subjects inhabiting within his kingdom and dominions, and
that is false which you shall see anon.

Now seeing that Antichrist his brood can make bold to describe a Prerogative
Royal in a false manner to set the king and his subjects at variance, I do
think it not only necessary but also of necessity for a christian subject to
describe the truth of a Prerogative Royal, thereby to set peace between the
king and his subjects, so far forth as it shall please God to give his
blessing thereunto.

And now to the matter what the Kings Prerogative is, as namely that the King
is subject to none but to God.

So that he may have command of the subjects whatsoever things necessary and
necessity does require, so far forth as the truth of his Prerogative does
extend.

Object. Then the King may command or require whatsoever the malignant party
aforesaid has spoken of before.

Answ. No, for as the King is subject to none but to God, so he is subject
only to God alone, and for to give an account unto God for all his works
whether good or evil, so that the office of a King as it is the greatest
dignity and honor in all the world, so it is a heavy burden being well
considered and flatterers, inchanters or spiritual witches, will make it more
heavy, if God in his mercy do not defend him from those wicked fiends.

But the truth is a Prerogative Royal does stand upon three points, or
architects: that is to say foundation, supportation, and obligation, even so
does the Prerogative Royal stand upon the foundation of truth, supportation of
judgment, obligation or bond of righteousness: now if any of these three
points be wanting, in architect the building cannot stand.

Even so likewise in a Prerogative Royal it stands as aforesaid, upon these
three points, but after a mystical manner, as first, the foundation of truth,
secondly the suportation of judgment, and thirdly the bond of righteousness.

And these three points has God commanded the Kings Prerogative to stand upon,
as first in the book of Deuteronomie, the 17. chap. the 18.19. and 20. verses:
Giving us to understand that Kings must be godly, and religious, whose
affections must be still to obey the truth, the will, and the word of God,
whereby he may be a discerner of truth from falsehood; and and not to be carried
away with every wind of false doctrine, as many Kings are.

The second point that the Prerogative is upholden by, is judgment, for if a
man have never so good foundation in the truth, yet if he have no judgment to
support the truth aright, whereby does proceed matter of true faith, as good
not know the truth, for without truth it is impossible to please God: even so
the Kings prerogative must have judgment to uphold the truth, for he that has
not true judgment is subject to many errors and falls into heresies and is
always apt and ready to be deluded, and miserably detained.

The third point upon which a good building does consist, is Peace, Obligation,
and a sound Band; for in Architect the foundation, the supportation, being
never so firm to show, yet if it have not good Band to hold it outward
together, it will soon fall, and be ruinated.

Even so stands the case of a Prerogative Royal if it have not truth, and
having truth, has not judgment, and having judgment, have not the bond of
Righteousness, it can be no Prerogative Royal, for God has commanded in the
22. of Jeremy, the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. verses.

So here, we vulgar sort of people may see upon what ground the Kings
Prerogative does stand, as namely, upon Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness,
so as Truth and Judgment do teach matter of Faith, so Judgments and
Righteousness do teach manners of life and conversation.

So that here we may learn and observe, that as it is the duty of all Kings
from God to reign, to rule, to govern and command (in their several
Kingdoms, and Dominions) all the subjects according to the Prerogative before
mentioned.

So it is the duty of every subject from God faithfully to obey his Sovereign
Lord the King, according to the same Prerogative, as in Truth, Judgment, and
Righteousness, and this in the performance of this duty, will make a good
accommodation and reconciliation between King and People, Sovereign and
Subject.

As in Joshua the first Chapter 16. and 17. verses, And they answered Joshua,
saying, All that thou have commanded us will we do, and whithersover thou
sendest us will we go, as we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee,
only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses: Whosoever shall
rebel against thy Commandments, and will not obey thy words, in all that thou
command him, let him be put to death, only be strong and of a good courage.

Object. Then the King may command what he please.

Answer. As Moses and Joshua did receive Gods will by immediate means; so the
King and his People must receive the will of God by immediate means, as
namely, from the written word of God.

This being so, it is a maxim inviolable, the use that we are to make is
this, that it do not only reprove, but also condemn those that do abuse and
falsify the Kings Prerogative, saying, and holding that the King may command
by his Prerogative the lives, lands and goods and chattells of any subject or
subjects, when or wheresoever he pleases, and so consequently do make of a
good King a witty tyrant, not only in matters of faith, but also in manners of
life, wherein do consist the mark of true Christianity.

And those miserable wretches being crossed in their wicked designs, have
labored by all means possible to make variance between the King and his
Parliament, and so by this consequence they raise a breach between the King and
this Kingdom, by their enchanting spiritual witchery, flattering and
dissembling, and so seducing the King under pretense of honesty and plain
dealing, when there is no such matter, but only mere deceit, and all for their
own ends.

But be they what they will be, so long as they continue in those wicked
courses and practices, that make themselves instruments and slaves to their
master the Devil, and he will one day pay them their wages to their utter
shame and confusion of soul and body for evermore, except God in his mercy do
give them grace to repent.

The second Use is to advise them to pray unto God that he will be merciful
unto them, to open the eyes of their understanding, and to give them a clear
sight and feeling of their sins, that they may not be blinded in them through
delight or custom, as reprobates are: But that they may be weary of them,
much grieved for them, if the Lord of his mercy touch their hearts with true
repentance, that they be inwardly sorry for all sins, not to take any delight
or pleasure in any ^in, but that they turn to the Lord with all their heart,
and seek him while he may be found, and call upon him when he is near, and
whiles he offers grace and mercy unto them before it be too late.

Furthermore, seeing the King is subject to none but to God; then here is a
duty for all Christian Subjects to entreat the Lord by daily prayer so to
sanctify and direct our Kings heart, that he may reign, rule, and govern us
according to his blessed and sacred will revealed in his word, that is to say,
in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness, and that God would vouchsafe to enrich
his royal heart with the manifold graces of his holy Spirit, that he may be an
advancement to his glory and comfort to his Church, and a terror to his
enemies, keeping from treason and treacheriet at home and abroad, and
especially from the conspiracy of Romanists, and from seducing deluding
flatterers, giving him to see what belongs to his peace, and give him a heart
earnestly bent to set up the practice of the same; give him all grace necessary
for his place, and necessary for his own salvation, continue his government
peaceably and prosperously amongst us, and as thou have made him the breath of
our nostrills, and a gracious instrument for the saving of many thousand
souls: So O Lord, let his own soul be saved in the day that thy Son Jesus
Christ shall appear, and grant dear Father that we his subjects may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; and now O Lord, we
beseech the strengthen his Majesty, and sanctify his royal affection, that he
may imitate thy good servant King David in the reformation of his house, from
the nearest to the furthest, the highest to the lowest: fix his eyes O Lord,
upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with him, Psalm. 101. and to
have respect to those that walk in the perfect way to serve him, and give him
O Lord, a settled resolution, that no deceitful person dwell within his house,
and he that flattereth and tells lies may not remain in his sight. Amen, so
be it.

So that if all faithful subjects that are Householders, will take this for a
president, to receive and entertain good and faithful servants, and to turn
out all wicked and profane wretches, that have no fear of God before their
eyes, so that when these people shall see themselves cast out of the favor of
God, good men, and their services, and pious families, by reason of their
wicked behavior; by this means they may be brought to see their own misery
and gross sins they have committed; and considering what vile wretched persons
they have been, like to the prodigal son spoken of in the Gospel, Luke 15.
thereby grace may work upon them, as to turn their ways from evil to
goodness, and change their minds from vice to virtue, and to pray to God to
give them true and hearty repentance; that whereas they were before prophaners
of the Lords day, they may be sanctifiers of the Lords day; of blasphemers and
foul mouthed swearers, to become reverend speakers, of proud, to be humble,
of damnable idolaters to be true worshippers of God according to his Word; of
railers and spiteful haters of the true preachers and professors of Gods Word,
to be true hearted lovers of the Preachers and professors of Gods Word; of
ignorants of God, to learn to be well acquainted with God and his word; of
hurtful, harmless; of filthy whore-mongers and wantons, to become chaste
livers; of beastly drunkards, to become sober people; of cheaters and thieves,
to hate and detest all sin as the very hangman or cutthroat of our souls.

These are some of the fruits of true repentance, so that they may be
regenerated faithful and religious people to the glory of God, and salvation
of our own souls in Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer.

But now to answer to an objection that may be made by Papists, Atheists,
Newters, and Protestants at large.

Object. This which you have before spoken, is too much preciseness, we are
not to live so precisely, and none are so precise but Puritans.

Answ. First, preciseness in matters of Religion is not only necessary, but
also of necessity, because St. Paul does confirm it.

In the time, or after the way which you call heresy, so worship I the God of
my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets,
Acts 24.14.

Secondly, preciseness in Religion is of necessity, else we should be ignorant
of the knowledge of God, and then mark what judgments of God will follow.
Saint Paul says in the Romans, chap. 1. verse. 28. For as they regard not to
know God, even so God delivers them up unto a reprobate mind, to do the
things that are not convenient.

Again in 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.9. And unto you that are troubled, rests us, when the
Lord Jesus shall show himself with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, rendering
vengeance to them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

Thirdly, I would willingly know what opinion Puritans (as you tear me them)
do hold contrary to that as every one has promised to God in his baptism,
and is bound upon pain of damnation to perform it.

If you can prove any thing contrary to that covenant made unto God, then make
it appear, and spare not. But if you cannot prove any thing contrary to that
we have promised and vowed in our Baptism (as indeed you cannot) then take
heed how you do hate and deride the Preachers and Professors of the Gospel,
giving them nicknames and scoffing terms: for Christ his words will prove
true, that has threatened against those railing, despitefull, and envious
wretches, that it shall be easier for the people of Sodom and Gomorrah in the
day of judgment, then for such, Matthew. 10.15. Then being so, it were good for
those people that are given over to such a habit of deriding and despising Gods
ordinances, that they take into consideration the great danger they do pull
upon their own souls and bodies, which are judgments in this life, and
eternal torment in the world to come. First judgments in this life, as
ignorants of God, thereby comes blindness of mind, Esa. 6.9.10. and 59.8.9
10. Hardness of heart, infidelity and unbelief, Matthew. 3.5. Exo. 9 34.35.

Secondly, eternal torments, as to be separated from a good and merciful
gracious God, and to burn in the lake of fire and brimstone for evermore,
which is the second death, Rev. 21.8. Consider what is said, and the Lord be
with your understanding in all things, 1 Timothy 2.7.

FINIS.

