THE BATTLE ON HOPTON-HEATH IN STAFFORDSHIRE, Between His MAJESTY'S Forces
under the Right Honorable the Earl of NORTHAMPTON, and those of the Rebels,
March 19.

Together with A Letter from the Lord COMPTON now Earl of NORTHAMPTON.

Printed by H. Hall. M.DCXLIII.

THE BATTLE ON HOPTON-HEATH.
IT is too manifest what poor shifts the Authors of this re^llion have used to
bring about their designs: among whom none have been more busy then Sir
William Brereton and Sir John Gell, two that (one would think) have conspired
together to be beaten as often as they unite their mutual forces. Witness
Ashby de-la-zouch and other places where they shamefully have been worsted by
that noble courageous Colonel Hastings. Though I must tell you both Brereton
and Gell for their personal valor are as notorious Cowards as any in the
saw-pit. I confess indeed, Gell dare fight, provided his enemy have been
seven years dead; his valor having lately showed it self against the Coffins
and Monuments of some dead men, whose living fac^s he durst not look upon, as
if his business lay (like that devil's in the G^spell) among the Tombs and
Sepulchers. And Brereton is as valiant as he, if lying down in a ditch,
standing behind a hayricke, or riding a full mile from the field, may go for
valor, of which three performances his own Soldiers confess him guilty. And
yet these two Champions (to show they are perfect Cowards) are always raising
quarrels, and seducing His Majesty's subjects to kill one another; As in many
other, so in this battle on Hopton Heath, an impartial Relation whereof you
here have by an express from far better hands.

From Stafford March 21. 1642.
Upon Friday last having intelligence of the Enemies intentions to approach
hither, we marched toward the way we conceived they would come, and having
notice of about two hundred of them quartered in a Town called Heywood in
Staffordshire near to our pass, we fell upon them, and after a short skirmish
beat them from their hold, took and killed above the one half of them, the
rest escaping by by-ways so that we could not follow them, only quartered
there that night Sunday being at Stafford, about twelve of the clock we had
intelligence of Sr W. Brereton and Sr John Gells being met with all their
forces, being about 3000 Horse and Foot, placed upon a Heath called Hopton
Heath near a Town called Weston some two miles from Stafford. We drew out our
Horse and Dragooners being about 900. And the Heath seeming fair resolved to
charge them, the breadth of it being more then Musketshot from enclosure on
each side. As we advanced we discovered Musketeers placed within a walled
Close, and some Musketeers and drakes in hedges on our right wing. Against
which we sent some of our Musketeers but those being too few to beat them, by
order of counsel we advanced with our whole body of Horse (leaving only a
Reserve) toward their body, and upon our advancing their Musketeers ran from
the hedges, we chargeing their body their Horse presently ran, and we forced
them to quit their Cannon. But our men following the Execution beyond command,
and our Musketeers not coming up, they got some of their Cannon again, yet we
brought off 8 pieces. And then rallying up our horse again as soon as we
could, we charged some other Horse which they had near their Foot, which
presently retreated and ran, and then Sir Thomas Byron at the head of the
Princes Regiment chargeing their Foot broke in among them, but they having some
Troops of Horse near their Foot, fell upon him, and then he received his
hurts, bleeding so that he was not able to stay in the field. But by reason of
the night and our Horses being weary we stood about a Musket Shot from them,
and after a time our men being weary, we drew somewhat further off, keeping
strong parties nearer them. The next morning by break of day we made ready to
fall on again, but finding no Enemy, we then understood that they had marched
away in the night about an hour after our parting with them, there we found
carriages, with Ammunition and other things, and the fore carriages of their
Cannon, which makes us believe they have thrown the rest of their Cannon into
some pooles thereabouts. In this fight (and in that former skirmish on Friday)
we took and killed above 300, and wounded at the least 500 more (for our Horse
charged their Foot which occasioned so many wounded) as their own men confess
whom since we took prisoners. We have taken above 300 of their Horse, 8 pieces
of Cannon, with a great deal of other Ammunition. Gell is certainly hurt but
not killed, yet they say he was hurt by chance by one of their own soldiers
as they went away in the night, and we are apt enough to believe it, for he is
not too forward to come into danger.

But now we must from the sadness of our souls acquaint you with the great
loss both His Majesty and the whole kingdom have sustained in this action by
the death of a most Loyal and hardly to be equalled Subject, the most noble
and most valiant Earl of Northampton, who upon the first charge with out
horse, being engaged upon Execution near their foot, his horse was shot, so
that he was constrained to alight, and being encompassed with enemies he fought
on foot a long time, killing (as they themselves confess) a Colonel of foot,
and striking another Captain into the breast with his Poleax, besides other
common soldiers whom he wounded and slew, until such time as he was overborne
by multitudes, and then being knocked down with a musket and grievously
wounded, and his head-peece taken off, was offered quarter (as they say) but he
answered that he scorned to take quarter from such base rogues and Rebels as
they were; and so fought it out a long while after, till such time as he was
shine by a blow with a halbert, on the hinder part of his head, receiving at
the same time another deep wound in his face. Which done, they hurried him away
so as we all thought he had been taken prisoner* for we could not find his body.

The sadness of this accident would not have left our greatest Victory without
misery, but yet the grearnesse of his example cannot but make all those that
are desirous of honor to follow him in his steps; though none can come nearer
him then his brave sons, and especially the Lord Compton: In whom we find
much gallantry and valor in this last action (wherein he received a shot in
the leg, but no ways dangerous, and his horse also shot under him.) So that
should we not say, that there is none more fitting, or deserving to serve HIS
MAJESTY and the Kingdom in those Commands, and Honorable employments which
his Father enjoyed, then this young Lord, we should both wrong his Lordship,
and our own judgments. We are assured he will be found to be the inheritor
of his Fathers Loyalty and Virtues, and endeavor by serving His Majesty, to
revenge his fathers death, and equal him in glorious actions. In which we
shall be ready to follow him, and are preparing for that purpose. We had 25
slain, the chief whereof were Captain Harvy of my Lords own Regiment,
Captain Baker lately a scholar in Oxford, Ensign Bowyer, Captain Middleton of
Colonel Hastings Regiment, Leiutenant Green, Coronet Billing and Coronet Hall,
who all carried themselves as gallantly as men could do. There were about some
twenty hurt, the most whereof were Officers; as Sir Thomas Byron, Colonel
Stanhope, Colonel Wagstaffe, Captain Knotsford, Captain Richard Bagot,
Captain Harvey Bagot, Captain John Clarke, Captain Thomas Harwood, Master
Spencer Lucy, Lieutenant Leving, Coronet Mettham, Coronet Washington, and
Master Lancaster, besides my Lord Compton's shot in the leg, not a man of
these but expressed admirable valor, the service for the time being very hot,
and the enemies being above three times our number, etc.

There can be little added to this express Relation, wherein though it pleased
God so to defeat the Rebels, yet our loss is invaluable in the death of this
noble Earl; who as he was early up (being one of the first defenders of this
righteous cause) so he continued at such a height of courage and magnanimity,
as drew all good men's eyes on his honorable actions. Whether the Rebels
offered him quarter, or whether he refused it when it was offered, is not
certain, for we have it only from themselves, who no doubt will make their
best excuse for murdering so incomparable a Lord. Nor is it improbable that he
scorned their quarter, preferring a present honorable death before that vile,
wretched, unprofitable captivity, whereof he was assured, were he once their
prisoner. For as he spent his noble endeavors in defense of his King and
Country while he lived, so he valued not his life when it would be serviceable
to none but Rebels. He has been often heard to say, that, If he outlived
these Wars, he was certain never to have so noble a death. And had we wholly
lost him, it would have filled us with too much sorrow, but that we have such
excellent Copies of him in his rare sons, and chiefly in the gallant young
Earl himself, who has so much of the father in him, that he only wants time
and opportunity to make him more like him. And this you will partly gather by
this ensuing Letter which my Lord writ with his own hand to the noble Countess
his Mother, two days after his Fathers death.


Dear Mother,
ON Sunday last we got the day of the Rebels, but our loss (especially your
Honors and mine) is not to be expressed. For though it be a general loss to
the Kingdom, yet it touches us nearest. But Madam, Casualties in this world
will happen, and in such a cause who would not have ventured both life and
fortune? pray'e Madam, let this be your comfort, that it was impossible for any
to do braver then he did, as appears by their own Relation. I sent a
Trumpeter to know what was become of my Father, he brought me a Letter from
Sir John Gell and Sir William Brereton, assuring me of my Fathers death,
making strange demand for his body, such as were never before heard of in any
war, as all their Ammunition, Prisoners, and Cannon which we had taken. I
sent them word back, that their demands were unreasonable, and against the
Laws of Arms, but desired them to give free passage to some Surgeons to
embalme him, or to let their Surgeons do it, and I would satisfy them for
their pains. their last Answer I have sent in Philip VVilloughby's Letter
which is, that they will neither send the body nor suffer our Surgeons to
come to embalme it, but will see their own Surgeons do it. Their Relation
was, that He was assaulted by many together, and with his own hand killed the
Colonel and others also, but was unhorsed by the multitude, his horse being
shot: But his Armor was so good that they could not hurt him, till he was
down, and had undone his head-peece.

'Pray'e Madam, be comforted, and think no man could more honorably have ended
this life (fighting for his Religion, his King, and his Country) to be partaker
of heavenly joies. We must certainly follow him, but can hardly hope for so
brave a death. Thus humbly craving your blessing, I shall remain till death

STAFFORD March, 22. 1642. Your obedient Son NORTHAMPTON.


Let the Reader now judge, if the genius and spirit of the Father be not
eminent in the son, and whether that hand that wrote this Letter does not
promise as great hopes for the good of this Kingdom as any whomsoever of his
age and quality. Next you may see the Barbarousnesse of these Rebels toward
the Corpse of the dead, who as they have made sale of their Allegiance and
Loyalty, so now have shaken hands with all common honesty, practicing those
inhumanities the very Turks scorn to descend to; For the Mahometans if they
kills Commander that is an Enemy, do not only embalme the corpse, but give it
safe convoy to the enemies quarters, that the friends of the dead may give it
burial, as the noble Earl of Craford and others that have been in the wars
betwixt the Polonian and the Turk,can testify to be true. And doubtless if
the Turks knew what breach of faith given, what robbing, stripping naked, nay
murder (after Arms delivered up by composition) has been committed on His
Majesty's soldiers, it would further harden them against Christianity; unless
they consider that these things were done not as they are Christians, but as
the worst of Rebels. And let them not for shame object, that we loose men of
eminency, but they do not, lest we tell the world the reason. For as the
Commanders of these rebellious Forces are made up of all Religions and Trades,
so those few men of quality that are on their side, are driven by their guilt
into ditches, and saw-pits, any whither out of the reach of danger, as not
daring to leave the world with all their sins about them. Therefore were it
any cause under Heaven but this, that is, were not Religion, Honor, Learning,
Laws, Nobility, Gentry, Honesty, and all at stake, these Noble Lords and
Gentlemen would not make their blood so cheap, as to spend it on such unworthy
enemies, who as they have endeavored to murder both King and Queen, so
labor the ruin of every English Gentleman.

FINIS.

