THE SEA-MANS DIAL, OR, THE MARINERS CARD: Directing unto the safe Port of
CHRISTIAN OBEDIENCE.

And showing the reasons which moved the Author, A Sea Commander, to return
unto his Loyalty, and the service of his Sovereign.

As it was sent in a Letter to a private Friend, to be published from him unto
the Seamen; and is by this Friend thus entitled:

And Dedicated unto the consideration, and commended unto the practice of all
honest true hearted Seamen of England.

Printed in the Year 1648.

The Seamans Dial, etc.
Gentlemen, and dear fellow Seamen:
I Would no ways have you to wonder, that notwithstanding the Oaths I have
taken, and the engagements I have made, together with my credit, and the trust
the Parliament put in me, I should nevertheless leave the Parliament, and now
betake my self unto the service of my Sovereign gracious King Charles, in
which I am resolved to live and dye.

For my Oaths, the Solemn League and Covenant, bind us unto the preservation
of Religion, and Liberties, and to maintain, and defend the Kings Person and
Authority.

Concerning Religion, since we took the Covenant that is almost quite lost,
and that which ought to be but One, is now increased into so many, that the
Religion of these times, is like unto a Common-Queane, that has borne a Child
unto every Whoremaster in the Parish, and has as many names and sirnames for
her Bastards, as she has had Fornicators for their Fathers; and therefore is
it that since we left the old Protestant Religion of the Church of England,
which King Charles well maintained, Anabaptists, Brownists, Famelists,
Erastians, Quakers, Shakers, Independents, and many more Sects which are
unworthy the naming, are so ripe amongst us, because we have left our first
love, and our first faith, and are gone almost every one as the Scripture
says, a whoring after our own inventions; so that the truth and life of
Religion is even quite lost in us; and you know fellow seamen, that there was
never so much cunning and cozening, and such deceit in trade amongst us, as
since these holy professors began to increase: Besides how for our wavering,
and fickleness in Religion are we marked and pointed at beyond the Seas: And
no marvel we are become a scorn unto others, if we consider how much worse
and more corrupt we are grown in our manners; for since this new preaching
and praying came amongst us, I see no amendment in our lives, only our
professors can sin with more secrecy and cunning, and do allow that unto
themselves under some name in Religion, which they condemn in others, whoring,
and cheating, and lying, and dissembling, being no faults in these men, when
they will openly rail at the merriments or drunkenesse, which I do not excuse
of other men; as though Almighty God, and they say so too, would see no sin
in these Saints, and you may observe this sort of men, much more ambitious and
coveteous then other men are: You see that our old honest preaching, which gave
us instruction for our conversation toward God and man, and to lead our lives
in all honesty and godliness of living, is turned into railing against the
King, and the Bishops, and the Cavaliers, and our old government in Church and
Commonwealth, under which God did much more bless us then now; yea not only
the Ministers, but every other man preaches amongst us, and men that cannot
well read will be expounding the Scriptures, though St. Paul says there are
many things in them hard to be understood.

And since the book of Common Prayer, which I have heard, the Martyrs of the
Protestant Religion gathered together was suppressed, every man prays and
prates as he pleases, and men are become more confident and familiar with God,
and be much less humble then ever the Saints, or Christ himself were in their
prayers set down unto us in the Scripture, praying for nothing but what may
please them, or for a blessing upon the plots of the Parliament; yet these who
do thus destroy Religion, are we see the men whom the Parliament principally
encourage, which sure cannot be thought the preservation of Religion according
unto the Covenant.

For our liberties, though I cannot I praise God much complain my self, yet I
have heard ten times more stories of the oppression of the Subjects since the
Parliament sat, then in the whole Reign of King James, and King Charles; yet
we know how many worthy Commanders and Seamen have been put out of their
places, and cast into prison, [as Stradling, Kettleby, Ashly, and others,] unto
the utter undoing of their wives and children, without any examination or
offense proved, but merely for suspicion that they loved the King; were
plainly see there is no Law, but the will of the Parliament, and whereas
before it was lawful to sue the King himself in any of the Courts, now a
Parliament man must not be touched: And who can say that ever he could get any
justice against a Parliament man by a Petition unto the Houses?

In the Covenant we have sworn to defend the Kings Person and Authority; yet
we know that he has been long kept so straight a Prisoner, that the meanest
Subject would have thought himself very much wronged to have been kept so long
in prison without a hearing; for the Kings Authority, the very name of that is
scarce left us, when it is become a great fault to pray for the King, or to
drink unto his health; although Gods word bids us pray for Kings, 1 Timothy 2.2.
And if the least sign of duty, and well wishing unto him can be discovered; it
is proof enough to put a man out of any place of profit or trust. You see how
well the Parliament have maintained the Kings Authority, when that they have
voted that no further Addresses be made unto him, and when the Army have in
their Declaration told us, That they are resolved to settle the government
without a King, and against him, and against all that take part with him; which
is the same thing, as to say, That they will have no King at all to reign over
them: There can be no man so silly sure, as to think that the Parliament or
Army ever think to have a King, when they will not proceed against Rolph, who
has three witnesses to prove against him a design to take away the Kings life
by the persuasion of the Army, because no doubt many of both Houses had their
hands with him in the plot.

For the Covenant, though I could have been well contented that I had never
taken it; I believe I have kept it better in leaving the Parliament, then I
should have done by staying in their service; for they have put down both
Religion, and the King, and broken the Covenant in every point, but in pulling
down the Prelates, and that it must be thought was to get the Bishops Lands
for themselves; for Popery, we see they pass not much of it.

The Covenant was for the preservation of Religion, and liberties, and to
maintain the Kings Person and authority, this Oath I took, and so far will
keep it (God assisting) preserve to my power the Protestant Religion, which
the Parliament practice to suppress; and defend the King, whom the Parliament
would depose: they were the ends for which I took the Oath; I break not my
Oath and trust, when I keep the end of my Oath and trust, which were to
preserve Religion, and defend the King; if they will (as they do) destroy both,
it is they have broke their Oath and trust; and not I; for I would never have
undertaken a trust to destroy these two things, which every Christian ought to
serve and honor, his Religion and King, which since the Parliament (as all men
see) have done, let them trust unto themselves, and their Sectaries; no honest
man that has a conscience unto God, can keep such a trust, unless he will
commit the greatest sin against God, and his own Conscience: and therefore
dear fellow Seamen be no longer abused by the devices of the Parliament, but
return unto your duty of obedience unto God and the King, Give unto God the
things that are Gods, and unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's Matt. 22.21.
join your hearts and hands with us your Brethren now in the Kings service, to
restore the protestant Religion, and his Majestyes Religion ought to be one and
the same, we ought not to halt between two Religions, 1. Kings 18.19. There
are now instead of two Religions more then the Moon has changes in the year:
let us set up the old protestant Religion, used in King Edwards days, in
blessed Queen Elizabeth's days, in King James his happy days, and in the
Reign of King Charles, which was a prosperous time, until the Parliament
Ruled, and suffered him not to Reign: Let us restore the King who has been
more wronged then ever Prince was; Gods word commands us to honor our King,
not to think ill of him, much less to speak ill of him, and surely least of
all to lift up our hands or sight against him, which whosoever does shall
receive unto himself damnation, 1. Pet. 2.17. Exodus 22.8. Eccl. 10.20. Job
34.18. 1. Sam. 26.9. Prove. 30.31. Ecle. 8.2. Romans 13.1. Our King is a good
King, a most gracious Prince, tender of his Subjects, loving to his Queen,
careful of his Children, courteous to his people, bountiful to his Servants,
zealous toward God; his whole life was never stained with a foul fault, what
man is there in both the Houses like him for conversation? what leading man is
there amongst them that may not be marked forth by some sin? let us then lend
our help unto him, and pull down his Enemies: The strengths of the Kingdom
(whereof the Navy are the chief) are by the Law the Kings; I have heard that
what in the time of Peace is a private man's property if it be a strength (put
to the case a Castle or ship of defense) during time of war becomes the Kings,
by the Law of the Land: the Parliament have wrested the King out of his Rights,
out of the strengths of the Kingdom, both by Sea and Land: It is in your power
in part to right him, and to deliver unto him not only what is always his
own, the Royal Navy, but also what this war maks his the use of all vessels
of defense.

The Seamen are the wall of this Island, do your duties, there is no man can
put a trust upon you or you receive any, but that which stands with your duty
to your Prince, which you owe unto him, and whilst you do you make no breach of
trust unto any other; for you do but what honesty requires, give every man his
own, and this we ought to do, or otherwise you join with them that wrong the
King, in not giving unto him what the Laws of the Land give unto him: for
suppose a man take away a purse of money upon the highway from another and
gives me who know not be came by it by robbery, this purse to keep, afterward
I certainly find that the money is not his, but an honest man's from whom he
took it by violence: unto which of the two (think you) am I bound to restore
the purse? whether unto him who gave it me in trust to keep, or unto the true
owner? Certainly unto the true owner, when I know him to be so, and not unto
the robber; for then I make my self a thief with him; for he cannot trust me
with that which is properly another man's, and the Laws of God and man, bids us
give unto every man that which is his own; and so would I wish you dear
fellow Seamen to do, and what I speak unto you, I speak likewise unto the
Watermen; that Company has always been a Nursery of able Seamen.

By this course ye shall not only do what every Christian ought to be careful
of, your duty to God and your King, but also exceedingly relieve your Country,
and benefit your selves; for you know the great decay of trade, and how the
Merchants (by whom the most of you live) are almost beggered, which has brough
such great want upon many of you, and your poor families; only the Seamen
have not been so poor since the memory of man, and surely because of our
disobedience unto our Sovereign King Charles is this great curse come upon us,
we were first used to serve the Parliaments wicked turns against the King:
Return then honest hearts unto your King, and doubt not but you will recover
your losses, and gain Gods blessing upon you; we have great encouragements to
gather and keep together to do this good work, we have able and good
Churchmen with us, who have not turned about with the winds of new doctrines;
we have many well borne Gentlemen amongst as Commanders, we have the Kings Son,
his Highness the Doke of York our Admiral; we stand up for our Religion, our
King, and our liberties, all which the Sectaries trample upon, and would pull
down.

His Highness the Prince of Wales has declared. 1. The reestablishment of the
Protestant Religion. 2. To rescue his Majesty from imprisonment that he may si^
with the Parliament, and enjoy his rights. 3. That the two Houses of Parliament
may be restored unto their fieedome. 4. That the King ^ome may be eased of
Excize. 5. That the Army of Sectar^s may be dub nded. 6. That all t^xes and
Cesses may be taken off. 7. That the narrow Seas may be protected for the
carrying on of a free trade for Merch ants ships. 8. I hat the City of London
may enjoy their Priviledg^s and rights: These are the th^^gs we stand up for,
and doubt not through Gods blessing to go through stitch: If you like these
matters, then a Gods name send us your help; and so I commend me heartily unto
you all, and pray God to direct you unto this duty, that our Land may again
rejoice under the Government of our Sovereign, which now mournes under the
Tyranny of the Parliament: for when the Righteous are in authority the People
rejoice; but when the wicked bears rule the people mourn, Prove. 20.2.

From the Downs, Aug. 10. 1648. W. B.

FINIS.

