A true RELATION of what past between the Fleet of his Highness the Prince of
Wales, and that under the Command of the Earl of Warwick.

Anno Dom. M.DC.XI.VIII.

A true RELATION Of what past between the Fleet of his Highness the Prince of
Wales, and that under the Command of the Earl of Warwick.
Understanding that there are diverse reports and untruthes vented concerning
his Highness the Prince of Wales goeinge up into the River of Th^mes, I have
thought good as being an eye witness of all the proceedings to set forth the
truth with out any partiality.

down as low as the boy of the Redsand, whereupon we presently stood back for
Marget Road hopeinge that night or next morning to have met with him.





Prince, of which we received answer about 12 a clock at night.

Prince with the Fleet standing away, with his Topsaile down on the chapp to
go for Holland and indeed it was high time, there being not in the Ships more
then a butt of bear and no water.

After we had stood away from him two leagues, he waighed with his Fleet as if
he would have done something, and stood after us with all his sails, we still
making noe more sail, and as he or any of his Fleet came near to us, we
stayinge for them they would do the like and off the Spitts all his Fleet came
by the lee night in hand we standing away our course for Holland with lights
upon the Admiralls poope.





Thus have I given a true and impartial relation of the whole business to
stopp the mouths of all those who report the Prince fled from the Earl of
Warvvick, for I must do his Highness that right that I never saw a man more
ready and willinge to engage his own person, then he was; for when Sr William
Batten and others came to him, desir^ing him to go down his answer was, he
would never agree to it, it being not for his honor, so that a resolution was
taken if they came to engage to have carried him down by force.

And now though I have done with the relation, yet I must say something in
vindication of the judgments of the sea commanders under whose sphere it
will most properly fall.

I know it vvil be objected and that justly to, unless cleared a great deal
of undiscretion in this business.

As first the coming into the River with so small a proportion of victuals,
and secondly, to offer to engage such Schips in so narrovv a straight and so
much disadvantage on the Princes side.

To both which I ansvvear it was quite against the sense of the council, but
occationed by the resolutions I will not say discretion of the seamen, for in
all me life I never savv men more ready and unanimous to engage then they were.


