Eminent CURES ^a^^a^ perform in several Di^ea^es, by Ba^emans SPIRITS of
SCURVEY-GRASS.
IT IS well known throughout the Nation, that I first of all Published these
Excellent Spirits for a general Good, above Eight y ars ago; and ^ave ever
since continued them, to the great benefit of many Thousands that have made use
of them. And such acceptance and esteem have they obtained, especially from
persons of Quality and Judgment; and their Virtues in the Scurvey, Dropsies,
Worms, Aches, Stone, Consumptions, and several other Diseases, are so
well-known, and their safe and effectual way of working so Universally proved
in and upon persons of all Ages, different Complexions, and various Distempers,
that I did not intend any further Advertisements, in this kind, had not several
ill men (observing the Quantities I daily vended) gone about to Ape and
Counterfeit them, to the great abuse of the Public. Which bad Practices of
theirs having occasioned much prejudice to many honest people, whereof I daily
hear lamentable Complaints, I am thereupon in justice to my self and my
Country, forced to continue this way of general Notice, lest any should be
drawn in to mistake those Counterfeits for my Spirits, and so not only be
defrauded of their Money, but injured in their Health. For my own part,
Hundreds in this Honorable City, of good quality, can testify, That as I was
bred up to Pharmacy, to for above Twenty years I have been diligently versed in
Preparing, Trying, and Improving of the choicest Medicines; but these Vpstart
Pretenders are generally inconsiderable fellows, that have kept Alehouses, or
followed other Mecharick Trades as long as they were able; and having been in
Goals, and reduced to necessity. For a last shift, they of late boldly ventured
to turn Quacks, and bubble the world with their pretended Spirits, though they
not at all understand the true Preparation. For how can it be supposed they
know it seeing I never imparted my Method to any person living? But because
there is no proof like that of Fact, I appeal to Experience, which daily
demonstrates as well the admirable Virtues of my approved Spirits in
themselves, as their Incomparable Excellency above and beyond all the
Counterfeit Merchandise of these impudent Physic Hucksters. And for the
Readers satisfaction therein, I shall here (besides those mentioned formerly)
publish some few Remarkable Cures that have lately been wrought by my spirits,
which I shall give you in the words of persons of unquestionable Credit in
diverse ^arts, who comm^ni^^ (...) same unto (...)

The (...) ^ecite is a Letter from Chic^e^^ (...) Suffex, dated March the 12th,
1680.
Sir, I am desired to return you the hearty thanks of many that have taken of
your Spirits, for the (...) benefit they have thereby received; particularly
one Richard Goly a young man of this City, having been long afflicted with the
Dropsy and Scurvey, and brought very low, after the taking of many other
Medicines without success, by using one of your Bottles, is perfectly cured.
Likewise my Mother having for many years been lamentably troubled with the
Stone, after taking some of your Plain Spirit, found a sensible benefit, and
has been at ease ever since. Many it has helped of the Toothache, and diverse
have by them been cured of tedious Agues, when, all other Remedies proved
ineffectual, and many more of several other Distempers, which desire to return
thanks to God and you, (as an Instrument under him by these your excellent
Spirits) for restoring their Health.

Yours Francis Fleshmonger.


The next shall be the following Extract out of a Letter from Hull.
Sir, These serve to give you a remarkable instance of the Virtues of your
Spirits of Scurvey-grass much admired in these parts, upon one Elizabeth
Thompson, Wife of Bernard Thompson of Barton over against this Town of Hull,
who having for a considerable time been troubled with a great pain and gnawing
at her heart or stomach, one Mr. Foy that had a Bottle of your Golden Spirit,
gave her an hundred drops of it, upon which she voided a worm three yards, and
three quarters long, as it was measured by the said Mr. ^oy in the presence of
several persons. And the woman is since freed of her pain; but has sent for
more of the Spirit, and much applauds it. Your Servant to command,

Hull, June 15th, 1681. John Goodrick.


No^ is the following Account less considerable from Aishburton.
Sir, This at present acquaints you of a great Cure wrought through the
blessing of God by your Bottles of Plain Spirits upon a Child of a Neighbor of
mine, by name Mr. Matthew Whitehair, the Child being abot ^hree year old, had a
Salt humor fell into her eyes, by reason whereof she was in a manner deprived
(...) part (...) had taken the cure in hand, but could not perform it. After
which her Father sent for a Bottle of your Spirits, by which finding some good,
they had another, upon the taking of which the child's eyes grew better, and
still the cure went on with the use of every Bottle, and the fifth bottle has
perfected the cure, and the child's Eyes are as well as over they were, to the
great admiration of all that knew her. Another Cure was also lately effected
thereby on a Maid of this Town of Aishburton, Mrs. Martha Tydball of about 24
years of age, who was a long time extremely tortured with the Toothache, the
pain whereof was taken away by the use of one bottle of your Plain spirit
without drawing her Tooth. Likewise Mr. Truelock of Abingdon told me lately,
That there was a young Gentleman his Neighbor that was troubled with the
Scurvey, to that great degree, that it had overspread his body in most places
in manner of a White Scurff, and that he had used variety of Physic, but to no
purpose, till he was persuaded to take some of your Spirits, whereupon he grew
better, and after the taking of some Bottles was perfectly cured.

Several other notable Cures might be specified, for there is scarce a week
passes, but I have an Account of some, besides abundance done in remote pares,
which I never hear of. And diverse Learned Doctors do both make use of, and
recommend my Spirits beyond any others extant, particularly Dr. Thomas Dyke of
Tetten in the Parish of Kingstone within three miles of Taunton in
Sommersetshire, as eminent a Physician as any in the West of England, having
made use of them, gives them an high commendation; he also tried Clarks
Spirits, and others that are sent abroad, but declares they are none of them
any ways comparable to Batemans; and for a general good gave his consent to Mr.
John Smith Bookseller in Taunton (one of the disposers of my Spirits) that his
Name and Approbation of them might be used in Print, to prevent peoples being
deceived by those that sell Clarks, etc. who that they might have the quicker
sale, are apt to make use of that Judicious Doctors Name, and pretended that he
had approved of theirs, which in reality he never did.

So that upon the whole, if long Experience, and Extraordinary Cures daily
wrought before your eyes, and the Approbation of the most Learned Doctors may
be sufficient proofs of the Excellency of a Medicine, Batemans Spirits have all
these to vouch for them. Therefore certainly they must be foolishly mad that
shall neglect such approved helps when they may be had; and will rather hazard
their lives by tampering with the counterfeit stops of ignorant Imposters, that
care not what mischief they do, so they may but put off their stuff, and any
way su^^y their own pinching Necessities and Debauche^ (...)

The ^ncomparable ^pirits, both Golden an^ (...) are to be had at these pl^^^^^
(...) Print (...) Directions for the use of them. The B^ttles being all Sealed
with my Coa^^ of Arms, The Half Moon and Ermins, to prevent Counterfeits.

M. Will. Atkins Bookseller in Leicester, Mr. Amphlet barber chyrurgion in
Bewdly. Mr. Adams barber chyrurgion in Tichfield. Mr. Arnold barber-chirurgion
in Epsom. Mr. John Butler in Shaftsbury. Mr. Rich. Bower at his Coffee house in
Yarmouth Mr. Bayley bookseller in Lichfield. Mr. Bayley Grocer in Bedford. Mr.
Elias Basset grocer in Hyth. Mr. Rich. Bott barber chyrurgion in Leominster.
Mr. Edw. Bridges barber chyrurgion in Ross. Mr. Rich. Black at the White Heart
in Grantham. Mr. Brisenden barber near the chequer in Ashford. Mr. Baker joyner
near the While Heart in Milton. Mr. Belton at the holy Lamb in Gravesend. Mr.
Jacob Belton Barber chyrurgion in Hastings. Mr. Browning barber in Cogshal. Mr.
Bullock at the Crown Inn in Billericay. Mr. Will Belthar at the George Inn in
Torrington M. Bateman of Narberth in the County of Penbrook Mr. Cadwell
bookseller in Darby. Mr. William Clark Bookseller in Winchester. Mr. John Smith
bookseller in Taunto^. Mr. Will. Cutlow Draper in Beccles. Mr. Camper at Mr.
Edw. Tailors a Butcher in Rochester. Mr. Cockeram bookseller in Northampton.
Mr. John Cook at the Bull Inn in St. Needs. Mr. Tho. Crouch barber-chyrurgeon
in Rye. Mr. Cocking barber chyrurgion in Ashburton. Mr. Cooksley barber
chyrurgion in Myne^ead! Mr. Rich. Davies bookseller in Oxford. Mr. Robert
Ducker grocer in gainesborough. M. Dagnal bookseller in Alisbury, and at his
shop in Laton. Mr. Reeve Schoolmaster in Dovet Mr. Ja. Edwards Glover at
Mildenhall. Mr. Fleshmonger barber in Chichester. Mr. Field at the Red Lion in
Weathersfield Mr. Fenton Bookseller in Burlington. Mr. Foster mercer in
Binbrook. M. Goodwrick Bookseller in Hull. Mr. Goodwin at his Coffee house in
Ipswich, Mr. Gillam mercer in Guilford. Mr. Tho. Heart bookseller in Chelm^forn.
And at my own House in Paul's Chain near Doctors Commons. LONDON.


