Bateman's Tragedy; OR, THE Perjured Bride justly Rewarded: BEING THE HISTORY
OF The Unfortunate LOVE OF German's Wife and young Bateman.

above, Bateman hanging on the other side of the door from bride and groom;
below, spirit carrying off bride from childbed

London, Printed by and for C. Brown, and T. Norris, and sold by the
Booksellers of Pye-corner and London Bridge.

Bateman's Tragedy: OR, THE Perjured Bride justly Rewarded.
CHAP. I. How young Bateman, riding through Clifton-Town accidentally espied
fair Isabella, a rich Farmer's Daughter, standing at her Father's Door, and
fell in love with her, enquiring who she was, and his Resolves to let her know
his Passion.
WE find that solemn Vows and Promises are of great Weight, and strictly
binding, by the severe notice God has taken of those that have violated them,
in punishing the Dishonor done to his Name, by various and fearful Judgments;
and that People may be more careful for the future, not to make any Vows or
solemn Promises they are prone to break, or intend not to keep, I shall
instance one dismal Example of God's Anger in this kind so dreadful a Manner,
that all England has not only heard it with Admiration, but stood astonished at
it.

James Bateman, Son to a Gentleman of Nottingham-shire, a Person well Educated,
but (by his Father's too much Liberality,) of no great Fortune, riding one Day
through Clifton-Town, a few Miles from Nottingham, happened to cast his Eyes on
a very comely Maid, who was standing at the Door of a seemly House, with whose
innocent Looks and pretty Features, he was, all on a sudden, so taken, that he
could not but make a full stop to gaze at her. The Maiden no sooner perceived
his Eyes were earnestly fixed on her, but coloring her Face with a rosy
Blush, she modestly retires, no less surprised with his comely Personage, than
he was with her charming Beauty; however, this being the first time they had
seen each other, neither had he Courage to make any Advances, but he passed on
about his Affairs to a Town fifteen miles beyond that, but in a manner without
a Heart, for he had left that (as Lovers term it) with his fair Mistress.

fair maiden at left; gentleman on horse at right

All the Way he rode his thoughts, were strangely confused, so that he labored
to compose them, but in vain; he found now though he had formerly made a Jest
of Love, and laughed at his Companions for declaring their Passions, that he
was taken in that Net he had persuaded others so often to break, and that the
more he strugled, the faster he found himself entangled, the Business he went
about was minded but little, and his sighs and restlessness made his Friends
conclude him in much disorder; yet he cunningly concealed the cause from them,
who little suspected it, considering his former freeness of Temper and airy
course of living, that Love could be any ingredient in this sudden alteration;
so that finding, however, the Contagion had seized the Mind more than the Body,
they concluded it might proceed from the decay of his Fortune; whereupon, that
he might not be dejected, they proffered him their assistance and service in
any thing he would command them. Whilst these things passed, he was urgent to
return home, and did so, enquiring by the way, who this sair Maid was, and the
condition of her Parents, and found she was Daughter to a covetous old rich
Farmer, who had refused many considerable Matches, in hopes to prefer her
higher, by the means of her Beauty, and the many Bags he intended to bestow
upon her as a Portion; and further, that he kept a very stricct Hand over her
to prevent her being stolen away. This struck him almost with the Horrors of
Despair; yet something he resolved to do, but what at present he could not
frame in his Mind; and so home he went, to consider prudently how to manage his
Love-affair, that at the first he might not by an over-rash Address, dash all
his future hopes of Happiness: In contriving which, we will leave him a while,
to consider the condition wherein he left fair Isabella, the Farmer's Daughter.

CHAP. II. How the fair Isabella fell sick of Love for Bateman, though a
Stranger, and his abode unknown to her; and how, when she was given over, he
came in the Habit of a Physician, discovered himself to her, and she recovered
by that means her Health, to the unspeakable Joy of her Parents.
maiden on her sickbed, attended by several humans and an angel

THis beauteous Maid, who, though often courted, had stood Proof against the
Sighs, Tears and Entreaties of many handsome young Batchelors, found now she
stood in need of Pity herself, Bateman's Idea was so fixed in her Mind, that
sleeping or waking, she fancied him always in her sight; she made private
enquiries, by the Description she gave of him, but not any she conversed with
could satisfy her in that particular, some guessing at one, and some at
another, as their Fancies led them; so that Love still blowing the hidden Fire,
she first grew regardless of the Domestic Affairs, of which her Father and
Mother had made her Overseer; then her Appetite failed, and, after that, she
fell into a languishing Disease, which caused great Heaviness in the Family:
Physicians were sent for to advise withal, but all their Skill proved
ineffectual; for, according to the old Proverb,

Where Love's in the Case,
The Doctor's an Ass.
So that the Father and Mother, fearing to lose their only Daughter, which they
doted on, and prized above all the valuable things in the World, were in a
manner at their Wits-end, wringing their Hands and shedding many woeful Tears.

Whilst they were in this pitious plight, and the sighing Maiden concealed the
inward Flame, that consumed her Health, had wasted her Spirits, one, in the
Habit of a Physician, mounted on a stately Steed, came riding to the Gate, and
desired to spoke with Mr. Gifford, for that was the Father's Name. The old Man
came quickly to him, with a heavy Countenance, and the marks of Tears on his
aged Cheeks, demanding, what brought him to so sorrowful a place, and what he
required? Truly, Sir, says he, I came out of compassion to the Affliction of
your Family, for being at an Inn in the Town, and hearing your Daughter was
sick, who is your only Delight and Darling, and whose Death might bring you
untimely to your Grave, diverse Physicians having used their Skill in vain; if
you will accept of my Advice, and she be willing to take what I shall direct, I
doubt not, but by the Blessin^ of God upon my many Years Study in Physic, and
Travels in diverse Countries, so to order things that her Health will be
restored in a few Days.

The Father, upon this unexpected Visit of a Stranger, concluded it was some
good Angel directed to him by a wonderful Providence, scarcely refraining from
falling on his Knees, or able to speak for Joy; but, after a little recovery
from this kind of Transport, he invited him in, in a loving manner; and, as
this new Doctor had desired, ordered all others out of the Chamber: The Love
sick Maid no sooner fixed her Eyes on him, but she knew him, and fetching a
deep sigh, fainted away; but he revived her with some Cordials he had brought;
so that recovering her Senses, her Blushes overcame her Paleness, and made a
very strange Alteration in her Countenance.

To be brief, he having before guessed at, and being now fully assured of the
Cause of her Distemper, told her the End of his coming in that Disguise,
entreating her to cheer up, and pouring out his passionate Love-expressions,
mingled with Tears, to see her in such a low condition, they at last so well
understand one another's Mind, that having made a few Visits to her for four or
five Days, and ordered her such things as are proper to restore decayed Nature,
her Health returned, and the Roses flourished again in her Cheeks, to Wonder
and Admiration; at which, the Father overjoyed, embraced this seeming
Physician, and offered him a handful of Gold; but he refused, only desiring
leave to visit him, as he happened to pass by his House on Occasions: And so at
this time they parted, with high Satisfaction on all Hands, especially of the
young Couple.

CHAP. III. How being invited to her Father's House, he walked abroad with and
discovered his Passion to her at large; of the Encouragement he found to
proceed in his Suit, and the Prospect there was of a happy Marriage between
them.
YOung Bateman, having thus, as he thought, made a thorough stepped to his future
Happiness, went home filled with Joy, but delayed not long to re-visit his
lovely Patient in the same Habit, taking an Opportunity after Dinner, to walk
with her in the Garden; where, after a turn or two, sitting down in a pleasant
shady Bower, they began to talk of Love, and of the last Adventure, devouring
each other in a manner with their eager Looks, kissing and using all the modest
Freedom that Lovers, whose Hearts were so united and enflamed, could wish or
desire; and after some interrupting Sighs had passed, clasping his Arm about
her snowy Neck: Ah! lovely Isabella, cries he, how blessed am I to have this
Opportunity, to tell you how much and how dearly I love you; you are the only
Jewel in Nature, that I prize; and could I but be possessed of your lovely
self, I should think my self the happiest of all Mankind.

At this, turning her Eyes with loveliness on him, and blushing with a
Virgin-grace, she told him, That since he had been so kind to come timely and
save her Life, she thought she could do no less than recompense him any lawful
and reasonable way he could desire; for though many courted her, she was
engaged to none.

Upon this encouragement, he pressing her further, and vowing eternal Love and
Constancy, she not only seemed by her kind Glances, and suffering him with
willingness to lay his Head in her Bosom, to give her Consent to a speedy
Marriage, but likewisa told him, That this being the first time he asked her to
render her self up to him, it was but all the Reason in the World for Virgin
modesty, and a Compliance with Custom, that he should give her some time to
consider of so weighty a Matter, which should, as she assured him, turn no ways
to his Prejudice; For, continued she, my Obedience to my Parents, that yet I
never disobeyed, must be continued, they must know of your Pretentions; several
very rich and likely Men court me at present, yet fear not my Good-liking.

This so over joyed young Bateman, that he would immediately have gone to her
Parents and asked that Jewel of them, whose precious Life they could not but
conclude, he, next to Heaven, had saved and continued to them; but she opposed
it, saying, She would prepare the way herself; and therefore the next Visit he
paid, it would prove new to them, and consequently more welcome. So, rising
from their Seats, they went into the House, where a splendid Treat was
provided, and they sat over against each other at the Table, feeding on Love
with their Eyes with greater Contentmen than on the Dainties; but, Supper
ended, and Night coming on, Bateman took his leave; when at parting the old
Farmer invited him to a Public Entertainment, that was to be at his House the
third Day following; which he accepted of, and so for that time they parted.

CHAP. IV. How he came in his proper Garb, and with her, a^ked her Father's
Consent; but, for want of an Estate, was refused: how one Jerman, who was his
Rival, attempting to kill him, was wounded by him, and how he made his Escape,
etc.
two men crossing swords

I Shall not trouble you with the Thoughts and Impatiency of the young Lovers,
during the Intervene, but tell you this Feast was made principally to entertain
a Gentleman, whose Grandfather, a little before dying, had left him a great
Estate, and whose Affections were strongly placed on the fair Virgin, so that
he had courted her long; but she seemed little to regard his Addresses:
However, the Father and Mother, charmed with the Desire of a rich Match for
their Daughter, listened to it; and had often by Persuasions, and sometimes by
Threatenings, desired and commanded her Compliance; but she with as much
Tenderness, and Beseeching, as often excused i^, protesting her liking to a
single Life, and entreating them they would not compel her to any thing against
her Inclination.

The Day being come, the Guest met, and young Bateman, resolving now to push on
his Suit, in his own proper Garb, came very bravely attired in the Habit of a
Gentleman. The Entertainment was very splendid, Sea, Earth, and Air contributed
their Stores to furnish out the Table with all manner of Dainties, as, Fish,
Flesh, Fowl, Fruits, etc. nor was Music, or any thing requisite wanting: But
that which dashed part of the Merriment, was, that fair Isabella, placing
herself over against Bateman, the other Lover, whose Name was German, and, by
his Years and Observations in Love-intreagues, understanding the Language of
their Eyes, in their often Gazings, the Blushes coming and going in his
Mistress's Face, and many other Signs that Cupid has lively painted perspicuous
to Lovers; his Fancy hit upon the Truth, viz. That they were deeply in Love
with each other; whereupon his Countenance changed to a Sullen and Melancholy,
and, throwing by what was before him, he abruptly retired from the Table,
ordering his Servant to make ready his Horse in order to be gone.

The Father and Mother were startled at this, and knew not what should be the
Occasion of so sudden an Alteration, in a Person who had professed so much Love
to their Daughter, and on whom he resolved to bestow her, and thereupon
followed him into a private Room, to be better satisfied in the Cause of his
Distaff, or Discontent, and was soon satisfied in it; whereupon taking his
Daughter aside, he told her what had been suggested by German. To which she
modestly replied, Seeing the Gentleman had saved her Life, when others had
failed she thought in Conscience she could do no less than to give him her Love
in Requital, and was resolved, if ever she married, to be his Wife. This
startled the old Man more and more, and Bateman mistrusting what had happened,
coming in in the interim, and being demanded by the Father, if he made Love to
his Daughter, boldly owning it, and desired his Consent to have her in Marriage.

How! says the old Man, You that are a Stranger, make Love to my Daughter, and
without my Knowledge? You may, for all your fine Gegaws, be a Beggar, for ought
I know: I intend to give her a great Fortune, and therefore resolve to have her
married to one that can settle a good Joynter en her: Pray what Estate have you?

Truly, replied Bateman, I am rich in Love toward her, but for Estate I cannot
boast of much; I was born a Gentleman, but without the Fortune to maintain it;
my Parents were unfortunate and left me but Little, yet I hope that Little,
with your Blessing, and oua Love, will woe Providence to be so kind, that our
Endeavors may not fail to make us Happy, and you not repine, to give me this
fair Creature to be my Wife.

Upon this, he was going to take her by the Hand, and Seal his Love with a
Kiss; but the old Dad stepped between them, in an angry manner, crying, Poh, poh;
stand off, Sir; a Gentleman without an Estate, is like a Pudding without Fat;
you have indeed done my Daughter a Kindness in recovering her Health, but for
having her to you Wife, I must beg your Pardon, she is Meat for your Betters.

Upon this, Bateman's Anger began to arise into some little Reproaches, but
whilst he was upbraiding his expected Father with Ingratitude, in rushes
German, who had heard in the next Room what had passed, with his drawn Sword,
and made a full Pass at him; but he nimbly put it aside, and drawing, wounded
him in the Breast, whereupon he fell dead to the Ground; and thereupon Bateman
was forced to make his Escape, to gain time for further Consideration of what
was to be done.

CHAP. V. How, being banished her Father's house, his love Mistress, upon
sending a Letter, came to him in Disguise, in a Neighboring Wood, and there
they sealed their Love, by Solemn Vows, and breaking a piece of Gold between
them.
maiden (left) and gentleman (right), outdoors

FAir Isabella, upon this unexpected accident, being left all in Tears as well
as the rest of the Family in Fear and Confusion, Surgeons were sent for, who
upon searching the Wound, gave Hopes of their Patient's Recovery; yet Bateman,
fearing the worst absented himself from his Dwelling, and got, one Evening, a
traveling Peddler, for a good Reward, to deliver a Letter to his Mistress,
which he did, under the Color of coming to her Father's House, to proffer his
Wares; which was, to entreat her, if she had any Pity on the Sufferings of an
unfortunate Man, not only to forgive what he did in Defense of his own Life,
but to meet in a Neighboring Wood at such an Hour.

She had no sooner read it, but, resolving to answer his Desire she escaped in
the Disguise of a Milk-maid, dressing herself with the Maid's Apparel; when
they met, (it is in vain for us to go about to describe the Raptures of Joy that
was between them) she gave him an Account of all that had happened, and how
German was likely to recover: But long they dwelt not on this Theme, before
they fell to that of Love, renewing their Vows of eternal Love and Constancy,
that nothing but Death should be able to separate them; and, to bind it, he
broke a piece of Gold, giving her the one half, and keeping the other himself;
and then with Tears and tender Kisses they parted; she, at the Farewell, which
proved a sad one, entreated him to travel a few Weeks, and give her Notice
where he was secretly, and she would send him word, as to the recovery, or
danger of his Rival; to which he consented with much alacrity.

CHAP. VI. How, upon her coming back, her going was discovered, and she
confined to her Chamber, which German courting her with Tears, Presents, and
the Proffer of a great Estate; she, at the Instance of her Parents, renounced
her Vows, sent back the broken Gold, and married German, whereupon Bateman
hanged himself.
THe beauteous Virgin, during her Absence, having been missed at home, and
much, enquired after, at her return, by reason of the unseasonableness of the
time, was suspected of what had happened; and although she modestly denied it,
she was confined to her Chamber, and an old Nurse set upon her as a Guard; so
that Bateman's Letters were intercepted, and she lost the opportunity of
writing to him. In the mean while German was recovered, and admired to court
her, whose addresses for a long time she resisted: but at last, O the
Inconstancy of Women! notwithstanding her Vows to be Bateman, Alive or Dead,
and many other Protestations, the Glittering of the Miser's Gold, the
Persuasions and Threats of her Father, and her Mother's Tears, with fine Treats
and rich Presentations, prevailed with her to alter her Mind; and, by
Instigation of these three to write to Bateman a Letter, wherein she detested
his Love; which, however, she could not do, without blotting the Paper with
Tears, and great Reluctance of Mind. This Letter found him many Miles off a
hunting; but, upon the reading it, his Spirits was dashed, and a chill struck
to his Heart: However, though he knew her Hand, he flattered himself in
believing it was to punish him for his so long absence, or that she was
compelled to do it; however, fearing the worst, he hasted the next Morning to
Clifton, and hearing the Bells ringing merrily, his Heart misgave him; however,
he had the Courage to enquire the Cause, which proved a fatal One.

That Morning he was informed she was married to his Rival; then in a rage he
began to curse his Stars, and all Womankind; often he thought to fall on his
Sword; but then Desire of Revenge interposed, not to fall alone, but to
Sacrifice the Bridegroom, and then himself: After somewhat milder Resolutions
came into his Mind, that he in this should give cause of Grief to his Mistress;
yet, to let know his Resentments, he sent her a Letter with the half piece of
Gold in it which found her Dinner, and made her be taken away sick from the
Table; however, she was comforted with Cordial, Joy of a Bridial-night, riding
in a Coach, and great Estate, passed it over, and to Bed they went when Night
came.

Bateman, receiving no answer, took it as a farther Slight, and so entering on a
desperate Resolve, he stole into the House privately, as knowing the way, and
hiding himself in a Closet by the Bridal Chamber Door, hanged himself before
the Door, where he was found, to their great Horror and Amazement, upon opening
the Door the next Morning, with this Distitch on his breast:

False Woman, of thy Vows and Oaths have dread,
For thou art mine by them, alive or dead.
CHAP. VII. How, upon Bateman's hanging himself before her Chamber Door, she
grew melancholy, always fancying she see him with a ghastly face, putting her
in mind of her broken Vows; and bow, ufter being delivered of a Child, a Spirit
carried her away.
above, Bateman hanging on the other side of the door from bride and groom;
below, spirit carrying off bride from childbed

THis not only Discomposed the Mirth of the Wedding, and made the Bride
exceeding melancholy, but the ensuing Night dreadful Cries and Screeks were
heard, as if Hell had been brook loose, blazing Lights often flashed in the Eyes
of the new-married Pair, as they lay entwined in each others Arms followed with
a dreadful Cry, Thou art mine dead or alive. This made them hastily remove to
the Husband's House some miles distant; but the same Hunting pursued them, and
wherever she went, she thought the Spirit of Bateman appeared to her, holding
the broken Gold in a String, and upbraiding her with her Breach of Faith: The
Curtains were often draw violently when they were in Bed, and the former Cry
continued, till at last, she proving with Child, the Spirit came in a more
furious manner, to bid her prepare to go with him, as soon as she was
delivered; at which, weary of her Life, stretching out her Arms she cried, I am
thine by right, and am ready to go along with thee.

No, replied he, the innocent Babe in thy Womb protects thee, that I cannot
have thee till thou art Delivered.

Thus she continued in Sorrow and Fear, having many Divines to pray with her,
but it availed not; for the time of her Delivery being come, which she desired
might be prolongod, though in Pain, her Mother and diverse other Women watched
with her, which she earnestly begged of to pray, and not by any Means to fall
asleep; however, a sudden Drowsiness about Midnight, in spite of all they
could do, overcame them, till wakened with a dreadful Cry, they found the
Candles out, and feeling for the Child-bed-woman, she wae missing; the Casement
being burst in pieces, and a strong smell of Sulpher left in the Room: The
Town's People affirmed, they heard great Cries and Screeks in the Air,
accompanied with a Clap of Thunder, and a Clap of Lightning about that time;
however, she was never after heard on, though much sought for.

A Godly Warning to all Maidens by the Eample of God's Judgment showed on
Jerman's Wife of Clifton, in the County of Nottingham, who lying in Childbed,
was borne away, and never heard of after.
To the Tune of, The Lady's Fall, etc.
above, Bateman hanging on the other side of the door from bride and groom;
below, spirit carrying off bride from childbed

YOu dainty Dames so finely framed,
of Beauty's chiefest mould,
And you that trip it up and down,
like lambs in Cupid's sold,
Here is a lesson to be learned,
a lesson in my mind,
For such as will prove false in love,
and bear a faithless mind:
Not far from Nottingham of late,
in Clifton, as I hear,
There dwelt a fair and comely Dame,
for beauty without Peer;
Her cheeks were like the crimson rose,
yet as you may perceive,
The fairest face the falsest heart,
and soonest will deceive.
This gallant Dame she was beloved
of many in that place,
And many sought in marriage bed
her body to embrace:
At last a proper handsome Youth,
young Bateman called by name,
In hopes to make a married Wife,
unto this Maiden came.
Such love and liking there was found,
that he from all the rest,
Had stolen away the Maiden's heart,
and she did love him best;
Then plighted promise secretly
did pass between them two,
That nothing could but Death itself,
this true love's knot undo,
He brake a piece of gold in twain,
one half to her he gave,
The other as a pledge, quoth he,
dear Heart, my self will have.
If I do break my vow, quoth she,
while I remain alive,
May never thing I take in hand
be seen at all to thrive.
This passed on for two months space,
and then this Maid began
To settle love, and liking too
upon another Man:
One Jerman who a Widower was,
her Husband needs must be,
Because he was of greater wealth,
and better in degree.
Her vows and promise lately made,
to Bateman she denied;
And in despite of him and his
she utterly defied:
Well then, quoth he, if it be so,
that you will me forsake,
And like a false and forsworn Wretch
another Husband take:
Thou shall not live one quiet hour,
for surely I will have
Thee either now alive or dead,
when I am laid in grave;
Thy faithless mind thou shall repent,
therefore be well assured,
When for thy sake thou hear'st report,
what torments I endured.
But mark how Bateman died for love,
and finished up his life,
That very day she married was,
and made old Jerman's Wife;
For with a strangsing-cord, God wot,
great moan was made therefore,
He hanged himself in desperate sort,
before the Bride's own door.
Whereat such forrow pierced her heart,
and troubled sore her mind,
That she could never after that,
one day of comfort find;
And wheresoever she did go,
her fancy did surmise,
Young Bateman's pale and ghastly Ghost
appeared before her eyes.
dark (ghostly?) figure in profile beside a door (?)

When she in bed at night did lie,
betwixt her Husband's arms,
In hope thereby to sleep and rest,
in safety without harms;
Great cries, and grievous groans she heard,
a voice that sometimes said,
O thou art she that I must have,
and will not be denied.
But she being big with Child,
was for the Infant's sake,
Preserved from the Spirit's power,
no vengeance could it take:
The Babe unborn did safely keep,
as God appointed so,
His Mother's body from the Fiend,
that sought her overthrow.
But being of her Burden eased,
and safely brought to bed,
Her care and grief began anew,
and farther sorrow bred:
And of her Friends she did entreat,
desiring them to stay,
Out of the bed, quoth she, this night,
I shall be born away.
Here comes the Spirit of my Love,
with pale and ghastly face,
Who till he bear me hence away,
will not depart this place;
Alive or dead I am his by right,
and he will surely have,
In spite of me, and all the World,
what I by promise gave.
O watch with me this night, I pray,
and see you do not sleep;
No longer than you be awake,
my body can you keep.
All promised to do their best,
yet nothing could suffice,
In middle of the night to keep
s^d slumber from their eyes.
So being all full fast asleep,
to them unknown which way,
The Child bed woman that woeful night
from thence was born away;
And to what place no Creature knew,
nor to this day can tell;
As strange a thing as ever yet
in any Age befell.
You Maidens that desire to love,
and would good Husbands choose,
To him that you do vow to love,
by no means do refuse.
For God that hears all secret oaths,
will dreadful vengeance take,
On such that of a wilful vow
do slender reckoning make.
Christ standing on top of the globe with arms outstretched; throngs of people
at right and left; winged creatures in the air

FINIS.
A Catalogue of several Delightful BOOKS, which are to be Sold by the
Booksellers of Pye-Corner and London Bridge.
There is Just Published,

AESop's Fables, with his Life, Morale and Remarks; fitted for the meanest
Capacities. Price Bd. 1 s.

The Unfortunate Lovers: or, The History of Argalus and ^arthenia: Containing
their Amors, Misfortunes, happy, but short Enjoyment of each other; with the
manner of their Deaths. Price Bound 1 s.

The most Pleasant and Delightful History of Reynard the Fox, and Reynardine
his Son. In two Parts: With Morals to each Chapter, explaining what appears
Doubtful or Allogorical: And every Chapter Illustrated with a curious Device or
Picture. To which is added, The History of Cawood the Rook: or, The Assembly of
Birds: With the several Speeches they made to the Eagles in hopes to have the
Government in his Absence; and how the Rook was Banished; with the Reason why
Crasty Fellows are called Rooks: Together with Morals and Expositions on every
Chapter. Twelves. Price Bd 1 s.

The famous and pleasant History of Parismus, the Valiant and Renowned Prince
of Bohemia: In Three Parts. ^art I. Containing his Triumphant Battles fought
against the Persians, his Love to the beauteous Laurana, the great Dangers he
passed in the Island of Rocks; and his strange Adventures in the Desolate
Island, etc. Part II. Containing the Adventures, Travels, and noble Chivalry of
arismenos, the Knight of Fame, with his Love to the fair Princess Angelica, the
Lady of the Goldon Tower, etc. Part III. Containing the admirable Adventures
and truly heroic Achievements of Parismenidas, the Knight of the Golden Star,
with his Love to the fair Astrea, Princess of Austracia, with other strange
Adventures. Price Bound 1 s.

The Famous and Renowned History of Guy, Earl of Warwick: Containing a full and
true Account of his many Famous and Valiant Actions, Remarkable and Brave
Exploits, and Noble and Renowned Victories.


