THE LADIES CABINET ENLARGED and OPENED: Containing Many Rare Secrets, and Rich
Ornaments of several kinds, and different uses.

Comprised Under three general Heads.

Viz. of 1. Preserving, Conserving, Candying, etc 2. Physic and Surgery. 3.
Cookery and Houswifery.

Whereunto is added, Sundry Experiments, and choice Extractions of Waters,
Oils, etc.

Collected and practiced, By the late Right Honorable and Learned Chemist, The
Lord RUTHUEN, With A particular Table to each Part.

London, Printed by T. M. for M. M. G. Bedell, and T. Collins, at the middle
Temple-Gate, Fleet Street. 1654.

To the Industrious improvers of Nature by Art; especially, the virtuous Ladies
and Gentlen omen of this Land.
Courteous Ladies, etc.
THe former Edition of this -- (call it what you please) having received a kind
entertainment from your Ladyships hands, for reasons best known to your selves,
notwithstanding the disorderly and confused jumbling together of things of
different kinds, has made me (who am not a little concerned therein) to
bethink my self of some way, how to encourage and requite your Ladyships Pains
and Patience (virtues, indeed, of absolute necessity in such brave employments;
there being nothing excellent that is not withal difficult) in the profitable
spending of your vacant minutes. For this purpose I resolved (at least) to
smooth your way a little, by bringing each particular to its proper head, or
(since its called A Cabinet) laying each Jewel in his peculiar box; and so
having fitted it for readier use, to have sent it abroad again to salute your
gentle hands the second time.

But hearing in the mean time of certain rare Experiments, and choice
extractions of Oils, Waters, etc. the practice of a Noble hand, and of approved
Abilities (to testify how ready I am to further ingenuous undertakings in this
kind) I have with much pains, and some charges, sought after, and at length
happily purchased them for you. Al which, with the addition of many other
Secrets of several kinds, (and I hope, of valuable concernment) I have so
incorporated together, if I may so say, and methodically digested, that they
may be the more easily and profitably improved.

And lest any thing might yet be lacking on my part, I have caused somewhat
like an alphabetical Table to be affixed to every part, by the help whereof you
may quickly view the particulars of your Treasury, and know where to find them
at pleasure.

The whole Cabinet consists of three Divisions, in each whereof are contained
many pleasant and precious pieces of different kinds, both for ornament and
profit. In the first you shall find a delightful Confectionary of Preserves,
Conserves, Candies, Syrups and such like, and how to make and use them. In the
second you may take notice of very many and rare Secrets in nature, belonging
both to Physic and Surgery, not unworthy the knowledge and practice of most
piercing spitits. And in the third are set down excellent patterns for the
neatest Cooks and good Houswifes.

The most stately of the three is that in the midst; the more delightful are
set on each side: This like a magnificent palace, stands above them; these like
places of pleasure, stand about it: Here you may sport, there you may rest;
These are for pomp, the other for safety. But lest I should be thought tedious
to little purpose, or any way to endeavor to byasse your affections, or abridg
your freedom, I shall thus leave you at liberty as Lovers in Gardens, to follow
your own fancies. Take what you like, and delight in your choice, and leave
what you list to him, whose labor is not lost if any thing please.

M. B.

Experiments in Preserving, Conserving, and Candying etc.
PRESERVING.
1. The best way to Preserve Quinces white.
FIrst pare and core the Quinces, and boil them in fair water till they be very
tender, not covering them; Then taking them out of the water, take to every
pound of them two pound of Sugar, and half a Pint of water, and boil it to a
sirrup, scumming it well; then put in some of the Jelly that is washed from the
Quince kernels, and after that making it boil a little, put in your Quinces,
boil them very fast, keeping the holes upwards, (as near as you can) for fear
of breaking; and when they are so tender that you may thrust a rush through
them, take them off and put them up in your glasses, having first saved some
sirrup till it be cold, to fill up your glasses.

2. A Special remembrance in doing them.
When you Preserve Quinces or make Marmelade, take the Kernels out of the raw
Quinces, and wash off the Jellie (that grows about them) in fair water; Then
strain the water and Jelly from the kernels, through some fine Cobweb Lawne,
put the same into the Marmelade or Preserved Quinces, when they are well
scummed; But put not so much into your Quinces, as into the Marmelade, for it
will Jelly the sirrup too much: Put six or seven spoonfuls of sirrup into the
Jellie before you put it into the Marmelade; you must boil your Quinces more
for Marmelade, then to preserve your Quinces, and least of all when you make
your clear Cakes.

When you would preserve your Quinces white, you must not cover them in the
boiling, and you must put half as much Sugar more for the white as for the
other. When you would have them Red, you must cover them in the boiling.

3. To Preserve Barberies.
Choose the fairest bunches of Barberies you can g^, pick off the withered and
shrunk berries, and wash them clean, drying them in a clean cloth. Then take
another good quantity of Barberies well picked, and boil them in Clarret wine
till they be soft, then strain them well through a strainer, rubbing or
wringing them through: boil this liquor, so strained out, with Sugar, till it
be very sweet and thick, and then let it stand till it be cold: Then put your
bunches or branches of Barberies into gallipots or glasses, and fill them up
with this liquor, and so shall you have both sirrup of Barberies, and preserved
Barberies.

4. Another way to preserve Barberies.
First take the fairest Barberies, and of them the greatest bunches you can
get, and with a needle take out the stones on the one side of them; then weigh
out to every half pound of them, one pound of Sugar, put them into a preserving
pan, strew the Sugar on them, and let them boil a quarter of an hour softly;
then taking out the Barberies, let the sirrup boil a quarter of an hour more,
then put in the Barberies again, and let them boil a pretty while with the
sirrup, then take them from the sirrup, let them both stand till they be cold,
and so put them up.

5. To preserve all kind of Flowers, in the Spanish Candy in Wedges.
Take Violets, Cowslips, or any other kind of flowers, pick them and temper
them with the pap of two roasted Apples, and a drop or two of Verjuyce, and a
grain of Musk; then take half a pound of fine hard Sugar, boil it to the
height of Manus Christi, then mix them together, and pour it on a wet
Pie-plate, then cut it in Wedges before it be through cold, gild it and so you
may box it, and keep it all the year: It is a fine sort of banqueting stuff,
and newly used. Your Manus Christi must boil a good while, and be kept with
good stirring.

6. To preserve green Pippins.
Take Pippins, pare them very thin, while they are green, then take ten small
green Pippins, worse then the other, pare them and boil them in a pottle of
water till they be all to pieces; then strain it from the cores, then take two
pound of sugar, and put it into the same liquor so strained, and set it on the
fire, and so soon as it boileth, put in the Pippins you purpose to preserve, so
let them bo^le leisurely till they be enough, and when they are preserved they
will be green. In like sort you may preserve Quinces, Plums, Peaches, or
Apricocks, if you take them green.

7 To preserve Oranges and Lemmons
Take your Oranges or Lemmons, lay them in water three days and three nights
to take away their bitterness, then boil them in fair water til they be
tender, make as much Syrup for them as will make them swim about the Pan,
let them not boil too long therein, for it will make the skins tough; then
let them lie all night in the syrup to make them take the syrup, in the morning
boil your syrup to his thickness, and put them in Gallipots or Glasses, to
keep all the year: And this is the best way to preserve Oranges, Lemmons or
Citrons.

8 To preserve Peaches.
Heat water scalding hot first, then scald your Peaches till you may pull off
the skin, which done, boil your Rosewater and Sugar till it be somewhat think:
then put in your Peaches one by one, stowing the Sugar on them; and as the fire
melts, cast on more four or five times, letting them boil with a soft fire
till hey be tender, keeping them covered as long as they seethe, then take them
out, and put them up for use.

9 To preserve Medlers
Take the fai^est Medlers you can get, but let them not be too ripe, then set
on fair water on the fire, and when it boyleth put in your Medlers, and let
then boil till they be somewhat soft; then while they are hot, pill them, cut
off their crowns and take out their stones, take then to every pound of Medlers
three quarters of a pound of Sugar, and a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, sees
your syrup, scumming it clean, then put in your Medlers one by one, the stalks
downward: when your syrup is somewhat cool, then set them on the fire again,
let them boil softly till the syrup be enough, then put in a few Cloves, and a
little Cinnamon, and so putting them up in pots, reserve them for your use.

10 The best way to preserve Goosberies.
Gather them with their stalks on, cut off their heads and stone them, then put
them in scalding water, and let them stand therein covered a quarter of an
hour: Then take their weight in Sugar finely beaten, and laying first a layer
of Sugar, then one of your Goosberries, in your preserving Skillet or Pan, till
all be in, putting in for every pound of Goosberries six spoonesuls of fair
water; set them on the Embers till the Sugar be melted, then boil them up as
fast as you can, till the syrup be thick enough, and cold, and then put them
up. This way serves also for Raspices and for Mulberies.

11 To preserve Damsins.
Take the Damsins before they be full ripe, but new gathered off the tree,
allow to every pound of them a pound of Sugar, put a little Rosewater to them,
and set them in the bottom of your Pan one by one, boil them with a soft
fire, and as they sees, strew your Sugar upon them, and let them boil till the
syrup be thick enough; then while the syrup is yet warm, take the Plums out,
and put them in a Gallipot Syrup and all.

12 How to preserve Cherries.
Take the Cherries when they be new gathered off the tree, being full ripe, put
them to the bottom of your preserving pan, weighing to every pound of
Cherries, one pound of Sugar, then throw some of the Sugar upon the Cherries,
and set them on a very quick fire, and as they boil, throw on the rest of the
Sugar, till the Syrup be thick enough; then take them out, and put them in a
Gallipot while they are warm. You may (if you will) put two or three spoonfuls
of Rose Water to them.

13 To preserve Artichokes.
Heat water scalding hot first, then put in your Artichokes and scald them, and
take away all the bottoms and leaves about them, then take Rosewater and Sugar,
and boil them alone a little while, and then put the Artichokes therein, and
let them boil on a soft fire til they be tender enough; let them be covered all
the time they boil: then take them out, and put them up for your use.

14 To preserve Roses or any other flowers.
Take one pound of Roses, three pound of sugar, one pint of Rosewater or more:
make your syrup first, and let it stand til it be cold, then take your
Rose-leaves, having first clipped off all the white, put them into the cold
syrup, then cover them and set them on so soft a fire, that they may but simper
for two or three hours; then while they are hot put them out into pots or
glasses for your use.

15 The best way to preserve Apricocks
Take the weight of your Apricocks (what quantity soever you mind to use) in
sugar finely beaten, pare and stone your Apricocks, and lay them in the Sugar
in your preserving pan all night, and in the morning set them upon the Embers
till he sugar be all melted, and then let them stand and scald an hour: then
take them off the fire, and let them stand in that syrup two days, and then
boil them softly, till they be tender and well colored, and after that, when
they are cold, put them up in glasses or pots, which you please.

16. To preserve Bullasses as green as grass.
Take your Bullasses as new gathered as you can, wipe them with a cloth, and
prick them with a knife, and quaddle them in two waters close covered: then
take a pound of clarified Sugar, and a pint of Apple water, boil them well
together (keeping them well scummed) unto a syrup, and when your Bullasses are
well dript from the water, put them into the syrup, and warm them three or four
times at the least; at the last warming, take them up and set them a dropping
from the syrup, and boil the syrup a little by it self, till it come to a
Jellie, and then between hot and cold put them up to keep for all the year.

17 To preserve green Walnuts.
Take Walnuts and boil them til the water do taste bitter; then take them off,
and put them in cold water, and pill off the bark, and weigh as much sugar as
they weigh, and a little more water then will wet the sugar; set them on a
fire, and when they boil up, take them off, and let them stand two days, and
boil them again once more.

18 To preserve Pomecitrons.
Of your Pomecitrons take one pound and a half, and cut them some in halves,
some in quarters, and take the meat out of them, and boil them tender in fair
water: then take two pound of clarified sugar and make syrup for them, and let
them boil in syrup a quarter of an hour very gently: then take them up, and let
your syrup boil till it be thick, and then put it into your Pomecitrons, and
you may keep them all the year. If you please, you may pare some of them; for
some delight to have them in the skin, and some pared.

19 To preserve Eringo roots.
Take Eringo roots, fair and not knotty, one pound, and wash them clean; and
when they be washed, set them on the fire and boil them very tender; pil off
their outermost skin, but see you break them not as you pare them; put them
into cold water, and let them all remain there till all be finished; and then
you must take to every pound of roots three quarters of a pound of clarified
sugar, and boil it almost to the height of a syrup, and then put in your roots;
but look that they boil very gently together (with as little steering as may
be, lest they break) until they be enough: and when they be cold, put them up
and keep them.

20 To preserve Raspices.
Take of your fairest and wel-coloured Raspices, and pick off their stalks very
clean, then wash them, but in any wise bruise them not: then weigh them, and to
every pound of Raspices you must take six ounces of hard sugar, and six ounces
of sugar candy, and clarify it with half a pint of fair water, and four ounces
of juice of Raspices: being clarified, boil it to a weak syrup, and then put in
your Raspices, stirring them up and down, and so let them boil til they be
enough; which to know, you must take some of the syrup with one Raspice, and
let it cool, and if it will scarce run out, it is enough; and being cold, you
may put them up, and keep them all the year.

21 To preserve Enula Campana roots.
Take of your Enula Campana roots, and wash them, scrape them very clean, and
cut them thin to the pith the length of your little finger; and as you cut
them, put them in water, and let them lie in water thirty days, shifting them
twice every day, to take away the bitterness; weigh them, and to every pound of
roots take twelve ounces of clarified sugar, first boiling the roots as tender
as a chicken, and then put them into the clarified sugar, and let them boil
upon a gentle fire until they be enough: and let them stand off the fire a good
while, and betwixt hot and cold put them up for your use.

22 To Conserve Cowslips.
Gather your flowers in the midst of the day, when all dew is off them: cut off
all the white, leaving none but the yellow blossoms of them so picked and cut
before they wither; weigh out ten ounces, taking to every ten ounces of them
(or greater proportions, if you please) eight ounces of the best refined sugar
in fine powder: put the sugar into a pan, and candy it, with as little water as
you can: then taking it off the fire, put in your flowers by little and little,
never ceasing to stir them til they be dry and enough: then put them into
Glasses or Gally-pots, and keep them dry for your use. These are rather candied
then conserved Cowslips.

23 A Conserve of Roses.
Take red Rose buds, clip all the white bruised and withered from them, then
weigh them out, and taking to every pound of Roses three pound of sugar; stamp
the Roses by themselves very small, putting a little juice of Lemmons or
Rosewater to them, as they wax dry; when you see the Roses small enough, put
the sugar to them, and beat them together til they be well mingled; then put it
up in Gallipots or Glasses. In like sort are the Conserves of flowers of
Violets, Cowslips, Marrigolds, Sage and Scabious, made.

24 The use of Conserve of Violets and Cowslips.
That of Cowslips does marvellously strengthen the brain, preserves against
madness, against the decay of memory, stops Headache, and most infirmities
thereof. For Violets, it has the same use that the sirup has. Vide among
Syrups.

25 The use of Conserve of Marigolds.
Conserve of Marigolds taken fasting in the morning, is good for melancholy,
cures the trembling and shaking of the heart, is good to be used against the
plague and corruption of the air.

26 Of Sage flowers.
It preserves against meloncholy, does dry and comfort the Stomach, cures an
old cough, and opens the stopping of the Liver.

27 Scabious flowers.
These cleanse the breast and lungs, take away old Coughs, Impostumes of the
breast, and all inward parts. Probatum.

28 Conserve of Barberries.
Take your Barberries, pick them clean in fair branches, and wash them clean,
and dry them on a cloth: then take some other Barberries, and boil them in
claret wine, til they be very soft; then strain them and rub them so well
through the strainer, that you may know the substance of them, and boil up this
matter thus strained out til it be very sweet, and somewhat thick; then setting
it by til it be cold, and then put your branches of Barberies into Gallipots or
glasses, and fill it up with the cold syrup, and so shall you have both syrup
and also Barberies to use at your pleasure.

29 The Cordial Conserve.
Take the Flowers of Rosemarry, Buglosse and Borage well picked: the flowers of
Clove Gilliflowers, Pauncies, Violets, Cowslips, Red Roses, Damask Roses, and
Marigolds clipped from their white, of each two ounces, put to every of them
three ounces of Sugar, very finely beaten and searced, and stamp them all
together to a Conserve, and keep it in a Gallipot. When you would use it, take
the quantity of a small Walnut, every morning fasting.

30 To make Muscadine Comfits.
Take four ounces of double refined sugar finely beaten and searced, put
thereto two grains of Musk, a penniweight of Orris root in powder, beat it to
perfect fine paste, then roll it as thin as paper, and cut it like to Diamonds
with your knife, as with a fine jagged Rowell cutter, so dry them in your
Stove and keep them.

31 To make black Clove Comfits.
Take two ounces of Cloves dried in a dish in the Oven, beat them to very fine
powder; then take four ounces of sugar finely beaten and searced; add to that
two or three Date stones burned and made into fine powder, (which brings your
paste to the blackness) mix with all these Gum Dragon steeped in Rosewater,
beat it up into a comfit paste, roll it in long small rols, and with a knife,
cross cut them at one end like a Clove blossom, so stove them, and serve them.
This is an excellent comfit, it will taste like a Glove, and eat pleasantly.

32 To Candy all kind of flowers as they grow with their stalks on.
Take the Flowers, cut the stalks somewhat short, then take one pound of the
whitest and hardest sugar you can get, put to it eight spoonfuls of Rosewater,
and boil it til it will roll between your finger and your thumb; then take it
from the fire, cool it with a stick, and as it waxes cold, dip in all your
flowers, and taking them out again suddenly, lay them one by one on the bottom
of a sieve; then turn a joined stool with the feet upward, set the sieve on the
feet thereof, cover it with a fair linen cloth, and fet a chafindish of coals
in the midst of the stool, underneath the sieve, and the heat thereof will run
up to the sieve, and dry your Candy presently; then box them up, and they will
keep all the year, and look very pleasantly.

33 To make the Rock Candies upon all Spices, Flowers, and Roots.
Take two pound of Barbary sugar, clarify it with a pint of water, and the
whites of two eggs, then boil it in a posnet to the height of Manus Christi,
then put it into an earthen Pipkin, and therewith the things you will Candy, as
Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmegs, Rose buds, Matigolds Eringo roots, etc. Cover it
and stop it close with clay or paste; then put it in a Still with a leisurely
fire under it, for the space of three days and three nights; then open the
pot, and if the Candy begin to coin, keep it urst pped for the space of three
or four days more, and then (leaving the syrup) take out the Candy, lay it on
a Wier grate, and put it in an Oven after the bread is drawn, there let it
remain one night, and your Candy will be dry. This is the best way for rock
candy, making so small a quantity.

34 The Candy Sucket for green Ginger, Lettice flowers etc.
Whatsoever you have preserved, either herbs, fruits or flowers, take them out
of the syrup, and wash them in warm water, and dry them well: then boil sugar to
the height of candy for flowers, and draw them through it: then lay them on the
bottom of a sieve, dry them before the fire, and when they are enough, box them
for your use. This is that the Comfit-makers use, and call Sucket Candy.

35 To Candy Ginger.
Take very fair and large Ginger, and pare it, and then lay it in water a day
and a night; then take your double refined sugar, and boil it to the height of
sugar again: then when your sugar begins to be cold, take your Ginger and
stir it well about till your sugar is hard to the pan; then take it out race by
race, and lay it by the fire four hours, then take a pot and warm it, and put
the Ginger in it, then tie it very close, and every second morning stir it
about roundly, and it will be rock-candied in a very short space.

36 To candy Eringo roots.
Take of your Eringo roots ready to be preserved, and weigh them, and to every
pound of your roots you must take of the purest sugar you can get two pound,
and clarify it with the whites of Eggs exceeding well, that it may be as clear
as Crystal; for then it will be very commendable: it being clarified, you must
boil it to the height of Manus Christi, and then dip in your roots, two or
three at once til they be all candied, and so put them in a stove, and keep
them all the year.

37 To make Quince Cakes.
Prepare your Quinces, and take the just weight of them in sugar, beaten
finely, and searcing half of it: then of the rest make a syrup, using the
ordinary proportion of a pint of water to a pound of sugar: Let your Quinces be
well beaten, and when the syrup is Candy height, put in your Quinces, and boil
it to a paste, keeping it with continual stirring; then work it up with the
beaten sugar which you reserved, and these Cakes will taste well of the Quinces.

38 Clear Cakes of Quinces or Apricocks
Take of the best sugar finely beaten, and searced, one pound to a pound of
Quinces or Apricocks: set your sugar upon a chafingdish of coals, and dry it
about half an hour; then cooling it, stir into it a little Musk and
Ambergreece, finely beaten and powdered: then pare your Quinces, etc. and boil
them in fair water whole, til they be tender, (and not covering them) for so
they will be white: Then take them, and scrape off all the Quince to the core,
into a silver dish, and boil it therein til it grow dry, which you shall
perceive by the rising of it up: when it is thus well dried, take it off, let it
cool, and strew on the Sugar, setting some other to strew it til it be all
thoroughly wrought in; then lay it out on Glasses, Plates, or Prints (of Flowers
or Letters) an inch thick or less as you please.

39 To dry Apricocks.
Take them when they are ripe, stone them, and pare off their rinds very thin,
then take half as much sugar as they weigh, finely beaten, and lay them with
that sugar, into a silver or earthen dish, laying first a lay of sugar, then of
the Fruit, and let them stand so all night, and in the morning the sugar will
be all melted; then put them into a skillet, and boil them apace, scumming them
well: and as soon as they grow tender, take them from the fire, and let them
stand two days in the sirup; then take them out, and lay them on a fine plate,
and so dry them in a stove.

40 The best way to dry Plums.
Take you Plums when they are full grown (with the stalks on them) but yet
green; split them on the one side, and put them in hot water (but not too hot)
and so let them stand three or four hours: then to a pound of them take three
quarters of a pound of sugar, beaten very fine, and eight spoonfuls of water to
every pound: set them on hot embers till the sugar be melted, and after that
boil them till they be very tender, letting them stand in that sirup three
days, to plump them: Then take them out, wash the sirup from them in warm
water, and wipe them with a fine linen cloth very dry, and lay them on plates,
and set them to dry in a Stove; for if you dry them in an Oven, they will be
tough.

41 To dry Pippins.
Take half a pound of powder sugar, boil it to a sirup in a pint of fair water,
and clarify it with the white of an eg, then strain it through a linen cloth,
and set it on the fire again in another clean skillet: while this is doing,
pare eight pippins, cut them in halves and core them, putting in every half
into the sirup as you pare them: and so let them boil (still scumming them) til
the sirup be almost all wasted away, within three or four spoonfuls: then take
out the Pippins, lay them on plates, and dry them in a stove.

42 A way to dry Cherries.
Take three quarters of a pound of sugar, and a pound of good Cherries, their
stalks and stones taken from them; then put a spoonful of clean water in the
skillet, and so lay one lay of Cherries, and another of sugar, til your
quantity be out: then set them on the fire and boil them as fast as
conveniently you can, now and then shaking them about in the skillet, for fear
of burning: and when you think they are enough and clear, then take them off
the fire, and let them stand till they be half cold, then take them out as
clear from the sirup as you can, and lay them one by one upon sheets of Glass,
setting them either abroad in the Sun, or in a window where the Sun may
continually be upon them: If they dry not so fast as you would have them, then
in the turning scrape some loaf sugar finely upon them; but add no greater heat
then the Sun will afford, which will be sufficient, if they be well tended: and
let not dew fall on them by any means, but in the evenings set them into some
warm cupboard.

43 How to keep Apples, Pears, Quinces, Wardens etc. all the year dry.
Pare them, take out the coars, and slice them in thin slices, laying them to
dry in the Sun in some stone or metalline dishes, or upon an high frame covered
with course canvas, now and then turning them, and so they will keep all the
year.

44 How to dry Fruits in the Sun.
If it be small fruit you must dry them whole, by laying them abroad in the hot
Sun in stone or pewter dishes, on iron or brass pans, turning them as need
requires.

45 To make Quidony of Cherries.
Take your Cherries while they are red at the stone, put out the stones, and
boil them til they be broken; then strain then through a very clean strainer,
and take the matter strained forth, boil it again, and giving it in the boiling
as much sugar as is sufficient: when you think it thick enough, put it into
your boxes.

46 To make printed Quidony of Quinces.
Take two pound of Quinces, pared, coated and cut in small pieces; put them
into a clean posnet with a quart of fair water, and when they are boiled
tender, put into them one pound of sugar clarified with half a pint of fair
water: let them boil till all the Fruit fall to the bottom of the Posnet, then
let the liquid substance run through a fair linen cloth into a clean Basin;
then put it into a Posnet, and boil it til it come to a Jellie, then print it
in your moulds, and turn it into your boxes: you shall know when it is ready to
print by rolling on the back of a Spoon.

47 To make Quidony of Pippins.
Take two pound of Pippins, pare, core, and quarter them, and put them into a
quart of fair water, boil them til they begin to break: then put in a pound of
Brasil sugar clarified with half a pint of water, and the white of an egg,
boil them then til the fruit fall to the bottom, then take it up draw all the
liquid substance from it, as in your Quinces, and boil it in a posnet til it
come into a Jellie, try it on the back of a spoon, and when it is ready to
print, put it into your Moulds, and when it is cold turn it off upon wet
Trenchers, and put it into boxes.

48 To make Quidony of Raspices
Take a quart of red Raspices, put them into a wodden dish, with three
spoonfuls of fair water; bruise them all to pieces with a spoon or a rolling
pin, then strain them through a cloth into a fair dish; season it with half a
pound of Sugar finely beaten, boil it on a Chafindish of coals, stirring it
till it come to a Jellie; your trial is on the back of a spoon, as in all other
Jellies, and when it is ready for the print, print it, and it will be a very
orient color: you must not put too much water to the Raspices, for they will
not abide too much boiling for losing their color.

49 Colors for fruitage
Saffron is the best yellow. Sap green the best green. Indian Lake the best red.

All your colors must be tempered with Gum water made of Rasewater.

50 To make all kind of turned works in fruitage, hollow.
Take the strongest bodied sugar you can get, boil it to the height of Manus
Christi, then take your stone (or rather Pewter) Moulds, being made in three
pieces, tie the two great pieces together with Inkle, then power in your sugar
being highly boiled, turn it round about your head apace, and so your fruitage
will be hollow, whether it be Orange, Lemmon, or whatsoever your Mould does
cast: after they be cast, you must color them after their natural colors.

51 To make Dia Citonicum (as it is called) but rightly, Dia Cydonium.
Take four or five very fair Quinces, pare them, quarter them, core them, and
boil them in a Pipkin with a pint of fair water: when they are tender put to
them half a pint of red wine vinegar, and one pound of sugar; let them boil an
hour after it, and then let the sirrup and all run through a strainer into a
fair posnet, and let it there boil til it come to a Jellie as thick as Quidony,
then put it up into a glass or gallipot: This is a most special Cordial and
comfortable matter for a sick body.

52 To cast all Kind of Sugar-works into moulds.
Take one pound of Barbary sugar, clarify it with the white of an egg, boil
it til it roll between your finger and your thumb, then cast it into your
standing moulds, being watered two hours before in cold water, take it out,
and gild them, to garnish a Marchpane with them at your pleasure.

53 The names and use of your Sugars.
Refined sugar, hard and white, is best for paste of Genua, and to cast all
kind of sugar works.

Barbary sugar is best to preserve withal.

Brasile sugar white and dry is best to make Quidony.

54 The names and prices of Gummes for Sugar work.
Gum dragon the ounce iiii. d Red Rosset the ounce i. d Sap green the ounce
ii. d Indian Lake ii. d. weight iii. d Fine gold the book xvi. d Party gold
the book vi. d
Buy your Gold at the Gold-beaters: your Gummes, and your colors at the Talbut
in Newgate Market.

52 To make Jumbols.
Of almonds being beaten to paste, take half a pound, with a short cake being
grated, and two eggs, two ounces of carroway seeds being beaten, and the juce
of a Lemmon; and being brought into a paste, roll it into round strings, then
cast it into knots, and so bake it in an oven: and when they are baked ice them
with Rosewater and sugar, and the white of an egg, being beaten together; then
take a feather and gild them, then put them again into the oven and let them
stand in a little while, and they will be iced clean over with a white ice; and
so box them up, and you may keep them all the year.

56 To make Paste of Carrots.
Take Carrot roots, boil them, take out of the pith one pound, paring off all
the outside, beat the pith in a Mortar, with half a pint of Rosewater; then
take one pound of Sugar finely beaten, and the yolks of sixteen eggs, beat
them with the Carrots altogether, then put it in a dish and dry it; and being
thus made into paste, put it to what use, or in what fashion you like best.

57 To make the Macaroones
Blanch a pound of the best Almonds, and put them in fair cold water as you
blanch them, then dry them out of the water in a clean cloth, and beat them in
a mortar: then take a sawcer full of Rose water, wherein of music and
Ambergreece half a grain of each is dissolved, and therewith still sprinkle the
Almonds as you beat them: and when they are almost beaten enough, put in by
degrees a pound of fine sugar very small beaten, and searced all but two or
three spoonfuls: when they are beaten enough, put them into a dish, and take
the whites of three Eggs very well beaten, and the froth taken off, put the
clear thereof to the Almonds, with a spoonful of fine flower, and the two or
three spoonfuls of sugar you left, and the rest of the Rosewater, with the musk
and Ambergreece dissolved in it; mix all these very well together in the dish,
and lay them upon March-pane Paper, the bigness and fashion of an eg, laying
them rough and high: Then put some other Papers under your water Paper. for
fear of burning, and bake them in a oven hot enough to bake a light oven
Pudding, having a care that they scald not.

58 To make Paste of Almonds
Take one pound of small Almonds, blanch them out of hot water into cold, then
dry them with a cloth, and beat them in a stone mortar til they come to paste,
putting now and then a spoonful of Rosewater to them to keep them from oiling;
when they are beaten to fine Paste, take half a pound of sugar finely beaten
and searced, put it to your Paste, and beat it till it will twist between your
fingers and thumb finely without knots, for then it is enough: then make
thereof pies, Birds, Fruits, Flowers, or any pretty things printed with Moulds,
and so gild them and put them into your Stove, and use them at your pleasure.

59 To make a March-pane.
Take two pound of small Almonds, blanch them, and beat them as you do for your
Paste of Almonds: then drive it into a sheet of Paste, and spread it on a
bottom of Wafers, according to the proportion or bigness you please; then set
an edge round about it, as you do about a Tart, and pinch, it if you will:
then bake it in a pan or Oven; when it is enough take it forth, and ice it with
an ice made of Rose water and Sugar as thick as Barter, spread it on with a
Brush of Bristles, or with feathers, and put it in the Oven again, and when you
see the Jee rise white and dry, take it forth and stick long Comfits in it, and
set up a stadderd in the midst of it, so gild it and serve it.

60 To make past of Violets or any kind of Flowers.
Take your flowers, pick them and stamp them in an Alabaster Mortar, then
steep them two hours in a Sawcer of Rose water, after strain it and steep a
little Gum Dragon in the same water; then beat it to paste, print it in your
moulds, and it will be of the very color and taste of the Flowers; then gild
them, and so you may have every flower in his own color and taste; better for
the mouth then any printed color.

61 To make the white Paste royal.
Take half a pound of white Barbary sugar, finely beaten and searced, put it
into an Alabaster mortar, and therewith a little Gum Dragon steeped in Rose
water, beat it by little and little til it come to a Paste; when you have
beaten it unto a perfect fine paste, print it with your moulds and gild it, and
dry it in your stove, set them on white papers, and dry them on a hand-peel
before the fire, and when they be through dry, box them and keep them for your
pleasure.

62 To make a red Paste royal.
Take half a pound of Barbary sugar, finely beaten and searced, put it into a
stone mortar, with a quarter of an ounce of Gum Dragon steeped in rose water;
then strowing a little powder de Rosita on it, beat it to a perfect paste, then
print it, gild it, stove it, or otherwise dry it, and keep it at your pleasure.

63 To make the Paste royal in Spices
Take four ounces of double refined sugar, beaten and searced, put thereto one
ounce of searced Cinnamon, beat it in a stone mortar to paste, then print it
with your moulds, and turn some upon sticks to make them show like Gummes; they
be called in Confectionary, Cinnamon sticks or Cinalonians; then gild them, and
put them into your stove, but draw not out the sticks till they be dry, for
else they will shrink.

64 To make Paste of Pippins
Take twenty fair smooth skind Pippins, pare them and cut them into quarters,
and core them: then boil them in a quart of fair water til they be tender;
then pouring the liquor from them, strain them and dry them on a Chafingdish
full of coals, and put as much sugar to them as they weigh, then boil them to
the height of Manus Christi, and fashion some like plummes, some like leaves,
so stove them; when they are stoved one night, you may put two halves of the
plummes to either, and put a stone between them, and prick a stalk in the end,
so may you make some like plummes with stones and stalks; some with leaves: (I
suppose it should be like leaves) for the Pippin is the best fruit to
counterfeit any plumme.

65 To make Paste of Genua
Take of Quinces two pound, and two pound of reaches, bake them in a pot in the
Oven, then pulp them through a hair sieve, dry them on a Chasingdish of coals;
then take two pound of sugar, boil it to the height of Manus Christi, and put
it to your dried pulpe, make it to the fashion of great water leaves, put them
into an Oven after the bread is drawn, let it stand all night; in the morning
warm the Oven again, and turn your Paste, and put it in again: after that, for
the space of three or four days, set a chafingdish with coals into the oven to
it, and when it is through dry, box it and keep it all the year.

66. To make Paste of Lemmons.
Take half a dozen of thick rined Lemmons, cut them through the midst, and boil
them tender in fair water, then stamp them in a mortar, strain the juice or
pulpe from them, and dry it and put sugar to it, as to the Paste of Genua; then
make it into what fashion you will, on a sheet of white paper, dry it in an
oven, and turn it often for two days and two nights, for in that time it will
be dry enough: box it thus up, end it will endure all the year.

67 To make Paste of Regia.
Take half a pound of Almonds, blanch them and beat them into fine paste, then
take half a pound of Pistacius, beat it among the Almonds; take the Brawn of a
Capon, mince it very small and beat it with the Almonds and Pistacius, put into
it the flesh of two Partriges, a dozen of Cock Sparrows, all which flesh must
be well roasted before you take it from the bones; put thereinto also half a
pound of Dates thin sliced, a quarter of a pound of the four cold seeds, a
quarter of a pound of sugar candy: beat all these together in a mortar til it
come to be Paste, with the yolks of two new laid eggs, and two or three
spoonfuls of Rosewater, then make it up in little Cakes, and bake them on
papers: this is an especial Paste to preserve against the consumption, and to
restore him that has it.

68 How to make Paste of Goosberries, or Burberries, or English Currants.
Take any of these tender fruits, and boil them softly on a chafingdish of
coals, then strain them with the pap of a rotten apple, then take as much sugar
as it weighs, and boil it to a candy height, with as much Rose water as will
melt the sugar, then put in the pap of your fruit into the hot sugar and let it
boil leisurely, till you see it reasonable stiff, almost as thick as for
Maimelade, then fashion it on a sheet of glass, and so put it into the Oven
upon two billets, that the glass may not touch the bottom of the oven, (for if
it do, it will make the Paste tough) and so let it dry leisurely; and when it
is dry, you may box it, and keep it all the year.

69 To make an excellent Marmelade.
Of sugar take a pound and a half, boil it with a pint of fair water till it
come to the height of Manus Christi, then take three or four small Quinces, one
good Orange pill, both very well preserved and finely beaten, and three ounces
of Almonds blanched and beaten by themselves, Eringo roots preserved two ounces
and an half; stir these with the sugar til it will not stick- and then at last
put in of Musk and Amber dissolved in Rose water, of each four grains, of
Cinnamo, Ginger, Cloves and Mace, of each three drams, of oil of Cinnamon two
drops: These being done, put it into your Marmelade boxes, and so present it to
whom you please.

70 To make Marmelade of Lemmons and Oranges.
Boil ten Lemmons or Oranges with half a dozen Pippins, and so draw them
through a strainer; then take so much sugar as the pulp will weigh, and boil it
as you do Marmelade of Quinces, and then box it up.

71 To mke Almond Biscuit.
Steep one pound of Almonds so long in cold water, till they will blanch, then
put them in Rosewater, and beat them in so much Rose water as will keep them
from growing to an oil, and no more: take one pound of sugar beaten very fine,
and sifted through a searce: take the whites of six Eggs, beat them to a
froth, as you use to do for other Biscuit, with a spoonefull of fine flower:
set the Almonds and sugar on a soft charcole fire, let them boil together til
they be very thick, and so let them stand til they be almost cold, then beat
the Eggs and that together, put in a little Musk for the better taste, if you
please, then lay them upon papers in what proportion you will, and dry them in
a Oven with a slack fire.

72 How to make the fine Biscuit Bread, called in some places Norffe-cakes, and
commonly Diet-bread.
Take half a peck of fine Wheat flower, half a pound of sugar beaten in fine
powder, a good handful of Annis seeds, rubbed, dusted, and made in fine powder,
a competent spoonful of Salt, one pound and a half of Batter: mix all these
(thus prepared) together: Then take a Porringer full of light Ale yest, and as
much of good sweet Cream, made lukewarm, or somewhat hotter: but first take
heed your yest be sweet, then take the Yolks of six eggs; work all these
together into Dough, then lay it warm to rise, while the oven is heating:
mould them into what form you will, but let not the rols in dough be bigger
then your little finger: then put them into the oven well and clean swept, but
not too hot, for a little heat will bake them: when they are baked, let them
stand till the oven be little more then lukewarm, and then take them out till
they be through cold, and put them in again to dry the space of an hour or
more; so may you keep them half a year, or longer: and if they chance
through moist standing, or weather, to wax soft, give them a drying for an
hour in an Oven, that has stood an hour after a batch of Bread.

73 The best receipt for Biscuit bread.
Take all the yolks, and half the whites of sixteen eggs, beat them well
together; then put to them a pound of the finest wheat flower, as much of the
best loaf sugar, very finely beaten and searced, with a quarter of a pint of
Rose water, and half a quarter of a pint of Sack, (if you please) beating them
thus compounded together about two hours, very well, then strowing upon it two
spoonfuls of Coriander-seed, and as much Annis seed finely beaten, and then
working them well into Paste, bake it in boxes or upon Plates well buttered,
keeping a little sugar in a piece of Cobweb Lawne, to searce upon it and ice
it. If you make for some Physical use, then use the Sack, and put in a quarter
of a pound of Annis-seed, and as much Liquorice beaten into fine powder.

74 How to make Comfit makers Biscuit
Of flower take a peck, and four ounces of Coriander seed, one ounce of
Annisseed; take three eggs, three spoonfuls of Ale yest, and as much warm water
as will make it as thick as paste for Manchets; make it in a long roll, and bake
it in an oven one hour; and when it is a day old, pare it, and slice it, sugar
it with searced sugar, and put it again in the Oven; and when it is dry, take
it out, and new sugar it again, and box it, and keep it.

75 To make Manus Christi.
Of refined sugar take half a pound, and some Rosawter, and boil them together
til it come to a sugar again: then stir it about while it be somewhat cold,
then take your leaf-gold and mingle with it; then cast it according to art,
that is in round gobbers, and so keep them.

76 The Syrup of Violets.
Take fair water, boil it, scumme it, and to every ounce of it so boiled and
scummed, take fix ounces of the blue of Violets only: shift them as before
nine times, and the last time take nine ounces of Violes, let them stand
between times of shifting twelve hours: keeping the liquor still on hot embers,
that it may be milk warm, and no warmer, after the first shifting: you must
stamp and strain your last nine ounces of Violets, and put in only the juice
of them, then take to every pint of this liquor thus prepared, one pound of
sugar finely beaten, boil it, and keep it with stirring, till the sugar be all
melted, which if you can, let be done before it boil, and then boil it up with
a quick fire. This does cool and open in a burning Ague, being dissolved in
Almond milk, and taken: especially it is good for any inflammation in
children: the conserves are of the same effect.

77 Syrup of Century.
Take Flowers and green leaves of Century, and boil them in a good quantity of
fair water, being first boiled, and well scummed before the Century come in:
when you think it is boiled enough, set it upon hot Embers for twelve hours,
shifting it again and again, till you think it be strong enough of the Century,
then take to every pint of the liquor thus boiled, a pound of sugar, and so
boil it up. It cleanses the stomach, kills Worms, Agues, and the green
Sickness: it must be taken in the morning with Mace Ale.

78 Syrup Gresta, or Syrup of unripe Grapes.
Take a good Basket fill of unripe Grapes, set them three days in a vessel
after they be gathered, stamp them, and strain out the juice of them, take
thereof six quarts, boil it with a soft fire, till the third part be consumed,
then four quarts will remain: Let that run through a Woollen bag, and stand till
it be clear in it self, then take of the cleerest of it seven pints, put
thereto five pound of clarified sugar; boil them together to the thickness of
a syrup, and keep it in a glass. It is good for a perbreaking stomach
proceeding of Choler, and for a swelling stomach; it takes away thirst and
dryness, and Chollericke Agues. It is a great comfort to the stomach of women
being with child; it is a preservative against all manner of venom and against
the Pestilence.

79 Syrup of Roses.
Take Damask Roses, clip off the white of them, and take six ounces of them to
every pint of fair water, first well boiled and scummed: let them stand so as
abovesaid, twelve hours, as you did in the syrup of Violets, wringing out the
Roses, and putting in new eight times, then wringing out the last, put in only
the juice of four ounces of Roses: so make it up as before. If you will put in
Rubarbe, take to every pint two drachms, slice it, string it on a thread, hang
it within the pot after the first shifting, and let it infuse within your
Roses. Some use to boil the Rubarbe in the Syrup, but it is dangerous. This
syrup purges Choler and Melancholy.

80 Syrup of Wormwood.
Take half a pound of Wormwood leaves, of red Roses two ounces, of Spikenard
three drachms, of old and well relisht white wine two ounces, juice of Quinces
two pound and a half. Let all these stand a day and a night in a stone pot,
then let them boil softly to the one half, so let it cool, strain it, and
clarify it with the white of an egg: then put to it two pound of good English
honey, and let them boil a little together: then strain out the liquor, and
with sugar boil it up to a syrup.

81 Syrup of Cowslips
In stead of running water you must take the distilled water of Cowslips, put
thereto your Cowslip flowers clean picked, and the green knobs in the bottom
cut off: and therewith boil up a Syrup, as in the Syrup of Roses is showed. It
is good against the Frenzy, comforting and staying the head in all hot Agues
etc. It is good against the Palsy, and procures a sick patient to sleep: it
must be taken in Almond Milk, or some other warm thing.

82 Syrup of Borage and Buglosse.
Syrup of Borage and Buglosse are made in the same sort: they cool, open and
comfort the body.

83 Syrup of Calamint
Does warm and comfort the stomach: it is made ut supra.

84 Syrup of Scabious
Syrup of Scabious is made of the juice of the herb strained and clarified as
the juice of Fool foot: and the flowers insused or steeped, shifted and boiled
up as of Roses. It cleanses the breast and lungs; cures an old cough and
Impostumes of the breast, and of all other inward parts, cleansing, ripening and
healing the same.

85 To make Syrup of Saffron.
Take a pint of Endive water, two ounces of Saffron finely beaten, and steep it
therein all night; the next day sees it, and strain out the Saffron; then with
sugar boil it up to a Syrup.

86 Syrup of Fole-foot or Golts-foot
Take the leaves of Fole-foot, wash them very fair, and wipe them with a clean
linen cloth leaf by leaf: then lay them on a clean cloth to dry, till all the
wet be off them: then beat them in a mortar, and put them into a Strainer, and
wring out all the juice you can out of them, and put it into Glasses, and let
it stand in them to settle all night; the next day pour out the clearest of the
juice from the Grounds into a fair Basin, and taking for every pint thereof a
pound of sugar finely beaten, boil the juice of Folefoot softly on a Charcole
fire, and when you have well scummed it, put in the sugar according to his
proportion: and so let them boil together, keeping it with due scumming, until
(to see when it is enough) it will stand on a stiff purle when you drop some
of it upon a Plate of silver, or a Sawcer: then take it from the fire, pour it
through a Jellie bag into a clean basin, putting first a branch or two of
Rosemarie into the bags bottom, then keep it stirring with a spoone, till it
be lukewarm, foraelse it will have a Cream upon it: So letting it stand all
night in the basin well covered, the next day put it into such glasses as you
mean to keep it in. It is good to open the breast, and Lungs, and cures old
Coughes.

87 To make Syrup of Pomecitrons
Take Pomecitrons and cut them in halves, and juice them; but beware you wring
them not too hard lest it be slimy: and take to every pint of juice three
quarters of a pound of refined sugar, and boil it in an earthen pipkin til it
come to the height of a syrup, and take heed in any case that you boil it not
on too hot a fire, lest it burn: and then when it is boiled enough, put it up
and keep it all the year.

88 A Syrup against Malencholly humors, especially where there is wind in the
stomach.
To make this syrup, it is necessary to be expert in the Art; for it must be
made with great diligence.

Take water of Fumetory, of Hops, of Wormwood, of Maidenhair, of each five
pound: Herewith make a decoction, with these following ingredients. Take
Pollipodium of the Oak, one pound, Sine leaves, Epitimum ana four ounces,
Cordial flowers two handfuls, Maidenhair one handful, Liquoris, Cinnamon,
Raisins, of each two ounces, of the four cold seeds two ounces; make thereof a
decoction accrding to art, and strain it; then take four pound of that
Decoction, and put thereto the juice of Borrage, of Buglosse, and Hoppes, of
each two ounces; common Honey six ounces: then with white sugar make a sirrup
in good sorm, and aromatize it with musk and amber, putting thereunto one ounce
of Plyris without musk, and then it is made.

The dose is from three to four ounces in the morning warm, and fast thereupon
at least three or four hours; for this purges marvellously the melancholy
humors, and all other gross humors, and dissolveth wind, and comfort the
heart.

89 Syrup of Wormwood simple.
Take of the clarified juice of common Wormwood, and clarified sugar, of each
four pound, make it into a sirrup according to art.

After the same manner are prepared simple Syrups of Betonie, Borrage,
Buglosse, Cardus, Camomel, Succorie, Endive, Hedgmustard, Strawberries,
Fumetorie, Groundivie, St John's wort, Hops, Mercury, Mousear, Plantane,
Apples, Purslain, Raspberries, Sage, Scabious, Scordium, Housleek, Coltsfoot,
Paul's Betonie, and other Juices not sour.

90 Syrup of Marsh mallows.
Take of roots of marsh mallows two ounces; the roots of grass Sparagus,
Liquoris, Raisins of the Sun stoned, of each half an ounce; the tops of
mallows, marsh mallows, pellitorie of the wall, burnet, plantane, maidenhair
white and black, of each an handful; red cicers an ounce; of the four greater
and four lesser cold seeds, of each three drachms; boil them in six pound of
clear water till four remain, which being strained, boil into a sirrup with
four pound of white sugar.

91 Syrup of Rhadishes.
Take of garden and wild Rhadish roots, of each an ounce; the roots of white
Saxifrage, Lovage, Bruscus, Eringo, Restharrow, Parsley, Fennel, of each half
an ounce; the leaves of Betonie, Burnet, Penniroiall, Nettles, Watercresses,
Sampier, maidenhair, of each an handful; winter Cherries, Jujubes, of each
ten; the Seeds of Bazil, Bar, Parsley of Macedonia, Hartwort, Caraway, Carrots,
Gromwel, the bark of the root of Bay Tree, of each two drachms, Raisins of the
sun stoned, Liquoris, of each six drachms; boil them in twelve pound of water
to eight, strain it, and with four pound of sugar and two pound of honey, make
it into a Syrup, and perfume it with an ounce of Cinnamon, and half an ounce of
Nutmegs.

92 Syrup of Poppies.
Take off the heads of both white and black Poppies, seeds and all, of each 50
drachms, Maidenhair fifteen drachms, Liquoris five drachms, Jujubes 30 by
number, Lettice seeds 40 drachms; of the seeds of mallows and Quinces (tied up
in a thin linen cloth) of each one dram and a half, boil these in eight
pints of water till five pints be consumed; when you have strained out the
three pints remaining, add to them Penides and white sugar, of each a pound;
boil them into a syrup according to art.

93 Honey of Rosemarry flowers.
Take of Rosemary flowers a pound, clarified honey three pound, mix them in a
glass with a narrow mouth, set them in the sun and keep them for use.

The CONTENTS of the First part.
The best way Preserve Quinces white. page 1 A Special remembrance in doing
them page 2 To Preserve Barberies. ibid Another way to preserve Barberies. page
3 To preserve all kind of Flowers, in the Spanish Candy in wedges. ibid To
preserve green Pippins. page 4 To preserve Oranges and Lemmons ibid To preserve
Peaches. page 5 To preserve Medters ibid The best way to preserve Goosberies.
page 6 To Preserve Damsins. ibid How to Preserve Cherries. page 7 To Preserve
Artichokes. ibid To preserve Roses or any other flowers. ibid The best way to
preserve Apricocks page 8 To preserve Bullasses as green as grass. ibid To
Preserve green Walnuts. page 9 To preserve Pomecitrons. ibid To preserve Eringo
roots. ibid To preserve Raspices. page 10 To preserve Enula Compana roots. ibid
To Conserve Cowslips. page 11 A Conserve of Roses. ibid The use of Conserve of
Violets and Cowslips. page 12 The use of Conserve of Marigolds. ibid Of Sage
flowers. ibid Scabious Flowers. ibid Conserve of Barberries. ibid The Cordial
Conserve. page 13 To make Muscadine Comfits. ibid To make black Clove Comfits.
page 14 To Candy all kind of flowers as they grow with stalks on. ibid To make
the Rock Candies upon all Spices, Flowers, and Roots. page 15 To Candy Sucket
for green Ginger, Lettice flowers etc. ibid To Candy Ginger. page 16 To candy
Eringo roots. ibid To make Quince Cakes. ibid Clear Cakes of Quinces or
Apricocks page 17 To dry Apricocks. ibid The best way to dry Plums. page 18 To
dry Pippins. ibid A way to dry Cherries. page 19 How to keep Apples, Pears,
Quinces, Wardens, etc. all the year dry. page 20 How to dry Fruits in the Sun.
ibid To make Quidony of Cherries. ibid To make printed Quidony of Quinces. ibid
To make Quidony of Pippins. page 21 To make Quidony of Raspices ibid Colors
for fruitage page 22 To make all kind of turned works in fruitage, hollow. ibid
To make Dia Citonicum (as it is called) but rightly, Dia Cydonium. ibid How to
cast all kind of sugar works into moulds page 23 The names and use of your
Sugars ibid The names and prices of Gummes for Sugarwork. ibid To make Jumbols.
page 24 To make Paste of Carrots. ibid To make the Macaroones ibid How to make
Paste of Almonds page 25 How to make a Marchpane. page 26 How to make Paste of
Violets, or any kind of flowers. ibid How to make white Paste Royal page 27 How
to make red Paste royal ibid How to make Paste Royal in Spices ibid How to make
Paste of Pippins page 28 How to make Paste of Genua ibid How to make Paste of
Lemmons page 29 How to make Paste of Regia ibid How to make Paste of Goosberies
or Barberies, or English Currants page 30 How to make an excellent Marmelade
ibid To make Marmelade of Lemmons and Oranges page 31 How to make Almond Biscuit
ibid How to make the fine Biscuit bread called in some places Norffe Cakes, and
commonly Diet-bread. page 32 The best receipt for Biscuit bread page 33 To make
Comfit-makers Biscuit ibid To make Manus Christi page 34 To make Syrup of
Violets ibid Syrup of Century page 35 Syrup Gresta, or Syrup of unripe Grapes
ibid Syrup of Roses page 36 Syrup of Wormwood ibid Syrup of Cowslips page 37
Syrup of Borage and Buglosse ibid Syrup of Calamint ibid Syrup of Scabious ibid
To make Syrup of Saffron page 38 Syrup of Folefoot, or Colts foot ibid To make
syrup of Pomecitrons page 39 A Syrup against Melancholy humors, especially
where there is wind in the stomach ibid Syrup of Wormwood simple page 40 Sprup
of Marsh mallows page 41 Syrup of Radishes ibid Syrup of Popies page 42 Honey of
Rosemary flowers ibid
Experiments in PHYSIC and SURGERY, Distillations, Waters, and Oils: Their
Virtues and Uses.
1 Doctor Stevens his Water.
TAke a Gallon of Gascoin wine: of Ginger, Gallingall, Cinnamon, Grains,
Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Annis-seeds, Caraway-seed, Coriander-seed, Fennel-seed
and sugar, of every one a dram, then take of Sack and Ale a quart apiece, of
Camomill, Sage, Mint, red Roses, Time, Pellitory of the wall, wild marjoram,
wild Time, Lavender, Peneroyal, Fennel roots, Parsley roots, and Setwall
roots, of each half a handful: Then beat the spice small, and bruise the
herbs, and put them all together into the wine, and so let it stand sixteen
hours, stirring it now and then: Then distill it in a Limbeck with a soft fire,
and keep the first pint of the water by it self, for it is the best; and the
rest by it self, for it is not so good as the first. The principal use of this
water, is against all cold diseases, it preserves youth, comfort the
stomach, cures the stone, of what nature soever; using but two spoonfuls in
seven days. It preserved Doctor Stevens ten years bed-red, that he lived to
ninety eight years.

2 To make Cinnamon Water.
Of the best Cinnamon you can get take one pound; bruise it well, and put it
into a gallon of the best Sack, and infuse it three days and three nights, and
then distill it as your Aqua Coelestis.

3 Angelica water.
Of Cardus take and dry a handful, Angelica roots three ounces, of My the one
dram, Nutmegs half an ounce; Cinnamon, Ginger, of each four ounces, Saffron
one dram and a half. Cardomons, Cubebs, Gallingale and Pepper, of each a
quarter of an ounce, Mace two drachms, Grains one dram; Lignum-Aloes,
Spikenard, Juncus-odoratus, of each a dram; Sage, Borage, Buglosse, Violets,
and Rosemary flowers, of each half a handful: bruise these, and steep them in
a pottle of Sack twelve hours, and distill it as the rest.

4 Aqua Mirabilis
Take three pints of White wine, one pint of Aqua vitae, one pint of juice of
Salendine, one dram of Cardamer, a dram of Melliot flowers, Cubebs a
dram, of Galingale, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, and Ginger, of each a dram;
mingle all these together over night. the next morning set them a stilling in a
glass Limbeck. The Virtues.

This water dissolveth swelling of the Lungs, and being perished, does help and
comfort them; it suffers not the blood to putrify; he shall not need to be
let blood that uses this water; it suffers not the heart-burning, nor
melancholy or phlegm to have dominion; it expels Urine, and profits the
stomach; it preserves a good color, the visage, memory, and youth; it
destroys the Palsy. Take some three spoonfuls of it once or twice a week, or
oftener, morning and evening, first and last.

5 Balm water.
Take Balm dry three ounces, Thyme, Penniroyal, of each an ounce, Cinnamon four
ounces, a dram of Cardomus, grains half an ounce, sweet Fennel seeds an
ounce, Nurmegs and Ginger of each a dram, Galingale one ounce, Calamus,
Cypress, Cubebs and Pepper, of each two drachms, of Caper-roots half a dram,
of Diptamus one dram: bruise these things, and put them to a pottle of Sack,
and steep them 24 hours, and then use it as the former waters.

6. Another Balm Water.
Take a gallon and a quart of Sack, put to it Annis seed and Fennel seed of
each one pound, Liquorice scraped and bruised a quarter of a pound, of
Coriander seed corrected, and Caraway seed, of each as much; Cowslip flowers
clipped from the whites, and Rosemary flowers well picked, of each one pound; of
red Mints, wild Time, of each a good handful, and of Baulm 2 pound: steep all
these first in the Sack 4 hours, in the brass pot wherein they shall be
distilled, and then distill them in a Limbeck.

7 A Barley water to purge the Lungs and Lights of all diseases.
Take half a pound of fair Barley, a gallon of running water, Liquorice half
an ounce, Fennel seed, Violet leaves, Parselie seed, of each one quarter of a
ounce, red Roses as much, of Isope and Sage dried, a good quantity of either,
of Hearts tongue twelve leaves, a quarter of a pound of Figs, and as many
Raisins; still the Figgs and Raisins, put them all into a new earthen pot, with
the water cold, let them sceth well, and then strain the clearest from it,
drink of this a good quantity, morning and afternoon, observing good diet upon
it; it takes away all Agues that come of heat, and all ill heat: it purges
the Lights, Spleen, Kidneys and Bladder.

8 A Water for a sore Mouth.
Take of Sage, Rosemary, and Woodbine leaves, a like quantity, viz. a handful
and half of either, boil them in a quart of running water, with as much of the
best Allom as an Egg, and let them boil to a pint, then put in a pint of white
Wine, and let them boil again, and so soon as it boileth, take it off the fire,
and let it cool, and then put it up in a glass, and therewith wash your mouth
morning, evening and at night, and other times as couse requires, till it be
well.

9 Another for the same use.
White wine, and fair water, of each a quart; wine Vinegar a pint, red Sage a
good quantity, Mercury two penniworth, Roch Allom half an ounce, Rosemary an
handful, Woodbine leaves somewhat more, and 3 spoonfulls of Honey; sees them
together, and wash your mouth therewith.

10 Rosa solis.
Take of Liquorice 8 ounces, Annise-seeds, Carraway, of each an ounce; Raisins
stoned, Dates of each three ounces, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Ginger and Mace, of each
half an ounce, Galingale a quarter of an ounce, Cubebs a dram, Figs two
ounces, Sugar four ounces; bruise these, and distill it with a gallon of Aqua
vitae, as the rest: But when it is distilled, you must color it with the herb
Rosa solis, or else Alkanet root.

11 Wormwood water
Take of Wormwood two ounces and a half, Sage, Bittony, and Rue, of each half a
handful, Rosemary tops a handful, Cinnamon 3 ounces, Nutmegs half an ounce,
Cloves and Mace of each half a dram, Ginger one ounce, Galingale, Cubebs and
Spikenard, of each a dram and a half, of Scordium half an handful, bruise
these, and put them into a pottle of Sack, and a pint of Aqua vitae, and steep
them 24 hours, and distill them as the rest.

12 Aqua Fortis.
Take of Vitriol prepared as for oil of Vitriol two pound, Salt Peter purged
one pound; beat them together, and put them in a Retort well luted, place it in
a furnace with a large receiver, and giving fire to it, distill it by degrees
for 24 hours, rectify the water in sand.

13 Water of Snails.
Take of the juice of ground Ivy, Coals foot, Stabious, Lungwort, of each one
pound and a half; the juice of Purslain, Plantane, Ambrosia, Paul's Betony, of
each a pound; Hogs blood, White wine, of each four pound; Garden snails two
pound; dried Tobacco leaves, eight; powder of Liquorice two ounces, Alicampane
half an ounce, of On is an ounce, Cotton seeds an ounce and half, the greater
cold seeds, Annise-seeds, of each six drachms; Saffron one dram, the flowers
of red Roses six pugils, of Violets and Borage, of each four pugils; steep them
three days warm, and then distill them in a glass Still in sand.

14. An excellent Water against the Stone in the Kidneys.
Take of the middle rind of the root of Ash bruised two pound, Juniper Berries
bruised three pound, Venice Turpentine that is very pure two pound and a half,
put these into is pints of spring water, in a glass Vessel well closed, and
there let them putrify in Horse dung for the space of three months; then
distill them in ashes, and there will come forth an oil and a water, separate
the one from the other. Ten or twelve drops of this oil being taken every
morning in four or six spoonfulls of the said water, dissolves the gravel and
stone in the Kidneys most wonderfully.

15 A water for outward or inward VVounds, Impostumes, and ulcers, and a sore
mouth.
Take Plantain, Ribwort, Bone-wort, wild Angelica, red Mints, Betony, Egtimony,
Sanacle, Blue-bottles, White-bottles, Scabious, Dandelion, Avens, Honey-suckle
leaves, Bramble buds, Hawthorn buds and leaves; Mugwort, Daisie roots, leaves
and flowers; Wormwood, Southernwood, of each one handful. Boil all these in a
pottle of white wine, and as much spring water, till one half be wasted, and
when it is thus boiled, strain it from the herbs, and put to i^ half a pound of
Honey, and let it boil a little after, and put it into bottles, and keep it for
your use.

Note, that these Herbs must be gathered i^ May only, but you may keep them
dry, and and make your water at any time.

If the wound be inward, 3 or four spoonfuls morning and evening, will in a
short time ease, cure, if not too far gone, as almost nothing can recover the
Patient.

If outward, it must be washed therewith, and linen clothes wet in the same
applied thereto.

16. A very excellent Water against Worms.
Take of Wormseed bruised eight ounces, the shavings of Hartshorn two ounces,
of Peach flowers dried an ounce, of Aloes bruised half an ounce, pour on these
the water of Tansie, Rue, Peach flowers, and of wormwood, of each a pint and a
half, let them (being put into a glass vessel) be digested the space of three
days, then distill them; cohobate this water three times.

This Water may be given from half an ounce to three ounces, according to the
age of the Patient.

17 An Excellent sweet Water.
Take a quart of Orange flower water, as much Rosewater, add thereto of Musk
mallow seeds grossly bruised four ounces, of Benjamin two ounces, of Storax an
ounce, of Libdanum six drachms, of Lavender flowers, and sweet Marjoram, of
each two pugils, of Calamus Aromaticus a dram, distill all these in a glass
Still in balneo, the vessels being very well closed, that no vapor breath
forth.

But upon urgent or sudden occasion, you may make a sweet water in an instant,
by putting a few drops of some distilled oils together in to some Rosewater,
and brewing them well together.

18 How to make artificial Tunbridg water.
This water proceeding from an Iron Mine, (as is granted by all) is thus made:
Take of the Mine or Ore of Iron, beat it very small, and put it into the
Furnace expressed in p. 83. of John French his Art of Distillation; and there
will come forth an acid spirit and flowers, which you must mix together, till
the acid spirit extracts the salt out of the flowers; then decant off the clear
liquor, which will have a strong taste and smell of Iron.

A few drops of this liquor put into a glass full of fountain water, give it
the odor and taste of Tunbridg water, and communicates the same operations to
it.

It opens obstructions, purges by Urine, cleanses the Kidneys and Bladder,
helps pissing of blood, and difficulty of making water, it allayeth all sharp
humors, cures inward Ulcers and Impostumes, cleanses and strengthens the
Stomach and Liver, etc.

The dose is from one pint to six, but by de-degrees. Use moderate exercise
after taking it, and fast seven or eight hours, till the water be gone out of
the body.

19 How to make artificial Epsome water.
Take of the mine of Allom, or Allom stones, powder it very small, and distill
it in the furnace expressed in page 83. of John French his Art of
Distillations, and there will distill over a certain acid alluminish water,
which must be mixed with a double quantity of Nitre-water. For Epsom water has
a certain kind of acid taste, which is partly nitrous, and partly alluminous,
which proceeds from nitrous air, and vapors arising from the fermentation of
alluminous mines, being first mixed together, and then mixed with the fountains
passing through the earth.

A few drops of this water put into a glass full of fountain water, will give
it the odor and taste of Epsome water, so that the smell or operation will
scarcely be discerned from it.

This water purges sharp burning humors, cools an inflamed, and opens an
obstructed body, cleanses the Kidneys and Bladder, cures inward Ulcers and
Impostumes, and is a very good preservative against the Consumption, etc.

Fountain water made acid with this liquor, may be taken from one to six pints:
after it use moderate exercise, and fast till the water be out of the body.
Only some thin warm suppings may be taken to help its working; some take this
water warm.

20 Spirit of Confection of Alkermes, its Virtues.
It is an excellent comforter of the Spirits, vital, natural, and animal, in
weak and delicate persons, and against all trembling pensiveness, and sudden
qualms of the heart.

21 Spirits of Saffron, its virtues.
It is good to comfort the vital Spirits against passions, trembling, and
pensiveness of the heart, and helps all malignity oppressing it, and
expels wind; suppresseth fumes which arise from the spleen, and go up to
the head, and opens the obstructions of it. It is excellent against all
Melancholy; and very good for women in travel, for it comfort, and hastneth
delivery.

The dose is morning and evening one spoonful for three days together.

22 Extract of Ambergreece.
Take a dram of Ambergris, grind it very small on a Tainters stone, then
put it into a bolt head, then take of the best spirit of Wine, either Canary or
Malago Sack, half a pound, spirit of Clary two ounces, mingle them together
well, and pour of the Menstrua one pint to this proportion of Amber, set them
to digest in a gentle Balneo, about eight hours, shaking it together three or
four times; then take it out, and being cold, pour it forth, and put almost as
much more of the mixed spirits, digested as before in a gentle heat by Balneo,
then put it forth to the first extracted; and add half as much more spirits
the third time, and digest it again: and then have you extracted all the
special part of the Amber, and leave nothing but a black dead earth of no
value. Then take a pint of the spirit of what herb you will use, and dissolve
therein one pound of pure white sugar candy, or at the least twelve ounces,
very finely powdered and searced through a fine searcer, for the speedier
resolution thereof: It is best to dissolve it cold. This dissolution must be
twice filtered through a thin cap paper, to make it very perfect clear; then
take three parts of this dulcified spirit to one of your extract of Amber drawn
with spirit of wine; then shake them well together, and let them stand in a
square glass very close stopped, until it shall be perfectly clear: one
dram of this extraction of Amber will serve to dulcifie and make fit two
quarts of the spirit of Mints, or Clary, or the like, and give it a most
excellent taste, and efficacious virtues.

23 Spirit and water of wormwood, the lesser Composition
Take of the leaves of dried Wormwood two pound, Annis-seeds half a pound;
steep them in six gallons of small wines 24 hours, then distill them in an
Allembick, adding to every pound of the distilled water two ounces of the best
sugar.

Let the two first pound you draw out be called Spirit of Wormwood; those which
follow Wormwood water the lesser Composition.

24 Spirit and water of Wormwood, the greater Composition.
Take of common and Roman Wormwood of each a pound; Sage, Mints, Bawm, of each
two handfuls; the roots of Gallanga, Ginger, Calamus-aromaticus, Alacampane, of
each three drachms, Liquoris one ounce, Raisins of the Sun stoned three ounces,
Annis-seeds and sweet Fennel seeds, of each three drachms; Cinnamon, Cloves,
Nutmegs, of each two drachms; Cardamoms, Cubebs of each one dram: Let the
things be cut that are to be cut, and the things bruised that are to be
bruised; all of them infused in 24 pints of Spanish Wines for 24 hours, then
distilled in an Allembick, adding two ounces of white sugar to every pint of
distilled waters.

Let the first pint be called Spirit of Wormwood, the geater Composition.

25 Spirit and water of Angelica.
Take of the leaves of Angelica eight ounces, of Carduus Benedictus six ounces,
of Bawm and Sage of each four ounces, Angelica seeds six ounces, sweet Fennel
seeds nine ounces: Let the herbs (being dried) and the seeds be grossy bruised;
to which add of the spices called Aromaticum Rosatum, and of the spices called
Diamoscha dulce, of each an ounce and a half; infuse them two days in thirty
two pints of Spanish wine, then distill them with a gentle fire; and with every
pound mix two ounces of sugar dissolved in Rosewater. Let the three first pound
be called by the name of Spirit, the rest by the name of Water.

26 Spirit of Wine extraordinary.
Take the finest paper you can get, or else some virgin parchment, strain it
very right and stiff over the glass body wherein you put your Sack, Malmsie or
Muscadine; oil the paper or virgin parchment with a pensil moistened in the oil
of Ben, and distill it in Balneo with a gentle fire, and by this means you
shall purchase only the true spirit of Wine. You shall not have above two or
three ounces at the most out of a gallon of wine; which ascends in the form
of a cloud without any dew or veins in the helm: Lute all the joints well in
this distillation. This pirit will vanish in the air, if the glass stand open.

27 Quintessence of Snakes, Adders, or Vipers.
Take of the biggest and fatest Snakes, Adders or Vipers, which you can get in
June or July, cut off their heads, take off their skins, and unbowel them, then
cut them into small pieces and put them into a glass of a wide mouth, and set
them in a warm Balneo that they may be well dried, which they will be done in
three or four days, then take them out and put them into a bolt head, and pour
on them of the best alcolizated Wine, as much as will cover them six or eight
fingers breadth; stop the glass he metically, and digest them fifteen days in
Balneo, or so long til the Wine be sufficiently covered, which pour forth; then
pour on more of the foresaid spirit of wine til all the quintessence be
extracted: Then put all the tinged spirits together, and draw off the spirit in
a gentle Balneo, til it be thick at the bottom; on this pour the spirit of
Wine caryophilated, and stir them well together, and digest them in a
Circulatory ten days; then abstract the spirit of wine, and the quintessence
remains at the bottom perfect.

This quintessence is of extraordinary virtue to purify the blood, flesh and
skin, and consequently all diseases therein. It cures the falling sickness,
strengthens the brain, sight, and hearing; and preserves from gray hairs,
renews youth, preserves women from Abortion; cures the Gout, Consumption,
causes sweat, is very good in and against pestilentiall infections.

28 A liquor against the tooth Ach.
Take of oil of Cloves well rectified half an ounce, in it dissolve half a
dram of Camphire; add to them of the spirit of turpentine four times
rectified (in which half a dram of Opium has been infused) half an ounce. A
drop or two of this liquor put into a hollow tooth with some lint, eases the
tooth ach presently.

29 A Liquor to comfort smelling, and preserve the head.
Take Lignum aloes two ounces, Annis-seed four ounces, Calamus aromaticus one
ounce, Calamint dried three ounces, common honey two pound, strong white wine
twelve pound, let all these be infused for four days, and then distill it in
Balneo; and when you distill it, put into the Receiver six grains of Musk
dissolved in two ounces of Rosewater, and distill away but three pound, the
which keep in a glass close stopped; and when you will comfort the smelling,
wash the face and beard therewith, and you shall smell a savor of mavelous
effect, which comfort nature marvelousty; it comfort the stomach, and
helps a stinking breath; it helps the mouth being ulcerated, and those that
have the rupture in short time, if you wash it twice a day therewith; it
helps also women that are troubled with descension of the Matrix; if you wet
a cloth in it and lay it upon the mother, in short space it restores great
health. Also it helps those that are troubled with the Meagrum, or pains in
the head coming of cold or wind; if you wash the head with the said liquor, it
presently gives ease. It has diverse other virtues, which I will not now
recite.

30 To make an Antimonial cup, and to cast diverse figures of Antimony.
Take the best crude Antimony very well powdered, Nitre, of each a pound; of
crude Tartar finely powdered two pound, mix them well together, and put them
into a crucible; cover the crucible, and melt them, and the Regulus will fall
to the bottom, and be like a melted metal: then pour it forth into a brass
mortar, being first smeared over with oil.

This Regulus (when you have made enough) you may melt again and cast into what
moulds you please: You may cast it into the forms of shillings or half crowns;
either of which if you put into two or three ounces of Wine in an earthen
glazed vessel, or glass, and infuse in a moderate heat all night, you may have
a liquor in the morning which will cause vomit; of which the dose is from two
drachms to two ounces and half.

You may put a little Cinnamon into the wine, to correct and give a grateful
relish to it.

It is the custom to fill the Antimonial cup with wine, and to put as much wine
round about betwixt that and the little earthen cup where it stands, and so
infuse it all night, and then drink up all that wine; but I fear that so much
wine will be too much, a being three or four ounces, when as we seldom exceed
the quantity of two ounces of the infusion of Antimony.

These cups or pieces will last for ever, and be as effectual after 1000 times
infusion, as at first: and if they be broken at any time, (as easily they may,
being as brittle as glass (they may be cast again into what forms you please.

Note, that he that casts them must be skilful in making his spawde, as also in
scowring them, and making them bright afterward: for if they be carefully
handled, they will look even as bright as silver.

31 How to make the true spirit of Antimony.
Take of the subtle powder of the Regulus of Antimony, as much as you please;
sublime it out of it self, till it will sublime no more (still putting what is
sublimed to that which remains at the bottom) or with salt Armoniack six or
seven times, remembering that then you must dulcifie it with warm water, by
dissolving therewith the salt, and dry the precipitate afterward. Set this
fixed powder in a celler, laying it very thin upon a marble Stone; and in about
six weeks, or two months it will all be dissolved into water, which must be
filtered. Then evaporate part of this water, and let it stand two or three
days in the Cellar to crystallize; these Crystals purify and dry: mix them
with three times the quantity of the gross powder of Tiles, and distill them in
a retort, and there will come forth first a white spirit and then a red, which
you may rectify in Balneo.

32 The true Oil or essence of Antimony is made thus.
Take of the foresaid crystals, dissolve them in good rectified spirit of wine,
digest them two months in Balneo, or horse dung; then evaporate the spirit of
wine, and there will remain in the bottom, the true oil or essence of
Antimony.

Then take new crystals of Antimony, and let them inbibe either this oil, or
the foresaid spirit, till they will inbi be no more; then digest them two
months in sand, and they will become a flowing fixed salt, and of excellent
virtue.

The foresaid spirit, this oil and essence of Antimony, may be equallized to
Aurum Potahile, to all intents and purposes, according to a medicinalure,
especially the fixed essence. The dose is five or six grains.

33 Wormwood wine.
Take a handful of dried Wormwood for every gallon of wine, stop it in a vessel
close, and so let it remain in steep. So is prepared Wine of Rosemarie flowers
and Eye bright.

34 To make an Artificial Malago Wine.
First take a wine barrel well hooped and dressed, with one end being open, to
which a close cover must be well fitted, which must be to take off, and put on
at pleasure. Set it in a warm place, winter or summer, and fill it full with
clear and pure water; to each three gallons put six pound of the best Malago
Raisins, which you must bruise in a stone mortar, and then strew upon the
water; upon each twenty gallons of which, you must cast an handful of Calx
vive; then cover the vessel close with the cover, and cast clothes upon it to
keep it warm, and let it stand four or five days to work, as Wine or Beer does
when they be new: then see if the raisins be risen up to the top of the water;
if so, then put them down again, and cover it again as before, let them thus
stand three weeks or a month together, the Raisins being every fourth or fifth
day put down in case they rise up. Then put a tap into the Vessel three or four
fingers above the bottom, and try if it be good, and taste like wine; if not,
let it stand a while longer; but if so, draw it off into another wine Vessel,
and to every twenty gallons that you have drawn off, put a pint of the best
Aqua vitae, two new laid Hen-egs, and a quart of Alligant beaten well together,
and let it stand in a Cellar as other wine does, til it be clear, and fit to be
drunk.

35 How to make artificial Claret wino.
Take six gallons of water, two gallons of the best Cider, put thereunto eight
pound of the best Malago Raisins bruised in a mortar, let them stand close
covered in a warm place, the space of a fortnight, every two days stirring
them well together; then press out the Raisins, and put the liquor into the
said Vessel again; to which add a quart of the juice of Raspberries, and a pint
of the juice of Black-Cherries; cover this liquor with bread spread thick with
strong Mustard, the Mustard side being downward, and so let it work by the fire
side three or four days, then tun it up, and let it stand a week, and then
bottle it up, and it will taste as quick as bottle-Beer, and become a very
pleasant drink, and indeed far better and wholsomer then our common Claret.

36 How to make good Raspberry Wine.
Take a gallon of Sack, in which let two gallons of Raspberries stand steeping
the space of twenty four hours, then strain them and put to the liquor three
pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, let them stand together four or five days,
being sometimes stirred together: Then pour off the clearest, and put it up in
Bottles, and set it in a cold place. If it be not sweet enough, you may add
some sugar to it.

37 Oil of Almonds.
Take Almonds, blanch them, and put them into a pot, and set that pot in
another pot of water that boileth, and the steam of the seething pot, will
arise and enter into the pot with the Almonds, and that will become Oil, when
they are stamped and wringed through a cloth: thus they make oil of the kernels
of Filberts; VValnuts, etc.

38 Oil of Sage.
Take the Sage, and boil it in Oil of Olives, till it be thick and green: then
strain the Oil from the Sage, and reserve it.

39 Oleum Laureum.
Take Bay Leaves, grind them well, and boil them in Oil of Olives til it be
green, then strain it and cool it, etc. This is for coldness in the Lims,
Palsies, and such mortifications, etc.

40 Oil of Tobacco.
Take the Green leaves of Tobacco, cut them small and put them into a glass or
gallipot well stopped, then fill it up with Sallet oil, set it a good while in
hot water, or in the Sun forty days, and you shall find it a precious Balm.

41 Oil of Roses.
Take Sallet Oil, and put it into an earthen pot; then take Rose leaves, clip
off all the white, and bruise them a little, and put them into the oil, and
then stop the pot close with paste, and set it into a boiling pot of water, and
let it boil one hour; then let it stand all one night upon hot Embers, the
next day take the oil and strain it from the Rose leaves into a glass, and
put therein some fresh rose leaves clipped as before; stop it and set it in the
Sun every day for a fortnight or three weeks.

42 Oil of Cream.
Take Cream and sees it softly upon some embers, and it will become an Oil:
this will cure the gout in a hauks leg.

43 Oil of Swallows.
Take two dozen or twenty Swallows out of the nest, a good handful of
Rosemary, as much Lavender cotton, and as much Strawberry leaves, strings and
all, stamp all these together, and fry them altogether in May Butter, or rather
sallet Oil, til the rawnesse be gone; then put it in an earthen pot fast
stopped nine days, and then fry it again; wring it through a cloth, and keep it
in a glass or gallipot; and being warmed, anoint the place grieved there
with, it is good for all Aches, and for the shrinking of Sinews.

44 Oil of Roses.
Take a pint of good Sallet oil, or more, as you please, then take as much red
Rose leaves, the white clipped off, three quarters of a pint, put them into a
stone pot, stop it close with paste, and set it so long in a greater pot of
boiling water; till the strength of the Roses be gone into the Oil, then wring
the Roses through a Canvas cloth, till they be dry, then put in new, stop them,
boil, strain, and change them thus four or five times, til you think it
strongenough of the Roses; then put it up for your use. This is the best
Pattern for these Oils.

45 The use of Oil of Violets.
Oil of Voilets. Camomile, Lillies, Elder-flowers, Cowslips, Rue, Wormwood, and
Mint, are made after the same sort. Oil of Violets if it be rubbed about the
Temples of the head, does remove the extreme heat, asswageth the headache,
provokes sleep, and moisteneth the Brain, it is good against melancholy,
dullness and heaviness of the Spirits, and against swellings and sores that be
over hot.

46 The use of the oil of Camomil
Oil of Camomil is good in glisters, for the Agues that come of costive
stoppings; it asswageth all pain and Ach, it cures wearied, and bruised
parts, it loosneth and softneth hard and swollen parts, and opens all which is
stopped.

47 The use of oil of Lillies
Oil of Lillies is good to supple, mollify and stretch sinnews that be
shrunk, it is good to anoint the sides and veins, in the fits of the stone.

48 The use of the Oil of Elder-flowers.
Oil of Elder flowers is good for the hardness and pains of the liver and
spleen, if the sides be therewith anointed; But you must not come near the
bottom of the belly where the bladder lies, nor the hollow of the stomach: It
is very good to apply to green wounds, with some lint dipped in it, for it
cools and heal, eth them, and also festring sores.

49 Oil of Cowslips
Oil of Cowslips, if the nape of the neck be anointed with it, is good for the
Palsy; it comfort the sinnews, the heart and head.

50 The use of the Oil of Rue.
Oil of Rue is good to be used in Olisters against the Colic and Stone: It
is good for the Kings Evil, or any swellings in the chroat; it does warm and
dissolve cold humors in any joint; it provokes Urine, being anointed about
the region of the Bladder; it is good to anoint the Spleen for the stopping
of it.

51 The use of the Oil of Wormwood.
Oil of Wormwood is good for strains and bruises, and to comfort the stomach.
It is made of the green herb, as are the Oils of Camomile, Rue, and Mint.

52 The use of the Oil of Mint.
Oil of Mint comfort the stomach, overlaid and weakened with casting: it
does drive back milk, and dry up women's breasts, and does keep them from being
sore, being therewith anointed.

53 To make the Oil of Salerne.
Take Southernwood, Wormwood, Lavender tender Crops, Rose leaves, Camomile,
Saint John's Wort, red Sage, Rosemary tops, of each one handful; cut them
somewhat small, as it were about an Inch long, and bruise them a little; then
put to them a pint of the best Aqua vita, and a pottle of the best Sallet-Oyl
you can get: boil them an hour and half upon a soft fire, keeping them from
burning, with continual stirring; then strain it through a linen cloth, and
when it is cold, put it up in a glass, and keep it for all cold infirmities.
When you use it, warm the Oil a little, and warm your hand against a
Chafingdish of coals, and anoint the place pained therewith.

54 How to compose the Oil of Excester.
Take one pound and a half of the Flowers of Cowslips, and steep them in three
pints of the best Candy oil, and let them so stand three weeks, or a month: and
then take of Calamint, Saint John's Wort, Sage, Egremony, Sothernwood,
Penneroyal, Wormwood, Lavender, Parietarie, Rosemary, Camomile, Pellitory of
Spain, Bay Leaves, Scabious, of each a handful; beat them in a stone Mortar, as
small as you can, then strain the Cowslip flowers from the Oil, and stamp them
among the other herbs as small as you can, and put them altogether in aquart of
white wine, and let them stand therein twenty four hours, then put the Oil to
them, and boil them upon a soft fire, til they be so incorporate together, that
it is all become oil: then letting it cool a little while, strain it into some
earthen pan, there keep it till it be cold, and then put it up in some glass or
gally-pot.

55 Oil of Amber.
Take of yellow Amber one part, burnt flints or powder of tiles two parts,
distill them in a Retort in sand, keep the white clear oil which comes out
first, by it self; then distill it on till all come out, keep both oils
severally, and rectify them with water, gather the salt of Amber which sticks
to the neck of the retort, and being purged by solution, filtration, and
coagulation, according to art, keep it for use.

56 How to make an excellent Oil of Hypericon.
Take flowers, leaves, and seeds of Hypericon as much as you list, beat them
together, and infuse them in white wind, that they may be covered therewith,
and set them in the sun for ten days; then put thereto so much oil of Olives
as all the rest does weigh, and let it stand ten days more in the Sun: But
look you weigh the oil, to know how much it is; then put thereto for every
pound of oil two ounces of Turpentine, and one dram of Saffron; and of
Nutmegs and Cloves of each half an ounce; of Mirrhe and Rosin of each an
ounce, and of the root of Briony two ounces; put them all in a vessel of
glass, and mix them well together, and then set them in a vessel of hot water,
and set thereto an head of glass and a Receiver well shut, and boil it so long
until no more will distill from it, which will be about twenty four hours; then
take it out and strain it whilst it is hot, and keep it in a vessel of glass.
And when you use it, first heat it well, and apply it upon a wound without
using any tent at all. This is excellent for a green wound, especially if there
be veins, sinnews, or bones offended or cut: It keeps wounds from
putrefaction, it cleanses them, and eases pain, and does incarnate and skin
them: It helps bruises, pains, aches, or swellings in any part; and is
wonderful against venom or poison.

57 Oil of St. John's Wort.
Take a quart of Sallad oil, put thereto a quart of the flowers of St. John's
wort well picked, let them lie therein all the year till the seeds be ripe, the
glass must be kept warm, either in the Sun, or in water, all the Summer until
the seeds be ripe; then put in a quart of St. John's wort seeds whole, and so
let it stand twelve hours; then you must sees the oil eight hours, the glass
being kept open, and the water in the pot full as high as the oil is of height
in the glass; then when it is cold, strain it, that the seeds may not remain
in the oil, and then put up the oil for your use.

58 Oil of yolks of Eggs.
Boil the yolks till they be hard, and bruise them with your hands, or with a
pestle and mortar; heat them in an earthen vessel glazed until they begin to
froth, stirring them diligently that they burn not: being hot, put them in a
linen bag, and sprinkle them with aromatic wine, and press out the oil
according to art.

59 To make oil of Mandrakes.
Take of common oil two pound, juice of Mandrake Apples, or (for want of them)
of the leaves, four ounces; juice of white Henbane two ounces, juice of black
Poppie heads three ounces, juice of Violets, and tender hemlock of each one
ounce: Set them all in the sun, and after the tenth day, boil them to the
consumption of the juice; then put in Opium finely beaten, and Styrax Calamltis
dissolved in a little Turpentine, of each half an ounce.

60 Oil of Musk how made.
Take two Nutmegs, Musk one dram, Indian leaf or Mace, Spkenard, Costus,
Mastick, of each six drachms; Styrax Calamitis, Cassia lignea, Mirth, Saffron,
Cloves, Cinnamon, Carpobalsamum, or Cubebs, Bdelium, of each two drachms; pure
oil three pound, Wine three ounces: brutle them as you ought to do, mix them,
and let them boil easily til the wine be consumed, the Musk being mixed
according to art, after it is strained.

61 How to make oil of Snakes and Adders.
Take Snakes or Adders when they are fat, which will be in June or July, cut
off their heads and take off their skins, and unbowel them, and put them into a
glass gourd, and pour out so much of the pure spirit of wine well rectified,
that it may cover them four or five fingers breadth; stop the glass well, and
set it in Balneo till all their substance be turned into an oil, which keep
well stopped for your use.

This oil does wonderful cures in recovering hearing in those that be deaf, if
a few drops thereof be put warm into the ears. It Is reported that some have
been cured that were borne deaf, by using this oil.

62 An ointment for a Rupture.
Take of Sanicle two handfuls, of Adderstongue, Doves foot, and shepherds
purse, of each as much, of Limaria one handful, chop them somewhat small, and
boil them in Deers suet, until the herbs be crumbly and wax dry.

63 Flos Unguentorum.
Take Rosin, Feroline, Virgin Wax, of each half a pound, melt all these
together and put into them one quarter of a pound of Rosemary tops beaten
small; put then to them all together, a pottle of white wine, let them boil well
together, then strain them through a course linen cloth into a pot or pan, and
when it is cold, put the wine from it as much as will, and and melt the medicine
again, and put therein two ounces of Camphire, Venice Turpentine one quarter of
a pound, Sallet oil half a pint, let it boil a little, and put it up in some
gally-pot for your use. It is good for new or old wounds, for sinnews shrunk,
started, or sprung, to draw out thorns, or broken bones, heals Biles, all
Aches of the reins and back, swelling of the members, and the emerauds.

64 Unguentum Populionis, commonly called Pompillion.
Take a gallon of Bores grease, as much of Popple buds when they first put out,
and a handful of Smallage; stamp the herbs and the Bores grease together,
put them togeher in an earthen pot well stopped, and set it in an horse
dunghill fourteen days together; then boil it over the fire about a quarter
of an hour, keeping it still with stirring: when you are ready to take it off
the fire, put thereto half a pint of the best Sallet or Olive oil, and stir
them well together; then let them boil a little, and strain it into an earthen
pot, which being close covered, will keep good seven or eight years.

65 Doctor Lewins Unguentum Rosatum, good for the heat in the Back.
Take a certain quantity of Barrows grease. of oil of sweet Almonds and
Rosewater, either red or damask, of each a like quantity, but of neither so
much as of the Hogs grease; beat them together to an ointment, put it in some
gally pot, and when you would use it, heat it, and therewith anoint the Back
and Reins.

66 Vnguentum Sanatinum
Take of Turpentine one pound, Wax six ounces, oil of Camomile half a pint,
put all together in a pan, and put to it a handful of Camomile bruised or cut
very small: boil them upon a soft fire till they be well melted and no more:
then take it from the fire, and strain it into a clean pan, and so let it cool
all night, and in the morning put it up for your use. This Ointment is good for
any cut, wound, or breaking of the flesh, it eats away dead flesh, and
ranklings, and does heal again quickly.

67 Ointment of red Lead.
Take of oil of Roses a pound and a half, red lead three ounces, Litharge two
ounces, Ceruss one ounce and half, Tutty three drams, Camphire two drachms, Wax
an ounce and a half, make it into an ointment according to art, in a pestle and
mortar made of lead.

68 A bitter Ointment.
Take of oil of Rue, Savin, Mints, Wormwood, bitter Almonds, of each an ounce
and a half; juice of Peach flowers and leaves, and Wormwood, of each half an
ounce; powder of Rue, Mints, Century the less, Gentian, Tormentil, of each one
dram; the seeds of Colworts, the pulp of Colocynthis, of each two drachms,
Aloes Hepatick three drachms, Meal of Lupines half an ounce, Myrrh washed in
grass water a dram and half; Bulls gall an ounce and a half, with a
sufficient quantity of juice of Lemons, and an ounce and a half of Wax; make
it into an Ointment according to art.

69 Apectoral Ointment.
Take of fresh Butter washed in Violet water six ounces, oil of sweet Almonds
four ounces, oil of Cammomile and Violets, white Wax, of each three ounces,
Hens and Ducks grease, of each two ounces, Orris roots two drachms, Saffron
half a dram; the two last being finely powdered, the rest melted and often
washed in Barley or Hysop water; make an ointment of them according to art.

70 An Ointment for an Ach, to be made at any time of the year, and is approved
good, and has helped old pains, griefs and aches.
Take Steers gall, Sallet oil and Aqua vitae, of each five spoonfuls, boil
them together a little, and therewith anoint the place pained by the fire, and
lay a warm cloth on it.

71 An Ointment for the Sciatica.
Roast a handful or two of Onions, and take Neatsfoot oil, and Aqua-vitae, of
each a pint: stamp, or rather boil all these together to an oil or ointment;
and strain it into a Gallipot, and therewith anoint the place grieved, as hot
as you can endure it, morning and evening.

72 An Ointment for any wound or sone.
Take two pound of Sheeps suet, or rather Deers suet, a pint of Candy oil, a
quarter of a pound of the newest and best Bee-wax: melt them all together,
stirring them well, and put to them one ounce of oil of Spike, and half an
ounce of the Goldsmiths Boras, then heating them again, and stirring them all
together, put it up in a Gallipot, and keep it close stopped, till you have
cause to use it. This is an approved ointment to cure any wounds or sores, new
or old.

73 A Purge to drive out the French Pox, before you use the Ointment.
Take half a pint of good Aqua vitae, one ounce of Treacle of Gene, one quarter
of an ounce of Sperma caeti; boil all these together on a soft fire, half a
quarter of an hour, and let the Patient drink this as warm as he can, and lie
down in his bed and sweat: and if any of the disease be in his body, this will
bring it forth, and bring him to an easy loosnesse. This is thought the best
and furest of all other Cures, for this infirmity.

74 The Ointment for the French Pox
Take Barrows grease well dried from the filmes, beat it in a Mortar, till it
be small and fine: put thereto of Lethargy one ounce, of salt Peter two ounces,
both in fine powder: of Salgemme, one ounce, of Mastick in sine powder two
ounces, of Olibanum in powder one ounce, of oil of Spike one ounce, oil of
Pulliolum one ounce, of Turpentine one quarter of a pound; beat all these
together into a perfect Ointment, and therewith anoint these places.

75 What places to anoint for the French Pox Viz.
The principal bone in the nape of the neck with. out the shoulder places,
taking heed it come not near the Channel bone, for then it will make the throat
swell, else not; the elbows on both sides; the Hip-bones; the Share; the knees
the Hams and the Ankles: If the Patient have no Ach, anoint not these places,
but only the Sores till they be whole. If there be any Knobs lying in the
flesh (as many have) anoint them often, and lay Lint upon them, and brown
paper upon the Lint; and keep the Patient close out of the air, and this used
will make him whole in ten days by the grace of God.

76 Another purge to heal the French Pox without Ointment
Take a great handful of Carduus Benedictus, of unset Leeks leaves and all, if
they be great six, if small 10; cut these herbs small, and put them in an
earthen pan, and with a quart of small Ale or white Wine, and one ounce of
Coloquinrida, boil them to half a pint of liquor, then strain out the liquor,
and keep it in a glass, and two or three days before you set the Patient to
sweat, if his body be of a strong constistitution, let him drink half of it; if
he be weak, a third part thereof, taking care that the Sign and day be good to
purge in.

77 An Ointment to kill the Worms in little children.
Take oil of Wormwood, oil of Savine, and the powder of Aloe Cicatrina finely
beaten, mix them together, warm them and anoint the belly therewith morning
and evening, and this will kill the belly worms; for stomach worms anoint the
stomach with oil of Wormwood, and the belly with oil of sweet Almonds, You
must not use any Savine in medicines for Maiden children, but in stead of oil
of Savine, take as much of an Oxes Gall.

78 For the worms.
Drink Mares milk as hot as you can have it from the Mare, in the morning
fasting.

79 An excellent good Medicine or Salve for any Ach coming of cold, easy to be
made by any Country good houswife.
Take of good Neatsfoot Oil, Honey and Wax a like quantity, boil them well
together; Then put to them a quarter so much of Aqua vitae as was of each of
the other: and then setting it on the fire, boil it till they be well
incorporated together; then spread it upon a piece of thin leather, or thick
linen cloth, and so apply it to the place pained.

80 For a pain or Ach in the Back.
Take Nepe, Archangel, Parsley and Clary, of each half a handful, wash them
clean, cut them small, and fry them with a little sweet Butter, then take the
yolks of three or four Eggs, beat them well together, and put them to the Eggs,
fry them altogether, and eat them fasting every morning, with some Sugar to
take away the unsavoriness of the herbs. Some use to take only Clary leaves,
and Parsley washed, not cut; or Clary leaves alone, and pouring the yolks of the
Eggs upon them, so fry them and eat them.

80 A Searcloth for all Aches.
Take Rosen one pound, Perrosen a quarter of a pound, as much Mastick, Dcers
Suet, the like, Turpentine two ounces, Cloves bruised one ounce, Mace bruised
two ounces, Saffron two dachms; boil all these together in oil of Camomile,
and keep it for your use.

81 An excellent Ointment for any Bruise or Ache.
Take two pound of May Butter purified, pour it out from the dregs, and put in
it of Broom flowers, and Elder flowers, of each a good handful, so clean
picked, that you use nothing but the leaves; mix them altogether in a stone
pot, and boil them seven or eight hours in a Kettle of water, being covered
with a board and kept down with weights, keeping the Kettle always full of
water, with the help of another Kettle of boiling water ready to fill up the
first, as it wastes; and when it waxes somewhat cool, but not cold, strain
the ointment from the herbs into a Gallipot, and keep it for your use.

82 The cure of grievous pains and aches in the Body.
A dose of Aromatico Leonardo, and the application of Emplastrum foetidum, is
an approved cure for grievous pains and aches in the knees, shoulders, or other
parts.

83 Aches coming by the Pox healed.
Purge twice or thrice with the said Aromatico Leonardo, then take for four or
five days together, half a dram of the extract of Hermodactiles with white
wine; then to the articular parts grieved, apply Emplastrum foetidum. This has
in short time cured one of a dark melancholy complexion, who was given over for
incurable.

84 Back weak or diseased, to strengthen, etc.
Take the pith of an Oxes back, wash it in Wine or Ale, and beating it very
small, strain it through a course cloth, and make a caudle of it with Muskadine
or strong Ale, boil therein a few Dates sliced and the stones taken out, and
drink it first and last as warm as you can, walking well, but temperatly after
it: Toasted Dates often eaten are very good for the same.

85 To take the Ague out of any place.
Take Vervine and black Hemlock, of each an handful, boil them in a pint of
fresh Butter til they be soft and begin to parch again; Then strain the
Butter from the herbs and put it into a gallipot, and two or three times a day
anoint the place grieved, with a spoonful or two thereof. Probat.

86 For the Ague in children, or women with child.
Take Venice Turpentine, spread it on the rough side of a piece of thin leather
two fingers breadth, and strew thereon the powder of frankincense finely
beaten, and upon it some Nutmegs grated; Bind this upon the wrests an hour
before the fit comes, and renew it still till the fit be gone.

87 An easy and approved Medicine for a quartaine Ague.
Take a white flint stone, (for it will best endure the fire without breaking)
burn it in the fire till it be red hot, then quench it in or dinary Beer, and
let the Patient drink of it a little before the fit comes, and likewise in the
fit. Let this be done three or four several days, at the time when the fit is
expected. A woman by this only medicine did cure diverse of quartain Agues,
when long and much Physic could not prevail.

88 An Almond milk to cool and induce sleep.
Take sweet Almonds blanched five pound, beat them in a stone mortar, by
sprinkling them now and then with a little barley-water; at last put a quart of
barley water to them, and four ounces of fine sugar; then strain it, adding two
ounces of Rosewater. This may be drawn out with chicken broth, and sweetened
with Sugar Candy in stead of other sugar.

89 For an Andcome.
Put half a dozen knots of a young oak into a sire pan, and burn them to a red
coal; and take Bores grease and fine suet, and two or three corns of salt. and
stamp them very fine, and so make a plaster of it; and if it do draw and beal
too fast, lay lime underneath the salve: dress it twice a day in winter, and
thrice in summer.

90 Liquid Amber, and its medcin al virtues.
Take liquid amber, and distill it in a retort, and there from will come a red
oil. This oil is used against all indispositions of cold, and moisture, or
wind. The same heals scabs, and is good for wounds. If you anoint the
stomach therewith, it will exceedingly comfort the same; for it is a thing
incorrupptible, and like unto Balsamum.

91 A most Sovereign Balsam for several diseases.
Take five pints of Sallet oil, one pound of Venice Turpentine, half a pound of
Virgins Wax, fix ounces of red sanders, half a pint of Damask Rosewater.
First put your oil with six spoonfuls of Rosewater into a clean skillet, or new
pipkin, and let it boil a quarter of an hour; wash the Turpentine with the
rest of the Rose water, pare the wax clean, and cut it into thin slices, and
put it into another clean skillet or new pipkin with the Turpentine; Let them
be well melted and mixed together: then pour the water from the oil (if you can
see any) and put it into the Wax and Turpentine, and let them boil upon a
gentle fire a dozen walms: Then take it off, and put in the sanders by two
ounces at a time, mingling and stirring it well: then let it boil a dozen walms
more, stir it to avoid burning, then strain it into a basin, and fill it into
gallipots

92 For a sudden bleeding at the nose
Burn an Egg shel in the fire, till it be as black as a Cole, then beat it to a
fine powder, and let the party snuff it up into his nostrils.

93 A remedy for the spitting of blood, occasioned by the breach of some vein
in the breast.
Take Mice dung beaten to powder as much as will lie upon a groat, and put it
into half a glass full of juice of Plantane with a little sugar, and so give
the Patient thereof to drink morning and evening: continuing the same he shall
be sound.

94 To stop bleeding of a wound.
Take Vervine dried and made into powder, and put it in the wound, and it will
leave bleeding. Burn also the sole of an old hose, and put in the Ashes into a
wound, and it will leave bleeding.

95 To stop inward bleeding.
Drink the juice of Neepe, and it will help you.

96 A medicine for those that are given to bleeding.
Make a Posset, take off the curd, and take liver-wort and beat it, and put the
juice thereof into the Posset Drink, and drink it morning and evening warm.

97 To stanch bleeding at the nose.
Take Bolearmanack and the white of an egg, and vinegar, and beat them
together and make plasters thereof, and lay them to your temples.

98 To heal the Cut, or sore Breast of a Woman.
Take Buglosse and Yarrow of each two handfuls, stamp them, and strain them
with the third part of a pint of good Ale, then stamp the herbs again, and
strain them with an other third part of a pint of good Ale, then stamp and
strain them again the third time, and you shall have near a quart of the Ale,
keep this in a glass close stopped, and let the patient drink of it first in
the morning, and last in the evening three spoonfuls at a time; but if you make
this for a sore breast, if the breast be broken, take three handfulls of Yarrow.

99 A Medicine to break and heal sore breasts of Woman, used by Midwives, and
other skilful women in London.
Boil Oatmeale of the sm^llest you can get, and red Sage together in running
or Conduit water, till it be thick enough to make a Plaster; and then put into
it a fit proportion of honey, and letting it boil a little together, take it off
the fire, and while it is yet boiling hot, put thereto so much of the best
Venice Turpentine as will make it thick enough to spread; then spreading it on
some soft leather, or a good thick linen cloth, apply it to the breast, and it
will first break the sore, and after that being continued, will also heal it up.

100 To dry up a woman's Breast.
Take of oil of Linseed and English honey of each a penny worth, white wax half
a penny worth, and half a quarter of a pint of sweet Butter; boil all these to
a plaster and lay it on the breast. Master Buxton. Colchester.

101 For a stinking Breath.
Take Rosemary leaves with the blossoms, if you can get them, and sees them
in whitewine, with a little myrhe and Cinnamon, and you shall find a
mavelous affect, if you use it often in your mouth.

102 A Gargle for an unsavory breath
Take Rosewater, Myrtle water, Orange flower water, of each two ounces; Musk
three grains, salt a little more. Musk and Ambergreece you may put in for
greater persons.

103 For the Canker in a woman's Breast.
Take Goose dung and Cellydony, stamp them well together, and lay it
plaister-wise to the sore; it will cleanse the Canker, kill the worm, and
heal the sort.

104 For the Canker in the mouth.
Take the juice of Plantanc, vinegar and Rosewater, of each a like quantity,
mingle them together, and wash the mouth often with them.

105 Of the Catarrhe, or Rbume in the bead.
The Catarrhe is a moist vapor which assaulteth the head, and afterward
falls down again into the stomach, where it ingrosseth and corrupieth. This
moisture has its beginning of the moisture of the lungs; and until the lungs
be discharged thereof, the Catarrbe will continue in its force. It is
predominant more in phlegmatic then other constitutions. Such as are troubled
with it, are not long lived because their lungs consume by little and little,
and thereupon they are troubled with the Ptisick, and consequently perish, if
not quickly relieved. See a rare secret to cure the same.

Take Pulmonaria and Sena that is fresh and new, infuse them in wine and water
over a gentle fire, till the wine have drawn out the virtue; then strain it,
and put thereto some Quintessence Leonardo, and keep it close in a galffe: Let
the Patient drink every morning three ounces lukewarm, for twenty days
together; let him eat good nourishing meats, for they agree well with this
disease: If the patient be not too far spent, you shall see your our performed
in a short time. In the mean time, if the patient be weak, let him take new
laid Eggs, and good whitewine: if the humidity be perceived not to be quite
expelled and evacuated, then give him Aromatico Leonardo; afterward comfort him
again with Restoratives and Cordials, to make him strong; and no doubt, by the
help of God, he shall be cured.

106 For young children that are weak in their limms, and can neither go nor
stand.
Take Sage, sweet Marjorome, of each a like quantity, beat them very well
together, and strain out the juice, and put it into a double Vial glass, fill
the glass as full as it can hold; then stop it with paste very close, and
cover it with thick paste all over, and then set it in an Oven, and there let
it stand so long as a great loaf requires time to be thoroughly baked; then take
it out, and let it be cold, then break the paste round about it, and if the
juice be grown thick, break the glass, and put it into a gallipot, and keep
it. When you will use it, take the quantity of two spoonfuls at a time, and as
much marrow of an Ox leg, melt them together, and mingle them well, and both
morning and evening anoint therewith (as warm as can he endured) the tender
parts of the child's thighs, and legs, and knees, chafing them well with your
warm hands; and so in a short time (through Gods blessing) it will be able to
stand and go. Successfully proved.

107 For breaking out of childrens heads.
Take of White wine and sweet Butter, a like quantity, boil them together till
it come to a salve, and so anoint the head therewith.

108 A medicine for the swelling of a child's Cods.
Bray red Rose leaves, and boil them in red wine an hour; then wet a cloth in
it, and lay it to the child's Navel as hot as can be endured.

109 To heal children of the Lunatic disease.
This disease happens to children by reason of a worm with two heads, which
breeds in their bodies, which coming to the heart, causes such a passion in
the child, that of times it kills them. The remedy whereof is this, Dry the
tender stalks of a Wilding tree in the shadow; then stamp them well, and fifth
them, and take of the said powder, and roots of Gentian, mirth and long Pyome,
of each a quarter of an ounce; all these well beaten to powder you must put in
a dish, or some other vessel, and moisten them with a little water; then take
of it with your two fingers, and wet the lips and mouth of the child: Do this
three or four times, and you shall see the worm come forth dead with the
excrements.

110 For a Consumption.
Taste Ash Keys, so soon as they look withered, set them into an oven (the
bread being drawn) in a pewter or rather an earthen dish, and being so dried,
pill off the outside, and reserving the inner part of the seed or Keys, beat
them to fine powder; and either mix it with good English Honey, and so eat of
it first and last, morning and evening, a pretty deal of it at once, upon the
point of a knife; or else drink of the powder in some posset Ale or thin
broth. Mares milk drunk also warm morning and evening, is a sovereign Medicine
for it,

111 To make a China Broth for a Consumption.
Of China root thin sliced take two ounces, keep it in fair water twenty four
hours, letting it stand warm all the time, being close covered in an earthen
pipkin or iron pot; then put to it a good Cockrel, or two Chickens clean
dressed, and scum it well; then put in five leaved grass, Maidenhair,
Hart's-tongue, of each half a handful, Dates twenty sliced, two or three Mace,
and the bottom of a manchet; let all these stew together, until not above one
quart remains, then strain it, and take all the flesh, and sweet bones, beat
them in a stone mortar, and strain out all the juice with the broth, then
sweeten it with two ounces of white sugar candy in powder, and take thereof
half a pint at once, early in the morning warm, and sleep after it if you can,
and two hours before supper at your pleasure; when you steep the root, slice
two drachms of white Sanders, and as much red, and let them boil in the broth.

112 A Broth for a Consumption.
Take a course Pullet and sow up the belly; and an ounce of the conserves of
red Roses, Borage, and Bugloss flowers, of each of them half an ounce; Pine
apple kernels, and Pistaties, of each half an ounce, bruised in a mortar; two
drachms of Amber powder, all mixed together, and put in the belly; then boil it
in three quarts of water with Egrimony, Endive, and Succory, of each a handful;
Sparrow grass roots, Fennel roots, Caper-roots, and an handful of Raisins of
the Sun stoned; when it is almost boiled, take out the Pullet, and beat it in a
stone mortar, then put it into the liquor again, and give it three or four
walms more; then strain it, and put to it a little red Rosewater, and half a
pint of white Wine, and so drink it in a morning, and sleep after it.

113 An excellent confortative for the Stomach, helping digestion, warming the
brain, and drying the Rheumes.
Take two ounces of good old conserve of red Roses, of chosen Mithridate two
drachms; mingle them well together, and eat thereof to bedward, the quantity of
a Hasel nut: This does expel all windiness of the stomach, expels raw
humors, and venomous vapors, causes good digestion, dries the Rheum,
strengthens the memory and sight.

114 For the Corns on the feet or toes.
First pare away the corns, then take a black snail and bruise it, and put a
drop or two of the juice thereof into the place grieved, and put thereto a
little powder of Sandphire; and it will take away the corn very speedily.

115 A Cordial for the Sea.
Take of Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers, Mr. Mounifords water, and Cinnamon
water, of each an ounce; Confectio Alcharmis one dram, Borage water an ounce
and half, the like of Mint-water; temper all these together in a Cordial, and
take a spoonful at a time when you are at Sea.

116 For the Ptisick and dry Cough.
Take the lungs of a Fox, beat them to powder; take of Liquorice and
Sugar Candy a good quantity, a small quantity of Cummin, mix all these well
together, and put them in a bladder, and eat of it as often as you think good
in the day.

117 An excelient medicine for the Cough of the Lungs.
Take Fennel and Angelica, of each one handful, the leaves in Summer, roots in
winter, sliced figgs twelve, (but if the body be bound, twenty at least) green
Liquorice (if you can) two or three good sticks, scraped and sliced,
Annis-seeds cleaved and bruised two good spoonefuls, two or three Parsely roots
scraped and the pith taken out, and twenty leaves of Folefoot; boil all these
in three pints of Hysop water, to a pint and half, then strain it out into a
glass, putting as much white Sugar Candy to it as will sweeten it: Drink
hereof being warmed, five spoonfulls at a time, first in the morning, and last
in the evening, taking heed that you eat nor drink any thing two hours before
or after: continue this till it be all done.

118 A Medicine for the chin-Cough, for a child.
First take Bores grease, and warm the soles of the feet at the fire; then
chafe them with it, and go to bed and keep them warm, by lapping clothes about
them.

119 A Diet drink to clear and temper the blood.
Take Scurvy grass half a peck, Brooklime, Watercresses, Acrimony, Maidenhair,
Liverwort, Borage, Bugloss, Betony, Sage, sweet-Marjoram, Sea-wormwood, tops of
green Hops, Fumitory, of each a good handful, I very, Hartshorn, and yellow
Sanders, of each one ounce; red Dock roots two ounces; Parsely, Fennel,
Asparagus roots of each an ounce, Raifins half a pound; boil these very well in
a gallon of Beer, then stamp and strain them, and put it into three gallons
more of Beer to work together.

120 A Diet drink to open and temper the Liver.
Take the roots of Fennel, Parsley, Dock, Coroch, Kneeholm, of each half a good
handful; the leaves of Endive, Bugloss, Fumitory, Hartstongue, Agrimony, garden
Wormwood, Cetrach, of each a good handful; the bark of the roots of Capers half
an ounce; boil these in a convenient quantity of Whey, till a third part be
spent; then clarify the same: Hereof drink in the morning fasting at the least
half a pound at a time.

121 A Diet drink for a Canker in the mouth.
First get a Diet pot of the common sort, put into it half a pound of Liquorice
scraped and bruised; half a pound of Annise-seeds bruised, twelve ounces of
Lignum vitae bought at the Turners, and an ounce of the bark of the same wood
from the Apothecaries, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, an handful of
Seabious, two ounces of Solyprilla, a quantity of white Wine, and an ounce of
China; then fill up your pot with fair water saving a pint; then cover your pot
with his cover, and close it round about the brim with paste; then set it on a
gentle fire of coals, and let it boil three hours, till the fourth part be
consumed: Then put the clearest in bottles; and every morning and night drink a
good draught for fourteen days together. If you put a little of the wood into
the fire, and there fry out of it somewhat like oil, be sure it is good.

122 To cure the Dropsy, be it hot or cold.
Take of the tops of Red Mint, of Archangel or blind nettles, and red Sage, of
either of them ten or twelve, stamp them all together and strain the juice of
them into some stale Ale, so much as will serve to drink morning and evening:
do the like every day for nine or ten days together, and (God willing) it will
do away your disease.

123 A medicince that has recovered some from the Dropsy, whom the Physicians
have given over.
Take green Broom, and burn it in some clean place, that you may save the
Ashes of it: take some ten or twelve spoonfuls of the same Ashes, and boil
them in a pint of White wine, till the virtue of it be in the wine: then cool
it, and draine the wine from the dregs, and make three draughts of the wine;
and drink one fasting in the morning, another at three in the afternoon,
another last at night near going to bed, continue this, and by Gods grace it
will cure you.

124 To open obstructions of the Liver, and to preserve from the dropsy.
Take every day half a dram of fine Rubarb thin sliced, with a spconful of
Currants steeped and washed in white wine two hours, then chop them finely with
the Rubarb, and eat them fasting nine mornings together at the Spring and Fall.

125 An approved medicine for the Drepsie.
Take the herb called Bitter sweet (it grows in waters, and bears a purple
flower) slice the stalks and boil a prerty deal of them in white wind, and
drink thereof first and last morning and evening, and it will cure the Dropsy.

126 A Bath to comfort the Brain.
Take a quart of Muscadine, sweet Marjoram a handful, Rosemary tops half a
handful, and a few Cloves; boil them upon a soft fire, to the one half, and
bath the head therewith often in the Spring and fall of the lease, drying it in
with hot Napkin.

127 For pain in the Ears, or deafness
Take a hot loaf, of the bigness of a Bakers penny loaf, and pull or cut it
in two in the midst, and lay the middle of the crummy side to the midst, or
to the holes of the ear, or ears pained, as hot as they may be endured: and so
bindthem fast together on all night. And then if you find any pain in either or
both ears, or any noise, put into your pained ear or ears, a drop of Aqua
vitae in each, and then again binding more hot bread to them, walk a little
while, and after go to bed; this done three or four days together, has taken
away the pain, hearing noise in the ears, and much eased the deafness and
dullness of and in many.

128 For the Emrods.
Take Egremony and bruise it small, and then fry it with sheeps Suet, and honey,
of each a like quantity, and lay it as hot as you can suffer it to the
sundament, and it will heal you very fair and well.

129 For the Pin and Web in the Eye.
Take the Gall of a hare, and clarified honey, of each a like quantity, mingle
them well together, and an anoint the web with a feather dipped in the same, and
within three or four days it will take it quite a way.

130 A Plaster to take away the Filme on the Eye.
Take a rotten Apple, the yolke of one egg, and as much grated Maunchet as will
make it pretty stiff, and then put to it two spoonfuls of Egrimony water, two
of Eyebright water, and two of red-Rose water, or all six of red Rosewater, for
want of the other two, beat all these together, til it be stiff enough to
spread, then make a plaster of it and lay to the Eye, and when you take off
the Plaster to renew it, wash the Eye with some of these waters, mixed equally
together to clear it again.

131 A Medicine for sore, Blood shotten and Rheumatick eyes.
Take ground Ivy, Daisies and Celedony of each a like quantity, stamp and
strain out the juice of them, and put to it a little brown Sugar Candy
dissolved in a little white Rosewater, and drop two or three drops of this
liquor at one time, into the grieved eye or eyes with a feather, lying upon the
back when you do it, and an hour after. This by Master Waldgraves own
experience, and by diverse others to whom he taught it, proved to be the best
Medicine for Byes; for it takes away all inflamatious spots, webs, itches,
smarting, or any griese whatsoever in the eye, yea though the sight were near
hand gone.

132 To make the face white and fair.
Wash thy face with Rosemary boiled in white wind, and thou shall be fair; then
take Erigan and stamp it, and take the juice thereof and put it altogether,
and wash thy face therewith. Proved

133 To take the heat out of the face.
Put Elder flowers, Plantane, white Daisie roots, and herb Robert into running
water, and wash your face morning and evening therewith.

134 To take away the Spots or red Pimples of the face.
Take half a pint of rain water, and half a pint of good verjuyce, sees it
till it be half consumed; the whiles it boileth fill it up again with juice of
Lemmons, and so let it sees a pretty while; then take it from the fire, when
it is cold, put to it the whites of four new laid eggs well beaten; and with
this water anoint the place often.

135 A Secret to help all Fevers in the beginning.
When the Fever is new begun, give the Parlent two drachms of Aromatico
Leonardo fasting in the morning; and the next day about the same hour give him
an ounce of Vegitabile Syrup; and the third day give him four drachms of the
said Electuario Angelica Leonardo with broth, which takes away the Fever
altogether. And this operation intends only to the continual, Quotidian,
Tertian, and putrified or pestilentiall Fevers; but not to the accidential or
Heclick, nor Quartain, for these three kinds are much differing from the rest;
because the accidentiall is caused of another infirmity anterior, or going
before: The sever Hectic is caused of weakness of natures; and the Quartain
is caused of great quantity of melancholy humors; and they are cured by
contrary means to the first: the accidental by helping the principal
infirmity, the Hectic by helping nature, and preserving the liver and lungs
from putrefaction; the Quartaine by Vomits, Unctions, Cerrots, and drying
drinks; and these are great secrets to be known. For herein consists a great
part of Physic and Surgery, if it be well considered.

136 To ripen and heal a Fellon.
Boil Clarret wine and wheat flower to a poultesse, and spreading it very
thick, apply it as hot as you can endure it.

137 A medicine for a Fistula.
Dry Vervine upon a tile, and make powder thereof, and make clean the sore with
a linen cloth, and fill the hole full of the powder.

138 A medicine for the falling sickness.
Gather Germander in May when it is in the blossom, dry it in the shadow, and
make it into fine powder; and when you will use it, take the yolke of an egg
or two, and stir and break it with a spoonful of the said powder, then sees it
and give it to the patient to eat: Do this morning and evening eight days,
abstaining from wine, carnal company of Women, from all pulse, beans, pease,
vetches, tares, and such other; from salets, salt fish, and from other things
that are hard of concoction. A very good and notable secret.

139 For the Piles.
Set a Chafingdish or a Pan of coals under a close stoole-chaire, or in a close
stoolecase; and strew Amber beaten in fine powder upon the coals, and sit down
over it, that the smoke may ascend up into the place grieved.

140 An especial good Medicine to make the Piles bleed.
Beat the yolke of an egg: and some sallet oil or oil of Roses together, with
some Saffron, and spread it upon a piece of Leather, and lay it to the place
grieved.

141 A Medicine for the Piles.
Take a little Orpine, Hackdagger, and Elecampane, stamp them altogether with
Boares grease into the form of an ointment, and lay them to the place grieved.

142 A Cullesse to stop the Bloody flux.
Take a gallon of fair running water, and a quart of Red wine, boil therein a
Cock or a Hen, of Bramble leaves, Ribwort, Oaken buds, Plantaine, Bursa
Pastoris, Knotgrasse, stones of Raisins of the Sun, of each one handful: and so
let them boil to the one half or more. Then take one pound of unblanched
Almonds, stamp them and strain them with this broth, and put thereto a box of
Quidony of Quinces, a spoonful of powder of Pomegranate rinds, the powder of
Cinnamon and of Rose leaves of each as much, two Cakes of Manus Christi, half a
cake of Terra Sigillata and a little Sugar to make it sweet; boil them all
together about one quarter of an hour, then strain out the liquor, and let the
Patient drink thereof morning and evening an hour before he eats any thing.

143 Bloody flux cured.
The Fluxes of the body are no other but the distemporature of Nature, and are
of two kinds; the one is caused of the distemper, and evil quality of the
Liver, and is called Flusso Epatico. The other is caused of great heat, fever,
and distemperament of Nature, and is called Diffenteria, that is, a distemper
of the guts; and both these sorts are hard to be helped by the Ancient Doctors,
as it is well seen by those that practice; for they will help them with
repression and restrictives; but that is not the way, if we shall believe Galen,
who says, Fluxus fluxum curat, which is most true: For many hundreds have been
cured of the flux by giving them Aromatico Leonardo, and three or four doses of
his Syrupo Solutivo.

But the Dissenteria or flux is cured with Electuario Angelica Leonardo, and
then every day after dinner, stand in a bath of water of the sea, cold, two
hours at least. This helps with much ease, and in a short time. But use it as a
secret.

144 Another for the bloody Flux.
Distill Frogs as you do herbs or flowers; or any thing else; but you must put
nothing to them but the frogs. Take two or three spoonsuls of this water in any
thing you will drink, and you shall find present case.

145 A Medicine to cure the biting of all venomous beasts.
As soon as the party feels himself bitten with any venomous beast, or as
soon after as may be, take green leaves of a fig tree, and press the milk of
them three or four times into the wound: And for this serves mustardseed
mingled with vinegar.

146 An approved Medicine for the Gout in the feet.
Take an Ox his paunch new killed, and warm out of the belly, about the latter
end of May or beginning of June, make two holes therein, and put in your feet,
and lay store of warm clothes about it, to keep it warm so long as can be: use
this for three or four days together, for three weeks or a month, whether you
have the fit or pain of the Gout at that time or no, so you have had it at any
time before. This has cured diverse persons, that they have never been troubled
with it again.

147 A pultesse for the Gout.
Take new milk, white bread grated, and an handful of red Rose leaves; boil
them together to the thickness of a pulcesse; then spread them on a linen
cloth, and apply them to the place grieved.

148 How to cure all kinds of Gout.
The Gout, of what kind soever, whether hot or cold, or of any other
temperature, proceeds of one only cause, although they work diverse effects,
which come through the complexions of those that have it: As for example, In
fat men, it comes always with inflammation and redness, and great pain: In
lean persons it comes always with pains, but with less inflammation: In
choleric and melancholic persons it comes with tumors, and that is nodosa.
The cause of this infirmity is an evil quality engendered in the stomach, in
the liver, and in the blood: and the cure thereof is to ease the stomach of
that evil, to purge the liver and the blood, and to mitigate the pain: All
which thou may do with these three Remedies followin; viz. by Pillole
Magistrale Leonardo, by the Unction for the Gout, and by the Quinta Essentia
solutivo: The Pills discharge the stomach, the Quinta Essentia solutivo purges
the Liver and the Blood, and the Unction takes away the pain: for if you
remedy the Cause, which is only one, the Effect will cease.

The manner of using these is this: When you feel the pain begin to come, take
two Doses of those Pills in the morning fasting, one day after another; or if
you will, rest a day or two, according to your strength. That being done, take
every morning two drachms of the foresaid Quinta Essentia solutivo in half a
porringer full of broth made with Veal, and a little sugar; and this you must
take five hours before meat; and keep no straight diet, but eat reasonably.
And every night after Supper anoint the grief with the foreiaid Unction for
the Gout. And thus, by the help of God, and the virtue of these medicines, the
Oout shall be cured.

149 An approved Medicine for the Green-sicknesse.
Take a quart of Claret wine, one pound of Currants, an handful of young
Rosemary crops, and half an ounce of Mace; seethe these to a pint, and let the
patient drink thereof three spoonfuls at a time, morning and evening, and eat
some of the Currants also after.

150 The Green salve, which closes up Sores, being well drawn.
Take half a pound of Wax, one pound of May-butter, set it on the fire and boil
it: then take an handful of Plantane, half an handful of Ribwort, Brooklime
and Smallage, of each as much; Valerian two handfuls, Organie, Tutsaine and
three-leaved Grass, of each an handful, ground Ivy half an handful,
Elder-flowers while they be green, an handful; cut them small and sees them all
together in the Wax and butter til they be ready to strain, then strain them,
and keep the Salve either in gallipots, or in a round Roll, rolled up in
Parchment.

151 To cleanse the Head, and take the Ach away.
Chaw the root of Pellitory of Spain often in thy mouth.

152 Harts-horu Jelly.
Take two ounces of Harts-borne, filed (not scraped) very fine, steep it in a
quart of fair water, and let it stand so all night upon hot embers, stirring
it when you go to bed, and covering it: In the morning put four pints of water
more to it, then boil it a good space on the fire, till it will jellie, and when
the liquor is almost three quarters boiled in, then strain it, and put to it a
little Sugar, and as much juice of Lemmons as will make it sharp, and a little
Ambergreece: Then let it stand and cool, and so put it up for your use. It is
Excellent good for those that are brought low with burning Agues, giving them
three or four spoonfuls fasting, morning and evening, and about nine in the
forenoone, and three in the afternoon.

154 To make a Potion that is good against all Infirmities.
This following Potion destroys all the evil qualities in our bodies,
comfort Nature, helps Digestion, provokes Urine, and loses the Body:
which things are most comfortable to the body. The order of making it is thus;

Take ten ounces of the seeds of Quinces, the pills of Citrons six ounces, Balm,
Nettles, of each four ounces; beat all these grossly, and infuse them in twelve
pound of strong white wine, and there let it remain six days; then distill it
with six ounces of honey, and fifteen ounces of sugar, until you have received
two pound of water; then take it from the fire and let it cool, and strain it
by a filter; and then put therein the first water, and eight grains of Musk
dissolved with about two ounces of Rosewater; and then for every pound of the
said Water, put thereunto one scruple of the oil of Vitriol, and incorporate
them well together; then keep it in a Glass close stopped, that it take no
air: And of this you may take one ounce in the morning (cold) and fast
thereon: for whosoever they be that shall use this in their health, shall
seldom be sick, but shall live in much health.

For into this Composition there enters the seeds of Quinces, which resolve
the evil quality of the stomach, and make the heart merry: the Pomecitron pills
preserve and help digestion; the Balm purifieth the blood, he aleth the Liver,
causes good digestion, and comfort the heart: The nettles warm, provoke
urine, mundifie the reins, and resolve the malignity of the sinnews. The Wine
comfort nature, strengthens the head, and sustaineth the strength. The
Musk is warm by nature, and resolves the windiness, and purges the blood:
The oil of vitrioll heals all the Scoriationes of the mouth, the breast and
stomach, and preserves the body from all corruption. So by this you may see of
what importance this Composition is, through the virtue of the Simples that are
therein. So to conclude, I say, this is one of the best Compositions that can
be made, because of its nature: It lets alteration in our bodies, and
helps against all diseases and infirmities, and prolongeth life.

155 An exceeding good remedy against the yellow Jaundice.
Take one handful of red nettle-tops, Plantane and Saffron, and boil them well
in a pint of Ale, then strain it, and drink thereof for four or five days
together, and you shall find help.

156 An excellent receipt to destroy any Impostume.
Take of the roots of Flower-de-luces, and roots of Lillies, of each a like
quantity; stamp them together, and put therein a quart of honey: boil them all
together either in wine or Ale: and when they are well boiled, then take the
liquor thereof and strain it through a fine linen cloth; and when occasion
serves, let the Patient drink two or three spoonfuls at a time, especially in
the morning and evening, first an last, and this will speedily cure it.

157 To make an issue.
Take Rice flowers and Mustard seed beaten to powder, and with water make a
little paste, and lay a ring upon the place made of a rush, and apply it.

158 A medicine for the Itch of the body.
Take sweet butter, unwrought wax, vinegar, Brimstone, a little Rosewater, red
Cloves whole; boil them together till they be like a salve, then anoint the
flesh three sundry nights by the fire therewith, and no more.

159 For kibed heels.
Take a Turnep, make a hole in the top of it, take out some of the pith, infuse
into, that hole oil of Roses, then stop close the hole, roast the Turnep under
the embers, when it is soft, apply it plaster wise warm to the Kibe; bind it
fast.

159 Of Waxing Kernels, called by some Scrophulae, their cure.
These kernels are commonly in the throats of young children, being caused by
superfluous melancholy humors corrupted, and are a kind of Ulcers, very hard
to be helped, and evil to endure; for when they are broke they cause excessive
pain, in that, great abund ance of humors runs thereunto; and they are so
hot and corrupt, that outward medicines alone will never help them, because they
proceed from an inward cause. Therefore if thou will help them, remove the
cause first.

First then give them the Syrup against melancholy humors, which you shall
find among the syrups in the Experiments of Conserving and Candying: then give
them a dose of Aromatico fasting, which will evacuate the stomach of choler
and phlegm, and dry up those humors that run to the sores. The Medicines to be
applied are two; the first is Costick, which will mortify it in 24 hours, and
take away the corruption: but the Askar must not be taken away till it fall out
it self. The other medicine to be applied to the sore is the black Cerot of
Godfredo de Medic. which is also written in Galen. Thus it will be cured in a
short time, as has been proved.

160 A special receipt to destroy Lice.
Take Frankincense, and beat it into fine powder, and a good quantity of Bores
grease: boil them together in an earthen pan, and when it is boiled anoint
therewith the place where the lice are, and you shall be suddenly rid of them.
Or take stavesacre beaten to powder, searced, and mingled with soap and Tobacco
ashes, and anoint often therewith, it will speedily destroy them.

161 How to cure the Measels.
In the curing of this disease, it being only necessary to defend the heart,
and preserve the stomach from corruption and putrefaction, you shall use this
receipt. Take Julep of Violets two cunces, Rose water four ounces, Oil of
Vitriol four grains, mix them, and let it be drunk cold. This is a most rare
medicine.

162 To cure the disease of the Mother.
Take six or seven drops of the spirit of Castoreum, in the beginning of the
fit, in two or three spoonfuls of posset Ale, applying a plaster of Gavanum to
the Navel.

163 For the dead Palsy.
Anoint the neck pit often with Oleum Benedictum, and that will restore the
speech; anoint also the place affected oftentimes with mustard against the
fire, and after that bath it with wine, and bath it again morning and evening
(if the party be young) with Aqua vita; if old, take a spoonful of Aqua vitae,
and half a spoonful of Sage-water distilled, and bath it therewith; drink also
every morning and night as much treacle as four Pease in some stale Ale.

164 A plaster for a Bile or Push.
Take a yolke of an egg, and half a spoonful of English honey, mix them
together with fine Wheat Flour, and making it to a Plaster, apply it warm to
the place grieved.

165 A very good Plaster to heal and dry up a sore, or cut suddenly
Take of Marigold leaves, Porret blades or leaves, and House-leek, of all two
handfuls, beat them all very small in a mortar, and put to them the whites of
two new laid eggs, and beat them very well til they be thoroughly incorporated
with the eggs, and apply this til you be well. Renew it every day.

166 A plaster for the Stomach.
Take of wood of Aloes, Wormwood, Gumarabick, Mastich, Cyprus, Costus, Ginger,
of each half an ounce; Calamus Aromaticus, Olibanum, Aloes, of each three
drams; Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Spikenard, Nutmegs, Gallia Moschata,
Schaenanthis, of each one dram and a half; with Rob of Quinces make it into an
emplaister: and when you have spread it upon a cloth, persume it with wood of
Aloes, and apply it to your stomach.

167 A Preservative against the Pestilence when it is first suspected.
Take a halfpenny weight of English Saffron, two penny weight of Bole
Armanack, one penny weight of Mace, made all in fine powder, and of Treacle the
quantity of a hasell nut, put them all in small Ale lukewarm, mix it well with
the Ale, and let the party drink it, and lie down on a bed and lay upon him a
temperate quantity of clothes, and so let him sweat two hours.

168 An approved good drink for the Pestilence.
Take six spoonfuls of Dragon water, two good spoonfuls of wine vinegar, two
penny weight of English Saffron, and as much treacle of Jane as a little
Walnut, resolve all these the other upon the fire, and let the Patient drink it
blood-warme, within twenty hours (or sooner) that he is sick; and let him
neither eat nor drink six hours after, but lie so warm in his bed, that he
may sweat. This expels the disease from the heart: and if he be disposed to
a sore, it will straightwaies appear; which you shall draw out with a plaster
of Flos Unguentorum.

169 A medicine for the Plague.
Take of Setwal grated, one root, of Jane treacle two spoonfuls, of Wine
vinegar three spoonfuls, make all these more then lukewarm steep them well
together, and drink them off at once: Sweat after this six or seven hours, and
it will bring forth the plague sore. To break which, lay a roasted Onion; also
sees a white Lilly root in Milk til it be as thick as a Pultis, and lay it to
the same: If these fail, lance the sore, and so draw and heal it with salves
for Botches or Boils.

170 Signs of death in the Plague.
Take a live Frog, and lay the belly of it next the sore; if the Patient will
escape, the Frog will burst in a quarter of an hour; then lay on another; and
this you shall do til more do burst; for they draw forth the venom. If none
of the frogs do burst, the party will not escape. This has been frequently
proved. Some say a dried toad will do it better.

171 A water to drive out any infection.
Take Dragons, Angelica, Rue, Wormwood, of each a handful, chop them pretty
small, and steep them in a quart of White Wind twenty four hours: then distill
them in a Still, and reserve the water in a glass close stopped. Give to the
sick Patient, six or seven spoonfuls hereof at a time fasting, and let him fast
an hour and an half after, and keep himself very warm in his bed or otherwise.

172 A Medicine for a Plurisie, Stitch or VVind offending in any part of the
Body.
Gather the young shoots of Oak after the fall of a Wood, and picking out the
tenderest and softest of them, especially those which look reddest, bind them
up together in a Wet paper, and roast them in hot Embers as you do a Warden,
whereby they will dry to a powder: of which powder let the patient take a
spoonful in a little Posset Ale, or Beer warmed, in the morning, fasting after
it two hours or more, if he be able, doing the like about three afternoon, and
two hours after supper, four or five days together: which thus done in the
beginning of the disease, is by often experiments found to cure such windy
pains in the side, stomach, or other parts of the body. You may dry them also
in a dish, in an oven, after the bread is drawn; you shall do well to gather
enough of them in the spring, and make good store of the powder then, to keep
for all the year following.

173 A great and sore Plurisie cured by M. R.
A certain man of 24 years old, was vexed with a most grievous Plurisie, with a
pricking, shooting and a cough, with a continual fever and inflammation of the
tongue; First there was good store of blood taken from the liver vein on that
side where the pain was; then were these syrups (that do decoct and purge)
ministered unto him. Take Syrupi de Liquoritia, de Hysopo, acetosae ana, one
ounce; Oximelitis squilitici, acet. squilit. ana, three drachms, make thereof a
loch. Of this he licked in the morning with a liquorice stick, which caused him
to spit easily, and took away the heat or burning of the tongue, being used
with this direction following; of French barley three ounces, Carduus
Benedictus M. 1. Roses, Violets, ana. P. 1. Liquorice scraped three drams,
three figs, Raisins a pound and a half, Sugar Candy two ounces: Boil them in
sixteen pound of water till two pound be wasted, and so to drink them cold.
His diet was also light and thin, as broth, and drink, etc.

174 To take away Pock holes, or any spots in the face.
Wet a fine cloth in white Rosewater, and set it all night to freeze, and then
lay it upon your face till it be dry: also take three Poppies, the redest you
can get, and quarter them, taking out the garbage; then still them in a quart
of new milk of a red Cow, and with the water thereof wash your face.

175 A Pultis to stay fluxes proceeding from a cold cause, to be applied to the
Belly.
Take: oasts of Bread, steeped in vinegar six ounces, beat it in a mortar, and
add Mace, Mastick, Myrtle Berries, stones of Raisins, Galany, Cloves, flowers
of Pomegranates, of each one ounce; oil of Wormwood, and Mints, of each two
ounces. Make a Cataplasm.

176 For the heat of the Back.
Take oil of Roses six ounces and an half, and put it to a little wax, and
four drops of vinegar, and anoint the Back therewith.

177 Astma, or the Ptisick, and its cure.
This disease is cured four manner of ways: First by letting blood under the
tongue, cutting those veins overtwhart, and sucking them as much as may be;
which evacuates and opens the opilation of blood; and eases the lungs of all
the offending matter. Secondly, By taking a dose of Aromatico Leonardo, which
evacuateth the stomach of all evil qualities that offend the lungs. Thirdly, By
eating every morning for a month together, one ounce of Electuario de Althea.
Fourthly, By anointing the stomach every night with Magno liquore. For
speeding the cure, take every ten days a dose of Electuario Angelica Leonardo;
and keep a sober diet, refraining Fish, Pork, Slimie things, spice, baked
meats, cheese, and such like, which nourish grossly, and infect the blood.

178 A very good Poultesse for any Member swelled and inflamed, and not broken,
to take away the pain.
Take three pints of new milk, of stale Manchet crummes two handfuls, or so
much as shall make the milk somewhat thick, add thereto two handfuls of dried
red Rose leaves, and three ounces of Oil of Roses; boil all these together to
the thickness of a Poultesse, then let it stand and cool, and while it
cools, take a spoonful of oil of Roses, and with a warm hand, rub the place
grieved till the oil be dried in, and then lay the Poultesse as warm as you may
endure it to the part inflamed: do this morning and evening for three or four
days, as you shall see cause.

179 An especial medicine for all manner of poison.
Take Hempseed, dry it very well, and get off the Husks, and beat the Hempseed
into fine powder; take Mints also, dry them and make them into powder: Boil a
spoonful of either of these in half a pint of Goats-milk, a pretty while, then
put the Milk into a cup to cool, and put into it a spooneful of Treacle, and
stir them together til it be cool enough; then drink it in the morning fasting,
and eat nothing till noone, or at least in two hours; do the like at night,
and use it so three days, and it will kill and overcome any poison.

181 A very gentle purge. Gerard page 1115.
Take Borage, Buglosse, Balm and Fumitory of each three drachms, Seen of
Alexandria well prepared and powdered two ounces, strew the powder upon the
herbs, and distill them, reserving the water to purge with, for such as cannot
endure strong purges, it being taken in white wine, Sugar, or some other dainty
ways, not offending the taste: you may, according to the nature of the disease
add Agarick, Mirabolanes etc. If Seen be infused in whay, and then boiled a
little, it is very good Physic for melancholy, purging the Brain, Heart,
Liver, Lungs, and Milt, it causes a man to look young, breeds mirth,
cleereth the sight, and strengthens the hearing, it is very good against old
Agues, and all diseases caused by melancholy.

182 The purge for a Plurisie, Stitch, or Wind: It may be given any sound man
or woman, at any time, in temperate weather, not keeping their Chambers for it
Take a quart of running water, two handfuls of Currants well picked, Seen,
Liquorice, and Annis seeds, of each half an ounce, and the quantity of two
Races of Ginger sliced: boil all these together til the liquor come to a pint,
then let it run through a Colender, and drink it three mornings equally, being
warmed, taking only an hour or two after it, a little thin broth.

183 Another Purge.
Take half an ounce of Seen, two handfuls of Annis-seeds, as much Fennel
seeds, both, bruised, a stick or two of Liquorice scraped, sliced and bruised,
put them into a pint of Beer boil them, scumme them well, and let them seethe
til there be but a pretty draught left to drink at one time; then take an ounce
and a half of Manna, dissolve it in three or four spoonfuls of the hot liquor,
and strain it through a thin cloth into the rest: then straining the liquor
through a Colender from the other matters, put into it four spoonfuls of syrup
of Roses, and drink it while it is warm, taking a little thin broth after it.

184 The purge of Assarabacha, which the Lady A.D. used to rectify her stomach
any way offended.
Take the weight of eight pence of Assarabacha leaves; stamp them and strain
out the juice of them with a little fair water or warm broth, and mixing it
with a little soft English honey, warm it and drink it fasting; taking a little
warm posset drink after it; and now and then a little more, at times between
the Vomits.

185 The Apothicaries Gascon's powder, with its use.
Take of Pearls, white Amber, Hartshorn, eyes of Crabs, and white Corals of
each half an ounce; of black thighs of Crabs calcined two ounces; to every
ounce of this powder, put a dram of Oriental Bezoar: reduce them all into
very fine powder, and searce them, and with Hartshorn jelly, with a little
Saffron put therein, make it up into a Paste; and make therewith Lozanges or
Trochises for your use.

You must get your crabs for this powder, about May or in September; take them
before they are boiled: When you have made these, set them neither by the sire,
nor in the Sun, but in a dry air, till they grow hard. The dose is ten or
twelve grains.

186 A powder for a Rupture.
Take Shephards purse, and Doves foot, of each a like quantity, dry them until
they rub to a powder, and drink thereof half a spoonful in half a pint of
broth.

187 To kill the Ring-worme, and the heat thereof.
Take a quart of white wind Vinegar, boil therein of Woodbine leaves, Sage and
Plantane of each one handful, of white Coperas one pound, of Alum as much as an
egg: when it is boiled to half a pint, strain out the liquor, and therewith
wash the sore as hard as you can suffer it.

188 Rubarb and its virtues.
The herb called in the Italian tongue Lappacia Maggiore, or Rombice domestice,
is a kind of Rubarb, which among the learned Herba^lists is termed by the name
of Rha recentiorum, whereof one dram when it is new will loose the body,
evacuate choler, as the Rhabarbarum does. It is very good against opilations,
it purges the blood, and takes away scabs.

You shall have most precious medicines thereof, if you mix the green root with
honey, Cinnamon, Saffron, Ginger, and the powder of Roses. If you roast the root
in the embers, and mix it with condited sugar, it breaks waxing kernels
(called Scrophulae) and mundifies them, and heals them in a short time. Some
do mix it with the gum called Ammoniacum, an so do bring it into the form of
an Unguent, and apply it to the parts affected with Scrophulae.

189 An approved good medicine for running of the Reins.
Make Almond milk of Plantane water, or else boil plantane in the liquor
whereof you make your Almond milk; take a quart of it, and put thereto three
spoonefuls of Lentine Farine, and three spoonefuls of Cinnamon water: take of
this at six in the morning a good draught, two hours before dinner another, at
four of the clock afternoon a third, and two hours after supper a fourth: and
twice or thrice between meals eat a spoonful of conserve of red Roses at a time.

190 A medicine for burning or Scalding.
Take Maidenwort, stamp it, and seethe it in fresh butter, and therewith
anoint the place grieved presently.

191 To take away the heat of a burn, or out of a scald.
Roft eggs as hard as a stone, then take out the yolks of them; then take a
frying pan, and put in the yolks of the hard eggs, and so let it fry til it
come to an oil, then strain it, and anoint the burn with it; then take a
bladder and anoint it with saller oil, and lay it to the burn.

192 For one burned with Gunpowder or otherwise.
Take one handful of Groundsel, twelve heads of house-leek, one pint of goose
dung, as much chicken dung, of the newest that can be gotten; stamp the herbs
as small as you can, then put the dung into a Mottar, temper them together with
a pottle of Bores grease, labor them together half an hour, and strain it
through a canvas bag with a cleft stick into an earthen pan, and use it when
need requires: It will last two years.

193 For the Scal or Scabbinesse of the head.
Take of red Sage, Woodbine leaves, and ground Ivy a like quantity, in all so
much as a good handful; boil them in a pint of Hogs grease, a quarter of an
hour, then strain the medicine from the herbs into a galli-pot, and therewith
daily anoint the head. Probatum.

194 An approved receipt for a scald head.
Take a candle, and let it drop upon it as hot as you can, in so doing it will
scale off; then take the stale of a cow, and the furring of a whole chamberpot,
boil these together and wash the place, and it will straight way cure it.

195 To heal the white scal.
This noisome malady is perfectly cured by purging the patient with Aromatico
Lconardo; and annoi^^ing his head with his Oleum Philosophorum, or his
artificial Balsum, or his Oleum Benedictum.

196 The black Salve.
Take one pound of red lead, finely ground, of oil of Roses one pound and a
half, of Be wax half a pound, of white wine vinegar six ounces, boil them
altogether, and make a plaster of it.

197 A Salve for ranklings, where the skin is rubbed off.
Take one pound of May-Butter, clarify it, and take the purest of it, put
thereto three ounces of English Wax, two ounces of Rosin, clarified by
themselves, boil them all together, cool it and keep it in a Cake for your
use. This is also a very good Lipsalve.

198 A Barley Cream to procure sleep: or Almond milk.
Take a good handful of French Barley, wash it clean in warm water, and boil
it in a quart of fair water to the half, then put out the water from the Barley,
and put the Barley into a pottle of new clean water, with a Parsley and a Fennel
root clean washed and picked, with Borage, Buglosse, Violet leaves and Lettice,
of each one handful: boil them with the Barley till more then half be consumed;
then strain out the liquor, and take of blanched Almonds a handful, of the
seeds of Melons, Cucumbers, Citruls and Gourds husked, of each half a quarter
of an ounce; beat these seeds and the Almonds together in a stone Mortar, with
so much Sugar and Rose water as is fit, and strain them through a clean cloth
into the liquor, and drink thereof at night going to bed, and in the night. If
this does not sufficiently provoke sleep, then make some more of the same
liquor, and boil in the same the heads, or a little of white Poppie.

199 An outward medicine for the same.
Take red Rose-leaves or Cakes, and fine white bread crummes, mix them well
together, and wet them thoroughly with red Rosewater and Vinegar, and woman's
Milk if you can get it: then taking off the cold of it, lay it to the Temples
of the head.

200 A Receipt for a backward business.
Take a pint of Milk, and make a clear posset with either Ale or Beer, and
take off the curd very clean; then take an handful of Violet leaves, a handful
of Mallow leaves (and the flowers if you will) and wash them; also take a
handful of Damask rose leaves, either dried or otherwise, and a good spoonful
of Annisseeds rubbed from their dust, and then bruised in a mortar, and so boil
all together in the posset drink, til it come to somewhat less then a pint:
then take it off from the fire, and put into it three spoonfuls of red Sugar,
then strain it out, and put into it 3 spoonfuls of the oil of Camomile flowers:
and if you have none of that oil, then take as much Butter as two walnuts; also
take the yolks of two new laid eggs, and beat them; then mingle all well
together with a spoone, stirring it thoroughly, and then put it up into the
bladder, and so take it, but not too hot. Though red Sugar be best and most
usual for Glisters, yet if you have none of that, as much course powder Sugar
will do it very well.

201 A Glister to open and loosen the Body being bound, which may safely be
ministered to any man or woman.
Take Mallows and Mercury unwashed, of each two handfuls, half a handful of
barley clean rubbed and washed: boil them in a pottle of running water to a
quart, then strain out the water and put it in a skillet, and put to it three
spoonfuls of sallet oil, two spoonfuls of honey and a little salt: then make it
lukewarm, and so minister it.

202 A cooling Glister in hot diseases.
Take Mallows, Violets, Lettice, of each a good handful, of the four greater
cold seeds, of each half an ounce; twenty Pruins, Violet and Buglosse flowers,
of each a small handful; boil them to a pint, and put in kitchen sugar one
ounce, and oil of Violets three ounces. Or take barley and Linseed of each two
ounces; boil them, and to one pound put an ounce and half of Sugar, one yolk
of an egg, common oil three ounces, salt one handful; take milk warmed one
pound, sugar and syrup of Violets, of each two ounces. Make a Glister to cool.

203 A medicine that has healed old sores upon the Legs, that have run so
long, that the Bones have been seen.
Take a quantity of good sweet Cream, and as much brimstone beaten in fine
powder as will make it thick like paste, then take so much sweet butter as will
work it into the form of an ointment, and herewith anoint the place grieved
twice a day.

204 Of the hidden secrets of Frankincense
The Pine is a tree which by nature is uncorruptible, and the gum that runs
from it is of great virtue and strength, because it preserves those things
wherein it is put; and when his elements are separated out of that gum, the
phisician may work strange things therewith against most part of infirmities
that happen to man's body, if he apply them where they are convenient: for the
water being drunk, helps wind in the stomach. Also it helps the white scal,
and all such like scabs, if they be washed therewith morning and evening. It
dries up Ulcers; also it is of mavelous virtue against chilblains and kibed
heels, and chaps, and such like, in the hands or feet, that come through cold;
being used thus: First perfume the parts that are sore over the fume of hot
water, so that they may sweat, then dry them and wash them with the aforesaid
water, and anoint them with the oil, and put on a pair of gloves or such like,
and in very short time they shall be whole. The air helps much in wounds in
any part of the body, because it preserves the flesh from putrefaction, and
keeps it from alteration, and takes away the pain, and heals the sore:
Also it preserves the face, if it be anointed therewith. Moreover it is
mavelous in old diseases inwardly, if ye give thereof every morning a dram,
with half an ounce of Vegitabile Syrupo Leonardo. The fire cures sores and
such like, and the earth remains in his state. Ye shall understand, that
these are great secrets of importance which I have revealed of this Gum, and
happy shall he be that uses them in the time of need. Now the order to make
this oil is thus; Take as much Frankincense as thou will, and put it into a
Retort of glass, with the fourth part of common ashes, and set it to distill,
and give it first a small fire until the oil change color; then presently
change the Receiver, and augment the fire until all the substance be come out.
Ye shall understand, that this oil is best fresh; for when it is old, it will
wax thick, and cannot pierce so well.

204 The secrets of Mercury, or Quicksilver.
Quicksilver is a liquid Mineral, and volatile, which the Alchymists call
Sulpher volatilis, and will accompany with all other metals; but with small fire
they may be separated again, and will fly away in fume: and for that cause, the
Philosophers call it Servus fugitivus, as a man would say; it can hold
friendship with none; but so soon as he has done his service, he flies away,
as it is seen by Goldsmiths that gild plate: for when they have laid him on
with the gold, they put it to the fire, and he flies away; and the like it
would do when any man does occupy him in any sort of infirmity. And the order
to calcine it is this,

Take a long pot of stone that is very well glazed, with the neck a foot and
half long, and that has a very narrow mouth, as is possible, and put therein
two or three pound of Quicksilver, then set the same pot in a sallet of Iron,
and lute them close together, and set it upon a furnace, and give them fire
according to art, until the Quicksilver remain calcined; having special care
that your head and receiver be very well luted, lest you lose some part of the
Quick silver; and thus in eight days it shall be finished, which shall be apt
for solution. Also this calcination serves to diverse and sundry medicines; it
mortifieth corrosive Ulcers without any pain. The solution is made in this
order.

Take the said Calx, and put it into a long neck'd glass, and put thereon
distilled vinegar, and set in warm sand four and twenty hours, and then give
it one walm, and when it has boiled, pour out the vinegar, and then if there
remain and feces in the bottom, put in fresh vinegar, and do as thou did
before; and this thou shall do so often, till it be dissolved into water; and
when all is dissolved, evaporate away the vinegar, that there remain but little
in the bottom, then put thereto water of honey made by distillation, and so the
solution of Mercury shall be finished, which is miraculous in many infirmities.
It serves against the cough, Catarrhe, and for those that have their stomachs
putrified with the Pox, using it with other syrups and potions. It helps
those whose milt is indurated; and also for those that have any kind of Fistula
in any part of the body: It is also good for diverse other things which I will
not insert here, because others should endeavor too, by exercise to find out
other secrets thereof as I have done.

205 To make the representation of the whole world in a glass
Take of the purest salt Nitre as much as you please, of Tin half so much, mix
them together, and calcine them hermetically; then put them into a Retort, to
which annex a glass receiver, and lute them well together: let leaves of gold
be put into the bottom thereof; then put fire to the retort, until vapors
arise that will cleave to the gold: augment the fire till no more fumes ascend;
then take away the Receiver, and close it hermetically, and make a lamp fire
under it, and you will see presented in it the Sun, Moon, Stars, Fountains,
Flowers, Trees, Fruits, and indeed, even all things; which is a glorious sight
to behold.

206 In a fit of the stone, when the water stops.
Take the fresh shells of Snailes, the newest will look of a redish color, and
are best: take out the Snails, and dry the shells with a moderate heat, in an
Oven after the bread is drawn: Likewise take Bees and dry them in the same
manner, and beat them severally into powder; then take twice so much of the
Bees powder as of the Snails, and mix them well together; keep it close covered
in a glaffe, and when you use it, take as much of this powder as will lie upon
a six pence, and put it into a quarter of a pint of the distilled water of Bean
flowers, and drink it fasting, or upon an empty stomach, and neither eat nor
drink for two or three hours after. This will both cause the urine to come away,
and bring the gravel or stone away with it, and has done very much good.

207 A Medicine for the Stone.
Pellitory of the wall, Smallage, Holioaks, Mallows, Tansie and Saxifrage, of
each take an handful; chop them small, and quile them in a little linen bag:
then take three pints of Cream, half a pint of malmsie, a quarter of a pint of
running water, and set them on the fire; and when it does seethe, then put the
bag of herbs into the pot, and when the bag is thoroughly hot, wring it between
two trenchers over the pot to save the liquor: then lay the bag to the grief as
hot as you can suffer it; and as soon as it cools, make it hot again in the
same liquor, and so apply it to the grief.

108 Another very good medicine for the Stone.
Make a posset of a quart of Rhenish wine, a pint of Ale, and a pint of milk;
then take away the Curd, and put into the drink two handfuls of Sorrel, one
handful of Burnet, and half a handful of Baulm: boil them together a good
while, but not too long, lest the drink be too unpleasant: then take of the
drink a quarter of a pint, or rather half a pint at once, at morning and to
bedward, putting therein first two or three spoonfuls of juice of Lemmons. This
is an excellent medicine for the Stone in the Kidneys, to dissolve and bring it
away. It is very good in these diseases of the Stone to use Burnet often in
your drink at meals; and often to steep it in over night, and in the morning
put in three or four spoonfuls of juice of Lemmons, and to drink thereof a good
draught every morning a week together, about the Full Moon, three days before,
and three days after.

209 To dissolve the Stone, which is one of the Physicians greatest secrets.
Take a peck of green Bean Cods, well cleaved and without dew or rain, and two
good handfuls of Saxifrage, lay the same into a still, one row of Bean Cods,
another of Saxifrage, and so distill one quart of water after this manner; and
then distill another proportion of Bean Cods alone, and use to drink of these
two waters. If the patient be most troubled with heat of the reins, then it is
good to use the Bean Cod water stilled alone more often, and the other upon
coming down of the sharp gravel or stone.

210 A Stove to sweat in.
I know that many Gentlewomen, as well for clearing of their skin, as cleansing
of their bodies, do now and then delight to sweat, For which purpose I have set
down this manner following, as the best that I ever observed. Put into a brass
pot of some good content, such proportion of sweet herbs, and of such kind, as
shall be most proper for your infirmity, with some reasonable quantity of
water; close the same with a cover fit for it, and well luted with paste made of
flower, and whites of eggs. At some part of the cover you must let in a leaden
pipe, (the entrance whereof must also be well luted;) this pipe must be conveyed
through the side of the chimny where the pot stands, in a thick holow stake
of a bathing tub, crossed with hoops in the top, according to the usual manner,
which you may cover with a sheet at your pleasure. Now the steam of the pot
passing through the pipe under the false bottom of the bathing tub, (which must
be bored full of big holes) will breath so sweet and warm a vapor upon your
body, as that (receiving air by holding your head without the tub, as you sit
therein) you shall sweat most temperately, and continue the same without
fainting. And this is performed with a small Charcole fire maintained under the
pot for this purpose. Note, that the room should be close wherein you place
your bathing tub, lest any sudden cold should happen to offend you whilst your
body is made open and porous to the air.

211 Against surfeiting and indigestion.
Take the bottom of a Wheaten loaf, and toast it at the fire til it be very
brown and hard; then take a good quantity of Aqua vitae, and put upon the same
so toasted, and put it in a single linen cloth, and lay it at the breast of the
patient all night, and with the help of God he shall recover, and shall vomit
or purge soon after.

212 To make a tooth fall out of it self.
Take wheat flower and mix it with the milk of an herb called Spurge, make
thereof a paste, and fill the hole of the tooth therewith, and leave it there,
changing it every two hours, and the tooth will fall out.

213 To take away the cause of the pain in the Teeth.
Wash the mouth two or three days together in the morning every month with
white wine, wherein the root of Spurge has been sodden, and you shall never
have pain in your Teeth.

214 For a hollow Tooth.
Take two or three dops of Aqua fortis, and dip a little lint therein, and stop
the hollow place therewith, and for an hour or thereabouts it will put you to
some pain; but in a very short space after it will give you ease. Use this twice
or thrice, and it will quite expel the pain for ever after, without perishing
the tooth at all.

215 For the Rheum in the Gummes and Teeth.
Boil Rosemary in fair water, with sometenne or twelve Cloves slit; and when
it is boiled, take as much Clarret wine as there is water left, and mingle,
with it; and make it boil but a little again, then strain it into to some
glass, and wash your mouth therewith morning and evening; this will take away
the Rheum in short time. And if you boil a little Mastick therewith, it is the
better.

216 Tobacco, its virtues and uses
Take of the green herb and root three pound and an half, stamp it in a
mortar with a little salt, then put it in a glass with six ounces of the
spirit of wine, and set it a whole month in horse dung to putrify; then distill
it in Balneo til all the substance be come out; and put as much Oleum sulphuris
into it as will make it tart; then keep it close from air. A spooneful every
morning will help against the Fever in a short time. It speedily cures Ulcers
or Scabs, by drinking a spooneful every morning, and washing the sores
therewith.

217 A Diet for the Patient that has Vloers or wounds that will hardly be cured
with Ointments, Salves, or Plasters.
Take one pound of Guaicum, boil it in three pottles of Ale, with a soft fire,
to the consuming of two parts: but if it be where you may have wild Whey, or
Cheese Whay, they are better: let the Patient drink of this morning and evening
half a pint at a time, and let him sweat after it two hours. His drink at his
meals must thus be used; put into the same vessel where the former was made, to
the Guaicum that is left, three pottles of Ale, (and not whay) let it boil to
the one half, let him drink thereof at all times, and at his meals, which must
be but one in a day, and that so little, that he may rise hungry: this must be
do five days together: but he must first be purged.

218 To help Ulcers of all sorts.
Seeing Ulcers are of diverse an^d sundry kinds; it is necessary to know of what
kind and quality they are, so that thou may help them in form and order
convenient. And first of the corrosive Ulcers, as of a wound cancrenated, of
Mal di formica, and of other sorts of Ulcers that go creeping on the flesh; the
cure of these is, by applying quickly Caustic to mortify the evil; which thou
shall do thus, Wet a little bumbast in the said Caustic, and therewith wash
all the sore, and then leave it so open four and twenty hours without binding
it fast, and when twenty four hours are past, wash the sore with strong vinegar
and water of an equal quantity, with great care that there remain none of the
Caustic in the sore: then lay thereon butter washed with a Colewort leaf,
until the askar or dead flesh fall; then take Cerrot Magistrale, with a little
Precipitate strewed thereon, and then anoint it with Magno liquore, and lay it
upon the sore; for this Cerot helps all manner of corrosive Ulcers, without
any other help; and every plaster will serve three or four days, taking them
off every twenty four hours, and making them clean, and then lay them on again.
As for the filthy Ulcer abovesaid, you shall dress it only with the Unguento
Magno Leonardo, which (without any other help) will heal them quickly: but you
must every four days, touch them with Aquafortis drawn from Precipitate,
which water draws forth the offensive matter, and leaves it purified and
clean. As for all other sorts of Ulcers, Magno Liquore Leonardo, with Balm
artificial, oil of Wax, and Turpentine, the black Cerot of Godfredo di Medio.
and the beforesaid Cerot Magistrale with Precipitate, are able to help, be
they never so evil.

219 An approved Remedy to stay Vomiting, by M. R.
A man of thirty years old was troubled a long time with sore vomiting,
throwing up presently whatsoever he eat or drank; and was relieved by this
receipt. Take of Malmsey six ounces, oil of Vitriol six drops or more; mix them
together, and take thereof every morning fasting an ounce or thereabout, and in
short time it will stay the vomit.

220 A Receipt for to make Vomits.
Take of the glass of Antimony pounded as small as may be, five grains; infuse
the same all night in four ounces of white wine, shaking it diverse times: early
in the morning pour out all the clear part, whereunto add one ounce of Oximel
Julinizans: so take it, drinking after every vomit a draught of posset-ale.

Or take of Mercurius vitae five grains in a spoonful of white wine. Or take
two ounces of Crocus Metallorum; Or take warm warer wherein a Raddish root has
been boiled, adding to it a little sallet oil; also a little Oximel of the
squil may be added. This vomit is taken specially for the weakness of the
stomach, and for four or five days together, it is taken for expelling the
phlegmatic and malign humors.

221 To kill Warts, an approved Medicine.
Take a Raddish root, scrape off the outer side of it, and rub it all over with
salt, then see it, (thus dressed) upright in a Sawcer, or some other small dish,
that you may save the liquor which runs from it: and therewith anoint your
Warts three or four times in a day, (the oftener the better) and in five or six
days they will consume away. Saepe Probatum.

222 For one that cannot make water.
Take the white strings or filmy roots of Primeroses, wash them very clean, and
boil of them half a handful in a pint of Beer or white wine, til half be
consumed; then strain it through a clean cloth, and drink thereof a quarter of a
pint somewhat warm, morning and evening, for three days. and it will purge away
all viscous or obstructious stopping the passage of the water. Probatum.

223 An excellent medicine for a child that cannot make water.
Kill three or four hive Bees, then dry them upon an hot slate: being through
dry, bruise them to small powder, then put the powder into a quart of small ale,
and give it the patient to drink, and he shall have present remedy.

224 For one that pisseth blood.
Take Toutsain, Sanguinary and Parsley, of each one handful, stamp them
together very small, and mix the herbs, juice and altogether with warm Goats
milk, and drink a good draught thereof fasting every morning.

225 To kill the wild fire,
Take Plantaine, Sorrel, Marigold leaves, of each one handful, stamp them and
strain out the juice, and boil it with twice so much vinegar, and put it up in
a glass for your use.

226 How to order a woman with child, before, in, and after her labor.
To preserve the infant, and prevent abortion, take Coriander seed prepared 2
drachms, of the root of Bistort, the shavings of Ivory, and red Coral of each a
dram; of white Amber, Crystal, of each a scruple; Alkerms half a scruple,
Sugar dissolved in four ounces of Rose water; make tables, each of them
weighing a dram. Let the patient take one every other day morning and
evening: between whiles let her sup up a rathe new egg, thickened a little with
Magisterium of Pearl, or fine powder, or red Coral. But if her breasts after
their filling should begin to lessen and fall, it is a sign of future abortion;
to prevent which, let her take root of Bistort, and Corianders, of each two
drachms; of unripened Gales, red Sanders, and Hipocistidos, of each one dram,
Gum Labdanum, Mastick, of each half an ounce; choice Frankincense, Bdelium
(the Gum of a tree in Arabiae) of each two drachms; Coral, Amber, of each one
dram: Powder those which are to be powdered, and with oil of Turpentine and
Wax make two or three Cere-clothes; apply them sometimes to her loins and
sides, and someimes under the Navel. She must avoid all sudden and violent
motions both of the mind and body, as Coughs, sneezeings, Frights; also spices
and strong wines. And thus much before labor.

In labor; to procure ease and speed, take three or four drops of the
distilled oil of Nutmegs in a spoonful of white wine. Or, Take white Dictamne
root, Stones of Dates, Borax, of each two scruples; Cinnamon, Cassia lignea,
Amber, fine pearl, of each one scruple; Saffron half a scruple; make a small
powder, which divide into two equal parts; and let her take one part in a
draught of the water of Lilies or posset Ale made with Rhenish wine; and the
other part let her take about six hours after, if need require.

If she should be subject to sainting or swouning before or after labor, take
now and then a spoonful of this excellent Cordial following: Take Borage water,
Rose water, Strawberry water, and Rhenish wine, of each two ounces; species of
Diamargaricum frigidum one scruple; make a warm infusion for the space of an
hour, then strain it, and add thereunto Manus Christi made with Pearl four
ounces; Syrup of Baum one ounce, Syrup of Gilli-flowers, of each two ounces;
Oriental Bezoar, Unicorns horn, and Ambergreece, of each six grains. Make a
Cordial Julep.

Many times after labor great pains follow women newly delivered, for which
this plain simple remedy is very good: Drink a good draught of beer boiled
with a spoonful of Camomile flowers; and in greater pains let her drink six
ounces of the oil of sweet Almonds fresh drawn.

To dry up milk, a quick and safe remedy is new sponges wet in vinegar (where a
handful of Comminseed boiled is bruised) tied close to the breasts, anointing
them with Unguentum populeum.

To procure store of milk, use posset drink made and boiled with Fennel, and
the sweet seeds of Annis seeds and Fennel. These Remedies are approved to be
safe, sure, and forcible to effect what is propounded.

227 Te bring a woman to a speedy birth.
Take of Piony root dried, as much as half an Almond, beat it to very small
powder, and give it the woman to drink in an Aleberry.

228 For the same.
Take Hysop, Vervine and Betony, of each one handful: stamp them small with some
old Ale, and strain out that Ale and juice, and put as much more ale, as will
make a pretty draught, and let the woman in her labor drink it, and she shall
be speedily delivered.

229 For a dead child in a woman's body.
Take juice of Hysop, temper it in warm water, and give it the woman to drink.

230 A medicine for a woman in travel to make her have Throws.
Take Coral, Amber, Date-stones, Pearl, Piony seeds, Saffron, Commine: beat all
these in powder, and put it into Malmsie, and take Unicorns horn, and put it
into a spoon with a sittle Malmsie, and give it to her; and preently let her
drink a draught of the Malmsie with the powder aforesaid, warming it a little.

231 A medicine for the falling down of the Matrice to the bearing place.
First take chickweed and sees it in an earthen pot; then lay of it upon a
piece of scarlet, as hot as the party may suffer it: Let her take it to the
privy place; and as one plaster cools, so lay on another, and use it.

232 Another to be laid to the Navel, and to the back right against the Navel,
for the same use.
Take an Onion, and roast it very tender, then take of Alysander seeds and
bruise them in a wodden dish, and mingle the onion and bruised seeds together,
and lay it upon a piece of linen cloth; so lay it to the Navel a little warm:
roll that on, and let it lie on four and twenty hours; then change it and take
a new one til it be cured. It avails much, that the midwife hold Musk below
(tied in a little Lawn) to draw down the child.

Take Torchwort, and lay a leaf of it to the crown of a woman's head warm; to
stay other flowers.

233 Immoderate flux menstrual suppressed or stayed.
Take the roots of Orpine and Comfry thin sliced, Clary, of each as much as you
please; boil theme with a Chicken, and with that broth make Almond milk, and to
every handful of Almonds add one scruple of Labdanum; grind them well together,
and drink thereof morning and evening. Also anoint the reins and grieved parts
with this ointment: Unguentum album camphoratum 2 ounces, Saccarum saturni two
drachms; mingle them and make an ointment.

234 For a woman that has too much of the flowers.
Burn the foot of a Hare to powder, and drink thereof with red wine and
Cinnamon, first and last, nine days; and it will help her.

235 To stop the whites i^ women.
Fry Hemsock in fresh twines grease, lay it as hot she may suffer it to the
secret place.

236 Another for the same.
Of new milk of a red Cow take a quart, ten spoonfuls of red Rosewater, or
Pomegranate pil be aten, and a little Cinnamon beaten, and see the it half
away: sweeten it with sugar, and drink a draught morning and evening, and two
whites of eggs beaten.

237 To make Pomatum.
Take the Leaf of a hog new killed, lay is in water nine days, keeping it
close covered, and shifting it three times a day; then take it out of the water
and beat it, and beat it with a wooden peftel in a stone mortar; then put into
a great galli-pot a branch of Rosemarie, half a pound of Almonds blanched and
beaten, a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, three or four large Mace bruised, a
grain of Musk bruised, and upon them all put in the hogs leaf so beaten, and
cover it close: Then take a brass-pot, sil it so full of water, that the
galli-pot may stand two or three inches above the water in the same pot, set
the brass pot on a Charcole fire, or such another fire as may make it seethe
apace, and have no smoakie brands about it. Set a weight on the top of your
gallipot, lest it swim and fall, and then let the brass pot boil so fast as
may make the gallipot sees also, and so let it sees three hours, keeping in a
kettle by on another fire some seething water, to fill up the brass pot still,
as the water shall evaporate out of it by seething; then take out your
gallipot, stir the stuff in it well together, and strain it through a fine cloth
(which you must be sure must have no holes in it) into another gallipot, of the
same size: and set that with the matter so strained in it, into the brass pot
close stopped, and let it boil for an hour, then pour it into little gallipots
for your use, but bind them not up til they be thoroughly cold.

Several Compositions of great Use in this second part of this Manuel.
1 Magno Liquore, which is of great virtue.
TAke sweet Sallet oil twenty pound white wine two pound, boil these together
until the wine be consumed, then put it in a vessel of stone, and put thereunto
these things following.

Take the flowers of Rose-mary three pound, Lignum aloes six ounces; Olibanum,
Bdelium, of each ten ounces; then stop it very close, and bury it in the ground
four foot deep; and this would be buried in the beginning of August, and there
remain until the month of March, then take it forth of the ground, and set it
in the Sun, and put thereto these matters following. Sage, Rosemary, Rue,
Betony Millifolly, Comfery roots, Tamaro, Viticella, of each one handful;
Gallingall, Cloves, Nutmegs, Spikenard, Saffron, one ounce; Sarcocolla, Sanguis
Draconis in grain, Mastick, one ounce; aloes hepatick, Rasa di pino, of each
eight ounces, yellow wax, Auxungia, of each eighteen ounces, Colophony one
pound, Hypericon with the seed and all, one pound, Musk one dram; mix them
all well together, and boil them in Balneo until the herbs become dry, and have
no more substance, then it is boiled; then take it forth and strain it; and put
thereunto for every pound six drachms of balm artificial; and when the month
of Septem. comes, put thereunto two pound of the fruit of the herb called
Balsamina, which is red, and then it is ended; which thou shaft keep in a
glass close shut, for the older it is, the better it is; and is of such
virtue, that it helps the Etisie, and Hidropsie, if ye give them every
morning four drachms with two ounces of syrup of Roses warm, the space of
eleven days, as is well proved: and this is the true and perfect Unction that
helps the Petocchie, a disease so called in the Italian; If any were wounded,
and had cut veins, sinnews and bones, let him join the parts close together,
and dress it with this oil very hot upon the upper parts; and in short time it
shall be whole without any alteration; it helps also the white scal, if ye
anoint it therewith: it helps coldness in the head, and Catarrhs, if ye
anoint within the nostrils at night when ye go to bed; if ye anoint the
stomach therewith, it causes perfect digestion of the meat, it provokes urine
where it is let through carnosity, or Gonnorea, or such like Matter; it causes
hair to grow, it preserves the beard black, and is good against worms; and all
these experiments are true and proved by one diverse and sundry times in the
aforesaid infirmities, and also in diverse other, which are left until another
time: Ye shall note, that if you anoint one all over that is grieved with the
Pox, with this oil, it will increase his pain; and so by that means you may
know whether he be infected or no.

2 How to compound Aromatico Leonardo, with its virtues.
Aromatico Leonardo, is a miraculous medicine, that serves against all manner
of discases of what quality soever they be; for it works this operation, viz.
as soon as it joineth to the stomach, it draws to it all the evil humors of
the body, and imbraceth them, and carries them forth of the body both by vomit
and seige, and so leaves nature unburthened, which may prevail at pleasure,
because it has no impediment: and the order to make it is thus:

Take fine white sugar four ounces, pure Pearls, Musk, Saffron, Lignum aloes,
Cinnamon, of each one scruple; Petra Philosophale four drams, mix them together,
and make thereof Lozanges with Rose water according to art, the which ye shall
keep in a box of Wood close shut: and the order to use it is thus; When the
physician goes do visit any sick person, and intends to prepare him some
medicine to take inward; the best and most perfect inward medicine that he can
ordain is this Aromatico, because it evacuateth the stomach by vomit, and the
body downward; and his operation is such, that it does in manner help any crude
sort of infirmity, and the quantity is from one dram to two drams, and may be
taken in broth, in wine, in water, or mix it with any pills, or potion, giving
charge, that when it is put into any potion, thou leave none in the bottom of
the cup where thou drink it out, because the Petra Philosophale is heavy, and
will remain in the bottom, for if that remain, it will not work at all; giving
also charge, the day that you give this medicine, that you let the patients
drink as much crude water as they will, and give them little meatto eat that
day, and this is the order to use this medicine.

3 Caustic.
Take Arsenick, Cristaline, sal Armoniak, Sublimate, of each alike; boil them,
being sinely ground, in as much strong vinegar as the matter weighs, until 2
third parts be consumed, and that there remain a third; then keep it in a glass
close shut for thy use, as I will show thee in diverse places when occasion shall
serve.

4 A Magistrale Cerot against the white Scal.
This Cerot is of great virtue, and of mavelous experience to resolve the
white scal, because it is penetrative, Mundificative, and Resolutive, and
causes the hair to grow where it is fallen away, to the great content of the
Patient, and honor of the Physician, and it is made in this order. Take
Frankincense that is strained from his filth, what quantity you will, and distill
it in a retort, and give it fire at the least forty hours, then let it cool,
and break the glass, and in the bottom thou shall find a black mase the which
make into powder, then for every pound of the said powder, put thereto one
ounce of Wax, and four ounces of the said oil that you distilled, and half an
ounce of the heads of Bees, the which are easy to be had in Summer: Mix all
the aforesaid things in a vessel of Copper, and with a small fire make them in
form of a liquid unguent; and when thou will use it, shave the head, and wash
it, and lay thereon this Cerot upon a fair cloth warm, and every two days
change it; and so in short time thou shall see strange effects of his virtue.
This serves also against breaking of bones, dislocations, and for scabs
ulcerated, because it dries, and comfort, and resolves all the evil
qualities; giving charge in the distilling, because the fire many times
consumes it so, that in the bottom their remains nothing that is good, and
therefore beware in the making.

5 Pillole Magistrale, which is good against any infirmties.
These pills are of great virtue, and especially against all kind of pains
coming of corrupt humors; for they purge the putrified humors, and preserve the
body from corruption: and the order to make it is thus.

Take Olibanum, Mastick, Mirrhe, Sarcocolla, aloes hepatica, Eleborus niger,
Saffron, Turbit, Colloquintida, of each what you please, Stamp them finely; and
for every ounce of the aforesaid matters, put thereunto two Carets of Musk, and
then incorporate it with honey of Roses and Aqua vitae of each a like; and this
paste thou may keep six months in a vessel of lead; the quantity is from two
drachms to three drachms, in the morning fasting, and drink thereon a little
wine. These pills are most excellent to take away the pains of the Gout, and to
preserve a man from it; they are also good for them that have the french pox,
because they evacuate the gross and viscous humors, and maintain the body in
good temperature, and using them in those diseases, it preserves the body in
good temperature. They are also good for women that are troubled with pains of
the Mother, and retention of their terms, for these are aperative, and provoke
them, and purges the Matrix of all impediments contained therein: They serve
against the Megrum, and all pains of the head, and also against all kind of
putrified fevers, as the experience thereof has been seen sundry times.

6 To make a Quintessence of mavelous virtue.
Quintessence is so called, because it is an essence taken from the elements
without corrupting them; and it is called Quinta essentia, because its an
effence above the four elements; which has a marvelous virtue in preserving
all things from putrefaction; and is of so much virtue, that drinking every
morning half an ounce thereof as soon as a person rises out of his bed, it
preserves in continual health: It helps wounds and sores of all sorts by
washing them therewith: It preserves all flesh, fish, and fruits that are put
therein. The order to make it is thus:

Take fourteen pound of good strong wine, common honey one pound, Annis-seed,
Coriander, Lignum aloes, Calamus Aromoticus, of each three ounces, Rose water
four ounces: Beat those things which are to be beaten grossly, and infuse them
in the said wine two days, and then put them in a gourd of glass, and distill
it by Balneo so long til the extracted water burn, and when it will burn distill
it no more: then keep that which is distilled in a glass close stopped, that
it take no air, and so keep it til thou have occasion to use it; for it is a
most rare liquor, because it resolves all indispositions that happen to man's
body. If any desire to have this Quintessence more perfect, let him take a
tenth part of good honey, with a little Cinnamon, and distill it again by Balneo,
and the Phlegm will remain all in the bottom of the vessel, and the Quintessence
will be so fine, that the air will take it away. And therefore he that can make
this well, shall work strange cures therewith, even to admiration.

7 Quintessentia solutiva, which is of Marvelous operations in diverse matters.
This Quintessentia solutivae evacuateth the body with great ease and without
any detriment, and it purges all parts of the body that are troubled with
gross and viscous humors, it resolves swellings, and takes away the pains;
it preserves the sight, and kills worms, and causes a good appetite, with
many other good qualities, which I shall leave at this time; and the order to
make it is thus.

Take Lignum aloes, Cinnamon, Turbit, aloes hepatica, of each one ounce,
Colloquintida, two ounces, Cloves, Saffron, of each three scruples, Musk of
Levant one dram, Julep of Violets one pound. Mix all the aforesaid matters
together in a glass, and put thereon two pound of Quintessence, and so let it
stand twelve days, and then strain it, and put it into a vessel of glass
close shut; this may be taken with broth, wine, or with what sirup or potion
you will; the quantity is from two drams to four drams in the morning fasting,
without keeping of any diet at two ounces, and it shall work well without trouble
at all.

8 Syrupo Solutivo, or the soluble Syrup; with the order how to make and use it.
This soluble Syrup made in decoction is very wholesome, and of great virtue,
and especially in crude humors; for it disperseth the matter, and evacuates it
with great ease, and without danger or trouble of the Patient: The order to
make it is thus.

Take Sage, Rosemary, Siccory, Carduus Benedictus, Nettles, Organy, of each an
handful; Figs, Raisins, Dates, sweet Almonds, Sal Gemma, of each four ounces,
Colloquintida, Aloes hepatica, Cinnamon, Mirabolani citrini, of each two
ounces, common honey two pound. Stamp them all grossly, and put them to infuse in
eighteen pound of fair water; then boil it til half be consumed; then strain
it, and distill it by a filter, and atomatize it with two carets of Musk, and a
pint of Rosewater, and then it is made: which you shall keep in a glass bottle
close stopped. The dose is from four ounces to six.

In winter you must take it very warm; and in the spring and Autumn take it
warm and no more; in summer you must take it cold: This purges the gross
humors of the body, and hurts not the stomach. You may use it in a Fever for
four or five days together, and it will help it. In crudity of humors, as the
French Pox, Gouts, Catarrhs, Dogly Artetica, and such like matters, where there
is no accident of Fevers, you may take it ten or fifteen days together, and it
cannot hurt, for it purges most excellently: It is given against the cough,
against flux of the urine, and pains in the head, and carnasity in the yard, or
the Hemeroids. And in brief, it is good against all diseases caused of corrupt
humors; for it has such virtue, that it draws from all parts, and evacuateth
the humors intestinal. There has been great experience of this syrup in such
persons as had in a manner utterly lost their taste, who by using it, have been
brought to a good temperature; there have been also infinite experiments on
ulcerated persons and full of sores, ill handled by poverty and weakness, who
finding no means to cure them, have been cured by this syrup in fourteen or
fifteen days, Cum multis aliis etc.

9 Sirrupo Magistrale Leonardo, which serves against an infinite number of
diseases, and is a rare medicine.
This syrup is solutive, and very pleasant to use, and cannot hurt in any wise,
which is seldom seen in other Medicines: and the order to make it is thus.

The leaves of Sine, two ounces; Fumitory, Maiden hair, Hart's-tongue, Liver
wort, Epitemum, Ellemo, Pollipody of the oak, the flowers of Borage, Bugloss,
Liquorice, of each three ounces, Colloquintida, Eleborus niger, Aloes hepatica,
Mirabolani Indi, of each one ounce, Pruins fourteen, Sebestien twelve, Tamerisk
one ounce; Stamp them grossly, and infuse them in ten pounds of fumitory water,
then boil it until the consumption of the third part, and then strain it, and
in that which is strained put these things: Syrup of Staecados one pound,
Saffron one scruple, mel rosarum six ounces, Rectified Aqua vitae four ounces:
Musk one dram, the mussege of Marish Mallows four ounces, Benjamin one
ounce, Rose water three ounces; and then it is made, which ye shall keep in a
glass close stopped, and keep it in a temperate place, and this you must take
warm: the quantity is from two ounces to four ounces, and it is a most safe
medicine, to be used without keeping of any diet. It helps those much that
have Pellaria, Scabs, Hemeroids, and such like diseases, and may be given unto
a woman with child, without any danger, when she shall have occasion to use any.

10 To make artificial Balm, and the virtues thereof
This balm has all the virtues of the natural balm, although not in quality,
yet in virtue, The order of making it is this.

Take one pound of Venice Turpentine, oil of Bays perfect without mixture four
ounces, Galbanum three ounces, Gum Arabic four ounces, Olibanum, Mirrha elect,
Gum Hederae of each three ounces, Lignum Aloes, Galingal, Cloves, Consolida
minore, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Ginger, Zedoaria, Diptamnum album, of each one
ounce; Musk of Levant, Ambergreece, of each one dram: Beat all these things
together, and put them into a Retort of glass well luted, and put thereto six
pound of rectified Aqua vitae without phlegm, and so let it stand eight days,
and then distill it by sand, and the first extraction will be white water mixed
with oil; then keep the fire small, until there come forth a blackish oil then
change the receiver, and set thereto another, and increase the fire til all the
spirits be drawn out: then separate the oil from the black water, and likewise
from the white, and keep them a sunder by themselves. The first water that is
white is called Aqua del Balsamo, or a Balm water, and the oil separated from
that is called Oleum del Balsamo, or oil of Balm. The second water that is
black, is called Matter del Balsamo, or mother of Balm, and the oil separated
from that water is called del Balsamo artificiato, or artificial Balm; which
should be kept as a most precious Jewel.

Each of these Waters and oils have their several admirable virtues and
operations for effecting of wonderful cures; but the artificial Balm is a most
miraculous liquor; as for the Stitch in the side, for which the dose is two
drachms; the Cough, Catarrhe, coldness in the head or stomach, wounds in the
head, andinfinite others; yea, I know no disease either hot or cold, but it
does good to it, and that by its own quality, and hidden virtues; cooling the
hot, and heating the cold. In a word, whosoever has this precious liquor, may
be kept from, or cured of all infirmities, and need not seek for the natural
Balm with so great expenses, and the hazard of life, as has been often seen.

11 Vegetable syrup, which is miraculous and divine.
This Syrup is a secret, with which many miracles have many times been wrought,
in diverse operations, on many infirmities. The order to make this syrup is thus.

Take Lignum aloes, Riopontico Eupatorio, red Saunders, of each two ounces;
beat them, and make thereof a decoction in good form, and with four pound of
the decoction make a syrup, and put thereto these things following while it is
hot, Saffron one scruple, Ginger one dram, Musk two Carets, the solution of
our Petra Vegetabile three ounces, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each one scruple and a
half; then keep it in a glass close shut, and this is vegetable Syrup, which
works miracles in diverse infirmities; for by its nature it purifieth the
blood, mundifieth the liver, comfort the heart, preserves the stomach,
provokes urine, dissolveth gravel in the reins, it helps the cough, and
helps disgestion, and quieteth all the humors in the sick person, with diverse
other virtues which it has.

This may be taken with broth, with distilled, water, or with any decoction, or
medicine, fasting: The quantity is from one dram to two drachms; and happy
shall they be that use it.

12 Unguento Magno Leonardo.
This Unguento magno is called so because of his great virtue and operation;
for it works so strangely in some diseases, that it in a manner reviveth the
patient: and the order to make it is thus.

Take Otnegra ovium, six ounces, Oximel Squilliticum half an ounce, mix them
together in an earthen dish until the Otnegra ovium be become like ashes, then
it is deifitrom; then put thereon two ounces of vinegar and wash it well until
it remain pure and clear, then take Olibanum half an ounce, Cerusae one ounce,
beat them fine, and mix it in a stone mortar with as much Magno Liquore, as will
serve to incorporate them well, then put thereto the otnegra ovium, and mix them
very well together; that being done, put thereto Auxungia porcina, eight ounces;
and mix them altogether, and then it is made, which keep in a vessel well
glazed; for it will keep a long time without corruption, and is apt to help
those that are lame, full of pains, sores and swellings, pains of the eyes, the
Stone in the reins, and such like matters; it helps all manner of French pox,
if ye anoint them therewith til their gums be sore, and then leave. But ye
shall note, that the body must first be well purged before ye anoint them. This
unguent cools all corrosive ulcers, and helps them in short time, it
helps all pains in the eyes if ye put it therein, and takes away all
burning with speed: and to be short, it helps those diseases in most short
time, so that it is to be wondered at.

The CONTENTS of The Second Part, Containing Experiments in Physic and
Surgery, etc.
Waters, Liquors, Syrups.
DOcter Stevens his water, page 47 To make Cinnamon Water page 48 Angelica
water ibid Aqua Mirabilis ibid Its virtues. page 49 Balm water. ibid Another
Balm water. ibid A Barley water to purge the Lungs and Lights of all diseases.
page 50 A Water for a sore Mouth. ibid Another for the same use. page 51 Rosa
solis. ibid Wormwood water ibid Aqua Fortis. page 52 Water of Snails. ibid An
excellent water against the Stone in the Kidneys. page 53 A water for outward
or inward VVounds, Impostume, and Ulcers, and a sore mouth ibid A very
excellent water against worms. page 54 An excellent sweet water. ibid How to
make artificial Tunbridg water. page 55 How to make artificial Epsome water.
page 56 Spirit of Confection of Alkermes, its Virtues. page 57 Spirit of
Saffron, its virtues. ibid Extract of Ambergreece. ibid Spirit and water of
Wormwood, the lesser Composition. page 59 Spirit and water of Wormwood, the
greater Composition. ibid Spirit and water of Angelica. page 60 Spirit of Wine
extraordinary. ibid Quintessence of Snakes, Adders, or Vipers. page 61 A
liquor against the tooth Ach. page 62 A Liquor to comfort smelling, and
preserve the head. ibid To make an Antimouial cup, and to cast diverse figures
of Antimony. page 63 How to make the true spirit of Antimony. page 64 The true
Oil or essence of Antimony page 65 Wormwood wine. page 66 To make an Artificial
Malago Wine. ibid How to make artificial Claret wine. page 67 How to make good
Raspberry Wine. ibid
Oils.
Oil of Almonds. page 68 Oil of Sage. ibid Olcum Laureum. ibid Oil of Tobacco.
ibid Oil of Roses. ibid Oil of Cream. page 69 Oil of Swallows. ibid Oil of
Roses another way. ibid The use of Oil of Violets. page 70 The use of the oil
of Camomil. ibid The use of oil of Lillies ibid The use of the Oil of
Elder-flowers. page 71 Oil of Cowslips ibid The use of the Oil of Rue. ibid
The use of the Oil of Wormwood. ibid The use of the Oil of Mint. page 72 To
make the Oil of Salerne ibid How to compose the Oil of Excester. ibid Oil of
Amber. page 73 How to make an excellent Oil of Hypericon. ibid Oil of St. John's
Wort. page 74 Oil of yolks of Eggs. page 75 To make oil of Mandrakes. ibid Oil
of Musk how made. ibid How to make Oil of Snakes and Adders. page 76
Ointments etc.
An ointment for a Rupture. page 77 Flos unguentorum ibid Unguentum Populionis,
commonly called Pompillion. ibid Doctor Lewins Unguentum Rosatum, good for the
heat in the Back. page 78 Vnguentum Sanatinum ibid Ointment of red Lead. page
79 Abitter Ointment. ibid Apectoral Ointment. ibid An Ointment for an Ach, to
be made at any time of the year, and is approved good, and has helped old
pains, griefs, and aches. page 80 An Ointment for the Sciatica. ibid Ointment
for any wound or sore. ibid A purge to drive out the French Pox before you use
the Ointment. page 81 The Ointment for the French Pox. ibid What places to
anoint for the French Pox ibid Another purge to heal the French Pox without
Ointment. page 82 An ointment to kill the worms in little children. ibid For the
worms. page 83 An excellent good Medicine or Salve for any Ach coming of cold,
easy to be made by any Country good houswife. ibid For a pain or Ach in the
Back. ibid A Searcloth for all Aches. page 84 An excellent Ointment for any
Bruise or ach. ibid The cure of grievous pains and aches in the Body. page 85
Aches coming by the Pox healed. ibid Back-weak or diseased, to strengthen, etc
ibid To take the Ague out of any place. ibid For the Ague in children, or women
with child. page 86 An easy and approved Medicine for a quartaine Ague. ibid
An Almond milk to cool and induce sleep. ibid For an Andcome. page 87 Liquid
Amber, and its medcinal virtues. ibid A most Sovereign Balsam for several
diseases. ib For a sudden bleeding at the nose page 88 Aremedie for the
spitting of blood, occasioned by the breach of some vein in the breast. ibid To
stop bleeding of a wound. page 89 To stop inward bleeding. ibid A medicine for
those that are given to bleeding. ibid To stanch bleeding at the nose. ibid To
heal the Cut, or sore Breast of a Woman. ibid A Medicine to break and heal sore
breasts of Woman, used by Midwives, and other skilful women in London page 90 To
dry up a woman's Breast ibid For a stinking Breath. ibid A Gargle for an
unsavory breath page 91 For the Canker in a woman's breast ibid For the Canker
in the mouth ibid Of the Catarthe, or Rheum in the bead. ibid For young
children that are weak in their limms, and can neither go nor stand page 92 For
breaking out of childrens heads. page 93 A medicine for the swelling of a
child's Cods. page 94 To heal children of the Lunatic disease. ibid For a
Consumption. ibid To make a China Broth for a Consumption page 95 A Broth for a
Consumption. page 96 An excellent Confortative for the Stomach, helping
digestion, warming the brain, and drying the Rheumes. ibid For the Corns on the
feet or toes. page 97 A Cordial for the Sea. ibid For the Ptisick and dry Cough
ibid An excellent medicine for the Cough of the Lungs. ibid A Medicine for the
chin-Cough, for a child. page 98 A Diet drink to clear and temper the blood.
ibid A Diet drink to open and temper the Liver page 99 A Diet drink for a
Canker in the mouth. ibid To cure the Dropsy, be it hot or cold. page 100 A
medicine that has recovered some from the Dropsy, whom the Physicians have
given over. ibid To open obstructions of the Liver, and to preserve from the
dropsy. page 101 An approved medicine for the Dropsy. ibid A broth to comfort
the brain ibid For pain in the Ears, or deafness ibid For the Emrods. page 102
For the Pin and Web in the Eye ibid A Plaster to take away the Film on the
Eye. ibid A Medicine for sore, Bloud-shotten and Rheumatick eyes page 103 To
make the face white and fair. ibid To take the heat out of the face. ibid To
take away the Spots or red Pimples of the face. page 104 A Secret to help all
Fevers in the beginning. ibid To ripen and heal a Felon. page 105 A medicine
for a Fistula. ibid A medicine for the falling sickness. ibid For the Piles.
ibid An especial good Medicine to make the Piles bleed page 106 A Medicine for
the Piles. ibid A Cullesse to stop the bloody flux ibid Bloody flux cured page
107 Another for the bloody flux. ibid A Medicine to cure the biting of all
venomous beasts. page 108
Glister, See page 132
An approved Medicine for the Gout in the feet. ibid A Pultesse for the Gout.
ibid How to cure all kind of Gout page 109 An approved Medicine for the
Green-sicknesse. page 110 The Green salve, which closes up Sores, being well
drawn ibid To cleanse the Head, and take the Ach away. page 111 Hartshorn
Jelly. ibid To make a Potion that is good against all Infirmities page 112 An
exceeding good remedy against the yellow Jaundice page 113 An excellent
receipt to destroy any Impostume. page 114 To make an issue. ibid A medicine
for the Itch of the body. ibid For kibed heels ibid For Waxing Kernels, called
by some Scrophula, their cure. page 115 A special Receipt to destroy Lice page
116 How to cure the Measles. ibid To cure the disease of the Mother. ibid For
the dead Palsy ibid A Plaster for a Bile or Push page 117 A very good
Plaster to heal or dry up a sore or cut suddenly. ibid A plaster for the
Stomach. ibid A Preservative against the Pestilence when it is first suspected.
page 118 An approved good drink for the Pestilence. ibid A medicine for the
Plague ibid Signs of death in the Plague. page 119 A water to drive out any
infection ibid A Medicine for a Plurisie, Stitch or VVind offending in any part
of the Body. page 120 A great and sore Plurisie cured by M. R. ibid To take
away Pock boles, or any spots in the face. page 121 A Pultis to stay fluxes
proceeding from a cold cause, to be applied to the Belly. ibid For the heat of
the Back. page 122 Astma, or the Ptisick, and its cure. ibid A very good
Poultesse for any Member swelled and inflamed, and not broken, to take away the
pain page 123 An especial Medicine for all manner of Poison. ibid A very gentle
purge. page 124 The purge for a Plurisie, Stitch, or Wind: It may be given to
any sound man or woman, at any time, in temperate weather, not keeping their
Chambers for it page 124 Another Purge. page 125 The Purge of Assarabacha, with
which the Lady A. Dused to rectify her stomach any way offended. ibid The
Apothecaries Gascons Powder, with its use page 126 A Powder for a Rupture ibid
To kill the Ring worm, and the heat thereof. ib. Rubirb and its virtues page 127
An approved good medicine for the running of the Reins. ibid A medicine for
burning or Scalding. page 128 To take away the heat of a burn, or out of a
scalde ibid For one burned with Gunpowder or otherwise. ibid For the Scal or
Scabbinesse of the head page 129 An aptroved receipt for a scald head. ibid To
heal the white scal ibid The black Salve ibid A Salve for rankling, where the
skin is rubbed off page 130 A barley Cream to procure sleep: or Almond milk
ibid. See p. 86 An outward medicine for the same. page 131 A Receipt for a
backward business. ibid A Glister to open and loosen the Body being bound,
which may safely be administered to any man or woman. page 132 A cooling Glister
in hot diseases. ibid A Medicine that has healed sores upon the Legs that have
run so long, that the bones have been seen. page 133 Of the hidden seerets of
Frankincense ibid Secrets of Mercury, or Quicksilver page 134 To make the
representation of the whole world in a glass page 135 In a fit of the Stone,
when the water stops page 137 A Medicine for the stone ibid Another very good
medicine for the Stone page 138 To dissolve the Stone, which is one of the
Physicians greatest secrets page 139 A Stove to sweat in ibid Against
surfeiting and indigestion page 140 To make a tooth fall out of it self. page
141 To take away the cause of the pain in the Teeth. ib. For a hollow Tooth
ibid For the Rheum in the Gummes and Teeth. ibid Tobacco, its virtues and uses
page 142 A Diet for the Patient that has Ulcers or wounds that will hardly be
cured with Ointments, Salves, or Plasters. ibid To help Ulcers of all sorts.
page 143 An approved Remedy to stay Vomiting, by M R. page 144 A Recelpt for to
make Vomits. page 145 To kill Warts, an approved Medicine. ibid For one that
cannot make water page 146 An excellent medicine for a child that cannot make
water. ibid For one that pisseth blood. ibid To kill the Wild fire. ibid How to
order a woman with child, before, in, and after her labor. page 147 To bring a
woman to a speedy birth page 149 For the same. ibid For a dead child in a
woman's body page 150 A medicine for a woman in travel, to make her have
Throws. ibid A Medicine for the falling down of the Matrice to the bearing
place. ibid Another to be laid to the Navel, and to the back right against the
Navel, for the same use. page 151 Immoderate flux menstrual suppressed or
stayed. ib For a woman that has too much of the flowers. page 152 To stop the
whites in women. ibid Another for the same. ibid To make Pomatum. ibid Magno
Liquore, which is of great virtue. page 154 How to compound Aromatico Leonardo,
with its virtues. page 156 Caustic. page 157 A Magistrall Cerot against the
white Scal. ibid Pillole Magistrale, which is good against any infirmties page
159 To make a Quintessence of mavelous virtue. page 160 Quinta essentia
solutiva, which is of Marvelous operation in diverse matters page 161 Syrupo
Solutivo, or the soluble Syrup; with the order how to make and use it page 162
Sirrupo Magistrale Leonardo, which serves against an infinite number of
diseases, and is a rare medicine. page 164 To make artificial Balm, and the
virtues thereof page 165 Vegetable syrup, which is miraculous and divine. page
166 Unguento Magno Leonardo. page 167
Experiments in Cookery and Houswifery.
Sallets or Sauce.
1 A Lemmon Sallet.
TAke Lemmons, rub them upon a grate to make their rinds smooth, cut them in
halfes, take out the meat of them, and boil them in fair water a good while,
changing the water once or twice in the boiling, to take away the bitterness
of them: when they are tender, take them out and scrape away all the meat (if
any be left) very clean; then cut them as thin as you can (to make them hold)
in a long string, or in reasonable short pieces, and lay them in your glass,
and boiling some of the best white wind vinegar with sugar, to a reasonable
thin syrup, pour it upon them into your glass, and keep them for your use.

2 To keep Clove Gilliflowers For Sallets.
Take the fairest Clove Gilliflowers; clip off the whites from them, put them
into a wide mouthed glass, and strew a good deal of sugar finely beaten among
them: then put as much wine vinegar to them as will thoroughly wet them, tie them
up close and set them in the Sun.

3. To pickle Oysters.
Take a peck of the greatest Oysters, open them and put the liquor that comes
from them (saved by it self) to as much white wine, and boil it with a pound of
Pepper bruised, two or three spoonfuls of large Mace, and a handful of Salt,
til the liquor begin to waste away; then put in your Oysters and plump them,
and set them off the fire til they be cold, and so put them up in little
barrels very close.

4 To pickle Quinces.
Boil your Quinces that you intend to keep whole and unpared in fair water, til
they be soft, but not too violently for fear you break them: when they are
soft, take them out, and boil some Quinces pared, quartered, and cored, and the
parings of the Quinces with them in the same liquor, to make it strong: and
when they have boiled a good time, enough to make the liquor of sufficient
strength, take out the quartered Quinces and parings, and put the liquor into a
pot big enough to receive all the Quinces both whole and quartered, and put
them into it when the liquor is through cold, and so keep them for your use
close covered.

5 To keep Goosberries.
Take a handful or two of the worser of your Goosberries, cut off their stalks
and heads, and boil them all to pieces in a pottle of water, putting into the
boiling thereof half a quarterne of sugar; then take the liquor, strain it
through a hair strainer, and while it cools, cut off the stalks and heads of
the fairest Goosberries, being very careful you cut not the skin of them above
or below, put them into a Gallipot, and pour the liquor in after them.

6
Purslane must be used as you do the Goosberries.

7 How to keep Cucumbers raw.
Take a Kettle (big enough for your use) half full of water, make it brackish
with salt, boil therein ten or twenty Cucumbers cut in halves; then take the
raw Cucumbers, being somewhat little, and put them into the Vessel wherein you
will keep them; and when your liquor is cold, strain so much of it into them as
may keep the Cucumbers always covered.

8 To keep boiled Cucumbers.
Take a Kettle of water, put salt to it, boil it well; then take your raw
Cucumbers; put them into it, and keep them with running up and down very softly
til they be as it were perboyled: then take them out and lay them aside til
they be cold; then put them up in the vessel you will keep them in, and when the
liquor is cold, strain it into them til they be all covered.

9 To pickle Cucumbers to keep all the year.
Pare a good quantity of the rinds of Cucumbers, and boil them in a quart of
running water, and a pint of wine vinegar, with a handful of Salt til they be
soft: then letting them stand til the liquor be quite cold, pour out the liquor
from the rinds, into some little barrel, carthen pot, or other vessel, that may
be close stopped, and put as many of the youngest Cucumbers you can gather
therein, as the liquor will cover; and so keep them close covered, that no wind
come to them, to use all the year till you have new. If your Cucumbers be
great, it is best to boil them in the liquor til they be soft.

10 To keep Cowslips for Sallets.
Take a quart of white wine vinegar, and half a quarter of a pound of fine
beaten sugar, and mix them together: then take your Cowslips, pull them out of
the pods, and cut off the green knob at the lower ends, put them into that pot
or glass wherein you mind to keep them; and well shaking the vinegar and sugar
together in the glass wherein they were before, pour it upon the Cowslips,
and so stirring them morning and evening (to make them settle) for three weeks,
keep them for your use.

11 Violets, Buglosse, Borage, Rosemary, Marigolds, Fennel.
These are all to be used as you do your Cowslips: only of Fennel you must
take the seeds when they are new put out of the pod.

12 To keep Broom flowers for Sallets.
Gather so many buds in one day (if you can) as you mean to keep, then take
your pot, and lay first a lay of white salt in the bottom of it, and then a
lay of Buds or flowers, then another of white salt, and so another of Flowers,
till you have filled your vessel so full as you can thrust them down, let them
stand one day, and if they shrink down, fill them up with flowers, and after fill
it up with Verjuyce, and lay a good deal of salt upon the top of it, and stop
it up close.

13 To keep Barberies to garnish your meat, etc.
Take the worst of them and boil them in fair water, and strain the liquor from
them, and while the liquor is hot, put it into your Barberies, being clean
picked, and stop them up: and if they mould much, wash them thoroughly in the
liquor: then boil the liquor again and strain it, and let it cool, and then put
it to your Barberies again.

14 To keep Artichokes for all the year
The fittest time is about Michaelmas, and then according to the proportion of
Artichokes you will keep, sees such a quantity of water in a pot or pan,
seasoning it so with white Salt, that it may have a reasonable taste; then put
a fit quantity of white Salt into the water, and boil them together, and scumme
them well, then put a good quantity of good vinegar to them to make the liquor
somewhat sharp, and boil it again. Then boil your Artichokes that you mind
to keep, in another liquor, take them out of it, and let them cool; then set
your first liquer again on the fire to boil, and scumming it thoroughly, let it
cool again; when it is thoroughly cold, put it up in some Firkin, or large
earthen pot, and put in your Artichokes to them handsomely for bruising, then
cover them close from the air, and so keep them to spend at your pleasure.

15 To pickle Broom buds.
Take as many Broombuds as you please, make linen bags and put them in, and
tie them close; then make some brine with water and salt, and boil it a little;
let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen pot, and put the bags in
it, and lay some weight upon them, let it lie there til it look black: then
shift it again, so you must do as long as it looks black. You must boil them in
a little cauldron, and put them in vinegar a week or two, then they be fit to
eat.

16 How to pickle Cucumbers.
Take the Cucumbers and wash them clean, and dry them clean in cloth; then take
some water, vinegar, salt, fennel tops, and some dill tops, and a little Mace;
make it fast enough, and sharp enough to the taste; then boil it a while, and
then take it off, and let it stand and be cold, and then put in the Cucumbers,
and lay a board on the top to keep them down, and tie them close, and within a
week they will be fit to eat.

17 To make a gallendine saw ce for a Turkey.
Take some Claret wine and grated bread, and a sprig of Rosemary, a little
beaten Cloves, a little beaten Cinnamon, and some sugar.

Spoon meats.
18 The best Clouted Cream.
Take eight pints of Milk warm from the Cow, set it on the fire, make it
ready to boil; then pour it into bowls, and fleet it that night: if you would
have it thick, put in a quart of Cream to it.

19 Another way for the same in a less proportion
Take a quart of Cream or a pottle, set it in two dishes, on two Casingdishes
of coals, and cover them with two other dishes: and as it heateth, uncover the
Cream ever and anon, and with a spoone take off the film that rises, and put
it in another dish, and cover it again til more be risen, and take it still
off, and let it so rise by leisure, the longer the better; when there will rise
no more filme, pour out the uppermost of the Cream into a Platter alone, and
set it on a Chafingdish of coals, with a quick fire; then take the yolk of an
egg or two, well beaten, and strain them with a spoonful of cold Cream, and a
little Sugar and Rose water to season it, and put it in as soon as the Cream
begins to boil up, and stirring them together sofely, let them have a walme
or two, and put them in another dish to cool, and serve them.

20 To make the ordinary Clouted Cream.
When you have taken your Milk from the Cow, set it on the fire presently in a
broad vessel, and so keep it on the fire from morning til night, and be sure it
sees not all the while; then take it off the fire, and set it on a Board or
Table, and so let it stand all night, and in the morning take off the Cream,
and dish it at your pleasure.

21 To make Almond Milk.
Take a rib of Mutton or Veale, or rather a Chicken, boil it in fair water, put
thereto French Barley, a Fennel root, a Parsley root, Violet leaves, Straw
berrie leaves, and Cinquefoyle leaves, and boil them altogether til the meat be
over boiled; then strain out the liquor from the rest: while they are boiling,
blanch a proportion of Almonds, answerable to the liquor, beat them well in a
clean stone Mortar, and then grind them therein with Rose water and sugar; and
when they are well ground, put in all your liquor by little and little, and
grind with them, til they be al well compounded, then strain it into a fair
glass, and use it at your pleasure.

22 To make a Cullesse
Take a Cock, bruise all his bones and put them into a pot of fair water, set
it over a charcoale fire, boil it and scumme it well; put therein French
Barley, Fennel roots fliced, and the pith taken out, Parsley roots fliced,
leaves of Violets, Straw berries, Lettice and Succory; boil all these together
til the Cock be boiled all to pieces: then take a fit proportion of blanched
Almonds, grind them well with Sugar and Rose water, in a Stone Mortar, then put
to them the Cock, bones and all, and beat him all to pieces in the Mortar, then
put in all the broth by little and little, and compound them by beating, as in
the Almond Milk, and so strain them out all into a fair Skillet; then put into
it a fit quantity of large Mace and Cinnamon whole, but bruised, and alike of
Ginger sliced; set it then upon the fire again, and let it boil half an hour,
and keep it still with stirring, then letting it run through a clean cloth into
a Pipkin, there keep it til you use it, and then warm it in a Porrenger, and
drink it.

23 The best way to make a Sack Posset.
Take a dozen of eggs exceeding well beaten, put to them a pint of Sack, and
stir them well, that it curd not; then put to it three pints of your best sweet
Cream, half a pound of Sugar very finely beaten, and stirring them well together
til the sugar be fully melted in them, strain it altogether into a Basin, big
enough to receive it all: then set it in the Basin, on a pot of boiling water,
keeping the pot boiling until the Posset be like a Custard, and as thick: then
take it off, and keeping it til you think it be cool enough to eat, strew your
beaten Spices well and thick upon it, and serve it.

24 A Sack Posset without milk.
Take thirty Eggs, beat them so well, that you may take them up with a spoon,
like as you do milk or broth; and while they are beating, take a quart of Sack,
half a pound of fine sugar finely beaten, and a pint of strong Beer, and make
them boil a very little while upon a soft fire; then take them off the fire and
put the Eggs into them as soon as it comes off, and stirring them up well
together, put them into a fit Basin to receive them, and covering them close
with a dish; set them on a soft fire again, til they rise to a Curd; then take
it off the fire, strew it with Cinnamon and sugar, and serve it.

25 An Almond Caudle.
Blanch Jordan Almonds, beat them with a little small Ale, and strain them out
with as much more Ale as you mind to make your Cawdel of: Then boil it as you
do an Egg Cawdel, with a little Mace in it; and when it is off the fire,
sweeten it with sugar.

26 To make the Dnsick Cream.
Take your Cream, boil it with some Mace and Cinnamon in it, then take it off,
cool it a little, and put in as much Rose water and sugar as will make it sweet,
and give it a good taste; then put in as much Runnet as will be sufficient to
make it run, and then dish it and serve it.

27 To make fresh Cheese in Cream.
Take a pottle of good Milk as it comes from the Cow, and half a pound of
blanched Almonds beaten very small, and make a thick Almond milk; with a pint of
Cream strained, and a little before you go to dinner make it bloodwarm, season
it with a little sugar, Rose water, and searced Ginger, and put to it a little
Runnet; and when it is scummed, bread it up and whey it, and put it into a
Molde, and press it with your hand, and when it is well wheyed, then put it
into a dish with Cream: you may garnish it if you please, with a dozen of
Waters made of fine flower, sugar and water.

28 A mess of fine Cream.
Take a quart of Cream, set it on the fire, til it be ready to boil, then put
into it seven yolks, and two whites of egga very well beaten together, and boil
them (keeping them well stirred) til it be almost as thick as a Custard; then
take it off the fire, and let it stand til the Whey be settled from it; then
strain the thick of it through a cloth into a Basin, and making it as sweet as
you please, with Rosewater and Sugar, dish it, scraping a little Sugar upon it.

29 To make French Frumenty.
Boil your French Barley in two waters first, and then in the third, whereof you
shall make your Frumenty: when it is almost boiled enough, put into it some
yolks of eggs well beaten, and boil them a while: you must have your Jordan
Almonds ready blanched and laid a good while in cold fair water, then beat
them very small with a little Rose water, and strain their Milk from them, and
put it into your Frumenty, when it is ready to take off the fire, or you may
boil them a little while together; then take it off the fire, season it with
some sugar and serve it.

30 How to make a Goosberry Fool.
Take your Goosberries and pick them, and put them into clean water, and boil
them till they be all as thick that you cannot discern what it is: to the
value of a quart take six yolks of eggs small beaten with Role water; and before
you put in your eggs, season it well with sugar, then strain your eggs, and let
them boil a little while; then take it up, put it in a broad dish, and let it
stand til it be cold; thus it must be eaten.

31 How to make a Goosberry Custard.
Take as many Goosberries as you please, boil them til they be soft; then take
them out and let them stand and cool, and drain them, draw them with your hand
through a canvas strainer, then put in a little Rose water, Sugar, and three
whites of eggs, and stir them all together; put them in a skillet and stir them
apace, else they will burn; let them stand and cool a little while, and take
them off and put them in a glass.

32 To make pap of Barley.
Take Barley and boil it in fair water softly until it begin to break; then put
that liquor out, then put as much hot water to it, as you put forth, and so let
it boil til it be very soft, then put it into a cullender and strain it; then
take an handful of Almonds and grind them very well with your barley, and some
of your liquor, so season it with sugar and a little Rose water, a little whole
Mace and Cinnamon, and boil them well together.

33 The Lady of Arundels Manchet.
Take a bushel of fine wheat flower, twenty eggs, three pound of fresh butter,
then take as much salt and barm as to the ordinary Manchet; temper it together
with new milk pretty hot; then let it lie the space of half an hour to rise,
so you may work it up into bread and bake it: let not your oven be too hot.

34 To make Spiced bread.
Take two pound of Manchet paste, sweet Butter half a pound, Currants half a
pound, Sugar a quartern, and a little Mace (if you will put in any) and make it
in a loaf, and bake it in an Oven no hotter then for Manchet.

35 To make Buttered loaves.
Take half a peck of fine flower, a pint or more of Yest, the Yolks of twenty
eggs, one pound of Butter, of Cloves and Mace half an ounce, of Cinnamon and
Ginger one ounce, but the least part of Ginger, a little Pepper, let the spices
be beaten very small; make Dough of all these, and work them in pieces as big as
Manchets, and bake them: when it is baked, pare away the Crusts, and slice them
in Toasts, and steep them in clarified Butter in a fair Charger: then pour
fine sugar powdered between every of them, and make them up like loaves.

36 To make Almond Butter.
Blanch one pound of Almonds, or more or less as you please, lay them four
hours in cold water; then stamp them with some Rose water as fine as you can,
put them in a cloth, and press out as much milk as you can, and then if you
think they be not enough, beat them and strain them again, til you get as much
milk of them as you can; then set it on the fire til it be ready to boil,
putting in a good quantity of Salt and Rosewater to turn it; after one boiling
being turned, take it off, cast it abroad upon a linen cloth, being holden
between two, then with a spoon take off the Whey under the csoth, so long as
any will drop or run; then take so much of the finest Sugar you can get, as
will sweeten it, and melt it in as much Rose water as will serve to dissolve it,
put thereunto so much Saffion in fine powder as will color it, and so steeping
the Saffron and Sugar in Rose water, season your butter therewith when you make
it up.

CAKES.
37 To make Barberry Cakes.
Pick Barberries, and plump them in scalding water, as you do to make
Couserves, then take of your best ripest Apples you can get, and scald them
very tender: then pare them and take the best and softest of them, and strain
it with your Barberrie stuff, not too thin for fear of blacks going through:
then dry your stuff in a dish, upon a Chafingdish of coals, and make your
syrups after the same manner, that you do for Apricock Cakes, and when your
syrup is boiled high enough, cool it a little before you put it into the
platter, putting it in by a little at once, stirring it up continually: and so
you shall be sure to have your stuff as thick, or as thin as you like best;
then lay it upon your plates, and dry it as you do other Cakes, ghessing at the
quantity of your sugar, according to your own best liking.

38 To make a sweet Cake, and with it a very sweet water.
Take Damask-Rose leaves, Bay Leaves, Lavender tops, sweer Marjorome tops,
Ireos powder, Damask powder, and a little Musk first dissolved in sweet water:
put the Rose leaves and herbs into a Basin, and sprinkle half a quarter of a
pint of Rose water among them; and stirring them all together, cover the Basin
close with a dish, and let them stand so covered all night, and in the morning
distill them: so shall you have at once an excellent sweet water, and a very fine
sweet Cake to lay among your finest linen.

39 To make Almond Cakes.
Take of Jordan Almonds one pound, beat them as you do for Almond milk, draw
them through a strainer, with the yolks of two or three eggs; season it well with
sugar, and make it into a thick batter with fine flower, as you do for Biscuit
bread: then pour it on small Trencher plates, and bake them in an oven or baking
pan; and these are the best Almond cakes.

40 To make a Cake.
Take half a peck of flower, two pound and a half of currants, three or four
Nutmegs, one pound of Almond paste, two pound of butter, and one pint of Cream;
three spoonfuls of Rose water, three quarters of a pound of sugar, half a pint
of Sack, a quarter of a pint of Yest, six eggs; so make it and bake it.

41 To make a Slipcoat Cheese.
Take five quarts of new milk from the Cow, and one quart of water, and one
spoonful of Runnet, and stir it together, and let it stand till i^ does come,
then lay your cheese cloth into the vat, and take up your curd as fast as you
can without breaking, and put it into your Var, and let the whay soak out of it
self: when you have taken it all up, lay a cloth on the top of it, and one
pound weight for one hour; then lay two pound weight for one hour more, then
turn him when he has stood two hours, then lay three pound weight for one hour
more; then take him out of the Vat, and let him lie two or three hours, and
then salt him on both sides; when he is half enough, take a clean cloth and
wipe him dry, then let him lie a day or a night, then put nettles under and
upon him, and change them once a day: the Cheese will come to his eating in
eight or nine days.

42 To make the Angelotta Cheese.
The best time to make it, is in the midst of May: You must take your Milk as
it comes from the Cow, not beating it at all, and put to it some Cream of the
Evening Milk, and then put in your Runnet, as you do in other Cheeses; when the
Cheese is come, Whey it, but break it not, but put it into your Vat as whole as
you can, in the meat, not thrusting it too close at the first, but as it sinks
down, fill it up again, and then shut it up close: and let it stand so one
night, then take it out and lay it upon a board, casting salt upon it, and so
let it lie a day or two, turning and salting it: then lay it in a Basket or a
Flasket with long grass under it, and so let it dry as you do other Cheeses.

43 To keep Cherries all the year.
Take the fairest Cherries you can get; but be sure they be not bruised; and
take them and rub them with a linen cloth, and put them into a barrel of hay,
and lay them in ranks; first laying hay in the bottom, and then Cherries, and
then hay again: and then stop them up close that no air may come near them, and
lay them under a Feather-bed where one lies continually; for the warmer they
are, the better; yet near no fire: and this doing, you may have Cherries at any
time of the year.

FRIGASIES.
44 Frigasie of Chickens.
Kill your Chickens, pull skin and feathers off together, cut them in thin
slices, season them with thime and lemmon minced, nutmeg and salt, an handful
of sorrel minced, and then fry it well with six spoonfuls of water, and some
fresh butter; when it is tender, take three spoonfuls of verjuice, one
spoonful of sugar, beat it together, so dish it with sippets about.

45 Frigasie of Lamb.
Cut your meat in thin slices, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, mince
some thyme and Lemmon, and throw it upon your meat; then fry it slightly in a
pan, then throw in two eggs, beaten in verjuice and sugar, into the pan, also
an handful of Goosberries; shake it together, and dish it.

46 Frigasie of Rabbets.
Cut your Rabbets in small pieces, and mince an handful of thyme and parslie
together, and with a Nutmeg, Pepper and salt season your Rabbets; then take two
Eggs and verjuice beaten together, and throw it in the pan, stick it, and dish
it up in sipets.

47 Frigasie of Veale.
Cut your meat in thin slices, beat it well with a rolling pin, season it with
Nutmeg, Lemmon and Thyme, fry it slightly in the pan: beat two Eggs, and one
spoonful of verjuice, and put it into the pan, and stir it together, and dish
it.

Diverse other ways to dress Flesh.
48 How to boil a Capon handsomely.
Take the fat end of a neck of mutton, and cut it into two or three pieces,
making one piece of two or three bones; and boil these with your Capon: and of
herbs, take an handful of parsley, as much thime, and half as much Endive, and
bind them up in a bunch together, and boil them with you Capon; when it is
boiled enough, season it with Salt and Verjuice: then take a deep dish, and cut
into it sops of a fine stale Manchet, and scald them with the fat which comes
off the Capon and Mutton: You must boil ready in a Pipkin or some skillet,
half a pound of choice plunes, till they be well and plump, but not over
boiled: and when you serve up your Capon, garnish the dish sides with your
Prunes, and lay them thick upon your Capon. You may also boil some marrow with
your prunes, and lay it on your Capon.

47 To roast a shoulder of Mutton with Lemmons.
Take a Shoulder of Mutton half roasted, cut off most of the meat thereof in
thin slices into a fair dish, with the gravie thereof, put thereto about the
quantity of a pint of clarret wine, with a spoonefull or two at most of the
best Wine vinegar: season it with Nutmegs and a little Ginger: then pare off
the rindes of one or two good Lemmons, and slice them thin into the Mutton,
when it is almost well stewed between two dishes, and so let them stew together
two or three walmes: when they are enough, put them in a clean dish, and take
the shoulder blade (being well broiled on a Gridiron) and lay it upon the meat,
garnishing your dish with some slices and rind of the Lemmons, and so serve it.

50 To make Veale Toots or Olives.
Take the Kidney of a loyne of Veale roasted, with a good deal of the fat, and
a little of the flesh, mince it very small, and put to it two eggs, one Nutmeg
finely grated, a good quantity of Sugar, a few Currants, a little Salt, stir
them well together, and make them into the form of little Pasties, and fry them
in a pan with sweet Butter.

51 To make very fine Sawsages.
Take four pound and a half of Pork, chop it small, and put to it three pound of
Beef Suet, and chop them very small together; then put to them a handful of
Sage finely shred, one ounce of Pepper, one ounce of Mace, two ounces of
Cloves, a good deal of Salt, eight eggs very well beaten before you put them in:
then work them well with your hand til they be thoroughly mingled, and then fill
them up. Some like not the eggs in them: it is not amiss therefore if you
leave them out.

52 To make Brawn eat tender and delicate.
Put collars of Brawn in Kettles of water or other apt vessels, into an oven
heated as you would for household bread; cover the vessels, and so leave them as
long in the Oven as you would do a batch of bread. A late experience amongst
Gentlewomen, far excelling the old manner of boiling Brawn in great Kettles.
Quere, if putting your liquor hot into the vessels, and the Brawn a little
boiled first, by this means you shall not give great expedition to your work?

53 To boila Capon in white broth.
Boil your Capon by it self in fair water, then take a ladle full or two of
mutton broth, and a little white wine, a little whole Mace, a bundle of sweet
herbs, and a little marrow; thicken it with Almonds, season it with sugar and a
little verjuyce; boil a few Currants by themselves, and a Date quartered, (left
you discolor your broth) and put it on the breast of your Capon, Chicken, or
Rabbet: If you have no Almonds, thicken it with Cream or with yolks of eggs:
Garnish your dishes on the sides with a Lemmon sliced, and sugar.

54 To roast a shoulder of Mutton with Oysters
When you open the Oysters, save the liquor; then season them with pepper, and
a little cloves and mace, and herbs finely chopped, and the yolks of two or
three eggs chopped small, and some currants perboiled a little; then stuff your
shoulder of mutton thick with your oysters, then season it and lay it to the
fire and roast it; then take the rest of your Oysters and boil them with a
little white wine and some butter, this is sauce for a shoulder of mutton. When
your oysters are opened you may perboil them in their own liquor, then take
them out and season them.

55 To boil a Mallard with Cabbage.
Half roast your fowl, then take it off and case it down, then put it into a
pipkin with the gravie, then pick and wash some Cabbage and put to your
Mallard, with as much fair water as will cover it; then put in a good piece of
butter and let it boil an hour; season it with pepper and salt, and serve it
upon sops.

56 To stew a Mallard.
Roast your Mallard half enough, then take it up, and cut it into little
pieces, then put it into a dish with the gravie, and a piece of fresh butter,
and a handful of parsley chopped small, with two or three onions and a cabbage
lettice; let them stew one hour, then season it with pepper and salt, and a
little verjuyce, then serve it.

57 To souce a young Pig.
Take a young pig being scalded, boil it in fair water and white wine, put
thereto bay leaves, whole Ginger and Nutmegs quartered, a few whole Cloves;
boil it thoroughly, and leave it in the same broth in an earthen pot.

58 To roast a Pig with a Pudding in his belly.
Flay a fat Pig, truss his head looking over his back; then temper as much
stuff as you think will fill his belly, then put it into your Pig, and prick it
up close: when it is almost roasted, wring out the juice of a Lemmon; when you
are ready to take it up, take four or five yolks of eggs, and wash your Pig all
over; mingle your bread with a little Nutmeg and Ginger, then dry it and take
it up as fast as you can: let your sauce be vinegar, butter and sugar, the yolk
of an hard egg minced, and serve it hot.

PUDDINGS
59 How to make an Italian Pudding.
Take a Manchet and cut it in square pieces like a die; then put to it half a
pound of beese suet minced small, raisins in the sun the stones picked out,
Cloves, Mace, minced Dates, sugar, marrow, Rose water, Eggs and Cream; mingle
all these together, and put it into a dish fit for your stuff; in less then an
hour it will be baked; then scrape on sugar, and serve it.

60 To make a Haggesse Pudding
Take a fat Haggesse; perboil it well, take out the Kernels, shred it small, and
temper it with a handful or two of grated Manchet, then take three or four Eggs
well beaten, Rosewater and Sugar, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Mace, very finely
beaten, Currants and Marrow good store, temper them all together, with a fit
quantity of Cream, being first moderately seasoned with Salt.

61 To make the best white Puddings.
Take a pound of Almonds, blanch them, stamp them, putting in a little milk
sometime to them in the stamping: then put to them three handfuls of fine
flower, or as much grated bread first baked in an oven; six eggs well beaten, a
good deal of marrow cut in little pieces: season them with Nutmegs and Sugar,
three spooufuls of Rose water and a little salt: temper them all together with
as much Cream as will serve to wet or mingle them, and so fill them up.

62 A Rice Pudding.
Take thin Cream, or good milk of what quantity you please, boil it on the
fire with a little Cinnamon in it, and when it has boiled a while, take out
the Cinnamon, and put in Rose water and Sugar enough to make it good and sweet;
then having your Rice ready beaten as fine as flower (and searced, as some do
it) strew it in, til it be of the thickness of a hasty Pudding: then pour it
into a dish, and serve it at the Table.

63 To make a fine Pudding in a dish.
Take a penny white loaf and pare off all the crust, and slice it thin into a
dish, with a quart of Cream, and set it to boil over a Chafing dish of coals
til the bread be almost dry, then put in a piece of sweet butter, and take it
off, let it stand in the dish til it be cold, then take the yolks of three eggs
and the white of one, with some Rose water and sugar, and stirring them all
together, put them into another dish well buttered, and bake it.

64 To make the best Puff-paste.
Take two great handfuls of fine flower, the whites of two eggs, and one yolk,
beat them a little together, with two spoonfuls of Rose water, and put them to
the flower, and work it into the paste (with as much cold water as is fit) very
well together: then roll it out like a Pasty, and take one pound of sweet butter,
(beating it a little to make it soft) and lay it all over the Paste in little
pieces, and fold it over, and well roll it out again, laying on more butter as
you did before, til the butter all be wrought in, and if it be too soft, strew
a little flower before you roll it all over: be very careful you roll it not too
thin, lest the butter come through, for if it cleave to the Table it will not be
good: Roll out a piece thin to lay in the bottom of a dish, or on a paper, and
put on it Apples, or what you like best, and cover them over with some of the
Paste, and cut it round about with Peakes, that it may rise up in the baking.

Pies and Baked meats.
65 To make an Artichoke Pie
Boil your Artichokes, take off all their leaves, pull out all the strings,
leaving only the bottomes; then season them with Cinnamon and sugar, laying
between every Artichoke a good piece of butter; when you put your Pie into the
oven, stick the Artichokes with slices of Dates, and put a quarter of a pint of
white wine into the Pie, and when you take it out of the oven, do the like
again, with some butter, sugar and Rosewater, melting the butter upon some
coals before you put it into the Pie.

66 To make a Neats-foot Pie.
Take a Neats-foot, dry it in a cloth, then take it and shred it with Mutton
Suet, as small as you think fit, putting in no seasoning but Nutmegs and sugar:
and to every Pie almost a pound of Currants well picked, when you put it into
the oven. And before you set it into the Oven, put in a quarter of a pint of
white wine: and when you take it out, do the like again with a good piece of
butter and sugat.

67 To bake Beef like red Deer.
Take a pound of Beef, and slice it thin, and half a pint of good wine vinegar,
some three Cloves, and Mace above an ounce, three Nutmegs; pound them all
together; pepper and salt according to your discretion, and a little sugar, mix
these together: take a pound and a half of suet shred, and beat it small in a
mortar; then lay a row of suet, and a row of beef, strew your spices beaten
every lay, then your vinegar; so do til you have laid in all, then make it up;
but first beat it close with a rolling pin, then press it a day before you put
it in your paste.

68 A Calves head Pie (for supper)
Boil your Calves head almost enough, cut it in thin s^ices all from the bone,
season it with 3 beaten Nutmegs, a quarter of an ounce of pepper, and as much
salt as there is seasoning; then take a handful of sweet herbs minced small, and
two spoonfuls of sugar, and two or three Artichoake bottoms boiled, and cut
them in thin slices, and the marrow of two bones rolled in yolks of eggs, a
quarter of a pound of Eringo roots, and a quarter of a pound of Currants; then
put it into your pie, and put a quarter of a pound of Butter, and a sliced
Lemmon, three or four blades of Mace, three or four quartered Dates; let it
stand an hour or more in the Oven; then when you take it out, put into it a
cawdle made of sugar, white wine, verjuice and butter.

69 A Lark Pie.
Take three dozen of Larks, season them with four Nutmegs and half an ounce of
Pepper, and a quarter of an ounce of beaten mace; then take Lumbard pie-meat
and fill their bellies if you will: if not, take half a pound of suet, and one
pound of mutton minced, Raisins of the sun half a pound, and six apples, minced
all together very small; then season it with a Nutmeg, Pepper and salt, and one
spoonful of sweet herbs, and a Lemmon peel minced, one penny loaf grated, a
quarter of apint of cream, two or three spoonfuls of Rose Water, three
spoonfuls of sugar, one or two of verjuice; then make this into boles and put
it into their bellies, and put the Larks into your Pie; then put marrow rouled
in yolks of Eggs upon the Larks, and large mace, and sliced lemmon, and fresh
butter: Let it stand in the oven an hour; when you take it out, make a cawdle
of butter, sugar, and white wine Vinegar, and put it into the Pie.

70 A Skerret Pie.
Take a quarter of a peck of Skerrets blanched, and sliced, season them with
three Nutmegs, and an ounce of Cinnamon, and three ounces of Sugar, and ten
quartered Dates, and the marrow of three bones rouled in yolks of Eggs, and a
quarter of a pound of Eringo roots, and preserved Lettice, a sliced Lemmon,
four blades of Mace, three or four branches of preserved Barberries, and half a
pound of Butter; then let it stand one hour in the Oven; then put a cawdle made
of white wine, verjuice, butter and sugar into the Pie when it comes out of the
Oven.

71 A Pork Pie.
Boil your leg of Pork, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and salt; bake it five
hours in a high round Pie.

72 How to bake a Steak Pie.
Cut a neck of mutton in steaks, beat them with a cleaver, season them with
Pepper and salt and Nutmeg, then lay them in your coffin with butter and large
mace, then bake it; then take a good quantity of parslie and boil it, beat it
as soft as the pulp of an apple, put in a quarter of a pint of Vinegar, and as
much white wine (with a little sugar) warm it well, and pour it over your
Steaks, then shake it, that the gravie and liquor may mingle together: scrape
on sugar, and serve it.

73 To bake Chucks of Veale.
Perboil two pound of the lean flesh of a leg of Veal, mince it as small as
grated bread, with four pound of bief suet; then season it with Biscay Dates
and Carawaies, some Rose Water, sugar, raisins of the Sun and currants; cloves,
mace, nutmeg, and cinnamon; then mingle them all together, fill your Pies, and
bake them.

74 To make Symbals.
Take fine flower dried, and as much sugar as flower; then take as much whites
of Eggs as will make it a paste, and put in a little Rosewater; then put in a
quantity of coriander seed and Annis seed, then mould it up in that fashion
you will bake it in.

75 To make Cracknels.
Take five or six pints of the finest wheat flower you can get; to which you
must put in a spoonful (and not above) of good Yest: then mingle it well with
butter, cream, rose water, and sugar finely beaten, and working it well into
paste, make it in what form you will, and bake it.

TARTS
76 To make fine Pippin Tarts.
Quarter, pare, core, and stew your Pippins in a pipkin upon very hot embers,
close covered, a whole day, for they must stew softly: then put to them some
whole Cinnamon, six Cloves, and sugar enough to make them sweet, and some
Rosewater: and when they are stewed enough, take them off the fire, and take
all the spice from them, and break them small like Marmelade: and having your
coffins ready made, not above an inch deep, fill them with it, and lay on a
very thin cover of Puff-paste, close and fit; so bake them, and serve them in
cold: but you must take heed you do not over-bake them.

77 How to make a Tart of Butter and Eggs.
Take the yolks of sixteen Eggs, well parted from the whites, three quarters of
a pound of Butter well clarified, and strain it twice or thrice in a fair
strainer (seasoned with sugar and a little Rosewater) wherein Spinach first a
little boiled has been strained, to make it green. Be sure your paste be well
made, and whole, and so bake it up, and serve it.

78 A Tart of Strawberries.
Pick and wash your Strawberries very clean, and put them in your paste one by
another as thick as you can: then take Sugar, Cinnamon, and a little Ginger,
finely beaten, and well mingled together, cast them upon the Strawberries, and
cover them with the lid finely cut into Lozanges, and so let it bake a quarter
of an hour, then take it out, and strewing it with a little Cinnamon and Sugar,
serve it.

79 A Tart of Hips.
Take Hips and cut them, and take out the seeds very clean, then wash them,
season them with Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger; then close your Tart, bake it, ice
it, scrape on sugar, and serve it.

80 A Tart of green Pease.
Take green Pease, and seethe them tender, then pour them out into a cullender,
season them with Saffron, salt, and sweet butter, and sugar; then close it,
then bake it almost an hour, then draw it forth and ice it; put in a little
verjuyce and shake it well, then scrape on sugar and serve it.

81 To make a Tart of Wardens.
You must first bake your wardens in a pot, then cut them in quarters, and core
them, then put them into your Tart with Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger; then close
up your Tart, and when it is almost baked, do it as your warden Pie, scrape on
sugar and serve it.

82 To marble Beef, Mutton or Venison.
Stick any of these with Rosemary and Cloves, then roast it, being first
joynted very well, then baste it often with water and salt; and when it is
thoroughly roasted, take it up and let it cool; then take Clarret wine, and
vinegar, and as much water, boil it with Rosemary, Bays, good store of
Pepper, Cioves, Salt; when it has boiled an hour, take it off and let it
cool; then put your meat into a vessel, and cover it with this liquor and
herbs, then stop it up close, the closer you stop it, the longer it will keep.

83 To marble Fish.
Take Flounders, Trouts, Smelts, or Salmons, Mullets, Makrel, or any kind of
shelfish; wash them and dry them in a cloth, then fry them with sallet oil or
clarified butter; fry them very crisp; then make your pickle with clarret wine
and fair water, some Rosemary and Thyme, with Nutmegs cut in flices, and pepper
and salt; when it has boiled half an hour, take it off and let it cool; then
put your fish into a vessel, cover it with liquor and spice, and stop it close.

84 To make a very good Tansie.
Take fifteen eggs and six of the whites, beat them very well, then put in some
sugar and a little sack, beat them again; then put in about a pint or a little
more of Cream, and beat them again; then put in the juice of Spinnage or of
Primrose leaves, to make it green; then put in some more sugar, if it be not
sweet enough, then beat it again a little, and so let it stand til you fry it;
when the first course is in, then fry it with a little sweet butter; it must be
stirred and fried very tender: when it is fried enough, then put it in a dish,
and strew some sugar upon it and serve it in.

85 To make excellent bottle Ale.
Take two or three drops of the extracted oil of Sage, and mingle it with a
quart of Ale; brewing the same well out of one pot into another; and this way a
whole stand of Sage-Ale is very speedily made. The like is to be done with oil
of Mace or Nutmegs: But if you will make a right Gossips cup, that shall far
exceed all the Ale that ever mother Bunch made in her life time; then in the
bottling up of your best Ale, tun half a pint of white Ipocras that is newly
made, and after the best Receipt, with a bottle of Ale; stop your bottle close,
and drink it when it is stale. Some commend the hanging of roasted Oranges
pricked full of cloves in the vessel of Ale, til you find the taste thereof
sufficiently graced to your own liking.

86 The particulars of the Ipocras made usually in London.
Cinnamon one ounce, Ginger one ounce, Nutmegs half an ounce, Cloves, Coriander
seed, long Pepper, of each one quarter of an ounce, bruise all these in an
mortar; Sugar one pound, Rosewater a fit quantity; milk half a pint, Rosemary a
little to lay in the bottom of the bag; a gallon of the pleasantest
High-Country White wine. Some add to this a quantity of Galingal, and some
Raisins of the Sun.

JELLIES.
87 How to make a fine Crystal Jelly.
Take a knuckle of Veal and four calves feet, and set them on the fire with a
gallon of fair water, and when the flesh is boiled tender, take it out; then
let the liquor stand still till it be cold; then take away the top and the
bottom of that liquor, and put the rest into a clean pipkin, and put into it
one pound of clarified sugar, four or five drops of oil of Cinnamon and
Nutmegs, a grain of Musk, and so let it boil a quarter of an hour leisurely on
the fire; then let it run through a Jelly-bag into a basin, with the whites of
two eggs beaten; and when it is cold, you may cut it in lumps with a spoon, and
so serve three or four lumps on a plate.

88 To make Jelly of Pippins.
Take Pippins and pare them, and quarter them, and core them, lay them in
water; and when you set them on the fire, shift them in another water, and put
them in a skillet, and put in as much water as will cover them and a little
more, set them over the fire and make them boil as fast as you can; when the
Apples are soft, and the liquor tastes strong of the Apples, then take them
off, and strain them through a canvas cloth gently, take to a pound of juice a
pound of sugar, then set it on the fire, when it is melted, strain it into a
basin and rince your skillet again: set it on the fire, and when it is boiled
up, then scumme it, and make it boil as fast as you can, and when it is almost
boiled, put in the juice of three Lemmons strained through a cloth: if you will
have Orange pil, pare it thin that the white be not seen, and then lay them in
fair water all night, then boil them in the water til the pil be soft; then put
it into the syrup, and stir it about, and fill your glasses, and let it stand
til it be cold; and then it is ready to eat.

89 To make a Jelly.
Take either Veal, a Cock, or (which is best of all) Calves feet, boil them well
in one water, or as they call it, scald them til you can get off the skin and
claws, so make them very clean, and let them cool.

Then set on more water, and when it seetheth, put in the Calves feet (which
for these proportions may be four or six) and let them boil until they will
Jelly, which you shall know by letting it stand til it be cold: when it is
enough, strain the clearest from the other, and let the best stand til it be
cold.

Then an hour after set it on the fire again, and put to it a pint of white
wine, and so much sugar as will make it sweet; two ounces of Cinnamon bruised in
a Mortar, one ounce of Nutmegs, and the white of one Egg well beaten, and when
it begins to boil, after they are put in, put in two or three spoonfuls of
whitewine Vinegar: then make ready your white Cotton bag, and put in the bottom
thereof a sprig or two of Rosemary; and while this is doing, set the liquor on
the fire again, and when it begins to sees, put in the white of one egg
more well beaten first: then take it off the fire, and let it run through the
Cotton bag, then take that which is run through, set it on the fire again; as
soon as it seetheth, put in another white of an egg, and then let it run
through the bag again: do so again the third time, after it is heated and
clarified, and then it will be enough; then put it up in glasses well covered,
and not in pipkins or gallipots: and keep it for your use.

90 A direction to make a Jelly.
Take three Calves feet, flea and wash them very clean, take also a fleshie
Pullet, or a piece of Veal, pick the fat away and put them into an earthen pan
or basin, and to them so much water as will cover them, steep it therein two
days and a night, changing the water, and bruising the flesh six or seven
times a day, then put it into a clean brass pot, pour to it more then a gallon
of fair water, keep it boiling and always scummed, til it come to the height
of a Jelly, putting thereto first, when you see the liquor half wasted, more
then a pint of white wine. When it is enough, strain it through a double linen
cloth, let it stand til it be cold, when if you can see any fat, take it off
lightly; then pour the Jelly into a basin, set it on a Chafingdish of coals,
and put thereto of the finest sugar finely beaten so much as will sweeten it
thoroughly, then take of Cinnamon scraped and gross beaten, half a pound, three
Nutmegs, one ounce of white Ginger scraped and grossy bruised a little, and a
very little -- scraped and only broken, ten Cloves bruised a little, and a very
little white salt, put to them the whites of eight eggs (new laid) lightly
beaten together, stir them together til they be all thoroughly mixed, so let
it boil softly til it taste of the spice, and in the places where it rises in
boiling, drop in here and there a spoonful of white wine vinegar, and lastly
three spoonfuls of the best damask-Rose water; when you find it boiled enough,
take a clean Jelly bag, put into the bottom of it, of Thime and Rosemary of
each a branch, three branches of sweet Marjorome, a handful of Violets if they
may be had: sprinkle the herbs and bag with good store of Damask-Rosewater,
hang the bag near a good fire, and put therein your Jelly, taking great heed
that no dust or smoke hurt it, and so let it run into a clean basin through your
bag twice at least, then put it up in fittest sort for your use.

LEACHES.
91 To make Leach of Ipocras.
Take one pint of Ipocras, two ounces of Isonglas, six spoonfuls of Rose water,
two grains of Musk, and four ounces of sugar candy, boil it leisurely upon a
chafingdish of coals, then let it run through a Cotton bag into a basin; and
when you serve it, cut it in what fashion you will with a spoone, knife, or
otherwise; being colored as you please.

92 To make fine white Leach of Almonds.
Take half a pound of small Almonds, beat them and strain them with Rosewater
and sweet milk from the Cow, put into it two or three pieces of large Mace, one
grain of Musk, two ounces of Isonglas, and so boil it on a Chafingdish of
coals, a quarter of an hour, till it will stand, which you shall try thus: Set a
sawcer on, or in a little cold water, so that none come into it, and put a
spoonful of the Leach into it, and if you see that stand, take the other off
the fire, then you may slice it in what fashion you please.

93 To make Leaches.
Take a pottle or gallon of Milk, as you think fit: make it hot as it came from
the Cow, then take a quantity of Almonds blanched and ground, answerable to the
Milk, strain them with the milk, and sees them with so much sugar as will
sweeten it, and some bruised Nutmeg, Ginger, and Cinnamon, and a little Salt
tied in a cloth with some Rose water, and one ounce or more of Isonglas, being
washed and steeped before three or four hours in fair water: let them seethe
altogether til it be so clammy that it will cut with a knife; then strain it
through a cooler, that the Isonglas may be taken away, and the next day when it
is cold, cut it in slices into a dish, and serve it. So you may make it red
with red Sanders, yellow with Saffron, green with, etc.

94 The Cooks common white Leach.
Take the Sinnews of a Cowes heel, the flesh and fat cut away, slice them as
thin as you can, and boil them in milk warm from the Cow, till it be stiff
enough to cut, which you shall try with a spoon: then strain it through a cloth,
and sweeten it with sugar and a spoonful or two of Rose water: then stir them
well together with a spoon, and letting it stand til it be cold, slice it out in
what form you list, and serve it.

SWEETS.
95 To make sweet Bags to lay Linen in.
Take Damask Rose buds, pluck them and dry the leaves in the shadow, the tops
of Lavender flowers, sweet Margerome and Basil, of each a handful, all dried
and mingled with the Rose leaves: Take also of Benjamin, Storax, Gallingal
roots, and Ireos or Orris roots (twice as much of the Orris as of any of the
other) beaten into fine powder; a piece of Cotton wool, wetted in Rose water,
and put to it a good quantity of Musk and Ambergreee, made into powder, and
sprinkle them with some Civit dissolved in Rosewater, lay the cotton in double
paper, and dry it over a chafingdish of coals: Lastly take half a handful of
Cloves and as much Cinnamon bruised, not small beaten, mix all these together,
and put them up in your Baggs.

96 Sweet bags to lay among linen.
Take Orris, Ciprus, Galamus, Fusis, all of them gross beaten, and Gallingal
roots, of eath a handful, and as much of the small tops of Lavender dried, and
put them into bags to lay among your clothes: you may put in a handful or two
of Damask-Rose leaves dried, which will somewhat better the scent.

97 Cyprus powder.
Take of Storax Calamint four ounces, Calamus Aromaticus two ounces; red Roses
two ounces; of Marjorome and Rosemary flowers of each one ounce: Orange pil one
ounce and a half, of Cloves and Lignum Rhodium, of each two drachms, and fine
Musk twenty grains. Make all these into powder, and put it up into a bag
fitting.

98 Powder of Violets.
Take of sweet Ireos roots one ounce, red Roses two ounces, Storax one ounce
and a half, Cloves two drachms, Marjorome one dram, Lavender flowers one
dram and a half, make these into powder, then take eight grains of fine Musk
powdered also, put to it two ounces of Rose water, stir them together, and put
all the rest to them, and stir them half an hour til the water be dried, then
set it by one day, and dry it by the fire half an hour, and when it is dry, put
it up into bags.

99 Cyprus Matches to burn in perfume
Take of Willow wood made into Charcoal, one pound, of Benjamin two ounces,
Storax liquida one dram and a half, of Storax Calamint one ounce, Marjorome
one ounce, Cloves one ounce, of fine Musk ten grains: beat them altogether into
powder; then take of Quincy Draggagenty four ounces; put it in Rose water, and
stir them well together, and let them stand a night and a day; then put all the
aforesaid parcels to this Rose water, which must be no more then will make it
into a Paste, and thereof make up your Matches in what form you list, and let
them dry in the shadow, without fire or sun.

100 How to make a sweet water.
Take a gallon of Wort, half a gallon of running water, of Lavender and
Bay Leaves dried of each two handfuls, of Orris powder one ounce; put all these
together in an earthen pot, let them stand one day and one night, stirring them
often; the morrow after distill it, putting in a penny worth of Balm: and the
water which comes off the distilling will be very sweet.

101 To make a sweet powder.
Take Orris half a pound, six pence; Ciprus, half a pound, ten pence; Calamus
half a pound, eight pence; Fusis half a pound, twenty pence; Benjamin two
ounces twelve pence, Musk powder twelve pence; grains one pound, eighteen
pence. Total, seven shillings two pence.

102 Another for the same,
Take Benjamin four ounces, two shillings; Storax Calaminta three ounces, two
shillings; Fusis of Cloves three ounces, nine pence; fine Ireos six ounces, two
pence; Santalum Citrinum three ounces, eighteen pence; Musk 20 grains, three
shillings four pence; Civet ten grains, 20d. Total, eleven shillings five
pence.

103 To make the Moss powder.
Take of Moss that grows upon a sweet Appletree, or a pippin tree, a good
quantity, gathered betwixt the two Lady days, put the moss into a quart of
Damask Rose water, stop the glass, set it before the fire, let it so remain
one day and one night; then take it out and lay it on the bottom of a sieve,
put it into an oven and dry it; beat it to powder: then take Benjamin, Storax
Calaminta; Lignum aloes, of each one ounce; Musk, Ambergreece, Civet, of each
six ounces, beat all these in a mortar together, til they come to a powder,
then mix it with the moss powder, and it will be a most excellent sweet powder.

104 To make a sweet Bal or powder.
Take Cloves and Nutmegs, of each one ounce; Cinnamon and Benjamin, of either
half an ounce; Calamus Aromaticus and white Sanders of each two ounces, beat
every of them severally, and searce them into fine powder; and then beat them
into a past with Rosewater. Take then Storax Calaminta two ounces, Labdanum one
ounce, beat them in a mortar with Rosewater til they be well mixed: and then put
the other Paste to them, and beat them together, till they be thoroughly mixed.
Then take Ambergreece, Musk and Civet of each four or six grains, bruise them,
and mix them well together in a Sawcer with a little Rose water; then put them
to the other Paste, and work them well together, warming both the paste and your
hands, very well with a chafingdish of coals well kindled standing by you, til
you have very well incorporated them together: and then while the paste is
warm, make it up into what assize or form you please.

104 To make Snow.
Take a quart of thick Cream, and five or six whites of Eggs, a Sawcer full of
sugar finely beaten, and as much Rose water, beat them altogether, and always
as it rises take it out with a spoone: then take a loaf of bread, cut away the
crust, set it in a platter, and a great Rosemary bush in the midst of it:
then lay your Snow with a spoone upon the Rosemary, and so serve it.

105 To make a Junket.
Take Ews or Goats milk; if you have neither of these, then take Cows milk and
put it over the fire to warm, then put in a little runnet to it; then pour it
out into a dish and let it cool, then strew on Cinnamon and sugar, then take
some of your aforesaid cream, and lay on it, scrape on sugar and serve it.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS of the third Part.
For Sallets, etc.
A Lemmon Sallet. 181 To keep Clove Gilliflowers For Sallets. ibid To pickle
Oysters. 182 To pickle Quinces. ibid To keep Goosberries. 183 Purslane ibid How
to keep Cucumbers raw. ibid To keep boiled Cucumbers. ibid To pickle Cucumbers
to keep all the year. 184 To keep Cowslips for Sallets. ibid Violets, Buglosse,
Borage, Rosemary, Marigolds Fennel. 185 To keep Broom flowers for Sallets. ibid
To keep Barberies to garnish your meat, etc. ibid To keep Artichokes for all the
year 186 To pickle Broom buds. ibid How to pickle Cucumbers. 187 To make a
gallendine sauce for a Turkey. ibid
Spoon meats.
The best Clouted Cream. 187 Another way for the same in a less proportion.
188 To make the ordinary Clouted Cream. ibid To make Almond Milk. 189 To make a
Cullesse ibid The best way to make a Sack Posset. 190 A Sack Posset without
milk. ibid An Almond Caudle. 191 To make the Danfick Cream. ibid To make fresh
Cheese in Cream. bid A mess of fine Cream. 192 To make French Frumenty. ibid
How to make a Goosberry Fool. 193 How to make a Goosberry Custard. ibid To make
pap of Barley. 194 The Lady of Arundels Manchet. ibid To make Spiced bread. ibid
To make Buttered loaves. 195 To make Almond Butter. ibid
CAKES.
To make Barberry Cakes. 196 To make a sweet Cake, and with it a very sweet
water. ibid To make Almond Cakes. 197 To make a Cake. ibid To make a Slipcoat
Cheese 198 To make the Angelotta Cheese. 198 To keep Cherries all the year. 199
FRIGASIES.
Frigasie of Chickens. 199 Frigasie of Lamb. 200 Frigasie of Rabbets. ibid
Frigasie of Veale. ibid
Diverse other ways to dress Flesh.
How to boil a Capon handsomely. ibid To roast a shoulder of Mutton with Lemmons
201 To make Veale Toots or Olives. 202 To make very fine Sawsages. ibid To make
Brawn eat tender and delicate. 203 To boil a Capon in white broth. ibid To
roast a shoulder of Mutton with Oysters ibid To boil a Mallard with Cabbage.
204 To stew a Mallard. ibid To souce a young Pig. ibid To roast a Pig with a
Pudding in his belly. 205
PUDDINGS
How to make an Italian Pudding. 205 To make a Haggesse Pudding 206 To make the
best white Puddings. ibid A Rice Pudding. ibid To make a fine Pudding in a
dish. 207 To make the best Puff-paste. ibid
Pies and Baked meats.
To make an Artichoke Pie. 208 To make a Neats-foot Pie. ibid To bake Beef like
red Deer. 209 A Calves head Pie (for supper) ibid A Lark Pie. 210 A Skerret
Pie. ibid A Pork Pie. 211 How to bake a Steak Pie. ibid To bake Chucks of
Veale. ibid To make Symbals. 212 To make Cracknels. ibid
TARTS.
To make fine Pippin Tarts. 212 How to make a Tart of Butter and Eggs. 213 A
Tart of Strawberries. ibid A Tart of Hips. ibid A Tart of green Pease. ibid To
make a Tart of Wardens. 214 To marble Beef, Mutton or Venison. ibid To marble
Fish. ibid To make a very good Tansie. 215 To make excellent botle Ale. ibid
The particulars of the Ipocras made usually in London. 216
JELLIES.
How to make a fine Crystal Jelly. ibid To make a Jelly of Pippine. 217 To make
a Jelly. 218 A direction to make a Jelly. 219
LEACHES.
To make Leach of Ipocras 220 To make fine white Leach of Almonds. 221 To make
Leaches ibid The Cooks common white Leach. 222
SWEETS.
To make sweet Bags to lay Linen in. ibid Sweet bags to lay among linen. 223
Cyprus powder ibid Powder of Violets. ibid Cypress Matches to burn in perfume.
224 How to make a sweet Water. ibid To make a sweet Powder. ibid Another for
the same. 225 To make the Moss Powder ibid To make a sweet Ball or powder.
ibid To make Snow. 226 To make a Junket. ibid
FINIS.
Books Printed for William Lee. D. Pakeman. Ga. Bedell.

REports of certain Cases, Arising in the several Courts of Record, at
Westminster, in the Reigns of Qu. Elizabeth, King James, and the late King
Charles; with the resolutions of the Judges of the said Courts, upon debate, and
solemn Arguments. Collected, and lately reviewed by Justice Godbold: in Quarto.

The Touchstone of common assuraences, by William Sheppard Esquire; in Quarto.

The whole office of a Country Justice of peace, both in Sessions, and out of
Sessions; with an Abridgment of all the Acts, and Ordinances of Parliament,
relating to the office of a Justice of peace; in Octavo.

A Collection of several Acts of Parliament, published in the years 1648, 1649,
1650, 1651, very useful, especially for Justices of peace, and other officers,
in the Execution of their duties, and Administration of Justice, with several
ordinances of the like concernment, by Henry Scobel Esquire, Clark of the
Parliament: in folio.

A Collection of several Acts of Parliament, which concern the Adventurers of
Ireland, by Henry Scobel Esquire, Clark of the Parliament; in folio.

A General Table, to all the several Books of the Reports of the Lord Cook,
with two tables, one of the principal Cases, the other of the general Titles,
arising out of the matter of the Reports, done into English; in Octavo.

The new Natura Brevium, of the reverend Judge Mr. Anth. Fitzherbert, with the
Authorities of Law, Collected out of the year Books: an A bridgment with Writs,
and return of Writs, translated into English; never before Printed; in Octavo.

The Grounds and Maxims of the Laws of England, by William Noy Esquire, in
Octavo.

The Atturneys Accademy; being the manner of proceedings in all the Courts of
Record at Westminster, and other Courts of Law, and Equity; in Quarto.

An excellent Treatise entitled, For the Sacred Laws of the Land, by Francis
White Esquire; in Octavo.

De Priscis Anglorum Legibus, being the ancient Laws of England, in Saxon, and
Latin, out of the Authors (Mr. Lambert) own manuscript copy, published with
the Additions of Mr. Wheelock of Cambridg; in folio.

Reports and Pleas of Assizes at York, held before several Judges in that
Circuity, with some Presidents useful for pleaders at the Assizes; never
Englished before: in octavo.

Reports, or Cases in Chancery, Collected by Sir George Carry, one of the
Masters of the Chancery; in Octavo.

A perfect Abridgment of the Eleven Books of the Reports of the Lord Cook,
written in French by Sir John Davis, and now Englished; in Duodecimo.

Reports, or new Cases of Law, by John March, in Quarto.

Statuta pacis, containing all statutes in order of time, that concern a
Justice of peace; in Duodecimo.

Three Learned Readings, the first by the Lord Dyer, of Wills; second by Sir
John Brograve of Jointures; third by Thomas Risden of forcible Entryes; in
Quarto.

The Learned Arguments of the Judges of the upper Bench, upon the writ of
Habeas Corpus, with the opinion of the Court thereupon; in Quarto.

The Book of Oaths, with the several forms of them, both Ancient and Modern; in
Duodecimo.

The Office of Sheriffs, and Coroner, by J. Wilkinson of Bernards Inn; with
Kitchins return of writs, newly translated into English; in Octavo.

Synopsis, or an exact Abridgment of the Lord Cooks Commentary upon Littleton,
being a brief Explanation of the Grounds of the common Law, Composed by that
learned Lawyer, Sir Humphrey Davenport Knight, Lord chief Baron of the
Exchequer; in Octavo.

Miscellania Spiritualia, or devout Essay's, by the Honorable Walter Mountague
Esquire, the first part; in Quarto.

The History of the Civil wars of France, written in Italian, by Henrico
Catarino D' Avila, translated into English by Sir Charles Cotterel Knight, and
William Aylsbury Esquire; in Folio.

Books Printed for, or to be sold by M. M. G. Bedell, and T. Collins, at their
shop at the middle Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet.
EAdmeri Monachi Cantuariensis, Historiae Novorum, Joannes Seldenis Notis; in
Folio.

Mare Clausum. seu Dominio Mare, Joannes Seldeni; in Folio.

The History of great Britain, from the first peopling of this Island, to the
Reign of King James, by Willam Slayter, with the Illustrations of John Seldom
Esquire in Folio.

The History of Tithes, in the payment of them, the Laws made for them, and
touching the Right of them, by John Seldom Esquire; in Quarto.

Annals, or a general Chronicle of England, with an Appendix, or Corrollary of
the foundations of the Universities of England, begun by John Stowe, and
continued to the year 1631 by Edm. Howes Gent. in Folio.

A Chronicle of the Kings of England, from the Romans Government, unto the
Reign of King Charles, containing all passages of Church, and State, with all
other observations proper for a History. The second Edition, enlarged with
Marginal notes and large Tables, by Sir Richard Baker Knight; in Folio.

The History and Lives of the Kings of England, from Will. the Conqueror to the
end of the Reign of K. Henry the eighth, by Will. Martyn Esquire: to which is
added, the History of K. Edward the fixed, Q. Mary, and Queen Elizabeth; in
Folio.

The History of the Reign of K. Henry the seventh, written by the right
Honorable Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban; with a very useful, and
necessary Table annexed to it; in folio.

The Life and Reign of K. Henry the Eight, written by the Right Honorable
Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury; in Folio.

Orlando furioso, in English Heroical verse, by Sir John Harrington Knight, now
the third time revised and amended, with the Addition of the Authors Epigrams;
in Folio.

The Marrow of the French tongue, containing rules for pronunciation, an exact
Grammar of the nine parts of speech, and dialogues for Courtiers, Citizens, and
Countrymen, with varieties of phrases, letters missive, proverbs etc. So
compiled, that a mean capacity may in a short time, without help, attain to the
perfection of the Language, by Mr. John Woodroephe; in folio.

Pyrotechina, or a discourse of artificial fireworks, laying down the true
grounds of that Art: to which is annexed, a treatise of Geometry, by John
Babington student in the Mathematics; in Folio.

A French-English Dictionary, with another in English and French, Compiled by
Mr. Randal Cotgrave: whereunto are added the Animadversions, and supplement of
James Howel Esquire; in Folio.

Annals veteris Testamenti, a prima Mundi Origin deductis, una cum Rerum
Asiaticarium, et Aegyptiacarum Chronico, Jacobo Usserio Armachana digestore; in
folio.

With the second part now in press in Lain; in folio

Devotionis Augustinianae Flammae, or certain devout and learned meditations,
upon several Festivals in the year, written by the excellently accomplished
Gentleman, William Austin, of Lincolnes Inn Esquire; in folio.

The Christian man, or the Reparation of nature by grace, written in French by
John Francis Sennault, and now Englished by H. Gresly Master of Arts, and
student of Christ Church in Oxford; in Quarto.

An Interpretation of the number 666, wherein not only the manner how this
number ought to be Interpreted, but it is also showed, that this number does
exactly describe that state of government, to which all other Notes of
Antichrist do agree, by Francis Potter, B. D. with Mr. Medes Judgment of this
Treatise; in Quarto.

John Barclay his Argenis, translated out of Latin into English, the prose
upon his Majesty's command, by Sir Robert^le Gry's Knight, and the verses by
Thomas May Esquire; with a Clavis annexed to it, for the satisfaction of the
Reader; in Quarto.

The History of the Imperial estate of the Grand Seigneurs, their Habi^ations,
Lives, Favorites, Power, Government and Tyranny; to which is annexed, the
History of the Court of the King of China, written in French and translated by
Edward Grimston; in Quarto.

The state of France, as it stood in the ninth year of this present Monarch
Lewis the fourteenth, written to a friend, by I. E. in duodecimo.

The Pourtract of the Politic Christian Favorite, drawn from some of the
Actions of the Lord Duke of St. Lucar, by the Marquess Virgillio Malvezzi; to
which is annexed, Maxims of State, and political observations, on the same
story of Count Olivarez D of St. Lucar, in Duodecimo.

The Prince, written in French, by Mounsieur Du Balzac: now translated into
English, by Henry Gresly, Mr. of Arts, and student of Christ Church in Oxford,
in duodecimo.

The Life and Reign of King Edward the sixth, with the beginning of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, both written by Sir John Hayward Knight, Doctor of Law: in
duodecimo.

Of Liberty and Servitude; translated out of the French into the English
tongue, and dedicated to George Evelyn Esquire: in duodecimo.

The new plannet no plannet; or the earth no wandering Star. Here, out of the
principles of Divinity, Philosophy etc. the earths Immobility is asserted, and
Copernicus his opinion, as erroneous, etc. fully refuted, by Alexander Ross; in
Quarto.

The Picture of Conscience, consisting in the truths to be believed, the
virtues to be practiced, the vices to be avoided, and the Heresies to be
rejected, by Alexander Ross; in Duodecimo.

An humble Apology for Learning and Learned Men, by Edward VVaterhous Esquire;
in Octavo.

Selected parts of Horace Prince of Lyricks, concluding with a piece out of
Ausonius, and another out of Virgil; done into English by Richard Fanshaw
Esquire; in Octavo.

Palmer in D' Oliva both parts, in Quarto.

The true History of the Tragic Loves of Hypollito and Isabella, Neopolitans;
in Octavo.

The Nuptial Lover; in Octavo.

The Jesuit, the chief, if not the only state heretic in the world, or the
Venetian Quarrel; in quarto.

Brinsleys small Copy Book, in octavo.

Synopsis, or a Compendium of the Fathers; in Octavo.

Supplementum Lucani, Thomae May Anglo; in duodecimo.

Jacksons Evangelical temper in duodecimo.

Maran-Atha, the second advent, or Christ coming to Judgment. A Sermon preached
before the Honorable Judges of Assize, at Warwick, July 25, 1651. by VVil.
Durham, B. D. late preacher at the Rolls, now pastor of the Church of
Tredington, in Worcester shire; in quarto.

Steps of Ascension unto God, or a ladder to heaven, containing prayers and
meditations for every day of the week, and for all other times and occasions,
by Edward Gee Dr. of Divinity; in 24o.

The Devils an Ass, a Comedy, acted in the year 1616, by his Majesty's
servants, the Author Ben. Johnson; in folio.

The Marriage of the Arts, by Barten Holliday; in Quarto.

Michaelmas Term, in Quarto.

Fine Companion; in quarto.

The Phoenix: in quarto.

The just General, by Cosmo Manuche: in quarto.

The Courageous Turk: in 4to by T. Goffe, of Christ Church in Oxford.

The Tragedy of Orestes: in 4to by T. Goffe, of Christ Church in Oxford.

The Bastard a Tragedy in 4to by T. Goffe, of Christ Church in Oxford.

Edward the fourth, first and second part, a play in quarto.

Platonic Lovers: in 4to per Sir William Davenant Knight.

The Wits, a Comedy, in 4to per Sir William Davenant Knight.

The Triumphs of Prince D' Amor: in quarto. per Sir William Davenant Knight.

The faithful Shepardesse, Acted before the King and Queen, diverse times, with
great applause, at Black friars, by his Majesty's servants, written by John
Fletcher Gent. in 4to.

A Recantation of an ill led life, or a disovery of the highway Law, as also
many Cautelous Admonitions, and full Instructions, how to know, shun, and
apprehend a thief: most necessary for all honest travelers to peruse,
observe, and practice; written by John Clavel Gent.

The eleventh Report of the Lord Cook in French, in folio.

Statutes in the xxi K. James, and the first and third Caroli: in folio.

Lamberts Archeion; or comments on the high Courts of Justice: in Octavo.

Powels search of Records: in quarto.

The Laws, and Resolutions of women's Rights: in quarto.

Reformatio Legum, Ecclesiasticarum: in quarto.

The Parsons Law, Collected out of the whole body of the Common Law, and some
late Reports: in octavo.

The Court keepers Guide; A plain and familiar treatise, useful for the help of
those that are employed in keeping Law-daies, or Courts Baron; wherein is
largely, and plainly opened, the Jurisdiction of those Courts, with the
learning of Manors, Coppy-holds, Rents, Herriots, and other services, and
advantages belonging to Manors, to the great profit of Lords of manors, and
owners of these Courts. The third edition enlarged, the Author William Shepard
Esquire; in Octavo

Reliquiae VVottonianae, or a Collection of Lives, Letters and Poems, with
characters of sundry personages, and other Incomparable pieces of Language, and
Art, by the Curious pensil, of the ever Memorable, Sir Henry Wotton Knight,
late provost of Eaton: in duodecimo.

Calendarium Pastorale, sive Eglogae Duodecim, totidem Anni mensibus
Accomodatae, Anglice olim scriptae, ab Edmundo Spencero, Anglorum Poetarum
Principe, nunc autem Eleganti Latino Carmine donarae, a Theodoro Bathurst Aulae
Pembrokianae, apud Cantabrigiensis, aliquando socio. And the same in English,
against the Latin, in Octavo.

Miscellanea spiritualia, or devout Essays, by the Honorable Walter Mountague
Esquire, the second part: in quarto.

The Combat of Love and Friendship: A comedy as it was formerly presented by
the Gentlemen of Christ Church in Oxford: by Robert Meade sometime of the same
College. in 4to:

Cabala, Mysteries of State in letters of the great Ministers of King James,
and King Charles; wherein much of the public manage of affairs is related,
faithfully collected by a Noble hand: in quarto.

FINIS.

