CONFIRMATION AND RESTORATION, The necessary means of REFORMATION, And
RECONCILIATION; For the Healing of the Corruptions and Divisions of the
Churches:

Submissively, but earnestly tendered to the Consideration of the Sovereign
Powers, Magistrates, Ministers, and People, that they may awake, and be up and
doing in the Execution of so much, as appears to be necessary as they are
true to Christ, his Church and Gospel, and to their own and others Souls, and
to the Peace and welfare of the Nations; and as they will answer the neglect
to Christ, at their Peril.

By Richard Baxter, an unworthy Minister of Christ, that longs to see the
Healing of the Churches.

Isa. 44. 3, 4, 5. For I will pour water on him that is thirsty, and floods
upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit on thy seed, and my Blessing upon
thine Offspring, and they shall spring as among the grass, as willows by the
watercourse. One shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by
the name of Jacob; and another shall Subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and
surname himself by the name of Israel.

London, Printed by A. M. for Nevil Simmons Bookseller in Kederminster, and are
to be sold by Joseph Granford, at the King's Head in Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader;
HAving in diverse writings, moved for the Restitution of a solemn Transition,
of all that pass from an Infant-state of Church Membership, into the number of
the Adult, and are admitted to their Privileges, and the Associated Ministers
of this County, having made it an Article of their Agreement, at last came
forth an excellent Exercitation on Confirmation, written by Mr. Jonathan
Hanmer, very learnedly and piously, endeavoring the Restoration of this
Practice. Being very glad of so good a work, upon an invitation, I prefixed an
Epistle before it; which has occasioned this following Disputation. For when
the Book was read, the design was Generally approved, (as far as I can
learn) and very acceptable to good men of all parties. But many of them called
to me, to try whether some more Scripture proofs might not be brought for it,
that the Preceptive, as well as the Mediate Necessity might appear. At the
desire of some Reverend Godly Brethren, I hastily drew up this which is here
offered you; 1. Partly to satisfy them in the point of Scripture Evidence; 2.
But principally to satisfy my own earnest desires, after the Reformation, and
Healing of the Churches, to which I do very confidently apprehend, this
excellent work to have a singular tendencie. Here is a Medicine so effectual to
Heal our Breaches, and set our disordered Societies in joint, (being owned in
whole by the Episcopal, Presbyterian, Congregational, and Erastian, and in
half, by the Anabaptists) that nothing but our own self-conceitedness;
perverseness, lazyness, or wilful enmity to the Peace of the Churches, is able
to deprive us of a blessed success. But alas, our minds are the Subjects of the
disease; and are so alienated, exulcerated, and so selfishly partial and
uncharitable, that when the Plaster is offered us, and Peace brought to our
doors, I must needs expect that many should pievishly cast it away, and others
betray it, by a lazy commendation, and so disable the few that would be
faithful, practical, and industrious, from that General success, which is so
necessary and desirable.

As for them that lay all our Peace on Episcopacy, and Liturgy, I intend if
God will, to send them after this, some Healing motions on those subjects also.
And if they have no better success, than presently to satisfy my own
Conscience, in the faithful performance of so great a duty, and to awaken the
Desires, Endeavors and Prayers of the more moderate and Impartial, I shall not
think my labor lost. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that
love it. Let Us seek it of God, as well as men; which is the daily, though too
defective practice, of

The most unworthy Servant of the King of Peace, R. BAXTER.
April 7. 1658.
If Magistrates or others, who are obliged to promote the work, which is here
commended to them, do want leisure, or patience to read the whole, I desire
them to peruse these following Contents, and those parts of the Work, in which
they are most unsatisfied.

THE CONTENTS.
QUESTION. WHether those that were Baptized in Infancy, should be admitted to
the Privileges proper to Adult Church Members, without Confirmation, or
Restoration, by an Approved Profession of personal Faith and Repentance? Neg.

A general Rule to guide Reformers.

PROP. I. It is supposed, that the Infants of Believers should be admitted by
Baptism into the Church, and so be partakers of Infant-priviledges. A Breviate
of Reasons for this.

PROP. II. There are many Privileges belonging to the Adult-members of the
Church, which Infant-members are not capable of.

PROP. III. The Continuation of Privileges received in Infancy, is part of the
Privileges of the Adult: or the Restoration of them, if they be lost.

PROP. IV. The Title-Condition of Infant Church Membership, and Privileges is
not the same with the Title-Condition of the Church Membership and Privileges
of the Adult; so that if this new Condition be not performed, when men come to
age, their former Title cease, and there is no other, that arises in its
stead: Proved.

PROP. V. As a Personal faith is the Condition, before God, of Title to the
Privileges of the Adult; so the Profession of this Faith, is the Condition of
his Title before the Church, and without this Profession, he is not to be taken
as an Adult-member, nor admitted to the Privileges of such. Proved, and
Vindicated from their Objections, that plead against the necessity of an
express Profession: with some Application urging to the practice.

PROP. VI. It is not every kind of Profession that is the Condition, or
necessary qualification of those, that are to be admitted to the Privileges of
Adult-amembers, but such a Profession, as God has made necessary by his
express Word, and by the nature of the Object, and the uses and ends, to which
he does require it. It must be a Profession of True Christianity in all the
Essentials. What are the Essentials, as to Objects and Acts: It must be a
Credible Profession. 1. It must seem to be Understanding. 2. And serious. 3.
And voluntary, upon deliberation. 4. Not nullified by a contradiction in word
or deed. 5. It must be Practice first, that must make words Credible, when the
person by perfidiousness has forfeited his credit.

PROP. VII. The Profession of those that expect the Church State and
Privileges of the Adult, is to be tried, judged and approved, by the Pastors
of the Church, to whose Office it is that it belongs. 1. An untryed
Profession must not serve: proved. 2. Pastors by Office are the Tryers and
Judges, of the Prosession of such, as to these Ends: proved by 14 undeniable
Arguments; and Objections Answered. Consent of the Ancients.

PROP. VIII. Though it belong to the Pastors Office to Judge of the Profession
of such expectants, yet are they bound up by the Laws of Christ what Profession
to accept, and what to refuse: and if by breaking these Laws, they shall
dangerously or grossly wrong the Church, it belongs to the Magistrate to
correct them, and to the people to admonish them, and disown their sin; yea and
in desperate cases to disown them. The Positive Title-condition to be produced,
is The Profession of true Christianity. The Minister that refuses this
Profession, must prove it not credible. Of tolerable ignorance.

PROP. IX. It is evident that Magistrates, Ministers and people, have each a
power of Judging: but different, as they have different works. How far
Ministers are Judges. Proved by ten Reasons, against the popular claim, etc.
How far the people must Judge: How far the Magistrate must Judge Ministers for
these Matters, and Ministers obey them?

PROP. X. To this Ministerial Approbation of the Profession and Qualifications
of the Expectant, there is to be adjoined a Ministerial Investiture or Delivery
of the Benefit expected. How many Sacraments there are. 1. More than seven in
the largest sense. 2. Five in a large sense (not intolerable.) 3. Two only in
the strictest sense, as we define them.

PROP. XI. The solemn Ministerial Investiture of Professors into the right of
the Church Priviledges of the Adult, is either 1. Of the Unbaptized, who are
now first entered. 2. Or of the Baptized in Infancy, that never proved ungodly,
nor violated that first Covenant. 3. Or of those Baptized (whether in Infancy
or at Age) that have since proved wicked and broke the Covenant. The first of
these Investitures is to be by Baptism; the second by Confirmation, and the
third by Absolution. So that the solemn Investiture that now I am pleading for,
is by Confirmation to one sort, (that never proved ungodly since their Baptism)
and by Absolution to the other sort (that broke their Covenant) which yet has
a certain Confirmation in, or with it.

PROP. XII. This solemn Investiture on personal Profession, being thus proved
the Ordinance of God, for the solemn renewing the Covenant of Grace, between
God and the Adult-Covenanter, it must needs follow that it is a Corroborating
Ordinance, and that Corroborating Grace is to be expepected in it from God, by
all that come to it in sincerity of heart: And so it has the name of
Confirmation upon that account also.

PROP. XIII. Ministerial Imposition of hands, in Confirmation and the
foredescribed sort of Absolution, is a Lawful and Convenient action, or
Ceremony, and ordinarily to be used, as it has been of old by the Universal
Church. But yet it is not of such Necessity, but that we must dispense in this
Ceremony with scrupulous Consciences, that cannot be satisfied to submit to it:
Imposition of hands is allowed in Scripture to be used Generally by Spiritual
Superiors, to signify their Desire, that the Blessing, Gift or Power, may be
conferred on the Inferior, for which they have a call to mediate. Proved.
Particllarly, 1. We find in Scripture a Blessing of Church Members, with laying
on of hands. 2. And that the Holy Ghost is in a special manner promised to
Believers, over and above that measure of the Spirit, which caused them to
Believe. 3. And that Prayer, with laying on of hands, was the outward means to
be used by Christ's Ministers, for procuring this, or investing them of it. 4.
And that this was not a temporary, but fixed Ordinance. All proved. How the
Holy Ghost is given before Faith, and after Faith, and how sealed in Baptism,
and how not? What Hope of the success of Imposition, with Prayer for the
spirit. Scripture and Antiquity for it. Reasons for the non-necessity of it to
the the scrupulous.

PROP. XIV. Though in receiving Adult-persons out of Infidelity by Baptism into
the Church; a sudden Profession, without any stay to see their Reformation, may
serve turn, yet in receiving these that were Baptized heretofore, into the
number of Adult-members, or to the Privileges of such, their lives must be
enquired after, which must be such as do not confute their Profession.

PROP. XV. It is not of flat Necessity, that the Profession of the Expectant be
made in the open Congregation, or before many, in order to his Confirmation or
admittance.

PROP. XVI. When a person is admitted an Adult-member of a particular Church,
as well as of the Universal, his Profession and Admission must be either before
the Church, or satisfactorily made known to the Church, at least, who must
approve of it by a Judgment of discretion, in order to their Communion with
him: and this among us is the ordinary case; because it is the duty of all,
that have opportunity to join themselves to some particu-Church, and it is in
such Churches, that Communion in public Worship and order must be had, either
statedly, or transiently and temporarily. Reasons to prove this Interest of the
People. Cases of difference between Pastors and people resolved.

PROP. XVII. It is convenient (though not of necessity) that every Church do
keep a Register of all that are thus Invested, or admitted into the number of
Adult-members.

PROP. XVIII. Those that were never thus Ministerially and Explicitly Approved,
Confirmed, or Absolved (after an ungodly life) but have been permitted without
it, to join usually with the Church in prayer and praises, and the Lords
Supper, are Approved and Confirmed, eminently, though not formally, though in
so doing, both the Pastors and themselves might sin against God, by the
violation of his holy order. Such therefore may be a true Church, and are not
to be called back to solemn Confirmation, though in many cases they may be
called to Trial by their Overseers.

PROP. XIX. So exceeding great and many are the Mischiefs that have befallen us
by the neglect of a solemn meet Transition from an Infant into the Adult
Church State, and which undoubtedly will continue till this be remedied, that
all the Magistrates, Ministers and people, that dissemble not in professing
themselves to be Christians, should with speed and diligence attempt the cure.
The state of our Parishes anatomized. Twenty intolerable mischiefs, that
follow the taking all into our Church Communion, and neglecting this
Confirmation: such as all Christians should lay to heart.

PROP. XX. So many and great are the Benefits that would follow the general
practice of this duty of trying, approving and confirming (or Absolving) all
those that enter into the number of Adult-Christians, that it should mightily
provoke all Christian Magistrates, Ministers, and people to join in a speedy
and vigorous execution of it. Twelve excellent Benefits that will come by
Confirmation. It Is like to be an admirable increaser of knowledge, and holiness,
and Church-Reformation. It Is a singular means of Agreeing the Episcopal,
Presbyterians, Congregational, Er^stians, and moderating the Anabaptists:
proved and urged.

Twenty Objections against this Approved Profession and Confirmation, answered.
How little reason have Princes, and Parliaments to restrain most Ministers
here from overdoing.

The Duties that lie upon us all, for the Execution of this Work: and 1. on
Ministers. 1. We should Agree upon an unanimous performance. 2. In those
Agreements, we must leave men to their Liberty in all unnecessary modes, and
circumstances. 3. In taking men's profession, we must avoid both extremes, viz.
Loose formality, and overmuch 4. What course must be taken with all our
Parish, where some have without a Personal Approved Profession already been
admitted to the Lords Supper and some not particularly opened? 5. We must
require of all the notoriously ungodly, a Penitent Confession in order to
Absolution, as well as a Profession of Faith, and future obedience. 6.
Delegates to be chosen by particular Churches, to meet with the Pastors for
those and other Church-affaires. 7. The Pastors and Churches should be all
Associated, and the Churches that we hold Communion with, differenced from the
rest: that those that are Confirmed and Received by them, may be capable of
Communion with all. 8. We must be diligent in public and private Teaching the
Catechumens, and walk inoffensively, condescendingly and vigilantly among them.

2. The Duty of the People, especially the Godly, in order to this Work.

3. The Magistrates Duty hereto. 1. To cause those People that are unfit for
Church Communion, to live quietly in the state of Expectants, and to submit to
public and personal Instruction, and Catechizing, to prepare them. 2. To
compel Ministers thus to Teach and Catechize them, and see that great Parishes
have so many Teachers as may be able to do it. Reasons for compelling us. 3. To
lay some penalty on all Pastors, that will not guide the Church by Discipline,
as well as preach: Not forbidding them to be Preachers, but to be Pastors and
administer Sacraments, that will not do it, as Christ has appointed. To these
ends it may do well, for the Magistrate to have his Agent or Church-Justice to
join in the Church-meetings, and to inform the Commissioners for Ejection, who
may be empowered hereunto. 4. To promote and command the Associations and
correspondencies of Pastors and Churches. With what limitations, and to what
ends. 5. It would much further this Work, if Visitours were appointed in all
parts to see it done, or put on Ministers: Not that any Ministers should have a
Power of silencing, suspending, etc. But to let a Civil Visitor, and a Visitor
of the Ministry be still joined together, and let the Minister have only a
power to persuade, and the other as a Magigistrate to compel, or to bring the
causes, which are exempt from his power, to the Superior Commissioners. 6.
It Is the unquestionable Duty of Magistrates (not to drive men to
Church Communion that are unmeet, but) to restrain Seducers, from taking
advantage of their discontents and drawing them away, while they remain
Expectants: Ten Reasons, that deserve the serious consideration of the
Magistrate, that show the great Necessity of this his Moderate assistance, for
keeping of deceivers, especially Papists, and containing the profane and
ignorant people in quietness and submission to instruction in an expectant
state till they are fit for Church Communion. 7. To satisfy the Magistrate
that is afraid of persecution, certain Regulations of Toleration are
propounded. 1. Let all that pretend scruple of submitting to the personal or
public Instruction of the Teacher of the Parish where he lives, be compelled
to submit to some one else, who may give it under his hand that he takes that
care of him. 2. Let Commissioners be appointed (according to the Laws given
them) to guard the door of Toleration, as now they are to guard the door of
public Allowance and Maintenance: and let none be Tolerated to preach or
openly persuade (though for nothing) that have not an Instrument of License
sealed by these Commissioners: Or else Blasphemers and Heathens may preach for
all your Laws against them. 3. Let those that have a sealed Toleration be as
responsible to the Commissioners, for their violating the Laws of their
Toleration, as we are for breaking the Laws that bind us: and let their
Toleration be forfeitable, as well as our Maintenance. Reasons for this. To
conclude, if as before the days of William the Conqueror, Magistrates and
Ministers might sit together, the Ministers having no power but to persuade,
and the Magistrate the sole power of Compulsion, and so 1. Approvers keep the
door of Toleration. 2. A Church Justice, or Agent of the Magistrates keep the
peace of every Church, or Parish. 3. And the Civil and Ministerial Visiters
aforesaid shall be appointed to take Cognizance of the state of Parishes. 4.
And the Commissioners for Ejection of scandalous Ministers, be equally enabled
to eject the scandalous and blasphemous from their Toleration; the Magistrate
might assist us without danger of persecution.

CONFIRMATION AND RESTORATION The necessary means of REFORMATION And
RECONCILIATION.
Quest. Whether those that were Baptized in Infancy, should be admitted to the
Privileges proper to Adult Church Members, without Confirmation, or
Restoration, by an Approved Profession of Personal Faith and Repentance? Neg.
THough the distempers of the Churches of Christ in England, are not so great
as the Popish adversaries, or some discontented Brethren do pretend, nor as
some inconsiderate lamenters of our condition do imagine, who observe less our
enjoyments then our wants, and that have not the faculty of discerning our true
Agreements, where there is any difference, but think that many things are
wanting that are not, because they cannot find them: Yet is our discomposure
such as the wisest have cause to mourn for, and all of us should contribute our
endeavors to redress. And for the accomplishment of this blessed Work, two
things must be done: The first is, to Discover the Principles that must Reform
and heal us, if ever we be healed; and to acquaint the world with the necessary
means. The second is, to concur for the execution, in the application and use
of the Remedy, when it is discovered. The first is a work, that is usually
done best by a few at first: Though the more Receive and Approve of the
discovery, the better it will be brought into use. But it is here, says Pemble,
as in discerning a thing a far off, where one clear eye will see further then
many that are dim, and the greatest conjunction of unfurnished intellects
affords not so much assistance for the Discovery, as the greater sight of a few
may do. But in the executive, part, there must be many hands to the work. If
the Pastors and people do not consent, it cannot be accomplished; and if they
barely consent, and be not up and doing, Discoveries will lie dead, and nothing
will go on: And if the Christian Magistrate afford not his assistance, his
Guilt will be great, and the work will go the more heavily on. Though all the
body be not an Eye, and therefore be not as good at Discovering as the Eye is;
yet must each member perform its own office, and none be idle, or withdraw its
help, because it is not an Eye; but all must execute by the Guidance of the
Eye.

In order to the Discovery of the Healing Means, among others, this Rule is
worthy our observation. If any Church Order, or administration seem offensive
to you, before you wholly cast it out, consider whether there be not somewhat
that is necessary and excellent either in the substance,
or in the Occasion and Reason of it: and you will find, that Reformation is to
be accomplished more by Restoration of Ordinances and Administrations to their
Primitive Nature and Use, then by the utter Abolition of them. Satan found it
easier to corrupt the Ordinances of Christ, and to cause them to degenerate
into somewhat like them, then to Introduce such of his own as were wholly new,
and as Christ had given no Occasion of. I could give you very useful instances
in many of the Popish administrations, which require a Restoration, rather
then an Abolition, lest that which is Christ's part, be cast out with that
which is man's, and we should throw away the Apple which should be but pared;
and lest we cast away our necessary food, and most precious Jewels, because
they have fallen into Romish dirt. But my present business is to instance only
in Confirmation and Penitence, so far as is requisite to the decision of the
Question now before us.

I know you will easily excuse me from the needless labor of explaining any
terms in the Question which you understand already: I think the best method to
lay the matter naked before your understandings, will be by approaches and
degrees in the opening and confirming of these Propositions.

Prop. I. It is here supposed, that the Infants of Believers should by Baptism
be admitted into the Church, and so be partakers of Infant Priv^ledges.
THeir sin and misery is come upon them without any actual consent of their
own, by the will of others; and the Remedy must be applied to them accordingly,
not by any actual consent of their own (which is as impossible) but by the will
of others, as the Condition, and by the Gift of God as the Cause. In his
dealing with mankind; God is not so much more prone to wrath and vengeance then
to Mercy, as to put Infants into the Comminatory terrible part of the Covenant,
with their Parents, and not into the Remedying part; and to condemn them for
their first Fathers Covenant Breaking, and give them no help from their
gracious Parents Covenant-keeping; and to fetch weight from Parents sins to
weigh down the scale of Vindictive Justice, and to put nothing from the
gracious Parents into the other end. Yet is it not to Infants as the mere
Natural Issue of godly Parents, that God extends this Grace. But 1. As they
are Naturally their Own, the Parents have a Power of them to dispose of them
for their good. 2. Every man that is Sanctified, has devoted himself, and in
General, all that he has to God; according to the several capacities of what
he has, that every thing may be for God in its proper Capacity. 3. Virtually
then the Children of the Godly, even in the womb are thus Devoted unto God. 4.
It is the revealed Will of God, that Infants should be Actually Dedicated and
Devoted to him. 5. He that requires us to make this Dedication, does imply
therein a promise of his Acceptance of what is Dedicated to him by his command.
For his precepts are not vain or delusory. 6. He has also expressly signified
this in Scripture Promises, extending his Covenant to the seed of the
Faithful, and telling us that his Kingdom is of such. 7. This Dedication is to
be made by Baptism, the Ordinance which God has appointed to that End; and in
which he is ready to signify his Acceptance, that so there may be a mutual
solemn Covenant.

The Servants of God before Christ's coming were enabled and required to enter
their Infants into the Covenant of God, sometime (and ordinarily) in
Circumcision, and sometime (as in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 29) without it. And
they have the same Natural Interest, and as large a discovery that it is the
W^ll of God, for the Dedicating of their Children, to God, and Choosing for
them, and entering them into the holy Covenant, now as then. If then a Child
that had no exercise of its own will, might by the Will of his Parents choose
the Lord, and be entered into Covenant with him, it is then so still. God has
no where reverst or abrogated that Command, which obliged Parents to enter
their Children into Covenant with God, and Devote them to him. Nay Christ chid
those that would keep them from him, because his Kingdom, that is, his Church,
is of such. A place that does purposely and plainly express the continuance of
his Love to Infants, and yet the Gospel entertaineth them as readily as the Law
or Promise before did. Often and again does Christ signify to the Jews that he
would have gathered them wholly to his Church, and not have broken them off, if
they had not by unbelief been broken off, and in the same Olive has he
engraffed the Gentile Church. Infants are members of all Commonwealths on the
face of the earth, though they know not what a Commonwealth is, nor yet what
sovereignty or subjection mean. And he that should say they are no members,
because they are Imperfect members, would but be laughed at. And Christ has
not cast them out of his family or Commonwealth, nor shut the door against them.

And that in this Infant state they are capable of many Privileges is
apparent. They have Original sin, which must be pardoned, or they are lost.
Most of the Anabaptists that I hear of, do hold that all the Infants in the
world are pardoned by Christ, and shall be saved if they die in Infancy, and
run in the downright Pelagian road. But this is not only utterly unproved, but
contrary to Scripture, which tells us, that sin is not pardoned by the
bloodshed of Christ, till men be brought into Union with him, and participation
of him, and for all his bloodshed, no man shall have pardon by it, till it be
given him by the Act of Pardon in the Gospel. Now the Gospel no where gives out
Pardon to every Infant in the world: Nay it frequently and plainly makes a
difference. The Parents Will does Accept the offer, and choose for them that
cannot choose for themselves. For others, what ever God will do with them,
doubtless they have no promise of Mercy. And it is strange that they should deny
Baptism to Infants that deny not Salvation to them, yea that think (though
ungroundedly) that they are all in a state of Salvation. For either Infants
have Original sin, or not: If they have none, then they need no Savior, and
must be saved without a Savior; for the whole need not the Physician, but the
sick. If they have Original sin, and that it is pardoned to them by Christ,
then how can men deny them the sign and seal of pardon, or the solemn
investing means. If they are sure that they are washed with Christ's Blood, how
can they deny to wash them with that water, that is appointed to signify and
invest?

Moreover, Infants are capable of many other Priveledges; and of being the
Adopted Sons of God, the Members of Christ, the Heirs of Heaven, as having
Right thereto; and being the members of the Church, and being under the Special
Protection and Provision of God, and in a special sort partakers of the Prayers
of the Church, with diverse more. As in the Commonwealth, an Infant is capable
of having Honor and Inheritance in Right, though not Actally to use them; and
of the protection of the Laws for Life, Reputation and estate; and of being
Tenant, and obliged to pay a certain Rent and Homage when he comes to age, and
in the mean time to have Provisions from the Estate that he has Title to.

But all this I have fuller expressed elsewhere: And I have altely read Mr
Tombes's last and large Reply, to part of my Book, and many others; and must
needs say that it leaves me still persuaded that it is the will of Christ that
the Infants of his Servants should be Dedicated to him in Baptism, and members
of his visible Church; and though upon the review of my Arguments I find that I
have used too many provoaking words, for which I am heartily sorry, and desire
pardon of God and him, yet I must say, that I am left more confident then
before, that the cause is Gods which Mr Tombs opposes: Of which if God will,
I intend yet to give some further account: In the mean time I deal with this
but as a Supposition that is already sufficiently proved, though all men, yea
all good men see not the sufficiency of the proof.

Prop. 2. There are many Priveledges belonging to the Adult Members of the
Church, which Infant members are not capable of.
THis is true both of Natural and Moral Capacities: The Privileges which I
mean are, the pardon of many actual sins, committed since they are Adult; the
exercise of all Holy Graces; Knowing God; Loving him; Trusting him; Serving
him; the Communion that we have with God herein; as particularly in Prayer, in
holy Praises and Thanksgivings, in Heavenly Meditations; The Peace and Joy that
follows Believing, and the Hopes of Everlasting Life; the Communion which we
have with the Church of Christ in hearing, praying, Praises, the Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Christ, in distribution by giving and receiving, and an
endearing holy Love within: These and many more Priveledges are proper to the
Adult.

That Infants are not Naturally capable of these, is as needless to prove, as
that they are Infants: And then that they are not Morally capable, is an
inseparable consequent. For though Natural Capacity may be without Moral, yet
Moral cannot be without Natural: In point of Duty, Infants are not bound to the
work; as to Hear, Pray, Praise, etc. beyond the Natural Capacity of their
Intellects and bodies: And so in point of Benefit, we must have more sobriety,
then to suppose God to make over any Benefit to them which they are not capable
of. All this is plain.

Prop. 3. The Continuation of Priveledges received in Infancy, is part of the
Priveledges of the Adult; or the Restoration of them if they be lost.
IF the cause discontinue, the effect will cease. Adult Priveledges comprehend
the Infant Privileges, partly as that which is Perfect comprehends the
Imperfect, and partly as the whole comprehends the parts; and partly as the
thing Continued is the same with the thing Begun. Infant Privileges would all
cease with Infancy, if the Causes or Conditions cease, and there be no other
Cause for their continuance. God never took Infants into his Church and
Covenant, with a purpose so to continue them, without any other Condition then
that upon which they were admitted. This is past denial, and will be more
cleared in the next.

Prop. 4. The Title-Condition of Infant Church Membership and Privileges, is
not the same with the Title-Condition of the Church Membership and Privileges
of the Adult; so that if this new Condition be not performed when men come to
Age, their former Title cease, and there is no other that arises in his
stead.
1. WE are agreed I think, that our Title, See the Rubric of the Common Prayer
Book before Confirmation after cited.
(which is Fundamentum Juris) is Gods Covenant, G. Cassande^ Consult. de
Confirm. Haejusm^di sa^e Institutionem seu Catechismi explicationem in pueris
fieri debeere, and Veteres praecipiunt, and Recenciores quoque ex utraque part
consentiunt. Vide August. Sermon. 116. in Ramis Palmarum, and Wallafridum de
rebus Ecclesiast. cap. 26. and quae scripsit Ruardus Tappenus Lovan. Tom. 2. ad
illud Calvi^i Instit. c. 17.
Grant, or Gift. As it is his Precept that constituteth our Duty, so it is
his Promise or Deed of Gift which is our title to the Benefit.

2. And we are agreed I hope, that this Promise, or Grant from God is
Conditional, For if Church Membership and Privileges he Absolutely Given, then
it is to All, or but to Some: Not to All; for then the Church, and the world
are all one; and then it is not Ecclesia, caetus evocatus; and then Heathens
and Infidels have right; which are things that no Christian, I think will
grant: If it be but Some that have Title, then there must be some Note to know
them by: or else the some will be equal to All or to None. And if they be
Marked out, then it must be by Name or by Description: Not by Name; for we find
the contrary. Scripture does not Name all that have Title to Church
Privileges. If it be by Description, it is either by mere Physical, or by
Moral Qualifications that they are described: The former, none does imagine,
that I hear of. If they are Moral Qualifications, then either they are such as
are prerequisite to our Right and Privileges, or not: That they are
prerequisite all must confess that read the Promise, and all do confess that
they are prerequisite to all the following Privileges: And if Prerequisite,
then either as Means or no Means. The later none can affirm, without going
against so much light, as ordinary Christians have still ready at hand to
confute them with: And if they are required as Means, then either as Causes or
Conditions: And I think you will sooner yield them to be Conditions then
Causes, though either Concession suffices to the end that is before us.

But of this we need to say no more, both because it is commonly confessed, and
because that the words of the Promises are so plain, and undeniable, being
uttered in Conditional terms.

Nor is this either inconsistent with, or any way unsuitable to an Absolute
Decree: For as a Threatening, so the Conditionality of a Promise, are
Instruments admirably suited to the accomplishment of an Absolute Purpose or
Decree. He that is fully Resolved to save us, or to give us the Privileges of
his Church, will deal with us as men, in bringing us to the possession of the
intended benefits; and therefore will by Threats and Conditional promises
excite us to a careful performance of the Condition: and that Grace which is
resolved to effect the very Condition in us, is also resolved to make a
Conditional Promise, yea and a Threatening the Instrument of effecting it.

3. Note, that the great Question, whether all the Infants of true Believers
are certainly Justified, or whether some of them have but lower Privileges, is
not here to be determined, but, in a fitter place: And therefore I determine
not what Privileges they are that will cease, if our Infant Title cease. But
that according to the tenor of the Promise, the Continuance of them, with the
Addition of the Privileges proper to the Adult, are all laid upon a New
Condition.

4. Note also, that when I call it another or different Condition, I mean not
that it is different in the Nature of the Act, but in the Agent or Subject. It
is the same kind of Faith which at first is required in the Parent, for the
Child's behoof, and that afterward is required in our selves. But the Condition
of the Infants Title is but this, that he be the Child of a Believer. Dedicated
to God: But the Condition of the Title of persons at Age is, that they be
themselves Believers, that have Dedicated themselves to God. The Faith of the
Parent, is the Condition of Infant Title; and the Faith of the person himself,
is the Condition of the Title of one at Age.

That their own Faith is not the Condition of an Infants Title, I think I need
not prove: For 1. They are incapable of Believing without a Miracle: 2. If they
were not (as some Lutherans fondly think). yet it is certain that we are
incapable of discerning by such a sign. I think no Minister that I know will
judge what Infants do themselves believe, that he may baptize them. 3. And I
think no man that looks on the Command, or Promise, and the Person of an
Infant, will judge that he is either Commanded then to believe, or that his
Believing is made the Condition of his Infant Title.

But that a Personal Believing is the Condition of the Title of them at Age, is
as far past doubt: and it is proved thus.

Arg. 1. The Promise it self does expressly require a Faith of our own, of all
the Adult that will have part in the Privileges: therefore it is a Faith of
our Own that is the Condition of our Title, Mark 16 16. He that Believes and
is Baptized shall be saved, and he that Believes not shall be damned, Act. 8.
36, 37. And the Eunuch said, See here is water, what does hinder me to be
baptized? And Philip said, If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may,
Act. 2. 38, 41. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus
Christ for the Remission of sins, etc. Then they that gladly received his
word were baptized, Act. 10. 44, 47, 48. Act. 16. 14, 15. and 30. 32, 33. Romans
10. 12, 13, 14.With many other Texts, do put this out of doubt.

Argument 2. We were engaged in our Infant baptismal Covenant to Believe and
Repent, when we came to Age, as a means to our reception of the Benefits of the
Covenant, proper to the Adult: therefore we must perform our Covenant, and use
this means, if we will have the benefits.

Arg. 3. If another Condition were not of Necessity to the Aged, beside the
Condition that was necessary to them in Infancy, then Turks, Jews, and
Heathens, should have right to Church Membership, and Privileges of the Adult:
But the Consequent is notoriously false: therefore so is the Antecedent.

The Reason of the Consequent is evident. Because a man that has believing
Parents, may turn Turk (as is known in thousands of Janissaries) or Jew, or
Pagan: and therefore if it were enough, that he was the Child of a Believer,
his Title to Church Privileges would still continue. And so among professed
Christians, the Child of a Believer may turn Heretic, or notoriously profane
and scandalous, and yet have Title to Church Privileges, if his first Title
still hold, and a personal Faith be not a necessary Condition of his Right.
Add to these the many Arguments tending to confirm the point in hand, which I
have laid down on another occasion in my D^sputations of Right to Sacraments.
But I think I need not spend more words to persuade any Christians, that our
Parents Faith will not serve to give us Title to the Church Privileges of the
Adult, but we lose our Right even to Church Membership it self, if when we come
to Age, we add not a personal Faith (or profession at least) of our own.

I only add that this is a truth so far past doubt, that even the Papists
and the Greekshave put it into their Canons. For the former, you may find it in
the Decrees, Part. 3. did. 3. page (mihi) 1241 cited out of Augustinin these
words Parvulus qui baptizatur, fi^ad anne^s rationales veniens, non crediderit,
nec ab illicitis abstinuerit, nihil ei prodest, quod parvulus accepit. That is,
An Infant that is baptized, if coming to years of discretion, he do not
believe, nor abstain from things unlawful, that which he received in Infancy,
does profit him nothing.

And for the Greeks, that this is according to their mind, you may see in
Zonaras in Comment. in Epist. Canon Can. 45. cited ex Basilii Mag. Epist. 2. ad
Amphiloch.thus, Siquis acc^pto nomine Christianismi, Christum contumelia
afficit, nulla est illi appellationis utilitas: that is; If any one having
received the Name of Christianity, shall repreach Christ, he has no profit by
the Name.On which Zonaras adds Qui Christo credidit, and Christianus
appellatus est, cum ex Divinis praecept is vitam instituere oportet, ut hac
ratione Deus per ipsum glorificetur, quemadmodum illis verbis praecipitur, sic
luceat Lux vestra coram hominibus, etc. Siquis autem nominatur quidem
Christianus, De^ vero praecepta transgreditur, contumeliam irregat Christo,
cujus de nomine appellatur, nec quicquam ex ea appellatione utilitatis
trahit:That is, Seeing he believed in Christ, and is called a Christian, ought
to order his life by the Commandments of God that so God may be glorified by
him; according to that [Let your light so shine before men, etc. ] If any one
that is called a Christian, shall transgress Gods Commands, he brings a
reproach on Christ, by whose name he is called; and he shall not receive the
least profit by that Title, or Name. This is somewhat higher then the point
needs, that I bring it for.

And indeed, it were a strange thing, if all other Infidels should be shut out
of the Privileges of the Church, except only the treacherous Covenant Breaking
Infidel; (for such are all that being baptized in Infancy, prove no Christians
when they come to Age.) As if persidiousness would give him right.

Prop. 5. As a Personal Faith is the Condition before God of Title to the
Privileges of the Adult; so the Profession of this Faith, is the Condition of
his Right before the Church; and without this Profession, he is not to be taken
as an Adult member, nor admitted to the Privileges of such.
THis Proposition also, as the Sun, reveals its self by its own light, and
therefore commands me to say but little for the Confirmation of it.

Arg. 1. The Church cannot judge of things unknown: Non entium, and non
apparentium eadem est ratio: Not to appear, and not to be, is all one as to the
judgment of the Church. We are not searchers of the heart; and therefore we
must judge by the discoveries of the heart, by outward signs.

Arg. 2. If Profession of Faith were not necessary Coram Ecclesia to men's
Church Membership and Privileges, then Infidels and Heathens would have Right,
as was said in the former case, and also the Church and the world would be
confounded, and the Church would be no Church: But these are consequents that I
hope no Christians will have a favorable thought of: and therefore they should
reject the Antecedent.

Arg. 3. It is a granted case among all Christians, that Profession is thus
necessary: the Apostles and Ancient Churches admitted none without it: nor no
more must we. Though all require not the same manner of Profession, yet that
Profession it self is the least that can be required of any man, that lays
claim to Church Privileges and Ordinances proper to Adult members: this we are
all agreed in, and therefore I need not add more proof, where I find no
Controversy.

But yet as commonly as we are agreed on this, yet because it is the very point
which most of the stress of our present Disputation lies on, it may not be
amiss to foresee what may possibly be Objected by any new comers hereafter.

Object. Perhaps some may say, 1. That we find no mention of Professions
required in Scripture: 2. It is not probable that Peter received a Profession
from those thousands whom he so suddenly Baptized. 3 Our Churches have been
true Churches without such a Profession, personally and distinctly made:
therefore it may be so still. To these briefly, yet satisfactorily.

1. The Scripture gives us abundant proof that a plain Profession was made in
those times by such as were baptized at Age, and so admitted (by reason of
their ripeness and capacity) into the Church, and to the special Communion and
Privileges of the Adult at once. To say much of the times of the old
Testament, or before Christ, would be but to interrupt you with less pertinent
things: Yet there it is apparent, that all the people were solemnly engaged in
Covenant with God, by Moses, more then once: and that this was renewed by
Joshua, and other godly Princes; and that Asa made the people not only enter
into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers, with all their hearts,
and with all their Soul: But that whosoever would not seek him should be put to
death, whether small or great, man or woman: And they swear to the Lord with a
loud voice, and with shoutings, and with trumpets, and with cornets, 2 Chronicles.
15. 12, 13, 14. So following Princes called the people to this open
Covenanting. But this is not all: To take the Lord only to be their God, (with
the rest of the Law) was the very essence of an Isarelites Religion, which they
did not only openly Profess, but excessively sometimes glory in. As
Circumcision sealed the Covenant (and therefore supposed the Covenant) to
Infants and aged whoever were circumcised; so had they many sorts of Sacrifice,
and other worship, in which they all were openly to profess the same Religion
and Covenant. Many Purifications also, and Sanctifyings of the people they had:
and many figures of the Covenant. I am the Lord thy God, etc. Thou shall have
no other Gods before me, etc. was the tenor of the Covenant which every
Israelite expressly and by frequent acts professed to consent to: The Law is
called a Covenant, which all were to own, and avouch the Lord to be their God,
and themselves his people. See Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18. and chap. 29. 10, 11, 14, etc.
2 King. 23. 3. 2 Chronicles. 23. 3, 16. and chap. 29. 10. Ezr. 10. 3. Neh. 9. 38.
Psalm. 50. 5. Ezekiel. 20. 37. Jer. 50. 5. Isa. 56. 4, 5. Exodus 34. 27. Psalm. 103.
18. and 25. 10. and 18. 10, etc.

And yet I hope no Chhistian would wish that we should deal no more openly and
clearly with God, the Church, and our selves, in days of Gospel Light and
worship, then the Jews were to do in their darker state, under obscure Types
and shadows.

We find that when John Baptist set up his Ministry, he caused the people to
Cenfess their sins, Matthew. 3. 6. And if we confess our sins, God is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1. 19. And whereas some
say, that John Baptized them, that he calls a Generation of Vipers; I Answer,
1. We will believe that when they prove it. It seems rather that he put them
back. 2. If he did Baptize them, it was not till they Confessed their sins
(before that all did,) and it seems by his charge, till they promised to bring
forth fruits meet for Repentance, Matthew. 3. 8.

Christ would not have so instructed Nicodemus in the Nature and necessity of
Regeneration, before he was a Disciple, if a Professed or Apparent preparation
had not been necessary. Nor would he ordinarily have taught men the Necessity
of denying themselves, and forsaking all for a treasure in Heaven, with such
like, if they would be his Disciples, if the Profession of so doing had not
been Necessary, to their visible Discipleship.

I grant that so full a Profession was not made before Christ's Resurrection as
after: For many Articles of our Belief were afterward made Necessary: And the
Apostles themselves were unacquainted with what the weakest Christian did
afterward believe. But still the Essentials of Faith, then Necessary in
existence to men's Justification, were Necessary in Profession ^^ men's visible
Christianity or Church Membership.

As to those Acts. 2. 37. etc. It is plain, that they made an open Profession,
if you Consider 1. That they were openly told the Doctrine which they must be
baptized into, if they did consent: 2. It is said, They that gladly received
that word, were baptized. 3. It is certain therefore that they first testified
their glad reception of the Word. 4. We may not imagine that Peter was God, or
knew the hearts of all those thousands, and therefore he must know it by their
Profession, that they gladly received the Word. 5. Their own mouths cry out for
advice in order to their Salvation. 6. It had been absurd for the Apostles to
attempt to baptize men, that had not first professed their Consent. 7. The
Scripture gives us not the full historical Narration of all that was said and
done in such Cases, but of so much as was Necessary. 8. The Institution and
Nature of the Ordinance tells us, that Baptism could not be administered without
a Profession, to the Adult: For they were to be Baptzed into the Name of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and therefore were to profess that they believed
in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Yea the very receiving of Baptism was an
Actual Profession. 9. The constant Practice of the Universal Church, has
given us by infallible Tradition, as full assurance of the order of Baptism,
and in particular of an Exprss Profession and Covenant then made, as of any
point that by the hands of the Church can be received by us. 10. And it was in
those days a more notorious Profession to be so Baptized, and to join in the
holy Assemblies then now it is. When the Profession of Christianity did hazard
men's liberties, estates, and lives, to be openly then Baptized upon Covenanting
with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and openly join with a hated,
persecuted sort of men, was an eminent sort of Profession. It being also
usually Private in houses, as separated from the main body of the people, and
not in public places like ours, where men are (justly) driven to come as
leaners for instruction.

Moreover, it is said of all that were Baptized (being then at Age) that they
first Believed: And how could the Baptizers know that they believed, but by
their Profession: Yea, it is said of Simon Magus, that he Believed and was
Baptized; which (though he might really have some historical Faith, yet)
implies, that he openly Professed more then he indeed had, or else he had
scarce been Baptized. Which has caused Interpreters to judge, that by Faith is
meant a Profession of Faith. And if so, then sure a Profession was still
Necessary.

Yea, Christ in his Commission directs his Apostles to make Disciples, and
then Baptize them; promising, that he that believes and is Baptized shall be
saved. And who can tell whether a man be a Disciple, a Believer, or an Infidel,
but by his Profession.

How was it known but by their Profession, that the Samaritans Believed Philip,
preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus
Christ, before they were Baptized both men and women? Act. 8. 12.

Philip caused the Eunuch to profess before he would Baptize him, that he
believed that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; which upon his teaching the
rest, did import the rest, if it were not more fully (as is likest) Professed,
Act. 8 37, 38.

Saul had more then a bare Profession before Baptism, Acts 9. 5, 15, 17.

Cornelius and his company had a Profession and more, for they had the Holy
Ghost powered on them, speaking with tongues, and magnifying God: (that use of
the gift of tongues imparting more then the gift it self,) Acts 10. 46. Yea,
the Spirit bid Peter, Go and not doubt, Acts 11. 12 And it was such a gift of
the Spirit, as caused the Apostles to conclude, that God had granted the
Gentiles Repentance unto life, Acts 11. 18.

How was it known but by their Profession? Acts 11. 21. That that great number
Believed and turned to the Lord, And the Grace of God was such as Barnabas saw,
verse. 23.

And when Saul after his Baptism assayed to join himself to the Disciples at
Jerusalem, they so suspected him, that they would not receive him, till
Barnabas took him and brought him to the Apostles, and declared to them, how
God had dealt with him, and how boldly at Damascus he had preached in the Name
of Jesus; which shows that they admitted not men to their Communion, till their
Profession seemed Credible to them. For no doubt but Saul told them himself
that he was a Believer, before he was put to make use of the testimony of
Barnabas.

The Converted Gentiles, Acts 13. 48. showed their Belief and gladness, and
openly glorified the Word of the Lord. How but by a Profession did it come to
pass, that the great multitude at Iconium, both Jews and Greeks, were known to
be Believers, Acts 14. 1. The same I may say of the Jaylour, Acts 16. Who by
works as well as words declared his Conversion. And the Bereans, Acts 17. 12.
And the Athenians, Acts 17. 34. And Crispus with the Corinthians, Acts 18. 8.

Acts 19. 18. The believing Ephesians, Confessed and showed their deeds, and
many of them burnt as many of their Books of ill Arts as came to fifty thousand
pieces of silver.

In a word, it is the standing Rule, that If thou confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved, For with the heart man believes unto Righteousness: and with
the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation.He that bids us Receive him that is
weak in the Faith, but not to doubtful disputations, implies, that we must
not receive them that Profess not at least a weak Faith. Heb. 5. and 6. 1, 2,
3. Show that the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, were first laid as the
Foundation; before Baptism. And who received those Principles could not be
known but by a Profession.

To this let me add, that Poenitentiam age^e was judged by the Ancient
Doctors, the Repentance that was prerequisite to Baptism: and that is, A
manifested, professed Repentance.

Gods order is (to the Adult) first to send Preachers to proclaim the Gospel;
and when by that men are brought so far, as to Profess or manifest that their
cies are opened, and that they are turned from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, then must they be Baptized, for the Remission of their
sins, and to receive the Inheritance among the Sanctified by Faith in Christ,
Acts 26. 17. 18.

As their sins are not forgiven them till they are Converted, Mark 4. 12. So
they must not be Baptized for the forgiveness of sins, till they Profess
themselves Converted: Seeing to the Church non esse, and non apparere is all
one. Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, is the
sum of that Preaching that makes Disciples, Acts 20. 21. And therefore both
these must by Profession seem to be received, before any at age are Baptized.

If as many as are Baptized into Christ, are Baptized into his death; and are
buried with him by Baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised from
the dead, so we also should walk in Newness of life, Romans 6. 4, 5. Then no
doubt but such as were to be Baptized, did first Pro^ess this mortification,
and a consent to be buried and revived with Christ, and to live to him in
Newness of life. For Paul was never so much for the Opus operatum above the
Papsts, as to think that the Baptizing of an Infidel, might effect these high
and excellent things. And he that Professes not Faith, nor ever did, is to the
Church an Infidel.

In our Baptism we put off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ, being buried with him, and rising with him through
Faith -- quickened with him, and having all our trespasses forgiven, Col. 3. 11,
12, 13. And will any man, yea, will Paul, ascribe all this to those that did
not so much as Profess the things signified, or the necessary Condition? Will
Baptism, in the judgment of a wise man, do all this for an Infidel, or one that
Professes not to be a Christian?

Baptism is said to save us, 1 Pet. 3. 21. And therefore they that will be
Baptized must profess the qualifications necessary to the Saved.

The Key's of the Kingdom of Heaven are put into the Churches hands; and they
that are loosed on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven (if the Key do not err) And
therefore Pastors of the Church must absolve none (by Baptism) that do not by
Profession seem to be Absolvable in Heaven: They must Profess to have the old
man Crucified with Christ, that the Body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth they might not serve sin, Romans 6. 5, 6, 7, 8.

As many as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, and are all one
in Christ Jesus: and are Abraham's Seed, and Heirs, according to promise, Gal.
3. 27, 28, 29. This speaks the Apostle of the Probability grounded on a
credible Profession. And thereforeit is clear, that the Profession was
presupposed, that might support this charitable judgment. Our Baptism is the
Solemnizing of our Marriage with Christ. And its a new and strange kind of
Marriage, where there is no Profession of Consent.

The Baptized are in Scripture called men Washed, Sanctified, Justified, etc. 1
Cor. 6. 11. 1 Cor. 14. 33. They are all called Saints, and Churches of Saints,
1 Cor. 1. 2. All Christians are called Sanctified ones, or Saints; therefore
its certain that they professed themselves such.

But why should I go any further in this, when the main substance of my Dispute
of Right to the Sacraments proves it? I entreat the Reader that would have
more, to prove not only the Necessity of a Profession, but also of the
Profession of a Saving Faith, to peruse that Book, or at least the second
Disputation, where are Twenty Arguments for it; and the sense of all the
Ancient Churches there cited out of Mr Gatakers Collections. See also Dr
Hammonds many testimonies to prove the use of the Abrenuntiation, Paraenes.
page 18, 19, 20. I love not needlessly to recite whath others have already
cited. But he that knows not, that the Universal Church from the days of the
Apostles, has baptized the Adult, upon a personal Profession of Faith, and
Repentance, and Vow, or Promise, or Covenant for obedience, knows little of
what the Church has Practiced. And I hope few sober men will be found that
will be so singular and selfconceited, as to contradict the Practice of the
Universal Church in such a case as this, and set up their own private judgment
against it, and go about to persuade us to a new way of Church entrance, and
admission, now in the end of the world. Blame me not to be confident with you,
where I have so good ground as Scripture, and so good company, as the Primitive
Universal Church.

To this let me add, that most, or too many, that we are to receive to the
Privileges of Adult members, have violated their Baptism-Covenant, and proved
ungodly after Baptism, and that by open, notorious Scandals. Now Scripture, and
the Practice of the Universal Ancient Church direct us, to require of these an
open Confession of sin: For they need an Absolution, and not a mere
Confirmation. It is past all controversy, that such have both an open
Confession and Profession to make. Yea, how scrupulous the Ancient Church was
of Receiving and Absolving such violators of the Baptismal Covenant; and on how
severe terms they did it, is known to all, that know any thing of those times.
I pray amongst others see what Grotius (Discus. Apol. Rivet. page 221, 222.)
cites from Irenaeus, Tertullian, Pacimus, Hierom, etc. ad page 235. n.

And as to the last Objection (that our Churches were true Churches, when we
made no particular Professions.) I Answer 1. Without some Profession of true
Christianity, our Churches could not have been true Churches. And therefore
against those that would prove them no Churches, we plead (and justly) that a
Profession was made by them. 2. But I pray you mark, that that will prove a
Church to be a true Church, which will not prove every person in the Parish, to
be a true Member of that Church. 3. And he that thinks it enough, that our
Churches have a mere Metaphysical Verity, (such as Bishop Hall, and multitudes
of Learned Protestants allow the Church of Rome it self) is as good a friend to
it, as he is to his wife or child, that will let them go naked; yea, and be
contented, that they catch the plague, or leaprosie, yea, and plead for it too;
and all, because they have still the Truth of Humane Nature.

I know that any thing that may truly be called a Profession, will (in that
point) seem to prove the Being of the Church. But as it will not seem to prove
the well-being; so an obscure Profession does but obscurely prove the Being of
it: which an open, plain Profession does more clearly prove. Let us not
befriend either the Kingdom of darkness, or the Seperatists so much, as to
leave our Churches so open to their exceptions, and so apt to cherish and
befriend their ignorance, and infidelity of the world. If coming to Church, and
sitting there be somewhat a probable argument, that men do implicitly believe,
as that Church believes; yet, it is a very dark proof, that they understand what
the Church believes: especially when experience has acquainted us with the
Contray of many of them.

But now I have said this much for a personal and plain Profession, I would
feign know what any man has against it. The Church through the great mercy of
God, has yet liberty to use it. And we see how many thousands make a blind
kind of show of Christianity, going from one public duty to another, and
knowing not what they do. Albaspin. in Tertul. de Praescript. c. 43. p. 308.
Non nisi magna cum deliberatione quenquam in societatem and communionem
Ecclesiarum venire patiebantur -- Ait igitur diu multumque Orthadoxos
deliberare, quorum Sententiis subscribere, quosve in societatem ejusdem
Ecclesiae and corporis recipore debeant: contra vero haereticos ullo discrimine
cum omnibus haereticis pacem miscere.
And is there not need that they should be brought out into the open light, and
see their way? If Covenanting with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be the
Essence of our Christianity; in the Name of God, I desire you to consider
whether it be a thing to be hudled up in the dark? Unless it be men's design to
hide the Nature of Christianity, and keep people in destructive ignorance, and
delude their Souls with a name and show of a Religion, which they understand
not; they will surely be willing that men should know the Covenant that they
make, and understand what they do, before they enter into a Marriage bond with
Christ, (if at Age) or own it, if they have been entered in infancy. Why should
we choose Darkness rather then Light? Why should an Implicit Covenant and
Profession be pleaded for? when the being of a Profession is palam fateri,
openly to make known; and when we know by sad experience, that when we have all
done the best we can, to make our ignorant people understand, we shall find
enough ado to accomplish it. Ignorance has no need of friendship: especially
from Ministers it deserves none: especially in so great a point as the
Covenant that men make with Christ. We have wares that deserve the light, and
need not a dark shop. We have a Master that we need not be afraid, or ashamed,
explicitly and publicly to confess. It beseemes not so high and honorable a
Profession as that of a Christian, to be lapt up in obscurity. Such a Glorious
state as Sonneship to God, to be an Heir of Heaven, etc. should be entered into
with great solemnity, and owned accordingly at our first rational acceptance
and acknowledgment. Kings are Crowned more solemnly, then poor men take
possession of their cottages. Christ will be ashamed of them before the Angels,
that are ashamed of him before men, and will confess them before his Father,
that confess him before men. Christianity is not a game to be played under
board. Why then should any be against an open Professing, and Covenanting with
Christ? If it be needful that we Covenant, certainly the plainest and most
explicit Covenanting is the best. And what will be his portion, that has a
male in his flock, and offers the worst, yea the halt and blind to God?

Let us therefore deal as openly, and plainly, and understandingly in the
Covenant of God as we can, and not contrive it in the greatest darkness that is
consistent with the Essence of a Church. Nay let us not tempt men to unchurch
us, or separate from us, by leaving our cause to such Arguments as this: [ such
a man sits among other hearers, in the Congregation: therefore he makes a
Profession of the Christian Faith;] lest they think it follows not [
therefore he seems to understand the Christian Faith;] much less [ he
Professes it:] especially when it is known that so many understand it not; and
that the Papists in their writings, maintain it lawful, Vid. Thom. a Jesu de
Convers. Omn. Gentium de hac quest.
for them to be present at our Assemblies; and Infidels tell us, that they can
hear any man, and do come thither.

Nehemiah caused the Jewsto subscribe the Covenant, and seal it, (c. 9.v. 38.)
Even under the Law it was the character of visible Saints, to make a Covenant
with God by Sacrifice, Psalm. 50. 5. At least now God has caused us to pass
under the Rod. Let us yield to be brought under the bond of the Covenant, Ezekiel.
20. 37. And let us as weeping Israel and Judah, Seek the Lord our God, and ask
the way to Zion, with our faces thitherward, saying; come and let us join our
selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgotten, Jer.
50 4, 5. Let us take hold of his Covenant, and choose the things that please
him, that he may bring us into his holy Mountain, and make us joyful in his
house of Prayer, and our Sacrifices may be accepted on his Altar, Isa. 56. 4,
6, 7. Are not these the days of which it is said, Isa. 44. 3, 4, 5. I will
pour water on him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will
pour my Spirit on thy seed, and my blessing on thine offspring; and they shall
spring as among the grass, as willows by the water courses. One shall say, I am
the Lords; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord; and surname himself by the name of
Israel.I would have as little Covenanting for doubtful, or needless, or
mutable things, in Church or State, as is possible: but in the great things of
our Salvation, even the Essence of Christianity, we cannot be bound too fast,
nor deal too understandingly, and openly with God.

Prop. 6. It is not every kind of Profession, that is the Condition, or
necessary qualification of those that are to be admitted to the Privileges of
Adult members, but such a Profession as God has made necessaery, by his
express Word, and by the Nature of the Object, and the Uses, and Ends, to which
be does require it.
THe Negative is not controverted among us. If any were so quarrelsom or
ignorant, it is easily proved. And I shall do it briefly, but satisfactorily, in
the opening of the Affirmative.

I have proved in my first Disputation of Right to Sacraments, (which I desire
the Reader, that would have further satisfaction, to peruse) the Necessity of
these following Qualifications of this Profession.

1. In General, as to the Object of our Faith, it must be a Profession of true
Christianity, and no less. It must be a Profession of our entertainment, both
of the Truth of the Gospel, and of the Good therein Revealed and offered. More
particularly, it must be a Profession, that we believe in God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, as to the Nature, persons, and works, which they have
done or undertaken for us. Yet more particularly, and explicitly: It must be a
Profession, 1. That we Believe in God the Father, and so the pure Deity, as our
Creator, Sovereign, and chief Good, who gave us the Law of Nature, by breaking
of which, we have lost our selves, and all our part in Everlasting Life. 2.
That we Believe in Jesus Christ, God and Man, that taking our Nature, fulfilled
the Law, overcame the Devil, dyed as a Sacrifice for our sins, Rose again,
and conqured death, ascened into Heaven, where he is Lord of all, and the King,
Prophet, and Priest of his Church, in Glory with the Father: That he has
offered himself with Pardon, and Eternal Life, to all that will accept him, on
his terms: and that he will come again at last to Raise us from death, and
judge the world, and Justify his Saints, and bring them to Eternal Glory, and
cast the wicked into utter misery. 3. That we Believe in God the Holy Ghost,
that Inspired the Prophets and Apostles, to deliver, and confirm the Word of
God, and who is the Sanctifier of all that shall be saved, illuminating their
understandings; and changing their hearts and lives, humbling them for their
sin and misery, causing them to believe in Christ, the Remedy, and heartily
and thankfully accept him; Possessing them with an hearty Love of God, and a
heavenly mind, and a hatred of sin, and Love of Holiness, and turning the
principal bent of their hearts and lives, to the Pleasing of God, and the
attaining of Eternal Life. This much must be believed, and the Belief of this
much, must be somehow Professed.

2. As to the Acts of the thing Professed, it must be, not only the naked
Assent of the Understanding; but both this Assent that the Gospel is true, and
a Consent of the Will, to take God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to the
forementioned Ends, in the forementioned Relations; and to give up our selves
unfeignedly to him, renouncing the flesh, the world, and the Devil.

3. As to the Nature of the Profession it self. 1. It must in General be
Credible: For no man is bound to Believe that which is Incredible. The words
are the signs of the mind, and as such they are to be uttered, and received. If
they be contrary to the mind, they are false; and if wilfully contrary, they
are a lie: And God does not make a lie to be the Condition of
Church Membership, or Privileges; nor does he bind his Ministers, or Church,
to believe a known lie: Nothing but Real, or seeming truth is to be believed.
Therefore it is to be made at years of understanding. The Papists themselves
say in their Catechism, composed for the Armenians, Translated by Peter Paulus.
page 194. Tum recipiendum est Sacramentum hoc, quando ad usum rationis pervenit
homo, fidemque profiteri incipit, and ut confirmetur, and stabiliatur in gratia
opus habet.
2. More particularly, the Profession which we speak of, must have these
Qualifications.

1. It must be, or seem to be Understanding. Ignorant is non est Consensus. If
a Parrat could say the Creed, it were not a Credible Profession of Faith.
Therefore the Ancient Church was wont by Catechists, to prepare them to
understand, the Doctrine which they were to believe, and profess. This is past
Controversy. I think no Minister would take that man's Profession, that seems
not to Understand what he says.

2. No Profession is Credible, but that which is, or seems to be serious. He
that speaks in scorn, or jest, is not to be believed, as one that speaks his
mind; nor is it to pass for a Profession.

3. No Profession is credible or sufficient, but that which is, or seems to be
Free and Voluntary. Though some force, or outward urgencies in some cases may
help to incline the will, yet willing it must be; or it is not a Credible
Profession. He that Professes himself a Christian, when a sword or Pistol is
at his breast, is not to be Credited, if he continue it not when he is free. And
also that which is done in a mere Passion without Deliberation, is not to be
taken as the act of the Man, and a true expression of the bent of his mind;
unless he afterward stand to it upon Deliberation.

4. It must be a Profession not nullified by a contradiction in word or deed.
Though their may an obscure contradiction, not understood, consist with it; or
a contradiction only in Degree; as Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief: yet
there must be no contradiction of the Essentials of our Profession, that
nullifieth it, by showing that we lie, or speak against the bent of our hearts.
If a Minister can by contrary words or deeds disprove the Profession of the
party, he is not to believe it, or accept it. For we are not to believe without
Evidence of Credibility, much less against it. I have given instances of this
in the foresaid Disputation of Sacracrament, page 10.

5. When by Covenant Breaking, and Perfidiousness, or often Lying, a man is
become come Incredible, having forfeited the Credit of his word, with wise and
charitable men, this man must give us a Practical, as well as Verbal
Profession, before we can again admit him, to the Privileges of the Church.
For though we are not to be so strict, as some old Fathers seem to have been,
and the Novations were, that would not admit such Penitents again into the
Church at all, but leave them to Gods own Judgment; yet must we not go against
Reason and Scripture, and the Nature of the thing, in believing that which is
not to be believed; nor to cast by all Order and Discipline, and prostitute
Gods Ordinances to the lusts of men, and make them a scorn, or level the Church
of Christ with the world.

The Testimonies cited by me on another occasion, in the foresaid Disputations,
show the Judgment of Protestants in these Points, and somewhat of the Judgment
of Antiquity. I shall recite but those on the Title page of the third
Disputation.

Tertullian Apologet. cap. 16. Sed dices etiam de n^stris, excedere quosdam a
Regulis disciplinae. Desi^unt tum Christiani haberi penes res: Philosophi vero
illi cum talibus factis, in Nomine and honor Sapientiae perseverant:that is,
But you will say, that even of ours, some swarve from (or forsake) the Rules of
Discipline.

Answ. They cease then to be counted Christians with us: But your Philosophers
with such deeds, do keep the Name and honor of Wisdom.

The Judgment of the French Professors at Saumours, you have in these words,
These. Salmuriens. vol. 3. page 39. These. 39. Sacramenta non conferuntur nisi
iis, qui vel findem habent vel salt^m eam praese ferant, adeo ut nullis certis
argumentis compertum esse possit, eam esse ^mentitam: that is, Sacraments are
conferred on none, but these that either have Faith, or at least pretend (or
Profess) to have it, so that it cannot by any certain Arguments be proved to be
feigned.

The Judgment of the Scottish Divines, may be much discovered in these two
Testimonies following: Gillespie, Aaron's Rod Blossoming, page 514. [I believe
no conscientious Minister would adventure to Baptize one; who has manifest and
infallible signs of unregeneration. Sure We cannot be answerable to God, if we
should minister Baptism, to a man whose works and words, do manifestly declare
him to be an unregenerated, unconverted Person. And if we may not initiate such
a one, how shall we bring him to the Lords Table.]

Rutherford, Due Right of Presbyteries, page 231. n. 2. But says Robinson,
most of England, are ignorant of the first Rudiments and Foundations of
Religion; and therefore cannot be a Church.

Answ. Such are materially not the Visible Church, and have not a Profession;
and are to be taught; and if they will fully remain in that darkness, are to be
cast out.

If you would have the Testimonies of Protestants, you may read above
threescore of them, expressly maintaining that it is a Profession of Saving
Faith that is prerequisite to to our Right of Sacraments, cited in my
forementioned Disputation second. To which I add 33. more, cited to a like
purpose in my fifth Disputation of Sacraments: And to these add the large
testimony of Davenant, with his many Arguments, on Colos. 1. verse. 18. too
large to recite.

And for the later sort of Episcopal Divines, that they also agree in the same,
I will satisfy you from an Eminent man among them, Mr Herbert Thorndike, in
his Discourse of the Right of the Church, page 31, 32. where he says [And
hereby we see how binding and loosing sins, is attributed to the Keys of the
Church: Which being made a Visible Society, by the power of holding Assemblies,
to which no man is to be admitted, till there be just presumption, that he is
of the Heavenly Jerusalem, that is above.] I shall add more from him anon.

Somewhat I have elsewhere cited, of the Fathers Judgments in this Point, and
more anon I shall have occasion to produce. But in a Point that we are agreed
on (that is not Every Profession, but only a Credible Profession of true
Christianity, even of Faith and Repentance, that must be taken as Satisfactory
by the Church) I hope I may spare any further proof.

Prop. 7. The Profession of those that expect the Church-sttate and Privileges
of the Adult is to be tried, judged, and Approved by the Pastors of the
Church, to whose Office it is that this belongs.
THis Proposition has two parts: 1. That it is not a Profession untryed, and
unapproved, that must serve the turn. 2. That the trying and approving of it,
belongs to the Office of the Pastors of the Church.

The first is grounded by almost all Christians that I know of, and therefore
need not may words.

1. If every man should be the sole Judge of the soundness, and validity of his
own Profession, then Heretics, and Heathens, and Infidels may all crowd into
the Church: for when there is any outward advantage, or other common motive to
induce them to it, they would all join with the Church: as if they were
Christians. And we see that it is the custom of Heretics to intrude: And who
shall say to any of them, why do you so, if themselves are the only Judges? We
meet daily among our own neighbors, with abundance that know not whether
Christ be God or man; nor who he is, nor what he has done for us, nor why he
came into the world, and are ignorant of almost all the Essentials of the
Christian Faith; and with abundance more that live in common drunkenness,
scorning at holy duties, and at a Godly life, and hating those that use it, and
giving up themselves wholly to the flesh, and the world: And yet all these men
are so confident of the soundness, and validity of their own Profession, that
they will hate that Minister, that shall make any question of their Right to
the Privileges of the Church. I speak not by hearsay, or conjecture, but by
sad experience. And if they be their own judges, all these will be approved,
and admitted; and indeed, what man would not be admitted where Christianity is
in credit, or has any worldly advantages? so that it is certain, that this
would pluck up the hedge, and lay open the Vineyard of Christ unto the
wilderness. For self-love is such a powerful blinding thing, that it will make
every man almost, especially of the worser sort, approve of that which is their
Own.

2. If every man should be the sole Judge of his own, Profession, and fitness
for Church Privileges, then there could be no Communion of Saints: For all the
most ignorant and impious persons, would intrude into our Communion; and it
would be a Communion not only of actual, but of professed impious men. But the
consequent is intolerable, as being contrary to an Article of our Belief, and
a principal part of Christian practice.

3. If each man, were the only Judge of his own Profession, then there could be
no exercise of Church Discipline, nor keeping, or casting out the wicked: But
the consequent is unsufferable: Therefore.

4. If each man be the only Judge of his own Profession, then the Church is an
unguided, ungoverned Society: but the Consequent is false; therefore so is the
Antecedent.

2. And now I prove that it belongs to the Office of the Ministers to judge
of, and approve, the Profession of such as expect admission, or the Priveledges
of the Church.

1. If persons are not the sole Judges themselves, then it must belong to the
Minister to judge: But the Antecedent is before proved: The Consequence is
proved thus: It must belong either to the Pastors, or the Magistrate only, or
the people only; or to all, or some of these conjunctly. Not to the Magistrate
only: for 1. No man that I know of affirms it. 2. It is another man's office.
Not to the people only: for 1. None that I know of affirms this, They all
include the Pastors. 2. As I said, it is made part of the Pastors office. If
you say that it belongs to Magistrates, People, and Pastors jointly, then you
include the Pastors: And I grant that in some sort it belongs to them, but in
a different sort, as I shall tell you under the next Proposition.

2 It is to Ministers as such that the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are
committed: but to approve of the Profession of such as are to be admitted into
the Church, or to its Privileges, is part of the exercise of the Key's of the
Kingdom: therefore it is Ministers, to whom it belongs thus to judge and
approve.

I have proved in another place, (and so have many others, more at large) that
the Key's were not given to Peter, or to the Apostles, as to private men, for
so they were not; nor as to a Church of private Christians; for so they were
not, nor the representatives of any such: nor yet as to Apostles only; for then
they should have belonged to none but themselves; the contrary whereof is
certain: nor as to fixed Diocesan Bishops; for such they were not: and it is
generally granted that the Key's belong also to Presbyters, either wholly, or
the chief of them, and particularly, that in question: Nor yet were the Key's
given them only as a Synod, or Presbytery; for Peter was not such: and this in
question has ever been exercised by such Ministers.

Arg. 3. The Rulers of the Church are the lawful Judges, or Approvers of the
Profession of those that come into the Church, or demand the Privileges of it:
But it is the Ministers of Christ, that are the Rulers of the Church, as is
expressed, 1 These. 12. Acts 2. 28. Heb. 13. 7. and 17. 24. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Therefore.

Arg. 4. Those that are by Office the Stewards of the Mysteries of God, and
Rulers over his household, to give them meat in due season, which they must do
as faithful and wise servants, till their Lord comes; are the men that must
judge of, and approve the qualifications of those that come under their
Stewardship, Government, and Administration, of these Mysteries. But such are
the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Matthew. 24. 45, 46, 47. Therefore.

Arg. 5. To whom it belongs, to receive men at age into the Church; to
restore by Absolution, them that fell off, and to Administer Christ's
Ordinances to those that are within; to them does it belong to try, judge, and
approve of them, that are to be thus received, absolved, or that expect the
Privileges of the Church: But it belongs to Christ's Ministers to receive
men, absolve them, and administer the Ordinances to them: Therefore. The
Antecedent is commonly granted, and plain in Scripture. The Consequence has
Reason so evident, as needs no confirmation.

Arg. 6. If all that enter into the Church, or that are restored by Asolution,
or are stated in a Right to Church Privileges of the Adult, are therewithal
engaged into a mutual, voluntary Relation to Christ's Ministers, then must their
Profession be judged of and approved by Christ's Ministers: but the Antecedent
is certain: Therefore so is the Consequent. The Antecedent is clear, because
1. All that enter into the Universal Church, do enter under the hand of the
Ministry, and thereby acknowledge their Relation to them, and Authority to
admit them. 2. Because all such do engage themselves to be Christ's Disciples,
and learn of him as their Master, not as coming down from Heaven, to teach them
personally, but as teaching them by his Word, Spirit, and Ministers conjunctly,
saying ( Luke 10 16) He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises
you, despises me. 3. Because they all engage themselves to take Christ for
their King, who rules them by his Laws and Officers; and his Ministers are his
Ruling Officers, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 12. 7. and 17. 24. 1 These. 5. 12. 4.
Because they are all engaged to take Christ for the great High Priest of the
Church, who has appointed his Ministers, to officiate under him, in leading
them in public Worship of the Church; and in offering up the Praises of God,
and blessing the people, and praying for them and celeberating the
Commemoration, and Representation of Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross. 5. Because
they that enter into a particular Church, where only the constant stated use of
holy Ordinances, and Privileges, are to be had, (though occasionally elsewhere)
do enter into a Relation to the Pastors of that particular Church; as members
of their flock and Church; whom they must oversee, and watch over: all this is
past controversy.

And then for the Consequent of the major Proposition (that therefore Ministers
must approve of their Profession) I prove it thus. Ministers are naturally
freemen, as well as others: and therefore no man can become a member of their
charge, and put them upon so great duty as the Relation does require, against
their wills, without their consent, and contrary to their Judgment, and
Consciences. It is an exceeding great burden that lies on us, and a great deal
of work that is required of us, to each particular Soul: in our charge we must
exhort, instruct, admonish, in season, and out of season, publikly, and
privately, and watch over, and govern them, visit them in sickness, comfort,
strengthen them, etc. O what a mountain lies on me, and how should I bear it,
if God did not support me? And if every man that will, shall make me more work,
and put himself under my Care, without my Consent, then I am so far from being
a freeman, as all other are, that I am enslaved, and undone in slavery For 1.
They may oppress me when they will with Number; and so many may flock in to my
charge, in despite of me, as shall nullify the particular Church, and by the
magnitude make it another thing, by making it incapable of its ends, 2. And
hereby they may force me to leave undone my duty, both to them and others, by
oppressing me with work: For when I have ten times more then I can teach and
oversee, I must needs neglect them* all or most. 3. And they may abuse the
Church, and me with the evil qualities, as well as the excessive quantity of
members; and we shall be obliged to give that which is holy to dogs, and to use
those as Church members, that are enemies to the Church; and to administrate
Sacraments to any, that will have them, how unfit soever; and to profane all
Gods Ordinances, and turn them to a lie. 4. And by this means, the Church will
be utterly ruined, and made a den of thieves, and a stie of swine: For besides
that all the worst may at pleasure be members of it, all men that are
faithful, (or most at least) will run away from the Ministry, and sooner
turn Chimny sweepers then Pastors. For what man dare venture his Soul on so
great a charge, for which he knows he must give an account, when he is certain
to leave undone the work of his Office, in so great a measure, and when he
knows he may be thus oppressed in soul and body, and so undone by wicked men,
when ever they please: yea, if they purposely do it to despite him.

Arg. 7. That which belongs to all other Superiors, in voluntary Relations,
is, not to be denied to Ministers in theirs: but a free consent, and
Approbation of them, that they are related to, belongs to all other Superior,
voluntary Relations: Therefore to us.

A Schoolmaster, is to Approve the capacity of his Scholars; and a Physician
is to judge of the fitness of a person to be his patient, and his fitness for
this or that medicine in particular. Not only a Master would take it ill, if he
may not have the approbation of his own servants, but have as many, and as bad
thrust on him, as shall please; but a husband would think it hard, if he might
not have the approbation, and choice of his own wife, but that any might force
him to take them that they please. And are the Pastor of Christ's Church, the
only slaves on earth? How improbable a thing is this?

Arg. 8. That Relation which must be rationally, regularly, and faithfully
managed, must be rationally, regularly, and freely entered (for otherwise we
cannot so manage it) But the Relation of a Minister to each member of his
charge must be thus managed: Therefore.

Arg. 9. It is plainly expressed in the Ministers Commission, that he is to
approve of the Profession of Disciples: therefore it belongs to his Office,
Matthew. 28. 19. Go Disciple all Nations, baptizing them -- teaching them to
observe all things -- Which plainly manifests, that it is they that must
judge, when a man is made a Disciple, and when not, or else how can they either
Baptize them as such, or teach them the Precepts of Christ as such? So when he
gives to his servants the Key's of the Kingdom, Matthew. 18, etc. it shows
that they are to judge who is to be admitted, and who not, as is aforesaid: or
else he would never have set them at the door, and made them the Porters, and
Key-bearers of his Church, to let men in.

Arg. 10. No man in the Administration of holy Ordinances, is ordinarily to
renounce his own Reason and Conscience, and to act against them. But thus it
would be if we have not the approving of the Profession, or Qualification of
those that we must administer them to: Therefore -- He that is to Execute here
is to judge: For 1. Else you will force Ministers to go against their Reason,
and Conscience in all administrations. 2. You will deny them so much as
Judicium Discretionis, which you allow to every Christian, much more Judicium
Directionis, which belongs to their Office. Every man must judge and
understand what he does, and why he does it: you will not force the people to
participate of Sacraments, against their Consciences. Why then should Ministers
be forced to Give them against their Consciences? Administering is their work:
and therefore they must know why they do it, and on what grounds: Else you will
make them but like hangmen, or worse, if they must do Execution against their
judgments, because it is another judgment. And whose judgment is it, that we
must follow, when we go against our own?

Arg. 11. If it belong to Christ, to pass an open Approbation, of the
Qualification of such as are to be admitted into his Church, or to his special
Ordinances, or Church Privileges, then does it belong to the Ministers of
Christ, as his instruments: But it does belong to Christ. 1. For all that enter
either into an Infant, or Adult Church State, do join themselves into a near
Relation to Christ: And will Christ have men married to him, and made his
children, and members, and servants, without his Approbation of them, or
against his particular will? 2. All that thus come into the Church, or are
restored, and claim Church Priviledges, do expect, and claim the Benefits of
Christ, and the greatest benifits in the world. And shall any man have Christ's
great, and precious Benefits against his will, and without his Approbation? It
may be you will say, that he has already expressed his consent in the free
Promise of the Gospel, to all believers. I Answer: He has so to Believers: but
he has done it only to Believers, and he has not said in the Gospel that you
are a Believer.

Object. But it is sufficient, that my own Conscience bear me witness.

Its before proved, that men are not here their own judges.
I Answer, It is so, as to all matters of Conscience, that are to be transacted
only between God and you, as about your Justification, and Glorification, etc.
(And yet in this case, Ministerial Absolution is a great means to help the
Peace of your Consciences.) But where the Minister has to do with you, by
Administrations, and the Church has to do with you in the way of Communion,
there they must know what they do, and why, and must have some expression, of
what you say your Conscience testifies to you.

And the Consequence of the Major is plain, (that if it belongs thus to Christ
to approve, then it belongs to his Ministers,) 1. Because he appoints not
personally on earth, nor uses, or approves any other way, to signify his own
Approbation of you in particular, for a Church State, and Privileges. 2.
Because he has expressly entrusted his Ministers with this Power, as to speak
to men in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5. 19. So to espouse them to Christ their
husband, that we may present them a chaste Virgin to Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Yea,
and hereupon they are to give up themselves to the Lord first, and to us by the
Will of God, 2 Cor. 8. 5. Christ's Ministers are his Agents, or Ambassadors, as
to solicit men in his Name to be Reconciled to him, so to Approve them in his
Name, and tell them that he is Reconciled to them. And therefore they are to
deliver Himself, his Body, and Blood, in his Name to them in the Lords Supper;
and to bind, and loose in his Name; and whatsoever they loose on earth,
(according to his Promise) shall be loosed in Heaven: So much of his work does
Christ by his Officers.

And even men's first Faith is a Believing the Preacher, and Christ by them,
Acts 8. 12. They believed Philip preaching, etc.

Arg. 12. To whomsoever the Labor belongs, to them the Power of doing it
belongs: But it is to Ministers that the Labor of trying and judging of such
Professions, and Qualifications, belongs; Therefore it is to Ministers, that
the power belongs.

The Major is undoubted: for else we must be bound by God, to do that which we
have no Power (or Authority) to do, and others must have Power to do it, and
not be bound to it, which are both senseless. The Minor I prove.

1. From the frequent Commands of Scripture, that lay this burden on the
Ministers, but not Magistrates or People. (in the way that is now in Question)
All the directions, and Canons which Paul gives to Timothy, Titus* to the
Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20. and other Pastors, together with the Exhortations
to performance, and terrible charges given them to be faithful, do show that
it is they that must do the work.

2. From common consent: all would have the honor and Power: but who besides
the Pastors would have the work, and care, and severe Obligations to perform
it? Will Magistrates, or all the people undertake it, to try, and judge of the
Professions of every man that enters upon Adult Church Membership, or
Privileges, of such as are to be restored? They that will undertake this work
must attend it, and give themselves wholly to it, and confer with the
persons, and do so much work as our people would be hardly brought to do (if
they were able) It Is unexperienced Rashness, and perverseness, that makes them
so jealous of the Ministers Power in such cases, and some of them to reproach
us for it. Ah blind unthankful Souls! Do you know what the Ministry and this
Power is? It is a power to be the servants of all; a power to spend and be
spent, even for the unthankful. It Is a Power to do the most toylsome, and
displeasing work to flesh and blood, one of them in the world; such as flesh
calls a very drudgery. I profess unfeignedly that i^ God had left it to my
choice, and I should consult with flesh and blood, I had rather preach twice or
thrice a week for nothing, and do no more, then to have this Power (a duty of
judging and governing this one Parish, though I had for it many hundred pounds
a year. Nothing does bring so much trouble upon us, as that Power which
unthankful persons scorn at. I had rather, if I might consult with flesh and
blood, be advanced to the Power, of holding or driving plow for you, if not of
sweeping your streets. (Though yet because of Gods interest, and the ends of
the work, I count it the happiest life in the world.) And do you grudg us such
a Power as this? Would you grudg me the Power of threshing your corn? Or will
you grudg a Physician the Power of judging of your disease, and the Remedy, to
save your life? Or a School master the Power of examining, and teaching your
children? Do the work, and take the Power, if you are able, and can go through
with it, and spare not.

Arg. 13. It is only the Ministers of Christ, that are Able and Capable to
receive the Power, and do the work: and therefore it is they only that have
Authority thereto.

Nothing but the Antecedent needs proof. And that I prove by three several
Enablements, which Ministers have, and others want. 1. Ministers only have
ability of Mind, for the work of this trial, and Approbation. Here I speak of
them Ordinarily, and I have these grounds for it. 1. God has commanded that
the most knowing, able, faithful, holy men, shall be destinated to this work,
1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. etc. And therefore it is supposed that usually they are such,
or else it is the shame of the Magistrate that should see to it. 2. It Is they
only that set themselves a part to the work and study from their youth, for the
accomplishments that are requisite, (unless here and there one of other sorts)
And men are likeliest to be understanding in that, which they have all their
days set themselves to study. 3. We see by experience that they are the most
able, unless it be (alas how few) here and there a godly studious Gentleman, or
other person: who are most of them too blame, that they become not Ministers, I
think.

2. It is only the Ministers, who being separated to the Gospel and Work of
God, do lay by all other business, and give themselves wholly to these things.
Gentlemen, (much less all the people of the Church,) cannot lay by their
callings to attend this business of trying, and judging of men's Professions as
Ministers must do, if they will be faithful. Should private members have so
much Church governing work as some cut out for them, and should they bear such
a burden, as some would lay upon them, under the name of Power and Privileges,
it would undo them soul or body, or both: they would find time little enough
for it in some places, if they all cast off their outward callings.

And 3. The Pastors only are capable, because of Unity. For should the People
have this work, as some would have it, the multitude would hinder execution,
and they would turn all to wrangling. 1. Such bodies move slowly. 2. Multitude
with that divesity of parts and minds that is among them, would set them by the
ears; and the Church would be almost always in a flame. If every man that is to
make Profession of his Faith, on this or the like occasion, must be tried and
judged by all; some would approve, and others would disapprove and reject, in
most or very many cases. Whereas the Pastors being single, or not many, and
more experienced, and able, and vacant for a full enquiry, have less reason to
be partial injurious, or disagreed.

Arg. 14. The Practice of the Apostles, Evangelists, and the Pastors of
Christ's Church in all Ages, does put us quite out of doubt, that it is not
only belonging to the Ministerill Office, to judge and approve of such
Professions, but that it is a very great part of that Office.

John Baptist received, and judged of the Profession of his Penitents, before
he did baptize them. The twelve Apostles, Mat. 10. 13, 14. Were to judge of the
worthiness, or unworthiness, of those that they were to abide with, Mark 6. 11.
Who were the Judges or Approvers of the Profession of the 3000 Converts, Acts.
2. 41. but the Apostles that Baptized them, or judged them to be Baptized? Who
else approved of all the believers that were added, Acts 5. 14. even multitudes
both of men and women? They that Continued in the Apostles Doctrine and
fellowship, (Acts 2. 42.) and under their Government, no doubt entered at first
under their cond^ct. Philip was the Judge of the Eunuch's Profession, Acts 8.
37, 38. Ananias was scrupulous of admitting Paul, but as God himself Approved
of him to Ananias (Acts 9. 13, 14, 15.) So A^anias also must ministerially
approve him ( verse. 17.) Who judged of Lidia's Profession, and the Jaylours,
(Acts 16) but the Apostles, or other Ministers of Christ? What need we instance
any more, when we all know, that no Convert entered at Age into the Church, but
under the hand of some Minister of Christ, that did Baptize him, or appoint him
to be Baptized.

Object. But this is not our Case, for we were Baptized in Infancy, and are in
the Church already.

Answ. You entered not into the number of Adult and more perfect Members in your
Infancy; nor did you make any personal Profession in your Infancy: That Is yet
to be done. Your Parents Profession will serve you no longer then your Infant
state. These being not in the Gospel Church before, were at once Baptized, and
entered thereby into the Number of the Adult members. So would we do if we
converted those that were the seed of Heathens or Infidels. But though this be
not your Case in respect of Baptism, and an Insant Church State, yet this is
your own Case in regard of personal Profession, and Adult Church State.

If the Ministers of Christ in Scripture time, admitted none into an Adult
Church State, and to the Privileges of such, but upon a Personal Profession,
approved by the said Ministers, then neither must we do so now. But the
Antecedent is past doubt: Therefore. --

The Reasons of the Consequence is, because the Scripture is our Rule, and the
Reasons of the Cases are the same. If you say with the Anabaptists, that I may
as well argue from the Apostles example, for the Baptizing of the Aged: I
Answer so I will, when the Case is the same: when they are converted from
Infidelity, or are not born and baptized into the Gospel Church before: The
Apostles did not Baptize at Age, any person that was born of believing Parents
in the Gospel Church, after Baptism was instituted. As to them that say, that
Mary was a Christian, Anabap. Object. Answ.
and yet Christ was not Baptized till full Age. I Answer, 1. That Mary was not
a Baptized person: 2. That Baptism into the Name of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, was not Instituted in Christ's Infancy: How should he be Baptized in
Infancy, when there was no such Ordinance of God in the world, as
Gospel-Baptism, or John's Baptism? If you think Baptism, and Profession, or
Church Membership so inseparable, that we must not require such a Profession,
but in order to Baptism. 1. You speak without proof. 2. You speak even contrary
to the experience of the Jewish Church: where in the wilderniss, Circumcision
was separated from Profession, and Church Membership, both of Infants, and
Adult, the later being without the former. 3. If we may be Baptized in Infancy,
without a Personal Profession, then they are separable: but the Antecedent is
proved in due place. 4. No man denies that I know of, but that Personal
Profession approved by the Ministers, is necessary in several Cases, after
Baptism. But all the examples of the Baptized Adult in the New Testament, will
fully prove, that all men should enter into the state and number of Adult
Church Members, upon a Personal Profession approved by the Ministers of Christ:
for so did all in the Scripture terms, on Reasons common to them and us: and no
man can put by the obligation of the example, by any pretense of an imparity of
Reason, but what will be as strong to evacuate almost all Scripture example,
and much of the commands. But as to the Baptizing persons at Age, we will do
the same, when the persons are such, as the Apostles baptized: and that they
baptized none others, was never yet proved; but more said for the Affirmative.

And ever since the Apostles days, it has been the constant Practice of the
Church, that the Profession, and claim of the Adult should be tried by the
Ministers of Christ. 1. In Case of Infant Baptism, the Minister was to receive
and approve the Parents Profession. 2. In Case of the Baptism of the Aged, they
always entered under the trial, approbation, or hand of the Minister. 3. In
Case of the Confirming of those at Age, that were Baptized in Infancy, it was
always done under the hand and judgment of the Minister. 4. In Case of
Absolution of those that fell after either Infant, or Adult Baptism, it was
always upon a Profession approved by the Minister. To prove these things is
vain, it being the Subject of so many Canons, and so commonly known, both by
Record and Practice.

Mr Herbert Thorndike, in his forcited Discourse of the Right of the Church, is
full upon it, page 32. he says, As the Power of Judging who is, and who is not
thus Qualified, presupposes a Profession, so that an Instruction, obliging the
obedience of them; which seek Remission of sins, by the Gospel, and therefore
confidently assuring it to them, which conform themselves. In a word, because
admitting to, and excluding from the Church, is, or ought to be, a just and
lawful presumption of admitting to, or excluding from Heaven, (N. B.) it is
morally and legally the same act, that entitleth to Heaven, and to the Church;
that makes an heir of Life Everlasting, and a C^ristian; because he that
obeys the Church, in submitting to the Gospel, is as certainly a member of
the Invisible, as of the Visible Church. You see here in his Judgment, both
what kind of Profession it must be, and who is the Judge of it (of which he is
more large.) And surely they that see Confirmation, and Penance, or Absolution,
grown up to the reputation of proper Sacraments, and understands how they
came to it, will never question whether the Universal Church, has still taken
the Pastors for the lawful Judges, and Approvers of that Confession, and
Profession, which in such Cases was requisite.

And that it was a Profession, both of saving Faith, and Repentance, that was
expected by the Church; which the Pastors were to Judge of: I mentioned some
plain testimonies of Antiquity. Apol. page 95. to which I shall add some more.

Justin Martyr, Apolog. 2. Expressing how Baptism was then admitted to the
Adult, says, As many as being persuaded, do believe these things to be true
which we teach, and do promise to live according to them, they first learn, by
prayer and fasting, to beg pardon of God, for their former sins, our selves
also joining our prayer and fasting: then they are brought to the water, and
born again, in the same way as we our selves were born again.And of the Lords
Supper he says, This food we call the Eucharist, to which no man is admitted,
but he that believes the truth of our Doctrine, being washed in the Laver of
Regegeneration, for Remission of sin, and that so lives as Christ has
taught.

Nazianzen. Orat. 40 vol. 1. page 641. The force and faculty of Baptism, is
nothing else, but a Covenant entered with God, for a second (or new) life, and
a more pure course of living. And therefore that we should all exceedingly
fear, and with all diligence keep our souls, lest we be found to have
violated this Covenant. Basil's words, and many more to the like purpose, there
recited I forbear.

And that a man baptized, is not so much as to be taken for a Christian, if by
word or deed he nullify that Profession (much more when he never made a
Personal Profession, when he is at Age) the Ancients commonmonly agree. Some I
cited before: Tertullian again says, Apol. cap. 44. Speaking of the Jailer*
Nemo illic Christianus, nisi plane tantum Christianus; aut se and aliud, jam
nox Christianus.

Athenagoras, in Legate. pro Christ. page 3. Nullus Christianus malus est nisi
haut professionem simulaverit.

Damascene Orthodox. fid. lib. 4. cap. 11. page 303. Qui enim secundum
traditionem Catholicae Ecclesiae credit, sed communicate operibus Diabolo,
infidelis est.

Salvian. de Gubern. lib. 4. in the beginning: Nam cum hoc sit hominis
Christiani fides, fideliter Christi mandata servare, fit absque dubio ut nec
fidem habeat qui infidelis est, nec Christum credat qui Christi mandata
conculcat. Ac per hoc totum in id revolvitur, ut qui Christiani nominis opus
non agit, Christianus non esse videa^ur. Nomen enim sine actu atque officio suo
nihil est.

Cyprian, de dupl. Mart. Frustra miscetur caetui Sanctorum, in Templo
manufacto, si submotus est ab universo Corpore Mystico Christi.

August. de Baptis. cont. Donatist. lib. 4.cap. 2. Ad Ecclesiam non pertinent
omnes qui sunt intus, sed qui sunt in ea pie viventes. Etcap. 4. In corpore
unica columbae, nec heretici, nec improbi nominantur.

See the like passages of the Ancient Schoolmen, cited by Davenant in Colos. 1.
18. page 118.

And thus I have showed you the Necessity of a Profession, and of what sort of
Profession, and that the Pastors of the Church are by Office appointed by
Christ, to try, approve, and receive it.

Prop. 8. Though it belong to the Pastors Office to judge of the Profession of
such expectants, yet are they bound up by the Laws of Christ, what Profession
to accept, and what to refuse: and if by breaking these Laws they shall
dangerously, or grossly wrong the Church: it belongs to the Magistrate to
correct them, and to the people to admonish them, and disown their sin.
IN sum, as is aforesaid, It is a credible Profession of true Christianity,
which they must accept. And as that which seems not to be Understanding, and
serious, and voluntary, and deliberate, is not credible; nor that which is
Nullified by Verbal, or Actual Contradiction; nor that which is made by one
that has forfeited the credit of his word; so on the other side, a Credible
man's Profession is his Title-condition, in the Judgment of the Church, or that
Evidence of the Condition that we must take up with: And if a man produce the
Positive Evidence of his Title, we must be able to disprove, and invalidate it,
before we reject him: so that it is a Profession of true Christanity, which we
cannot prove to be false, at least by a Violent Presumption, (as the Lawyers
speak) which we must accept.

By this it appears, 1. That a grossly ignorant person, that knows not the
Essentials of Christianity, is not to be taken for a Professed Christian. For
trial of such, the Ordinance of Parliament, of October 20. 1645. does give us
satisfaction (recited in the form of Church Government, of March 29. 1648.) 2.
Nor one that denies any of the said Essentials Heretically. 3. Nor one that
speaks Ludicrously, and jestingly. 4. Nor one that speaks in a Passion, not
deliberatly. 5. Nor one that is manifestly forced and unwilling. 6. Nor one
that says and unsaith. 7. Nor one whose life does prove his Profession to be
incredible. 8. Nor one that has perfidiously been a breaker of Covenant with
God already, till his reformed life shall recover the credit of his word. So
that with a Credible person, his bare Profession is Evidence fefore the Church
of his Right; and we must prove him a Liar, or false in his Profession, before
we can reject him. But a man that has been wicked, after open Covenanting with
God, or Profession of Christianity, has forfeited his credit, and therefore
must show us a new life, as well as a verbal Profession, before he is to be
restored to his Privileges. In the first case (with a Credible person) we must
prove his Profession false, before we reject him: but in the second Case (with
an incredible person) he must Evidence his Profession to be true, by probable
Evidences, that shall make it credible. If I thought that the very light and
law of Nature, joined with the known General Rules of Scripture, did not put
this past Controversy, with most judicious Christians, I should stand to prove
all this by parts.

But on the other side, it is hence manifest, 1. That the Pastors of the
Church, must refuse no man that has the least degree of Grace, or makes a
credible Profession of the least. 2. And that we must nor require as a matter
of Necessity, such ^ipe, or clear, and judicious expressions, from the
ignorant, bashful, or such, as for want of use and good breeding, are unable to
express their minds, as we may from others. If a man, or woman be unable in
good sense to express their Faith, in the very Essentials, or to reveal the
Grace of God within them: yet if upon our Interrogations, and helping them,
they can do it in any intelligible manner, so that we do but perceive that it
is a sound Profession in the Essentials, which they Mean, though they cannot
handsomely utter it, we may not reject any such as these. 3. Note also, that
defects in Knowledge must be indeed exceeding gross., where the person is
willing to be taught, and Ruled by Christ, and use his means, and thus seems to
Love God, and Holiness, before they will warrant us to reject them. Should the
Judgments of such persons seem unacquainted with some fundamentals, about the
Trinity, and the like mysteries, I should search them better, and I should
plainly tell them presently of the truth, and if they received Information, I
should not reject a willing Soul. The very Apostles of Christ had the Sacrament
administered to them by himself, when they did not understand and believe, the
Death and Resurrection of Christ. I know that this will not warrant us to give
such persons the Eucharist now; because that those great Truths were not then
of such great Necessity, as after Christ's Death and Resurrection they did
become; as being not so fully revealed, nor the Actual belief of them so
peremptorily imposed. But yet it shows us this much, that even in persons
admitted to the Lords Supper, if there be but a Belief in God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and the Points of Absolute Necessity, (though in rude
and unperfect conception) and a Love to Christ, and a willingness to Learn of
him, and obey him, a great deal of lamentable ignorance may be born with, in
those that have wanted either Means of knowledge, and clear discoveries of the
Truth, or natural ripeness of understanding to receive it. You see then that
Pastors are not Arbitrary, nor merely left to their own wills.

Prop. 9. It is most evident that Ministers, People, and Magistrates, have each
a Power of Judging; but different, as they have different works.
2. When the Question is, To whom the Sacraments, and other Ordinances, and
Church-Relations, and Privileges are to be Ministerially deliverd as from
Christ, and to whom not? Here the Ministers of Christ are the Judges. And so
are they, when the Question is, Whom must we teach, direct, and persuade, and
in Christ's Name command the people to avoid, or to hold Communion with? For
those two are our own work in the Execution. And if either Magistrate, people,
or any other must be Judge, where Ministers must Execute and work; Then 1. We
have not that common Judicium Discretionis to guide our own actions, which is
allowed, and Necessary to every Christian. 2. Then the Rulers of the Church,
are not only degraded, and made no Rulers, but are put into that slavery, and
subjection to them, that are commanded to obey them, which no Pastor must
desire the People, or any one of them to be in. For we must not deny them a
Judgment of Discretion, about their own actions. 3. And by this course,
Ministers that are the Eyes of the Body, must not only be guided by other
parts, but they must execute against their own Knowledge, and Conscience, when
other men miss-judge. 4. And if so, either God commands us to sin, when
ever people, or Magistrates bid us, (which none dare say) or else it is no
sin, when it does but get their Vote: and so we may warrantably do what the
Magistrate bids us, (as Hobbs thinks) or what the people bids us, (as others as
unreasonably think) As if it would be a sufficient excuse for me, to say, Lord
I did what the Magistrate, or the Major Vote of the people bid me, though it
was that which thou forbidest. 5. If the people have no such Power over one
another, then they have none over their Rulers or Guides: But they have none
such over one another. Indeed in order to Unity, a Major Vote may (not
effectually oblige) but occasion an obligation: But as to Government, let them
show us if they can from Scripture, where the Major Vote of a Church has the
Government of the Lesser part, or that the Lesser may go against their own
Judgment, and Conscience, merely because the greater part requires it. This
Governing Vote, is as strange a thing to the Scripture as a Pope is. 6.
Pastors, or General u^fixed Ministers, may receive persons into the Universal
Church sometime, without receiving them into any particular Church: And what
have any people there to do with the trial, or Approbation of their Profession
or Qualifications? One can lay no more claim to it then another. And sure all
the world must not have the trial of them. 7. What people did Philip advise
with before he Baptized the Eunuch? Or who but Philip alone was judge of his
Profession? What Vote approved of the 3000 Converts, Acts 2 or of Paul, Acts 9.
or of Lydia, or the Jailer, Acts 16. or any other that ever were admitted by
the Ministers of Christ in Scripture times. And what Magistrates were the
Approvers for 300 years after Christ? No nor after. 8. If in this part of our
Office we must obey men, against God (whether Magistrate or People) then in
other parts: And so if the Vote of the Church, or Magistrate, forbid me to pray
or preach against Pride, Covetousness or Drunkenness, I must obey them, that
is, I must obey men before God, and please men, and be no longer the Minister
of Christ. 9. What can be more plainly contrary to Scripture, then for the
people by a Major Vote, to Rule those whom God commands to obey, as their
Rulers? Heb. 13. 7. and 17. 24. 1. Tim. 5. 17. 1 These. 5. 12. Acts 20, etc.

Object. Pastors have but a Ministerial Ruling Power.

Answ. Who doubts of that? But is a Ministerial Rule no Rule? No man on earth
has more then a Ministerial Power: For all are under God, and the Redeemer.
All Judges, Justices, and other Officers in the Commonwealth, have but a
Ministerial Rule as Officers: But is that no Rule? Or shall the People
therefore Rule these Rulers? We are Christ's Ministers for the people: we are
theirs finally, but have our Power from Christ only Efficiently. If the People
are the Rulers, who are the Ruled? It Is a strange society, when the Ruling, and
Ruled part is the same; where all the Body is a Head and an Eye. 10. If People
or Magistrates will oblige the Ministers by their Power, whom they shall
Baptize, Confirm, or Absolve, and what Profession they shall accept; then must
the People and Magistrates undertake to Answer it before God, and to bear all
the blam, and punishment, if we miscarry in obedience to them. And truly if
they dare undertake this, we should gladly accept of the condition, with a
thousand thanks, if we could but be sure that God would give us leave, and
thus acquit us, and accept of our service on these terms. O then how easy a
thing were it to obey, rather then to Rule. So much for the Power of the
Ministers in this (and other such like) work.

2. When the Question is, Whether such a Professor be fit for our own Communion
or not, and whether it be our duty to avoid him or not, then the People have a
Judgment of Discretion: Not a Governing Judgment, as the Pastors have; but a
Judgment that must be the Immediate Guide of their Actions. Yet this is to be
thus exercised: They are to look to Gods Word as the Rule, and to trust that
with a Divine Faith: They are also to look at the Judgment and Directions of
the Pastors, that are their authorized Guides; and to trust them as the
Officers of Christ. For the Word is their Regulating Guide; the Pastors are
their authorized Directing Guides; and their own Understandings are their
Immediate Discerning Guides. So that they must not be wise in their own
conceits, nor lean to their own Understanding, without the use of Scripture,
and Ministry; but use their Understandings for the improvement of these. So
that if they know not that the Postours of the Church do mislead them, contrary
to the Word of God, they cannot deny them obedience (For the command to obey
them is unquestionable.) Or if they have not a grounded strong presumption, or
probability of it, they may not suspend their obedience; but must leave the
Pastors to the work of their Office, and trust them in it, and avoid those
whom they reject, and hold communion with those whom they accept, and
introduce, confirm, or restore. But in case they know that a Pastor leads
them into sin, they are not to follow him: and if they have just ground for a
strong suspicion of it, they must suspend, and consult with other Pastors, and
get full information: For Christian People are not to be Ruled as beasts, but
as the Children of God; and must understand what they are required to do, and
why, as being free Subjects, (though Subjects) in the Kingdom of Christ, and to
be governed accordingly.

3. When the Question is, Whether Ministers are to be punished for abusing
their Power, Receiving or Rejecting men to the injury of the Church, and
contrary to the Word of God: here the Magistrate is the Judge. For as forcing,
or punishing corporally is his work, so he must be the Judge, where he is the
executioner, or else he should be forced to go against his own Judgment, and to
be a mere servile executioner, which were to him an insufferable injury.

But here, 1. The Magistrate must not give the Minister a Law to Govern the
Church by; (unless the determination of circumstantial appendants) but must see
that we Govern it according to the Word of God, our only and sufficient Rule.
2. And he must not be over busy, nor unnecessarily intermeddle in the works of
another Office, nor be too confident of his own Understanding in the matters of
the Pastors work, as if he knew better then they. 3. But he must correct or
cast out those Ministers that will not obey the Word of God; Punishing us for
breaking the old Rule, and not making new Rules for us, is their work, so be
it, he can procure a better supply; 4. In this case, if the Magistrates
Judgment be right, he does his duty, and Ministers must obey him: If he err,
he may be guilty of persecution, in hindering good, under pretense of punishing
evil. If his error tend not to the destruction, or great and certain hurt of
the Church; the Ministers whom he casts out, are bound to obey him, and give
place to others, and bestow their labors, in some other Country, or in some
other kind at home: But if his error lead him to destructive persecution, we
must Passively submit, but not Actively, or Negatively obey him, but must
preach as long as we are able, and do our duty, till by prison, or death he
stop us in the exercise.

Prop. 10. To this Ministerial Approbation of the Profession, and Qualification
of the expectant, there is to be adjoined a Ministerial Investiture, or
Delivery of the Benefit expected.
THis is the proper work of the Ministers of Christ. He that is Himself in the
Heavenly Glory, has left his Spirit within to draw men to him, and his
Ministers without, to Deliver up the Counter-covenant on his part, in his Name,
and to espouse them to Christ, and to Accept them in his Name, and stead. And
this Investiture is one of the principal parts of the Nature and use of
Sacraments, which all have not fully Considered of. The Papists tell us of
seven Sacraments, Baptism, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, the Eucharist,
Matrimony, and Extreme Unction. Calvin sticks not to yield them three. The name
Sacrament being not in Scripture, but of mere Ecclesiastik use, and being a
word that will stretch, I distinguish between three sorts of Sacraments. 1. For
any Divine Institution which notably signifies Spiritual Grace: And so (though
I think Extreme Unction none, as being now no duty, yet) I doubt not but
there is more then seven. 2. For any solemn Investiture of a person by
Ministerial Delivery, in a state of Church Priviledges, or some special
Gospel-mercy. And so I grant that there are five Sacraments: Baptism,
Confirmation, Absolution, the Lords Supper, and Odination. As a man that
delivers Possession of a house, does deliver the Key to him that enters; and
as we are Invested in the Possession of land, by the delivery of a twig and
turfe; and as Ministers were wont to be invested, or have Induction into the
Churches by giving them the Books, and the Bell-ropes; and as women were wont
to be married with a ring, and as a Prince does Knight a man by a sword; so
Christ by his Ministers does first by Baptism Invest us in our Church State,
and Infant-priviledges: and by Confirmation, confirm us in our Church State,
and Invest us with a Right to the Privileges of the Adult: and by Absolution
reinvest us in the Privileges that we had forfeited: and by the Lords Supper
Deliver to us Christ and his Benefits, for our ordinary nourishment, and growth
in Grace: and by Ordination he Investeth the pardon ordained with Ministerial
Power. 3. But taking the word Sacrament in that strictest sense, as our Divines
define a Sacrament, as it is an outward sign of Christ's Institution, for the
obsignation of the full Covenant of Grace, betwixt him and the Covenanter, and
a delivery, Representation, and Investiture of the Grace, or Benefits of that
Covenant; thus we have only two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. But
truly I would not quarrel with them for the mere name, as to the five which I
mentioned.

Prop. 11. The solemn Ministerial Investiture of Professors, into the Right of
the Church privileges of the Adult, is either 1. Of the unbaptized, who are
now first entered. 2. Or of the Baptized in Infancy, that never proved ungodly,
nor violated that first Covenant. 3. Or of those Baptized, whether in Infancy
or at Age, that have since Proved wicked, and broke that Covenant. The first of
these Investitures is, to be by Baptism; the second by Confirmation; and the
third by Absolution. So that the solemn Investiture that I am pleading for, is
by Confirmation to one sort (that never proved ungodly since their Baptism) and
by Absolution to the other sort that broke their Covenant.
THe Baptism of the Adult, we have not now to do with. Of those that are
Baptized in Infancy, some do betimes receive the secret seeds of Grace, which
by the blessing of a holy education, (and some among the profane) is stirring
within them, according to their capacity, and working them to God by actual
desires, and working them from all known sin, and entertaining further Grace,
and turning them into actual acquaintance with Christ, as soon as they arrive
at full natural capacity: so that they never were Actual ungodly persons. To
these their Investiture in the state of Adult-members upon their personal
Approved Profession, is a Confirmation of the mutual Covenant that it finds
them under, and of them in that Covenant.

But there are others (I doubt the most) that since their infant Baptism, have
proved Actual wicked ungodly persons; if not openly flagitious and scandalous,
yet at least, unacquainted with any special sanctifying work, till after they
attain to the full years of discretion. De Exhomologes. vide Albespin. in
Tertul. de Paenit. c. 10. page 297. and Observe. passim.
These break their Covenant made with God in Baptism, in which they were
devoted to him, and engaged to live to him, forsaking the flesh, the world, and
the Devil. And therefore these must come in as Penitents (even as if they had
proved wicked after an Adult Baptism, they must do:) and therefore it is first
an Absolution which they must receive: not only a Particular Absolution from an
Act of heinous sin (which afterward may be renewed upon particular
penitence) but a General Absolution from a state of sin. Yet this does
consequently participate of the Nature of the former, and has a Confirmation
in it, or with it: Not a Confirmation in the wicked state that such have lived
in, but a Renewal, and solemn Confirming of the Covenant, between God and them,
which in Baptism was made. So that to such it is as an Absolution and
Confirmation Conjunct.

Prop. 12. This solemn Investiture on personal Profession, being thus proved
the Ordinance of God, for the solemn renewing of the Covenant of Grace, between
God and the Adult Covenanter, it must needs f^llow, that it is a corroborating
Ordinance, and that corroborating Grace is to be expected in it from God, by
all that come to it in sincerity of heart: And so it has the name of
Confirmation upon that account also.
THe Papists quarrel with us, and curse us in the Counsel of Trent, for denying
their Ends of Confirmation, and making it another thing. But they fasly
describe our Opinion: We do not take it to be a mere Catechizing, or receiving
the Catechized to the Lords Supper, or to a higher form: But we take it to be
the Approbation of the personal Profession of them that claim a Title to the
Church State, and Privilege of the Adult, and an Investing them solemnly
ther^in, upon the solemn Renewal (and personal Adult entrance) into Covenant
with God. Now in this Renewed Covenant, as they give up themselves to Christ
afresh, and personally engage themselves to him, and renounce his enemies,
owning their Infant Baptism, when this was done by others in their names, so
God is ready on his part to bless his own Ordinance, with the Collation of that
Corroborating Grace, which the Nature of the Renewed Covenant does import.
Otherwise God should appoint us means in vain, and fail them in the Use of his
own Ordinances, that use them as he has appointed: which is not to be
imagined: Though the unsound h^pocritical Receivers may miss of this blessing;
and though as the Degrees of Coroborating Grace, God is free to give it out as
he pleases. So that the Papists shall have no cause to say, that we needlessly,
or erroneously do deny either the name of Confirmation, or the true use and
ends of it, or the notional Title of a Sacrament to it in a larger (yet not the
largest) sense. We affect not to fly further from them, then we needs must;
much less to fly from the Ancient Practice of the Universal Church: But we must
crav^ their pardon, if we introduce not their An^ointing (though ancient)
seeing when i^ was used of old but as an Indifferent Cere^monie, they have
turned it now into a proper, necessary Sacramental sign: And if we give not
the Confirmed a box on the ear, as they do for a holy sign, or abuse it not
as they in many respects, and turn it not into a mere deceiving formality, in
this also we must needs crave their pardon. So much of the Name, and Ends of
Confirmation.

Prop. 13. Ministerial Imposition of hands in Confirmation, and the
fore-described sort of Absolution, is a lawful, and convenient Ceremony, and
ordinarily to be used, as it has been of old by the Universal Church. But yet
it is not of such Necessity, but that we must dispense in this Ceremony with
scrupulous Consciences, that cannot be satisfied to submit to it.
THus must we take heed of both extremes: either of rejecting a Ceremony, that
has so much to be said for (...) as this has: or of making it more Necessary
then it is, to the wrong of tender Consciences, that are not yet ripe enough,
to be well informed of it, and to Answer the Objections that they have heard
against it; nor yet to receive your Answers.

I. Grotius Epist. 154. p. 377, 378. Mihi legenda compertum est manuum
impositionem caeremeniam fuisse Juda^cam, usurpatam, non Lege ulla Divina, sed
moribus, ubicunque precandi pro aliquo causa quaedam emerserat. Tunc enim
Judaei orabant ut sic Dei efficacia esset super illum, sicut manus, efficaciae
symbolum, ei imponebantur. Hunc quemque morem ut Synagogae pleraque secutus est
Christus, sive pueris benedicendum fuit, sive aegrotis adhibenda sanatio
addita, ut semper honos Patri haberetur, prece. Eodem more non ex ullo
praecepto, est quod Apostoli manus imposuere iis, quibus ignoto ante hac jure
dona conspicua Sancti Spiritus precando conferebant: quod Presbyteri eundem
ritum adhibuere non tantum in allegendis presbiteris, puta Timotheo, 1 Timothy 4.
15. Sed and ipsis Apostolis, ubi novi aliquid opis aggrederentur, Act. 13. 2.
Ita ut si quotiens manus imponitur toties Sacramentum est, jam nulla futura sit
ad precandum pro aliquo occasio, quae non eo nomine veniat; quod nec vocis
Origo, nec veterum in ea usus repudiat. Et ex una hac non imperata sed usita
Judaeis Christianisque caeremonia, exstitere illa, quae dicuntur Sacramenta
confirmationis, Ordinationis, Paenitentiae, extremae unctionis immo and
Matrimonii.
For the first Part of the Proposition, I think it may suffice, 1. That
Imposition of hands was used in Scripture times, and so used, as may invite us
to imitation, but not deter us from it at all. 2. And that it has been since
of ordinary use in the Universal Church, in this very case, so that no other
Original of it can be found, but Apostolical; yea we have exceeding probable
evidence, that the use of it was never interrupted, from the days of the
Apostles, down to the Reformation. 3. Nor is it laid aside in many of the
Reformed Churches. So that you will find that as it is easy to prove Lawful, so
it is more likely to be a Divine Institution, Necessary Necessitate praecepti,
then to be unlawful.

I shall purposely say the less of it, because Mr Hanmer has said so much
already as to the Judgment of the Ancients; and my intent is to pretermit that
part (or say less to it) which he has performed. But that it is Lawful and
fit, if not of some Necessity, I shall prove by the forementioned Evidence.

1. Imposition of hands, is allowed in Scripture, to be used Generally by
Spiritual Superiors, to signify their Will and Desire, that the Blessing may
fall on the Inferior, or the Gift, or Power be conferred on him, for which
they have a call to mediate: So that it is not confined to any particular
Blessing, Power, or Ordinance. And therefore if there had been no example of
the use of it, in this particular case (of Confirmation, or Absolution) yet
hence it is proved to be Lawful and Meet, because it has this General use and
allowance. The Lifting up of Hands in Prayer was used to signify from whom and
whence they did expect the blessing; even from our Father which is in Heaven:
And the Laying of Hands on the Head of the person, in or after Prayer, was used
as an Applicatory sign, to signify the Terminus ad quem of the blessing
desired, or the Person, on whom they would have it bestowed. And as you will
not cast away the use of Lifting up of Hands, though it be for such mercies, as
you read no Scripture instance, that Hands were lift up for; because the
General warrant is sufficient; so you have as little reason, to scruple or cast
away the Laying on of Hands, though in such cases as you read not that the sign
was used for in Scripture; because the unlimited General use, is sufficient
warrant, in such particular cases. God showed that the very outward sign of
Lifting up of the hands, was not to be despised, when Ameleck had the better
when Moses hands fell down, though but through weakness, so that Aaron and Hur
were fain to underset them, Exodus 17. And I think we have no reason to contemn
the Laying on of hands, which in Grounds and Nature is so near kin to the
other. And as spreading forth the hands, does not cease to be good and meet,
for all that God has said he will not hear them that spread forth hands that
are full of blood, Isa. 1. 15. So the Laying on of hands does not cease to be
good and meet, though in some cases the Blessing do not follow it. Still we
must every where Lift up holy hands in Prayer, without wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Though the sign be not of absolute Necessity in every Prayer, yet
it is very meet, and too much neglected among us. And so I may say of the
other. When Solomon prayed in the Temple he spread forth his hands toward
Heaven, 1 King 8. 22. And so he supposed all would do, that looked to be heard
by the God of Heaven, when verse. 38. he prays for the people thus: What
Prayer and Supplication soever be made by any man, or by all thy People Israel,
which shall know every man the plague of his own heart (that was their
Prayer Book) and spread forth his hands toward this house, then hear thou in
Heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, etc. see verse. 54. 2 Chronicles. 6.
12, 13. We must lift up our Hearts with our Hands to God in the Heavens, Lam.
3. 41. We must prepare our hearts, and stretch out our hands toward him, Job
11. 13. Praying to a strange God, is signified by stretching out the hand to
him, Psalm. 44. 20. Even in Praises the people were to Lift up their hands
toward Heaven, Neh. 8. 6. Yea and in Blessing, Lifting up the Hands was used
to signify whence the Blessing came, Luke 24. 50. Now this being so commonly
applied, the other that is so near a kin to it, may without scruple be used in
any case that that falls under the foredescribed General case. Indeed every man
must lift up hands, because every man must pray, (and it is an engagment, that
those hands that are lifted up to God, be not used in wicked works:) but Laying
on of hands is ordinarily the Act of a Superior, to the Ends abovesaid.

Thus Jacob, Genesis 48. 14, 15. Laid his hands on the son^es of Joseph in
blessing them. Moses laid his hands on Joshua, when he ordained him his
successor, Number. 27. 18, 23. and Deuteronomy. 34. 9. Yea even in the execution of evil
they laid on hands, as an Applicatory sign, as in Sacrificeing; as if they
should say, Not on me, but on this substitute let the Evil of punishment be.
See Levit. 16. 21, 22. Exodus 29. 10, 15. Lev. 4. 15. and 8. 14, 22. Numb. 8.
12. Yea in putting a Blasphemer and Curser to death, they first laid their
hands on his head, as an Applicatory sign, in whom the fault was, and to whom
the punishment did belong, Lev. 24. 14. In the Ordination, or Consecration of
the Levites, the people were to lay their hands on them, Numb 8. 10. Not to
give them Authority, but to Consecrate and give them up to God. By Laying on of
the hands, as an Applicatory sign, did Christ and his Disciples heal
diseases, etc. Mark 5. 23. Where note, that the Ruler of the Synagogue Jairus,
took this as an ordinary sign of conferring blessings from a Superior, and
therefore he mentions it with the blessing desired, Mark 6. 5. and 8. 23, 25.
Luke 13. 13. and 4. 40. So you may see also the Apostles did; yea, and other
believers, as the promise runs, Mark 16. 18. Acts 28. 8. Also by laying on of
hands, as an Applicatory sign, they invested the seven Deacons in their
Office, Acts 6. 6. And the Prophets, and Teachers in the Church of Antioch,
separated Barnabas and Paul, to the work that God appointed them, Acts 13. 2,
3. By Fasting, and Prayer, and Imposition of hands. And Timothy received his
Ministerial Gift, by the Laying on of Paul's hands, and the hands of the
Presbitery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 2 Timothy 1 6. If this last Text be understood of
the Ministerial Ordination and Gift, which I rather think is meant of the
Apostolical Imposition of hands, after Baptism, for giving of the Holy Ghost.
So that this sign was used upon several occasions, and is not at all forbidden
in this, directly, nor indirectly, and therefore it is undoubtedly lawful:
seeing that without doubt the less is blessed of the greater, Heb. 7. 7. and the
Duty and Power of the Pastor to Bless the person in this case is
unquestionable, and this Imposition of hands is an allowed sign in Blessing,
as Lifting up the hands is, in Praying; here is Scripture enough to prove it
Lawful, and very meet.

2. Leg Albaspin. Observat. 31. lib. 2. p. 166, 167, 168.
But let us enquire yet whether the Scripture lay not some kind of obligation
on us, to use this Ceremony, in Confirmation. To which end let these several
things be well considered.

1. We find in Scripture a Blessing of C^urch-members, with Laying on of hands.
2. We find in Scripture, that the Holy Ghost is in a special manner promised to
Believers, over and above that measure of the Spirit, which caused them to
believe. 3. We find that Prayer with Laying on of hands, was the outward means
to be used by Christ's Ministers, for the procuring of this blessing. 4. We find
that this was a fixed Ordinance to the Church, and not a temporary thing. Lay
all this together, and you will see as much as my Proposition does affirm.
Let Us try the proof of it.

I. Though the proof of the first be not Necessary to the main point, yet it
somewhat strengthens the cause, Mark 10. 16. Christ took the Children up in
his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them so, Math. 19. 15. This is
not I confess a Confirmation upon personal Profession, which I am now pleading
for: But this is a Benediction by laying on of hands: And the subjects of it
were such Children as were Members at least of the Jewish Church, being before
Circumcized.

II. But to come nearer the matter; let us enquire what this Gift of the Holy
Ghost was, that is promised to Believers. Whatsoever the Pelagians say, the
Scripture assures us that Faith and Repentance which go before Baptism in the
Adult, are the gifts of the Holy Ghost: and yet for all that the Holy Ghost is
to be given afterward. And though very often this after^gift is manifested by
Tongues, and Prophecy, and Miracles, yet that is not all that is meant in the
promise of the Holy Ghost. Gad has not tied Himself by that promise to any one
sort of those extraordinary Gifts, no nor constantly to give any of them: But
he has promised in General to give Believers the Spirit: and therefore there
is some other standing gift, for which the Spirit is promised to all such. And
indeed the Spirit promised is One, though the gifts are many; and the many
sorts of gifts make not many Spirits. If any man therefore shall ask, whether
by the Promised Spirit be meant Sanctification, or Miracles, or Prophecy, etc.
I Answer with Paul, There are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit, as
there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord, and diversities of
operations, but the same God, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. It is therefore no wiser a
question to ask, whether by the Spirit be meant this gift, or that, when it is
only the Spirit in General that is promised, then to ask, whether by the Lord
be meant this or that administration; and whether by God be meant this or that
op^ration. To one is given the word of Wisdom by the Spir^t, and to another the
word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit, to another Faith by the same Spirit, etc.
verse 8, 9, 10. Now I confess if any man can prove that this promise of the
Spirit to the faithful, is meant only of the extraordinary gift of Miracles,
then he would weaken the Argument that I am about. But I prove that contrary,
1. Cor. 12. 12, 13. It is the gift of the Spirit, by which we are One body,
which is called Christ's, by which we are all baptized into this one body; and
such members as have a lively fellow-feeling of each others state, verse. 26.
27. Yea such as gives to the Elect, the excellent, durable grace of Charity,
verse. 31. and Chap. 13.

Gal. 4. 6. And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father. Note here, that it is not only the
gift of Miracles, but the Spirit of Adoption that is here mentioned; and that
it is given to Believers, because they are Sons. And all the first part of
Romans 8. to verse. 29. does show, that it is the Spirit of Adoption,
Supplication, and that by which we mortify the flesh, that is given to
Believers.

2 Cor. 1. 21, 22 Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has
anointed us, is God who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts. It is not the common gifts of the Spirit only that are
here spoken of, nor is it the first gift of Faith, but it is Confirmation, or
inward establishment in Christ, and that Spirit, which is the Fathers Seal upon
us, and the earnest of the Inheritance. I believe not that it is outward
Anointing, or sealing with the sign of the Cross, that is here mentioned, as
many Papists dream; but inward unction, seal, earnest, and confirmation by the
Spirit, are here expressed. So 2 Cor. 5. 5. Zach. 12. 10. It is the Spirit of
Grace and Supplication that is promised to the Church. And see the pattern in
Christ our head, on whom after Baptism the Spirit descended, and to whom it is
promised, Matthew. 12 18.

Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. In whom also after ye believed, ye were sealed with the
Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our Inheritance. Here it is
evident that it is such a gift of the Spirit, which is an Earnest of Heaven that
is given to men, after they believe.

Joh. 7. 39. For the Holy Ghost was not yet given them because that Jesus was
not yet Glorisied.Yet the Apostles had Saving Faiththen. And that it is not
meant only of the Apostles extraordinary gifts of Miracles, the foregoeing
words show: He that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow living
waeters: but this he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive.

By all this it is evident, that there was an Eminent gift of the Holy Ghost
promised to them that had already the grace of Faith, and Repentance, and Love
to Christ, wrought in them by the Holy Ghost; and that though this Eminent
Gift, did very much consist in gifts of Languages, Prophecy, and mighty works
for the Confirmation of Christ's Doctrine which was then to be planted in the
world: yet was it not only in those gifts; but as some had only those common
(though extraordinary) gifts, for the good of the Church; so some had an
Eminent addition of Special Gifts, to seal them up to the day of Redemption,
and be the earnest of the Inheritance, to the saving of the Soul. If you ask,
Wherein these special Eminent Gifts of the Holy Ghost do consist, I Answer: 1.
In a clearer knowledge of Christ,
and the rsteries of the Gospel; not an uneffectual, but a powerful, affecting,
practical Knowledge. 2. In a fuller measure of Love, agreeable to this
Knowledge. 3. In Joy and Peace, and sweet Consolation. 4. In establishment, and
corroboration, and firmer resolution for Christ, and everlasting Life.

For the understanding of which we must know, that as the Doctrine is the Means
of conveying the Spirit, so the Spirit given is answerable to the Doctrine, and
Administration that men are under. It Is a very great question whether Adam in
Innocence had the Spirit or not? But as the Administration according to the
mere Light, and Law of Nature, is eminently in Scripture attributed to the
Father, so Adam certainly may be well said to have had the Spirit of the
Father, to enable him with gifts that were answerable to the Law that he was
under, and the state that he was in: But we cannot fitly say that he had that
which the Scripture calls the Spirit of the Son, as not being under the
Administration of the Son. But after the Promise till the coming of Christ,
as the Administration was mixed of Law and Promise, Nature and Grace, as the
dawning of the day before Sun rising does partake of darkness and of Light,
so the Spirit that was then given, was answerable to the Administration and
Doctrine. And therefore as there was somewhat of the Gospel in those times,
though yet God has not thought it meet to call it (at least usually) by that
name, but rather by the name of the Promises, and Prophecies of Christ; so
there was somewhat of the Spirit of Christ, though it be not usually so called,
but when it appeared in some eminent Servants of Christ, as the Prophets were,
in whom the Spirit of Christ is said to have been, 1 Pet. 1. 11. Now as it was
part of that work ascribed to the Father, to send and give the Son, and to
Give men to the Son; so commonly those Gifts are ascrbed to Him which are
cotained in these expressions, and are the accomplishment of this work; And
that not only in the old Testament, but in the New: and therefore it is called
the Giving and the Drawing of the Father, by which we are brought to Believe in
the Son; though yet the Grace of Faith is a special Saving Grace, and not
common to the wicked, as the Papists dream, because they find an uneffectual
Assent to be common.

But now, as Christ at his coming does bring to the world a clearer Light, and
fuller Revelation of Himself, and the mysteries of Redemption, and bring Life
and Immortality to Light in the Gospel; and as the rising Sun, dispelleth the
remnants of Legal darkness, and his Doctrine is fully called The Gospel, the
Testament of Jesus Christ, so answerably he does by, and with this Doctrine,
give out such a measure of the Spirit, to the Church; as is Eminently called
the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Which carries us higher then the first Grace of
Faith and Repentance, to those fuller degrees which were not ordinary, no not
to the Godly in the time of the Law. And as this Spirit of Christ did
extrinsecally shine in the Glory of tongues and wondrous works, while those
were necessary to the Church, and Christ's service; so both then, and ever after
it does work (but in various degrees) for the Sanctifying of believers, and
conforming their hearts and lives to Christ; in his humiliation, patience,
self-denial, meekness, contempt of the world, obedience, etc. till at last we
be conformed to him in his Glory.

III. I have cleared the second point, (that there is an Eminent Gift of the
Holy Ghost to be expected after our first Believing, even such as ceased not
with Miracles: I now come to the third point, which is, That Ministerial Prayer
with Laying on of hands, was the Scripture-way for the giving of this Eminent
gift of the Spirit.

For the understanding of this, observe these things: 1. How Sacraments, and
Investing signs, confer Grace. 2. How the Spirit is given in Baptism 3. How
far God has, as it were, tied himself to Ordinances for conferring Grace. 4.
What proof the Scripture yields us of the Proposition. 5. What aptitude there
is in Ministerial Confirmation, for the attainment of these ends.

1. We find in Scripture, that Sacraments are not appointed (nor to be used,
according to the intent of the instituter) for the conferring of that Grace
which men have not in any degree already: but they are, 1. Partly a Solemn
Investiture in that which before we had a Fundamental Right to: as the Listing
of a Soldier, or the solemnization of Marriage after a firm contract; the
Crowning of a King; the delivering possession by a Key, a twig, or turf; the
Knighting a man by a sword, etc. This is as to Relative benefits, and Right to
Phycal benefits. 2. And withal they are by actual excitation of Grace, to
Increase the Inherent Grace received, and so to give us more. All this is
evident in Baptism it self, where we are to receive both Remission of sins,
with right to Everlasting Life, and also an increase of Grace in the Adult: And
yet no man at age, is to come to Baptism (to require it) that is not a Penitent
Believer already, and consequently that has not the beginning of special
Saving Grace, and somewhat of Christ, and the Holy Ghost; and title to
forgiveness, and Everlasting Life. For he is under the promise that Whoesoever
believes, shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life: and a Papist will
grant, that the Votum Baptismi may serve to his Sa^vation, if he die without
it. And the case of Infants is the same, as to these Mercies which are
Necessary to their state of life. Their Parents must be Believers, before they
Dedicate them to God, and consequently the Child has the Covenant right before
it is sealed. And it is ridiculous in the Papists to damn all Infants, for want
of Baptism, and not the Aged; and to make the Votum to serve for the Parent,
and yet not for his Child, when yet the Parents Faith must serve to prove his
Title to Baptism it self. But to leave these Corrupters, and Innovatours; we
see now what is to be expected by Confirmation: Not that men that have no
signs of Corroborating Grace, should come thither first to receive it; but
that such as appear Initially Resolved, Confirmed, and Corroborated, may be
(though not by a full and proper Sacrament, yet) Ministerially; 1. Invested
into the state of the Confirmed, and their Privileges, which is a higher form
in the School of Christ. 2. And may receive yet further Confirmation, and
Corroboration by Gods Approbation, and Ordinance.

2. But has not Baptism done all this already, seeing we are Baptized into the
Name of the Holy Ghost? This is our second Point to be resolved. I Answer, It
is a great error, to think that Adult Persons that have nothing of the Holy
Ghost, may demand Baptism, and that Baptism does not give the Holy Ghost: But
yet it is one thing to give the Holy Ghost in Relation, and Fundamental Right,
and another thing to give the Graces of the Spirit; and it is one thing to seal
and increase the Initial, Special Grace of the Spirit, and another thing to
Invest in a stablishing degree: And so it is evident that Baptism, as such is
appointed but for the two first: That is, 1. As we must have some Faith and
Repentance, before a person at age may come to Baptism, and so must have
Fundamental Right by promise, to Christ, and pardon, and life, so this is
sealed in Baptism, and we are solemnly Invested in it, and our Grace excited
for increase: But it is not requisite that a man have a further degree of Grace
before he come. 2. In Baptism, it is our very Relation to God, as our Father
and God, to Christ as our Savior, and to the Holy Ghost as our Sanctifier,
that is sealed to us, and we are Invested with: which is the Foundation of all
that afterward from the Spirit is given us. As in Marriage, the persons in
Relation, are given to each other for Marriage ends; So in Baptism, God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one God in three persons, are solemnly given to
us in Relation to themselves, for Christian, Baptismal Ends. But as after
Marriage, the man takes home his wife, and delivers her a possession of his
house first, and after admits her to bed and board, according to his Covenant,
so Christ does after Baptism, take home the Christian into his Church, and
admit him to the several Privileges of it, in the season, and manner as he
sees meet. So that as all the good that we do after Baptism, is but the
fulfilling of our Baptismal Covenant, and yet we did not the good when we
Covenanted to do it: So all the after-Mercies, that God gives us by promise
(at least) on his part, are but the fulfilling, or fruits of his Baptismal
Covenant; and that he did not give them in our Baptism. So that Confirmation is
no full, and proper Gospel Sacrament as Baptism is, but a particular subsequent
Investiture, in some of the fruits of Baptism it self, in the season of them.

3. But have we any certainty, that this Ordinance shall prove effectually
confirming to us? If not it will be but an idle, empty Ceremony. This is our
third Question: To which I Answer: 1. Ordinances are Duties, which we must use,
and in which we must wait on God for his blessing, if we will have it: and
therefore in the way of Duty, we must be found. 2. What if you have not a
certainty that your Prayer shall be granted, will you not therefore pray? Or if
you are not certain that a Sermon shall profit you, will you not hear it? Or
that Reading shall profit you, will you not read? Or that the Lords Supper
shall increase your Grace; will you not use it? 3. But I may say more: If you
come prepared, you may be sure of a Blessing in some degree: As it is not every
one that Prays, and hears, and Receives the Lords Supper, that shall
certainly have the blessing, but the prepared Soul that is the subject of the
promise, which is annexed to that Ordinance; so it is not every one, that is
externally Confirmed by Prayer, and Imposition of Lands, that shall be sure of
the Blessing, but the Soul that is prepared, as aforedescribed. 4. But yet the
several Degrees of Blessing, God has kept in his own hand, and not affixed
them by promise to any person, in any Ordinance: He may bless the Word, Prayer,
the Lords Supper, etc. to one true Christian more then to another, and yet
perform his promise to them all: and so he may this outward Confirmation.

3. But what proof is there in Scripture of such an Ordinance, or Practice?
That Is our fourth Question: To which I Answer, 1. For the main Point in
question, it is already proved, beyond all Controversy, viz. the Necessity of a
Personal Profession, and Covenant, before men be admitted to the
Church Priviledges of the Adult, and that it belongs to the Office of
Christ's Ministers to judge of, and approve this Profession, etc. It is none of
this that we have now to prove, but only the Manner of Admisson hereupon,
whether it be to be done by Prayer with Benediction, and Imposition of hands:
And it is not the Lawfulness of this; for that is proved before: but whether
this Manner and Solemnity be a thing which ordinarily we should observe? And
that it is so, this seems to me to prove, 1. As beyond Controversy it
belongs to Spiritual Superiors, even the Ministers of Christ, to Pray for
the people, and Bless them, so this must be in a special manner exercised upon
great and special Occasion: But the Admission of the Adult upon their personal
Covenanting and Profession, is a great and special Occasion: This is as good an
Argument as we have for stated Family Prayer, that I remember; and it is clearly
good for both.

1. I should but trouble you to prove the General Part of the Major, that it
belongs to the Pastors to Pray for, and Bless the people Ministerially. 2.
And the application to this season is proved thus; 1. All things are Sanctified
by the Word and Prayer: Therefore this. 2. If the great and special works, and
changes of our lives, be not thus to be Sanctified, much less the smaller; and
so the whole Command would be void. We agree, that at Marriage, at our
Investiture in the Ministerial Office, etc. there must be Ministerial Prayer,
and Benediction, usually to Sanctify it to the faithful: But here there is as
great, if not greater reason for it, the change and blessing being in some sort
greater As some doubt whether Conversion, or building up be the greater work
(and give it to the later, that they may conclude the la^er only to be the work
of Pastors, and the former, but of gifted private men (so the doubt in this
case, is on the same ground, whether Baptizing and Confirming, be not as great
as Ordaining, (and some give i^ to the later, le^t ^resbyters be thought to
have power to ordain.) But I Answer both as Aquila in Scotell. in sent. 4. Des.
7. 8. and 2. page 816. In the case of Confirmation: Quando benefit comparatio
harum gratiarum: haec potest fieri dupliciter. Vno modo sine Praecisione; and
sic omnino major est gratia confirmationis, quam Baptismalis; sicut been and
perfect vivere, est melius quam vivere: si autem fiat comparatio harum
gratiarum cum praecisione, sic major est gratia Baptismalis quam
confirmationis, quia majoris virtutis est mortuum vivificare, quam vivificatum
fortificare. So I say between Initiating a Christian, and Initiating a Minister.
.

And as this is plain for Ministerial Prayer and Benediction, so it seems that
the Weight and Nature of the work, does determine us to the sign of Imposition
of hands, seeing God has not tied it to any one or two particular cases, but
made it a sign of General use, in Spiritual Benediction, and Collations of
authority, from a Superior, or great and special Occasions.

2. But we have yet a more clear proof from Scripture example, Acts 8. 15, 16,
17. Peter and John were sent to Samaria,when they heard that they believed, and
when they were come down, they Prayed for them, that they might receive the
Holy Ghost; for as yet he was fallen on none of them: only they were Baptized
in the Name of the Lord Jesus: Then laid they their hands on them, and they
received the Holy Ghost. So Acts 19. 5, 6. When they herad this, they were
Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus: And when Paul had laid his hands upon
them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with Tongues, and Prophesied.
And Acts 9. 17. Ananias laid his hands on Saul (before Converted by a voice
from Heaven, though not Baptized) that he might receive his sight and the Holy
Ghost at once.

And this was the gift that Simon Magus would have bought with money. And it
seems to me most probable, that this was the gift that Timothy received by
Laying on of Paul's hands (which being for the service of the Church, 1 Cor. 12.
7. He was to stir up, and exercise in his Ministry) 2 Timothy 1. 6. And that the
Laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1. Tim. 4. 14. was at another time.
That the Holy Ghost was then given by Prayer, with Imposition of hands, is thus
evident.

IV. But the last Point remains, Whether this were not Temporary and now
ceased: (whether I shall take in the fifth particular, before named, about the
Aptitude of the means now.) And 1. When I have proved it once Appointed, it
lies on the contrary minded, to prove it changed, or ceased: That Is the task
of them that affirm it ceased, If I show them an obligation once laid, they
must prove it taken off. Their only Argument is, that the persons and occasion
were only extraordinary, and are ceased, and therefore so is the sign or
means. To which I Answer, 1. By denying the Antecedent; both as to persons and
occasion: They were not Only extraordinary. 2. By the denying the Consequence,
as it is inferred from the persons: For extraordinary persons were our patterns
for ordinary, durable works.

But I prove the Negative: 1. The Use and Ends of the Ancient Imposition of
hands do still continue: Therefore we are to judge that the sign and means is
not to cease. For the proof of the Antecedent, remember that I have before
proved, that it was not only (though very eminently) the gift of Tongues and
Miracles, that was then meant by the Holy Ghost that was given, but also
Corroborating Grace. And the necessity and actual collation, and use of this
does still continue.

2. There is still a discernable Aptitude in the means to these necessary Ends.
The Baptized believer may yet want the Joy of the Holy Ghost, and boldness of
Access to God, and the shedding abroad of fuller Love in the heart, Romans 5. 5,
And that Consolation which is much of the work of the promised Spirit, which
therefore is called the Comforter; and that Corroboration, and Stability which
he needs. Now to have a Messenger of Christ that has received a binding and
loosing power, in the Name of Christ to Encourage us in our Profession, and to
put up Solemn Prayers for us, and as it were take us by the hand, and place us
in the higher form (at least, to place us at our first personal Profession,
among Adult believers) and make particular application of the Promise to us,
and Bless us in the Name of Christ, by virtue of their Ministerial Office; this
must needs tend much to confirm, and comfort, and encourage the weak. Though
still further Ministerial Confirmation by Praying, and Exhortation will be
necessary to the end, Acts 14. 22. and 15. 31, 32.

3. The Scripture signifies to us, that Imposition of hands was of standing
use in the Church, and therefore not to cease with Miracles. In Heb. 6. 2. We
find it named among the parts of the Foundation, Laying on of hands. Now all
the doubt is, what Impositon of hands is there mentioned. 1. For them that
think the Apostle means Jewish Imposition, when he mentions the Christian
Foundation Points, I think their Opinion saves me the labor of Confuting it.
2. Either then it is Imposition of hands, in case of Ordination, or in case of
Confirmation, or in case of Absolution, or for working Miraculous cures. The
last alone it cannot be, because we find it among Foundation Points, and find
it a continued thing; and because there is no evidence, to lead us to such a
restrained exposition. And if it be in the case of Absolution, or Ordination,
that Imposition is to continue, it will by consequence be proved, that it no
more cease here then there. And usually they that question the use of it in
one case, question it in the rest. 3. For my part, I think that it is no one of
these cases alone, that the Scripture here speaks of, but of the Power and
use of it in General, for the Ministers of Christ to be his Instruments, in
conferring Evangelical Gifts, and Power, by imposition of hands. We must not
limit, and restrain the sense of Scripture, without Evident cause. It is as if
the Apostle had said, You are long ago taught the Necessity of Repenting, and
forsaking the works of Death, and of Believing in the true God, and of being
Dedicated, and Engaged to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost in the Baptismal
Covenant, in which you your selves have been consecrated unto God, and received
the remission of sin; and you have seen the Power that is given to the
Ministers of Christ, that by their Prayers, and Imposition of hands, Miracles
have been wrought to confirm their Doctrine, and Grace is given to confirm the
Soul, and Absolution and Peace is given to the Penitent, and Ministerial Power
delivered to others, etc. But however you understand this Imposition of hands,
without apparent violence, you must confess either Imposition in the case that
we are speaking of, or that which will warrant it, and stands on the same
ground, to be here meant.

So 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other
men's sins. Some think that here is meant Imposition of hands in Ordination,
and some that it is meant only of Confirmation, and some of Absolution; but
however, it will help us in the following Argument.

4. Scripture fully proves that Laying on of hands, is a thing to be continued
to other Uses, where the reason of continuance is the same: Therefore we are
not to judge it ceased as to this use. This Text last named, shows that it is a
standing, or continued thing; and if for Absolution, then for Confirmation; and
if for Ordination, then for both the other. So 1 Timothy 4. 14. shows, that the
Presbytery did lay hands on Timothy in Ordination: And if it cease not to this,
it cease not to other continuing uses.

This much from Scripture, for Imposition of hands, is more then Nothing,
though it may not be so full as you expected: But on the contrary, Nothing is
brought to prove it unlawful, that is worth the mentioning.

The last thing that I have to do, is to argue from the Practice of the Church,
as the Exposition of these texts of Scripture. If the Universal Church of
Christ have used Confirmation by Prayer, and Laying on of hands, as a Practice
received from the Apostles, and no other beginning of it can be found; then
have we no reason to think the Ceremony to be ceased, or to interpret the
forementioned Scripture, contrary to this Practice of the Universal Church: But
the Antecedent is true, as I now come briefly to prove, supposing what Mr
Hanmer has said. It is commonly known, that the Ancientest Canons of the
Church do speak of this as the unquestioned Practice and duty of the Church: So
that to recite Canons were loss of time in so known a case. And if any say that
Anointing and Crossing were Ancient; I Answer, 1. That they were as ancient in
the Popish use, as the Matter of a Sacrament, or as necessary signs, is not
true, nor proved, but disproved by our Writers, against the Popish Confirmation
frequently. Greg. M. in Epist. ad Quirin. (Leg. inter Usserii Hybernie. Epist.
2. p. 6.) Et quidem ab antiqua Patrum institutione didicimus, ut qui apud
haeresin in Trinitatis Nomine Baptizantur, cum ad Sanctam Ecclesiam redeunt,
aut unctione Chrismatis, aut Impositione manuum, aut sola professione fidei, ad
sinum matris Ecclesiae revocentur.
2. Nor can it be proved that they were as Ancient as Indifferent things. 3. We
prove the contrary, because they were never used in Scripture times, their
being no mention of them. 4. So that we bring Antiquity but to prove the
continuance of a Scripture Practice, and so to clear the sense of it: But the
Papists plead the Fathers, for that which Scripture is a stranger to.

If Ignatius ad Heronem Diaconum be genuine, there is this testimony, Nihil sine
Episcopis operare. Sacerdotes enim sunt: tu autem Diaconus Sacerdotum: Illi
baptizant, sacrificant, manus imponunt, tu autem ipsis ministra. I recite it
out of Vshers' Latin copy, as supposed the most pure.

Tertullian lib. de Proscript. cap. 36. appealing to the practice of the
Apostle John, in the Africane Churches, mentions, as his Faith that he
taught; one God the Creator, and Jesus Christ the Son of God, and the
Resurrection of the body, and that he joined the Law and Prophets, with the
Evangelical, and Apostolik Writings, and thence drunk this Faith: And of his
Practice he says, Aqua signat, Sancto Spiritu vestit; Euchristia pascit; as
three distinct Ordinances. Lib. de Baptismo cap. 8. Having mentioned Baptism,
(and the Unction joined to that, and not then to Confirmation) he adds, De
hinc manus imponitur, per benedictionem advocans, and invitans Spiritum Sanctum.

Idem de Resur. Carn. cap. 8. Sed and caro abluitur, ut anima emaculetur: Caro
unguitur, ut anima consecretur: Caro signatur, ut and anima muaiatur: Caro
manus Impositione adumbratur, ut and anima Spiritu illuminetur.

Cyprian ad Stephan. Epist. 72. Et ad Jubaian, is too much for it. I will not
trouble you in citing any Writers, since General Councels were in use, because
their testimony is enough. He that would see such, may read Barronius ad An.
35. at large. So much for the proof of the fitness of Imposition of hands in
Confirmation.

I come now to the second Part of my Proposition, viz. That this Ceremony is
not of such Necessity, as that such as scruple it, should be denied liberty of
forbearing the reception of it, if they submit to the Ministerial trial and
Approbation of their Profession, and admission, and reception to Church
privileges.

The Ancient Church also used it so variously, as that it is plain, they fixed
it to no one case alone. Of the diverse cases, in which they Imposed hands (on
the Catechumens, and four times on the Penitents, and diverse other,) You may
see in Albaspinaeus Observationes, Obs. 31, 32. and passim. Grotius Epist. 154.
p. 379. Manus impositas* baptizatis, nisi ab iis, qui jus haberent conferendi
caelestia illa dona, primis temporibus non apparet. Serius id introductum est
in Episcoporum honorem, quo magis in Apostolicum jus successisse crederentur.
Nec causa aberat, quam Caeremoniae illi, velut naturalem diximus, praecandi
scilicet Deum, ut ei qui baptizatus jam fidem erat Professus, ea largiri
vellet, quae ad praestandum in fide, maxim in periculis gravibus, sunt
necessaria.
For proof of this consider, 1. That we do not find that God any where
Instituted this sign, as a matter of Necessity, still without interruption, to
be used; but only that by holy men it was applied as a convenient sign, or
gesture to the works, in which they used it. Even as Lifting up of hands in
Prayer was ordinarily used as a fit gesture, not wilfully to be neglected
without cause, and yet not of flat necessity; or as kneeling in Prayer, is
ordinarily meet, but not always necessary. We find no more Scripture for the one
then for the other: Which indeed shows on one side, how causeless it is to
question the Lawfullness of it, any more then of Listing up the the hands, or
Kneeling; and yet how little reason there is on the other side, to make it a
matter of flat necessity.

2. As we find that Kneeling in Prayer, and Lifting up the hands were often
omitted, so we find that sometime the Holy Ghost is given before Baptism, or
Imposition of hands, Acts 10. And we find not that the Apostles used it to all
(though I confess the Negative arguing is infirm, yet it seems not probable,
that this was always done.

3. It is somewhat suspicious to find in Justin Martyr's description, of the
Christian Churches Practices, no mention of this, nor any Sacrament, but
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, nor any of the Roman Ceremonies: And Irenaeus,
and some other are silent in it.

4. God makes no Ceremonies under the Gospel so necessary, (except the two
Sacraments) not lays so great a stress on them as under the Law: And
therefore we are not to interpret the Gospel as laying men's Salvation, or the
Peace of the Church on any Ceremonies; unless we find it clearly expressed.

5. For all that I have said from Scripture for Imposition of hands in
Confirmation, though the lawfulness of it is proved past doubt, yet the proof
of the duty of using it, is liable to so many Objections, as that I must needs
conclude, that the Gospel tenderness and the sense of our mutual infirmities,
and our care of tender Consciences and of the Churches Peace, should restrain
all the Sons of Piety and Peace, from making it a matter of flat Necessity, and
forcing them that scruple it, to submit to it.

And now having said thus much of Imposition of hands, and Confirmation, as
grounded on the Apostles example; I must again and again remember you, that
this is in a manner but ex aebundanti, and that the cause that I am pleading,
does not at all need it; but that I did before most clearly manifest the Truth
of my position upon other grounds, upon which I shall proceed: and having
showed the Necessity of Ministerial judging of men's Profession, and the
personal Covenanting of the Adult, and the Lawfullness of imposing hands
therein, I go on as to the manner.

Prop. 14. Though in Receiving Adult persons out of Infidelity by Baptism into
the Church; a sudden Profession without any stay to see their Reformation, may
serve tu^n; yet in the receiving those that were Baptized heretofore, into the
Number of Adult-members, or to the Privileges of such, their lives must be
enquired after, which must be such as do not confute their Profession.
WE find in Scripture, that the Converted were suddenly Baptized, and they
stayed not for any Reformation of life to go before. Indeed the Ancient Chrches
afterward kept their Catechumens long in expectation; but that was not to see
their lives first reformed, but that they might have time to teach them the
Doctrine of Christ, which they must know before they could be Converts indeed.
The Apostles did suddenly Baptize, converted Jews and Proselites, Leg. quae
habet Grotius Discus. Apol. Rivet. p. 235. Cum antecedent^h. ex Anti^. and de
suis.
because they had so much preparatory knowledge, as that a shorter teaching
might acquaint them with the Christian doctrine. But the Heathens must belong
in learning so much as the Jews knew before Conversion.

Yet if the Catechumens did fall into gross sin in time of their expectation
and learning, they were so much the longer delayed, because it signified, that
their first professed desires of entering into the Church, upon Christ's terms,
were not right.

But the Baptized stand upon other terms: For 1. They are already in Covenant
with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and have renounced the flesh, the
world, and the Devil, and promised obedience to God, and to live according to
their Covenant. And this the Church has still required of them, as I showed
out of Justin Martyr,and others before Read the whole order of Baptism in
Dionysius ibid. c. 4.
Dionysius (or whoever else) in lib: de Hierarch Eccles.says, Ipse autem se
omnino ea quae tradentur, sequuturum esse pollicetur: And Ex eo praeterea
quaerit, number ita instituat vivere, cum promisit asseverationibus, etc. upon
which says Albaspinaeus, Quia scilicet fidem Christianam, Christianumque
vivendi genus, and mores, sese complexos persequnturisque jucabant, antequam
baptizarentur. (in Tertul. de Paenit. page 289.) and Postea. Non accedebant ad
Baptismum nisi de rebus fidei plane instructi, id est, de Dei magnitudine, and
potestate rebusque quae in Evangeliis continentur, uno excepto Eucharistiae
mysterio; neque baptizabantur, nisi post quam ea omnia se credere jurassent,
quorum fides a fide poenitentiae incipiebat,etc. Et in sequ. Jucabant in
Baptismo solennibus verbis, se nunquam That is not to turn to an ungodly life,
but to endeavor and perform sincere obedience. Albaspin. in Tertul. de
Paenintent. cap. 7. Sexcent^^ locis, non dicam hoc capite; unam ait tantum a
lavacro veniam superesse, neque ullam primis illis temporibus inter privatam
aut publicam graviorum criminum discrimen invenient. Vide caetera.
peccaturos; deinde renunciabant Diabolo and pompis ejus. Denique Censura, si
peccarent post baptismum coercebantur.So that men that are engaged in covenant
with God, must keep Covenant, or manifest themselves Penitent, for the
violation of it, before they are admitted to further Privileges. There is a
long time, in which they grow up from an Infant-state to an Adult; and how they
live in that time, must be enquired after.

2. Otherwise the Apostate would have equal Acceptance and Privileges with the
Faithful.

3. And so Penitence and Absolution would be excluded and confounded with mere
Confirmation.

4. Moreover the Baptized are obliged to be responsible for their lives, being
under the Government of Christ's Ministers, and among his Saints.

5. For the sake of their own Souls, and of the Church and Ordinances, we must
endeavor to preserve them from Corruption, which lying Professions would
introduce; and therefore must not overlook, or neglect such Evidence as is
within our reach.

6. Else Ministers that are by office to judge of their Profession, would be
unfaithful Judges, and forfeit their trust, if they shall wilfully neglect any
Evidence within their cognizance, by which they may be enabled to judge.

But yet it is not the certainty of inward saving Grace, that we must find out
by men's lives; for no man can have such certainty of another: but only that
their lives be not such, as Null and Invalidate, and confute their Profession,
and they live not in the perfidious violation of their Baptismal Covenant.

Prop. 15. It is not of flat Necessity that the Profession of the Expectant be
made in the open Congregation, or before many, in order to his Confirmation and
Admittance.
PRoved, 1. It is not of Necessity, that Converted Infidels be admitted by
Baptism into the state of Adult-members, upon a Public Profession in a
Congregation: therefore it is not of Necessity, that others be so admitted in
Confirmation. The Antecedent is proved by the instance of the Eunuch, Acts 8.
whom Philip Baptized in their way, and the Jaylour and his household, Acts 16.
Baptzed in the night at home. The Consequence is proved by the propriety of
reason and case.

2. If a man may by Confirmation be admitted into the Number of Adult
Christians, in the Church Universal, without being admitted into a particular
Church, then his Profession and Admission need not (in that case) to be before
the Congregation: But the Antecedent is true: as I prove thus. A man may by
Adult Baptism, be admitted first into the Universal Church only: (As was the
Eunuch, the Jaylour, Lydia, Sergius Paulus, and every first Convert in any
City, where the Apostles came:) Therefore a man may by Confirmation be admitted
into the Number of the Adult, in the Catholic Church only: For the reason is
the same, and the former admits them into the same number.

The Consequence of the Major is plain. For no one Congregation more then
another, can claim the cognizance of the Admission of a member into the
Universal Church, or Confirming them in it.

3. Scripture has no where made such Public Admission to be of constant
Necessity: therefore it is not so.

4. Else none could be Admitted, or Confirmed when persecution hinders Church
Assemblies.

5. The Church is to believe and trust the Pastors, to whom it does by office
belong to try and admit them.

6. General unfixed Ministers may thus try, approve, and confirm, who are not
Pastors of any particular Church: (such as Apostles, Evangelists, and others
were:) therefore they are not always to do it before a particular Church: Nor
indeed did they always do so.

Prop. 16. When a Person is admitted among the Adult-members af a Particular
Church; as well as the Universal, his Profession and Admission must be either
before the Church, or Satisfactorily made Known to the Church at least, who
must Approve of it by a Judgment of Discretion, in order to their Communion
with him: and this among us is the ordinary case; because it is the duty of all
that have opportunity, to join themselves to some particular Church; and it is
in such Churches, that Communion in public Worship and Order must be had,
either statedly, or transiently and temporarily.
1. THe solemnity it self of our Transition into the number of Adult-members,
and their Communion, is of very great advantage, as I shall manifest more anon.

2. Read Dr Hammond's Pract. Catech. l. 5.. 4. page 298, 299. Of the Communion
of Saints.
We that are commonly against the private Admission of Infants (at least except
in some urgent case) have less reason to be for the private Albaspinaeus in
Te^rtul. de Paenitent. cap. 8, 9. page 291. Cum pro foribus Templi starent
paenitentes, pretereuntibus sacerdotibus, caeterisque fidelibus omnibus, omnino
dolentis animi signis paenitentiam suam testabantur, lacrymis non parcebant,
precibus institebant, volvebantur, and si quae alia habet paenitentia, quae
miserecordiam movere possint; non omittebant, ut pacem recupearent. Primum ante
sacerdotes procumbebant, martyribus deinde adgeniculabantur, caeteris denique
fratribus and viduis, ut ait Paciamis, enixe supplicabant, ut a Deo and ab
Ecclesia veniam pro se impetrarent.
Transition and Admission of men among the Adult, and that into a particular
Governed Church.

3. The whole Society among whom such a person is entered, do owe him much duty
and brotherly assistance: They must Love him with a special Love: They must
live, though not in a Levelling, yet in a Charitable Community with him, not
shutting up the bowels of Compassion from him, when they see him in want, but
relieving him, as if they sufferd with him: They are not only to Love him, and
Relieve him as a man; but as one of Christ's little ones, or friends; yea as
his brethren, yea as loving and relieving Christ in them, Matthew. 25. 35. to the
end. They must receive and relieve a Disciple in the name of a Disciple.
Besides this, they must have Church-Union and Communion with him, as one Body;
and must pray for him, and rejoice with him in Gods Praises, and the Lords
Supper, and watch over him, and admonish and reprove him in sin, for his
recovery; and avoid him if he walk disorderly, and be impenitent in scandalous
sin, etc.

Now 1. No man can perform all this duty, to a man that he knows not to be
thus related to him: If he know not that he owes him this duty, any more then
to any one else in the world, how shall he pay it him? To say that we are bound
to take all men, that converse with us, to be such; is to say, that Christians
must renounce their wits, and turn the Church into Bedlam.

2. And as this proves, that the Church Members must be made known to one
another, so it proves that they must have a Judgment of Discretion in receiving
them: (though the Pastors have the Judgment of Governing Direction.) For 1.
God has not left the Pastors at liberty, to take in whom they Please; but
has described what Profession they shall accept, or what persons they shall
admit, and whom they shall reject. If therefore the Pastors go against the
Word of God, then this following is the peoples duty: 1. If they know not the
error, or the case be doubtful, they are to rest in Obedience to their
Pastors, (for that is undoubtedly their duty) the work being the Pastors and
not theirs. 2. But if the case be plainly contrary to the Scripture, (as if he
would admit an Impenitent Drunkard, Fornicatour, etc.) they must disown his
sin, that it lie not upon them, and refuse private familiarity with that
person; but not withdraw from public Ordinances, because of his presence. For
when they have done their duty, and rid themselves of the guilt by a dissent,
the person is to them as Morrally absent, though Locally and Physically
present; and the Ordinance is not defiled to them by his Corporal presence; but
the guilt will lie on the Rulers of the Church: otherwise, all Churches should
be broken in pieces, if the people must separate, when every one that they are
confident is unworthy is Introduced: and the Governed will become the
Governors. 3. But if it be not a few that the Pastors thus introduce against
the certain Word of God; but so many and such as will corrupt the substance of
the Church,
and make it an incapable matter for the form, and so to become another thing,
and destroy the very Ends of Church-association, so that it is no longer a
Communion of Saints; then the people fearing God, are bound to stop this before
it have quite corrupted the Church, by admonishing the Pastors, and advising
with neighbor Churches to admonish them; and if that prevail not, by rejecting
them: and if they cannot do so, by reason of a Major Vote of incapable persons,
they ought to withdraw themselves, and worship God in such a Church as is truly
capable of the Name and Ends: Albaspin. ubi sup. Animadvertendum est,
paenitentes non solum haec and similia egisse, ut cum Deo in grati^^ redirent,
verum etiam ut sacerdotes, and caeteros fratres aequiores haberent, in quorum
arbitrio and judicio non-nunquam erat, eos in Ecclesia revocare.
And this is a Lawful and Necessary separation; of which as it is a duty, God
is the Cause; and as it is a forsaking of the rest, the culpable cause is only
in themselves. I can easily prove all this, but that I think it needless
tediousness. I cit^ this to show what Conisance the people were to have of such
affairs.


4. And indeed it would be very hard measure, if at the corrupt administration
of a carnal, or carless, or erroneous Pastor, all the Church must be under an
Obligation to give their estates by way of relief to every one, that he will
put the name of a Christian and Church member upon unworthily: Then may he
force them to maintain all the beggars and rogues about them, though they were
Infidels and impious men. I speak not of the common relief of the needy; for
that I know they owe to an Infidel: but of the special Community, which Charity
must make among the Disciples of Christ. It Is against all Reason, that an
erring or careless Pastor, shall thus Command all the Peoples estates, by
introducing such without their consent, whom they are bound thus to maintain.

5. Yea indeed, the Spirit of God, is in the Saints, a Spirit of discerning; so
that it is not Possible that all the Church should in their Affections obey
such a corrupt Administratour, by Loving all the notorious, ungodly men, as
Saints, with the special Love of brethren, whom he will carelessly, or
erroneously put in the place of Saints. I cannot possibly Love that man as a
Saint, or Disciple of Christ, that I am certain is his enemy, and none such.

I conclude therefore, that though the people be not Church Governors by a
Vote (that is a great error) yet they have a Judgment of Discerning, according
to which, they must obey, or reject their Pastors administrations. And he that
denies this, and would have them yield an Absolute obedience, without trying,
choosing and refusing, would not only make the Pastors to be of a Papal
streine, but would give them a Jesuitical Obedience, above what the moderate
Papists give the Pope. And therefore seeing that ad finem there is a Necessity
that the People consent, (or else they cannot Obey, nor hold communion with the
person) therefore there is also the same Necesity ad finem that they have
satisfaction offered them, and have either the cognizance of the Profession,
and admission of the person, or that they be satisfied in the fidelity of their
Pastors in Administration, and that he seek their consent; or (which is best)
that some chosen persons do Represent them, and be present at such Professions
with the Pastors; and the Pastors, and their own Delegates together, do
acquaint the Congregation of all that are Admitted, and of their Satisfactory
Prfession, that they may hold Communion with them. This I speak of those (which
are very many) that are fit for Church Communion, and yet through bashfullness,
or want of utterance, are unable to make a Public Profession before all (The
choicest Christians that I have known, have been such:) But those that are
able, should rather in Public make their own Profession.

Object. But what if one part of the Congregation approve of the Person and
Profession, and the other disallow it?

Answ. 1. They are to be governed by the Pastors. 2. And consult with the
Pastors of Neighbor Church^^, in rules of great weight aed danger. 3. And the
lesser part of the Church, in doubtful cases, and tolerable differences, is
to yield to the greater part: Not as if a Major Vote had the Government of the
rest (much less of their Governors;) but in Order to Unity the fewer must
submit.

Quest. But what if the people would have the Pastor Baptize, Confirm, or
introduce an open heretic, or wicked person in his impenitency?

Answ. The Pastor must obey God, and refuse to obey them.

Quest. And what if the People think a man unfit, whom the Pastor would
Approve and Introduce?

Answ. 1. He may admit him into the Universal Church: notwithstanding their
unjust refusal. 2. He has power to Admit him into that particular Church,
against their unjust dissent, as he is the Ruler of the Church, and the
Administratour of the Ordinances. 3. He has Authority to persuade and command
them from Christ, to hold communion with the person, and do their duty to him:
which if they do not they commit a double sin: one of unjustice and
uncharitableness, in a causless rejecting of a member of Christ; and another of
disobedience, against the fifth Commandment. 4. But yet the Pastors cannot
force the people to obey their advice, and command, nor effectually procure it
perhaps. 5. And therefore their forementioned Power is not always to be
exercised. For it is in vain to use a means, that will rather hinder the End
then attain to it; and so is at that time, no means. Sometimes the Pastor may
see just cause to exercise all this Power, and execute his part of Church
communion with the person, in administering the Ordinances to him, and leave the
people answerable to God, for refusing their part: But this is not an usual
case: Usually, if he see the People resolve against Communion, with that person
(how fit soever,) he is publicly to clear himself by disallowing them in
their sin, and reproving them for it, and leaving the blame on them; and then
in Prudence to forbear the Intruding of the person; because no duty is at all
times a duty to be performed; and especially when the hurt that will follow
upon it, in the divisions of the Church, is like to be far greater then the
good, if it be done. 6. But if the Church should be so corrupted, as that the
Major Vote does set against Faith and Godliness as such, and so will not admit a
sound member to be added to them, the Pastor with the Minor part, may after
due Admonition and Patience, as justly reject the guilty and obstinate, as if
they were but one man, and not a Major part.

What is said of this case of Admission, holds also of Rejection by
Excommunication, and of other Antecedent acts of Discipline.

4. Lastly, If Excommunication must usually be done in public, before the
whole Church, that they may know whom to avoid, and know the Reason of it; then
Admission must usually be done in public (the Person or the Pastor, opening
the case to the people) that they may know whom to have Communion with; and
know the Reason of of it: but the Antecedent is confessed by almost all. And
its proved plainly by Paul's practice and direction, 1 Cor 5. throughout: And
it was the custom of the Christian Churches in Tertullians days, Apolog. cap.
39. There also (in the Christian meeting for Worship) are exercised
exhortations, castigations and the Divine Censure: for Judgment is passed with
great deliberation, or weight, as with men that are assured of the presence, or
sight of God: and it is the highest Representation of the Judgment to come, if
any one so offend, as that he be discharged, or banished from Communion of
Prayer, and of the Assembly, and of all holy Commerce, or fellowship.

Abundance more out of Cyprian, and others might be easily produced, to prove
that this which I have spoken, was the ancient interest of the people in these
Church-affaires: Yea in the choice of their Pastors, yea and in rejecting
unworthy Pastors, Cyprian says, they had a chief Interest: Not by Ruling
Power, but by a prudent exercise of obedience, choosing the good, and refusing
the evil. Self-preservation is natural to every body, where it is not by evil
means, and to the hurt of the Public State. It Is hard if a Natural body may
not lawfully refuse, or cast up Poison, if a Governor should give it them. God
binds none to the perdition of their Souls; nor any holy Society to destroy
it self, or suffer it self to be destroyed, or corrupted by others, without the
use of all just means, to resist the bane. But of this I shall desire the
Reader, that would know the Judgment and Practice of the Ancient Church, to
peruse Dr Blondel de Jure plebis in Regimine Ecclesiast. adjoined to that
excellent piece of Grotius de Imperio summarum Pot^statum circa Sacra. To
recite more after all those of Blondel, is but to do a needless work. There Is
enough to satisfy all that are moderate for Popular Interest.


This much may satisfy you, that it should not be usually a secret but a
solemn Transition from an Infant-state of membership, into an Adult-state; and
that by a public Profession or Notification of it, the particular Church
should have satisfaction herein.

Prop 17. It is convenient, though not of Necessity, that every Church do keep
a Register, of all that are admitted thus into the Number of the Adult-members.
AS we were wont to keep a Register of the Infants Baptized, so have we as much
Reason, of the Adult, Approved and Confirmed or Restored. Corporations of old,
were wont to keep a book of the names of their Burgesses or Citizens: in
respect to which, God is said to have a Book of Life, wherein he writes men's
names, and out of which he blots them, speaking after the manner of men. The
Church has great reason for this practice, the business being of so great
weight; that we forget not who are of our Communion: which without a Register,
in great Congregations, must needs be done. If any be so vain, as to demand a
Scripture proof of this; let him first bring me a Scripture-proofe, that he
may read with spectacles, or write a Sermon from the Preachers mouth, or use
Notes in the Pulpit, or print, etc. and then I will give him proof of this: In
the mean time, if this do not satisfy him, he shall have liberty to disuse it.

Prop. 18. Those that were never thus Ministerially and Explicitly Approved,
Confirmed or Absolved (after an ungodly life,) but have been permitted without
it, to join ordinarily with the Church in Prayer and Praises, and have been
admitted to the Communion of the Church, in the Lords Supper, are approved and
confirmed, Eminently though not Formally: though in so doing, both the Pastors
and themselves did sin against God, by the violation of his holy Order. So that
such may be a true Church, though much corrupted or disordered.
THis I add for two Reasons: 1. To confute them that say our Churches are no
true Churches, for want of an explicit Profession. 2. And to acquaint you who
it is among us, that are, or are not to be called to Confirmation.

1. It is not the degree of clearness and openness in our Profession, or in the
Ministerial Approbation or Admission, that is Essential to a Churchmember. An
obscure Profession may be truly a Profession. Some obscure Profession, has
been ordinarily made by our people in this Land heretofore, by their ordinary
hearing the Word, and standing up at the Recital of the Creed; and joining with
the Church in Prayer and Praise, and confessing the Scriptures to be the Word
of God, and acknowledging the Ministry: And a further Profession they made, by
actual receiving the Lords Supper, which is a silent Profession of their Faith
in Christ. And though they were not solemnly Approved and Confirmed, (except
that one of many, had a Cerimonious Confirmation from the Bishop in their
Childhood) yet were they Actually admitted to daily Communion with the Church,
and the special part of Communion in the Lords Supper. And though this
Profession and admission was lamentably defective, (of which more anon) yet it
is such as may prove our ordinary Assemblies to have been true Churches.

2.
And I do not think it fit, that any that have been already admitted to
Church Communion in the Lords Supper, should be now called out to Confirmation,
by Imposition of hands; though where there is just cause to question their
Knowledge, Faith, or lives, they may by the Postour be called to give an account
of them; and put upon a clearer Profession then they have yet made: But sure
when they have been admitted to the Lords Supper, by any regular Ministry and
Church, they are to be taken for Adult-members, till they are justly cast out,
or do cast out themselves. For the more Perfect does include the less Perfect
in it: If a man be ordained a Presbyter, that was never ordained Deacon, he is
not to be called back again and made a Deacon. If you make a man free of your
Trade, before he was ever bound prentice; you cannot call him back again, and
bind him prentice after this. If the University give a man the Degree of Doctor
of Divinity, or Master of Arts, that never took Degree of Batchelour of
Divinity, or of Arts, they cannot afterward call him back to take his
Batchelours Degree. If you have irregularly admitted the untryed, unapproved,
unconfirmed to the Lord Supper, you have Eminenter, though not Formaliter
Confirmed and Approved him though irregularly. Of this more anon.

Prop. 19. So exceeding great and many are the mischiefs that have befallen us,
by the neglect of a solemn meet Transition from an Infant, into the Adult
Church state, and which undoubtedly will continue, till this be remedyed, that
all Magistrates, Ministers, and People, that dissemble not, in professing
themselves to be Christians, should with speed and diligence attempt the Cure.
LEt us here take a view of the case of our Nation, and Congregations, and then
consider of the effects and consequents.

All the people of our Parishes, (except Anabaptists) do bring their Children
to be Baptized; which if it were faithfully done, were a happy means of an
early engagement unto Christ, and a happy entrance upon further mercy.)
Multitudes of those know not what Baptism is, nor to what use and end it is
appointed, nor what benefit their Children may receive by it: (I speak upon too
sure and large experience) nor do they know what Christianity is, nor who Jesus
Christ is, nor what it is, that they are to do in Baptism: But there they make
a promise customarily, as they are bid, in words not understood, that they will
acquaint their children at age with the Covenant there made (which they never
understood themselves) and that they will educate them in Godliness, when they
hate Godliness at the heart. And when they come home, they perform their
promise accordingly: They teach them nothing of the Doctrine of Christianity,
and the life to come, but they give them up to the flesh and the world, which
there in words they did renounce; and they teach them by their daily examples
to curse, and swear, and rail, and to be proud and covetuous, and voluptuous,
serving their bellies in stead of God; and hateful reproaching a godly life,
instead of teaching it their Children. These Children are customarily brought
to the Assemblies, where they hear the plainest teaching, without
understanding, or regarding it, and grow hardened under daily reproofs and
exhortations; living as their Parents taught them, some in gross ignorance and
worldlyness, without any signs of Godlyness, further then to come to Church;
some in Drunkenness, some in Whoredom, abundance in a malignant hatred of a
holy life, making them that use it the common scorn, and taking them for the
hatefullest persons in the Parish, or Country where they live: For custom
sake, and to quiet their Conscience in their sin, they will come to the Lords
Table, if they be admitted by the Pastor, and may have it in their mode and
way: And if a Minister shall desire them to come to him first, that he may
understand their knowledge and Profession, they scorn it; and ask him by what
Authority he would examine them, and what proof he has that men must be
examined, before they be admitted to the Lords Supper? And some self-conceited,
half-witted Writers have taught them this lesson, and made Ministerial trial
and Approbation^odious to them. But because they were once Baptized, and have
since come to hear and join with us in the Assembly, therefore they think that
they have right to all Ordinances, and are true Christians and Adult members of
the Church; and also exempt from the Government of the Pastors, that require
them to submit to the means of their own good. In the Bishops days, some few
of them were Confirmed: (in the Country where I lived, about one of ten or
twenty) and what that was, and how it was done I can tell you, but what I once
made trial of. When I was a Schoole-boy, about 15 years of age, the Bishop
coming into the Country, many went in to him to be Confirmed: we that were
boys, run out to see the Bishop among the rest, not knowing any thing of the
meaning of the business: when we came thither, we met about thirty or forty in
all, of our own stature and temper, that had come for to be Bishopt, as then it
was called: The Bishop examined us not at all in one Article of the Faith; but
in a Churchyard, in have, we were set in a rank, and he past hastily over us,
laying his hands on our head, and saying a few words, which neither I nor any
that I spoke with, understood; so hastily were they uttered, and a very short
prayer recited, and there was an end. But whethey we were Christians or
Infidels, or knew so much as that there was a God, the Bishop little knew, nor
enquired. And yet he was one of the best Bishops esteemed in England. And
though the Canons require, that the Curate or Minister send a Certificate that
children have learnt the Catechism; yet there was no such thing done, but we
run of our own accord to see the Bishop only; and almost all the rest of the
County, had not this much: This was the old careless practice of this Excellent
Duty of Confirmation. Some few (perhaps half a Parish in the best places) will
send their children to Church, to be catechized yet; but even those few that
learn the words for the most part understand not what they say* and are as
ignorant of the matters, as if they never learnt the words. This is the common
way, by which our Parishes come to be Churches, and our people to be
Christians; supposing some to be mixed among them, that are more Faithfully
devoted to God in Baptism, and better educated, in the fear of God.

2. Now let us see what are the real, visible, undeniable fruits of this
defective sinful course. Because men build upon this Fundamental falsehood, that
infant Baptism upon the Parents Profession, does give them right to the
Church State and Privileges of the Adult, without any personal Profession and
Covenanting with God, when they come to the use of reason, which the Church
must have cognizance of; and so they that entered somewhat more Regularly into
an Infant Church state, do become Adult-members secretly, unobservedly, and no
body well knows how: Hereupon it follows,

1. That our Churches are lamentably corrupted and diseased, (though they are
true Churches, and have Life in them) while they are made so like the
unbelieving and ungodly world; and the Garden of Christ is made too like the
common wilderness For Heathens, and Impious persons, and all sorts of the
unclean (almost) are the members of them, where Parishes, or Parish-meetings
are made convertible with Churches. I would make the case neither worse nor
better then it is. Till within these few years, I knew but very imperfectly how
it is, and I thought the case had been better with some, and worse with others
then I have found it upon trial. And had I not set upon the duty of Personal
instruction, I should never have known the state of the people: But now we have
dealt with them almost all in private personally, I shall truly tell you the
state of this Parish, by which you may conjecture at the rest of the Nation. I
know not a Congregation in England that has in it Proportionably so many that
fear God: and yet our whole Parish consists of all these sorts following. 1.
Among eight hundred Families, there are about five hundred persons, such as the
vulgar call precise, that are rated to be serious Professors of Religion, (or
perhaps somewhat more) These live in Unity, and seem to me to seek first the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness; and are of as peaceable, harmless, humble
Spirits, and as unanimous without inclination to Sects, or Ostentation of their
parts, as any people I know. 2. Besides these there are some of competent
Knowledge and exterior performances, and lives so blameless, that we can gather
from them no certain Proof, or violent Presumption that they are ungodly, or
that their Profession is not sincere. So many of these joining with the rest,
as make about six hundred, do own their Church Membership, and consent to live
under so much of Church Order and Government, as unquestionably belongs to
Presbyters to exercise, and to be my Pastoral charge.

3. Besides these, there are some that are tractable and of willing minds, that
by their expressions seem to be ignorant of the very Essentials of Christanity;
which yet I find to have obscure conceptions of the truth, when I have
condescendingly better searched them, and helped them by my enquiries. These
also (as weak in the Faith) we receive. Of this fourth sort I hope are many
that truly fear God, that some on one pretense, and some on an other, forbear
to ioyn with us in the Communion of the Church, in the Lords Supper: but yet
hear, and live in love and peace with us. And some do join with us (on the
grounds as godly strangers may be admitted) sometime in the Lords Supper; that
yet expressly own not a membership in the particular Church.
4. Some there are that are of competent understandings, and of lives so
blameless, that we durst not reject them; but they hold off themselves, because
they are taught to question, if not to disown our Administrations; for all
that, we give liberty to all that in tolerable things do differ. 5. Some there
are, that are secret Heathens, believing with Aristotle, that the world was
from Eternity; making a scorn of Christ, and Moses, and Heaven, and Hell, and
Scripture, and Ministers, and all Religion; thinking that there is no Devil,
no Immortality of the Soul, or Everlasting Life: But this they reveal only in
secret, to those that they find capable, by viciousness, unsetledness, or any
malignity, or discontent against the Godly, or the Orders of the Church: And
yet for the hiding of their minds, they will hear and urge us to baptize their
children, and openly make the most Orthodox Confessions, and secretly deride it
when they have done, as I can prove. And this is the only differing party among
us, in Judgment and design, that is in danger of leavening many, As I would
not have mentioned the faults of any of my Parishioners, but on this necessity
of opening the state of the Nation de facto, so they have no reason to take it
ill of me. For 1. I accuse none by name, much less the Generality. 2. The
Innocent do themselves know, and bewail the sins that I mention. 3. I am so
far from making them worse then other Parishes, that I un^eigne^iiy proses,
that I do not know a^y other in England of so much Godliness, and
tractableness; which testimony is true, and more to their honor, then the
mentioning of the remnants of ignorance and ungodlyness is to their dishonor.
If it be thus, here, how much worse is it in most parts of the ^^nd?
that God forsakes. 6. many there are that have tolerable knowledge, and live
in some notorious, scandalous sins: some in gross Covetuousness, and these will
not be convinced: some in common drunkenness, and those will confess their
faults, and promise amendment a hundred times over, and be drunk within a few
days again; and thus have spent the most part of their lives: some in as
constant ^ipling, drinking as great a quantity, but bearing it better away:
some in ordinary swearing, cursing, ribaldry, whoredoms sometimes. Many in
neglect of all Family Duties, and the Lords Day: and some in hateful, bitter
scorns at Prayer, holy Conference, Church Order and holy living, and the people
that use it; sometimes rising up in tumults against the Officers that endeavor
to punish a drunkard, or Sabbath breaker, and rescuing them, and seeking the
ruin of the Officers. 7. Some there are that are of more tractable
dispositions, but really know not what a Christian is: that hear us from day
to day, yea and some few of them learn the words of the Catechism, and yet know
not almost any more, then the veryest Heathen in America. They all confess,
that we must mend our lives, and serve God: but they know not that God is
Eternal, or that Christ is God, or that he is man, but say, he is a Spirit;
some say neither God nor man; some say God and not man; some say man and not
God: abundance say, He was man on earth, but now He is not: Abundance know not
what He came to do in the world: nor that there is any satifaction made for
sin, but what we must make our selves; and they tell me, they trust to
nothing for Pardon and Salvation, but Gods Mercy, and their good serving him
(which is only saying every night and morning in bed, or as they undress them,
the Lords Prayer* and the Creed for a Prayer, and coming to Church.) They say
openly, they do not know of any surety that we have, or any that has borne the
punishment of our sin, or suffered for us: And when I repeat the History of
the Incarnation, life, death, and resurrection of Christ to them, they stand
wondering, and say, they never heard it before: what the Holy Ghost is, they
know not: nor what Sanctification, Faith, or Justification is: nor what Baptism
is; nor the Lords Supper; nor to what use, but in general, for our Salvation.
What a Church is, they know not; nor what is the Office of Pastor or People,
save only to preach and hear, and give and receive the Sacraments. If I ask
them what Christianity is, the best answer is, that it is a serving God as well
as we can, or as God will give us leave. So that there is scarce an Article of
the Creed, or very few that they tolerably understand. Nay one of about
fourscore years of age (now dead) thought Christ was the Sun, that shines
in the Firmament; and the Holy Ghost was the Moon. 8. Many there be, that
join this Heathenish ignorance, and wicked obstinacy together; hating to be
instructed; scorning to come near me, to be taught, and to be told of their
sin, when they come. They will rail at us bitterly behind our backs, if we
will not let them have their own will and way about the Sacraments, and all
Church-affaires: but they will not submit to that Teaching, that should bring
them to know what Christ or Christianity is. 9. Some there be that are of
tolerable knowledge, and no Drunkards, nor Whoremongers that the world knows
of, but of more plausible lives, and have some forms of Prayer in their
families: but yet live in idle or tippling company, or spend their lives in
vanity, and hate more a diligent serving of God, and heavenly life, then the
open Drunkars do: These make it their work to possess people with a hatred of
strict Professors, and of our Churches and Administrations, and to that end
get all the books that are written for admitting all to the Lords Table, that
they can light of; I have but very few of these; but I know neighbor Parishes
that have too many, to the grief of their godly Ministers.
and contrary to the Authors meanings, they make them Engines to harden others
in their Impiety, and hatred of Reformation: The like use they make of the
Writings of man^y Dissenting Divines, about Church-governemnt; or any from
whence they may fetch matter of reproach against the Pastors and Ordinances
among us. This tenth sort, are some of them infected by the Infidels (who are
all for Hobs his Necessity) but most of them have got it, I know not how: but
so many are possessed by these conceits, that I little thought, that near so
many of the ungodly vulgar, had so abused the Doctrine of Predestination and
Grace; as if they had been hired to disgrace it.
10. Another sort there are, that are deeply possessed with a conceit, that God
having determined before we are borne, whether we shall be saved or not, it is
in vain to strive; for if we be predestined, we shall be saved what ever we
do; and if we be not, we shall not, what ever we do; and that we can do nothing
of our selves, nor have a good thought, but by the Grace of God, and if God
will give it us, we shall have it; and the Devil cannot prevail against him;
but if he will not give it us, it is in vain to seek it; for it is not in him
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows Mercy; and
therefore they give up themselves to security and ungodliness, because they
cannot do nothing of themselves. And thus by misunderstanding some Texts of
Scripture, and abusing some Truths of God, they are hardened in ungodliness,
thinking that all is long of God: and they will not so much as promise
Reformation, nor promise to use the means, because they say, they cannot tell
whether God will put it into their hearts: and it is all as he will. 11.
Besides these, there is one or two honest, ignorant Professors, that are
turned Anabaptists, and join with the Church of them in the next Parish. 12.
Our Papists are but few; but if the rest of them be such as ours, their Church
has small reason to boast of its Holiness.
12. And some Papists are among us; and whether only those that stay from the
Assemblies, I cannot say.

Of these twelve sorts of People, Beside, if all these were fit to be members,
yet we must know their own consent, which mere living in the Parish, or coming
to Church does not signify.
this Parish is composed; which I therefore mention, that the state of our
Parishes may be truly known; while others are compared with this: For every one
has not had the opportunities which I have had, to know all their people, or
the most.

And now if all these are fit to go for Christians, then must we make a new
kind of Christianity; and a new Gospel, and a new Christ. And if all these are
fit to be Church Members, then we must make a new kind of Churches?

And why then may not those be Christians and Church Members, that never heard
of the Name of Christ, as well as many of these?

2. By this untried Entrance of all sorts into our Churches, we bring a
dishonor on the very Christian Name, and so on the Lord Jesus himself, and on
his Gospel and holy ways. Christianity is not a matter of mere Opinion: Christ
came not into the world only to persuade men to have high thoughts of him, but
to save his people from their sins, and to destroy the works of the Devil.
And when the Church of Christ shall be turned into a den of thieves, or a sty
of swine, what a great dishonor is it to the Lord? As if we would persuade the
world, that his servants are no holier then others, and differ but in an
Opinion from the world. Christ needs not Disciples, and therefore will not
take in all that refuse to come upon his terms; but has fixed his terms, and
will have only those that will yield to them. Though I abhor the rigor of the
contrary extreme, that would make the Church narrower then it is, and pin it
up in so small a number, as would tempt men to doubt of Christianity it self;
and teaches men to exclude their brethren, merely because they are themselves
uncharitable Judges, when they are not able to disprove their Profession; yet
must I also detest this horrible dishonouring of the Lord, as if his Body were
no better than the army of the Devil.

3. And by this means the Heathens, Jews, Mahometans and all Infidels are
exceedingly hindered from believing in Christ; when they can say as the Turks,
when men question their fidelity; what? do thou think I am a Christian? He
that knows any thing of Religious affairs, knows that commonly the first
thing that draws men to any party, is the liking of the Persons and their
Practices; from whence they grow to enquire with inclination into their
doctrines. The Ancient Christians that lived before the days of Constantine,
did bring Christianity into reputation by their Holiness, and God was then more
eminently seen among them. But when the countenance of the Emperor, and
worldly advantages had drawn in all men to the Church, and the Bishops did set
the door too wide open, Christianity looked like another thing, and that
inundation of wickedness overspread the Church, which Salvian and so many more
complain of. Our likeliest way to win the Jews, and all Infidels to the
Church, is by showing them the true Nature of Christianity in the
Church Members.

4. Hereby also we confound the ancient Order of Catechumens, or Expectants
with the true members of the Church, and lay the Church and the porch, yea and
the Churchyard, if not the commons, all together. By which also our Preaching
and Administrations are confounded: so that whereas the Ancient Churches had
their Common Sermons (and some Prayers) which were fitted to the unconverted or
Expectants; and had also both Doctrine, Prayers, Praises, and other worship,
proper to the Church (especially on the Lords Days) we must now speak to all,
and join with all; and the Church, and the Enemies of the Church must sing the
same Praises, as if they were one body. And God is not the God of confusion but
of order in the Churches. He that put two sorts of Preaching and Doctrine into
the Apostles Commission, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. One for making Disciples and
another for the edifying and guidance of Disciples, did never intend, that
these should be confounded.

5. And then by this means, the Souls of millions of poor people are deprived
of the great benefits of the Ordinances and Administrations suitable to their
state. The begetting Word goes before the feeding, strengthening Word, even
before the milk for babes. The laying of the foundation must go before our
building thereon. Every one will thrive best in his Own Element and place. A
fish will not prosper on dry land, nor a man under water. The womb is the only
place for the Embrio and unborn child, though not for those that have seen the
Sun. If you will break the shell before the Chicken be hatched, that you may
hasten its production, or honor it with a premature association with the rest
that see the Sun, your foolish charity will be the death of it. And so deal
abundance of mistaken Zealots with the Souls of men; who cry out against the
wisest and most conscionable Ministers, as if they were unchristning the
People, and undoing the world, because they would feed them with food
convenient for them, and will not be such hasty midwives, as to cast the mother
into her throws, if not rip her up, that she may have the child at her
breasts, which should yet be many days or months in the womb. Moreover they
thus cause our people, to lose all that benefit of preparations, and solemn
Engagement to Christ: of which more anon among the Benefits.

6. By this means also the Souls of our poor people are deluded, and they are
made believe that they are Christians when they are not, and in a state of
Salvation, when it is no such thing. Mr Thorndicke, see Dr Hammond's Practic.
Catech. lib. 2.. 2. p. 103. and l. 6.. 2. page 311, 313, 314, 319, 320, 321,
322, 323, etc.
As Mr Thorndicke says (as aforecited) No man is to be admitted to the
Assemblies (or visible societies of Christians) till there be just presumption
that he is of the Heavenly Jerusalem that is above: -- And admitting to, and
excluding from the Church is, or ought to be a just and Lawful presumption, of
admitting to, or excluding from Heaven: It is morally and legally the same act
that entitleth to Heaven, and to the Church, that makes an heir of life
Everlasting and a Christian: -- And if so, then what greater mischief can we do
the Soul of an ungodly man, then so to delude him, by our admitting him into
the Church, and make him believe he is in a state of Salvation, when it is no
such thing? False faith, and false hopes, are the things that fill Hell, and
are the common undoing of the world: And all that ever we can do, is too little
to cure it. When I bend all my studies and labors, but to make a wicked man
know that he is wicked, I cannot procure it. I can make him believe that he is
a sinner, but not that he is an unconverted, ungodly sinner, and in a state of
Condemnation. O the power of blinding self-love! that will not suffer them to
see themselves miserable, when they see themselves sinful, and all because
they would not have it so; when yet it is most visible to others. And shall we
all join to strengthen this potent Enemy? and lay this share, and thrust men
headlong into Hell, that are running down-hill so fast already: and all under
pretense of Charity and Compassion?

7. We shall put them by this means into a way, not only of losing the fruit of
Ordinances, but of misapplying all to the increasing of their deceit: When we
preach Peace to the true believer, the wicked will misapply it, and say, it
belongs to them: When we speak against the unbelievers and ungodly, they will
think that this is not their part, but bless themselves because they are
Christians. In our praises they are tempted with the Pharisee to thank God, and
perhaps for mercies which they never had, as Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, etc. The Sacraments by misapplication will confirm them in
Presumption. And thus as they enter by deceit, among Adult-believers, so will
they turn all the Ordinances of God, and the Privileges of the Church to feed
that deceit, more effectual then among the expectants it would have been.

8. But the greatest mischief that troubles me to think of, is this; that by
this hastening and admitting all the unprepared into the Number of
Adult-Christians, and members of the Church; we do either put a necessity upon
our selves to throw away Church Discipline, or else to be most probably the
damnation of our peoples Souls, and make them desperate, and almost past all
hope, or remedy. I must confess, that what I am saying now, I was not sensible
of, till lately that experience made me sensible: While I meddled not with
Public reproofs or censures, I disputed of these things, without that
experience, which I now find is one of the greatest helps to resolve such
doubts; which makes me bold to tell the Church, that the Practice of so much
Discipline as we are agreed in, is a likelyer way, to bring us all to agreement
in the rest, then all our Disputings will do without it: And that I resolve
hereafter, to take that man for an incompetent Judge, and unmeet Disputer about
Church Discipline, that never exercised it, or lived where it was exercised:
And I shall hereafter suspect their judgments, and be almost as loath to follow
such, as to follow a swimmer, that never was before in the water, or a Pilote
that was never before at sea; or a Soldier that never saw wars before, but
have only learned their skill by the Book. Our case stands thus: If we take all
our Parishes according to the old Church-constitution, to be particular
Churches, and all the Parishiones to be members, then either we must exercise
the Discipline which Christ has commanded, or not. If not, then we disobey our
Lord and Master, and own such a Church, as is utterly incapable of Church-ends,
and consequently of the essence, seeing that it is a Relative being. For it is
supposed that it is not for any unusual accident, that we cannot exercise this
Discipline, but from the very Church constitution, or incapacity of the matter.
And then 1. We shall be Traitors to Christ, under the name of Pastors, if we
will wilfully cast out his Ministerial, Kingly Government. 2. We shall betray
the Church to licentiousness. And 3. We shall set up a new Church Way, which is
contrary, to that which has been practiced in all ages, from the Apostles
days, till Impiety had overspread the Christian world. He that dare take on
him to be an Overseer and Ruler of the Church, and not to oversee and rule it,
and dare settle on such a Church State, as is incapable of Discipline, is so
perfidious to Christ, and ventureth so boldly, to make the Church another
thing, that I am resolved not to be his follower.

But if we shall exercise the Discipline of Christ upon all in our ordinary
Parishes, what work shall we make? I will tell you what work, from so much
experience, as that no reasonings can any more persuade me to believe the
contrary, then that wormwood is not bitter, or snow not cold.

1. We shall have such a multitude to excommunicate, or reject that it will
make the sentence grow almost contemptible by the commonness. 2. We shall so
extremely enrage the spirits of the people, that we shall go in continual
danger of our lives: Among so many that are publikly reproved, and cast out,
it is two to one, but some desperate villains will be studying revenge. But all
this is nothing: but that which sticks upon my heart is this: This is no
dishonor to the Discipline: for we find it has great effect on such as are
capable of it.
3. We shall be the cruellest enemies to the Souls of our poor people in the
world: and put them the very next step to Hell. For as soon as ever we have
rejected them, and cast them under public shame, they hate us to the heart,
and either will never hear us more, or hear us with so much hearted and
malice, or bitterness of spirit, that they are never like to profit by us. If
you say that doubtless Discipline will have better fruits, if it be an
Ordinance of God: I Answer 1. It Is no time now in the end of the world, to
question whether that be an Ordinance of God, which Scripture speaks for so
fully, and so plainly; and which the Catholic Church has so long practiced,
and that with such severity as it has done. 2. I know the Discipline is of
excellent use, and is likely to have excellent effects: But upon whom? Upon
such as are fit to come under Discipline, and with such I have seen the
usefulness of it: but with the rest it makes them next to mad. They that before
would patiently hear me, in the plainest, sharpest Sermons that I could preach,
and would quietly bear any private admonition, when once they are publikly
admonished and cast out, are filled with the gall of malice and indignation,
and never more likely to profit by a Sermon. Nay they set themselves with
malice, to reproach and oppose, and stir up others; and fall in to any party,
that will receive them that are enemies to the Ministry: so that I look upon
some of them, when once they are cast out, almost as if they were already in
Hell: For they are desperately hardened against any further means of their
recovery. 3. Yea I am persuaded, that if we exercise Christ's Discipline
according to the Scripture Rule, upon all in the Parishes in England, it would
endanger a rebellion; and the rage of the people would make them ready, to take
any opportunity to rise up against the Sovereign Power, that does maintain
and protect us; and if we were not protected, we should soon have enough of it.

Object. Perhaps you will say, that public admonitions, and Church censures are
not to be easily exercised, nor upon any but notorious, scandalous sinners, and
that in case of obstinate impenitency.

Answ. I am as much against a rash, unnecessary censure, or use of the severity
of Discipline, as another: I know that a fly must not be killed with a beetle.
Let it be exercised but according to the Parliaments Ordinance, called The form
of Church Government, to be used in the Church of England and Ireland, Aug. 29.
1648. Or let it be exercised but with one half, or the sixth part of the
severity of the Ancient Canons of the Church, and you shall certainly see the
effects that I tell you of. Do you think to use it but with few, when
Impenitent, scandalous sinners are so many? But perhaps you think to use it
only in terrorem or now and then one, and let others alone that are in the same
case. But 1. That Is the same disobedience to God, as to use it upon none at
all. He that has commanded us to reject a Heretic, to have no company with
the disorderly livers, to turn away from scandalous, ungodly men, and not to
enter with drunkards, railers, etc. has not bid us do thus by some some but by
all. God 2. condemns partiality. 3. Your Partiality will presently be so
noted by men, that it will turn to your reproach, and make both you and your
Discipline odious, when they can say, He cast out one, and forbeareth others in
the same case.

Object. But were there not more offenders then the incestuous man at Corinth?
And yet Paul casts out but him.

Answ. 1. How can you tell how many Paul cast out? 2. Does he not give the
Church a flat command to cast out and avoid the rest, 1 Cor. 5. 11, 12. When
will you make us believe, that Paul at that time commanded them to do that
which he would not have them do? 3. Corinth had many offenders, whom Paul in
that Epistle reprehendeth: but can you prove that any of them were obstinately
Impenitent, after admonition? I know you cannot.

Bu^ perhaps you will think that you should by the preparatory, private admonition
so bow them, and work upon them, that few of them should be so obstinate as to
fall under censure.

I answer, You speak this because you never tried, and know not the world. I
must presume to tell you (though to tell you the reasons be unmeet) that
there is but few men in England must expect more advantages for Interest in
their people, then I have in mine: and yet all is nothing, when I come to
exercise Discipline, and cross their selfish, sensual inclinations. Those that
will tell me, they are beholden to me for their lives, yet will not hear me
when I persuade them to any humbling confession. Those that cannot hide their
sin, will confess it, and commit it over and over: will you accept of their
private Confession for Satisfaction, that will publicly slander their
Neighbors, I desire those that are overridgid and uncharitable in censuring
others, not to extend these complaints to more then I extend them: nor to take
it as an occasion for the unchurching of whole Parishes, or any one particular
person, without sufficient evidence. For I must profess that I meet with
hundreds in my Parish, that I can comfortably hold Communion with, that some
men of stricter principles, or more censorious dispositions would reject: Yea,
and I take abundance for truly goldy men, that are not noted for any eminency
of Religion, perhaps their parties, or callings, or opportunites, being such as
keep them much from the Knowledge of others.
or be drunk openly every week or month, or swear every day. But many of them
will not so much as confess before a few Ministers or Officers of the Church,
that they have sinned, but will stand impenitently in it to the last. Let me
entreat them withal the submissiveness and earnestness that I can, when one
has beat or slandred another, or in the like cases, if I would kneel to them,
I cannot get many of them once (Hypocritically) to say, I am sorry, or I did
amiss: And those that do say so, in a cold, Hypocritical, heartless manner,
will join with it such bitter words, against the accuser or reprover, and show
such hatred to those that admonish them, that declares their impenitency. If
you have such extraordinary abilities, to melt and mollify hardened sinners,
more then we have, you are the more unexcusably unfaithful to God and man, that
will not use them. And all are not so haypy as to have your conquering parts.
For my part I can say in uprightness of heart, that I do what I can do,
(abating those neglects which are the consequents of any frailty) and if I knew
how to do more, I would, with study, preaching, conference, labor or estate;
and yet with abundance I am not able to prevail, so much as to make them
capable of Discipline. So that I see plainly by unquestionable experience, that
either we must have Churches without the Discipline of Christ, and be Rulers
without Ruling it; or else we must utterly undo our people, body and Soul for
ever, and plunge them into a desperate state, and make all our following labous
in vain to multitudes of them: Or else we must take another course, then to
admit all our Parishes to Adult Church Membership, as was formerly done,
without preparation, and fitness for such a state.

And yet in their blindness, Gentlemen, Ministers, and all that plead for
common Church Membership, pretend to be charitable to the Peoples Souls, when
they are exercising this grievous cruelty. It is just as if in Mercy to the
schoole-boyes, you should set them, that cannot read English, in the highest
form, where they must make Orations in Latin and Greek^, or else be whipped:
would they thank you for such advancement. It is as if you should put an
ignorant unexercised, cowardly Soldier, or one that is but learning to use his
arms, into the front of the Battle, for his honor: or as if you should
prefer a Pupil to be a Tutour, or put a freshman in the Doctors chair, or
admit a new baptized Novice to be a Pastor of the Church, where the blood of
the people shall be required at his hands; or as if to honor him, you should
admit any common Mariner to the Pilots place, or any Apothecary to play the
Physician to other men's ruin, and his own shame. If you set such Children on
horsback, while you pretend their good, you will break their necks. No man is
safe out of his own rank and place: If the Husbandman know that every sort of
plants and grain, must have their proper soil and season, and the Gardner
knows that several herbs and flowers, must be variously manured, or else they
will not prosper; why should we be less wise in the Work of God? As Country
Schools are Seminaries to the Academies, so the state of Catechumens or
Expectants is the Seminary to the Church, and the state of Infant
Church Membership, the Seminary to the state of the Adult, into which they must
be seasonably and solemnly transplanted, when they are ripe and ready, and not
before. Truly our merciful hastlings do but yoke untamed bullocks, that are
fitter to strive and tire themselves then to plow; and do but saddle such wild,
unbroken colts, as are liker to break their own and their riders necks, then to
go the journey which they are designed for. In the state of Expectants, these
men may profit by Preparing Ordinances, and the season may come, when they may
fitly be transplanted: But if we put them inter fideles that are infideles,
among Actual Believers, and Adult Church Members that are not such, nor
prepared for the station, we bring them under a Discipline which will
exasperate them, and turn them to be malignant enemies, and undo them for
ever. The Disposition of the matter, must go before the Reception of the form:
For undisposed matter will not receive it. As the Operation follows the
Being, and the Disposition, so we must employ every person and thing, in such
operations only, as their Being and Qualification is capable of, and suited to.
A due placing of all according to their Qualifications, is the chiefest part of
our Government. Misplace but one wheel in your watch, and try how it will go.
If any person or thing be not good in his Own place, he will be much worse out
of in, it the place of his Superior. Fire is better in the chimny then in your
bed, or upon your Table: A good Cleark may make but a sorry Counselor; and a
good Subject may make but an ill Magistrate: And many a man becomes the seat of
a Justice, that would not become the Princes Throne. If you would not undo
men's Souls by a Discipline, which they cannot bear; let them stay in the
Seminary of Expectants, till they are ripe for it.

Object. But how do the Churches of France, Holland, Geneva and Scotland, that
have exercised Discipline upon all?

Answ. 1. Must I be sent to another Nation to know that which I have made
trial of, and attained the certain knowledge of, at home? I was never in
France, nor at Geneva, and therefore I know not what number of obstinate,
impenitent, scandalous persons are there, nor how many that know who Jesus
Christ is, nor what a Christian, or a Church is: but I have been in England,
and I partly know what store of these are there, and what usage they will bear,
and what not. 2. Either other Churches have such materials as our Parishes, or
not. If not, their cause is none of ours: If they have, then either they
exercise Christ's Discipline on them faithfully, and impartially or not: If not,
then they are not to be imitated by us in their negligence, unfaithfullness, or
partiality. If they do, and yet do not undo the people, they have not such a
people as ours, or else they have other means to further their ends. 3.
Melancthon Epist. (Impres. Lugdun. 1647.) ad Dominicum Schleupnerum, says. 1.
Quia in tanta multitudine vix pauci sunt Christiani, and apti qui Sacramento
fruantur, cavendum est ne vulgus invitetur ad prophanandum Corpus Domini.
The truth is, as in France they are but a people gathered from among the
Papists, whose Church does drink up most of the scumme; so the other Churches:
1. Are too lamentably careless, partial, or defective, in executing their own
Discipline: And if I should come to think it lawful, Lege Calvin. Institut.
lib. 4. cap. 12.. 1, 2. Zanch. de Ecclesia. vol. 3. fol. 123, 124, 134, 135.
and others cited in the Preface of my Reformed Pastor.
to forbear the Execution of it upon nineteen, I should soon think it lawful
to forbear the twentieth: And then what should I think of Scripture, and the
Canons of the universal Church. 2. By this neglect it is, that Reformed
Churches have contracted the greatest dishonor that is upon them, while they
are sound in Doctrine, and have Learned Pastors, able to confound the Romish
adversaries; but alas, too many unmeet Church Members. 3. They have (and
Scotland had till lately) the Magistrates Sword to drive men on, and force them
to submit to Discipline, which is not our case, nor was the case of the
Primitive Church. It is not there the Churches censure that does the work, but
the Magistrates Sword, no more then it was with our Bishops in England. 4. And
yet what work a little exercise of Discipline made, may appear in the case of
Calvin, at Geneva, when for suspending the Sacrament, when the people were in
enmity, he was banished Geneva, and their dogs called by the name of Calvin;
and when the suspending of one Bertelerius could put them all into such a flame.

Object. But fiat Justitia and ruat coelum: let us trust God with His own
Ordinances: we must do our duty, what ever come of it?

Answ. This does but beg the Question: Gods Ordinances are not for destruction,
but edification; at least as to the multitude of the ungodly, they tend to
their Conversion, and not to their perdition. Is that likely to be Gods
Ordinance, which certain experience tells us, will put such multitu^es of men
into a hopeless case, or next to hopeless? Ministers are appointed to make
Disciples, and gather men to Christ, and further their Conversion, and not
plunge them into a remediless state, and to hurry them all unprepared into
Church Communion, that they may be thrust out again, and brought t^ hate the
Church. It Is another work to advance them to the Pinnacle of the Temple, that
he may cast them down headlong. And I yet never knew the man, nor saw his face,
that practiced what this Objection pleads for; and exercised Discipline,
faithfully on a whole Parish. Nor do I believe that any man can do it that
would; unless the Magistrate do it for him. For he cannot do it without the
peoples consent: and if he sentence such to be avoided by the people, they will
despise his sentence, and hold communion with them the more, and do as our
Drunkards do, when one of their Companions is put in the stocks, bring him Ale
and good cheer* and eat, and drink, and make merry with him, if the Magistrate
restrain them not.

Object. But Excommunication must not be used, till all other remedies will do
no good: and when all will do no good, what good will it do such to be kept
under other means?

Answ. To do good, for the bringing a man out of that sin, for which he is
admonished, is one thing, and to do good, for his Information and Conversion in
the maine, is another thing; It is the use of Discipline, to cure men of the
particular sins that they are reproved for, rather then to convert them from
a state of wickedness in general. 2. Nor is Excommunication to be deferred, as
long as there is any Hope by other means; but only till we have used other
means in vain, for such a season as is meet; that the ends of Discipline be
not frustrate. For else there should never man be Excommunicated: For there is
some Hope that preaching against his sin may do him good at last; though he
come drunk to the Lords Table twenty years together, you cannot say that his
Conversion is Impossible: And yet we must not hereupon defer the casting out
of such a member. But in his Expectant state, or among the Catechumens, we may
bear with him lawfully in his wickedness, without excluding him from among our
hearers, and if he hear us seven years and seven in vain, there is yet some
Hope of his Conversion, while he waits in his own place and way.

And yet I yield this much to the Objectours freely, that when fit persons are
taken into the Church, (yea or unfit, by negligence) we must wait with all
patience that is consistent with the ends of Government, and cutting off must
be the last remedy: and that when it is necessary, it must be used, though we
see that it is ten to one, it will plunge the person (occasionally) into a worse
condition. For the Public Ends of Discipline, (the credit of Christianity, the
preservation of the Church, and abundance more) are to be preferred before the
good of that man's Soul: and as paena debetur Reipublicae, and we cut not off
malefactors for their own good, so much as the Commonwealths, which by their
hurt must be promoted, so is it as to the Church. But this must be done but
upon a few, for example: and therefore but few that will need this severity,
are supposed to be in our Communion. And I cannot believe that way to be of
God, that would bring such multitudes into this miserable state.

Object. Your very keeping them from the Communion of the Church, and not
Approving or Confirming them, would as much exasperate them.

Answ. It Is no such matter. Much it may, but not near so much, as I certainly
know by experience: Those not Admitted hear with Hope; but to the rejected I
speak as almost hopeless, except such as were fit to live under Discipline, on
whom it may have its due effect.

9. And by this admitting all men without trial and Confirmation, to come
unobservedly into the state of Adult-Christians, we breed and feed continual
heart burnings against the Ministers of Christ; while we are necessitated to do
our work upon such unprepared Souls. And how much the hatred and contempt of
Ministers does conduce to the destruction of the people, Satan is not ignorant,
that is the diligent promoter of it.

10. By this means also we frustrate our own studies, and Ministerial Labors,
to abundance of our people. Partly by deluding them actually, in the Reception
of them among Christians, that really are no Christians, and partly by this
provocation of their hatred.

11. By this means also we breed and feed abundance of Controversies in the
Church: For when once we displace any parts of the frame, we shall find almost
all in pieces, and one error draws on so many, that Controversies grow
numerous, and will never be reconciled by mere words and writings, till we
actually set the Church in joint again.

12. By this course also we lay open the Ordinances of God, to a continual
profanation, while abundance that know not who Christ is, nor what
Christianity is, are admitted as Christians, to our Christian Communion: and so
themselves are involved in more sin, and Gods own Worship turned into
Provocation; so that we may fear lest God should frown upon our Assemblies,
and withdraw the tokens of his Presence, and deny his blessing to those
profaned Ordinances. Though the innocent may still have their share in the
blessing, yet may the Pastors and the guilty majority, deeply suffer by this
great abuse of holy things.

13. By this means also it is that so many Scruples are cast in our way, about
Administrations, and reception of Ordinances; and the comfort of Ministers and
people in them, is much abated.

14. And I doubt it is a hinderance to the Conversion of many sects about us,
and of many ungodly ones among us, who if they saw the primitive holiness of
Churches might be drawn in.

15. And it much corrupts the Communion of Saints, and turns it to another
thing; when this Holy Communion is so much of our duty and our comfort, and
such a Representation of Heaven it self.

16. And if it be not a practical denial of some of the Articles of our Faith,
it is well. We say there, that we Believe the Catholic Church to be Holy, and
that it is a Communion of Saints, that is by the parts of it, to be exercised.
And shall we deny this in our works, which in words we profess.

17. By this means also we dishonor the work of Reformation, when we hinder
the fruits of it, that should be visible to the world; and make men believe
that it lies but in a change of bare opinions. They that see no great
difference between the Reformed and the Romanists in their lives, will think it
is no great matter, which side they are joined to. It Is noted by some
Protestant Writers, that when Luther opposed Popery in Germany, abundance of
the common licentious people, that were weary of Popish Confessions, and
Penances, did join with those that were truly conscientious, and dishonored
the Reformation by their lives, though they increased the number, and did the
service as Erasmus his Gospeller, that used to carry a bottle of wine, and
Erasmus New Testament, with great brass bosses, and when he disputed with a
Papist, knocked him about the pate with the Bible, and so confuted him.

18. And by this means we give the Papists more room then they should have, to
reproach our Churches, and glory comparatively of the Holiness of theirs.
Though I know that their glory is exceeding unreasonable, and that our
Impurities are no more to theirs, then a few boiles to a Leprosy; yet we do
ill to give them so much occasion, as we do, who are ready to make the worst of
all.

19. By this means also we leave all Sects, to quarrel with us, and dispute
against us, even whether we be true Churches of Christ or not, because our
Adult-profession and Covenant is no more express, and discernable, then it is.
And though we have enough to prove our selves a Church, yet do we leave them
under their temptations, and our selves under the obloquy. And indeed we
perversely maintain our own dishonor, while we think it a condition to be
rested in, if we can but prove our selves true Churches; when our Learned
Divines do give as much to the Romanists themselves, though not as Papal, yet
as Christian. A Leper is a true man, and yet his cure is a thing to be desired.

20. Lastly, By this means also we tempt many well meaning people among us, to
a dangerour separation from us, and to fly from our Churches, as if they would
fall on their heads; and we too much harden those that are already separated:
and all because we will not yield to the healing of our own diseases, or will
do little or nothing to procure it. I know these men have no just ground for
their hard conclusions, and censures of us; but we have little reason to give
them this occasion, and cast a stumbling block in the way of so many precious
Souls.

To what is here briefly thrust together, if the Reader will add the twelve
Reasons, in my Christian Concord, page 11, 12, 13, 14. and what is said in my
book of Right to Sacraments, where these matters, or those that sustain them,
are handled more at large, I suppose he may easily be convinced, that the
former Church Governors, in England, have been lamentably negligent, and our
Churches by their means are much disordered, and that the present Ministers
should be more forward, and diligent, and unanimous for the cure, and that the
Magistrate, if he love the Church of Christ, and the Souls of men, should
speedily afford his help, and all too little to remedy these great and many
evils, which we have let in, by suffering such a loose, unobserved transition
from the state of Infant Church members, or from Apostasy, into the number of
Adult-members, without Approved Profession and Confirmation.

Prop. 20. So many and great are the Benefits, that would follow the general
practice of this duty, of Trying, Approving, and Confirming (or Absolving) all
those that enter into the number of Adult Christians, that it should mightily
provoke all Christian Magistrates, Ministers, and People, to join in a speedy
and vigorous execution of it.
1. ONe excellent fruit of this Practice, will be the great increase of
Knowledge, and godliness, and the destruction of ignorance, and notorious
impiety. This is an effect, most apparent in the Causes. When men are made to
understand, that by the Law of God, seconded by the common consent of the
Church, and the most Learned, Godly Pastors, and (if it may be) by the Law of
the Land; no man is to be accounted, or numbered with Adult-Christians, but
those that make a sober, serious; understanding Profession of Christianity,
renouncing the flesh, the world, and the Devil, and not contradicting, and
nullifying this Profession, by a wicked life; this will engage Parents, to
teach their Children, and Children themselves to learn what Christianity is,
when they cannot have the Name, or the honor, and the Privileges of
Christians, without some Credible Appearance of the thing. For doubtless while
Christianity is in credit, the same motives that now prevail with the
multitude to seem Christians, and to desire the Baptism of their Children,
will continue then, to make them desire to be numbered with Christians, when
they are at age: and so will provoke them to do that, without which they know
they connot be esteemed Christians. And as it is now a common thing to be
baptized in Infancy, so will it be then a common thing, for our young people to
learn the Principles of Christianity, yea and to reform their lives, (I hope
with the most) when they understand, that else they must be taken to be no
Christians. And if it were but the making of the understanding Profession, and
outside of Christianity, to be commoner among us, it would be a most precious
fruit of our endeavors. But much more, when true Christianity it self, in the
life and power of it, would also be more common. As no doubt but it would: For
the Knowledge of the Letter, is the way to the receiving of the Spirit: and
among multitudes that have the outside of true Religion, there will be far
more, that have the life and soul of it, then among those that have not so
much as the outside. Any man in reason may foresee, that if we be openly
agreed, and it be publicly enacted, or declared, that none be taken into the
number of Adult Christians, nor admitted to their Privileges, till they have
made an Approved Profession of Christianity, and so be received by Jesus Christ
himself, acting by his Ministers, it will set all that care for the Name, or
hopes or Privilidges of Christians, to learn, and be, and do, that which they
know will be so required of them. Whereas, as things go now in most places,
they may bring their Children to Baptism, without understanding what Baptism
is; and those Children may slide into the state of the Adult-Christians, and
possess the Name, and place, and outward Communion, and other honors and
Privileges of such, without knowing whether Christ were a man or a woman, or
who he is, or what business he came about into the world: And when no outward
Necessity is laid upon them by the Church, to know more, or to seem better, no
wonder if so many Heathens do sit among Christians, and if the multitude look
not much after knowledge or Godliness.

2. And moreover it will be a very great help to their Consciences, in order
to the convincing them of their sin and misery, and of the insufficiency of
that Condition which multitudes do now rest in; and so to waken them to look
after a safer state, and to be what they must seem to be, if they will be taken
to be Christians. It is a great help to the deceiving of the multitude of the
ungodly, to be currantly esteemed Christians, when they are not: And self-love
is such a blinding thing, that a little help will go far with it, in the
promoting of such deceits. Naturally men are very easily brought to think well
of them selves, and hardly brought to confess their misery. Every man almost
will easily confess himself a sinner, and a very great sinner, so you will but
allow him to be a Christian, and a pardoned sinner. For this is a common
confession, and brings no very terrible Conclusion, and message to the Soul.
But when a man must confess himself, no true Christian, but unsanctified,
unpardoned, and a slave of Satan, this is as much as to confess himself in a
state of damnation, in which if he die he is lost for ever, and men are hardly
drawn to believe so terrible a Conclusion: when yet it is so necessary where it
is true, that we can scarce imagine how a man can be saved without it. He that
knows not himself to be out of his way, will hardly be persuaded to turn
back: And he that knows not himself to be unpardoned, will hardly value or seek
a pardon: And he that thinks he is sanctified, and a true Christian already,
will seek to be made what he takes himself already to be. And how much
Reputation does, to help or hinder men, even in self-judging, is easily
perceived. Now here is a threefold Reputation, of very great moment, to
concur, either for men's Deception, or Conversion. 1. The Reputation of Prince
and Parliament, and so of Lawgivers and Rulers of the Nation, who by their
Laws do manifest, whom they esteem good Christians, and this the people very
much look at. 2. The Reputation of all the Pastors of the Church, which is to
be manifested in their Agreements, Confessions, or Declarations and Practices.
3. The common consent of Christian people, which is to be manifested by their
actions, according to the Laws of Christ, and the Direction of their Guides. If
Magistrates, Ministers and people do concur, to repute all the Infidels, and
utterly Ignorant, wicked men among us to be Christians, how many thousand Souls
may this deceive, and undo for ever? Whereas, If Magistrates, Ministers, and
People that fear God, would all agree accordng to the Laws of Christ, to
esteem none Adult-Christians, but those that by a Credible Profession of
Christianity, do seem to be such, it would abundantly help to convince them of
their misery, and the need of Christ and Grace, and the absolute necessity of a
change. We see even among good men, in the case of a particular sin, how much
common Reputation, does help to hinder the work upon their Consciences: Among
the Reformed Churches beyond the Sea, what Conscience is troubled for these
actions, or omissions on the Lords Day, which in England would much trouble men
of the same temper in other things. Among several Sects it troubles them not,
freely to revile the Servants of Christ that are against them, because they
find it rather go for commendable, then much condemnable, by those whom they
most esteem. Among the Papists, the believing in a Vice-Christ, and the
worshipping of his Image and Cross, with Divine Worship, and also the
consecrated Host, and the condemning all the Churches of Christ that do it not,
do go for Virtues, and Christian Practices, though they are most heinous,
odious sins; and what is it but common Reputation of Prince and Priests, and
multitudes of people, that could make so many, yea and such persons as some of
them are, to continue in such sins, as if they were a part, yea an essential
part of holiness, and one generation to succeed another in them. Were these
sins but commonly reputed to be as odious as indeed they are, what a change
would it make on millions of Souls? So that it is strange to see the power of
Reputation.

3. Moreover, this course would be an excellent help to the Labors of the
Ministers of Christ, for men's Salvation. They would better understand and apply
our Sermons: whereas now, they lose the benefit by misapplying them. Now we
must labor all our lives, (and with most, in vain) to make unbelievers, and
ungodly persons understand what they are, and no means will serve to convince
many people, that they are not truly Christians, that know not what it is to be
a Christian, or that hate it and fight against it. When they all go together
under the name of Christians, what ever comforts they hear offered to
Believers, they take them to themselves, or mistake them as offered to them;
and all the threatenings that are uttered against unbelievers, they put by and
think it is not they that they are spoken against. But if once we could but get
men to stand in their own places, and to know themselves; how easily then would
our message work? Me thinks the Devil should not be able, to keep one man of an
hundred in his power, if they knew themselves to be in his power: nor one of an
hundred, in a state of ungodliness and condemnation if they knew that they are
in such a state. At least, I am sure men will not so numerously, nor easily
run into Hell, when they know they are going into it, as when they are
confident that they are good Christians, and in the way to Heaven.

4. If this foredescribed Confirmation be practiced, it will more powerfully
oblige our people to Christ, then a secret sliding into the number of
Adult-Christians will do. And doubtless solemn engagements and obligations,
have some force upon Conscience, to hold men to Christ, and restrain them from
sin: or else Baptism it self would be much frustrate; and the Jews should not
have been so often called by Moses, Joshua, Asa, and other Princes, to renew
their Covenant with God. But with us, men feel no such bonds upon them. And
many question whether they are bound at all, by their Parents promises for them
in Baptism.

5. The profiting of our people will be much greater in their own place: when
those that are not yet fit for Adult-membership, and Privileges, are kept in
the place of Catechumens or Expectants. Every thing does thrive and prosper
best in its own place: If you tear them not out of the Churches womb, till
they are ready for the birth, they will prosper there, that else may perish.
Your Corn will best prosper in the cold earth, where it seems to be dead and
buried, till the Springing time shall come. And you should not violently unhose
the ears, till Nature put them forth. The first digestion must be wrought,
before the second, and Nature must have time allowed it, and the stomach must
not too hastily let go the food, if you would have good sanguification and
nutrition follow. Men think they do a great kindness to grossly ignorant, or
impious men, to take them into the Church before they are capable of such a
station, and the work, or Privileges thereto belonging: but alas, they do but
hurry them to perdition, by thrusting them out of the state, where they might
have thriven in preparation to a Church State, into a state which will set them
abundance of work, which they are utterly unfit for, and under the pretense of
benefits and Privileges, will occasion abundance of aggravations of their
sins. A boy in his A, B, C. will learn better in his own place, among his
fellows, then in a higher form, where he has work set him, which he is
incapable of doing.

6. By this means also Church Discipline will attain its Ends; It will awe and
preserve the Church, and terrify, and reduce offenders, and help them to
Repentance, and preserve the order of the Church and Gospel; when it is
exercised upon such as are capable of it; that know the nature of it, and
either are habitually diposed to profit by it, or at least understand, what it
was that they were engaged to, and understandingly consent to live under such a
Discipline: and when it is exercised upon few, and we have not such multitudes
to sweep out of the Church.

7. By this means, both Church-associations, and Ordinances may attain their
Ends; and people will be capable of doing the duty of Christians to one
another, when others are capable of receiving it. Church members are bound to
exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any be hardened by
the deceitfullness of sin, Heb. 3. 13. and to teach and admonish one another,
Col. 3. 16. But before swine, we must not cast such pearls, nor give that which
is holy to dogs, Matthew. 7. 6. Therefore it necessarily follows, that dogs and
swine should be kept out of the Church, and cast out if they be crept in.
Nothing has more destroyed that Charitable Community, which should be among
the members of the Church, and that loving and relieving Christ in
Church Members, then the crowding of such into the place, as indeed are Satan's
members, and appear not capable of that special Love, nor are capable of
returning it to others.

8. This will make easy the Ministers work, and free him from abundance of
hatred, trouble, and disadvantage, when like a workmans tools in his shop,
that all are in their place, and so at hand when he should use them, so his
Hearers are in order, and each one looks but for his portion, and none are
snatching at our fingers, for the Childrens bread, that belongs not to them,
and men be not drawn to hate and rail at Ministers, for not fullfiling their
desires.

9. By this means also, the Ordinances will be more purely administered,
agreeably to their Nature, and the Institution: And so God will bless them more
to his Church, and own his people, with the fuller discoveries of his presence,
and take pleasure in the Assemblies and services of his Saints.

10. By this means also, the Communion of the Saints, (and the holy Ordinances
of God) will be abundantly more sweet to his Servants, when we have it in the
appointed way, and it is not imbittered to us, by the pollutions of Infidels,
and notorious ungodly men. Though yet I know, that in a negligent polluted
Church, Gods Servants may have their share of comfort, in his Ordinances, when
they have done their own duty for Reformation, without success.

11. By this means the Church, and the Christian Religion will be more
honorable in the eyes of the world, who judge by the members and professors
lives, before they can judge of the thing as in it self: And as Christ will be
thus honored, and the mouths of adversaries of all sorts stopped, so it will
do much to further their Conversion, when they have such a help to see the
beauty of the Church and Christian Faith. Many more such benefits I would name,
but that you may gather some of them, from what was said of the contrary
incommodities: Only I add

13. Lastly, it is a way that is admirably suited both to Reformation, and
Reconciliation; to Unity, as well as Purity: which removes many of the
Impediments, that else would trouble us in the way. For as all wicked men will
agree against it, as they will against any holy practice, so all parties
considerable among us, do in their doctrine and professions own it; and it
will suit the Principles, or the Ends of all that fear God, either wholly of
very far. I shall here distinctly show you, 1. That the Episcopal: 2.
Presbyterians: 3. Independants: 4. Anabaptists: 5. Yea and I may put in, the
Papists themselves, have no reason to be against this practice; but all of them
have great reason to promote it, supposing them to be what they are.

1. That it is so far agreeable with the Doctrine of the Church of England,
that our Episcopal party have reason to be for it, appears: 1. The rest of
the Rubricke see after.
By the Rubricke,for Confirmation, in the Common Prayer Book, which says as
follows, The Curate of every Parish, or some other at his appointment, shall
diligently upon Sundaies and Holydaies, half an hour before Evening, Prayer,
openly in the Church, instruct and examine so many Children of his Parish, sent
unto him, as the time will serve, and as he shall think convenient, in some
part of this Catechism. And all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Dames, shall
cause their Children, Servants, and Prentices (which have not learned their
Catechism) come to the Church at the time appointed, and obediently to hear,
and be ordered by the Curate, until such time as they have learned, all that is
appointed here for them to learn. And whenever the Bishop shall give
knowledge, for Children to be brought before him, to any convenient place for
their Confirmation, then shall the Curate of every Parish, either bring, or
send in writing, the names of all those Children of his Parish, which can say
the Articles of the Faith, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments, and
also how many of them can answer to the other Questions, contained in this
Catechism. And there shall none be admitted to the Holy Communion, till such
time as he can say the Catechism, and be Confirmed.

So that you see we must not admit any, but the Confirmed to the Sacrament. And
I suppose in common reason, they will extend this to the Aged, as well as unto
Children, seeing ignorance in them is more intolerable: And indeed the words
themselves exclude the unconfirmed, and that cannot say the Catechism, from the
Sacrament, of what age soever. The first part of the Rubricke anon cited, also
proves this.
2. And I may take it for granted, that it is not bare saying the Catechism,
that they expect, but also a Profession that they own their Baptismal Covenant
to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: And also that it be a Profession
somewhat understood; and not barely to say the words which they understand not,
as a Parot does. And this I prove to be their meaning, (yea and also that they
live a Christian life) from the Prayer in Confirmation, adjoined, which is
this; Almighty and Everlasting God, who have vouchsafed to regenerate these thy
Servants by water and the Holy Ghost, and have given unto them forgiveness of
all their sins; strengthen them, we beseech thee O Lord with the Holy Ghost
the Comforter, and daily increase in them the mani old gifts of Grace, the
Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel, and Ghostly
strength, the Spirit of Knowledge and true Godliness. So that here you see that
the Church of England supposes all those that are to be Confirmed, to have
already the Holy Ghost, and the Spirit of Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel,
Knowledge, and true Godliness: which they beg of God, as to an increase only for
the Confirmed. And sure they do not think that every notorious, ungodly man,
has the Spirit of true Godliness, if he can but say the Catechism; or that
every ignorant person or Infidel has the Spirit of Knowledge, Wisdom, etc. as
soon as he can speak the words which he understands not. And in the following
Prayer they say, We have laid our hands on them, to certify them (by this
sign) of thy favor and gracious goodness toward them. And sure they will not
think to Certify men that know not what Christianity is, or that live not
Christian lives, for this favor of God toward them, merely because they say
the words which they do not understand. So that if they will but let men
understand what they do, and make good what is here expressed, we are agreed
with them that stand for Common Prayer, that such as are unconfirmed be not
admitted to the Holy Communion. And as for the person Confirming, I shall speak
to that anon.

2. De hoc dissidium nullum futurm Sperem, etc. De tempore Confirmationis,
Video bonis viris utriusque partis non displicere, si ejus usus ad aetatem
paulio adultiorem differatur, -- ut parentibus, susceptoribus, and Ecclesiarum
prefectis occasio detur, pueros de fide quam in Baptismo professi sunt,
diligentius instituendi and admonendi. Georg. Cassander, in Consult. de
Confirmatione.
I will next speak of the Papists, because in their words I shall have
opportunity to recite some more of our Own, even those of the Canons Convocat.
London, An. 1603. c. 60. I will pass by Frans. de S. Clara,and such
Reconcilers, lest you say, that is not the common Judgment of the Papists: And
at this time it may suffice to instance in one, that most petulant, insolent
Jesuit, Hen. Fitz Simon, in his Britanomach. lib. 3. cap. 4. page 289, 290,
291. Where he recites the words of our Canon, that seeing it was a solemn,
ancient, laudable custom in the Church of God, observed even from the days of
the Apostles, that all Bishops laying hands on those that were Baptized in
Infancy, and are instructed in the Catechism of the Christian Religion, should
Pray over them, and bless them, which we commonly call Confirmation, -- we will
and ordain that every Bishop, or his suffragane, do in their proper person,
diligently observe this right and custom, in their ordinary visitation. To
which says the Jesuit, What do I hear? -- All this is very Orthodox, very
Catholic, if uttered in good sadness -- And citing the Rubricke
beforementioned, he mentions the Conference at Hampton Court, page 10, 11,
32, 33. That the Doctrine of Confirmation was part of the Apostles Catechism,
rashly rejected by some Churches, but in Calvin's Judgment to be taken up
again, and is ungrateful to the Puritans only, because they may not themselves
administer it. And page 64. he would persuade us, that most certainly the
Bishops borrowed this passage from the Rhemists Test. Annot. in Heb. 6. 2.
against the Puritans. More he adds from Resp. Oxon. ad Libel. supplic. Covell,
etc. and concludes, All this the Formalistes (as he constantly calls that
party) do freely grant us, then which the Catholics themselves, as to the
sound of the words, seem scarce able to think, or speak any thing more
honorable of Confirmation. And that you may see how far he accepts also of
Calvin's concession, he does with ostentation cite the words of Calvin, in Act.
2. and Instit. lib. 4. cap. 19.. 28. that It Is incredible that the Apostles
should use Imposition of hands, but by Chrsts Command: and that it was not an
empty sign, and that it is to be accounted for a Sacrament. So that these two
parties cannot be against us, in the matter of Confirmation, though I know that
the Papists are against us, for laying by their ceremonies and abuse of it.

3. And as for the Presbyterians, they cannot be against it: For 1. The most
eminent Divines of that Judgment, have written for it, of whom I could cite
abundance: But Calvin, Hyperius, and others, cited by Mr. Hanmer already,
sufficiently declare their desires, after the restoring of Confirmation: And
Chemnitius a Lutheran is large for it, and others of that way. 2. And it is so
clearly useful and necessary to the Reforming of distempers in the Church, and
the quiet of the Ministry, and the safe and succesfull exercise of Discipline,
that I know they will heartily consent to it.

4. And for the Congregational party, 1. Some of them have declared their
Judgments for it, in the approving or promoting Mr Hanmer's Book. 2. And I have
spoke with some of the most eminent of that mind, that are for it. 3. And the
solemn Covenant or Profession, which they require of all that enter among them,
as Church Members, does show that they are for it in the substance, though how
far they like, or dislike the sign of Imposition of hands I know not. It is
the want of this, that they are so much offended with in our Parish Church, and
therefore doubtless they will consent.

5. And For Anabaptists, though we cannot expect their full consent, because
they admit not Infants into the Visible Church, and therefore Baptize those
whom we Confirm or Restore, yet doubtless they will like this as next to that
which they suppose to be the right: and because we come as near to them as is
fit and lawful for us to do, it is the likeliest way to abate their censures,
and procure with them so much Peace, Some few also there are, that are
Antipaedobaptists (against baptizing Infants) and yet not Anabaptists (as not
judging it a Nullity, nor to be iterated) And these, one would think we might
live at Peace with.
as in reason may be expected, with men that differ from us in the point of
Infant Baptism. Three sorts of them, I suppose we may meet with: 1. Some that
grant that Infants are Christ's Disciples, Christian, and Vissible
Church Members, but yet think that Baptism is not for their admission, but only
for the Adult. I confess I know of none so moderate, nor am I sure there are
any such, but by hearsay, or conjecture: But if there be, our differences with
these men would be most in the External sign. If they do but as much by
Infants, as the express words of the Gospel do commend, and Christ chid his
Disciples for opposing, that is, if they yield that they shall be offered unto
Christ, and that the Minister of Christ do in his Name, Receive them, lay his
hands on them, and bless them, because of such is the Kingdom of God; and then
baptize them, when at age they make a personal Profession; and if we on the
other side offer them to Christ, and the Minister in his Name accept them by
Baptism, and at age confirm them, upon their personal Covenanting or
Profession, the difference here would be most, that they change the outward
sign, and they use Imposition of hands when we use Baptism, and we use Baptism
when they use Impsition. And with such it were easy for moderate men to hold
brotherly Love and Peace. 2. Some we shall meet with, that deny Infants to be
Visible Church Members, and yet think the Infants of Believers, to have some
promises more then the rest of the world, or at least that they are Candidati
Christianismi, Expectants of a Church State, and are as soon as they
understand any thing, to be bred up as Catechumens in the Church seminaries,
and to be Baptizd, as soon as they are actual Believers. And as far as I
understand them, some of them will consent that they be offered and dedicated
to God in Infancy, and solemnly received, by Ministerial Imposition of hands,
into the state of Expectants. If these men be of peaceable, moderate Spirits,
and agree with us in other matters of Religion (in the substance at least) they
must needs acknowledge, that in the foredescribed practice of Confirmation, we
come so near them, that they cannot deny us brotherly Love and Peace. For I
hope they will not think, that they may lawfully deny these (yea or their
communion) to all that be not punctually of their opinion, against the
Church Membership and Baptism of Infants. 3 And as for all the rest of the
Anabaptists, that hold also the doctrine of Pelagianism, or Socinianism, or
Libertinism, or Familism, or Quakers, or Heathenism, they are not in a capacity
for us, to treat with about Accommodation, or Christian Peace.

But yet, as to all the intemperate, dividing, unpeaceable Anabaptists, that
will but reproach us for our drawing so near them, at least we shall have this
advantage against their reasonings, that we shall be far better able to
manifest the variety of them, then otherwise we could do. For whereas their
common Argument against Infant Baptism is, that it defiles the Church, by
letting in all the Children in the Nation, which must be cast out again, or
the most will be openly vile; and that it defraudeth the Adult of the benefits
of solemn Engagement to Christ; all this will be taken off by Confirmation, and
will lie no more on us, then on themselves, seeing by this means, we can as
faithfully hold the Church door against the Adult, that are unfit to enter into
the number, as they can.

And here I shall entreat the moderate, godly persons among us, that are of the
Episcopal, Presbyterian, Congregational, or Erastian Judgment, yea and the
first and second sort of Anabaptists, to consider how nearly we are all Agreed,
or how near to an Agreement, when we are not aware of it, or live at such a
distance, as if we were not aware of it: And whether it be not our duty to
close upon this Practice, at least much nearer then we are? It is a sad and
fearful case, when men Professing Godliness, and all pretending to a Love of
Unity, Peace and Holiness, shall hate or oppose each other, and separate from
each other, upon a pretense that we differ in things that we are agreed in; and
when such shall persuade the common Enemies, and the ignorant people, that we
differ where we do not: as if the Enemy had not already matter enough of
reproach against us, nor the ignorant matter enough of temptation and offense,
but we must falsely give them more, by seeming to differ when there is no such
thing. And if this becaused, by any men's hating their own Principles, when they
see them in another hand, or yet by hating the Practice of their own
Principles, I leave it to the consideration of sober men, whether such are
liker to the Ministers of Christ, or Satan.

Give me leave here a little, by way of Application, to review what I said
concerning our Accord.

1. How much many Brethren of the Episcopal Judgment, do censure other men's
attempts, for Reforming their Congregations, is too open to be hid. But how
little cause they have to be offended with any Moderate attempts, let their own
forecited Principles be judge. I know that it is the Administration or
Government of the Churches, that seems by the noise of Opposition among us, to
be the greatest point of differences: But as far as I can descern, it is not
so. The Constitution of our Curches is the great difference: It Is a shame to
speak it: we differ most where we are Agreed. I have so much experience of the
minds of Godly Ministers, and private men in England, that I dare boldly say,
would we but all Agree in Practice, in the constituting our Churches of due
Materials, where for ought I know, we are almost all Agreed in Principles,
there were no Probability, that all the rest of our disagreements, would keep
us at a quarter of the distance as we are. Truly the common, honest, godly
people, stick not much on the difference in formalities, and extrinsick modes
of Government: If they hear a Minister pray heartily, preach soundly,
judiciously and powerfully, live holily and righteously, and charitably, and
beat down sin, and set himself to promote true Piety, they are (commonly
where I am acquainted) if not indifferent what form of Government he is for,
yet at least, can easily bear with him, though he differ from them. Let us
have the Work of God well done, and we shall care the less who it is that does
it. The greatest offense, that commonly is taken against Episcopacy is, 1. The
former viciousness, negligence and persecution, that men of that way were
guilty of; and 2. Because men know that a Diocesan Bishop has so much work
upon his hands, that he will certainly leave the far greatest part undone. So
that the Question is not so much who shall do the work, as whether it shall be
done or not.

But now if this Principle were Practiced, in which we are Agreed, about
Confirmation, or at least, a Public Profession, that so our Churches might be
constituted of fit materials, and not be pestered with so many Infidels, or
persons so Ignorant as that they know not Christ; or persons so notoriously
vicious, as that they are openly brutish and profane, and make a very scorn
of Honesty and Godliness, this would do much to heal all the rest of our
Divisions. The Country knows, that the reason why the multitude of Ignorant,
ungodly people are for Episcopacy, is principally because they think that
Government will do as it did, and rather curb the Precisians (as they call
them) then them, and will not trouble them with a Differencing discipline or
administrations, nor urge them so hard to labor for Knowledge, and live a Godly
life. Take away this conceit from them, by the faithful practice of your own
Principles, and they will hate you as much as others. What great satisfaction
would you give to all that fear God among us, if you would Practice but that
which the Rubricke of the Common Prayer Book requires of you, in this one
point? For it requires not only a Learning of the Catechism but also a public
owning of their Baptismal Covenant in the face of the Congregation, and a
solemn Promise to live a holy, obedient life: and this at full age; and after
this they must be Confirmed, before they be admitted to the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. That it may appear how fully we are Agreed in this point, I shall
transcribe some more of the Rubricke of Confirmation, which is as follows.

The Reasons given, why none shall be Confirmed, till they can answer such
questions of the Catechism, as they shall be apposed in, are these, 1. Because
that when Children come to the years of discretion, and have learned what their
Godfathers and Godmothers promised for them in Baptism, they may then
themselves with their own mouth, and with their own consent, openly before the
Curch ratify and confirm the same; and also promise, that by the Grace of God
they will evermore endeavor themselves, faithfully to observe and keep such
things as they by their own mouth and confession have assented unto. 2.
Forasmuch as Confirmation is ministered to them that be baptized, that by
imposition of hands and prayer they may receive strength and defense, against
all temptations to sin, and the assaults of the world and the Devil, it is
most meet to be admitted, when Children come to that age, that partly by the
frailty of their own flesh, partly by the assaults of the world and the Devil,
they begin to be in danger, to fall into sundry kinds of sin. 3. For that it
is agreeable with the usage of the Church in times past: whereby it was
ordained, that Confirmation should be ministered to them that were of perfect
age, that they being instructed in Christ's Religion, should openly Profess
their own Faith, and promise to be obedient to the Will of God.

This, with what was before cited shows, that in this main Point we are agreed
with the Brethren of the Episcopal Judgment, and therefore may expect their
concurrence: and to that end, we desire them to promote the Practice of their
own Principles: and let us not leave the Work of God undone, while we strive
who shall do it or rather who shall not do it. If the Canons allow the Bishops
suffragane to do it, you may bear with others of the same order to do it,
rather then leave it undone.

2. And for the Presbyterians, I entreat them to Consider, 1. H^w much the
faithful practice of this duty, will put by all the offense and
mistaking-reasons of the Erastians, who ask them so earnestly, how they can
prove that people must be examined by the Minister, in order to the Lords
Supper, any more then in order to a day of thanksgiving? I know it is an easy
matter, to prove that a Pastor may call his People to private, personal
Instruction, at any fit season; and therefore before a Sacrament when he sees
just cause: and they are bound to obey him, ordinarily, by virtue of the
general precept, Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that Rule over you, etc. But if you
make this the season and use of your Examination, to admit men out of a state
either of Catechumens, or Infant-members, into the number of Adultmembers, and
never trouble them afterward with Examinations, unless upon some special
occasion, or in your ordinary course of personal Instruction, this would put by
the opposition of gainlayers; and I think, satisfy all of them that have any
sober considerations and love to the prosperity of the Church.

2. And consider also how much this way would facilitate your course of
Discipline: you would be much more clearly satisfied, who are your
Church Members, and of your special charge, and on whom you are specially bound
to exercise Discipline, and to whom you owe your special care and labor: and
your people will be better satisfied then now they are, both of the quality,
and regular reception of members, and who they be, to whom they owe the special
Duty of members, and whom they are more specially bound to communicate their
worldly goods in their necessity. How much uncertainty, confusion,
dissatisfiedness and neglect of duty, remains in those Congregations, where
this work is quite ommitted, is obvious to common observations.

3. And if any should have a jealousy of this design, as seeming to set up
the Congregational way of Covenanting, I entreat such to remember; 1. What an
enemy to the Unity of the Church, and how unbeseeming a charitable Christian, a
spirit of causeless jealousy is. 2. That it should be the more grateful to
you, because it is acceptable to your Brethren: If you are Lovers of Unity and
Peace, you will be far from avoiding a Practice, because those hold it with
whom you would be united, that is, because it tends to Unity; but rather you
will be glad of such a healing means. 3. Consider that it is no more the
Congregational men's Principle, then the Episcopal, Presbyterians and the
Erastians. It is our common Principle, let us therefore make it our common
Practice; an easy, a reasonable way of Agreement. The not Practicing of this
has cast us into confusions; and the Practice of it must be it, that must
restore our Church Order, and heal most of our Divisions. I know it is
agreeable to your Judgments. I move you not to forsake your Principles, but to
Practice them. Do but enrol those only for your Adult Church Members, that are
Confirmed, or Approve, upon a personal credible Profession, of true
Christianity, and consent to live under your Ministerial Discipline; and it
will do more, then you can easily now apprehend, for an Union with your
Brethren, and for the closing of the sad, and long-continued divisions of the
Churches.

3. And to the Congregational Brethren, I may boldly say, it is a Practice so
suitable to your own Practice already, (though I think it is a more Regular
performance of it that I propound, then most have used) that in reason we may
expect your approbation and concurrence. Perhaps you will fear that some of your
Brethren may slubber over the work, and make but a Ceremony of it: But so may
some of your Own mind, if they be personally remiss and negligent, as well as
others. And perhaps others will fear lest you shonld use it over rigorously,
and make it a pretense for excluding many that are not to be excluded. But this
will be according to the Prudence, and Charity of particular Pastors; and is
nothing to those Principles, in which we are all agreed. Only I beseech you in
the fear of God, take heed of giving just occasion of this offense. Be not
Righteous overmuch: Remember how tender Christ is of his little ones: and how he
is displeased with those that keep them from him: and will not break the
bruised Reed: If he carry the Lambs in his arms, and gently drive those that
are with-young, it beseemes not us to turn them out of the fold, or to disowne
them. We are commanded to Receive him that is weak in the Faith, though not to
doubtful disputations, Romans 15. 1. It Is a conjunction of impiety, injustice
and uncharitableness, to thrust back those that Christ would have admitted.
It Is Impiety, to rob Christ of his Church Members, and diminish his Visible
Flock, and wrong those whom he values as his Jewels, and is tender of, as the
apple of his eye. It is great Injustice, to defraud men of their Due, in so
great a matter as his Church Priviledges and helps to Heaven. It Is greater
Injustice, then to turn them out of their houses and lands; for the Benefits
are greater. It Is Incharitableness, to deal so cruelly with us, in matters of
such Consequence. And it is the greater, 1. Because it is none of our own, but
our Masters treasure which we deny them. 2. And because we are Conscious, if we
are Christians indeed, of so much sin and unworthyness our selves, as should
provoke us to deal the more tenderly and compassionately with others. I would
not have you blind under pretense of Charity, nor to let in known swine, for
fear of keeping out the sheep. But remember that when the case is but so
doubtful and difficult, that you cannot know certainly the tares from the
wheat, or cannot make a separation without a danger of pulling up the wheat
with the tares, it is better let both alone till harvest. We will not be
wilfully guilty of men's Lying, or Hypocritical Professions: but if they be
guilty of them, we may yet believe, that God has much service for Hypocrites
in his Church. And the number shall be some honor to him; and some
encouragement to some that are yet without, to draw nearer us. Though it be the
Intention of Christ in Instituting his Ordinances, and the Intention of the
Church, that men be truly Penitent believers before they are Baptized (at age)
or admitted into the number of Adult Church Members, and to the Lords Table;
and so never made the Eucharist an Ordinance which is Primarily and Directly
intended for Conversion of the unregenerate, and which known ungodly men may
seek, and be admitted to, in order to their Conversion: ( Bellarmin himself
confessing that such come into the Church praeter intentionem Ecclesiae) Yet
Christ that knew abundance of unsound Professors would thrust themselves into
the Church, has provided those Ordinances there, which conduce much to their
regeneration: And even the Lords Supper, though instituted primarily for
another use, may be a means of this, to those that yet unworthily drew near it.
However, if we be commanded to invite, yea and compel men to come in to the
Church, that the house of Christ may be filled, we must not be too scrupulous
in admitting them, nor to busy in keeping them back. If any where, it is here
that Christ is like to say, Odi servum nimis diligentem. If men make a Credible
Profession, I dare not refuse them: Nor dare I by my uncharitable Incredulity,
take that for Incredible, which I cannot Prove to be so. His Profession is the
Evidence of his Title with the Church. If I will deny him when he seeks
admittance, I must disprove that Profession, and show it to be invalid. Truly
much experience has taught me, that many that were never commonly noted for
Godliness, and that through bashfulness, or want of expressions, or the
hinderance of carnal friends, and worldly affairs, have lived as strangers to
those that are eminent for the fear of Cod, have yet at last, disclosed
themselves to me, to have been humble, serious Christians many years, as far as
I was able to judge. Especially take heed how you slight or reject people for
want of parts, or gifts, or utterance. I have known excellent Christians, that
through bashfulness are not able to give an account of their knowledge of the
very fundamentals of Religion, to a person whom they much Reverence, and are in
awe of. And I meet with many ignorant people, that in answer to many of my
Questions do seem to be ignorant of Christ himself, who yet show the contrary,
when by other words, I have caused them better to understand me. If people be
but desirous, and willing and diligent, it must be very gross Ignorance indeed,
that must warrant us to refuse them. Many thousands are guilty of wrong
intruding into the Church, when the Ministers and Church were not guilty of
wrong admitting them, but had been culpable if they had refused them.

I speak all this to the Congregational Brethren rather then the rest, because
they are most suspected to be overstrict in their admissions; and because I
would entreat them, to avoid all just occasions of offense and disunion in
their Practice, when we are all so happily agreed in our Principles, in this
great point, of the Necessity of an Approved Profession.

4. And for the Erastians, as in the point of Discipline, they commonly contend
with us upon a mere mistake, thinking we claim a proper Imperium, or
Magisterial Power, when as we claim but the Power of an Ambassador, with such
a kind of Power, as a Physician has over his Patients, or as Plato or Zeno had
in their Schools, (besides the Ministerial Power in Worshipping) so their
Principal quarrel with us, will be removed by the Practice of Confirmation. You
talk much of the Sacraments being converting Ordinances, and against examining
men in order to the Lords Supper, and keeping men away. But are you not Agreed
with us, that a personal understanding, serious Profession of Christianity,
even of Faith, and Repentance (which contains a Renouncing the flesh, the
world, and the Devil) is necessary to those that will (either by Baptism or
Confirmation) be admitted into the Number of Adult-members of the Church? And
do you not grant that the Adult, whether before Baptism or Confirmation, are to
be tried and approved by the Pastors, before they Baptize them, or Confirm
them? Grant us but this (and that the ancient Discipline should be exercised in
the Church, which the Scriptures and all the Church Canons do record) and we
shall be agreed with you in a moment. For Baptism we are no stricter then the
Common Prayer Book, that required that the party (by him self or others) did
Promise and vow 1. To forsake the Devil and all his works, the Pomps and
vanities of the wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. 2. To
believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. 3. To keep Gods holy will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of his life. That so, it may
be truly said of the Baptized, that he is made a member of Christ, a Child of
God, and an inheritour, (or heir) of the Kingdom of Heaven: and of the
Confirmed, we expect but that which is here said to be given and assured in
Baptism, viz. A Death unto sin, and a New birth unto Righteousness; that
being by Nature born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made
the Children of Grace: yea we expect but what is required of persons to be
baptized; viz. Repentance whereby they forsake sin; and Faith, whereby they
steadfastly believe the Promises of God made to them in that Sacrament. All
these are the words of the Catechism in the Common Prayer Book. Yea we expect
but that open Profession before the Congregation, which the forecited Rubricke
of Confirmation requires: no nor always so much as that. So that I may well
suppose, that no Godly, moderate man of the Erastian way, can dissent from us
in this point of Confirmation: And a Consent in this, will be next to a Consent
in all, between us and them.

5. And for the Anabaptists themselves, though we evpect not their Consent, yet
we may well expect their Moderation, and nonopposition, and that as we thus
draw as near them, as possibly (in our present judgment) we can, so they would
lay by all bitterness and reproach, and divisive carriage, and come as near us
as they can. And as now with the more moderate of them, our difference
appears less then many of them imagined, so it may appear, that the distance
in affection and Communion shall be no greater then there is cause. The odium
of Division, and unpeaceableness, has so long lain upon their party, that
methinks they should be willing to have it taken off. And there is no way to
take it off, but their visible amendment: by becoming Lovers and Promoters of
Union, Communion, and Peace among the Churches of Christ. Men will never take
your opinion to be of God, while general experience shall show them, that it
will not stand with that Love, Union, and Communion of the Saints, but engages
almost all that receive it, in Divisions, Opposition, and Reproach, of the
Servants of Christ and his Churches. Though you think your own Opinion right,
let it not so far dispossess you of Charity, and Reason, as to unchurch all
the Churches of Christ, that think otherwise, or to cast off Communion with
the Godly, that are not of your Opinion; as long as we come so near you, as to
take none into the Number of Adult Church Members, but those that are
Confirmed, or Approved by Christ's Ministers, upon their personal, credible
Profession of Faith and Holiness.

Lay all this together, and we may well conclude, that this Practice of
Ministerial Approbation, and Confirmation, (or Restoration) of all that are
admitted into the Number of Adult-Christians, or visible Church Members, and to
their Privileges, is so necessary, and so admirably fitted, both for
Reformation, and Reconciliation, of the Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independants,
Erastian and moderate Anabaptists, and to stop the mouths of the Intemperate,
and of the Papists, that all Magistra^es, Ministers and People, that love the
Churches Purity and Peace, and long to see it cleansed and healed, should gladly
embrace it, and vigorously promote it it.

I Have two things yet more to do upon this Subject. 1. To answer some
Objections, and 2 To give some Directions to all sorts, for the effectual
putting it in execution. The Objections are these.

Object. 1. You will tempt the Anabaptists to say, that this is but a shift of
our own devising, instead of Baptism, lest we should yield to them, when we are
convinced of the Necesity of a personal Covenanting by the Adult.

Answ. There is no Ordinance or Truth of God, that will not be spoken against
by mistaking men: and yet we must not therefore cast them away. Nor is it the
way to vindicate a Truth or Ordinance from reproach, to disclame it, and so to
reproach it actually our selves. Nor is it the way to get advantage of an
adversary, to fly fom him too far into the contrary extreme, but rather to
come as near him as the truth will give us leave. And to the Anabaptists
Objection, we shall give them our reasons against their way, in a fitter place,
and have already done it. We are most certain that the Servants of God of old
(both with Circumsion and without it, Deuteronomy. 29.) did enter their children into
Covenant with God, as well as themselves. And if it be the express Word of God,
that both Infants and Aged should be entered and engaged to him in Covenant, we
will obey his Word, and do both, though the Anabaptists will do but the one. He
must have a hard face, that will deny that it was once the duty of Parents, to
offer their children to God, and enter them into Covenant with him: and when
they have proved that this Duty or Power is recalled, (which I never yet saw
done, no not in Mr. Tombs his last Voluminous Review) then we will forbear
it; but till then it is not men's talk and confident words, that must make a
tender Conscience yield, to omit so great and plain a duty, or give up so great
a Mercy as this is. I am sure that Infants were then no more able to believe
themselves, nor enter themselves in Covenant with God then now: and I am sure
the Parents by Gods appointment, did it for them, offering and engageing them
to God, and that God hereupon is called their God, and they his people: and
that usually the sign of the Covenant was annexed. And I am sure that Parents
have as much Natural Interest in their children now as then: And I never yet
saw where God had acquit us of this duty, or withdrawn this Mercy from us, and
our seed.

Object. 2. The proof which you bring for this Confirmation is so obscure, that
it is not like to be generally received.

Answ. It was generally received in almost all the Churches on earth, till
lately: And as far as I plead for it, it is yet Doctrinally at least owned and
maintained, even by those Churches that practically have disused it Of all the
Christians on Earth, I suppose there is a thousand if not ten thousand for it,
(doctrinally or dogmatically) for one that is against it, if we judge by the
Laws, Confessions, and writings of their guides. Though the Greeks I know do
not own the Popish Confirmation, nor have it not so formally as they should,
and the Papists have corrupted it by their abuse; yet the thing in substance is
owned dogmatically by almost all the Christian world: And they must be very
singular persons that disowne it. 2. And I think the proof that has been
given you is clearer, then you have for the Morality of the Lords day, for
constant family Prayer, for Infant Baptism, and many a holy Duty, which yet we
have sufficient proof for. What would you have plainer? Is there the least
doubt of it, whether a Presonal Profession and Covenanting with God, be
necessary to him that will be taken into the Number of Adult Christians, and
possess their Privileges and Communion? Or whether this Profession must be
approved by the Pastor, of the Church, and known to them that must hold
Communion with him? Prove if you can, that ever one man was admitted among
Adult-Christians, to enjoy Communion with them, without such a personal
Profession. You cannot prove it. If Infant-Covenanting were enough for the
Adult, then Infidels are Believers.

3. Object* But this will make Ministers to be Lords of the Church: when no man
can be taken into the Church, or possess the Privileges of a Christian, till
he be Approved by them This will put a Tyrannical Power into their hands.

Answ. 1. Such a Tyranical Power as every Physician has, who may choose or
refuse his patients; or every Schoolmaster has that may choose or refuse his
Scholars, if he engage not himself to the contrary, as Plato, Zeno, and every
Philosopher did in his School.

2. It is such a Tyranny as Christ has unquestionably set up; and to accuse
him of setting up Tyranny, is an unkind part of them that look to be saved by
him.

3. It is a Power that has Constantly been exercised by the Officers of
Christ, and did not men smell out the Tyranny of it till now? What Prince did
govern the Church doors, and judge who should be admitted, from the days of
Christ, till Constantines days, when the Church was at the purest; yea or ever
after for many a hundred years? Did not all the Apostles, and every Preacher
of the Gospel Baptize those that they convetred, and judge of them whether they
were Baptizable? And did not the Bishops Confirm the Baptized, without
consulting another Power? Half that were admitted into the Church by Baptism,
(and more) for some hundred years after Christ, were the Adult: and of these,
the Pastor required a personal Covenant and Profession. The other half were
their Infants: and for them they required the Parents Profession, and entering
them into Covenant: But still the Pastors were the Judges, who were the
administers.

4. If you think it too much Power for us, I beseech you think it too much work
for us: and dream not that we have a work, and not Power to do it, or discern
what we do. Set others to do it, that you can better trust.

5. Who would you have trusted with this Power? Some body must have it. I have
proved to you fully, that every man must not be the sole Judge of his own
fitness for Baptism or Church Privileges: and that the people or Magistrates
are not the sole or chief Judges: and who should it be but they, to whom it is
committed by Christ in their call to the office of the Ministry?

6. Ministers (as I before showed) have no Tyrannical or Arbitrary Power. For
Christ has tied them by a Law, who to admit, and whom to reject. And if they
disobey this Law, the Magistrate may correct them: So that in the exercise of
this Tyrannical Power, every Minister is under the lash of the Magistrates
violence, (if he grossly offend) whereas none of the people are under any
violence, or force from us to obey us; but if all of them disobey us and rebel,
it is their own loss, and we have no remedy. This is the Tyranny.

7. Lastly, If you think it (as it is) so great a Power, for us to judge of
men's Profession and fitness for Church Privileges, let it awaken you the more,
to get the wisest, ablest men you can for the Ministry, that are fit for so a
great trust. If the best that are to be got, are not in the Office, beshrew our
Governors, and the choosers. And if you do not cast us all out, if you can put
fitter men into the place, that are meeter for the trust, beshrew you for your
negligence: we give you no thanks for it. But if you have no fitter for this
work and trust, will you cast it upon unfitter or on none? It is a great trust
for a Physician to be trusted with your lives, and a Schoolmaster and Tutour
with your Children? But what of that? Will you therefore trust the good women,
or common neighbors about you with them; yea or the Magistrate himself. Or
will you have no Tutours or Physicians? Or rather will you not be the more
careful to keep our Empiricks and unworthy persons, and get the ablest and
faithfulest that you can. O unthankful men, that grudge us the Power of
laboring and spending our selves for their Salvation, and judging, where we
must act!

4. Object. Is it not the use of the Lords Supper to Confirm us; and do not men
there renew their Covenant and Profession? What need is there then of any more?

Answ. 1. You would think much, if at the Lords Supper we should openly call
each man to a personal, explicit Profession of his Faith, and Covenanting with
God: And indeed it would be a tedious, as well as unseasonable work. It is but
a general or joint Profession of all together, that is there renewed: and
notwithstanding that, there may for ought we know, be many a one there that is
an Infidel, and knows not what Christianity is. 2. The Lords Supper is the
food of the Soul, confirming by way of nutrition and augmentation; and
therefore you must show that you are alive, before you may partake of it. It is
a feasting upon Christ, and with him in his family, and at his Table: It is a
work of Communion with Christ and with his Saints: It is one of the highest
privileges of the Church: And therefore you must produce your little, before
you can lay claim to it. If a man must be admitted to the Lords Supper, without
any precedent, personal Profession or Covenanting with God, upon supposition,
that by the act of Receiving he does all this; then men that know not whether
there be a Christ, or what he is, may be admitted: For multitudes of such there
are, that in Infancy were baptized: And I know not by seeing him receive,
whether he know or believe any thing of Christianity. If a man converted at Age
from Heathenism, may not be admitted to the Lords Table without a personal
profession in Baptism, then neither may such as are baptized in Infancy, be
admitted without a personal Profession, in Confirmation, or such as is without
any other Baptism. Our Parents Profession will not serve our turn, in stead of
our own when we come to age. And therefore this Objection is vain, unless
Infidels may be admitted to Communion, and all be common. But I need not speak
much of this, because I shall have few such Objectours to deal with: Even the
Papists themselves are many of them against promiscuous communion, though the
Jesuits of late, have fitted almost all their work, to their man pleasing
design: See Joh. Thauleri flores. cap. 23, and 24 page 257, etc. (An old
Puritan, among the Papists) And they make confession also prerequisite.

Object. 5. According to our arguing, Confirmation is not necessary to those
that were Baptized at full Age; and therefore it is not necessary to any, if
not to all.

Answ. I have given some Reasons why it should be used, with all that have
opportunity after Baptism; but I have proved it more Necessary to those that
were baptized in Infancy. And if it were Necessary to no other, it would not
follow, that it is not Necessary at all, because not to all.

6. Object. Is it not better take up with an Implicit Profession and
Covenanting, then make so great a trouble to our selves, and disturbance among
the people, as this will make?

Answ. 1. Me thinks, not only the face of the Roman Church, but of our own,
might by this time have afforded us satisfying experience, what Implicit Faith,
and Implicit Professions are, and to what they tend. Peruse the forementioned
Evils of this course, and look upon the state of our people, where you may see
them in existence, and then judge whether this Objection be answered.

2. An Implicit Profession, is the lowest and least, that in any case of
extremity or necessity can be thought tolerable, and accepted by God, and
consistent with the life and being of a Church. And shall we deliberately
choose to offer God the worst, the least, the lowest that is possible to find
acceptance? Nay he will have the best, as he deserves the best, or he will not
accept it, when we have it to give: Shall we think that in a case of freedom,
the same will be accepted, which Necessity only can excuse? Or shall we be
content that our Churches have as many diseases as will consist with life and
being?

3. An Implicit Profession makes or proves men but Implicit^ly Christians. Such
dumb uncertain signs, do leave us in So great uncertainty of the thing
signified, that it seems but a very mocking of God (that will not be mocked)
when we have opportunity for an open Intelligible Profession, and will not use
it, or require it.

4. It is against Nature for a man that has a Tongue in his head, to refuse to
utter his mind any other wise then by dumb shows, and yet expect to be
understood and accepted. What is the Tongue made for but to express the mind?
Indeed if a man be dumb, and can neither speak not write, it is more tolerable
to take an uncertain sign from such a man; then from another that has the
use of Tongue or pen.

5. It is a very Implicit denying of Christ, which many call an Implicit
Profession. If a man that has a Tongue in his mouth, shall refuse to Profess
the Christian Faith and quarrel with the Minister that calls him to it, and
say, we shall have no other Profession from him then to come to Church, and put
the bread and wine into his mouth, and not to deny Christ expressly, I leave it
to any reasonable man, whether there be not so much of an Implicit denying
Christ in this refusing to confess him, when they are called to it by their
Pastors, whom God has commanded them to obey, and that in a case and season,
when all the Church has required it, or taught it to be due.

6. It is contrary to the honor of Christ, and the very Nature of
Christianity, for men to take up with Implicit, uncertain Professions, when
we have opportunity of more open free Professions. He is not a Master to be
ashamed of. And he will have no servants that will not confess him before men,
even in the hazard of life; much more in days of the freedom of the Gospel:
As with the heart men must believe to Righteousness, so with the mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans 10. 10. What reason have we to whisper
or draw back, in a cause of such a nature and weight as this.

7. Shall we thus teach our people to esteem Christianity, as an unobservable
thing, by no more observing it? The Solemnity of men's Transition into the
Adult-state of actual Believers, does make it more Observable in the eyes of
men; and they will see that there is more in it, then commonly is now esteemed.
I find by experience that our people hate no preaching more, then Differencing
Preaching, which leaves or shuts them out from the number of the Sanctified,
and sets them as one the left hand, in the face of the Congregation, and
judges them before the time: but feign they would have Ministry confound and
jumble all together: And then you may make them as great sinners as you will,
so you will make them no worse then the Justified, that are forgiven, and shall
be saved. And so in Practice, they love no differencing ways: But shall we so
far gratify the Devil and the flesh? No: we must labor to make the difference
between Christ's Servants and the world, as conspicuous as we can! that the
Consciences of poor sinners, may rather be wakened, then cheated by us: And
therefore we should choose the most solemn Transition, and Record the names of
the Confirmed, and let the people be brought to a public Observation, of the
Necessity of Faith and Holiness, while the Covenant and Profession of it is
made so Necessary.

8. That is the best means, that is fittest to attain the End; The End of a
Covenant is to Oblige, and the End of a Profession to declare the mind: And I
pray you which is fittest for these Ends: An Express Profession and Covenant,
or a dumb uncertain sign, by coming to Church; paying Tithes? etc.

9. Such dumb Professions are less tolerable now, because we have many in our
Assemblies that we know to be no Christians. I know of many that will hear,
that believe no life to come, and secretly make a scorn of Christ and
Scripture, and many more that know not what Christianity is, as is aforesaid.
Now shall we take up with such signs of Christianity, as we see and know are
commonly used by Infidels, when we may have better?

10. It is essential to a Profession to be in some measure explicit: for
Profiteri is but palam vel public fateri; It is no Profession if it be not, or
pretend not to be, an Expression of the mind: And therefore to be Implicit and
not Express, is so far to be against the very Nature of the Profession; in that
measure as your Profession is Implicit (as it is called) and not Express, in
that measure it is no Profession at all.

Object. 7. But when you have the most express Covenant or Profession, you are
not sure that it is true, and that the man is a believer at the heart.

Answ. 1. I am sure that it is Truly a Profession, that is, a Pretended sign of
the mind, though I am not sure that it is True Profession, that is, a True
infallible sign of the mind: I can know the metaphysical, though not the
Moral Truth of it. And then I can be sure that I do my duty, and take up
according to the Directions of Christ. It is his work to judge the heart
immediately, as being his prerogative to know it: but it is my work to judge of
the Credibility of the Profession. 2. And what if I have no infallible
Certainty? Must I therefore throw up all, and make the Pastoral
Church Government to be void, and cast open the Vineyard of Christ to the
wilderness, and not so much as require a Credibility, because we cannot have an
Infallibility? This may not be.

Object. 8. But this will encourage tbe Anabaptists and Congregational, in
their Express Covenantings, by our coming so near them?

Answ. 1. I may better say, you will make men Anabaptists, and drive them too
far, by your looseness, and wilfully shunning plain duty. How can weak
professors be drawn to think well of that party, which they see do shun so
needful a Work of God? 2. Love and Peace will teach all Christians to say,
that it is the best for Unity and healing of our breaches, to come as near
dissenting Brethren as we may, and no^ to fly the further from them. At least
we may not run from truth and duty, that we may be unlike our dissenting
Brethren. 3. And I take it to be my duty to tell this alowd to the Christian
world, that after long contest with the Anabaptists, and opposition of their
ways, I am grown (as I confidently think) to this discovery of the mind of God
in suffering them among us; that he had this great truth and duty, to which he
saw it necessary to awake us; the Church having been so lamentably defiled,
Discipline made an impossible thing, and men's Salvation grievously hindered, by
the common secret, unobserved transition of all people into the name, and
number, and Privileges of Adult-Christians; therefore did God permit these
men, to step too far on the other side, that the noise might be the greater,
and his call the more observable; so that they are his messengers, calling
aloud to England, and all other Christian Churches in Europe, to keep the
door, and repair the hedge, and no more to take an Infant Baptism, and
Profession of our Parents, as a sufficient Evidence of the Title of the Adult,
to the Name, or Place, or Priveledges of Christians; but to give them Infant
Privileges upon the Parents Profession; but to require of them a sober,
serious Profession and Covenanting by themselves, in owning their Baptismal
Covenant, before we number them with Adult-Christians: And that God has
suffered the Anabaptists to make such a stir among us* will prove a mercy to
us in the End, if we have the wit and grace to learn this, upon this
troublesome occasion; and then the Reformation will do us more good, then ever
the Anabaptists did us harm. But if we will not learn, nor obey Gods call, we
must yet look to be molested by them more, or else to do and suffer worse.

Object. 9. But if you will not take a non-renouncing of Christ, and Infant
Baptism as sufficient, without a Personal Covenant and Profession, you may on
the same grounds call men every week to such a Profession, because that the
former Profession shows not what they afterward are, but what then they are.

Answ. 1. The case is quite another: In your instance, it is but the
continuance of the same Profession and Condition that is requisite: And I am
bound to take it as continued, while I have no Evidence to question it, and see
the performance of it, as far as belongs to my cognizance. But in my case the
Conditions and the Professions are not the same: A new Condition of Right; is
necessary to the Adult, which they had not at all in their Infant Baptism. Then
they entered upon their Parents Faith or Profession; but at age they must
necessarily have a Faith, or Profession of their own, or else they actually
cease to be Christians.

2. And yet let me add, that frequent Professions of Faith, and renewing
Covenant with God, have ever been used in the Church; both before Christ's
Incarnation and since, and indeed, the Lords Supper does import it: And for my
part, I think it a very convenient, edifying course, to have the Articles of
our Faith every day repeated, as the Belief of that Church, and the people to
stand up at it, to signify their consent; so be it, you will not take up with
this silent Profession alone, and exclude a more explicit one, when it is
requisite. But this fitly signifies our standing to the first.

Object. 10. But this will cast you upon the same difficulties which you Object
to the Anabaptists; you will not know at what Age to take men for
Adult-Christians.

Answ. 1. We shall not accept them for their Age, but for their Profession: And
we can easily tell when they offer themselves to trial and Profession, and
desire the Communion of the Church: As the Ancient Churches could tell when
their Catechumens were to be baptized.

2. And for the time when we must judge their Infant Church State to cease, if
they own not the Covenant personally, we cannot set a certain year, nor is it
necessary: but when their Infancy cease, then their Infant-state cease:
That is, when they come to the full or competent use of Reason: But then
observe, 1. That if they be called at such a time to profess their Faith, and
own their Covenant, and refuse it, then we must judge them refusers of
Christianity unless the Reasons of the Refusal allows another judgment. 2. Or
if they will fully neglect for a considerable space, to own their Baptismal
Covenant, and to seek a standing among the Adult-Christians, it is a strong
presumption that they are Backsliders. 3. If they only suspend their personal
Profession at age, we must only suspend our Judgment, till we have some light
to discern the cause: and cannot be sure that there are Deserters or Apostates.
4. But we are sure that they are nor to be numbered by the Church among Adult
Christians, till they have produced the Evidence of their Title, which is no
other then A Credible, Personal Profession. So that it is easy to know when any
such person is to be admitted, and publicly owned as an Actual Believer,
though it be not so easy to discern of all, before that time, whether they are
to be reckoned as Desertours or not. He that wilfully neglects to come among
the Adult Christians, long after he has the full use of Reason (which is not
with all at the same age) is to be much suspected, at least: And commonly about
16, or 17, or 18, years of age, is the time when we have reason to expect that
they should seek the Communion and Privilidges of the Adult: For about that
age, they have a competent use of Reason.

Object. 11. But if you admit them into the Church in Infancy, say the
Anabaptists, you will be obliged to excommunicate them all, that prove ungodly
when they come to age, and not to let them silently pass out of the Church
again.

Answ. Excommunication is either an excluding them from all Relation of members
to the Catholic Church, or from the actual Communion of the Church, or from
both. The former we can do but Declaratively. In the latter we also adjoyne the
charge of God, for the execution of the sentence. But those that were never
personal Professors of Faith, nor admitted into the Communion of
Adult-Christians, are not fit to be cast out of it: And this is the common use
of Excommunication, to remove those, as unfit, from the Communion of the Adult,
that once were in it, and forfeit that Communion: which cannot belong to them
that never were in it. And for our Declaring them Desertours or Apostates, we
may do it upon just occasion, but we are not bound to do it publicly by all
that are guilty; this being not the Excommunication, that is so enjoined in the
Scriptures. Where do you find that the Church in Scripture-times or after, was
wont to Excommunicate Apostates? And yet Apostates were formerly of the Church.
It is those that hang on, and pretend still to be of the Church, and intrude
into the Actual Communion of it, that we must cast out, when they deserve it.

Object. 12. But if they cease to be Christians, you must Baptize them again,
if you will receive them.

Answ. No such matter: The Anabaptists themselves will not Rebaptize an
Apostate, when he returns to the Church. He is to be received by Confession
and Absolution, and not by Baptism. If a Christian turn Turk, and afterward
Return, he is not to be Rebaptized.

Object. 13. But by this means you will unchristen the people, and then they
will be exasperated, and turn Heathens, or hearken to any seducers that will
mislead them

Answ. 1. No: we will unchristen no man: but do that honor to Christianity,
and that right to the Church and the Souls of men, as to make a difference
between Christians and Infidels, and that somewhat wider then the bare Names.
He that is a Christian shall be more encouraged by this course, and he that is
not, cannot be unchristened by us. If men will not unchristen themselves, they
need not fear lest the just trying and approving of their Christianity should
unchristen them. 2. How little honor it is to Christ and the Church, to have
the number made up, by such as we would disallow; I have showed you before, and
also what a mischief that is to themselves, which some would give them as a
benefit. 3. If Magistrates and Ministers do their duty, (yea or but Ministers
alone) they will better be kept from Heathenism, or other evils in the state of
Expectants and Catechumens, then in the state of Church Members, where
Discipline will make them mad.

Object. 14. But at least your design looks as if you would keep the Children
of all such unchristened; and what work would that make?

Answ. I meddle not with that Question, but leave every man to his own Judgment.
And if I did my self keep off such children, I think it would prove but very
few. For 1. I would refuse none of the Parents that had aliquid Christi, that
made but a Credible Profession of Christianity. 2. I am persuaded that this
Practice would bring almost all the people to a tolerable Profession, when
they know it is expected, and what lies on it. 3. Upon experience now I find,
that both the Parents are seldom so bad as to be incapable of offering their
child to God, (in the Judgment of the Church) Nay commonly here the more one of
the persons is in scandalous sin, the more the other hates it: And they are
seldom both grossly ignorant. And those that were delayed on these terms, would
receive no wrong by it. Gods way is the best. The Children of unbelievers must
not be inchurched in ways of our devising, nor respected before the honor of
Christ, and the common good of the Church of God. But of this I say again, I
interpose not my Judgment, but leave each man to his own.

Object. 15. But though Confirmation be a duty, yet none but Bishops have power
to do it: and therefore it is not a lawful thing for Presbyters to attempt it.

Answ. Leg. Grotii, Epist. 162. ad Bignon: p. 397. Clem. Roman. against a lower
Episcopacy, then ours.
1. What mean you by Bishops? It is a word that has, by men's application, got
so many significations, that we may well expect that you give us the Definition
of a Bishop, before you make him the matter of your Dispute. And yet I have
read so many Books that Dispute for Episcopy, and so few that tells us what
they mean by it; that I must needs say, that most of them lose their labor,
with such as I. If by a Bishop you mean, such as our English Bishops were, or
any fixed Pastor of many particular Churches, I deny that such were ever
Instituted by Christ, much less have they the sole Power of such
administrations.

2. Do you mean that it is by Gods Law, or the Laws of men, that Diocesan
Bishops only may Confirm? Petav. him self says, Dissert. Eccles. lib 1. cap.
3. page 35. Ignorare non potuit Hieronimus quibusdam in locis absente Episcopo
Presbyteros idem illud Sacramentum Confirmationis dedisse* quod de Aegypto
testatur commentarius, etc. And p. 36. he says, Constat olim solos Episcopos
ordinario jure tam baptismum, quam paenitentium reconciliatione administrasse.
So that they may then as well forbid Presbyters to Baptize.
If by Gods Laws, prove it, and we shall quickly yield. But that it is very
unlikely you should do. If you say that only the Apostles had this Power, I
Answer, 1. That then fixed Diocesan Bishops had none of it: For the Apostles
were none such. 2. Then Timothy, Titus, ^paphroditus, etc. when they pretend to
have been Bishops, had it not. 3. Ananias was no Apostle, that laid hands on
Paul, that he might receive the Holy Ghost: of this more anon. But if you say,
that this Power is given to the Bishops merely by the Laws of men; then either
by the Laws of Magistrates, or of Bishops. For the former, we know of none in
force with us, to that purpose; and if they were, it is a work without their
line, which Christ has done before them, and not left to them, to describe the
Offices of his Church. And for Bishops Canons, we know no Power that any
Bishops ever had, to make standing Laws for the Universal Church; nor of any
such Laws that are obligatory to us: And the Opponents themselves do violate
the Canons of General Councils without scruple (as the 20th of 1. Con. Nic. and
abundance more) and how can they oblige us more then them?

3. Presbyters have the Keys of the Kingdom: Therefore they may takein, and
Confirm thereby.

4. Presbyters may by Baptism take in members into the Universal Church, and
judge of their fitness in order thereto: therefore much more may they Confirm
them, and judge of their fitness in order thereto.

5. Its granted, that Presbyters may Absolve, (which was ordinarily by
Imposition of hands) yea, says Bishop Usher, the Deacons were sometime allowed
it: therefore Presbyters may Confirm: Or if you yielded but Absolution, you
would yield much of what we contend for, seeing so many violate their Baptismal
Covenant, that Absolution for Restoring of them will be as necessary as
Confirmation.

6. Hierome, that makes Presbyters and Bishops by Gods Law to be the same, does
yet according to the custom of the Church say, that What does the Bishop except
Ordination, which the Presbyter does not: therefore he supposed that Presbyters
might Confirm.

7. The same Hierome expressly says, that Imposition of hands was reserved to
the Bishop, for the honor of Priesthood, rather then by Divine Ordinatlon:
Hier. cont. Lucifer. Ad honorem potius sacerdotii, quam ad legis necessitatem.
Alioqui si ad Eposcopi tantum imprecationem Sp. Sanctus de^luit, lugendi sunt,
qui in vinculis aut castellis aut in remotioribus locis, per presbyteros and
Diacones Baptizati, ante dormierunt, quam ab Episcopis inviserentur. Clem.
Alexand. Pedag^g. 3. Cui imponet Presbyter manus.
Therefore it is but a humane institution.

8. The Episcopal Divines, and other Writers of their side, do commonly
maintain the validity of Presbyters Ordination, viz. that in case of Necessity
it is lawful, and where there is no flat Necessity, it is not a nullity where
it is irregular. Ambros. in Ephesians. 4. Apud Aegyptum presbyteri consignant, si
prae^en; non sit Episcopus.
I cited (Christian Concord, page 53, 54, etc.) many Bishops and their
defenders, Grotius Epist. cords. 154. page 382. Si recte expendantur quae ipse
Aurelius, de rebus nec (...), nec prohibitis disserit, non mirum si in iis
alibi atque alio tempore alii fuerint mores; non erat cause satis, curtantis
animis, tam odiosis illationibus sta quaestio tractaretur. Nam etiamsi aut
baptizatus nunquam ungeretur, aut ungeretur tantum baptismi tempore, baptizante
etiam presbytero. Add etiamsi nulla subsequeretur manuum imp sitio, donis
illis quae per manuum impositionem conferebant Apostoli pridem ressantibus, non
ideo periret honor praesidentiae ^piscopalis, quae tunc etiam in Ecclesia fuit
cum Episcopi and Presbyteri nomen indiscriminatim usurparetur, and cum
praeji^entia illa, non Electione, quae Alexandris primum fieri (...), Macco
mortu^, sed participati consensus gradu deferretur.
that thus justify the Protestant Churches, that have no Bishops; as Dr.
Field, Bishop D^wname, Bishop Jewel, Saravia, Bishop Alley, Bishop Pilkington,
Bishop Bridges, Bishop Bilson, Grotius, Lord Digby, Mr. Chisenhal, Bishop
Davenant, Bishop Prideaux, Nowel, Bishop Andrews, Mr. Chillingworth; to whom I
add (to make up twenty) 17. Bishop Bramhal, of Schism. 18. And Dr. Steward. in
his Answer to Fountains Letter. 19. Dr. Fern, 20. And Bishop Usher, in his
Judgment lately published. Abundance more might easily be added: but Mr.
Mason's Book in vindicacation of the Ordination of the foreign Reformed
Churches, may serve instead of more.

9 We have no Bishop to do it: and therefore it must be done by Presbyters: Or
we have none that we know of, and non esse, and non apparere; are to us all one.

10. Presbyters may Impose hands in Ordination, and ever did here in England:
Therefore much more in Absolution and Confirmation.

11. King Charles, by the advice of his Doctors in the Isle of Wight, reserved
only Ordination, and not Confirmation and Absolution to the Bishops.

12. Presbyters are Governors of the Churches, which are their Pastoral
charge; and are called Rectors: (see Bishop Vshers, Reduction of Episcopacy,
etc. proving it) Therefore they may do this, which is an act of Government or
Guidance of the particular Church.

13. Presbyters must teach and oversee the people as their charge, and deliver
them the Sacrament: Therefore they must judge to whom they must do it.

14. A Diocesane Bishop is incapable of doing it faithfully: Could one man Try,
Approve and Confirm faithfully, all the Souls in 200 or 300 Churches? It Is
known that here they did not: and it is plain they cannot. If they lay hands on
them without Trial, upon the Presbyters word, then 1. This yields, all save
the Ceremony, which we require. 2. And it is a venturing their practices on the
judgment and fidelity of other men; who may send them Infidels to be Confirmed
for ought they know. But if they Try themselves, they are never able to do for
so many, in season: some will be old men, before the Bishop will have leisure
to Confirm them; and many a hundred die without it. Nor do they know the people
as their Pastors do.

15. The Doctrine and Practice of the Church of England, under the Bishops, is
for the Power of Presbyters herein as far as we desire: For 1. The Presbyters
of Curates, had by the Rubric, the Trial and Approbation of those, that were
sent to the Bishop for Confirmation. 2. The Bishops accordingly took them on
their words, with a Certificate, and used not to try them themselves, but only
to Impose hands with Prayer and blessing. 3. And this by the Canon, their
suffragane also might do; which yields that a Presbyter may do it.

16. The Pope himself does yield that Presbyters may do it. And Gregory's
Epist. to that end, is put into their Canon Law, Did. 95. 1, part. Baptizatos
etiam Chrismate eos tangere conceditur, and Gregory's Epist. to Januar.
Calaritan. is annexed: By which it appears that they took his former
prohibition so ill, that he was feign to reverse it. And though c. 11. he be
forbidden Infantes signare, in the presence of the Bishop, without his command,
yet so he was forbidden also to administer the Eucharist, yea and the Rural
Presbyters, might not give the cup or bread, in presence of the City
Presbyters, c. 12. ex Council. Neocaesar. 1. c. 13. But certainly this proves
neither the one nor the other, out of their Power.

17. The Papists commonly confess, that Presbyters may ex dispensatione,
Confirm by Imposition of hands: so Bellarmine himself. And the Shool-men
ordinarily make it an act of the Presbyters Power.

18. If it be proper to Bishops, then either because of their Order or
Jurisdiction: Not of Order: For they are of the same Order with Presbyters, as
is frequently confessed by Bishops and Papists themselves, and differ but in
degree: Not of Jurisdiction: for it is no more an act of Jurisdiction to
Confirm, then to Baptize or give the Eucharist.

19 Protestant Divines are commonly agreed, that Confirmation is not proper to
Bishops, but may be used by Presbyters. For 1. France, Belgia, Helvetia,
Denmark, Saxony, Sweden, the Palatinate, the Countries of the Duke of
Brandenburge, of the Duke of Brunswike, the Land-grave of Hassia, with the rest
of the Protestant Princes of Germany, and also Hungary, Transylvania, the
Protestants in Poland, etc. besides Scotland, and so many in England, are all
without Bishops, having put them down: And though three or four of these
countries have superintendents, yet they make not Confirmation proper to them.
2. The English Bishops, ordinarily maintain against the Papists, that
Presbyters may Confirm, and therefore we have their concurrance, as in Dr.
Field, Bishop Downam, Mason, and many others is apparent.

20. If all this will not satisfy you, for Peace sake, we will forbear
Imposition of hands, which you suppose to be the Bishops proragative; and we
will be content to do no more, then Presbyters always did in Baptizing the
Adult; even to judge and Approve of the Capacity of those whom they Baptized:
and so will we only judge of the Profession and Capacity of those that we take
charge of, and own as Adult-Christians, and must administer the Lords Supper
to: And this common reason cannot deny us.

Object. 16. But if Presbyters may do it, yet so cannot you; For you are no
Presbyters, as wanting Episcopal Ordination: or else schismatical, as having
cast them off to whom you were sworn.

Answ. 1. In my second sheet for the Ministry, and my Christian Concord, I have
answered already: And for fuller answer, I refer you to the London Ministers
Vindication, to Mr. Mason's Vindication of the Ordination of the Protestant
Churches, etc. If Bishop Bancroft himself, as Dr. Bernard mentions, in Bishop
Usher's Judgment, and the rest of the Prelates, were against the reordaining
the Scots Ministers, me thinks, few should be so much more intemperate, then
that intemperate Prelate, as to judge their Ordination Null. And if the Papists
in the Canon Law, do judge that in some cases an excommunicate man's Ordination
is valid, me thinks Protestants should not be worse to the Church then they:
Especially those that are for the Necessity of an uninterrupted succession of
justly ordained Pastors; who must (I dare boldly say) derive their succession
from unmeeter, and more incapable hands, then English Pastors.

2.
No more is necessary to the Authority and just ordination of a Pastor, but
that he enter according to the Laws of God; which Laws require us to submit to
the trial, of our Rulers and Brethren, Magistrates (in some cases) and
Pastors; and to come in according to the best means, for Election and
Approbation, that are then to be had and used; but they bind us not to come in
by ways Impossible, nor to see that our Antecessours through all generations
have been lawfully ordained.

3. I have showed already, and God willing shall more fully do it, in a
Disputation on that subject, that our English Episcopcay was not that which God
established, but intollerably inconsident with it: And therefore neither are
men the less Ministers for being without their Ordinations, nor are they
Schismatics for consenting to their deposition.

4 As for breaking Oaths of Canonical Obedience to them, I think but few among
us did take any such oath, and therefore broke none.

5. Many among us were Ordained by Bishops, and some that were Ordained took
not that oath: and others that did, yet obeyed them while they stood, and what
could they do more.

6 The younger sort of Ministers had no hand in taking down the Bishops; and
therefore are not scismatical thereby: And that their Ordination is no Nullity,
Bshiop Usher and other twenty Prelatical witnesses forecited will testify.

Object. 17. But on the contrary side it will be said, that you would set up
the Popish Sacrament of Confirmation again.

Answ. The Papists have made another thing of it: They use it to Infants, and
so will not we: They make a proper Sacrament of it: They make the visible
signs to be Anointing and Crossing, in the name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; and they make Imposition of hands no part of it, but cast it off,
(though in words they own it) They adjoyn a box of the ear, to signify, the
opposition that Christ's Soldiers must expect: Vid. Chamier. l. 4. de Sacra.
cap. 10, and 11.
They make it to imprint I know not what indelible Caracter, and to give grace
ex opere operato: They make it to be an entering of us into Christ's militia
abusing Baptism, as being but an entering us into his Family, and not his
warfare: All this is nothing to that, which I am pleading for, and which the
protestant writers do wish for.

Object. 18. At least you will revive the Prelatical Confirmation again, which
the old non-conformists were against.

Answ. We will revive nothing of it, but what was good: The corruption we shall
omit. They did it but on a few, (contrary to their own Laws) but we would have
it used to all. They Confirmed children that understood not what they said: But
we shall expect an understanding Profession of Faith. They did it in a hurry as
an idle Ceremony: we would have it done deliberately and with great reverence.
The Bishop only did it with them, that knew not whom he did Confirm, but
ventured on other men's words, or without: But we would have the Pastor do it,
that knows the persons, and has time to try them, having one Parish and not
two hundred to oversee.

Object. But, at least, the Papists and Prelates will be hardened or encouraged
by your coming so near them.

Answ. I will not cast off the Work of God, because that any will make it an
occasion of sin. And I take it to be the more my duty and not the less,
because it tends to Peace with all. I take it not to be any part of my
Religion, to study how to cross my brethren, or forbear a practice (yea so
necessary a duty) because they like it. I detest that principle and spirit. I
rather fear, lest their own selfconceitedness, interest, prejudice and
discontent, will make them dislike it.

Object. 19. What have we to do with the sign, when the thing that occasioned
the use of it is ceased? Imposition of hands was at first only for the gift of
Miracles.

Answ. 1. It was much for the gift of Miracles, but not only. And if the giving
of one sort of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost be ceased; yet the other, more
excellent and necessary gifts continue; and therefore no reason the sign
should cease, because it was not appropriated to the gift of Miracles. But 2.
If any man scruple either the sign of Imposing hands, or the Name of
Confirmation, we desire him his liberty: these are not the things that we
contend for: Let him but yield us that which I have showed to be most Certain,
and most useful to the Church; that is, a solemn Transition out of an Infant
Church State into an Adult, under Approbation of the Pastors, and the just
cognizance of the Church; and let him call it what he will, I shall not much
contend with him about the name, or sign of Imposition.

Object. 20. Abundance of Ministers are raw, imprudent young men, and not fit
to manage so great a trust: and so it will mar all; while some are so strict,
that they will refuse all that seem not godly to their censorious minds; and
some will be loose man-pleasers, and let in all, and turn it but to an
unprofitable formality.

Answ. 1. While men are men, they will act as men. If we shall have no
Church-Ordinances and Administrations, till you are secured from humane abuse
of them, you must shut up the Church doors, and give up all; and shut up your
Bibles, till Papists and Infidels can find no matter of cavelling at the
Translation. 2. As I said before, this indeed should provoke the Magistrate to
set a faithful guard on the Church doors, that seeing the Pastors have so
great a Trust, and the danger of abusing it is so great, the worthiest should
be chosen that can be had. And if it be not so, you reproach your selves, that
are choosers and Pastors, and have the Rule. Why choose you not better if you
know where to find them? 3. This Objection, is as much against our Judging of
those that are to be Baptized, which yet the Ministers that did Baptize, have
ever done, and were you not Baptized already, we must admit you, and judge who
is to be admitted, as the ancient Preachers of the Gospel did. 4. The Episcopal
Brethren had more wit, then to be against Confirmation, because one man may use
it too strictly, and another too loosely: The Congregational men are not
against Church-^ovenants or Professions, because one Pastor or Church may be
too strict; and another too loose in judging of men's Piety: The Presbyterians
are not against Trying men before admission to the Lords Supper, nor against
Discipline, because one Eldership may be too strict, and another too loose. The
Anabaptists are not against Rebaptizing men at age, because one Minister may
refuse the fit, and another may take in all that come. Why then should a
possibility of Ministers miscarriage, cause you to be more against this, then
all the rest? 5. If Ministers be Associated, they will be accountable for such
miscariages; and the Advice and Admonition of their Brethren, may do much to
prevent or reform such abuses: And the faithful people of their charge, will
somewhat observe them, and bid Archippus take heed to the Ministry that he has
received in the Lord, that he fulfill it, Col. 4. 17. 6. As long as you are not
forced into our charge, but have your Liberty to choose your Pastor, (as now
it is) you have the less reason for this complaint. If the Laws of Zeno or
Plato be thought too strict in their Schools, as long as the Scholars may
choose to come there, and all volunteers, they may the better bear it. 7. As I
said before, the trust must be put in some or other to judge: And where can it
be fitter then in them, who by study are prepared, and by office appointed by
Christ hereunto. 8. If you will give a Presbytery, or one Eminent Minister in
every Market Town, or visiters of your own appointment, a special care to
oversee the rest in doing this, and such like works, I shall be no gainsayer,
so the work be but done: the more inspection and circumspection the better. 9
If one Minister refuse the fit, there be many more that will not. 10 Your
Commissioners may have power moderately to correct the M^nisters abuses in
their work.

But because I perceive that Rulers are unreasonably jealous, lest the Pastors
of the Church will do too much, rather then left they do too little, and are
more solicitous to use the bridle of restraint, then the spur of instigation:
I entreat them to consider these things:

1. That most certainly there is no part of all our Ministry, that stirs up
near so much ill will, passion, malice, yea and persecutions against us, as
this part, about taking in and casting out, and exercising the Keys of the
Kingdom; in which you are so jealous of us.

2. And alas Ministers are flesh and Blood, as well as others: and all of them
too tender of their Interest, of Profit, Reputation, and Ease: which are all
contradicted notably by this work. Do you think Ministers will be so hot on it,
to have their neighbors hate them and revile them, and to live as Owls in the
places where they live, and to put themselves on a great deal of trouble?
Surely it is a very self-displeasing thing to the very Nature of man, unless he
be a monster, to displease his neighbors, and be hated and baited by them. And
it will provoke them not only to forbear all acts of kindness or bounty, but
to deny them their due maintenance, as far as ever they can: And many, if not
most Ministers, have no great mind to be so used; nay had rather lose it, then
go to Law for all their dues; the trouble, and cost, and odium of it is so
great. So that our Parliaments have been too much afraid, lest Ministers should
cease to be men, or to be sinners, and to be manpleasers, and to indulge their
flesh; and lest we should run into the fire, and lie down among the thorns,
and choose a life of trouble and sufferings.

3. And me thinks experience should satisfy men of this. Do you not see how
backward Ministers are to Church-Reformation, and Discipline in the exercise,
when they have been most forward for the Power? How little is yet done in it,
for all our liberty, after all our Prayers, and petitions, and writing for it?
Do you find in most Parishes that Ministers are prone to overdo? certainly you
do not.

4. Do you not know that all the Work of God is so much against Nature, and
has such abundance of enemies and difficulties in the way, that few men are
like to be guilty of over-doing? Why be you not as careful to hinder men from
overdoing in sanctifying the Lords day, in teaching and praying with their
families, etc. but because you see that few need your curb. I am confident,
should Parliaments do their best to drive on Ministers to such works as these,
and make Laws upon Laws, to spur them to the practice, they would not be able
to bring one half of us, nor the tenth man, to reach so far, as Christ has
bound us; no nor one man of us, in all respects.

And yet I again say, that if any rash men are overrigid and abuse their trust
(which is likest to be those whose maintenance no whit comes from the people;
for in the rest there is more danger of the contrary,) we desire not that they
should be exempted from the Magistrates, Ministers, or peoples due means for
their amendment. But let the spur be most used, seeing there is most need;
and let us see some severe Laws, to drive us on to those duties, that flesh and
blood, and all the world is so much against.

I Come now to the last part of m^^aske, which is to give some brief Directions
for the most effectual Practice of this excellent, needful work. And I shall
first speak of the Duty of Ministers in order to it, and 2. Of the peoples
Duty, and lastly of the Magistrates. The Duty of the Pastors I judge to
consist in these particulars.

Direct. 1. Let the Pastors in each Country meet together, and agree as one
man in faithfulness, and self-denial, to do their duty; that the most
conscionable may not be liable to the reproach of singularity, because the rest
betray them, and the Church and Cause of Christ, by withdrawing, and leaving
the work undone: so long has the Church already suffered the neglect, even of
godly Ministers, that in such a time of leave and help, we still hold off, and
dare not venture on a little displeasure of the people, when our Ancestors
ventered on the flames; I grieve to think what a shame it will be to our names,
and to the Reformed Churches, and what a confusion it may bring upon our faces,
before our Righteous Judge. And it is a grief to me, if I were sure of
Magistrates assistance, that all our Enemies shall say, and that the Histories
of this age shall tell posterity, that the Ministers of England, after fasting,
prayers, wars and vows pretended for Reformation, would yet do little or
nothing toward it, but preach; even in times of Liberty and encouragement, till
the Magistrate did it: And that it must be the work of the Magistrate, after
our unworthy, lazy, or treacherous desertion of it. Had we no more help then we
have, we might do much, were we willing and unanimous.

Direct. 2. Let us take heed of extending these Agreements to any unnecessary
Circumstances, so as to lay the stress of the business on them, or to make that
necessary, which is unnecessary: But let us Agree on the General certain
points, and leave particular men to their Liberty, in modes and circumstances,
not judging each other, if we differ herein: or if one be more or less strict
then another in the execution.

Direct. 3. Let us yet all be very careful, that in point of trial and
judging men's Profession, we avoid extremes: On one side let us not be
Righteous overmuch, by keeping out any, that make the most broken, intelligible
Profession of Faith and Repentance, and a Godly life, that may be taken for
credible: and remember that we are not searchers of the heart, and that charity
judges not evil of any, that are capable of a better Judgment. And certainly a
humble Soul that is conscious of its own infirmities, and unworthiness will be
very tender of condemning another, without very satisfying Evidence. Of this I
refer you to my first Dispute, of Right to Sacraments.

On the other side, let us take heed of turning this duty into a mere
formality, and making nothing of it, but mocking the Church and God. Let us not
take up with a Profession of any other kind of Faith, but the true Christian
saving Faith; nor with any Profession of this Faith, which we are able to prove
to be Incredible.

Direct. 4. None of the Aged that have already been admitted to the Communion
of the Church in the Lords Supper, may be brought under Confirmation by
Imposition of hands, as we have before showed. But all that were yet never
admitted to this special part of Communion, nor have made any solemn Approved
Profession, should yet be called to it, be they young or old, when they demand
Church Communion.

If you ask me what shall be done with the rest, seeing they were admitted
irregularly, without any Profession of the Faith? I Answer, 1. Acquaint them
plainly with the Nature of Christianity, and what a Church is, and what is the
Office of a Pastor, and what the duty of the flock, to God, to him, and
themselves, and one another. 2. Then tell them, that you resolve to proceed
according to these Rules in the Government of your flock; and to exercise this
Discipline. Tell them plainly (that they be not deceived) both what are the
benefits of a Church State and Discipline, and what are the difficulties that
unprepared men are like to grudg at; and how hardly they will take it to be
followed, and not suffered to rest in sin, and openly reproved, and cast out
with shame, if they will not be Penitent and Reform. And then tell them, that
if there be any that have slipped into a Church State (in show) and knew not what
Christianity was, or what they did, and find themselves as yet unfit for it,
if they do forbear the Privileges of the Church, till they are better
prepared, and acquainted with them, and can use them to their profit, you shall
in mean time be ready to Teach them publikly and privately, till they are
prepared: And those that are fit to continue, and use such Privileges, advise
not to forbear them. But let them know, that you can neither take all the
Parish as such for members of the Universal Church, or of your charge, and
therefore must have some better Evidence, especially after such a confusion,
that negligence has brough into the Church: And you cannot take any man to be
of your charge against his will, and therefore you must know their minds. 3.
Give them notice, that all that own their Church Membership, and will have
Communion with that Church, under your Ministry and Pastoral oversight, are
desired by you to signify their desires, by giving in their names to the
Cleark of the Parish, or some other fit person; or if they refuse that, by
coming to you. 4. When you have their names, keep them some time, while you get
information of the persons lives. And then give notice to all (if it may be, to
avoid imputation of partiality; or at least of all that you have reason to
suspect, of gross ignorance or impiety) by streets, Villages, or houses, to
come to speak with you, on some appointed days: where you may discern the
fitness of some; and such as you find to be grossly ignorant or scandalous,
advise them to stay till they are prepared, offering them your help, because
else you must do that in a way of Discipline, that they are unfit to bear. 5.
All that disown their own standing and Church Membership, or present Right to
Privileges, and withdraw into the order of Catechumens, as being ignorant in
what they did before, you may safely teach them as Catechumens, and are not
bound to enrage them by Church Discipline, which they consent not to, and are
not capable of. 6. All those that you find tolerable, that have owned their
Churchmembership, and not withdrawn themselves, you ought to keep their names,
in a Church Book for memory, and to call them solemnly (at some day of
humiliation, or other fit season) to own their Relation publikly, their names
being-read, that all may know with whom they are to hold Communion. And if
there be need, you may justly require them there openly to renew their
Profession and Covenant with God. 7. Your flock being then Reformed and known,
you need not call them again, to examination before particular Sacraments, or
other parts of Church Communion. 8. When any members are after added, they
should, if unconfirmed, and such as never did Communicate, be received solemnly
by Prayer and Benediction; and if they be such as have been admitted to
Communion, let them be only Approved upon renewing their Profession. For the
one sort are Confirmed in their Relation to both Catholic and particular
Church; but the other, only enter then into the particular Church, being
solemnly received into the Catholic Church before, and perhaps into some other
particular Church, or into that from which they departed.

Direct. 5. If any come in that has violated his Baptismal Covenant, by a
wicked life, he is before you Receive him, to give some open testimony of his
Repentance, (if his sin were open) that so he may be Ministerially Absolved,
and the Church receive him, not merely as an Adult-Believer, but as a Convert,
with Prayers and Rejoicing. And the fuller Confession he makes of his ungodly
life, and of the way and Love of God in his recovery, and the fuller warning he
gives others of the sins that he was guilty of, and the fuller he
communicates to them the Satisfying Reasons that caused him to turn, the
better it is, and more suitable to the state of a Penitent: as also the fullyer
he professes his Resolution to stick close to Christ, by the help of his
Grace, for the time to come.

Direct. 6. For the exeecution of this, because all the People cannot be still
ready, nor attend, and because, it is fit they have some cognizance of these
things; let some of the most sober, judicious persons, be chosen by the Church
(not into Office, but as their Delegates, or Trustees) to meet with the
Pastors monthly in some convenient place, where all persons may first address
themselves that seek the Privileges of the Church (and where matters of
Discipline may be first transacted, before we bring them to the Assembly yet
not forbidding any other of the Church to be there present, that will. And
either in that meeting may members after be admitted, and their names made
public at the next Communion; or else some meetings publikly appointed, four
times a veare, or more, for admitting such in public, as shall be found
fi^est: which may be at a fast before a S^crament. And let any of the Church
(at that prep^rative meeting) have leave to put in what exceptions they have,
against the person for his Profession or Conversation.

Direct. 7. Let the Pastors and Churches that live within the reach of any
Communion, be as many as is possible, associate, and meet for the maintaining
of Communion of Churches: (by their Officers, and Delegates) And those that
differ in such tolerable matters, as may not hinder their Christian or
Church Communion, and yet are not satisfied to join in Synods with the rest,
let them Agree upon such terms of Communion and Christian correspondence as
their Principles will admit. And let no stranger be admitted to our
Church Communion, that brings not a Certificate (called of old Communicatorie
Letters,) or some sufficient Testimony from one of these sorts either the
Churches nearly Associated, or those that we agree to take for Brethren. And
those that bring such Certificates must be admitted by us, without any further
Trial, or Confirmation; unless there be some notable cause of suspicion. But
for those that live in Heretical, or Impious Societies, or such as refuse all
Church Order, and Communion with neighbor Churches, or are justly disowned by
the Associated Churches, we should not admit them to our Communion, without a
particular Trial, or a better Certificate then those Churches can give them.
And thus should all the Churches be concatenated, and their Communion settled.

Direct. 8. Above all let every Minister see that he wisely and diligently
carry himself to the rest of his Parish; avoiding indeed the excommunicate as
Heathens: but for all that are willing to learn in an Expectant-state, let us
deal lovingly, gently and tenderly with them, denying them nothing that
lawfully we can yield them, in matters of Buryal, Marrying, Praying, Preaching,
or the like. And be sure to carry on the Necessary duty of Catechizing, and
personal Conference and Instruction with them, family by family, by which you
may the better know them and prepare them for Church Communion, and have
opportunity to quiet them, and answer their Objections; and they may see that
you cast them not off as Heathens, but only prepare them for the state and
Privileges, which they are yet unfit for.

And especially let us by all possible condescension, meekness, loving
carriage, blameless lives, and charitable contribution to the utmost of our
abilities, endeavor to win them and take off that Offense, or at least abate
it, or hinder the success of the reproaches of those, that will undoubtedly be
offended, by our Reformation and Discipline. And let us have a vigilant eye
upon any Seducers, especially Infidels and Papists that may creep in among
them, to take advantage of their discontents; that we may prudently and
effectually counterwork them. This much faithfully done by Ministers, might be
an admirable mercy to the Church.

2. THe Peoples duty in order to this Reformation before mentioned, is, 1. Of
the godly, and such as are fit for Church Communion: 2. Of the grossly ignorant
and ungodly that are unfit.

1. The duty of the first sort lies in these Particulars. 1. They must highly
value the benefit of Pastoral oversight and Church Communion, and therefore be
ready to promote any work of Reformation that is necessary, to their more
fruitful and comfortable enjoyment of them.

2. They must so behave themselves as may honor and further the work, and take
heed of that by which it may be hindered; least they weaken our hands and be a
stumbling block to others. For what can a Minister do himself, if the Church
assist him not? much less if they hinder him? Especially, 1. They must take
heed of scandalous sins, which may be a shame to their Profession, and open
the mouths of the enemies of the Church. 2. They must take heed of Sects and
Div^sions, and quarrellings among themselves, which will break them in pieces,
or hinder their Edification, and make them a stumbling block to the weak, and a
laughing stock to the wicked. 3. They must take heed of sur^yness and pride,
and domineering carriage toward those that are yet without: And must be as
eminent in meekness, and humility, and patience, and forbearance, and
self-denial, as they are in the Profession of Religion. For a proud domineering
spirit, or strangeness and unnecessary distance, does lose the ungodly, whom
you should be means to win. 4. They must study to do all the good they can to
those without; be as little as may be in executing penalties on them, and as
much as may be possibly, in speaking kindly and familiarly to them, and
relieving them in wants, and visiting them in sickness, and think it not much
to purchase their love, in order to their Salvation, with the loss of your
right, or with the price of much of your worldly goods. For all men love those,
or at least will less dislike them, that do no hurt to any, but do good to all,
or as many as they can. To be the servants of all, is the highest Christian
dignity, and the way to win them. 5. Take heed of falling out, or contending
with any of them, or of giving them any harsh, provoking words, to their faces,
or behind their backs. But put up any wrong that is merely your own, and is in
your power to forgive, for the sake of Peace, and your own neighbors good. 6.
Be not men of common spirits, or common speech, or a common conversation: but
as we must make a difference between you and others in our communion and
Church-administrations, so let the rest see that it is not without cause. For
if you be but like other men, we shall seem to be partial in making a
difference, between you and other men. Let your Light therefore shine before
men to the Glory of your Heavenly Father. Let them see that you despise the
world, and live above it, and can easily part with it; that you can forgive and
bear a wrong; that your heart is in Heaven, and your treasure there; and that
you are the heirs of another world: Let all men hear and see by you, that you
have a higher design in your eye, then the ungodly, and that you are driving
on another trade, then the men that have their portion in this life. Heaven is
your Real Glory: and to be Heavenly is your true Reputative Glory, not only in
the eyes of the wi^e, but of the common earthworms of the world. 7. Set your
selves in the most diligent and faithful improvement of all your parts and
Interests to help on the Work of God on men's Souls. Though you preach not, you
have work enough in your own places to do, to further the Preachers work.
Speak to poor people prudently, seasonably, and seriously about the state of
their Souls, and Everlasting Life: and consult with the Ministers, how to deal
with them: Tell them in what state you find the people, and take their advice
in further dealing with them. O if our neighbors would but help us in
private, and do their parts, and not cast all the burden on the Minister, there
would much more be done then is! Nay, alas, to our grief and hindrance, some of
our Professing people are so hot, and self-conceited, and proud, that unless we
will outrunne our own understandings, and be ruled by them, and shut out
abundance that the Word of God allows us not to shut out, and be Righteous
overmuch, and shut up the Church of Christ, as in a nut-shell; they presently
murmr and rebel, and separate, and must betake themselvel to a stricter
Congregation. And others of them, must have us cast off Discipline, and cut up
the hedge, and admit all to the Communion and Privileges of the Church, and
all under a blind pretense of Charity; and some Learned Gentlemen by words and
writings, do enrage our ignorant and ungodly* neighbors against us, and make
them believe, that we do them some grievous wrong, because we will not indeed
deceive them and undo them, and set up new Church-orders (or disorders) now in
the end of the world, so contrary to all the ancient Canons and Orders of the
Church. I honor and deerly love the names of many of these studious, pious
Gentlemen: But seriously I must tell them, that they want humility, and in
their good meanings do the Church a world of wrong. And though they may be more
learned even in Theology, then we, yet it is a great matter to have or to want
experience. They have not been so much in Church-administrations as we, nor had
so much to do with ignorant Souls. And verily I must say again, that the bare
Theory makes but a bungler in this work: I must much suspect the Judgment of
that man in matters of Church Government, or dealing with poor Souls, that
wants experience. Let these Gentlemen, but turn Ministers, (be it known to
their faces, there is none of them too good for it, nor too great) and let them
but try our life a little while, and I shall set more by their Judgments, then
now I do. I red many a Physicians writings, before I was fit to attempt a Cure.
It Is a raw deceitful kind of knowledge in these practical affairs, that is not
furthered by experience.

2. And as for the duty of the ignorant, ungodly people, I shall say little of
it, because I suppose they are not like to read or regard what I say. Only in
general, it is their first duty, to become truly godly persons, and so to live
in communion with the Church. But upon supposition that they will not yet be
such, their next choice should be to live in quiet submission to their
Teachers, and patiently stay among the Catechumens, and Expectants, till they
are fit for a higher place and Privileges. And with the reasonableness of this
motion, and how it conduces to their good, we should labor to acquaint them,
and make them sensible of it, that they may be patient in their station.

3. OUr last work is to tell you, what is the Magistrates part, for the
promoting of this work. And I shall urge them here to no great matters, because
they shall not say, that we would either drive them in the dark upon
questionable things, or put them upon that, which any reason can call
persecution, or make them think, that we can do nothing but by their sword And
therefore whether they should force people to be Church Members, or Christians,
or to come under Discipline, are Questions that at this time I shall not meddle
with; But Direct. 1. It is a great part of the Magistrates Duty to cause the
people that are yet unfit for Church Communion, In Tertullians days, says
Albaspinaeus in Tert. de prescrip. c. 41. p. 306. The Catechumeni being
somewhat instructed at home, cum caeteris tandem in Ecclesia primis
concionibus, quae in gratiam Catechumenorum habebantur, intererant; quibus
peractis rursus omnes iidem ipsi Catechumeni ex templo discedere jubebantur, ne
scilicet Divina mysteria rudium conscientia polluerentur -- So that it seems
they had then in the morning a Sermon fitted for the Catechumens, and all the
after part of the worship was more Eucharistical fitted to the Communion of
Saints.
to keep in their visible station, and to behave themselves as Expectants, and
submit to that Instruction of their Teachers, which is necessary to prepare
them for the Privileges of the Church: and to this End the Magistrate should
by Laws and Proclamations, own this Ministerial Reformation. Alas how little
knew they, what they did, that have so long been jealous of us, lest we would
do too much, and under pretense of Discipline inflame, or abuse them by
severity? When as it is a work that casts us on so much rage and hatred, of
rich and poor, and calls for such abundance of Faith and Zeal, and diligence
and self-denial, when we have so little, and are commonly like other men
addicted too much to man-pleasing, and to save our selves, that if we had all
the help that Magistrates can give us, it is ten to one but we should leve the
most of this work undone. Preaching is a very cheap and easy work, in
comparison of Church Government. They have taken great pains to stop poor,
lazy, short-winded men from running up the steepest hill, and carrying the
heaviest burden, and passing through the greatest sufferings, that in those
prosperous times we can expect. And indeed I know it to be true, that for all
the countenance of Authority, he that will faithfully execute the Pastoral
Oversight and Discipline, shall live a persecuted life, which by mere Preaching
he might avoid.

Therefore the chief Governors of the Nation ought to make Laws, and cause
them to be executed, for the constraining of the grossly Ignorant and ungodly,
to hear the Word preached publikly, and to submit to be privately Catechized,
and Instructed by the Ministers: and to command them patiently to wait, as
learners in this Condition, till they are fit to be Approved members of the
Church. These carnal people look more at the sword, and will of the Magistrate,
in matters of Religion, then others do; because they understand no other
argument, and can favor nothing but the things of the flesh. Did but the
Rulers of the Nation hear how they daily enquire what Religion shall be owned
and settled by them, they would sure think it their duty, to lend them a little
more of their help. We desire you not to drive them to Christianity, nor to
Sacraments, or Church Communion: only drive them to hear, and learn, and be
instructed, that the Light of Truth may do the rest. Surely none can reasonably
suspect, that this is against the Liberty of their Consciences, unless the
slavery of Satan be their Liberty: and it be their Liberty to be free from
Christ, and Righteousness, and Heaven. It Is hard to believe that Governor to
be a Christian, that will not do this much to help his Subjects to be
Christians.

Direct. 2. And as the Magistrate should constrain such People to submit to be
Instructed, so should he constrain the Ministers to Instruct them, both by
public preaching, and by private conference and Catechizing, if they be able:
and if through the greatness of the place, one Minister is not able to perform
it, there should be so many maintained proportionably, to the number and
necessities of Souls, as may be able. The Reason why Ministers themselves
should be compelled by Penalties are, 1. First because some are so dull, that
they need the spur. 2. Because our performances will be the less resisted by
the people, when they know we are forced by the Magistrate. 3. Because the
Magistrates Judgment puts much authority and honor on the work, in the peoples
eyes: compel us therefore, as well as them.

Direct. 3. The Magistrate should also impose a penalty upon all that undertake
to be Pastors of a Church, and administer the Lords Supper, and yet will not
make any necessary Trial of the Knowledge, Faith, and Lives of those, to whom
they do administer it, nor exercise any Church Discipline on the scandalous;
but utterly neglect that Oversight and Church Government, which is as much a
part of the Pastoral work, as public preaching is. They that will undertake to
be Pastors, and meddle with Sacraments, must be compelled to do the work of
Pastors, and to dispense the Sacraments in a tolerable order. Though yet we
are not for compulsion in any doubtful points, of lesser moment, where a
difference among the Godly may be tolerated: But that Pastors should act as
no Pastors, and Rectors of the Churches be as no Rectors, and should cherish
all ignorance, infidelity, and impiety, and profane Gods Ordinances, and
subvert the Communion of Saints, and lay the Garden of Christ open to the
common wilderness, and thereby make all seem singular to the people, that will
not do as wickedly as these; this is not to be tolerated; but the Commissioners
for ejecting scandalous Ministers, with the advice of the Assistants, should
have power to correct them, and in case of obstinate unreformedness to eject
them: Not to silence them from preaching to the Catechumens or any; but to
prohibit them from the actions proper to Church Rulers or Pastors, till they
will perform them more agreeably to the Scripture Rule.

And this compulsion also of the Ministers, we desire especially for the
peoples sake, who we are content should be excused themselves from any such
penal Laws, to restrain them from Sacraments; but when they know that
Ministers are under such penalties, they will bear it at their hands, and take
it the better, when we deal with them, as the Word of God requires. I hear
it with my ears, to the grief of my heart, how some of my neighbor Ministers
are spoken against, with bitterness by their people, because they give not the
Lords Supper to all, even to the most ignorant and ungodly, that refuse to be
instructed; or so much as to take themselves for any members of the Ministers
charge: And that which they say is, that though Bishops and Common Prayer be
taken down, yet the giving of the Sacrament to all the Parish, is not taken
down. And they that now submit so quietly to the disusing of many other things,
because Ministers are punishable if they use them, would also do the like in
this case. And yet if you are jealous, that Ministers will go as far on the
other hand, in refusing the people that are not to be refused, (though with one
of an hundred, there is little fear of that) we are contented that you look to
us also in this: To which end these two things will be sufficient. 1. Let the
Magistrate join with the Pastors and Delegates of the Church in their
meetings, where Church-affaires are transacted, that he may see what we do. If
there be no Justice of Peace in the Parish, let every Church have a
Church-Magistrate purposely chosen by the chief Magistrate; or some Agent on
his behalf deputed hereunto. 2. And let the Magistrates Agent acquaint the
Commissioners how things are transacted, in cases of Complaint, and let them by
the advice of the Assistant Ministers, correct us as we deserve, if you should
imagine this to be necessary.

Direct. 4. The Magistrate should promote, encourage, countenance, yea command
the Pastors to Associations and Brotherly correspondencies, for the more
cautelous, and vigorous, and effectual management of these works; and for the
concatenation and Communion of Churches, and the right understanding of each
others affairs; that he that has Communion in one Church, may by
Communicatory Letters, have Communion in any of the rest; and he that is cast
or kept out of one, may not be received by the rest, till it be proved that he
is excluded unjustly. And those that join not so fully as the rest, may yet be
provoked to own one another, as far as they can; that so we may maintain
brotherly Love, with all that differ from us by tolerable defferences; and may
own them as Churches, though we cannot own their different opinions or ways;
and may have such Communion with them, as we may, and upon their Letters may
admit their members to our Communion. This the Magistrate should at least
openly provoke, and encourage the Churches and Pastors to; seeing no man can
doubt whether it be for the edification of the Church.

Direct. 5. For the better promoting of this Necessary work, I conceive it
would be a very ready and unquestionable way, for the Magistrate to appoint an
able, Godly, moderate Minister, to be a Visiter in each County, or rather in
each half or quarter of a County, to see the Churches thus Reformed, and prvoke
the several Pastors to their duty, and assist them in it, where there is need:
But not to have any Episcopal power to punish, or cast out any Minister, or
excommunicate them, suspend them, or the like: But let every Visitor have an
Agent of the Magistrate joined with him, armed with authority to convent the
Ministers, and examine witnesses, and do what more the chief Magistrate shall
see meet, so that still these two Visitors go together, but have not the same
Authority or work; but let the Minister only enquire, direct, exhort, and give
account and advice to the civil Visiter; and let the civil Visiter have all the
Coercive Power: And let both of them transmit such causes as are exempt from
their determination, to the Commissioners for ejecting scandalous Mininisters,
who by the advice of the Assistant Ministers may determine them. These Visiters
did very much to the first and great Reformation of Scotland, when Popery had
overrun all: Nor did they Scruple the using of them, for all that they were
against Prelacy.

Direct. 6. It is one of the chief and unquestionable parts of the Magistrates
duty, in order to the Reformation and Peace of the Churches, and the saving of
men's Souls, In the Ancient Church the Catechumeni were not suffered to sit with
the Church Members, but had a separated place by themselves; and Tertullian
accuses the Heretics for breaking this order, ut vid. Albaspin. in Tertul. de
Praescription. c. 41. p. 306. He blames them also that they suffered them to
join with the Church in Prayers, and other holy worship ut Albaspin. ibid.
to see that dangerous Seducers be restrained, from infecting and carrying away
the ignorant, ungodly, discontented people, that are kept under Ministerial
Teaching, as Expectants. I do not move to have men driven into our Churches:
Nor do I move to have an unnecessary restraint laid upon men's tongues or pens,
in case of tolerable differences, among the Servants of Christ. In this case I
only desire now, that the Dissenting Godly Brethren, would agree together, to
meddle with their differences no more then needs, and to manage their
Disagreements with such Cautions, and in such manner, and season, and measure,
as may least hinder their success in the common work, viz. the promoting of the
common Fundamental Verities, and the converting and saving of the Ignorant and
ungodly, and getting down the reigning sins of the world. And then they will
find, 1. That if there by any truth in the private Opinions, which they would
propagate, it will far easier be received, when the minds of their brethren
are sedate and peaceable, then when they are allarmed to the conflict, by
unseasonable preaching for the said Opinions. 2. And that the Errors (of this
lower nature among Brethren) which some fear a tolleration of, will sooner die
of themselves for want of fuel in such Peaceable deportment, then when the
bellows of opposition, contradiction, reproach, and violence are blowing them
up, and putting life continually into them. For most Dividers are proud and
selfish, and must needs be noted, for somewhat extraordinary: And you take the
principal way to animate them, when you make so much ado with them: Whereas a
few years neglect, and not observing them, as if there were no such men in the
world, (unless when they impose a Necessity on us) would more happily
extinguish them. I speak but what I have seen and tried. This therefore is not
the matter of my present request, that Magistrates would use rigor and violence
with godly men, about tolerable differences; which the Power of greater Light
and Love in the contrary minded, is the principal means to reconcile.

But the thing requested now of Magistrates is, that they would keep out the
Wolves, while we are feeding the Sheep* or help us in it. That they suffer not
damnable deceivers, or any that plainly go about to subvert men's Souls, or the
state of the Church, to fall in with our Ignorant, ungodly people, in the time
of their Learning and Expectancy. And as I shall be ready against any
Libertine, Infidel, or Papist in the world, to prove this to be in the
Magistrates Power, and his flat duty (of which I hope no sober Christian
doubts) so I shall here lay before the Magistrate, the Reasons that shall
evince the need of his help, in the present case.

Reason 1. The people that we now speak of, are so utterly ignorant, that it is
easy to deceive them. It Is no dishonor to Truth, that a fool, or a child my
be deluded: but such are not to be left to the malice and craft of juggling
enemies.

Reason 2. So wicked are the hearts of those, that we now speak of (or many of
them) that they are prepared for Deceit, and willing of it Materially, though
not Formally, as such. It Is easy drawing men from that which they hate, or
their hearts are bent against, and to that which they Love, and their hearts
are set upon. Such gunpowder will soon take fire.

Reason 3. Our people by the foremencioned work of Reformation, will
undoubtedly be cast into Discontents: They will be sorely displeased with their
Teachers; which is a small matter, were it not that it hinders their own
Salvation. They have so long been used to have their own will, and to be
admitted even in Heathenish Ignorance and Impiety to the Communion of the
Saints, and all the outward Privileges, without any considerable exercise of
Discipline over them, that now it will be a strange provoking thing to them,
when their custom shall be altered. So that in the discontent and hatred of
their minds, if Infidels, or Papists, or any such Malignant adversaries shall
come among them, their own malignity and discontent, will drive them by
multitudes into their nets; and they will turn to the first that comes with any
plausible though pernicious doctrine. With half an eye we may easily see this:
And therefore, if the Magistrate will not help us to quiet and secure the
people, and keep off deceivers, while we are Catechizing, and Instructing, and
Preparing the grossly Ignorant and ungodly, it will be to the hazard of many
thousand souls, and a temptation to many fainthearted Ministers, again to cast
open the hedge* and lay the Churches Communion common, for fear of the ill
consequence, that will follow to the people by displeasing them.

And yet I may well conclude, that though still the Church will have need of
some of the Magistrates help in this same way, yet nothing so much hereafter,
as at first. 1 It is Custom that most holds the people now, and enrageth them
against the breakers of it. And when once the Custom is broken and turned, they
will be much more quiet. 2. We now find the Churches in the rubbish, and have
the harshest work at first to do, which will soon be over, and the Churches
and minds of men more settled. 3. A few years Practice of Confirmation, in the
foredescribed way, I hope will introduce such abundance of Knowledge, and so
increase the face of Godliness, that we shall have little need of the
Magistrates help, in this kind as now we have. But now at first our Necessity
is very great.

Reason 4. Moreover, our Doctrine and Practice is most contrary to men's sins*
and carnal Interest, and therefore though it be True, yet it is Provoking, and
seems to be against them; as blood letting, Fasting, and bitter medicines to
a Child, or a foolish Patient. And therefore no wonder, if tolerated Seducers
can draw them from it, by sense or nonsense, in such a case. A little Reason
seems to take men off from that, which seems against them, or which they hate.

Reason 5. On the contrary, the Doctrine and Practice of Deceivers, is suited
to their nature, and purposely sugered for them by Art. For Instance: If
Papists fall in with them in the depth of their discontent, and first rail at
us as no Ministers, but Liars and Heretics; and then revile us for receiving
maintenance (which is their way, though their Clergy receive so exceedingly
much more) and then tell them of all their Ancestors, and then set them upon
an easy, outside Piety, which ex opere operato, will certainly confer grace,
and shall take up at the strictest with an Auricuar Confession, instead of
necessary humiliation and true Church Discipline; and shall make those venial,
and improper sins, which we make damnable; and shall send many but to
Purgrtory, that according to Scripture, we send to Hell. In a word, when they
shall comply with carnal hearts and Interests, but as much, as Montalte the
Jansenian shows us, that the Jesuits do; what wonder if our Ignorant,
discontented people, do greedily swallow such baits as these, and turn to such
a kind of Religiousness? And this makes the Jesuits glad of our Reformation,
and stand by us as the Crows by Sheep, that they may have our leavings, or all
that we cut off: For it is Number that they regard; and if they will but believe
in the Pope, they shall be welcome to them; yea, be Catholics and be saved,
though they believe not in Christ and the Holy Ghost, nor know not what
Christianity is. He that thinks I wrong them: 1. Let them look on millions, and
millions in their Churches. 2. Let him but read In his Deus, natura Gratia:
where abundance more are cited of his side.
Fr. a Sancta Clara, Problem. 15, and 16.

Reason 6. The Adversaries also are very industrious, and have many advantages
of us from without. In most Churches they will meet, though with Godly, yet
with young, unexperienced Disputers; because our Ministry is but Reviving, and
the young ones must have time to grow. And the Jesuits, Friars and other
Missioners, have a Pope and Cardinals, and Bishops, and Princes, and Lords, and
Revenews, and wealth, and Seminaries, and trained Soldiers in abundance, at
their backs beyond. Sea, to furnish them with continual supply. And how eager
and busy they are, the Christian world has had long experience: so that if
such be let loose on Ignorant Souls, what wonder if they prevail?

Reason 7. And for the Event, if the Magistrates shall refuse us this
Reasonable and unquestionably lawful aid, it may be the means of the
damnation of many thousand Souls. I suppose I speak to Christians, that believe
that sin is the poison of the Soul, and believe that Faith in Christ is
necessary, and that there is a Heaven and a Hell: And if so, they must needs
understand, what it is, to suffer men to draw their Subjects from Christ, from
Scripture, from the means of Grace, and a Holy Life; and to draw them into
sin: that this is but to give men leave to do their worst, to undo and damn
as many as they can; and to take them at the greatest vantage in their
Ignorance and discontent to trip up their heels, and tise them into Hell. How
dreadful a thing is this to a Magistrate, once to think of, that has but any
belief of Scripture, and pity on the Souls of men. And therefore (as long as
we do not now call upon them, so much as to force Papists, or Infidels either
to be of our Religion, or to profess that they are so, or join in Communion
with us, but only desire, that they may keep their venom to themselves, and may
not be suffered to take the advantage of our peoples Ignorance and Discontent)
undoubtedly the Rulers that are friends to Christ, and the Souls of men, will
never find in their hearts, to deny this assistance.

Reason 8. And if they should deny it, in Reason they must needs see, that they
will fully give up the Churches of Christ, that are under their government, to
distraction and confusion. They know well enough wh^t would come of it, if
every man have but liberty to persuade their Armies into Mutinies and
Rebellion; or to persuade the Subjects against themselves, that Rule them; or
to entice men's Children, or servants to lewdness, or their wives to unchastity.
And will they, under pretense of Mercy or Liberty, permit men to do that
against Christ, and the Church, and the Souls of many that are bad enough
already, which they would not, they durst not permit against men's bodies, or
against themselves, or against the Peace of the Commonwealth.

And what a dishonor will it be to Christ, to the Church, and Reformation, and
Religion; and what a joy to all the Enemies of these, to see that our
Reformation shall breed such Confusion, and bring upon us such inconveniences?
And all because the Magistrate shall refuse his help.

Reason 9. And perhaps, the Magistrates will quickly find, that the
Distractions of the Church will breed, and feed such Distractions in the
Commonwealth, as may make them wish they had quenched the fire, while it was
yet quenchable. Our Unity is not only Our strength, but their strength,
especially if they promote it. Our Divisions weaken us as well as them. What
will the Magistrate do, if he help us not in this case? Ministers cannot in
Conscience always forbear their Duty, but will set about it? Either the
Rulers will suffer us to do it, or not: If they suffer us and assist us, it
will be our Peace and theirs, and our peoples good: If they suffer us and
assist us not, as is now desired, we shall exasperate so many of their Sujects
by our Reformation, and shutting them from Church Communion, that will shake
the Peace of the Commonwealth, and the Odium will fly on the Governors, for
setting up a Ministry that so provokes them, and so the people will be still
in Discontents, and prepared for Rebellion, or any violent change. And the fire
that begun in the Church, if it be let alone, may reach the Court. But if to
mend this, they will put down or hinder Ministers, their persecution will bring
Gods Judgments on them, and turn the hearts of honest, sober men against them.
They have seen what Deformation and persecution have done, before their eyes.

Reason 10. Lastly, it will bring a most heavy Guilt on the Magistrates Soul,
which he will never be able to stand under, before the King of all the world.
To be Guilty of the neglect of an Office so Divine, received from God, that it
might be used for him; and to be Guilty of the frustrating of much of our
Ministerial work; and of grieving the hearts of so many that fear God, and
frustrating such hopes as we lately had, (to say nothing of the Prayers,
tears, hazards, blood, and ruin of so many thousand, and the promises, oaths
and Covenants to God) to be guilty of the sins of so many thousand, and of
their everlasting Condemnation; to be guilty of the distractions, and betraying
of the Church, and cause, and people of the Lord, and to be guilty of the
insultings of so many Enemies, all this and much more, that would certainly
follow the denial of this moderate necessary help, would be a burden
intolerable.

Direct. 7. But because both the Magistrates, and many others are afraid, lest
by going too far in such assistance, they may be guilty of Persecution, by
restraining men from Preaching, or private peswasion, or by keeping the
Ignorant and wicked from Church Communion, or by compelling them to come to
hear* and to be personally Instructed, I humbly propound these following
things, for such a Regulation of their granted Liberty, as may free them from
all danger of persecuting, without depriving us of their principal help.

1. If you compel not the Ignorant and ungodly to hear, and be pesonally
Instructed, by the Minister of the Parish where they live, yet at least compel
them thus to submit to some Minister: and let that Minister certify under his
hand, that he takes care of him as a Catechumene, or Expectant, by public and
private Instruction.

2. Let not every man that will, be tolerated either to Teach, persuade, or
hold Assemblies; but let your Toleration be Regulated, as well as your
Approbation is. To which end 1. Let such persons as are thought meet for such a
work, be appointed as Comissioners, to Approve, or Judge of such as shall be
Tolerated through the Land, as the Commissioners now Approved of such, as shall
have the public maintenance. For there is no Reason, that the Tolerated
should not go under Trial, as well as the Allowed. And indeed without some such
course to keep the Door of Toleration, as well as the door of public Allowed
Teachers, you cannot put any reasonable Laws for Toleration in Execution; but
any will come in, what ever your Law say. 2. Let these Commissionets for Trying
the Tolerated, have Rules given them by the Lawgivers, whom to License, or
Tolerate, and whom not. 3. Let all that will gather Assemblies, or administer
Sacraments, or Preach, have an Instrument of Toleration, under the hands and
seal of these Commissioners, and let them be hindered, that have no such
Instrument. Otherwise if you stay till they are convict of Blasphemy, they may
do more mischief first, (for who will persecute them) then ever the Magistrate
can comfortably be accountable to God for suffering.

7. When a man has a sealed Toleration, to Preach, or hold Assemblies, let him
yet be as liable to any just Accusation, before the Commissioners for Ejection,
as the Approved, public Ministers are: That so if he be proved to be wicked
and scandalous, or to preach any thing excepted from Toleration, by the
Legislatours, the said Commissioners may be Authorized, to deprive them of
their Toleration, as they do others of their public station and maintenance.
And this is a most Rersonable and necessary thing.

1. For else the Public Ministers will be hardlier dealt with then they. It is
supposed that there is so much difference in the soundess of their Doctrine,
that one deserves the public encouragement, as well as the other deserves a
Toleration: Or else the Lawgivers, would make no difference. And that being
supposed, if they shall not be questionable, as well as we, nor their Right
forfeitable as well as ours, they are more cherished proportionably then others.

2. And if you do not this, it is as good do nothing, but openly License
Heathens, and Papists, and all Blaspheamers: For they will make a fair
Confession, till they have got their sealed Toleration, and then preach contrary
to that profession. I humbly propound it to the Consideration of the Sovereign
Rulers, whether it be not fit, that the Testimonies of these two sorts of men,
in any weighty case, against another be invalidate. And is it not a pitiful
case that the lives of the godly people whom they hate, shall be at the mercy
of any two of these wretches, that make no more of an oath then of another word.
Two sorts we know this to be true by: 1* Papists, that are for Equivocation,
and Mental Reservation, in their Professions and Oaths: or for the Popes to
dispense with them. 2. Heathens and Infidels that believe not, that there is
any sin, or Devil, or Hell, or Heaven, and therefore care not what they
swear. And indeed these are the two Sects that now are up: and all other are
like to fall into these. Alas by sad experience I speak it: Those that will
openly, and to my face make an Orthodoxe confession, do secretly harden many
poor Souls, by making a scorn of Scripture, as a fable, and of the Immortality
of the Soul, and of Christ and the Holy Ghost, and Heaven and Hell, and say all
these are nothing, but the inventions of men, and that the K^ave-Priests do
persuade men that there are Devils, and Hell, as a bugbeare to make them do
what they would have them, and all Religion is but deceit. Such Heathens, are
the predominant Sect in many places, and higher in England, then once I thought
to have seen them. And if all such perfidious Infidels and Jesuits, shall have
leave to B^aspheame God, Christ, and Scripture, because they once made an
Orthoeoxe Profession, then let Hell be turned loose upon our people, and the
Devil that was bound up from deceiving the Nations, have a Toleration from the
Magistrate to do his worst.

Thus I have showed that Magistrates, if they will, may help the Church
without any danger of persecuting the Truth, if they take not Popery, damnable
Heresy, and Heathenism for Truth. 1. If the Approvers keep the door of
Toleration, as well as of Public Maintenance and Ministry. 2. If a Church
Justice, or Civil Agent, do keep the Churches Peace. 3. If the Civil Visiter do
purposely take cognizance of the state of Parishes, and see the Laws put in
execution. 4. If the Commissioners for Ejections, have power of Judging all
Seducers, and Blaspheamers, as well as the public Ministers. And if these only
have the Coercive Power; but some able, chosen, godly Ministers be joined with
them for Advice and Exhortation: as Magistrates and Ministers sat together
before the days of William the Conqueror.

Joh. 13. 17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

Luke 12. 47. And the servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not, nor
did according to his will, shall be beaten much.


Finitur Hebr. 13. 1648.
Postscript.
READER,
AS great and needful a duty as this is, that I have here proposed, and as
clear as it is, and commonly agreed on by all the Parties before mentioned, I
am yet far from expecting, that all men should acknowledge it and obey it; or
that no person of contrary apprehensions or intentions, should rise up against
it as an enemy, with all the strength that the measure of his wit and passions
can prepare. We cannot speak for God himself, for Christ, for Scripture, for
men's own Salvation, but we meet with contradiction and resistance, even from
them that we would save. And were it not for this, what blessed work would the
Gospel make? and why might we not hope, that all our people should be saved? No
wonder then, if when ever we attempt Reformation or Reconciliation, we meet
with Learned, Nunquam enim, ait Lutherus periclitatur Ecclesia nisi inter
Reverendissin^s.
Reverend Brethen that come against us, armed with plausible cavils, and
contempts, and cast away the medicine as dangerous, or ungrateful, and
strenuously vindicate the Disease that should be healed: And were it not that
the Church has many, very many such, what should have kept us unhealed so
long? And who could have continued our deformities and divisions, and
frustrated such means as have been used for our cure? Satan is not so poor a
Politician, as to be without his Agents in our Ecclesiastike Armies, and
Councils, and Pulpits to speak for his cause and do his work, and resist and
frustrate that which would displease him; and all this under pretense of enmity
to Satan, and friendship to Christ, and a better doing of his work. As the
names of the chiefest of Christ Servants, were not cast out as Holy, but as
evil, Luke 6. 22. So their Doctrine was not cast out as Truth, nor as Saving,
but as Deceit. And his Means will not be openly resisted, (at least by those
that are building with us) as Reforming or Reconciling, but as groundless or
unproved, or troublesome, or unseasonable, or as suspected of some ill design,
or event. Some will say, it is mere Prelacie, or a Prelatical design: and
some that it is Independancie, or an Independent design: and some that it is
but Presby^erian Examination. Whereas they might know, that it is proper to
none of them, which is common to them all. If it be Prelacie, how comes it to
be found with Independants? If it be Independancy, how comes it to be approved
by Prelates, and Presbyterians? Is it not rather like Christianity it self, and
the Truths and Duties which we commonly own; and therefore not to be
appropriated to any.

By all that I have heard and read of late, concerning this Subject, I
understand that the principal Objections that are likely to be used against the
Doctrine of this Treatise, are these following.

Object. We were all Baptized in our Infancy, and therefore are Church Members,
and have Right to the Privileges of the Adult, when we are Adult, without any
new Title or Condition: Our first Right continues, though we never make
Profession of the Christian Faith, nor personally renewed the Covenant with God
that we made in Baptism. And therefore though in some cases, such an approved
Profession be a duty, yet is not any more Necessary to our Church State, and
Right to the Communion of the Adult, then that we were borne Church Members,
and so Baptized. Nothing but Heresy, Schism, or Apostacy can cut us ^ff. And
therefore all that were Baptized, and are not thus cut off, are still
Church Members, and have Right to all the Ordinances in the Church.

Answ. 1. I have said enough to this already to satisfy the considerate
impartial Reader; proving the Necessity of a personal Faith before God, and of
some Profession of it Ecclesia Judice, before the Church, to the Being of the
said Title of the Adult, as its Condition: and that all Scripture-Examples do
make for the Confirmation of this Truth. Moreover let me add, to answer the
new, or foreseen assaults,

1. If there be no word of Promise in the Scripture, that gives the Privilege
of Adult-Communion to any, upon their Infant title-condition only, nor any
example in the Gospel, or the ancient Church, that any possessed or used that
Privilege upon that Title-condition only, then are we not to imagine that the
Infant Title-condition alone, is sufficient to the said Privilege: But the
Antecedent is true; as has in part been manifested, and will be more, when the
Dissenter shall bring forth his pretended Evidences, by which his Title should
be proved.

2. The Title-condition of Infants is not sufficient to make any morally
capable of the Ends of Adult. Communion: therefore it is not sufficient to make
them capable of a proper, plenary Right to such Communion. For the Right and
Relation are for these Ends; if a natural incapacity may consist with a Plenary
Title, so cannot a Moral. No man can really possess and exercise the Communion
of the Adult intrinsically without Faith, or extrinsecall without Profession of
Faith: therefore no man without Faith or Profession of Faith, can have a
plenary Right to that Communion. For a man to have a plenary Right to praise
God, and celeberate with the Church the memorial of our Redemption, and
participate of the Redeemer, and his Benefits, that believes not in him, is a
palpable absurdity.

3. If the mere Title-Condition of Infants will serve in foro Ecclesiae, for
the Adult* then it will serve also in foro Dei: For the Church looks but to the
outward appearance, or visibility of that, whose Reality and sincerity God
expects. And it is Gods Covenant that gives us our Right: and therefore if
the Churh fin^ us to have true Right, it must find us receiving it from Gods
Covenant; and therefore find us the heirs of takes prom^se: The Reason why the
Church takes our Birth Privileges for a sufficient Title-Condition, is because
God is supposed so to take it. But that this will not serve the Adult in foro
Dei is manifest; because God will not own such Infidels, as neither have Faith,
nor a Profession of it.

4. If the litle-Condition of Infidels may serve them when Adult, then is there
no personal difference in acts, or qualities; no not so much as in Profession,
required on our part, to distinguish Christians from Infidels and Ath^ists: (
required I mean as necessary Conditions) But the Consequent is absurd:
therefore so is the Antecedent. If no di^ferencing character between Actual
Believers and Infidels or Atheists, be made thus necessary, then the Church and
the Infidel world, are laid together; and the Body of Christ, and consequently
Christ himself is dishonored, and blaspheamed, as common and unclean. But if
any personal difference be necess^ry, it must be the personal Profession of
Christianity, or nothing less then this can be it. For our Birth-Priviledge
cannot be it. Atheists and Infidels are borne of Christian Parents. Much of the
Turkish Army of Jani^aries, have their Birth-Priviledges to show, as well as we
It is a probable Argument: Such an Infant is horn of Christian Parents:
therefore he will be an Actual Believer. But it is not a probable Argument,
Such a man at age, that professes not Christianity, had Christian Parents;
therefore he is a believer: much less; therefore he had Right to the Benefits
of the Covenant, whether he be an Actual Believer or not. If Christians have no
visible note, by which they must be known from Infidels, then either the Church
is not Visible, or Infidels may be the Visible Church, without so much as
disowning their Infidelity.

5. If the Title-Condition of Infants may suffice the Adult for Church-Right
and Communion, then Heretics and Apostates have such Right: But the Consequent
is denied by them that I now dispute with. They confess that Heresy and some
Schism, and Apostacy, do cut off from the Church, and so from this Right. But
it is plain that such Heretics and Apostates have that which was their
Infant-Condition: as they were the seed of Believers in Infancy, so they are
since Apostasy: They cease not to be the seed of Believers, by their renouncing
Christ. If this therefore would prove a Right in silent Infidels, it will prove
a Right in professed Apostates.

Object. The Apostates cast away their Right, and therefore have it not.

Answ. 1. Either it depends on their own wi^^ when they come to age, or not.
If it do ^^t, then they cannot cast it away. They may refuse to use their
Right, but they cannot cast it away, or nullify it: For they cannot make
themselves not to be the Children of Christian Parents. The foundation stands
whether they will or no: and therefore so must the Relation. But if the
Relation or Right do now depend upon their own wills, then our cause is
granted; for from their wills then must the Condition, or Evidence be fe^cht.
2. Yea such persons, ordinarily as we have now in question, are actual
Apostates, and are so to be taken by the Church; and therefore not to be taken
as Church Members, having Right to Sacraments. He that being engaged to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost in his Infancy, does make no Profession of actual
Faith at full age, is ordinarily to be taken for an Apostate: But such are the
persons in question. I say Ordinarily, because I except them that have been
cast upon natural impossibilities or impotency, or wanted a call and
opportunity: that is, all persons that prove Ideo^s, or deaf and dumb, or
otherwise destitute of natural capacity; such come not to the use of Reason and
free will, and therefore are no^ bound to Actual belief. Such also as have
their tongues cut out, are separated from Humane society, or otherwise disabled
from Profession. But for the common case of mankind. 1. It is plain that they
have their tongues given them by nature of express their minds; and 2. That
Christ commands Confession with the tongue, and professing him before men. 3.
That much of his Worship lies in holy Profession, and all of it contains
answerable Profession. 4. That we have constant calls from God, even to profess
our Christianity: the godly and the wicked that live among us call us to it: we
have daily invitations to profess out Christianity one way or other. And among
all these occasions of Profession, he that Professes not, is to be taken for
an Infidel and Apostate. For the business is so exceeding great and weighty,
and the Object so glorious, and the duty so incumbent, and the very Life of
Christianity so inconsistent with a non-profession, that we have just reason to
conclude, that he that Professes not himself a Christian, ordinarily is to be
taken for none by the Church.

Object. But though at the first admitting of a forraIner into a Commonwealth,
you require an Oath of fidelity, or Profession of subj^ction, yet when we are
borne Subjects, we must be supposed to continue such, till we Rebel, and so
declare the contrary; and our fidelity is not to be qu^stioned.

Answ. 1. The case does exceedingly differ from ours in hand. Princes vary
their Commands as their affairs require. If you are borne in the midst of a
peaceable Republike, you may perhaps have no Oath of fidelity imposed, because
the Peace of the Commom-wealth requires it not: For while there is no enemy
near you, to solicit you to rebellion or treason, or with whom you may
conjoyn, it is supposed, that you have either no mind, or no power to it. And
it is only the common peace that is concerned in the cause. But our case is
otherwise: For we live among Devils and wicked men, and are known to have
hearts our selves, that are naturally treacherous, and at enmity to God. So
that we are still among enemies, that would seduce us, and with whom we are
inclined to take part. And besides that, our Profession is not only necessary
to the common safety, but to our personal performances, and daily Communion
with the Saints, and worship of God. 2. If it be in a Garrison that is near the
enemy, or in a Country that is inclined to Rebellion, or where Rebellion is on
foot, and the enemy hat a party, there Princes use to cause all their Subjects
to take an Oath of fidelity; and ordinarily also in peaceable Kingdoms this is
practiced: At such an age all persons are to take an Oath of Allegiance, or
fidelity, or to make Profession of their subjection, in many places: and in
other places they do it, before they enter upon any Office. And if you will
come nearer the case, and suppose that men were borne in a School, or an Army,
as well as a Republike, I think you would yield, that when they come to age, it
is necessary that they have more then their Birth-Priviledg to show, to prove
them Scholars, or Soldiers. We are Christ's Disciples and Soldiers, as well as
his Subjects; and one is as essential to our Christianity as the other. We may
be initiated into his School and Army in our Infancy, and so stand Related to
him: But sure we are Apostates, if when we come to age, we have nothing to show
but our mere Infant-Condition; and to more we must be called. 3. The case also
differs in this: Princes do make known to all in their Laws, that no man that
is an enemy, yea or that is not ( pro tempore) a Subject, shall dwell on their
Soil, among their Subjects: They suffer not Subjects and Enemies to live
promiscuously together in their dominions: and therefore it is supposed that a
man's very abode and residence in their land, is a profession of Subj^ction:
much more when they live in obedience to the Laws, and hold their estates by
them. But Christ deals not thus: He suffers Believers and Infidels to live
together, and his flock to be but little in the world; so that it cannot be the
least presumption, that a man is a Christian, because he lives among
Christians. 4. At least let us not teach Christ, what he should have done, when
we find he has done otherwise; we find that he requires personal Faith and
profession of all at age, that are naturally capable; and therefore we must
perform it, and not give reasons why we should not do it. No good Subject
that is called to profess his fidelity will ref^se, and say, you have no reason
to question me, and put such a Trial or obligation upon me.

So that I may conclude, that an Adult person not professing Christianity is
not a visible Christian, notwithstanding his birth privileges: and therefore
not a visible Churchmember; and therefore an Apostate, seeing he was once
engaged in Covenant to Christ, (though not an Apostate from actual Faith) and
therefore such as has no proper right to Church Communion and privileges.

Object. If his Infant Title be cut off, it is either by Ignorance,
Wickedness, Heresy, or Schism, or Apostacy: but ignorance and wickedness do
not cut him off; and Heresy, Schism, or Apostacy he is not guilty of;
therefore, etc.

Answ. 1. His Infant Title will cease of it self without any other cutting off,
if it be not continued by his personal actual believing, when he comes to
capable age. His birthpriviledges alone, or his Parents dedicating him to God
in Baptism, will serve no longer of it self. It is therefore for want of
Personal Faith Coram Deo, and of the profession of Faith Coram ecclesia, that
his right does cease.

2. Ignorance, where it proves Infidelity, must needs prove a Cessation of the
Infant Title, when they come to a capable age, and ignorance is privative. He
that knows not, that there is a God, a Christ, or what he has done for us,
or what a Christian is, can have no Faith in God, or Christ; and therefore is
an Atheist, and an Infidel privatively, if at a capable age, among means at
least. It is not only he that denies Christ, that is an Infidel, but he that
never heard of him, Negatively at least; and he that having heard of him,
understood not what he heard, and therefore believes not in him, because he
knows not.

And it is not only he that denies God, that is an Atheist, but he that
knows not that there is a God. And therefore if ingorance cut not off, then
Infidelity and Atheism cut not off. And if neither of these cut off, then no
particular Heresy can: nor any such Apostasy, as men are capable of, that had
but an Infant Church State: gross ignorance at a capable age, proves gross
ungodliness, and Apostasy. For if men's hearts had been toward God, they
would have sought to know him, and if they know him not, their hearts are
Atheistical, and without him.

3. Wickedness is either such as may consist with habitual adhering to God in
Christ; or such as shows a separation or renunciation; the one being
ungodliness partial, and quoad actum particularem, (as Peter's denial) and
the other being ungodliness quoad statum. He that says the former cutteth not
off from the Church, will scarcely say, that it does not meritoriously suspend
the Offender from the Communion of the Church, till he appear penitent. And he
that says the latter cuts not off, from the Church meritoriously, must say
that nothing does it. For this is Apostacy, and comprehends the greatest
Heresy. Such Heretics, hold that the pleasure of sin for a season, is to be
chosen before a life of Holiness with the Hopes of Everlasting life; and the
flesh to be pleased before the Lord: And I think this is Heresy. But whether
these be cut off from the Church or not, either they bring the person under the
guilt of excommunication, or else there is no excommunication to be used. And
if they be excommunicated, we shall not much contend with you about their
rights. As long as you grant that they have no such right as that they may have
the use of Church communion, we are satisfied. And yet I must say, that it is a
blind conclusion, that the excommunicate are Church Members, without
distinguishing of excommunication. If a man shall openly declare that he
believes not in Jesus Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, nor that there is any
life to come; but yet he believes in a Christ within him, and a Heaven and
Hell within men; (as the Ranters, Familists, etc. did) and yet this man, that
he may pervert the souls of others, will hold communion with the Church, and
declare, that he takes the Scripture in his sense, I doubt not but this man,
though a professed Infidel and Apostate, is yet to be excommunicated, while he
pretends to Communion; and if this excommunicate man be not out of the
Catholic Church, then no man is out of it, and you may next question whether
the Devil be not a Member, that believes much more then he.

But when I say that Infidelity, Impiety, Heresy, do cut off or cast out, I
mean it but Meritoriously. Either these crimes are private and unknown, or
provable If not provable, then they merit this, and more Coram Deo, but not
Ecclesia judice, that is, though there be guilt or demerits, yet we are no
capable judges of it. But if the crime be provable, then it is either such, as
needs a judgment or not* If it need a judgment, the person is only de jur^
cast out before the sentence (which is terminus diminuens and is no^ actual
casting out) and he is actually cast out by the sentence, and the execution: so
that his sin cast him out Meritoriously, the Law Obligatorily, the Paflors of
the Church Sententially, and the whole Church, Pastors and People, Executively
in avoiding him. But if there need no judgment, then he is excommunicate
actually ipso jure, by the Law alone without a Judge, which may be in many a
cas^^ A^ if he be a notorious Infidel, Atheist, Blaspheamer, or notoriously
beyond all doubt and controversy one of those, that the Law commands us to
avoid; we must execute this Law, though there be no sentence pronounced. The
want of a man's sentence will not excuse us from obeying Gods Laws. And where
there is no controversy through the notoriousness of the case, there needs no
Judge.

6. If Birth-priviledge will serve alone for the Adult to prove their Title to
the Churchstate and privileges of the Adult, then no man that is born of
Christian Paren^s can be obnoxious to excommunication, or justly excommunicate:
For he is still a Child of Believing Parents: and no sin will make them
otherwise. And therefore if that were enough, he has a good Title still. Nay
it would follow that he cannot Apostatize; for he cannot fall away from this.
But the consequence is absurd, therefore so is the Antecedent.

7. If Infant Title only be sufficient to the Adult, then no Parent is
necessarily obliged to profess himself a Christ^a^, or actual believer, in
order to prove the interest of his Child to Baptism (nor any that offer him in
the Parents stead.) For it is sufficient if the Parents (or susceptors) say, We
were Infant-members and Baptized, and therefore our Child must be so: but
whether we are actual Believers, now, it is not necessary that we tell you But
the Consequent is so absurd, that whoever should have offered a Child to
Baptism on these terms in the A^cient Church, (or any Church that I know of,
till very lately) would have been rejected. The acceptance and Baptism of our
Infants, is one of the privileges of Believers: But no one has right to this
privilege (that his children be thus accepted into the Church) upon a bare
Infant-Title, without the profession of a personal actual ^aith. Therefore,
etc.

8. If the opposed Doctrine should hold good, then all the world has right to
Church Communion* (or M^llions of Infidels, at least) But the consequent is
false: therefore so is the Antecedent. The reason of the Consequence is plain;
because Noah was a Churchmember, and all the world came out of his Loins: And
the men of Thracia, Bithynia, and most of Asia, where Mahomet is worshipped,
may say, Our Ancestors were Christians: Therefore the Birth-priviledges still
going down from generation to generation even to the Thousandth generation, it
must follow, that the present generation of Mahometans and other Infidels, are
Churchmember^ still: For they lost not their natural Relation to their Parents.

9. It will not prove a Society of Adult persons to be a Christian Church, if
they have no more but their Infant-Condition: therefore it will not prove a
single person to be a Member of the Church. That which is necessary to make a
society, a Christian society, is necessary to make a person, a Christian
person. But I hope none will deny, but that some kind of Profession is
necessary to make, or prove a company of men, to be a Christian Church:
therefore some profession is necessary to make, or prove a man, to be a
Churchmember.

10. If Infant-conditions will suffice to the Adult for Church Membership, and
common privileges, then will they serve for Justification, and Salvation, that
are special privileges: But the Consequent is false: therefore so is the
Antecedent. The reason of the consequence is, because though the benefits be
various, yet the Covenant and Conditions are the same, by which we have right
to one and to the other. It is the Appearance of the same Faith, by profession
before men, that give Title, Coram ecclesia, whose inward sincerity gives
right Coram Deo, (as was aforesaid) And God gives Title to all the blessings
of the Covenant, Coram Deo on the same conditions. And there is also a parity
of reason. For if it be enough to prove our right to Adult Communion (to praise
God, and have all his Ordinances and helps in the Church, etc.) that we had
Christian Parents, then must it be enough to prove our Title in all the rest of
our benefits. The ancient Fathers and Churches thought that Baptism did as
certainly give the Infant rightly Baptized, a right to pardon of Original sin,
and eternal life, a^ to outward Church Priviledges. And if the same Covenant
give both on the same condition, then he that has the condition of one, has
of both. I have proved in another Disputation, that God has not two Covenants
of grace on his part, one of spiritual or inward mercies, and another of
outward Ordinances; and that he gives not these inward benefits and the
outward signs of them, upon various conditions, but on the same.

11. Faith or the profession of it in the Adult, is either necessary to
Church Communion, or unnecessary; if unnecessary, then Christians have no more
to do in the Church then Heathens; if necessary, then either as a mere duty, or
as a condition, or other means Not as a mere duty^ for then still the Infidels
should be equally received, though not applauded: It must be therefore
necessary as a means. And the very words of the promise tells us what sort of
means it is, that makes Faith to be its condition.

12. I would know of my adversary, what he would do with the Son of a Believer
that were unbaptized at 40. or 50. years of age? would be Baptize him without a
profession of actual Faith of his own, or not? if he would, then he would make
new fashioned Christians and Churches; and might Baptize all the posterity of
the Apostates, or the ancient Christians in the world, that would consent. Yea,
he could not indeed Baptize them; for Baptism essentially contains a
profession of consent unto the Covenant* which therefore others make for
Infants, that have the dispose of them. But if he would not Baptize such,
without profession, then it seems he takes not their Birth-priviledges to be a
sufficient condition of their Title thereunto.

13. A Covenant breaker can claim no right to the benefits of the Covenant
(supposing him to violate the main conditions on which the benefits are
suspended) But all those at capable age that have nothing but their Infant
condition to show, are Covenant breakers: therefore they have no right to the
benefits of the Covenant They therefore were engaged personally to be^ieve in
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, when they came to the use of reason; we
have cause therefore to see whether they have broke, or kept this Covenant; and
if they have broke it, they can at present claim no Title to the benefits.

14. He that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder
of them that diligently seek him: Therefore those that profess not this belief,
cannot come to God, and consequently not have Communion with the Church.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 5, 6. Therefore without
a profession of Faith, it is impossible to have right to just Communion; which
is purposely for the pleasing of God.

Object. But (its said) Infants have Faith;that is, a Relative Faith, and a
Faderall Faith, as well as a Relative Faederall Holiness* Their right is not
only in their Parents, but in themselves; and therefore their Faith is in
themselves: and this continues with the aged, till Heresy and Schism cut it
off.

Answ. Call any thing under Heaven by the name of Faith, so you will but
explain your meaning, and we will quarrel as little as may be with you about
words: But little know we what you mean by Relative or Faederall Faith, unless
it be plainly, to be semen fidelium, the seed of believers: that there is a
Relative and Faederall Holiness, is Scripture Doctrine, and good sense: For the
formal nature of the thing is a relation which commonly is expressed by the
name of Holiness, and which in that phrase is employed. But I remember not that
Scripture ever speaks of a Relative or Faederall Faith: For I believe not that
it was Infants, that Christ calls the little o^es that believe in him. And
Faith being an act or habit, you must mean some other species of Faith, which
consists in relation. I know it not, nor will I use your Language; though I
think it more tolerable to call the Infant Relatively a Believer, then to say
he has Relative Faith; for in so saying, no more is meant, but that he is a
Disciple of Christ, or belongs to him as he is the Seed of a Believer in
Covenant. But let this word of Faederall Relative Faith be used by you as you
please: If the thing signified by it be any more then I have expressed, you
should tell us what you mean: If it be no more but to be the Seed of a
Believer, then we doubt not but thi^ continues when they come to age: but it
does them no good at age, as to the continuing of their Title to
Church Membership before God without a Faith of their own, nor before the
Church without a profession of it. That the Infant himself is the Subject of
h^s own Right, is a thing that no man, that I know makes doubt of, that
believes him to have any Right: But the active main condition of that right is
not to be performed by himself but by the Parent; and only the Passive
Condition is to be found in himself, that he be the Seed of that Parent: If he
must be a Believers Seed, its the Parent that must Believe: But that will not
serve his turn at age, if he do not also believe himself.

15. It is granted by the Dissenters, that the ignorant, for all their Infant
Title, have no Immediate right to the Communion of the Church. And we will not
contend about names: this satisfies us in the maine. It is not Actual right,
if it be not immediate plenary right: that which they call a remote right, is
properly no actual right, but a term of Diminution, as to it; when right has
two Conditions, you may call it right, when the first and greatest is
performed: but actually it is none, till all be performed: For it is still but
Conditional, while any part of the Condition is unperformed, says Learned Mr
Fullwood. page 274. The rule to give all their due, is of indispensable
Obligation: but seeing ignorant persons, have no such immediate right in the
Supper, what injury or wrong is there done them?

Object But ignorance does not wholly cut a man off from the Church: For such a
knowledge goes not to the ^ssence of the Church; for ^^s fo^m is society or
Community.

Answer. 1. Its sufficient to our present purpose, It is total Ignorance that
the Objection extends to, or Ignorance of the Christian Faith.
that it excludes men meritoriously from immediate right to the Communion of
the Adult. 2. Ignorance qua talis materially, is no sin (as in Idiots,
Paralyticks, etc.) and therefore cuts not off. But ignorance in a Subject, where
knowledge should be found, is culpable, and complicate always with Infidelity,
or not believing; and therefore does declare the person to be matter incapable.
If you choose to say, it cuts not off, I easily can prove, that it manifests
that he is not in the Invisible, and ought not to be esteemed of the visible
Church, by reason of his incapacity; his former Title ceasing, for want of the
condition of its continuation. 3. Knowledge in the capable Adult, is an
essential to the Church, as a society. A Church is a society of Christians; As
it is a society, Christianity is not essential to it, and so not Knowledge:
For there are societies of Heathens, and Infidels enough. But as it is a
Christian Society, Knowledge is essential to it; and therefore, as it is a
Church. It Is essential to a field of wheat, that there be wheat in it: Or to a
heap of wheat, that it be of wheat. And yet not as a field, or as a heap: for
there are heaps of dirt also. The aggregation of a number of individuals, makes
it a Community, and the form of the body aggregated, as to the mutual relation
of the parts, makes it a Body politic or society. But the essential
qualification of the Individuals, viz Christianity, is essential to that
society in specie, as a Christian Church. And Faith in the Adult is essential
to Christianity, and Knowledge is essential to Faith, or inseparable from it.

Object. Then one should not take another to be a Churchmember, till he is
satisfied of his Knowledge, which were a stranger thing.

Answ. Not so strange as true: supposing him an Adult Person capable of
Knowledge. For he cannot be satisfied of his Faith, without being satisfied of
Knowledge: nor of his Christianity without his Faith: For we are yet
unacquainted with the Christian Infidels. But then Consider, what must be
satisfactory to other men concerning their Brothers knowledge. It must satisfy
them, that he is by the Pastors of the Church, who are to judge, approved and
annumerated with Believers: and that he professes himself to be a Believer,
which cannot be without knowledge: This must satisfy them, till he nullify
this evidence, by a clean bewraying of his Infidelity.

Object. But the Scripture says not that ignorant persons cannot be
Church Members, or so much as that they ought merely for their ignorance to be
excommunicate. Answ. Does not the Scripture exclude visible unbelievers, and
take in only visible believers (of the Adult) and make the Church a society of
Believers separated from unbelievers? Such ignorance therefore as is essential
to, or inseparable from Infidelity, is in Scripture made the very brand of
them, that are without, excluded from the Church. If our Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the
minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.That Preaching which Discipleth men, Mat. 28. 19.
Does give them Knowledge, or else it could not give them Faith. For it opens
their eyes and turns them from darkness to light, etc. Act. 26. 18. And
surely we are translated out of the power of darkness into the Kingdom of
Christ, Col. 1. 14. Those that in time past were not a people, but now are the
people of the living God, are called out of darkness into his mavelous
light, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. And what Communion has light with darkness,
righteousness with unrighteousness, Christ with Beliall, the Believer with
the Infidel, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16.

Object. If Knowledge as such, were necessary to membership, then none could be
a member without it: But that is not so.

Answ. 1. Knowledge as such is necessary no otherwise, then Faith as such, and
all one; you may therefore as well plead thus against the necessity of Faith.
2. And we grant that neither Knowledge, nor Faith, are necessary to incapable
Subjects, that is, in themselves. You know Faith in Infants, (such as we call
Faith) is not necessary to their Justification; and yet will you say, it is not
necessary to the Adult? The promise has made it necessary to the Capable. 3.
And we grant that neither Knowledge, nor Faith (justifying or dogmaticall) are
necessary to the being of a visible Member, that is merely such: God only sees
the heart. But yet the appearance or profession of Faith, and so of Knowledge,
in the essentials of Christianity, is of necessity.

4. But though a personal Faith, or Knowledge, in truth or in profession, be
not necessary to an Infant, either for Membership or Justification, yet their
Parents Faith or Profession is necessary: or else the promise is to more, then
Believers and their Seed, quod restat probandum.

Object. But a Negative consent is sufficient, to continue such in Covenant, as
before were admitted in Infancy, or at age: And this Negative consent, is but
non-actuall dissent, or a non-renouncing of the Gospel: And therefore, as
Posi^ive consent, so actual Faith and Knowledge, are not necessary.

Answ. A dangerous doctrine! A negative consent is no consent. Should a man
never think of God, Christ* or Heaven, and so never have actual dissent, he
were yet an Atheist and Infidel: Much more when he hears, and therefore must
needs think of them: for then it is impossible, the will should neither dissent
nor consent. Faith is a positive being, and therefore must have a positive
discovery: perhaps many a Janizary never renounced Christ in words, nor many
another Ch^lde of Christians, that is carried away, where they never heard of
Christ.
Why then should the ears of men be abused by the ^ame, when there is nothing
to answer it? A Negative Faith, in english is Infidelity, or not believing. Is
not this a delusory teaching of the Church, to call unbelief by the name of
Negative Faith, or Negative Consent? If a block, a bruit, or a Subject
otherwise Naturally incapable, be the Subject; then indeed it is inculpable,
and your Negative Consent or Faith, is properly but a Negative dissent, or
unbelief. But if a capable obliged person be the Subject (which is our case)
then your Negative consent is in english privative not consenting, and
privative unbelief, or rejecting Christ. What a meanness is here to convey flat
Infidels into the Church, or continue them there, under the Cloak of an
abusive name! even by calling a non-dissenting conjunct with their Infidelity,
or not consenting to the Covenant of grace, by the name of Negative consent.
Were it a person that had entered at age, yet if he have afterward but your
Negative consent, (which is neither to consent or dissent) he is an Apostate:
And if he refuse consent, when called to it, by his lawful governors, he
gives occasion to be suspected of Apostacy, much more when he continues to
refuse consent, when so much of the life and practice of Christianity
consists in it, and in the manifestation of it. But especially when persons
were Baptized in Infancy, and never yet professed a Faith or Consent of their
own. If that man that had no Faith but his Parents, (and his being a Believers
seed, which you call Faederall Faith) shall be continued at age a Member of the
Church, by a not-actuall dissenting or renouncing Christ, by express words,
then lets talk no more of a Church, nor abuse poor Heathens and Infidels so
much as to question their salvation, or let them below us. But again, I answer
you, that not consenting, is dissenting in the inward act; it is undoubted,
that he that for one year, or month does not consent, does certainly dissent.
There Is no middle state between Believers and Infidels; Consenters, and
Refusers. How shall they escape that neglect of so great salvation? Neglecting,
and not consenting in a capable invited Subject is certain Infidelity: and
therefore in the external profession, we must judge accordingly. He that will
not confess Christ, even in a Christian Church, and a peaceable age, deserves
not to be called a Christian: He that is not for him is against him.

Object. But Gods Vovenant People under the Law, were not only admitted without
their voluntary consent or knowledge, but commanded to renew their Covenant in
such a manner, as that they that were absent, and not in place to express
consent, were included in those that were present.

Answ. 1. None but Infants were admitted without consent: nor they without the
consent of their Parents, natural or civil, that had the power of disposing
of them. 2. Those that were admitted upon others consent, were not continued at
age without their own. 3. The Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12, 15. Was no mutual
Covenant to the absent or unborn there mentioned: but only a Covenant offered
to the Nation, and conditionally made on Gods part as a promise, to them and
their posterity, even to many generations: But those unborn generations, were
not in Covenant on their parts, as promisers in the stipulation.

Object. Wickedness it self does not put a man out of the Visible Church. For a
man is said to be cut off, but either de jure, or de facto; Meritoriously, or
Effectually: the former is improperly called cutting off, being but the Desert
of it: therefore if those baptized in Infancy, prove afterward wicked, they are
not thereby cut off.

Answ. 1. Such persons as we have in question, lose their Right and title by a
Cessation, for want of that personal Condition, which the Covenant made
Necessary to its continuance. So that we need not prove any other cutting off.
2. If he be but Meritoriously cut off, it is the Churches duty to do it
Sententially and Executively; it being of indispensable obligation, to give to
all their due. 3. It Is granted that Heresy cuts off: But how does Heresy cut
off any otherwise then Meritorio^sly? If therefore Wickedness do as much as
Heresy, then thus far they are equal. 4. Either Wickedness signifies some
actual crime like David's or Peter's, when the Church knows not whether it be
joined with Habitual Impenitence, or else it signifies Habitual stated
wickedness with impenitency. The first sort requires but an Exclusion from
Actual Church Communion, (called suspension by some) as it is but Actual sin,
that deserves it. The second sort must have an Exclusion from their State and
Church-relation, as it is a State of Impenitency, that deserves it. The first
sort of Excommunication, leaves a man in the Church, quoad Statum and
Relationem, but out of it quoad actum and usum: The The second sort leaves him
out of it, both in State and Act. Not that the Excomunication puts him out of
the Church, as Invisible: For that he did first himself meritoriously, and so
efficiently; even by the efficiency of his demerits; as the Law of Christ did
it, by its Obligatory efficiency: But when he has put himself out of the
Church invisible, and plainly declared this to the Church by his imp^nitent
courses, the Church further declares it by their Sentence, and puts him out of
the Church Visible executively, when he had before, put out himself
meritoriously. 5. As I said before, the persons wickedness is either Notorious
and out of question, (as if a man be an open persecutour of godliness, or daily
blaspheame God in the open streets, or Congregation, and many lower cases) or
else it is Controvertible, needing proof, and not notorious. In the latter case
a wicked man is not Actually cast out of the Communion of the Visible Church,
or cut off from it, by his demerits, till his fault be proved, and sentence be
passed. But in the former case he is Excommmunicate ipso jure, which is more
then de jure. We call him excommunicate de jure, who ought to be
excommucatenicate de facto: but we call him excommuni- ipso jure, which is
actually excommunicated by the Law, without any further sentence of a Judge,
the Law it self sufficing to enable men to the execution: so the Law of Christ
commanding us to avoid and have no company with Drunkards, Adulterers,
Heretics, etc. if any be Notoriously such, past doubt, every man is obliged by
this L^w to avoid them in their several capacities, after the due admonitions
given them, which the Law requires, whether the Pastors censure them or no:
but his censure lays on them a double obligation.

Object. If wickedness cut off a man, excommunication cannot do it, because it
is done already.

Answ. If wickedness being not Notorious do only cut him off meritoriously and
de jure only he be excommunicate, then Actual excommunication must do that
which was not actually done, but ought to be done. But if by the Notoriety of
the crime he be cut off ipso jure, the Sentence yet may do the same thing, by
adding a Second Obligation to the first. A Traitor in actual prosecution of
the Sovereign, seeking his life, is condemned ipso jure, and any Subject may
kill him without sentence: and yet he may be proclaimed or sentenced a Traitor
for all that.

Object. It is proved by some Writers, that such persons as have neither grace
indeed nor in show, may yet have both a real and visible Interest in the
Covenant and Church: and the Arguments for this are yet unanswered: therefore
persons baptized in Infancy are in the Church and Covenant at age, though they
never by Profession made so much as a show of grace.

Answ. It was never proved by any Writer, nor ever will be, that any person at
age, I would fully answer such kind of Writings, but that judicious Readers are
awery of such contending, and think it not worth the Readers time, or mine.
and natural capacity ought to be a member of the Church of Christ, under the
Gospel (no nor under the Law neither) without a show of grace, even of Faith,
by his Profession of consent to the Holy Covenant. It Is the Arguments against
them that remain unanswered: But that all their Arguments, that I remember,
are sufficiently answered, I shall take for granted, till I see a Reply. And
for them that tell us of the Church membership of the Adult, considered without
Respect to saving Grace, I shall regard them, when they have proved, either
that Faith and Repentance are no saving Graces; or that Profession of Faith
has no Respect to Faith; or that men may have Title to Church Membership,
without respect to Profession of Faith; even of their Parents, if they are
Infants; or their own if at age. All these three points are yet unproved.

If any think the learned Mr. Fullwood to be of another mind, let them judge by
his own words: Of the Visible Church, cap. 28. page 180. Says he; However I
humbly conceive, though more then a bare historical faith should be requisite,
yet less then a Faith that Just fieth (I do not say less than the Profession
thereof) may truly entitle to Visible Church-membe^shipetc. mark the
Parenthesis. And in his Epist. Propos. 3. and 4. From the Pr^mises it seems at
least probable to me, that the Church is to have some kind of respect unto the
saving condition of the person She is about to admit into Communion, etc. 4.
Yet I humbly conceive that more then a bare outward Profession is requisite, to
give real Interest in the Visible Church, and the Privileges thereof, before
God; Though no more is requisite to give visible Interest before men, etc. And
for Immediate right to the Communion of the Church in the Lords Supper, he
says, page 270. Where there is want of Knowledge (whether naturally or morally)
there, we are sure, the Condition of Right is wanting; and consequently
admission is to be denied, when all is done. And for the maine design of this
Book, he says, Append. page 1, 2. (mentioning Mr. Hanmer's Book) Some happily
may be willing to surmise that our two Propositions are irreconcilable, and
interpret me an enemy to that most ancient, useful, and desirable Ordinance.
Wherefore, if I may possibly prevent so scandalous a censure, I shall not
venture to hold my Reader in so long suspense, till he come to the pages, where
Confirmation is considered in the Book; nor yet barely to acknowledge my
allowance of it under my hand; but after my humble thanks heartily tendered to
our worthy Author, for his excellent pains, in so seasonable a Subject, I do
also presume earnestly to beseech my Reverend Brethren, that what Mr. Baxter
has so smartly pressed upon the Ministry about it, may be speedily and
seriously considered, and undertaken by us. And many pages after he adds 7.
Yea, though after all due pains and endeavoures used, we should not be able to
reconcile our principles in every point, yet if we can m^et in the same
practice about Confi^mation, though on some small differing grounds, why may not
the Church be happily ed^fied, and the peace thereof in a measure obtained, by
such an V^ity, Uniformity in practice, white the persons diff^ring but in
lighter matters, may wait upon the Lord in this good service, for the great
blessing of Unanimity, promised also?

Object. But he adds the proviso, that Confirmation be not thought to have
any ingrediency into the nature or being of our membership: and that the temper
of the people be found such, as will admit of such a change.

Answ. We shall easily grant, that Confirmation, as it is a solemn Reception of
the person by Imposition of hands, or without Imposition in a purposed
solemnity, commonly known by that name, is not of necessity to the Being of our
membership: and that all those that are received upon profession of Faith may
be Church Members; and that the ordinary use of Christian Assemblies, and
exercises of worship, is a Profession, though obscure; and that a baptized
person that never was called to a Verbal Profession, may be taken for a
Christian, or Churchmember, upon such a Practical sort of Profession, joined
with a not denying of Christ in word or life. But yet we are far from thinking
that the Infant-Title-condition of such a one, serves to prove his present
Church State and Title, now he is at capable age. The Infant-Title cease, if
he continue it not by a Personal Profession at age. And as there is no middle
between Believers and unbelievers, so there is no such thing in a capable
subject, as non-dissenting, in a moral sense, but true Consenting. It is not
possible for the Soul to be neuter, when the thing is offered to our consent,
but we must either will or nill, consent or dissent; though if it were, yet not
willing, or not consenting, is Infidelity and Rebellion in such a Subject. And
accordingly we maintain, and must maintain that Profession of some sort or
other is a necessary Condition of the Title and Church State of the capable
Adult, and of Right to the Privileges: And as an obscure kind of Profession
may serve (when a man is called to no more) to prove his Right, so a clearer
sort of Profession is necessary to the clearer proof, and ad been esse
Ecclesiae. And I have showed what great and weighty Reasons we have, to require
an open, clear, intelligible Profession: And he that is justly called to for
such, gives cause to the Church to question him of Apostasy, if he refuse
without cause. So that of the three Conditions in question, the first (which is
our Infant-condition) is utterly insufficient to the capable Adult: and the
second (which is an obscure signification of our mind, by our Christian
practices) may serve ad esse, at least when no more is required: and the third
(which is an open approved Profession by word or subscription) is necessary
ordinarily ad been esse.

Thus far we are agred: But what if we were not? Must we therefore refuse to
agree in the practice of the aforesaid Confirmation? Will any good and
peaceable man refuse to join with those that think it necessary to Adult
Church Membership? If this opinion (of the said Non-necessity) had been an
Article of Faith, and among the necess^ry Credenda of the Church, we should
have had it in some Creed, or heard more of the necessity of it then we have
done, from the Ancient Churches. If we meet about the agenda in our practice,
let men take head how they divide from such as differ in the Reasons of their
Practice, till they can prove that they deny some Article of the Faith, which
is of necessity to be believed.

And as for the peoples unfitness, or any disturbance that will follow
thereupon: 1. If there be such a thing, it will be much long of the Ministers:
Let them unanimously agree, and they may do well enough with the people, or
much the better. But when Ministers themselves are the bellows of faction, and
think they can never sufficiently vilify dissenters, and so have themselves
taught the people to take such a Practice for a Prelaticall foppery, or
formality, or for an Independent rigidity and extremity; no wonder, if when
they come to practice their duty, they meet with such reproaches from the
people, as they have taught them. 2. But suppose that people would disturb us,
that may in some cases excuse us, as to the mode of Confirmation, or
Profession: but no unfitness of the people can excuse us, as to the substance
of the duty; the requiring and approving their Profession. We are false to our
trust, and the Church of God, if to avoid disturbance, we will confound
Believers and Infidels, and destroy the nature of the Church and Ordinances,
under pretense of the peoples good.

Object. But it would be your only sure and happy course to exercise Discipline
upon all that are baptized in their Infancy; whether at age they consent or no:
And finding them in the Church, you must do so.

Answ. I have said enough to this before. Have they that talk thus, tried this
course, or have they not? If they have not, we will bear with them as well
meaning men, that talk of what they never tried; as we would do with a
confident man, that would condemn the actions of Soldiers and Seamen, that
himself was never in at wars, nor at Sea. But if they have tried it, what
kind of Discipline do they exercise? Would they make us believe, that they are
able in a Parish of 4000, or 5000, or 6000 Souls, to exercise the Discipline
mentioned in Scripture, and the Canons of the Ancient Churches, and that upon
such persons, as our Parishes commonly consist of? I know they cannot do it: I
have had trial to tell me what a man can do. With the help of diverse
Ministers, and many hundred godly people, to watch over others, and promote
this work, I am not able to do it on all this Parish, if I might. There is so
many offenders weekly to be dealt with, and so much time required to hear
witnesses, and admonish them, that it is more then I could p^ssibly do. How
Bishops deal with Diocesses, let them see themselves. And if we could do it,
yet the people will not consent If you send for them, they will not come near
you: If you admonish them in the Congregation by name, they will have an Action
at Law against you, if they can? However, you will have such a multitude
enraged by the exercise of Discipline, if it be faithfully (though never so
tenderly done) that the Church will be in a flame, and your M^nistry hated, and
the people undone, as I have before declared. So that it is but a name of
Discipline, to the destruction of discipline, that this Objection pleads for;
or else it dishonoure^h it self and the Authors.

And as they do by Discipline, so they do by Christian Charity, which is a
greater thing. Of old, the Visible members of the Church were the Objects of
brotherly Christian Love: And so as they seemed to them to be Believers and
penitent persons, the living members did love all the body with that special
Love, that was the matter of the new Commandment, and proved them to be
Christ's Disciples. No man knew the hearts of others, and therefore knew not
whom to Love as Christians infallibly discerned. But the Profession of Saving
Faith and Holiness, being then (and ever) the test of Adult-members, they took
all the members of the Visible Church as credibly of the invisible; though with
different degrees of Credibility. And accordingly they loved them all, with a
Christian special Love, of the same species, though with different degrees of
that Love. Whereas this Popish new found trick, of making a new common sort of
Faith, and Visible membership, that has no respect to saving Faith, does teach
all Christians, to Love the members of the Visible Church, but with a common
love; and relieve and help them, but with a common Charity. And so the device
is to confine our special Brotherly Love and Charity, to a corner of the
Visible Church; to a few, whom we will please to think to be godly.

I have often marvelled in observing some Learned Divines, that bend that way,
that they think compassion, and Christian Charity is on their side. What
Charity can their Doctrine glory of? They will be so merciful to Infidels,
that are incapable of a Church State, as to plead them into the Church; and
when they are there, they leave them under the curse, and in a state of
damnation in their own judgments; teaching us to judge uncharitably, of the
Visible Church in general for their sakes; and to look on them as without
respect to any saving grace, and so without any special Love. A cold comfort I
to bring them into no more capacity of Gods Mercy, nor of our Charity; but into
much more capacity of aggravated damnation: which they might better have
prevented by being kept in their proper station, till they were capable of
more. I confess (though my belief of men's Profession, have different degrees,
as I see in them different degrees of Credibility) yet I have Charitabler
thoughts of the members of the Visible Church, then these that make so low and
miserable a description of them. And though I know that there are abundance
among them, that are Hypocrites, and unsanctified, yet know I none but Saints
and Hypocrites, that are tolerable in the Church; nor will I accuse particular
persons of Hypocrisy, till I have cause. Neither in my secret, or open
censures, will I pluck up the tares upon any such terms, as will not stand with
the safety of the wheat, but rather let them grow together in my esteem in
the Church, till the time of harvest. And that I may think charitably of the
Church, and walk charitably in, and toward it, therefore I would not have it
consist of such notorious, ungodly, or heretical men, as are incapable objects
of Christian, Brotherly Love. For Heresy, the foresaid learned Brother tells
us, that it cuts men off from the Church. I say so to (meritoriously at least)
if by Heresy be meant the exclusion of any essential Article of the Christian
Faith: But page 199, where he says, the Controversy may be easily ended, by
parting stakes: viz. that some Heresy, which absolutely denies some
particular fundamental truth, and takes up some one, or few stones thereof, is
consistent with Church interest: and other Heresy, which raises up the very
foundation of Religion, denying most, or the most chief, if not all of the
Articles of our Christian Faith, is inconsistent therewith. I must humbly, but
very confidently say, that this answer will not serve the turn. If by
Fundamentals, be meant (as commonly) the Essential Articles of Christian Faith,
then the absolute denying of any one Article, does prove that person to be no
Christian, nor capable of a Church state: For the form is wanting, where any
Essential part is wanting. But if any thing else be meant by Fundamentals, no
man can decide the Controvesie by it, till it be known what it is: And it will
be hard to fasten it on any thing, where the absolute denial of many points
shall unchurch, and the absolute denial of one or two points of the same rank
and kind not do it. Says he p. 198. The Jews held that an heretical Isralite,
had no communion with the Church of Israel: and why? but because Communion
supposes union; and union with Israel, or the true Church, is lost with Faith:
They also held, (as Seldom notes) that an Israelite turning an Heretic i. e.
denying any of the thirteen fundamental Articles, to be as an Heathen man. And
a few lines before, he says, that historical Faith, which has the Doctrine of
Faith for its Object, none do doubt to be an Essential, requisite to a true
Churchmember. Yet that with me is a Visible member, that has not this much,
which is said to be Essential, no man doubting of it. If they Profess true
Faith, though they are stark Atheists at the heart, and have not so much as
historical Faith, I shall believe them, till they nullify their own
Profession: But if they profess not also to consent to have Christ to be their
Savior, I shall not take it for a Profession of Christianity.

Certain I am, that the ancient Doctors with one consent, did look on the
baptized generally as pardoned, justified, and adopted; and therefore thought
that Visible Church Membership, did imply a credibility (at least) of a state
of saving grace. Says Cyprian, Epist. 76. Magn. In Baptismo unicuique peccata
sua remittuntur. And upon this supposition run the Arguments of the council of
Carthage, and Firmilian, Epist. ibid.

Says Augustine, De Catechizandis rudibus, cap. 26. His dictis interrogandus
est, an haec credat, atque observare desideret? Quod cum responderit,
solemniter utique signandus est, and ecclesiae more tractandus. Obedience it
self was promised, and a consent to it professed before Baptism then, and ever
since Christian Baptism was known.

Idem Epistol. 119. Ad Januar. cap. 2. Secundum hanc fidem and spem and
dilectionem, qua caepimus esse sub gratia, jam commortui sumus cum Christo, and
consepulti per baptismum in morte, etc. Baptism then supposes credibly Faith,
Hope and Love.

Idem Epist. 23. Having showed why Parents Faith profits Infants, and yet
their after-sins hurt them not, says Cum autem homo sapere caeperit, non illud
Sacramentum repetit, sed intelligit: ejusque veritati consona etiam voluntate
coaptabitur. Hoc quamdiu non potest (N. B.) valebit Sacramentum ad ejus tutelam
adversus contrarias potestates: and tantum valebit, utsi ante rationis usum ex
hac vita emigraverit, per ipsum Sacramentum Ecclesiae charitate ab illa
condemnatione, quae per unum hominem intravit in mundum, Christiano adjutorio
liberetur. Hoc qui non credit, and fieri non posse arbitratur, profecto
infidelis est, etsi habeat fidei Sacramentum, longeque melior est ille
parvulus, qui etiamsi fidem nondum habeat in cogitatione, non ei tamen obicem
contrariae cogitationis opponit, unde Sacramentum ejus salubriter percipit.

And says the Synod of Dort. Artic. 1. 8. 17. Quandoquidem de voluntate Dei ex
verbo ipsius nobis est judicandum, quod testatur liberos fidelium, esse
sanctos, non quidem natura, sed benefici^ faederis gratuiti, in quo illi cum
parentibus comprehenduntur, pij parents de electione and salute suorum
liberorum, quos Deus in Infantia ex hac vita evocat, dubitare non debe^t. And
if there be such certainty of the Election and Salvation of all such Infants of
the godly, as ought to exclude all doubting, surely the visible Church State of
the Adult also, has some respect to saving grace, so far as that its
credible fide humana that such have saving Faith.

And says Mr Fullwood, Append. p. 6. I conceive that such an ones personal
profession in his general ow^ing the true Faith, and usual attending Gods
public worship, does superadde a kind of new right, and mingle it with such a
persons former right, had by his Birth privilege. And if the [new Right] be
not a necessary Right, I think it will prove no right.

I will contend with no man whether the approved profession which I have
pleaded for in this book, be the very same thing with the Ancients
confirmation. I have given you my thoughts of it, and I am sure the thing in
question is our duty, and the name not unfit, and that its the same with the
Confirmation owned by the Divines of the reformed Churches, and particularly
with that established and recommended in the Book of Common Prayer, here in
England, for the substance.

I shall conclude with this serious request to my Brethren, seconded with
weighty reasons. Even that they would take heed of both extremes in their
judging of Church Members, and managing the Discipline and Ordinances of
Christ. 1. Should we be so loose as to cast out Discipline, or settle the
Churches either with such materials for quality, or quantity, as that it shall
be incapable of Discipline, we shall never be able to answer it to Christ. And
should we make a new qualification of Adult Church Members, even their
Infant-Title-condition alone, or the profession of a Faith that is not saving,
we should come too near the making of a new Baptism, and Church. And truly if
we do but slubber over the business, and to avoid offense or trouble to our
selves, I am sensible also how the arguments for both extremes do either drive
or draw the Reader to the Anabaptists.
should take up with a profession utterly incredible, especially in these times
when we have so much liberty and countenance from the Magistrate, for a fuller
Reformation, we shall be guilty of so much injury to the Church, and the
Christian name, and our people souls; as is little considered by many that have
their eye only on the contrary extreme, as if there were no danger but on one
side.

2. On the other side, if we go so rigidly and unrighteously to work, as some
men are bent to do, we may accomplish those ends, that we are endeavoring to
overthrow, and frustrate our own, which we think to attain. If we will reject
the Scripture-ancient-Character or Evidence of Title to Church Priviledges,
even a credible profession of Christianity, we shall confound our selves, and
trouble the Church, and be at a loss for a certain Evidence, and never know
what ground to rest upon. And we shall injure the souls of multitudes of true
Believers, and keep out those, that Christ will entertain. For there are no
other terms, besides taking men's profession by a humane Faith, on which we can
admit persons, without excluding multitudes, that should not be excluded. I
doubt many Ministers, that have had a more ingenuous education themselves, are
not sufficiently sensible of the great disadvantage, that Country People are
under, by their want of such Education. Many that are bred where holy discourse
is strange, and never were used to any thing of that nature, no nor to common
Urbanity of speech, or behavior, may be brought to hearty sorrow for sin,
and desires after Christ and Grace, long before they can express their
knowledge, or desires, in any such manner, as some men do expect. Many gracious
souls (as far as I can discern) I have met with, that never were noted for
any thing extraordinary in Religion, though they lived among such. I had rather
let in many, that are unregenerate, into the Church, then keep out one that is a
true Believer, if there be no other remedy. The Lord Jesus that died for them,
and sent the Ministry for them, and will at last admit them into Heaven, will
give us little thanks, for excluding his weakest Members from the Church, and
from the use of the Sacrament and Communion of Saints, who have most need of
them, of any that have right to them. For my part, I desire not, nor dare be
guilty of that way of Government in the Church, as shall grieve those that
Christ would not have grieved, and exclude the weak, and turn or keep out the
Infants in Grace, from the Family of the Lord. A compassionate Minister is
likest to Christ, that will not break the bruised reed. How dealt he with the
woman taken in adultery? How tenderly excuses he the sluggishnesse of his
Disciples, that could not watch and pray with him one hour, in his last
extremity, with the Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak? when many now
that think well of themselves would almost excommunicate men for as small a
fault; We know not in such cases, what Spirit we are of.

But this is not all: I must confess Brethren (which I beseech you patiently
to hear) these three things very much stick upon my thoughts. 1. I cannot but
observe, how many eminent Professors of Piety have miscarried, and grievously
miscarried of late, when some of lower Professions have stood fast. And I think
God suffers the falls of many of his own, to let them know the frailty of our
natures, and cause them to be compassionate to others. And some censorious men's
hearts might smite them, if they had heard from their Master, Let him that is
faultless, cast the first stone.

2. And it sticks very much upon my thoughts, how small a handful the
censorious way would reduce the Catholic Church of Christ to. The most
experienced holy of my flock are very tender of the scandalous themselves, and
would not have me to cast them out while there appears any present hope:
remembering the condition that once they were themselves in, and their failings
after convictions, and what had become of them if then they had been cast out.
When it is but about the sixth part of the world that are at all Baptized
Christians; and scarce the sixth part of them, that are Protestants; and of the
Protestants, so few, except in England, that are so qualified for holiness, as
in your admissions you exspect: and in England how small is the number that you
would admit, I am deeply afraid lest you hainously injure the Cause of Christ,
by your excessive rigor: and lest confining even the visible Church into so
exceeding small a compass, should tempt men to infidelity. For he that to day
can believe, that Christ died not for one of a hundred thousand in the world,
may to morrow believe, that he died for none at all. I hope the little flock of
the Elect, is not so little, as some would have the visible Church of the
called.

3. We are deeply sensible of the increase of Infidels here in England. They
are too thick about us, under several garbs, especially under the mask of
Seekers; and are persuading people against the Christian Faith, and truth of
Scripture, and the life to come: and so much do these Apostates now abound,
that we have reason to be jealous of them. And if any of you should strike in
with good men, that are of this censorious over rigorous way, consider how
far they may make use of such to accomplish their designs. If by you they can
get almost all the world un-Churched in estimation; and fifty for one, if not
an hundred for one in England, actually un-Christened, and their children after
them left unbaptized: what will follow? I doubt this, if God should not save us
from your miscarriages, When there is but one of an hundred in all the Land,
that is a Christian, the rest will want neither malice, nor power, to put an
end here to the Christian name; or at least to the liberty and glory of
Christianity. They may choose our Parliaments for us, and in a word, do with us
what they list, when they are exasperated to the greatest hatred of us; and cut
off our liberties, and set up Infidelity or Heathenism by a Law. I trust God
will never suffer this: But let us take ^eed of gratifying Infidels, and
casting all our safety upon miracles, lest we be found to be but foolish
builders, and tempters of God: still you may find that over-doing is the most
effectual undoing. And if you would find out the most dangerous enemies of the
Gospel, look for them among those, that seem over zealous against the enemies
of the Gospel, and seem to over-doe in the work of the Gospel, I desire to
bring no party^ of godly men into suspicion, or odium by this: but indeed I
desire to counter-mine the Apostates; and it would be the most amazing
consounding thing, that could befall us in this world, if we should see the
Church of God betrayed into the hands of Infidels, and the Gospel lost, by the
indiscreet and inconsiderate over-doing of those well-meaning men, that did the
work of Infidels, and ungodly men for them, while they thought that none were
so much against them. If the neck of Religion be broken among us, I am afraid
the imprudent will be some cause, that would lead us above the top of the
Ladder.

Sure I am between you both, you have the easiest way to the flesh, that run
into extremes. Durst I cast off Discipline, and only preach, and please all the
parish in Sacraments and other Ordinances, how easy a life should I have to
the flesh? And if I durst take out one of a hundred, that are eminent in Piety,
that will scarce ever call me to any penal acts of Discipline, I should have a
much more easy life then the former. But they are both so easy, that I the
more suspect them, to be the fruit of the wisdom of the flesh. Indeed, both
the extremes do cast off Discipline, for the most part, whatever they pretend.
One sort never mean to exercise it: And the other sort extol it; and when
they have done, they separate a few of the best that are like to have no need
of the troublesome part of it, and so sit down without the exercise of it;
pretending to be Physicians, but refusing to receive the sick into their
Hospitals. Brethren, I speak not as an accuser, but a Monitour, and shall
continue to pray for the Churches Purity and Peace, while I am

R. B.
July, 30. 1658.
Dr H. Hammond, In his view of the-Direct.. 41. p. 45, 46. For Confirmation,
which being so long and so scandalously neglected in this Kingdom (though the
Rule have also been severe, and careful in requiring it) will now not so
easily be digested, having those vulgar prejudices against it; yet must I most
solemny profess my opinion of it; That it is a most ancient Christian Custom,
tending very much to Edification: which I shall make good by giving you this
view of the manner of it. It is this; that every Rector of any Parish, or
Curate of charge, should by a Familiar way of Chatechizing, instruct the Youth
of both Sexes within his Cure, in the Principles of Religion, so far that
every one of them before the usual time of coming to the Lord's Supper, should
be able to understand the particulars of that vow, made in Baptism, for the
Credenda and Facienda; yea and Fugienda also: what must be Believed, what done,
and what forsaken; and be able to give an intelligent account of every one of
these: which being done, every such Child so prepared, ought to be brought to
the BP for Confirmation. Wherein the intent is, that every such Child, attained
to years of Understanding, shall singly and solemnly before God, the BP, and
the whole Congregation, with his own consent, take upon himself the Obligation
to that, which his Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism, promised in his
Name; and before all those Reverend Witnesses, make a Firm, Public, Renewed
promise, that by Gods help he will Faithfully endeavor, to discharge that
Obligation in every point of it, and persevere in it all the days of his life.
Which resolution and promise so heightened with all those solemnities, will in
any reason have a mighty impression on the Child, and an influence on his
actions for ever after. And this being thus performed by him, the BP shall
severally impose his hands on every such Child (a ceremony used to this purpose
by Christ himself) and bless and pray for him, that now, that the Temptations
of sin begin more strongly in respect of his age, to assault him, he may
receive Grace and Strength against all such Temptations or Assaults, by way of
prevention and special assistance; without which, obtained by Prayer from God,
he will never be able to do it. This is the Sum of Confirmation; and were it
rightly observed (and no man admitted to the Lords-Table, that had not thus
taken the Baptisme-Bond from the Sureties into his own Name; and no man after
that, suffered to continue in the Church, which brake it wilfully; but turned
out of those Sacred Courts by the power of the keys in Excommunication) It
would certainly prove by the Blessing of God, were it begun, a most effectual
means to keep men (at least within some terms of Christian civility, (from
fallings into open Enormious sins; and that the defaming and casting out of
this so blameless gainful order, would be necessary or useful to any policy,
save only to defend the Devil from so great a blow, and to sustain and uphold
his Kingdom, I never had yet any Temptation or Motive to suspect or imagine.
Instead of considering any Objections of the adversary against this piece,
whether of Apostolical or Ecclesiastical Discipline (which I never heard with
any color produced) I shall rather express my most passionate wish unto my
friends, those who sincerely wish the good of this National Church, that they
will endeavor their uttermost to revive these means of regaining of purity
and exemplary lives of all its members, when God by restoring our peace shall
open a door for it.

FINIS.
Errata.
COntents, p. 13. l. 9. r. [overmuch rigor.] p. 7. l. 8. for [yet] r. [that.]
p. 12. l. 23. r. [its stead.] p. 19. l. 24. r. [he that.] p. 24. l. 22. for
[before] r. [because.] p. 27. l. 5. r. [learners.] p. 34. l. 13. r.
[Baptismall.] p. 35. l. 25, and 26. for [seem] r. [serve.] p. 36 l. 4. for
[their] r. [the.] p. 37. Marg. l. 13. r. [nullo.] p. 47. l. 11. r. [^dem.] p.
49. l. 8. r. [that it is.] l. 25. for [grounded] r. [granted.] p. 55. l. 20. r.
[Heb. 13. 7. 17. 24. p. 58. l. 28. r. [pastours.] p. 64 l. ult. r. [and duty.]
p. 65. l. 1. for [judging.] r. [guiding] p. 75. l. 15. for [termes] r. [times,]
p. 73 l. 24. for [admitted] r. [administred.] p. 75 l. 2. r. [hanc.] p. 78. l.
21. r. [not.] p. 79. l. 12. for [them] r. [him.] p. 63. l. 16. r. [them to.] p
89. l. 26. for [pardon] r. person.] p. 94. l. 21. r. [as to the] p. 96. l. ulr.
r. [prove it.] p. 105. l. 4. for [that] r. [the.] p. 111. l. 16. r.
[physicall.] p. 114. l. 22. for [that] r. yet. l p. 119. l. 24. for [whether]
r. [where.] p. 125. l. 27. r. [prescript^ p. 131. l. 27. r. [persecuturosque
jurabant.] p. 132. l. 7. r. [jurabant.] p. 134. l. 15. for [propriety] r.
[parity.] p. 144. l. 27. for [intruding] r. [introducing.] p. 177. l. 4. for
[or] r. [on.] l. 11. for [enter] r. [eate.] p 179. Marg. l. 26. r. [partes.] p.
180. l. 6. for [any] r. [my.] p. 183. l. 24. r. [know not.] p. 198. l. 17 r
[will not.] p. 199. l. 21. r. [help or.] p. 209. l 3. for [the] r [thy.] l. 25.
for [for] r. [of.] p. 216. l. 8. for [variety] r. [vanity.] p. 218. l. 6 r.
[difference.] p. 220. l. 26. r. [Children.] p. 221. l. 13. for [admitted] r.
[administred.] p. 224. l. 21. r. [approved.] p. 241. l. 6. for [little] r.
[title.] p 242. l. 10. for [our] r. [your.] p. 245. l. 21 r. [on the.] l. 24.
r. [Ministers.] p. 252. l. 11. r. [they are.] p. 257. l. 22. r. [whom they.] p.
262. l. 13. r. [do it.] p. 265. l. 16. r. [answered this.] p. 267. l. 13. r.
[and the.] p. 272. l. 11. r. [all are.] p. 276. l. 7. r. [too long] l. 8. r.
[by the.] p. 279. l. 13. r. [in the.] p 292. l. 22. for enflame] r. [enslave.]
p. 293. r. [in these.] p. 316. l. ult. r. [Febr. 13.]

Postscript, p. 21. l. 23. for [therefore] r. [then.] p. 22. l. 9. r.
[Church-Communion.] p. 30. l. 4. r. [meane^.] p. 31. l. 8. r. neglect so]. p.
42 l. 17. r. [in the Warres] p. 46. l. 2 r. [and in the]


