THE MERCHANTS REMONSTRANCE.

Wherein is set forth the inevitable miseries which may suddenly befall this
Kingdom by want of Trade, and decay of Manufactures.

By I.B. of London Merchant.

This is licensed and entered into the Hall-Booke according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by R.H. February 12. 1644.

To the Reader.
READER,
MY Profession being that of a Merchant, thou must expect the Language and
style in this REMONSTRANCE, answerable thereunto: Let thy thoughts be upon the
matter it self, weigh it well, for it is of such concernment to the welfare of
the whole Kingdom, that it must stand and fall with it.

Farewell. I. B.

The Merchants Remonstrance.
TRade is the life of a State, Manufactures are the sinews of Trade, and Money
is the soul of both. There is such a necessary connection and dependency
between them, that the one cannot subsist without the other; The last does
animate the second, and the second supports the first, and the first gives
motion and quickening to the other two. Now of all sorts of Trade, Traffic
has been always esteemed the most noble, because the most hazardous; And
Traffic is most proper and useful to Islands, whose security and power
depends principally upon shipping, and navall strength. Amongst Islands, this
of great Britain has been from all times held the most rich, and renowned, as
well for the fertility of the soil, and temperature of the air; As for the
substantial and necessary native commodities it affords in such plenty to
advance Trade, and oblige all other Nations. Now there is no greater enemy to
Trade than War, be it in what Country it will; our Neighbors the Hollanders
excepted, who by so long a habit of War seems to make a Trade of it; They are
the only men who by the advantage of their situation can fish best in
troubled waters; witness the tumults of Germany, and these of England and
Ireland. Yet foreign war is not so great a disturber of Trade, nor half so
destructive, as intestine; For as the fire that is kindled within doors, and in
the bed-straw, as it were, rages more violently: so civil War ruins Trade
faster than any other, and makes poverty and desolation post in one after the
other, wheresoever it is kindled. Now the drift of this small Remonstrance is,
to show the great misery that may suddenly befall this Kingdom through want of
Trade, and the evil effects it may produce.

First, for that the chiefest way of enriching a Kingdom, is the expense of
it is native or home commodities (that can well be spared) in foreign parts;
if it fail, the Manufacture must cease, by which means many thousands of
poor Families, which have no other maintenance by their daily labor, or by
what each days work will afford them, will be suddenly exposed to beggary.

Secondly, diverse Workmen or Artificers, through want of employment here, will
doubtless go into other Countries, and exercise their Trade, whereby it may
come to the knowledge and practice of strangers, as I fear is already: being
at the penning hereof informed, that in Zeland there are Loomes set up for
Perpetuano's, and other Stuffs: And that in other places they are not idle,
setting up daily Loomes for Cloth, etc.

It will perhaps be objected, that if our Wool (which is the chief material)
be wanting, they will fail of the exercise of their Trade in foreign parts:
I answer, that such Wools may be had elsewhere, as will serve their turn, by
the due mixture of such sorts as will fit and agree best together.

Witness, The store of course Cloth made in High Germany, where about 20000
English Clothes, narrow Lists (commonly called by the Merchant Adventurers,
Franckfort sorts) each Cloth containing 28 yards in length, were yearly spent,
and since not above 2000 vented of the said sorts; the cause whereof, was that
unhappy Project of dying and dressing of Cloth by Sir William Cockaine and
others: which so much insenced the Germans (for if it had taken effect, many
Families of Clothworkers and Dyers would have bin destroyed) that they used
their utmost endeavors to practice the making of the said sorts of Clothes;
which had such success, that in a very short time the expense of those sorts
of English Clothes, was brought down from so great, to so small a number. That
Project found the like or worse entertainment in Holland, and other parts of
the Low Countries, where, before that time, many thousands of finer sorts of
English Clothes were more vented then now are; so that it was observed, that
whereas before the said Project was put in practice, there were about eighty
thousand English Clothes of all sorts per annum, exported by the old Company of
Merchant Adventurers, that in the new Companies time and since, not much above
thirty thousand, whence this Inference may be easily drawn, That Innovations
in a State or Commonwealth are always dangerous, and sometimes destructive.

Before the late war between us and Spain, there were sent hence thither great
store of knit Stockings; but the Importation of all English commodities into
that Kings dominions being prohibited, his Subjects put in practice the making
of Stockings, and in those quantities, and at such easy rates, that since we
have had peace with that King, it has been free for English Merchants to
import those of the Manufacture of our Country; yet very few are sent, for
that they cannot be afforded at such low rates as those made there. That people
did then also practice the making of Bays, which it is probable, had taken such
effect, that if the war had continued betwixt the two Kings somewhat longer,
the vent of English had bin there quite lost. Hence it follows, That War with
foreign States is destructive to our Manufactures.

But admit that foreign Nations, notwithstanding what has been said, will in
some measure have need of some of our Woollen Manufactures, we shall not be
able to furnish them therewith, the chief material Wool being wanting; which
want must follow when our Sheep are destroyed; and with them, all other kind
of Cattle, if this most unnatural war continue but a short time.

The Hollanders are an industrious and diligent People, and watch all
opportunities to ingrosse all the Trade they can into their own hands, they
have certainly a vigilant eye over our Actions, that Lethargy which has
seized on us, will make them the more watchful; they will make no little use
of our distractions; they will be ready to take hold of what we let loose, and
with great eagerness pursue what we let go; we shall not so soon be out, as
they will be in.

Lastly, if the Traffic of this Kingdom be once lost, what will then become
of it? what will then be preserved?

Our Ships, the walls of this Land will rot, and moulder away.

Our wealth and Estates will be consumed, and no means left for recovery.

Tenants will be disabled from paying their Landlords, and they, viz. the
Landlords, for want of supplies of moneys by their usual Rents, will not be
able to furnish themselves, and Families with commodities needful, vented by
men of sundry Trades, viz. Woollen and Linen Drapers. Mercers. Silkmen.
Grocers. Habberdashers. Vintners, etc. together with most sorts of
Handicrafts-men, or Artificers.


Part of the commodities wherein they deal, being native, or of our own
Country, both for the materials and Manufacture, and part brought into this
Kingdom from foreign Countries. Now those sorts of Tradesmen failing of the
vent of their commodities, the Trade of Merchants into other Kingdoms must
cease, there will be no need of them, thence will follow the decay of Ships,
Mariners, and sundry sorts of Artificers, Laborers, and many others that have
their dependency upon them. This mischief will not be altogether confined and
bounded within our own Land, it will extend it self (like an Epidemicall
disease) into all or most other Kingdoms where we have Trade: For, if we take
not off the commodities of those Countries in exchange of ours, they must
suffer, and that not a little by it, and for remedy partly, for want of their
accustomed employment, and vent of their said commodities; and partly, by
reason of the want of ours, be enforced to seek out, and learn other Trades,
and very likely pitch or fall upon the making of such as are here made: For, as
in the Body natural, there is such a sympathy and connection of the parts,
that if any of them be distempered, the rest has a sense thereof: so it may
be said of the Body of Trade, one Part has such a dependencie upon another,
that if any one fail in any remarkable manner, the rest will in time suffer
thereby.

The Merchants Strangers, both here and abroad, in regard of these troubles,
have withdrawn most part of their Estates hence, and will have shortly little
in this Kingdom: We shall have no little want and miss of their moneys, which
we receive of them here, partly by Exchange from foreign Parts, made over, or
remitted by our Factors, in return of such commodities as we usually send
hence to our said Factors; and partly, by the taking up of their moneys here by
Exchange, to be repayed by our Factors abroad; which moneys are commonly
employed in the commodities of this Kingdom, which has been no little
furtherance to the more abundant vent of our Manufactures, and has been
otherwise a great help to our Merchants, specially to some of the younger sort,
who had small stocks wherewith to begin their Trade; the want whereof, I mean
of the Strangers Money, must cause a great decay of Trade; and if once gone, as
is almost, though a present Peace should follow, it will not be so easily
brought back; They will in the Interim find or use other ways and means for
employment of the same.

By loss of Trade all sorts of People will fail of employment in all parts,
and so wanting means to maintain themselves and Families, be driven into such
straights (for Necessitas turpia coget) that they will lay hold on of what is
next for their support; neither Laws Divine, nor humane, will be able to
restrain them, a general confusion of, and in all things will follow. This
Nation will become contemptible, and a scorn to all others, and be subject to
be invaded and made a prey of by foreign people.

Having thus briefly given a touch of the miserable effects the want of Trade
may produce, which want (as beforesaid) must follow, if these sad distempers
continue: I humbly leave the prevention to the Trustees of the Kingdom, whose
hearts I beseech God may be forthwith moved to take a matter of so great
concernment into their serious consideration, not forgetting how easy a thing
it is, Principiis obstare. And that as War in general, so intestine War is one
of the greatest scourges of God Almighty, and a visible Argument of his
displeasure, and vengeance upon a People.

Page 3. line 13. read (but by)

FINIS.

