

Bold Poets and rash Painters may aspire
With pen and pencill to describe my Fair*
Alas; their arts in the performance fail,
And reach not that divine Original,
Some Shadd'wy glimpse they may present to view,
And this is all poor humane art Can do*
Philabius. M'Vander Gucht. Scul:

New Poems.

I. The Young Lover's Guide: OR, The Unsuccessful Amors of Philabius, a
Country Lover; set forth in several kind Epistles, writ by him to his
Beautious-unkind Mistress. Teaching Young Lovers how to comport themselves with
Resignation in their Love-Disasters. Si nec blanda satis, nec erit tibi comis
amica,
Perfer and obdura, postmodo mitis erit.
If your fair Mistress be not mild and kind,
Bear and persever, Time may change her Mind.
Ovid. de Art. Am. l. 1.

II. The Answer of Helena to Paris, newly Translated by a Country Shepherdess.

III. The Sixth Aeneid and Fourth Eclogue of Virgil, newly Translated

By J. B. Gent.

LONDON: Printed and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London. 1699.

The PREFACE: Writ by Philabius to Venus, his Planetary Ascendant.
Dear Mother Venus!
I must style you so,
From you descended, though unhappy Beau.
You are my Astral Mother; at my birth
Your powerful Influence bore the sway on Earth
From my Ascendent: being sprung from you,
I hoped Success wherever I should woo.
Your Power in Heaven and Earth prevails, shall I,
A Son of yours, by you forsaken die?
Twenty long Months now I have loved a Fair,
And all my Courtship's ending in Despair.
All Earthly Beauties, scattered here and there,
From you, their Source, derive the Charms they bear.
The Fair I court partakes in highest degree
Of your transcending Heavenly Quality.
Her I admire, as most resembling You;
O take from her what is your Right and Due,
Or so incline her Favor for your Son,
That by hard Usage he be not undone.
It Is said those Persons at whose birth you reign,
Prove gracious to your Sex, and Favor gain.
Must I be the only Man whom you deny
This Privilege? O great Severity!
But against Heavens Actions what can Mortals say?
It deals with us, as Potters do with Clay.
Even as it lists, for better or for worse;
Thrice happy those not fated for a Curse.
Though while our Ages Course is running on,
We little know what Heaven intends to have done.
What seems Affliction often proves for our Good,
If, with Submission, we embrace the Rod.
Life we are promised, but first we are drowned
In Death, and then with Life immortal crowned.
God's Works are all by Means contrary done,
And cross to Man's Imagination run,
'Till the just time is come that they are fulfilled,
And then, though late, to Providence we yield.
Perhaps my Fair's unkindness and delay
Are more t'endear what once I shall enjoy:
Those Goods are prized for which we dearly pay.
Or if she is fated for some other Man,
Perhaps for me kind Heaven has ordered one
More kind and Fair (if Fairer there may be)
Or, if being turned my Year of Jubilee,
Fate has ordained me a Quietus here,
And now my Course for Heaven I must steer.
O Venus! draw me, by your Charms divine
From Objects here, my dreggy Thoughts refine
From Earthly Things; that being raised to you,
As I your Heavenly Kingdom have in view,
Fixed on Ideal Beauty among the Blessed,
I may enjoy an everlasting Rest.
Philabius.

The Reader is desired to Correct the following Mistakes of the Press.
PAge 10. line 6. read maturer, p. 12. l. 9. seldom does, r. often fails, p.
26. l. 17. mightily r. nightly, p. 34. l. 6. breath r. leave, ib. l. 14. r.
there is, p. 42. l. 4. r. Ideal, p. 44. l. 5. our r. her, p. 48. l. 18. r.
learnt, p. 53. l. 2. Faith's dele 's, ib. l. 3. with r. wish, ib. l. 17. r.
suppress, p. 56. l. 4. calm r. but, p. 64. l. 6. now r. new, p. 65. l. 14. but
r. cut, p. 97. l. 11. r. in Heaven, ib. l. 16. might r. night, p. 86. l. 20.
ward's dele 's.

New Poems.
Three Addresses writ by Philabius to his beauteous Mistress.
The First Address.
My only DEAR,
WIth Thoughts as kind, as Lover ever knew,
Your Lover writes this Love-Address to you.
Did you but feel that Passion moves my Heart,
While I to you my Fondness here impart,
'Twould move your Pity, Love, Compassion, all
That tender Lovers grateful Kindness call.
But here, alas! my great Misfortune lies;
Words cannot present before your gracious Eyes,
My inward Feeling: All that Words can do,
I Will say in short, my Dear, as God is true,
There Is naught on this side Heaven I love as You.
Yet let not Words alone my Witness be;
They Are Actions I desire should testify.
Command me what you please, I beg command;
When once your Pleasure's known, if I withstand
Your Will in ought, my Life, my Fortunes, all
I have from God afford, then let me fall
For ever in Disfavour of my Dear;
The greatest Curse that Man on Earth can bear.
I Will not attempt, as common Lovers use,
To write my Mistress Praise; the Fair I choose
Surpasses me, surpasses Praise of Man;
She Is Praise it self, she is all Perfection.
Thrice happy's he, whose blessed Stars incline
Her gracious Favor; Heavens grant they are mine.
Beside those Stars which influence our Birth,
Three I must beg propitious here on Earth;
Your Father, and your Mother dear, and You:
Of whom I have already courted two.
And though some Men this Practice may disown,
Who pass by Friends, and Daughter court alone:
Yet since I know your Parents mighty fond
Of their dear Child, I let them understand
My Thoughts for you, and hope 'twill not displease
My Dearest, since their study is your ease.
Against my Address they one thing did object,
It was my Age; indeed, in that respect,
There Is disproportion; yet such have I known,
When happy Life has followed thereupon.
All kind Indulgence to my Dear I Would show,
Your Will should be my Law; to come and go,
And do whatever you pleased, you should be free.
And I Will presume to say, I think, with me.
You may enjoy as happy Scene of Life,
As where you else may choose to be a Wife.
I know in Age but two things give offense,
The Man's Moroseness, or his Impotence:
And Heaven's my Witness, I think I Am as free
From these, as one pretends to court should be.
And by my Years, I this advantage gain;
They Have taught me Knowledge, which may entertain
My Dear sometimes with what may please her Mind:
Sometimes in London Pastimes we would find,
Where all that is Curious to my Dear I Would show;
Being more, perhaps, than other Men may do.
In Summer-heats the Country we would see;
The small Retirement there belongs to me
Is pretty pleasant, may be made much more
With little Cost: Some Things I have in store
Are also curious, and of Value; these,
And all I have are yours, whenever you please.
Indeed, but poor are such Allurements, where
So high Desert abounds, as in my Dear.
Far greater Offers, doubtless, you have met;
Youth, Beauty, Riches; all that is gay and great,
From Men your sweet-prevailing Charms have won,
As who can stand before the glorious Sun?
If I to these a Sacrifice must fall;
I Have this, at last my Dear! to say, for all.
A Judge of Men most values Gifts of Mind;
For these I dare contend, though still resigned:
If by your Judgment cast, hard Fate, I Will cry!
And humbly kiss that Hand, by which I die.
My only Dear, Yours for ever, Philabius.

The Second Address.
My only DEAR,
SInce to my last no Answer you have given,
Impatient Love commands me write again.
Silence sometimes (they say) implies consent;
If yours be such, I have my Heart's content.
But if your Silence (as I fear it may)
Concludes your Lover's doom another way;
Sad is my Fate, which (though with trembling Hand)
I ne'ertheless desire to understand.
Tumultuous Passions now torment my Soul;
Hope gives me Comforts, Fear does all control.
All sick in Mind, where shall my Refuge be?
There Is none but you can ease my Misery.
Once you were ill, I then prescribed a Cure;
Fond was my Soul your sacred Health t'ensure.
And now I languish, to you I must fly*
It Is at your pleasure, that I live or die;
And even to Death more easily I Am resigned,
Than to continue in this state of Mind.
Your gentle Nature cannot be so severe,
To let him perish calls you's Only Dear.
And calls all Heaven to witness, it is true;
O! pity one, devoted thus to you.
I know some Lovers only Passions feign,
And if they Court, for nothing it is but Gain.
Fine Words they have, if Ladies will believe;
Sweet goes the Pipe while Fowlers Birds deceive.
Such Fraud my Dearest cannot suspect in me;
Her Person only's my great Treasury.
There lies in store the whole that I pursue;
For this alone her Self, and Friends I woo:
It Is all on Earth I beg of Heaven too.
I Am not ambitious, know the World too well;
Content with Greatness does not always dwell.
Great should I be, so I could sit at ease;
Admire my Dear, with fond Caresses please.
No Soul so clear, no Aspect so divine;
Sweet Mildness with Sublimeness there combine:
No cloud of Passion intercepts those Rays
Of charming Graces, which she thence displays:
All Is there surprising Mortals can descry;
Symmetrious Features, wondrous Harmony.
There should I gaze for ever, still should find
My Sense transported with transported Mind.
O Nature's Goddess! to you I must pay
All Adoration zealous Votive may.
What state of Bliss does Heaven to him decree,
Where it alots your blessed Society?
Wherever that God, whence you these Charms derive,
Designs the Station wherein you shall live,
To me's unknown; of this, at least, I Am sure,
Your absence long I cannot with Life endure.
As Flowers fade in the absence of the Sun,
My Life without your Influence is gone.
What may I do your Favor, Dear! to gain?
Can Life? can Love? can nothing it obtain?
With Muse sublime, above the Stars I Will raise
Your Name, your Fame, with my immortal Lays.
A Poem next I Will write of Love divine;
In which my Fair Heavens Angels shall outshine.
In Praise of her, let all the World that dares
Contend; they will find Philabius void of Fears,
And would's his Suit had Issue by such Wars.
I want a Friend Death robbed me of this Year,
To plead my Cause, with Kindness, to my Dear.
Had he survived, I had not stood alone;
To deal with many hard it is for one.
And florid Youth now rivals my Desire,
And most are apt the rising Sun t'admire;
Though Judges know the perfect state of Man,
Is when his Sun's in the Meridian.
The Air is foul with Fogs, as Sun does rise,
And as it further climbs the lofty Skies,
'Till come t'its height; nor is Man's Reason clear,
'Till he has reached his Jubilean Year.
And this, with Favor, let me farther say;
Unstedfast Youth, though specious, brisk, and gay,
Is prone to change; contingent Beauty too,
Mature Years more likely may prove true,
And let not this, unminded pass, by you.
Fain would my Pen much farther here enlarge,
Whole Floods of Passion, thus I could discharge:
But fearing this already tires my Dear,
I check my Pen, and stop in full career;
This only Boon imploring at your Hand,
That you will vouchsafe to let me understand,
In Verse, or Prose, or by some private Friend,
How all my Hopes, and Love-Address must end.
O Beauty! O Love! O Pity! --
Philabius.

The Third Address.
My only DEAR,
ONce more I write, for who can Love withstand?
Which Heart inflames, and presses on the Hand.
Help Muse again! this once my Fate to try;
And gently guide my Pen before I die.
Help me to soft Expressions which my Dear
May move, and force from her kind Eyes a Tear
Of Pity for me. Heavens! what is it I say?
Do I wish Sorrow to my only Joy?
Through Love distracted all in Mind I rave,
And wish for what I Would rather die than have.
Help me t'Expressions may affect her Mind
With Thoughts as cheerful, as they make them kind.
No Pity let them, but gay Love inspire;
Cold's hopeless Pity, Love's a sacred Fire.
If ever on Earth, true Love in Man has been,
It reigns in me, and Love I hope 'twill win.
By Love of Heaven, we Love from Heaven obtain,
My Fair is heavenly, Love her Love must gain.
On this I stand, on this my Soul relies;
If I Am deceived my Fall is with the Wise.
Though twice I Have writ, no Answer from my Fair
Have yet received, must I for this despair?
Once or twice asking seldom does with Men;
Ought I not ask Heavens Darling once again?
Perhaps this Silence of my Dear's to try
Her Lover's Patience, Zeal and Constancy.
If so, with constant Patience I must bear;
Although, if long, such Trials prove severe.
My Temper's not the same with other Men;
Strong are my Passions, where they take a run:
A Check inflames them, raging they boil over,
As Waves, when broken on a craggy Shore,
And strongly checked, with Terror rage and roar.
Such Measures with dull Lovers may do well;
They serve to stir and kindle sluggish Zeal.
But where you find Love apt to take on Flame,
I think the way of Dealing's not the same;
Good Sportsmen seek not to destroy their Game.
As roughness fits a rough, ungenerous Mind,
The tenderhearted Tenderness should find;
To them the Usage should be mild and kind.
O! sick am I, my Dear! by your delay;
What one Man cures, another may destroy.
I always take it as a double Boon,
If what I sue for may be granted soon.
And as the Favour's greater, still the more
The Grantor I prize, honor, love, adore.
With what surprising Joy think you then, Dear!
Quick News, and kind, from you would ravish my Ear?
I beg, at least, let gentle Hopes maintain
My Flame, and let my Heart some respite gain:
And cast me not severely in Despair;
Despair, as dark, as Heaven has made you Fair.
Doubt not how constant to you I will prove,
I Will cease to live, before I cease to love.
Consider, Dearest! what to you is said
In Three Addresses, now by me are made:
Proceeding all from Heart and Soul sincere,
As ever in devoted Lover were.
If more I thought my Dearest would desire,
More would I write; my Pen should never tire.
And loath it is to part with Paper now;
Though I no farther Scope shall it allow,
Till I my Dearest's Pleasure know, and then,
All crowned with Joys, I hope to write again.
Philabius.

An Address to a famous Poetess, going by the Name of Philomela, wherein
Philabius (having received no Answer to his three foregoing Epistles) begs her
Aid for moving his Mistress's Favor.
MADAM,
IF any of your Sex, fallen in Distress,
Desired my Aid (such is my Tenderness)
I should afford it freely; would to me
They would vouchsafe an equal Charity.
Madam, 'thas been my direful Chance to fall
In Love, of late, with what we Beauty call:
Beauty, that Lot divine, your Sex attends,
Working on Men, too often, fatal Ends.
Thrice to my Fair Addresses I have sent,
(Writ as I could) how she does them resent,
I cannot divine, nor will my Fair disclose;
She drowns her Thoughts in Silence, me in Woes.
Self-musing often, with revolving Mind,
This cause of Silence in my Dear to find;
I may suspect my unpathetick Style
Moves neither Frowns, nor an obliging Smile,
But leaves my Fair as unconcerned, as though
She nothing of Love-Verses yet did know.
This puts me to a stand, and what to do
It Is hard to think, and how my Suit pursue.
I Have done my best, and more to write were vain,
Unless I could pretend some happy'r Strain.
Your Genius, Madam, 's known by what you have writ,
Great is your Fancy, Judgment, Art and Wit.
Sweet Philomela's Aid I Would fain implore,
Her powerful Charms dumb Spirits may conjure.
Her sweet-tun'd Voice through all the Forest rings,
And all are moved when Philomela sings;
Shout with Applause, and echo forth her Praise,
Surpised and charmed with her melodious Lays.
Her wondrous Notes in Rapture all admire,
As hither brought from the Celestial Quire.
Would Heaven, my zealous Wishes could obtain
Her Aid, the Favor of my Dear to gain.
The depth of Hearts your Love-dipt Pen may reach,
And where mine fails, may force an easy breach.
Those genuine Arts your Muse may soon descry,
Which charm your Sex, to me a Mystery.
And though some Beau, perhaps, has not been true,
In zealous Passions he has vowed for you;
Which may discourage your Assistance, when
Desired, for gaining Kindnesses to Men:
Heaven knows my Soul's sincere, and Love to feign,
Is what my Heart will ever much disdain.
I bear a Mind too free, to fawn on them,
Or fondly write, but where I Have found Esteem.
And had I judged my Verses to my Dear
Worth Philomela's view, I Would sent 'em here.
It may be thought a very heavy Doom,
That all hard Censure should incur for some.
I wish Success may crown all your Desires,
And pray your Aid now, where my Heart aspires.
Your Aid's the last Expedient I can try;
There all the hopes I have of Life do lie.
Great are the Pains, through Love I undergo,
Which, though unfelt by you, you truly know,
And as you judge them, please your Favor show.
MADAM, Your great Admirer, and humbly-devoted Servant, Philabius.

Philomela having not vouchsaft her Aid, Philabius writ his Farewell to his
beauteous Mistress, as follows.
My only DEAR,
IT grieves my Soul to write my last Adieu,
To one I so entirely love, as you.
All Happiness your Self and Friends I wish,
Though no way kind to me, in my Address.
I know Affection is not always free;
Though one be fond, another may not be.
Heaven grants it, as a Favor, now and then,
That where we love, we are beloved again.
I find your Favor, Dear! I cannot obtain;
And cease my Suit, which I could wish to gain:
But cease, as doubting, all my Suit's in vain,
Or 'stead of Favor, may incur Disdain.
What I have writ already, pray resent
With Kindness, as by me 'twas kindly meant;
Which, though not worth your Thanks or Notice; still
A gentle Heart despises not good Will.
As far as I among the World converse,
Unfeigned Friends, I find, are very scarce;
And wish I had one Friend on Earth, as true,
As, if accepted, I had been to you.
The Heavens, it is like, far greater Things design
TO attend your Fate, than Kindnesses of mine.
Heaven grant my Life a quick and gentle end,
And let all Joy my Dearest still attend.
My joyful Hopes to Sorrows now must turn,
My Muse in Silence, shall for ever mourn,
'Till Death gives ease and quiet in my Urn.
Philabius.

A gentle Reviver, writ by Philabius to his beauteous Mistress.
My only DEAR,
I Have tried, and tried, but find it is never the near,
T'unlove that Person, once I called my Dear;
My only Dear; and find she must be so,
In spite of all abused Love can do.
When Love's abused, in some it turns to Hate:
It cannot in me; nay it is so far from that,
I rather love you more, if more may be,
When Love's exalted to its highest degree.
To Love, and find great Slights, and almost Scorn,
May seem severe, and hardly to be born.
Yet this from you and yours I undergo,
And love you still entirely, and you know
Such Trials height of Love will truly show.
Some, in Addresses, no resistance find;
Their Love-suit's easy, and their Mistress kind.
Kind Fortune with such Lovers sports and plays;
These freely may enjoy Love's Holy Days.
Others in Love-suits Hardships undergo;
They cannot prevail upon their Mistress so,
But meet with Lets and Rubs, and yet, at last,
Run smoothly on, and win the doubtful Cast.
Some others more unfortunate than these,
Reap but Disdain for all their Kindnesses.
And such am I; who yet, with cheerful Mind,
Bear even this; to you, my Dear! resigned.
Though Heaven on us is often pleased to frown,
We must not be displeased, but still love on.
Some Lovers Beauty, merely for the sake
Of Beauty love; and seek not to partake
Of more Enjoyments; yet Disdain to them
Would seem severe, and check their fond Esteem.
I therefore even these, in Love surpass,
And nothing stirs me, where my Love I place.
That Apathy the Stoics teach, to me
Seems but a frigid-dull Philosophy:
With Patience armed just Passions let us pursue;
It keeps our Thoughts in action, ever new.
Let us agree then Dearest! to go on,
I with my Love; and you with your Disdain.
Time and Experience to us both will show,
Which in our Pursuits weary first may grow.
I Am apt to think the advantage on my side,
Disdain, Love's kind Assaults, can scarce abide.
Love sweetly charms the Mind, where it does reign,
That Soul's uneasy, where there is Disdain.
How then shall this hold out with that? but tire
And yield to Love, as Nature does require,
And this is that to which my Hopes aspire.
Philabius.

Another Epistle writ by Philabius to his beauteous Mistress.
My only DEAR,
IF Men distracted chance to give Offense,
Good Natures turn it all to Innocence.
I hope in you such Goodness I shall find;
O'er-doz'd with Love, I Am discomposed in Mind.
I write, and write, and know not what I do;
O! pardon this fond Trouble given to you.
With Thought o'er-set my Soul no rest can have,
But in your Kindness, or my fatal Grave.
Often do my Friends dissuade me from my Suit,
Such is my Love, no Friend on Earth can do it,
Whatever Severeness you to me shall show;
If Love be true, 'twill creep where't cannot go.
Who shall presume t'a Lover Laws prescribe?
The Law within him is his only Guide.
'T shall not be said I vowed Love to my Dear,
And fell from what my Protestations were.
Love now so long I Have fostered in my Breast,
In wilful Bondage I must lie oppressed.
My Will is not my own to wish me free,
Or eased of my endeared Misery.
When Love's inflamed, it is vain to seek an end,
On it will go, as boundless as the Wind.
Often by your House, I sad and musing pass,
Fain would I enter; then I cry, Alas!
All is Unkindness there I ever found;
Despairing Thoughts my willing Mind confound.
My Soul, at least, is ever with my Dear,
Her Charms admiring, whispering in her Ear.
Soft is that Whisper; which when you perceive
In silent Thoughts, you roughly bid it, Leave.
My Soul then silent for a while does stand,
Humbly obedient to your dread Command.
Watches a time its Courtship to renew,
Believe me, so 'will ever ever do.
Alas, my Dear! take some small Care of me,
My Zeal for you a Person blind may see.
Long since it is I writ you an Adieu,
Cannot yet resign to leave my Home and You.
Still am in Fear that dreadful Day will come,
Which I may truly call my Day of Doom.
If you enforce it, what can I then say?
What Heaven denies us, we cannot enjoy.
A Wanderer in the World I then become,
No Friend I have on Earth, no House, nor Home;
And if I had them, what are these to me,
When I Am debarred your dear Society?
If I must leave my Country, Friends, and Dear,
And, as a Vagrant, wander here and there,
My Spirit mightily will return to you;
Be not affrighted when you it shall view.
'Twill be as gentle, as my Heart is kind,
Begging and Praying Kindness I may find.
As you would have Kindness from the Powers above,
Though not your Person, let me have your Love.
I Am but your Echo, Kindness thence you pray,
Kindness from you my Soul again does cry.
Heaven grant that both our Prayers may be heard,
Your Kindness mine, Heavens Kindness your Reward.
Philabius.

The last intended Farewell writ by Philabius to his beauteous Mistress, on his
hearing she was married to his Rival.
My only DEAR,
THis Month is called, the merry Month of May;
I wish to me 'twere as the People say.
So 'twas in you to make it, had you pleased,
My sad and discomposed Mind to have eased.
In Fields delightful lately I have gone,
To Enjoy the pleasure of the glorious Sun;
Revive my Senses all the various ways,
Our Sense, by Nature's Bounty, now enjoys.
Our Eyes are feasted with the curious dye,
Flowers display in great variety:
Their fragrant Odours strangely please the Smell,
Soft to the Foot the tender Meadows feel.
Young Fruits delight the Taste; the spacious Sky
Resounding with the charming Melody
Of chanting Birds, compleats our Senses Joy.
Thrice happy those, whose undisturbed Mind
Calm Ease enjoys, when Nature is so kind.
Unhappy Man! my Fate is most severe;
I languish through the unkindness of my Dear.
Cares, and despairing Thoughts my Soul oppress,
Without my Fair there is no Happiness.
Thus all complaining to my Self I talked,
With Sorrows tired, while in the Fields I walked.
At length, betwixt a Lilly and a Rose,
I laid me down to take a small Repose.
I could not sleep, but slumber'd for a while,
Th'uneasy time thus striving to beguile.
Long could not slumber, but awakt again,
When, all surpised, I saw the curious Scene
Of Nature changed, and wondered what did mean.
The Sun was clouded, and the Air was cold,
The Meadows all unpleasing to behold.
Their Verdure faded, all their Beauty gone,
The Lilly black, the blushing Rose turned wan.
While thus amazed, Queen Mab I chanced to spy,
With numerous Train of Fairies standing by.
O Queen, I cried! what means this sudden change,
Is Nature nigh its end? it is wondrous strange.
The Queen enjoined me Patience, then replied,
You know we often visit your Bedside.
You are no Stranger to our ways; you have seen,
How we are concerned in all Designs of Men.
You Mortals often propose your selves a Bliss,
In your Pursuits; now that, and sometimes this.
We watch your Motions, know all you intend;
Abet, or Counter, as Heaven has designed.
Think not that Men can gain all they pursue;
Heaven guides them by its providential Clew.
Whatever they purpose, Heaven will dispose;
Their fondest Longings often they must lose.
Strive not against great Providence's course,
Which leads the willing, others draws by force.
We are its Servants, in an Order, far
Surpassing yours, your Guidance is our Care.
With this Advice let me possess your Mind;
If you will live happy, live with Ease resigned.
Those fond Enjoyments Men would fain obtain,
Prove often fatal, if they chance to gain.
Man headlong runs presuming on his Wit,
When Heaven alone knows what for him is fit.
This change of Nature, you so much admire,
Is wrought by us, as we with Fate conspire.
That Beauty in the Fields, when you lay down,
All on a sudden, to your Dear is gone.
You know of Beauty she had ever store,
And those have much, you find will still have more.
This we have lent her, for her Wedding-dress,
To make her Person charming in Excess.
Your Patience now, for I must tell you too,
She Is even now wedded, though unknown to you.
Enquire not of me who the Man may be,
We long since told you what is your Destiny:
Which future Times to you will make appear,
With what concerns your Rival, and your Dear.
This said, the Queen was in a moment gone
With her Attendants, leaving me alone.
I deeply sighed, enforced by Nature, though
Grief, in such Cases, us no Good can do.
And Fairest now its time to take my leave;
My long Farewell I therefore to you give.
Whatever Unkindness I from you have found,
It Is all forgot, and in my Fondness drowned.
Kind Wishes you shall ever have from me;
Now humbly yielding to the Fate's Decree.
If by often Writing I have you displeased,
I beg, at parting, I may be released.
My Pen's fond Trouble now is wholly over,
Nor ever shall disturb my Dearest more.
Philabius.

A second Reviver writ by Philabius to his beauteous Mistress, upon his being
informed that the Report of her being married was false.
My only DEAR,
QUeen Mab, you see, late put me in a Fright,
To sport with Mortals Faries take delight.
It Is not the first time she has served me so;
Would now with Joy she would recompense my Woe.
When she said you were wedded, 'twas to try,
How meekly with Heavens Orders I Would comply.
And found 'twas with all Resignation done,
Though hard, as if I Would sacrifiz'd a Son.
O! could I be rewarded, as the Man,
In whom such pure Obedience first began!
The Queen now says, I may in Love proceed,
Though still without assurance to succeed.
Some gentle Hopes she grants I entertain,
And leave the rest to Providence again.
No India Merchant ever would give more,
Effects, in his Adventure, to ensure.
With Hopes revived, by leave, I then go on,
My heavenly Dear saluting once again:
And shall salute her Monthly, while on Earth,
Kind Heaven vouchsafes my Fairest here to breath.
And she continues in unmarried State,
And Men are free to try contingent Fate.
Twice, since I heard you wedded, I Would a Mind
To see a Beauty, might, perhaps, been kind.
Twice, intervening Chances put me by
Of that Design, as 'twere by Destiny.
This makes me think (since you are single still)
There something lies concealed in Heavens Will,
Which You and I may fatally fulfill.
I hear my Rival's lately at a stand,
As no Man Fortune can, at Will, command.
I wish him well, and ever shall; as he
Must have his Lot, so I my Destiny.
If, with your Favor, Dearest! now I may
Be free to utter what I have to say,
I think I Have Reason greatly to complain
Of your hard dealing with such Love as mine.
I need not tell you, what your conscious Mind
Foretells you, that you have been most unkind.
I am persuaded both your Friends, and You
Must be convinced my Love is great and true.
And that whatever here I have on Earth
Is yours, at Will: I nothing for it crave
But Kindness. If you cannot condescend
To make me Husband; let me be your Friend.
Your Friendship only, should engage me still
To serve my Dearest with my utmost Zeal.
Let me persuade you, Dear! no Friend to slight;
When found, endear him, as your Eye does light.
I mean a Friend, will firmly stand his Ground;
Pretending Friends are common to be found.
By Men of Learning Love has been defined,
A fond desire we have of being kind
To those we love, for Beauty's sake. To you
Soon would I prove this Definition true,
Would you give way; and poss'bly might do more
For you, than all the Friends you have in store.
As you are now at Bath, there would I be,
If any hopes of Welcome I could see.
Whenever Love and Service hitherto
I Have tendered, still they found Contempt with you.
As I strive to oblige, you take offense;
For tender Kindness, it is hard recompense.
Though offered Service often has such Success,
In you, I hoped to have found it otherwise.
I thought in you a mild-sweet Temper reigned,
That tendered Kindness would not be disdained.
O! please to show by some kind Word or Deed,
Your Lover, in so judging not deceived.
To none for Friendship did I ever sue,
Or court for Kindness, as your Friends and You.
No Self-advantage therein I propose;
Both Life and Fortunes for you I would lose.
Use, or abuse me, as you please; you see
How great's the Force of steadfast Constancy.
Many to me, in Kindness now excel,
Only presuming, that I wish them well.
From none such Usage, as from you, I Have found,
For whom my Love did ever most abound.
Surely, there is something, though unknown to me,
Moves your Averseness in so high degree.
O! let me know, why you are so severe,
Freedom allow, to try my self to clear.
If I have Failures, so have other Men,
We can but promise, that we'll mend again.
Nature I Would force to mend all Faults I have,
And 'stead of Servant, I would be your Slave.
My most endeared Princess you shall be,
Rule me with Mildness, or with Tyranny.
These Protestations, Dearest! please receive,
And let your Lover, in your Favor, live.
It Is all on Earth, it is all he begs of you,
So, with all Fondness, bids his Dear adieu.
Philabius.

The last Address writ by Philabius to his beauteous Mistress.
My only DEAR,
HArd Case it seems, Heaven should present to Men
Objects that please beyond their Strength; and then
Find Fault they love too much, and often withstands
Th'enjoyment of them, by its countermands.
I own the Charm's abounding in my Dear,
O'er-pow'r my Soul, that love I cannot forbear:
And though Heaven seems to oppose me hitherto,
I cannot desist, my Suit I must pursue.
All ways I try my charming Dear to move;
I beg, I pray, I tender Life and Love,
My Fortunes, Service, all that Man can do;
And this my All is still despised by you.
Would, at the time, when first I kissed your Hand,
I had been banished in some Foreign Land;
There to remain for ever, never to have seen
This wretched State your Lover now is in.
If you're resolved I perish; pray be quick;
I Would rather die, than long continue sick:
Say plainly, Dear! that mine you will never be;
So seal my Death, conclude my Misery.
Your Silence keeps me in continual Dread;
As tottering Stones when hanging over the Head,
With Frights torment us, never giving rest:
Even thus am I now cruelly oppressed.
All my Invention now is at an end;
When Stocks are out, we have no more to spend.
Words I here heaped on Words with all my Zeal,
Hoping thereby t'incline your gracious Will.
No Word of Comfort can get from my Fair;
O! keep me now, if ever, from Despair.
Philabius.

A Copy of Verses, writ by a Platonic to his Valentine.
Most beauteous Princess,
WHEN joyful Birds have chose at Spring
Their pretty Mates, they quaintly sing
Their little Notes, and strive to please
Those whom they love; I, taught by these,
Salute my Dearest with this Air:
As you surpass their fairest Fair;
So should my Song their Chant excel;
And 'twill, if you but say, it is well.
See how their Quills with curious dies,
Are decked, to please their Lovers Eyes.
The inn'cent White, the constant Blue,
The hopeful Green, and stately hew
Of Purple, joyful Yellow's there,
Gay Red, and Black, Badge of Despair.
There is no Passion of the Mind,
But there expressed the Eye does find.
Thus dressed, they fly with Wings of Love
Together to some pleasant Grove,
Where nothing can disturb their Joys;
All Is calm, and still, and free from Noise.
Some gentle Stream steals softly by,
'Fraid to offend Love's Mystery.
Sweet Flowers from the Fields beneath,
With Smells perfume the Air they breath:
Fresh Blossoms from the budding Trees,
Afford them rare varieties
Of Food: Thus blessed in all Desires,
They pass their Days in amorous Fires.
Blessed Birds; but blessed with sensual Joys,
A Bliss for Birds: Alas! what Toys
To Bliss of Man, the Bliss of Mind,
To sensual Objects unconfined.
With us, while, in this Frame of Clay
We live, those Objects still convey
Into our Minds the specious Rays
Of Beauty, which incite, and raise
Us, to contemplate that Divine
Idol Beauty, seen to shine
In Beauty's Source, whence Fairest, you
And all Things here, their Beauty drew.
There, Princess! your Idea lies,
Fair, Spotless, charming in our Eyes.
The Charms of Beauty here you bear,
Still raise us to contemplate there;
Where I with all Men evermore,
Must love, admire you, and adore.
J. B.

The Answer of Helena to Paris: Translated by a Country Shepherdess.
The PREFACE.
Though Lords and Knights, and others of the Town,
Inspired Poets all, of great Renown,
Have taught quaint Ovid speak our Mother Tongue,
In Language fit for Phoebus to have sung:
Yet since Men's Fancies change as Women's Dress,
I thought my self, though Country Shepherdess,
Might please as well, by offering somewhat new,
Though coming short of what before they knew.
And as more ways than one lead to a Mill,
Why may not many climb Parnassus Hill?
Even Women (for some of us rise betimes)
And fall into Enthusiastic Rhimes,
In Love-Concerns, at least, for as we draw
Our Passions deep, when once our Hearts do thaw
We melt in Love: It Is Helen's Case we find,
That beauteous Wonder of us Women-kind,
Who to our Paris thus expressed her Mind.
The ANSWER.
MY guilty Eyes your Letter having read,
Small Glory now to leav't unanswered.
You then a Guest, against sacred Laws of Friends,
Dare tempt a Wife to break her Wedlock Bonds.
It Is like, for this, when stormy Seas had tossed
You here, you found your Safety on our Coast!
And when you came a Stranger to our Port,
You were not barred the freedom of our Court!
These are the Thanks you to our Bounty owe!
Is this done like a Guest, or like a Foe?
I make no doubt, though my Complaint be just,
You Will called uncourtly; be it, if it must.
Let me be courtless, so an honest Wife,
And that none find a blemish in my Life.
Although my Countenance speaks me not severe,
Though I use not a grave-affected Air,
Yet am I spotless, and have lived my time,
Even unsuspected from the least of Crime.
The more's my Wonder what your Fancy fed,
And gave you hopes you should enjoy my Bed.
Cause Theseus once, by force, constrained me go
With him; perhaps, you think to do so too.
Had I been drawn by's fawning Words, in me
The Fault had been; but being forced, am free.
Nor by his Fact, did he his Will obtain;
Unless by Fear, I, unhurt returned again.
The saucy Gallant only got a Kiss
Sometimes by striving, and was glad h'ad this.
It seems you, naughty Man, would more pursue,
But Heaven be praised, he was not like to you.
Modest in this, which made his Crime the less,
He left m'unwrong'd, and did his Fault confess.
Sure he repented what h'ad done, that you
Might all enjoy, do you think he will say so too?
Yet I Am not angry, who can be with Love?
Unless it is all but feigned that you do move.
And this I doubt, not that I you distrust,
Or know not well my Face is not the worst.
But cause an easy Faith does often abuse
Us, and they say Men Truth do seldom use.
Though others sin, and few good Women known,
Of those so few, why may not I be one?
And though to you my Mother seems to be
A fit Example in this thing for me:
You know my Mother, by a false Disguise
Of Feathers cheated, suffered a Surprise.
If I should sin, I cannot say the same:
Nor have I any Cloak to hide my Shame.
She well might sin, the Author could dispense
With her, what Jove will take off my Offense?
Your Race, and ancient Blood, and Kingly Fame
You boast; our House is not to seek a Name.
To pass by Jove, as Great-Sire to Atraeus
And all the Stock of Pelops, Tyndarus,
Jove turned a Swan, deceiving Laeda'll own
Me for his Child, whom she embraced unknown.
Go now and boast your rise, if you think good,
From Priam's, and your Laomedon's Blood,
Whom I suspect; but he on whom you build
Your Fame, is fifth from you, when I Am his Child.
And grant, your Crown of Troy I great should own,
I cannot but as much esteem our own.
Though you have more Riches, and your Subjects far
In number greater, yours Barbarians are.
Your rich Epistle talks of so much Gold,
Against it a Goddess-heart might hardly hold:
But if against modest Laws I Would yield to sin,
It Is you your self would sooner draw me in.
Or with my spotless Flame I Will live and die,
Or after you, not after Gifts, will fly.
Though I contemn them not; for well I know,
They Are grateful when the Giver makes them so.
But more your Love does move me and your Pain,
And that for me you ventured over the Main.
I also mark, though still conceal, as fit,
Your Actions, when at Table you do sit.
Sometimes on me you cast such piercing Eyes,
That mine, to bear their Glances scarce suffize.
Sometimes you sigh, sometimes my Cup you draw,
And drink just at the place where me you saw.
How often your Fingers, and your speaking Brows,
Have I seen making secret Signs and Vows:
And often feared my Husband would perceive;
And blushed to see the open Marks you gave.
I often softly to my self did say,
This Man is shameless, and I think I may.
I often found upon the Table writ
My Name in Wine, I Love set under it.
Some Mark I gave, I did not think it true:
But since, alas! I Have learn to say so too.
To these Allurements, if inclined to sin,
I should submit, it is this my Heart would win.
Though I confess your Features I admire,
And your Embraces Ladies may desire.
But let some happy'r Person, loved by you,
Without a Crime enjoy, what I cannot do.
Pray learn by me a Beauty to forbear;
A Virtue it is, those things we love to spare.
How many, think you, wish for what you sue?
Have none discerning Eyes do you think, but you?
You see not more, but rasher, more you dare,
You Have not more Passion, but more shameless are.
Then should you have come, as swift as Winters Flood,
When, being a Virgin, me a thousand wooed.
If then but seen, from all you would had my Voice,
My Husband's self must pardon me my choice.
You're now too late, the thing you seek's possessed,
And what you hope for's in another Breast.
To be your Wife yet should I still consent,
If Menelaus would be so content.
Pray cease with Words my tender Heart to move,
Don't go to abuse her whom you say you love;
But leave me to my Lot, by Fortune gi'en,
Nor basely seek my Honors Spoils to win.
Venus you say on Ida gave you this,
Where you did judge three naked Goddesses:
And when the one promised Crowns, a Name divine
In war the other, she said Helen's thine.
I scarce believe those Heavenly Queens content,
To leave their shape to your arbitrament:
And grant this true, sure the other part is feigned,
That I should be your Gift, if Venus gained.
I cannot presume my Beauty such, that she
Should say it the great'st Gift in her Treasury.
I Am well content so Men my Shape approve;
A treacherous Praiser is the Queen of Love.
Yet I Will not gainsay't, though I it admire;
For why should I gainsay what I desire?
Nor be you angry that my Faith is slow;
Great things require no hasty Faith you know.
First then, to have liked Venus it is a Pleasure;
Next, that you take me as your greatest Treasure:
And slighting th'Honours Juno did propose,
And Pallas, you from Venus Helen chose.
Then I Am to you both Virtue, and a Throne;
An Iron-heart such Love were bound to own.
Nor am I Iron (credit me;) but may
I love him, whom I cannot hope to enjoy?
To what end should I plough the barren Sands,
And follow hopes the very place withstands?
Untrain'd to Venus-Thefts, my Husband's Trust
I never, as yet, abused, as Heavens just.
And now my Pen does correspond with you,
This thing to me is altogether new.
They Are happy who are inured, my inn'cent Mind
Does think the way to Vice is hard to find.
I Am full of Fears and in Confusion, I
Suspect that all on me do cast their Eye.
Nor is it causeless, Aethra says, of late
The World talks of me at an evil rate.
Be therefore close, unless you will quite give over;
Though why desist? your Actions you may cover.
Act, but be wary, though we are somewhat free,
By Menelaus absence, Spies can see.
He Is gone, it is true, a Voyage far away,
For just and weighty Reasons could not stay.
At least to me it seemed, for when he slack
And doubting stood, I said, pray make haste back.
With the Omen pleased he kissed me'nd did commend
To me the care of's House, and's Trojan Friend.
I scarce held Laughter, striving at it, all
I could return in Answer, was, I shall.
So he to Creete with happy Wind is gone;
But do not think for this the World's your own.
Though he be absent, yet his Guard is strong
On me, you know Kings Hands are very long.
Beside, my Fame and Shape you so much praised,
In him the more his Jealousy has raised.
In this Conjuncture better 'twere I Would none,
And that you would let my Beauty's Praise alone.
Nor wonder I Am left by my self, he knows
What Confidence he in me may repose.
My Face he feared my Virtue trusted, there
My Faith's secured, where Beauty made him fear.
You with me not to let the occasion die,
But that we use the Man's simplicity.
I would and fear, nor can I yet command
My wavering Will, my Heart is at a stand.
My Husband's absent, you have no Wife, in lieu,
Your Shape embraces me, and mine does you.
The Nights are long, and we converse alone,
Your Charms, alas! are great, our House is one:
And let me die, all things to sin conspire,
There Is naught but Fear can check our fond Desire,
What weakly you persuade, would you could force,
To stir my Dullness, it is the likeliest course.
Sometimes the abuse good for the Bearer's held;
And surely I were happy, if compelled.
But rather, let us surpass our young Desires;
A little Water quells new-kindl'd Fires.
A Stranger's Love's unfixt, with him it flies,
Or when we think it most secure, it dies.
Hypsiphile and Ariadne stand
Sad Proofs against wedding Men of Foreign Land.
And you, unfaithful Man! are also said
These many Years to have left Oenone's Bed:
You cannot deny't, I boldly say it, and know
More of your Actions than you think I do.
And say, you constant would in Love remain,
You cannot, the Phrygians would fetch you again.
And while you talk, and for that hoped Night
Provide, do you know the Wind will then stand right?
When half Seas over, and glutted with your Prey,
The blustering Winds will blow your Love away.
Shall I then go to Troy your Court to see?
Shall I great Laomedon's Grandchild be?
I slight not so the noise of flying Fame,
To spot my Country with eternal Shame.
Pray what will Sparte? what will Achaia say?
What Asia's Nations? what your very Troy?
What will judge Priam of me? what his Queen?
What all your Matrons, and your Trojan Kin?
And could your self ever think that I Would be true,
If I should once do such a thing with you?
When any Stranger (though by chance) you hear
Comes to your Port, he will give you cause to fear.
How often, angry, you will Adultress cry?
Forgetting you are guilty, more than I.
You Will be both Author, and condemn the Crime;
O let me die, ever live to see the time.
But I shall all your Trojan Wealth enjoy,
And you your Gifts will greater make than say.
You Will give me Purple for my Princely Dress,
And heaps of Gold you talk I shall possess.
Your Pardon, if I say it, my Country's Love
Does draw me back, more than your Offers move.
Whom shall I call, if wronged, upon your Shore?
What Brothers, or what Fathers help implore?
Fair Promises false Jason to his Spouse
Medea made, whom he expelled his House.
No Aetes, nor Ipsaea then was by,
No Friend, to whom, in her Distress to fly.
Such Dealing I suspect not, nor did she;
The fairest hopes are sometimes foiled you see.
Those Ships we hear so often cast away,
At setting Sail, had calm and gentle Sea.
The Torch does also fright, which before
Your Birth, your frighted Mother dreamt she bore.
And I do dread, what Prophets do forewarn,
That Grecian Flames your Town of Troy shall burn.
As Venus is your Friend, 'cause she obtained
Her Suit by you, and double Trophy gained:
So those I fear, whom (if your Boast be true)
In their appeal, your Sentence overthrew.
And certain it is, War follows, if I fly,
And clashing Swords our Love will soon unty.
Did not Hippodameia Athrax stir,
Against the Centaurus, to a bloody War?
Can Menelaus, think you, tamely hush
Th'Affront? my Brothers, and King Tyndarus?
And though you boast your Valor, at your Sword,
Your Face, methink, does contradict your Word.
You seem more fit for Venus, than for Mars;
Let Paris love, and others follow Wars.
Let Hector, whom you praise, his War pursue;
There is another Warfare fit for you.
In that your Skill I Have half a Mind to try;
A wifer Lady would, and why not I?
Or else, perhaps, 'twere better quit the Field,
And even to you my conquered Hand to yield.
Whereas you pray we may of these Things treat
In private; I know what you would be at.
But you're too quick, you would reap before you have sown;
Perhaps your stay makes for you, though unknown.
These Secrets of my guilty Mind I send
To you; and thus my weary Pen does end.
We by Clymene may the rest confer,
Or Aethra, both my Friends and Council are.
A New Translation OF VIRGIL's Sixth Aeneid, AND Fourth Cclogue.

THE PREFACE.
HAving a Book, in a forwardness for the Press, relating to the Symbolical
Theology of the Gentiles; and Virgil being known to have been critically
learned in that kind; and the most learned parts of his Works thereunto
relating being his Sixth Aeneid and Fourth Eclogue, it entered into my Thoughts
lately to peruse them: And on the perusal, conceiving I should more clearly
possess my self of his Sense, by a Translation, than by a cursary Reading, I
applied my self to it; and such as it is, have now permitted it to the Press:
And conceive, as to the main, it may appear to an indifferent Reader, more
easy, and more clearly comprehending Virgil's Sense, than Mr. Ogylby's; whose
Notes with others, for Illustration, the Reader may make use of, if he pleases,
it being beside my present Business to make Comments; and Virgil, taking him
either in the Original, or in any Translation, being unintelligible in many
Places without good Assistance in that kind, he presupposing much Learning in a
Reader. As for Mr. Dryden's Translation of Virgil, I must own, I heard it was
extant before I set upon mine; but I could not get sight of it in the Country
where I then was. As I have look on some parts of it since, I cannot pretend to
have given Virgil that Luster, in what I have translated of him, which Mr.
Dryden, by his more copious way of Expression, has done, I having generally
endeavored to hold way with Virgil Verse for Verse. However, in regard I look
on Virgil as an Author, which may be set in several Lights by Translators, for
making him more clearly intelligible, I have not withheld the small part I
have translated from the Public.

J. B.

The Sixth Book of Virgil's Aeneids.
THus weeping speaks, and sets his Fleet to Sea,
And came to Aeuboean Cuma 'n Italy.
Their Prows they Sea-wards turn, with Anchors moor,
Their Ships; whose Bow-built Sterns front all the Shore.
The crowding Youth with eager Spirit lands,
Some striking Fire with Flints, the wild Beasts dens
Some storm for Wood, fresh Rivers some descry;
Mean while Aeneas, famed for Piety,
Apollo's Temple minds, his Thoughts are on
The Sibyll's Cave, and dread recess, by none
Approacht, but with an awful Terror; where
Apollo future Truths makes known to her,
Inspiring an excess of Mind: And so,
To Trivia's Groves, and Phoebus Tower they go.
Daed'lus, t'escape from Minos (as they say)
Daring with Wings in The Air to make his way,
By course, before unheard of, Northward past,
And gently pitched on Chalcis Tower, at last.
Assoon's arrived, Phoebus! his Wings to you
And Art he sacred made, and Temple now.
In front of which Androgeus Death was carved;
And, as to Athens 'twas a Pain reserved
To pay sev'n pairs of Children yearly; there
Stands Pot, and Lot's drawn for them, every year.
On the opp'site part Creete stands above the Sea,
Where Is seen the cursed Love of Pasiphae,
And how, by slight, the Bull she underlay.
Here Is the mixed Race, and biform Minotaure,
All Mon'ments of nefarious Lust: And here
The Lab'rinth whence none ever could get clear.
Tho Daed'lus finding Ariadne involved
In desperate Love, through Pity once resolved
The Craft-contrived Windings of the Maze,
By guidance of a Thread through all its ways.
And Ic'rus, you, had Grief gi'en way, good part
In this great Work had had: Your chance by Art,
Your Father twice essayed t'engrave in Gold;
Twice his Hand faild him, and his Heart grew cold.
Soon had they viewed all; but Achates sent
Before, returned with her for whom he went
Deiphobe, Glaucus's Daughter, Priestess, both
To Trivia and Phoebus: Who to Aeneas says,
This is no time such Sights to view: But now
It Is fit you slay sev'n Stieres, untrayn'd to Plow,
As many Sheep, chosen as our Laws allow.
This said to Aenaeas, done without delay,
The Trojans, called to Temple, all obey;
A mighty Cave, but in the Mountains side,
To which an hundred ways, and Gates do guide.
Whence hundred Voices, Sibyll's Answers pass.
They came to th'entrance; when the Virgin says,
Time calls t'enquire of Fate, Lo! God appears,
And saying thus, straitway before the Doors,
Her Countenance and her Color changed; her Hair
Dechevell'd flew; her Breast, as wanting Air,
And filled with Sacred Rage, does pant, and swell:
And now she seems self-greater, and to tell
Things more than human: Being more nearly inspired
She cries, Aeneas! don't you, as required,
Your Vows and Prayers offer? For, till then,
In this Stupendous House, no or'cle's gi'en.
This said, she stopped: The Trojans quake with fear;
Aeneas then, poured forth this hearty Prayer.
O Phoebus! always pitying Hardships sent
On Trojans! who did guide the Dart was bent
By Paris at Aechilles: By your Hand
Being guided, Seas surrounding Tracts of Land
Of vast extent I Have entered; past the Moors
Remotest bounds, and all their sandy Shoars.
And now, though baulked long, we are hither come,
So far pursued still by our Trojan doom.
And now the Trojans you of right should spare,
All Gods and Goddesses, who ever were
Displeased with Troy, and Trojan Glory: 'nd you
Most holy Priestess! knowing things t'ensue,
(Since I ask nothing to my Fates undue;
Tell us the Trojans, and tossed Gods of Troy,
And wandering Deities, Latium shall enjoy;
To Trivia 'nd Phoebus Temples then I Will raise
Of Marble, and in's Name set Holy Days:
And in my Kingdoms Sacred Structures I
Will build to keep your Books of destiny,
And secret Fates foretold my Nation; and
Choice Men appoint, as Sacred, for that end.
Only I would, you write them not, lest they
To rapid Winds become a sport and prey,
But speak them: Ending thus what he should say,
Now she impatient Phoebus yet to bear
Within the Cave does rage, and strives to clear
Her loaded Breast of him; still he the more
Her raging Heart and Mouth does over power
And toyls her, and so works to tempet meet.
And now the Temples hundred Gates, which yet
Were closed, fly open of their accord; and through
Them fly the Sibyll's Answers, thus. O you!
Who now have past all dangers on the main,
Were fated for you; know there still remain
On Land far greater: Trojans shall possess
Lavinia's Kingdom (doubt you not of this)
But they will wish not to have come, Wars horrid Wars,
I see, and Tyber foaming with much Blood.
Simois and Xanthus here you will find made good;
And Dorique Tents: And an Achilles now
In Latium's born; and of a Goddess too.
Nor will the Trojans (go they where they please)
Be without Juno: When, in your distress;
You were suppliant to what Countries here
And Towns did you not sue for aid? Be sure
A foreign Wife, and extern Match will be
The cause again of so much Misery.
But boldly stem Misfortunes, yield to none,
What scarce you would think, your entrance to this Crown
Will first be shown you from a Grecian Town.
The Sibyll utters, with such Words as these,
From th'or'cle, dread ambiguous Prophesies,
Resounding in the Cave; Apollo so
The raging Virgin stimulates to do.
Assoon's her Fury ceased, and Rage was over,
Aeneas thus begins. O Virgin pure!
No unexpected face of toyls, or new,
Can rise to me; my Mind has all in view.
I beg this one thing (since they say the Gate
Of Hell is here, and that Infernal Lake
Of Acheron) vouchsafe that I go see,
And speak with my dear Father: You, I pray,
Be guide, and open those Sacred Gates; for I
Have snatched him from the midst of The Enemy;
And, on these Shoulders, born him through the Fire
And thousand Darts pursuing in the rear.
And he again, in Voyages with me,
Being weak, has born all Hardships of the Sea,
Indeed, beyond his Strength, and aged decay.
Nay, and, with great Entreaty, he did press,
My humble waiting on you, and Address.
Pray pity then the Father, and the Son,
O Virgin! all is in you; it is not in vain
Hecate placed you over Avernus Grove
If Orpheus, playing on his Harp, could move
His Wives return from Hell: If from the Earth
Pollux, his Brother by alternate Death,
Redeemed, what shall I of Alcides say,
And Theseus? I Am from Jove, as well as they.
Thus the Hero prayed, and The Altar held; to whom
The Sibyll thus began. O you that come
Of heavenly Race! It Is easy going to Hell:
Black Dis's Gates, we know, are open still:
But to return, and rise to the bright Sun,
Here lies the toilsome Work: Few this have done
Whom Jove has loved, or ardent Virtues raise
Us to the Skies, or God-born Men: The ways
That lie betwixt, with Woods are all beset,
And dread Cocytus close surrounds the Pit;
But if your Mind be such, so great your Zeal,
To visit twice the Stygian Lakes, and Hell,
And this mad Labor needs you will undergo,
Then learn of me what first you have to do.
Within a dark thick-shaded Tree lies hid
A Bow with Golden Leaves, and pliant Twig
T'Infernal Juno Sacred; this the whole
Grove covers, and dark Valley Shades withal:
But none the cov'rings of the Earth can pass,
Till he this Golden Bow shall first possess,
This present to her self Proserpine claims,
If one be gathered, strait another comes,
Which Branches with such Leaves as the other did.
Then seekt with care, and finding where it is hid,
Take It with your Hand; for if you're called by Fate,
'Twill come with ease; if not you never can have't
With all your Strength; even Iron then is in vain.
Beside, while here you stand, your Suit to gain
A friend of yours, ah! don't you know it? lies dead;
Whose Corpse pollutes your Fleet: First carried
T'its proper place, let it be buried;
Take black Beasts with you; let them expiate
Before you do it; then guided by your Fate
The Stygian Groves, and Kingdoms you shall view,
Unpast by Men, this said, she silent grew.
Aeneas sad, with down-cast look, goes on,
Leaving the Cave, and much self-musing on
Those blind Events: With whom his faithful Friend,
Achates goes, with no less plodding Mind.
Much 'twixt themselves they talked, what Friend was dead,
Whose Corpse the Sibyll would have buried.
And on the dry Shore, as they came, they see
Misenus slain, by unmeet Destiny.
Misenus, sprung of Ae'lus, famed for
His Trumpet, bravely stirring Men to War;
At Troy, Companion to great Hector, where
He bravely served, with Trumpet, and with Spear.
When Hector by Achilles Sword was slain,
This Hero with Aeneas joined again,
Making his Post as great as it was then.
But sounding's Trumpet on the Shore for skill,
Rashly presuming Gods to Contest call,
A Rival Triton (if like Truth it sounds)
This Man, among Rocks, in foaming Waters drowns.
All therefore, round him, much lament and cry,
Most good Aeneas, and without delay,
The Sibyll's Will perform; contend to raise
His Funeral Pile, with Trees, up to the Skies.
An ancient Wood they enter, horrid Den
Of wild Beasts, down the pitch Trees fall amain.
The Holm, with Axes struck, within the Grove
Resounds; the Oak and Ash abroad are clove
With Wedges; from the Mountains rolling fall
Wild-Ashes of a mighty Bulk: In all
This Work Aeneas foremost, cheers his Men,
And, by's Example, moves them to go on.
And sadly musing on these Things, as he
The Wood beheld, he thus began to pray.
Would now, in this great Wood, that Golden Bow
Would show it self; since all Things said of you,
Misenus! by the Sybyll, prove too true.
Scarce had he said this, when before his Eyes,
Two Doves, as chanced, came flying from the Skies
And on the green Soil pitched; the Hero then
Knew's Mothers Birds; and joyous, prayed again.
O! if there is any way, be you my Guide,
Direct my Course, as through the Air you glide
Into those Groves; whose fertile Soil, the Bow
So famed does shade: And you, fair Parent! now
Forsake me not in this Distress: This said,
He walked observing all the Signs they made;
Whither they feeding tended; they in Flight
Went on, as not to lose the Foll'wers sight.
And, as they came to Avernus stinking side,
In moment raised, they through the Ether glide,
And take their wished Seat on the biform Tree,
Whence Gold its various Colors did display.
As Misletoe in Wintertime is known
With Leaves to flourish, from Seed, not its own,
And twine its yellow Branches round the Limbs;
In this thick-shaded Holm the Gold such seems,
Such rustling noise its Leaves make by the Winds,
Aeneas grasps it strait, with greedy Hand,
And gathered, goes the Sibyll to attend.
Mean while, the Trojans on the Shore, bewail
Misenus; nothing in last Duties fail.
First, of cleft Oak, and pitchy Woods they build
A mighty Pile; whose Sides are stuck and filled
With mourning Bows, the Front with Cyprus dressed
On top, t'adorn it, shining Arms are placed.
Some in Brass-vessels Water heat, and wash
The dead Corpse, and anoint it; then they pass
A mourning Outcry; then lay't on a Bed,
And with rich Purple-cloaths its covered.
Some the sad Office undergo, the Hearse
To bear; and, as of old, with Face averse
Their Totch apply; much Frankencense withal
They burn, delicious Meats, and Pots with Oil.
After the Ashes fell, and Flame had ceast,
The Relics they with Wine, and th'Embers washed.
And Choryneus put, in Urn of Brass,
The remnant Bones; and his Associates.
Thrice sprinkled round, and purged, with Water pure
And peaceful Olive Branch; so all was over.
But good Aeneas, as the Custom was,
Raised him a mighty Tomb: For Arms did place
An Oar and Trumpet, near a Mountain high,
Misenuus called from him; and ever will be.
This done, the Sibyll's Orders he forthwith
Accomplishes; there was a vast deep Cave
With dreadful Mouth, strewn with rough little Stones,
Woods and a black Lake guard it, as its bounds;
Over which no Birds, without much danger fly,
Such Breath from its dark Mouth mounts to the Sky.
From whence the Greeks, Avernus named this Lake.
Here first he placed four Stieres of Color black,
And Wine the Priest pow'rd on their Foreheads, then
Took the stiff Hairs which 'twixt their Horns were grown
And as first Offerings, on the sacred Fire,
Lays them, loud calling Hecate, whose Power
Is great Heaven and Hell. Some with their Knife
The Victim slay, and the warm Blood receive
In Bowls. Aeneas slays with his Sword a Lamb
Black-colour'd to the Fury's Mother, and
Her Sister great. A barren Cow to you
Proserpine. Then might Altars dressed anew
To Pluto: Th'Oxen's Flesh then on the Flames
He lays, and pours on Oil as it consumes.
And now, behold! about Sunrising The Earth
Under their Feet began to groan, therewith
The Woods to move; and through the Shades they see
The howlings Dogs, the Goddess drawing nigh.
The Sibyll cries, far now, O far be gone
From this whole Grove, you Men that are profane.
And you, with Sword in Hand, come on your way,
Aeneas now your Courage you must try.
This said, with sacred Rage into the Cave
She rusht, whom he attends, as fearless brave.
You Gods who Souls command, you silent Shades,
Chaos, and Phleg'ton, Places where resides
Perpetual Night: Let me, impow'r'd by you,
Speak things I Have heard, in darkness drowned till now.
They went benighted through dark shaded ways,
And Dis his Kingdom, where no Body was.
As is the passage through a Wood by Night,
When neither Moon nor Stars give any Light,
And darkness takes all Colors from the Sight.
Before the entrance, and first Mouth of Hell,
Grief and revenging Thoughts have placed their Cell.
There pale Diseases, sad old Age, and Fear,
Base Want, and ill-advising Hunger were
All dreadful Forms to see: And Death and Toil,
And Death's near Kinsman, drowsy Sleep, and all
Mind's sinful Joys: And on the opp'site side
Stands deadly War; the Fury's Iron-bed,
And senseless Discord; who Serpentine Hair,
With bloody Hair-lace interwove, does wear.
In midst, a vast thick-shaded Elm displays
Its ancient Branches, where (as Rumor says)
Vain Dreams reside; and stick to all the Leaves.
Monsters beside, of many kinds, with these
Stand at the doors; the biform Scylla's there,
The Centaures, and the strong Briareus were.
There the Hydra, the Chimaera, Gorgons, and
The Harpies, with Tree-bodied Geryon stand.
Aeneas here, with sudden Fright, being scared,
Presents his Sword, and stands upon his Guard.
And if the Sibyll had not told him, they
Were aerie Souls, which such like Shapes display,
H'ad vainly strove with his Sword, the Ghost to slay.
Hence leads the way to Ach'rons Waters, here
A vast-foul-muddy Whirl-pool-gulfe boils over,
Into Cocytus spewing all its Sands.
The nasty Boatman Charon here attends
These Streams, and horrid Water he commands:
Appearing with great hoary-careless Beard
And flaming Eyes; his Cloths with Dirt besmeared
Hang down from's Shoulders, by a Knot secured:
With Oar and Sails his Vessel still he plies,
And Bodies in's dark-colour'd Boat conveys
Grown old; but as a God, in Strength seems young,
Here, on the Banks, the crowding Shadows throng.
Women and Men, the Ghosts of Heroes, Boys,
Girls, Children dead before their Parents Eyes:
As thick as Leaves, in Autumn, fall in Woods,
Or, from the Main, to land come Flocks of Birds,
When Winter drives them from beyond the Seas,
And sends them where they may enjoy warm Ease.
The first come, begging to be Ferry'd over,
With Hands stretched out, desiring the other Shore.
But the rough Boat-man sometimes into's Boat
Takes these, or those, and leaves some others out.
Aeneas, wondering at the crowding Ghosts,
Says, Virgin! what is this Concourse on these Coasts?
What seek these Souls? Why do some leave the Shore,
And others, on these Waters, ply their Oar?
To whom the Sibyll briefly thus replies;
Anchises Son, true Offspring of the Skies.
You see Cocytus, and the Stygian Lake,
By which, being sworn, their Oath Gods dare not break.
This Crowd, you see, is of unbury'd Men,
The Boat-man's Charon, those on Water seen,
Are buried; nor can any Ghosts before
Pass from these horrid Banks to the other Shore.
They rove an hundred Years about this place;
At length admitted, come with Joy, to pass.
Aeneas stood, then walked with plodding Mind,
Pitying th'hard Fate such Persons did attend.
He saw there sad, and wanting Burial right
Leucaspis, and Orontes by his side,
The Lycian Captain: In their Course from Troy
Both with their Ship, by South Wind, cast away.
And, Lo! the Steers-man Palinurus there;
Who, as, by Stars, from Lybia he did Steer,
Fell headlong from his Stern, when half Seas over.
Assoon's Aeneas knew him amongst the Shades,
He thus bespeaks him first. Who of the Gods,
O Palinurus! took you from us, and
Drowned in the Sea? Let me this understand,
Apollo in no Answer failed, but this,
Who told me you were safe upon the Seas,,
And should arrive in Italy. Is It thus
He keeps his word? Then Palinurus said,
Apollo's Or'cle has not you deceived.
For as the Stern I held, our Course to steer
Broke off, by chance, through my much toyling there,
I drew it with me, as I headlong fell:
And by tempestuous Seas I swear withal.
Less fear then seized me for my self, than lest
Your Ship its Stern, and Master having lost,
Should founder, with those turgid Waves being tossed.
Three bitter Nights a violent South Wind blew,
And drove me over vast Seas: With much ado,
The fourth of It'ly I got sight, as on
High Waves I lay; then made to Land, and soon
Arrived secure: But cruel People there,
As I came clogged with Garments wet to Shore,
And held a Rock, fell on me, Arms in hand
As thinking some rich booty they had gained.
Now on the Shore, by Winds I Am tossed about,
And therefore beg by Heavens sweet Air and Light,
Your Father, and Jule's rising hope, you will free
Me from these Ills; and that you bury me,
(For you may do it) and search all Velia's Port;
Or if some other way Heaven shows you for it,
(For I believe, without Heavens Aid, you never
Came to this Stygian Lake, and Rivers here)
Vouchsafe a Wretch your help, and now convey
Me over these Waters with you; that I may
A quiet Seat, in Death, at least enjoy.
Thus having spoke, the Sibyll said, I admire
Whence Palinurus! comes this cursed Desire.
Would you, unbury'd, pass the Stygian Lake,
And Fury's Streams, these Banks unbid forsake?
Hope not by Suit to change the Gods decree,
But take this comfort of your Chance from me.
The Bord'rers, far and near, by Judgments, forced
From Heaven, shall expiate your Bones on their Coast,
Erect a Tomb, pay Funeral Rites, and e're
Famed Palinurus name the place shall bear
By these her Words his troublous Thoughts being eased,
He with the Surname, given the place was pleased.
They then go on, and near the River came,
Whom Charon, who from's Stygian Lake had seen
A far off passing in the silent Wood,
Their Course directing to the place he stood,
Thus first assails with Words, and freely chides,
Who ever you are come armed to our River sides,
Say why you come, and make a stand there right;
This is the Place of Ghosts, sleep, drowsy night.
I may not pass live Bodies in my Boat,
Nor was I pleased Alcides came into it.
Nor Theseus and Pirithous, though sprung
All from the Gods; and Men would yield to none.
He sought, with his Strength, Hell's keeper to subdue,
And from K. Pluto's Throne him trembling drew;
And these his Queen from's Chamber would have too.
The Sibyll briefly thus to him replied;
Here Is no such Treason; Anger lay aside.
Our Arms are mere Defense; Hell's keeper's free,
Barking, to awe the Ghosts eternally.
Let chaste Proserpine keep her Uncle's Room;
Aeneas, who for Zeal and Arms is known,
Sprung of Troy's Royal Blood, is hither come.
To see his Father, in the Shades below;
If no respect such Piety you show;
You know this Bow (so ope's her Garment where
'Twas hid) and seen, his Passion strait was over.
No more being said: The fatal Gift h'admires,
Not seen before for many many Years.
And sets his tawny Boat close to the Shore,
Thence driving all the Ghosts stood there before.
And clearing's Seats, in's wicker Vessel took
The stout Aeneas; whereupon it shook,
And cracked, and let much Water in: Though still
On the other Shore he landed them, at Will,
On Mudd, and Marshy Weeds, the Coast do fill.
The monstrous three-mouth'd Cerb'rus in a Den
There opp'site barking, makes the Country ring.
To whom, being frightful to Spectators view,
With Snakes about his Neck, the Sibyll threw
A Bolus, made of Drugs to her well known,
With Honey mixed; which strait he swallowed down.
And on the Ground, with this, he reeling fell,
Extending's mighty Body over the Cell.
Hell's Ward's asleep, Aeneas th'Entrance seized,
Leaving the Lake, which no Man ever repast.
Just entering, Voices and great Cries they hear
Of Children: Infants Souls stand wailing there,
Who sweet Life scarce enjoyed, but from the Breast
Were forced by Fate; and sent to their long Rest.
Next these are Men unjustly judged to die,
Though not without their lotted Destiny.
Th'Inquis'tor Minos bears the Lot-pot, he
Ghost-Juries calls Men's Lives and Crimes to try.
The next are such, who, though no Crimes they had,
Life hating through Despair, themselves destroyed,
And threw their Souls away; what would they do,
Life to regain? what Hardships undergo?
But Fate withstands it, and the Lake them bounds,
And Styx's Waters nine times them surrounds.
Not far from hence; as far as The Eye can reach,
The mourning Fields lay round; they name them such;
In secret Av'nues and a Myrtle Grove.
Here Persons stand, brought to their ends by Love;
Whose restless Cares even Death it self survive.
Here he sees Phaedra, 'nd Procris, and the sad
Esiphyle, who shows the Wounds she had
From her own Son. Evadne here he saw,
Pasiphae, and Laodamia;
And Caeneus, who at first a Girl had been
And then a Man, a Woman then again.
Amongst whom Phoenician Dido, in the Wood
Walked as the rest; her Wounds all fresh with Blood.
Whom, when Aeneas, as he near her came,
Got sight of through the dark Shades; as a Man
Sees, or, imagines that he sees the Moon
Just turned the new, through cloudy Skies; he weeps,
And thus with tender Love his Mistress greets.
Unhappy Dido! a true Message then,
Was brought me; you are dead, with Dagger slain.
Alas! I caused your Death; by Heaven I swear
And Gods above; and if ought Faith be here,
It Was against my Will, O Queen! I left your Shore.
By Gods commands I did it; which compel
Me now, to pass these darksome Shades of Hell
Through loathsome rotten Ways: Nor could believe
My parting from you would cause so much Grief.
Pray stay, and go not from me, whom do you fly?
This is the last Thing I to you can say.
With such like Words he strove her angry Mien
And fretted Soul to appease, and wept again.
She turned her Head, and on the Ground her Eyes
She fixed, no more concerned at all he says,
Than might a Flint, or th'hardest Stone that is.
At length she starts, and to the shady Wood
She swiftly passt, where her Sichaeus stood,
Who Love for Love returned in high degree.
And ne'ertheless Aeneas moved to see
Her ill chance, follows weeping all the way.
Thence he proceeds, with Zeal, the Fields to view,
For famous Warriors 'lotted: There he knew
Tydeus, the famed Parthenopeus; and
Adrastus pale Ghost there he saw to stand.
The noble Trojans, who in Battle fell,
He viewing all in order, did bewail
Glaucus, Medon, Thersilocus, with these
Antenor's three Sons, and Polybetes.
The Priest of Ceres; and Idaeus, who
His Arms and Chariot holds in's Hand, even now.
The crowding Souls on Right and Left surround,
With one sight of him not content, they stand,
And fain would know why he came to their Land.
The Trojan Nobles, and great Army there
Of Agamemnon, seeing him appear
With Arms bright shining in the Shades, began
To quake with Fear, and part of them to run,
As living they ran to their Ships; some tried
To raise their low-still Voice, and loud to have cried,
And stood, their Mouths all vainly gaping wide.
And here he saw Deiph'bus mangled sore;
His Face disfigured, and his Body tore,
His Nose cut off, his Ears, his Hands; that he,
Striving withal that none his Maims should see
Through Shame, could scarce be known: But strait
Aeneas, calling him by's Name, thus said.
Valiant Deiphobus, sprung of Troy's great Blood;
What cruel Man would use you in this sort?
Or, whom would God permit to do it? I heard
That you being wear'ed with the Slaughter great
You made of Grecians, in Troy's fatal night,
Died on the Heap, among the Crowd confused,
Then I my self a Mon'ment for you raised
On Rhaetia's Coast, and loudly thrice did call
Your Ghost: The Place your Name and Arms has still.
But Friend! I could not see you, and Interr
In your own Country, as 'twas my desire.
Deiph'bus then, on your part nothing's left,
Dear Friend! you have done my Ghost all Funeral right.
'Twas my Fate, and Lacaena's Cruelty
Brought on me this; she left these Marks on me.
For, as we passed that last night in false Joys:
You know it; and cannot but too well mind how 'twas
When th'Horse by Fate passed over the high Walls of Troy,
And armed Men, in's Bowels, did convey.
She, feigning Bacchus Feast to celebrate,
Led Trojan Women with her through the Street.
And bore her self a mighty Torch, as chief,
And from a Tower the Greeks a Signal gave.
Then I, with Labors tired, requiring Rest,
Lay in my Bed, with sound Sleep being oppressed.
My exc'llent Wife, this while my Arms conveyed
From The House, and even the Sword lay at my Head:
Brings Menelaus in; and ope's my Door,
Hoping, it is like, his Kindness thus t'ensure,
And purge those Crimes she had incurred before.
In short, in rusht the Greeks, and with them came
Ulysses, much encouraging their Crime:
Which Heavens revenge; if I may wish the same.
Now, in return, pray tell me what has brought
You here alive? Have stormy Seas it wrought?
Or God's Commands? or what Chance might it be
Which moved you these dark mournful Shades to see?
While thus they talked, Aurora's ruddy Steeds
Mid Heaven had passt; she in her Course proceeds.
And hap'ly now the time allowed being gone,
The Sibyll gives this Admonition.
Aeneas! Night comes on, we time protract,
Here is the place, the way in two does part.
The right, which goes hard by great Dis his Wall,
Our way to Elysium it is: The left, for Ill
Has Punishments, and leads t'ungracious Hell.
Deiph'bus then. Great Priestess! be not moved
I Will go; the time required, keep to my Shade.
Adieu, our Glory! happy'r Fate enjoy,
This said, forthwith he turns himself away.
Aeneas strait looks up: And near a Rock
On's left hand saw, a mighty three-wall'd Fort;
Which rapid Phleg'ton, with its scorching Flames
Surrounds, and roaring throws up massy Stones.
There fronting stands a mighty Iron Gate
With Pillars, all of massy Diamond made
Which Men nor Angels can with Iron cut;
An high raised Tower there is, where Night and Day
In Bloody Robes still sits Tisiphone,
Who sleepless keeps the Porch. Thence cries are heard,
And Lashings most severe, and Noises made
By moving Chains, and Irons causing dread
Aeneas stood, and frighted heard the Noise,
Then said, O Virgin! pray what Crimes are these?
With what Pains punished? Whose are all these Cries?
The Sibyll then says thus. Great Trojan King!
No Entrance here to Pious Men is gi'en.
But I being placed here over Avernus Groves,
These Pains, and all to me Hecate shows.
Here Rhadamanthus rules, with Laws severe,
Hears and Chastises Crimes, and forces here
Men to confess whatever on Earth they did,
Which ought be purged, and vainly strove to hide.
It Is here Tisiph'ne, set Revenge to take,
With Whip insulting makes the Guilty quake.
And dreadful Serpents shakes with her left Hand,
And summons her fierce Sisters to attend.
And now, with horrid Noise, the dreadful Doors
Fly open. You see what Keeper them secures.
What Ghastly Form stands there: Within does sit
An Hydra much more terr'ble, gaping wide
With fifty Black Mouths: Tart'rus self does show
As deep and wide under the Shades to go,
As twice from Earth to Heaven seems to our view.
Here the ancient Race of The Earth, young Titans dwell,
Being Thunderstruck, in deepest part of Hell.
Here I the Twins Aloidae saw, vast Men,
Who strove from Heaven Jove with their Hands to have thrown.
And here I saw Salmoneus Torment great
Endure, who strove Jove's Thunder t'imitate,
And Lightning; carried with four Horses, and
His Torches shaking, as, in Triumph Grand,
He passed, amongst Greeks, in midst of Elis Town
Requiring God-like Honors should be shown.
Mad Man, who, Clouds and Lightning none can feign,
Acted on Brass, with trampling Horses train.
But mighty Jove from boiling Clouds then threw
A Thunderbolt: No smoaky Torch for show:
And so the bold presuming Rebel slew.
And Tityon, here is seen, that Child of The Earth,
Whose Body in length nine Acres covers,
And that huge Vultur, which with his crooked Bill,
On's Liver feeds, which as it is growing still.
He feasting still devours; so Tityon's Pain
For ever with his Liver will remain.
What of the Lapithae, and Ixion here
Remains to say? And of Pirithous, or
Of those over whom a black Flint hangs, as though
Still falling on them? or of others, who
Have Golden Tables, all with Dainties set,
In Princely manner, tempting them to eat;
The greatest of the Fury's standing by,
Forbidding them their Lands thereon to lay;
And rising with her Torch, them to dismay?
Here stand, expecting Punishment, all those
Their Brethren hated, or strove to depose
Their Parents living, Clients of their right
Cheated; or making Gold their sole delight,
No Friends relieved; as it is the use of most.
And those who for Adult'ry Life have lost.
And who in Wars unjust engaged; and Men
Who feared not break the Faith their Masters gi'en.
Ask not to know, what Pains all Men endure,
Or for what Crimes, or by what Chance came here.
Some roll a vast Stone, some hang on a Wheel,
Unhappy Theseus sits, and ever will,
Of Wretches chief, exhorts the Phlegians all,
And through the Shades, with loud Voice, thus does call.
Learn Justice, warned; and Gods not to contemn,
Some sold their Country, Tyrants bringing in,
Who Laws for Money made, and nulled again.
Others polluted their own Daughters Bed;
All daring great Crimes, what they dared enjoyed.
Had I an hundred Mouths and Tongues, withal
An Iron Voice, I could not run over all
The sorts of Crimes and Torments Men befall.
When this the Sibyll had set forth, she says,
Now, on your way, do what your Business is.
Let Us hasten, I the Walls behold, and in
Yond Arch, the doors; both Cyclops work have been:
Where we are required your Present to depose:
This said, she with him in the Umbrage goes.
The mid way kept, and soon the Porch drew near;
Where strait Aeneas entered, sprinkling there
His Body with fresh Water, and his Bow
Sticks at the Door; so being enjoined to do.
These things being done; the Goddess present made
T'a joyous Place they came, and sweet green Shade
Of the happy Groves, where blessed Souls have their Seats,
A large bright Ether all the Fields invests,
With Sun and Stars peculiar to these Parts.
Some on the Grass in Manly Sports contend
For Exercise, some wrestle on the Sand.
Some Sing and Dance; and long-rob'd Orpheus there
With His sev'n Note skill, a Counterpart does bear.
And one while with his Fingers, then with his Quill,
Plays the same discant, on his Harp, at Will:
Troy's noble Stock is here, fair Progeny,
Great Hero's, born in better times than we,
Ilus, Assar'cus, Dard'nus, rise of Troy.
At distance these the shadd'wy Arms admire,
The Chariots, Spears, which they see fixed there.
The Horses which in Fields loose feed and play.
As in Arms, Chariots, curious Horses they
Were pleased alive, the same they still enjoy.
And lo! on Right and Left, she others sees,
Sit on the Grass, who with Melodies Lays,
Sing Hymns to Apollo, among the fragrant Bays.
Whence large Erid'nus, passing through the Grove,
With rolling Waves, mounts to the Earth above.
Here valiant Men, who for their Country died,
And Priests, who chastely lived, in Joys reside:
And pious Prophets, Phoebus had inspired,
And those invented Arts, by all admired,
And such who others Kindnesses had shown,
All these white Garlands wore about their Crown.
To whom the Sibyll, as they rounding stood,
And chiefly to Musaeus (for the Crowd
Him in the midst upon their Shoulders had)
Says thus: O happy Souls! and Prophet you
Anchises Residence, please to let us know.
Through his Occasion it is, that we come here;
Hell's mighty River passing without fear.
To her the Hero thus, in short, replies,
We Have no peculiar Seat; our Mansion is
In shady Groves, and on the Rivers sides,
And bord'ring Fields. But if your Fancy leads
Ascend this Hill, I Will guide an easy Path.
This said, he goes before, and from above
Shows glorious Fields; whereon the top they leave.
And old Anchises, in a Vale beset,
With Hills, and wondrous Green; Souls thither brought
Who were t'arrive at Bliss, with Care surveyed,
Even one by one, and took a List of all,
Perhaps, of him descended, or that shall.
Their Fates inspecting, Fortunes, Manners, Power,
And when he saw Aeneas coming there,
Both's Hands presented, with a welcome Cheer
And Tears let fall, and this dropped from his Mouth,
What? come at last, my long expected Youth?
Has Piety stood the Hardship of the Ways?
And may I now discourse you Face to Face?
Indeed I thought so, and that times would come,
Nor has my Care deceived me, counting them.
Through what vast Countries, and what mighty Seas
Are you come? and through Dangers more than these.
How feared I Lybia fatal might have proved?
Then he, dear Father! your sad Ghost has moved,
Appearing often, my coming to this Land;
My Ships stand on the Italian Coast. Your Hand
I beg; and let us embrace, and be not gone;
This saying, Floods of Tears came trickling down.
Then thrice about his Neck, he strove to cast
His Arms; and thrice the Shadows hold he lost,
As it is in Dreams, or with an aerie Blast.
Mean while Aeneas, in a Secret drove
At distance, 'spies a private rustling Grove:
And Lethe's River passing by the Seats
Of Bliss, and Men surrounding these Retreats
In mighty Crowds, who fill the Place with noise,
As Bees, when thick in Fields on Summers Days,
Gathering from Flowers their delicious Preys.
Aeneas strait, astonished this to see,
Enquires the Causes; what this Stream might be,
And what those Men who there stood crowding by.
Then old Anchises. Souls decreed by Fate
T'assume new Bodies, drinking here forget
All Hardships ever they underwent in Life.
'Thas long been my desire, that you should have
Here Knowledge of all those will spring from me,
T'encrease your Joy, when come to Italy.
O Father! may we think ought Souls sublime
Would pass from hence to The Earth, there to resume
Gross Bodies? direful such Desire would seem.
I Will tell you Son, no longer keep in doubt,
Achises then in order all sets out.
First, The Air, Earth, Waters, and bright-shining Moon
And all the Stars, a Spirit acts within.
With Mind infused through all the Mass's parts,
Which the vast Bulk pervades and agitates.
Thence Men, and Beasts of all kinds Life receive,
And Fowls and Monsters which in Seas do live.
A fiery Vigor, and Celestial Birth
Their Seeds uphold, as far as their dull Earth,
And Body's clog, and dying Limbs give way:
Thence spring their Fear, Love Passion, Grief and Joy;
Nor blinded thus, can they Life's pureness see.
Nay when, at last, their Life is at end,
Some Vice, and Body's Plagues their Souls attend.
For long contracted Habits strangely stick;
To purge whose rooted Taint, they to the quick
Are therefore touched with Pains; some hung in the Air,
Some in vast Gulphs are washed, some burnt in Fire.
We Have all our fated Pains; and then are sent
To fair Elysium; few there ever went
Till a complete revolving course of time
Their Taint contracted purged, and pure from Sin
The Ethereal Spirit left, as first 'thad been.
When they in Bliss a thousand Years have passed,
God calls them all of Lethe's Stream to taste,
That so forgetful grown, they may review
The Earth again, and Bodies take anew.
This by Anchises said, he takes his Son,
The Sibyll with him, among the crowding Throng
Gets on an Hillock in the midst; whence he
Of all, in order, had an eager View.
Then says, my Son! I now shall let you know
Our Trojan Race; what Glory thence may grow.
Who our Successors are in Italy,
The Illustrious Souls, that of our Line shall be,
And you your Fate withal. That Youth you see
Leans on his Headless Spear, by Destiny,
Comes next to Life: It Is he the first will rise
From It'ly's mixed Blood to the Ethereal Skies.
Sylvius, an Alban Name, your poth'mous Child,
Whom your Lavinia, our long Race t'uphold,
Shall bring at length from woods, as King to sway,
Of Kings a Parent, whence our Progeny,
Long Alba's Kingdom shall of right enjoy.
The next him's Procas, Trojan's Glory, then
Capys and Numitor, and who bears your Name
Sylvius Aeneas; who will also be
For Arms as famous, as for Piety,
If Alba's Kingdom ever he attains;
Behold what Courage in their Faces shines.
And how their Temples all are shadowed round
With Oken City Garlands. These shall found
Nomentum, Gabii, Fidena, for you,
Collatia, Towns on Mountains built anew
Pomeria, Novum Castrum, Bola too,
And Cora. Then these for their Names shall stand,
They being at present nameless spots of Land.
And martial Rom'lus to his Grandsire here
Shall join: His Mother Ilia him shall bear.
She springing from Asarc'us. See, he is known
By's double topt Helmet, standing on his Crown,
Now marked by's Father Mars for great Renown.
Lo, Son! by him, that famous Rome controuls
For Empire The Earth, Heaven equals for great Souls.
Sev'n Hills, with one Wall, she will her self enclose,
In great Men fertile, as Cybele shows,
When crowned with Castles, through the Towns of Troy
She Is carried in Chariot, with Transports of Joy,
For numerous Gods sprungs of her; whom she greets
At pleasure, all in Heaven blessed with Seats.
Now, both Eyes hither cast, this Lineage see,
Your Romans; Caesar, all the Progeny
Here of Julus stand, that ever shall be.
This here is the Man, Augustus Caesar, sprung
From God, who to you has been promised long.
And who again a Golden Age shall found
In Latium, as when Saturn ruled the Land.
Beyond all Lybia, and the Indies he
His Empire shall extend. A Land does lie
Out of the Sun's and Planet's Course, where Heaven,
Nigh burning Stars on Atlas Shoulder's born:
Which dreads even now his coming, moved thereto
By Or'cles Answers, telling what is t'ensue.
Like Fear the Caspian and the Scythian Lands,
And Egypt, with its sev'n-mouth'd Nile attends.
Nor had Alcides Conquests such extent,
Though he the light-foot Deer in chase out-went.
And Erymanthus Boar in pursuit slew,
And Lernas Hydra with his unerring Bow.
Nor conquering Bacchus, who with his Vine-twig Reins,
From Nysa's top drove Tigers to the Plains.
And fear you now in Italy to land?
And by Exploits, your Glory there t'extend?
But, who is it stands far off, distinguished by
His Olive-bows and sacred Laws? I spy
His Hair and white Beard, like a Roman King
Who founding Rome, Laws thither first did bring.
Sent from small Cures, a poor Country-Town,
T'an Empire great; where Tullus next will come.
A Man whose Country's idle Peace will break,
And force his sluggish Subjects Arms to take,
And Triumphs, then disused, in Field to gain:
Next him Thrasonick Anchus comes to Reign.
Pleased, even now, too much, with Men's applause,
And will you see the Tarquin Kings with these?
The great Soul of revenging Brutus, and
The Rods, and Axe, in use brought to the Land?
The Consul's Office he the first shall bear,
And cruel Axe: his Sons for moving War,
Unhaypy Man! to Punishment shall bring,
Fair Liberty this pressing for the Sin,
However future times may judge the Thing:
His Country's Love will all things over bear,
And's vast desire of Praise. But see from far
The Decii, Drusi, and Torquatus dread
With His Axe: Camillus with his Ensigns spread.
But those two Souls so Friendly now you see,
While among the Shades, they shining equally
With glorious Arms, if ever they come to Life,
Alas! what Wars they will raise, and bloody Strife
Betwixt them. One from the Alps with his force will come,
The other an opp'site Army'll bring from Rome.
O Youths! use not your Minds to Wars as these,
Nor against your Country's Bowels turn your force.
You Caesar, first forbear; you Heav'n-sprung Man,
Throw by your Arms, my Blood --
That famous Man, at Corinth, Graecians slain
Returning Victor, shall his Triumph gain.
He Argos and Mycenae shall subvert,
The last of them, great Agamemnon's Seat,
And even Aeacides, of Achilles Race,
Revenging Trojan Wrongs, and that disgrace
Profane, Minerva's Temple shown. Can I,
Great Cato! you, or Costus you pass by
In silence? or the Race of Gracchus, or
The Scipio's both, called Thunderbolts of War
Great Lybia's Ruin? Or Fabricius, you,
Great Soul'd, tho poor? or th'happy Man at Plough
Serranus? Fabii! whither lead me now
Being tired? Maximus you that Man we'll own,
Who by delays, restored our falling Throne.
Others in Brass, and Marble, to the Life
Sweet Sculptures make, you would think they were alive,
Plead Causes better, and more nicely know
The site of the Earth, Heavens rising Signs to show.
Mind you, O Roman! to rule over Men,
(These shall be your Arts) how in Peace to reign,
The Meek to favor, Haughty to keep down.
Thus said Anchises: Adds, to their Surprise,
See how Marcellus, with Spoils laden goes,
A glorious Conq'rer, how he all out-shews:
This Knight, the State all discomposed at home,
Shall set to rights; the Lybians overcome,
And rebel Gauls. And to Quirinus then,
Spoils, took the third time from them, he shall hang.
Aeneas here (for he saw with him pass,
A Youth with shining Arms, of wondrous Grace
But's Countenance clouded, with dejected Eyes)
Who, Father is it, the Man accompanies?
His Son, or some great Man's, from us will spring?
What Shouts about him? how resembling him?
But round his Head a sad-dark Cloud appears.
Anchises then, all melting into Tears;
Says, Son! wish not that depth of Grief to know,
Yours may attend: The Fates will only show
That Youth to The Earth, nor let him longer live.
O Gods! The Roman Race should he survive,
Would seem to you too great: What mighty Groans
The martial Field at Rome will fill? What Moans
O Tyberinus will you see, when you
Pass by his Tomb, with Tears all fresh and new?
Nor will ought Youth of Trojan Stock ever raise
His Roman Grandsires hopes, so much as this;
Nor shall Rome's Empire ever boast that she
Had such a Son as this. O Piety,
And honest upright Mind! Unconquered Hand!
None ever with Safety might your Arms withstand
On Foot, or Horseback. Ah! much pitied Child!
Could you your hard Fate shun, you should be called
Marcellus. Lillies by whole handfuls strew
Before him, I will Purple Flowers throw;
On's Ghost, at least, heapt Presents let us bestow.
Thus through Elysium they walked here and there,
Observing all Things as their Pleasures were.
When old Anchises this had shown his Son,
And filled his Mind with Glories were to come.
He tells him what Wars he must undertake:
Of the Laurentines, and Latinus Seat.
And how he Dangers must avoid or fly;
And sometimes suffer in Adversity.
Two Gates there are of Dreams; they say that one
Is made of Horn, where true Dreams pass alone.
Of Ivory the others made; whence to the Sky,
False Dreams and Fantasms Ghosts use to convey.
When these things to his Son, and Sibyll both,
Anchises had declared; he sent them forth
At the Ivory Gate. Aeneas took his way
To His Ships; and finding there his Men to stay,
He to Cajeta, in strait Course did steer,
Cast Anchor there, and turned his Sterns to shore.
The Fourth Eclogue of Virgil.
SIcilian Muses! Let us raise our Strain;
Shrubs and some Tamarisks please not every Man:
This Past'ral Song deserves a Consul's Ear.
The Sibyll's last Age now has run'ts career.
And th'Ages great Course must anew begin;
The Virgin comes with Saturn's Reign again.
A new Race now from Heaven is sent on Earth;
O chaste Lucina! favor the Infant's Birth.
By whom the Iron Age shall cease; and through
The World a Golden Age shall rise anew,
And your Apollo's Kingdom shall ensue.
And while you're Consul Pollio, this our Bliss
Commences, with the great Months Happiness.
While you're in Power, if any Taints appear
Of former Crimes, they are nulled with Mortals fear.
He Will live as God, and see his Godlike Men
With Heroes mixed, and he will be seen of them,
And rule as his great Ancestors had done.
But Child! to you, as first small Presents The Earth
Untilled, in plenty Ivies will bring forth,
With Avens; and as grateful to your view
Brankurfine, with the Egyptian Bean, will show.
The Goats to you full Dugs of Milk shall bring;
Nor will the Herds fierce Lions fear, if seen.
Your Cradle 'tself sweet Flowers shall display,
The Snake and guileful poisonous Weed shall die;
The Assyrian fragrant Shrub grow commonly.
But when you come to read the Heroes Praise,
Your Fathers Facts, and know what Virtue is.
The Cornfieldsd yellow will begin to show,
The Berries on wild Thorns will ruddy grow,
And Heav'n-dropt Honey from hard Oaks will flow.
Yet still some few Seeds of our ancient Guile
Will spring; and make us take a second Toil
At Sea: New Wall-towns build, and till the Ground,
And there must be another Typhis found;
Another Argo, Heroes to convey,
And other Wars with Battles in Array,
And great Achilles must again to Troy.
When, after this, you're grown a perfect Man,
The Sailor shall give over the Seas, nor then
Shall Vessels Traffic carry to and fro,
But all things freely every where shall grow.
The Earth from Harrow free, the Vine from Hook,
The Ploughman's Oxen shall discharge from Yoke.
Wool shall no longer take a borrowed hew,
But on the Ram a Purple Fleece shall grow,
Sometimes a Yellow, and the native Die
Of Sandix-cloath the Lambs are feeding by.
The Destinies with the power of Fate agreed,
Run on such Ages to their Spindless cried.
Dear Offspring of the Gods, Jove's great increase!
O! now is your time great Honors to possess.
See how the World jogs with its Unequal weight,
The Earth, the Seas, high Heaven in its Flight.
How all Things Joy express at the Age to come.
O! that my Thread of Life may hold so long,
And Muses Vigor, your Deeds to record;
Orpheus in Verse then shall not me out-word.
Even with his Mother's Aid Calliope:
Nor Linus, with his Father Phoebus by.
If Pan, the Arcadian God contends, he will own,
Though judge himself, himself by me outdone.
Your Mother, Child! by Smile begin to know,
Ten long Months Loathings she did undergo.
Begin: 'Till Children smile on Parents, none
Genius at board, nor Juno 'tBed will own.
FINIS.
Books sold at the corner of Pope's Head Alley next Cornhill.
CAmbrige Concordance.

The History of the Life, Reign and Death of Edward II. King of England, Lord
of Ireland, with the Rice and Fall of his great Favorites Gaveston and
Spencers.

Tabulae Faeneratoriae, or Tables for the Forbearance and Discompt of Money;
whereby the Interest of all Sums from 10000 l. to one Shilling, from one Day to
365. is exactly calculated to the thousandth part of a Penny, with the Rebate
of all Sums to 36 or 3 years, etc. The Third Edition.

The New A-la-Mode Secretary: Or, Practical Penman. A New Copy-book. Wherein
the Bastard Italians, commonly called the New A-la-Mode, Round Hands, Mixed
Running Hands, and Mixed Secretary's, are so Modeled and Composed, as to
dispatch Business with Facility and Neatness. Written with much Variety, and
performed according to the Nature, Freedom, and Tendency of the PEN. by John
Airs, Master of the Writing School, at the Hand and Pen near St. Paul's
School, in St. Paul's Churchyard, London.

Youths Introduction to Trade: An Exercise-Book, Chiefly designed for the Use
of the Writing School, to employ Youth at Night and other vacant Times while
they learn to Write; by which the Young Apprentice may be able to Apply his
Writing and Arithmetic to Business; as, a Merchant, Shopkeeper, or other
inferior Trades: First Methodized for the Benefit of the Author's Scholars; And
Published for the Use of such as Teach Writing and Arithmetic. By John Airs.
The Second Edition, Corrected, and very much Enlarged.

Arithmetic; A Treatise designed for the Use and Benefit of Tradesmen.
Wherein the Nature and Use of Fractions, both Vulgar and Decimal, are Taught by
a New and Easy Method. As also, The Mensuration of Solids and Superficies. The
Third Edition, very much Corrected and Enlarged. By J. Airs, at the Hand and
Pen in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Physical Dictionary. Wherein the Terms of Anatomy, the Names and Causes of
Diseases, Chyrurgical Instruments and their Use; are accurately Described.
Also, The Names and Virtues of Medicinal Plants, Minerals, Stones, Gums, Salts,
Earth, etc. And the Method of choosing the best Drugs: The Terms of Chemistry,
and of the Apothecaries Art; and the various Forms of Medicines, and the ways
of compounding them. By Stephen Blancard, M. D. Physick-Professor at Middleburg
in Zealand. The Third Edition, with the Addition of above a Thousand Terms of
Art, and their Explanation.

Books sold at the Black Swan and Bible, without Temple Bar.
A Late Voyage to St. Kilda, the remotest of all the Hebrides, or Western
Islands of Scotland; with a History of the Island, Natural, Moral, etc. by Mr.
Martin, Gent.

Beauty in Distress, a Tragedy; as it is Acted by His Majesty's Servants.
Written by Mr. Motteux: With a Discourse of the Lawfulness and Unlawfulness of
Plays. By the Learned Father Caffara, Divinity Professor at Paris; sent in a
Letter to the Author, by a Divine of the Church of England. With a Copy of
Verses by Mr. Dryden, in Defense of the Stage.

The Canterbury Guest; or, a Bargain broken: A Comedy, Acted at the
Theater Royal. Written by Tho. Shadwell.

The Cornish Comedy, as it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Dorset-Garden, by
His Majesty's Servants.

Dr. Colebatch's four Tracts; his Treatise of the Gout, and Doctrine of Acids
further asserted.

Cursus Osteologicus: Being a complete Doctrine of the Bones, according to the
Newest and most refined Notions of Anatomy, etc. By Robert Baker, Surgeon.

Several Tracts about a Standing Army.

Life of King Lewis XIV.

The Gentleman's Recreation, in Four Parts, viz. Hunting, Hawking, Fowling,
Fishing; wherein these generous Exercises are largely treated of, etc. The 4th
Edition, with Aditions.

Books sold at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
PHilip's New World of Words; or an Universal English Dictionary, containing
the proper Significations, and Derivations of all Words from other Languages,
etc. the Fifth Edition, with large Additions and Improvements from the best
English and Foreign Authors.

Systema Agriculturae, The Mystery of Husbandry discovered, treating of the
several new and most advantageous ways of Tilling, Planting, Sowing, Manuring,
Ordering and Improving all sorts of Gardens, Orchards, Meadows, Pastures,
Corn-Lands, Woods, and Coppices; to which is added the Husbandman's. Monthly
Directions, and the Interpretations of Rustic Terms. The Fourth Edition, with
large Additions throughout the whole.

Archbishop Usher's Life, and Letters, Published by Dr. Parr, his Graces
Chaplain.

Archbishop Usher's Sermons.

Dr. Goad's Aphorisms of the Weather.

The History of England. By Dr. Frankland.

Love's whole Art of Surveying, and Measuring of Land, made easy: With plain
and practical Rules, how to survey, protract, cast up, reduce or divide any
Piece of Land whatsoever.

Strode's New and Easy Method to the Art of Dyalling.

-- His Arithmetical Treatise of the Permutations, Combinations, Elections, and
Compositions of Quantities.

Boyle's Experimental History of Cold, with Cuts.

Miracles performed by Money. A Poem.

School of Politics, or Humors of a Coffee-House.

Bishop Hopkins on the Lords Prayer and Commandments.

Happy Union betwixt England and Holland.

Lord Shannon's Letter to an Atheistical Acquaintance.

Religio Militis.

A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions.

Archbishop Cranmen's Judgment on the Holy Scriptures, published by Dr. Gee.

Baxter's Church History and Episcopacy.

History of Parismus and Parismenos.

Mr. Boyle's free Enquiry into the vulgarly received Notion of Nature. In
English and Latin.

-- His Disquisition of the Final Causes of Natural Things.

-- His Martyrdom of Theodora and Didymus.

-- The Christian Virtuoso.

-- Experimenta and Observationes Phisicae. With a Collection of strange
Reports.

-- Seraphick Love, or Motives to the Love of God.

-- Tracts about the saltness of the Sea.

-- Medicina Hydrostatica.

-- Of Languid and Local Motion.

-- Experiments of the Icy Noctiluca.

Abbadie of the Truth of the Christian Religion.

Quintilian's Declamations Englished.

Dr. Newton's complete Arithmetician.

Counselor Manner's Legacy to his Son.

Ray's Nomenclator Classicus, sive Dictionariolum Trilingue. A Classical
Nomenclator, with the Gender and Declension of each Word, and the Quantities of
the Syllables, etc. For the use of Schools.

Robertson's Large and General Phrase-book.

Dr. Owen's Meditations of the Glory of Christ.

Yworth's whole Art of Practical Distillation.

Bishop Hopkins Sermons and Discourses, in Four Volumes.

Plutarch's Morals, Englished by several Hands. Five Volumes.


