THE ARROW Of the Almighty shot out of the Creatures Bow, AGAINST The
uncalled Ministers in England. OR, A Message sent to them to forewarn them of
their determined destruction, before it fall upon them. Likewise here is
showed, from whence they had their Calling into the Ministry; and how all
People have been deceived by them. Here is also a Glass wherein all Formalists
may see their own deformity, and so seek after that which is the Substance,
wherein all their deformity shall be done away. Likewise here is opened the
Mystery of the Lords Supper, and the Mystery in Baptism; and how there is a
threefold Baptism, having relation to the threefold Name of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; with other Truths very needful to be known. All of them being laid
down in as brief a manner as possible may be, for the use and instruction of
the Presbyterians, Independants, and Anabaptists, so called; or for the good of
all others who have a mind to seek God in a right way; and in the conclusion,
a word to the Free-Gracians. By GEO. BAITMAN.

And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his Arrow shall go forth as the
Lightning; and the Lord shall blow the Trumpet, and shall go with the
whirlwind of the South, Zach. 9.14. London, Printed by R. I. for William
Hutcheson, and are to be sold at his Shop in the City of Durham. 1653.

A PROSCRIPT TO THE Unsent Priests in England.
FRiends, you who (pretend to be, or) call your selves the Ministers of the
Gospel, sent by God to declare his will and mind to the people, etc. and who
have these many hundred years reigned and ruled, by means of Authority, and
Devilish, Popish, and Kingly power, by which your heads have been born up, and
your hands made strong, and your hearts made haughty; so that you are become
great in your own eyes, yea, and wise in your own conceits, and who but you for
wisdom; but I should have said, who but you for wit; for wit and wisdom
differs both in the ground, and in the operation, and in the effect; but no
more of that, for my intention is not to argue cases, or stand upon distinction
of words; but to speak the simple and substantial truth, and to lay open both
to your selves, and all the world, what has been kept hid from you, and by
your means the knowledge thereof has been kept from others, whereby most of
the sons of men is become blinded of that which is the chief good: And to this
day the mystery of the knowledge of the chief good has been kept under by you;
so that even those souls, who cry you up, and bless God for having you to be
their Teachers, shall one day as fast cry you down, and shall curse the time
that they so much adhered to you; but this shall not be until the day of the
revelation of truth, and in that day you shall be all of you accounted as an
abomination amongst men, in so much that shame shall cover all your faces; and
that you shall be had in as great dis-esteem, as ever you have been had in
honor, yea, and that man that lends a hand to pull you down, shall be
accounted happy, yea, and shall receive a reward of God for his work. But this
will not come upon you so soon, as some imagine, neither shall this day be
deferred so long as others think, but this day shall overtake you; and as you
have kept the truth in obscurity, so shall you be kept in obscurity by the
truth: This day is in dawning, but the full noontide shall be your obscurity;
and, as yet you have some seeming splendour among men, therefore your deceit is
not as yet truly manifested, and as yet authority stands for you: But let me
tell you in plain English, Authority shall not be able to defend you, though
the Parliament should do nothing else but act for your upholding, yea, though
all the Armies in the Land should fight for you, and though you both preach and
pray for your selves, and against all others, yet all shall be to little
purpose; for the truth shall be your overthrow: For why, you have in your
generation been the chief opposers of the truth, and so the truth shall be your
ruin; and be as envious as you can, and be as cunning as you can, yet truth
will find you out, wherever you have hid your selves. I know you may beguile
men by changing your coats from black to gray, and by turning from Popery to
Prelacy, and from Prelacy to Presbytery, and from Presbytery to Independency,
and from Independency to Rebaptizing, etc. I know you may do this, yea, and
will do this, if you can but perceive more safety in one thing, then in
another; but yet for all your subtle changing, you carry your old selfish
hearts with you, and in your subtle dealing you shall not be secure; for though
thereby you oft-times beguile the eyes of blinded-men, and make them conceive,
that you are new converts, because your Coat and your Form is changed, yet the
eye of jealousy sees you, and will find you out; and neither shall your
changed Coats, nor your changed Forms, be able to shelter you from the hand of
Justice; for turn you what way you will, so long as your pride and covetousness
is in your hearts, you are but the enemies of God, and his truth, though the
fame be hid from your own beholding.

And I much marvel that men should be so far from the knowledge of truth, and
yet so fair to pretend truth: But this is a mystery bound up, in, and among
Gods treasures, and the most in your generation is bound up fast under lock and
key, from the knowledge of this mystery: And this has fallen upon you in your
generation; and when God shall begin to make his truth appear among men, he
will not own you to be his instruments in that work, but shake you off; for you
shall have neither lot nor portion in that matter; for you think, yea, and are
not ashamed to say, That you are Gods Ministers, and so think that you have God
obliged to your Ministry; and so have, and would have all other people tied
under you by the bonds of captivity; but you shall see it otherwise when God
begins to bestir himself; for you shall then see, that he is not tied to
Universities, nor any of those Ministers that have learned the art of preaching
there: No, no, the truth shall dash you and your art to pieces, and the people
shall be delivered from your cruel bonds. But this shall not be in this old
poisoned generation, who delight to live on the empty husks you give them, and
who delight in nothing but that which pleases their curious wit, and foolish
fancy, which always delights to have things framed according to its own
conceiting. And you have been the cause of the destruction of many a poor soul,
who have been bewitched by your smooth charms; and yet poor hearts they could
not know, nor to this day can know how you do beguile them. O, that I, and all
Gods people, who know the truth, had heads full of water, that our tears might
run down day and night, for the slain of our own flesh and blood; and yet poor
hearts, their bodies lives in the world, and their hearts lives in the
Creature, and their God lives in their head, and they worship him according to
your blind precepts, and they love to have it so; and yet is their poor
spirits under the chains of sin, death, devil, and hell, and yet you nor they
can be made believe that this is so: And this is the effects and fruits of your
wise preaching, by way of Use and Doctrine, which you have learned at the Holy
Universitie, you so much boast of. But I tell you plainly, that since your
wise preaching had its beginning, the truth of God has been hid by it, and so
the souls of men have been deprived of the sweet enjoyments thereof. O woe be to
you for your work, yea, woe and sorrow shall be your portion, in a far greater
measure then any of the sons of men; yea, you shall one day curse the time that
your fathers put you to the Holy Universitie to make you Preachers, nay, you
shall wish that they had put you to learn the trade of Tinklers, when they put
you to learn the trade of Preaching; though at present you glory in your trade,
and think you are the Minister of the Gospel. I know your pride is so great,
that when you see these lines, you will be ready to burn them, and make a scoff
of me for writing them; but that is no new thing, for I know your spirits well
enough; neither do I care for your displeasure, for I know in whom I have
believed, and who caused me to write these lines, and him I desire to obey.

Its possible some of you may Petition to Authority to get me punished for my
plainness with you, as some of your Brethren have done in these days, against
some poor people, unto whom God has more clearly manifested both his Justice
and Mercy to their souls, without your Ministry, then ever he did to any soul
under your Ministry. And this makes you all stark mad, that God should do any
thing in any soul, but by you; and so you both in Preaching and Petitions, go
about both to scandalize and persecute the truth of God, and those souls in
whom the truth is. But this shall return upon you with shame, and your own
preaching and acting against the truth shall be your overthrow.

But friends, I would not have you in the least to mistake me in what I write
in general to you; for no truth is so general, but there may be some particular
exception admitted in it: so in this that I have written to you; for though I
express you all in general, yet my charity causes me to admit of some
particular exception of some amongst you, in some respect; for far be it from
me to condemn the truth in any man, or in any order, if I can but perceive the
least appearance thereof in any soul. But that which I judge and condemn
amongst you all is, the illegal, and unjust calling, and coming into the
Ministry, and your pride and covetousness in the Ministry, and the ignorance
of the truth of God in the Ministry, and the great unknowing of God (in the
people) as he ought to be known, the which has been the evil fruits and
effects of your Ministry. I confess that many of you have wit and schollarship
enough, to maintain Argument with Papists, and any other Formalists that differ
in judgment with you, and that many of you be able enough to take a sentence
of Scripture, and divide it into so many parts, as the sense of speech will
carry; and so out of every part to raise out Doctrines and Uses, Applications
and Conclusions, etc. and so may beget a form of truth in some of your hearers;
and when this is done, yet the power of truth is hid from you in your wise
speaking, and from them in their wise hearing: For the power of the truth is
one thing, and the form of truth is another thing; and the form of truth I know
you hold out, and may hold out by your wit and schollarship taught you in your
Universities. And this I know, one man may teach another, and as he is taught,
so may he speak, yea, and by the work of the brain, may add much to what has
been taught; and yet for all this, the heart is far enough from the enjoyment
or partaking of the power of truth: And where the power of truth is wanting in
any of you, though you have the form of truth, yet are you none of those whom
God calls into the Ministry; but you shall one day be judged and condemned
as thieves, who came not in at the door, but by some other way. Though you put
this off your selves, and apply it to others, whom the Lord has raised of his
own accord, to speak what they know of God; and have in some measure received
the truth, and can bear witness to the truth; and by these your falsehood
becomes to be somewhat discovered: And therefore great is your malice and envy
against them; but yet they shall increase, and you shall decrease, for the Lord
will turn your skirts about your head, and your nakedness and shame shall be
discovered to all men.

I know that many amongst you who are envious fools, and haters of the truth,
do jear and scoff at experienced men, and speak evil of them behind their
back, yet will fawn upon them to their face, because they know these are too
hard for them in matter of speaking of the truth, as it is in Jesus; and like
beaten Cocks will hide their heads under the others wings, and will assent to
what they say, because they cannot gainsay it; but when their backs is turned,
then they will scandalize and speak evil of these persons, and wrest their
words to that which was never intended: And when a pack of these fools is met
together in their pots, then do they strengthen the hands one of another, and
make their malicious scandals complete, and then goes about to make the simple
people believe, that such and such men is perilous and erroneous persons, and
persuades them to take heed of them, least they be seduced by them. And thus
do some of you seek to undermine the truth, and the reason is, because the
truth will be their undoing.

But other amongst you, I know, is more witty, and will not be so much against
experienced men; but perceiving that God owneth them, they will not altogether
speak against these as do the other, but rather make use of their theevish art,
and steal some experiences from the mouth of others, and can lay them up in
their memories, and make as much use of them as their own, and speak of them
before others, insomuch that some may judge them to have received something of
God; but yet this is but the proper work of wit, which has power to
metamorphise man into any shape, which it conceives to be most in fashion, and
wherein most safety seems to be.

But others amongst you I know, that their pride and malice is so great, that
they will beat down truth both with word and sword, and their zeal is so great
for the advancing of the glory of God, that they will both preach, pray, and
fight against the truth; and by all means seek to devour and destroy all
persons in whom the truth appears: But it is no marvel, for truth always found
many enemies amongst men, but especially among Priests in all ages; and it will
be so, as long as the order of Priests is in date.

Yet I confess, though your coming into the Ministry be absolutely against the
mind and command of God, as was the first order of Kings in Israel; and that
God has winked at you above thirteen hundred years, and suffered you to come
into the Ministry by the ordinance of man; yet as God owned some of the Kings
in Israel, so I make no doubt, but that God has owned some amongst you; but
yet I believe Solomon's account may be their number, and those amongst you whom
God has owned, or to this day do own, they are made to see and confess the
emptiness of their wits and schollarship in the understanding of the mind, and
will of God, and finds their art learned in the Universities, to be one of
the greatest enemies against the truth of God, the which they have to deal
withal; and they can speak by experience, that Universitie learning is but a
mere cheat, and a foolish thing to make a right Minister of the word of truth,
and so is made to renounce all the curiosity of art and schollarship: And as
they have received the truth from the Fountain of truth, so are they made to
speak; and these souls cannot envy any man in whom the truth is, but rejoices
to see them, and hear them speak, and accounts them as the Ministers of God,
though they were never put to the Holy Universitie; for the same spirit
proceeding from the same Fountain makes no difference, and these men
accounts it their joy to be in the society of people who be experienced; and
they seek no Lordship over the people, nor are they so hungry hearted after
Tithes, and great Benefice, but can rather condescend to work with their own
hands for their Bread. But I believe you have not many of these amongst you,
for the curse has covered the faces of the most of you in your generation,
under which you are close sealed from the right knowledge of truth, and can no
more believe your deceit, then the Apostle Paul before his Conversion. But
seldom does God execute justice upon any people, before he give them warning of
their sin, and after that a time to repent.

But who is it that dare bring such a Message from the Lord as shall declare
the iniquity of the Priests, and give them warning to repent, and forsake
their sin and falsehood, and foretell them of their destruction, if they repent
not.

Who, I say, dare be so bold as proclaim such a thing, seeing the Authority of
Nations stands for them, and accounts them men worthy of honor, and sit men
for the promulgating of the Gospel; and most of the people esteem them little
less then gods, yea, and themselves account themselves the only men fit to be
forewarners and instructers of all others. May not such a one as brings such
a sad Message to them, expect to be envied, and evil spoken of, yea, and
persecuted to death? I know the man that shall be sent with this Message cannot
escape, no more shall I; for when first the Lord put this into my heart, the
which my Pen has put down in these lines, I was very unwilling to yield
obedience thereunto, because my Reason set before mine eyes the great hazard I
should run, if I should meddle in any such thing; but the Lord would not suffer
me to be quiet, until I undertook this Message; and better had I abide your
fury, and the displeasure of all men, then to be disobedient to the voice of
the Lord: And as the Lord lives in me, my malicious part has not caused me to
write these lines, though you may so judge of me; for I protest in the presence
of God, I unfainedly wish all your good, and should very much rejoice to know
of your repentance, and should no less be heartily sorry for your destruction,
if I should live to see it: For that which I have received of God, teaches me
to love all men, and wish well to all men, and I am glad at the welfare of all
men, and cannot but be sorry at the suffering of any, though he be my greatest
enemy, and would lend him my help, if I could do him any good, if he came into
distress, either of body or mind: Therefore my spirit being free, I hope to
bear all that any of you shall either inflict upon my name or person; and
though you shall hate me, yet I cannot choose but love you, as you are my fellow
Creatures, and of the same flesh and blood with me: And my advice to you is,
that you slight not these lines, but search your own hearts, and if the light
of God go along with you, you shall find that I have not wronged you at all;
for what I here declare unto you shall be found true, either to convince you,
or to be a witness against you.

But my Friends, I would have you to know that I have not said the tenth part
of what I have committed to me, to speak concerning you; for I have been as
much sparing as possible I could be, in what I had to declare to you; and if
this my first Message be slighted by you, and return upon my self, it is very
possible it will draw out a fivefold heavier message with it, but I will not be
too tedious at present. If I may pray for you, I wish that God would open your
eyes, and make sensible your hearts, that you might be acquainted with the
great Mystery of sin and selfness in you; and out of the true knowledge and
right sense thereof, that you may be made fit to discover the mystery of sin
and selfness in all other. And that you may be rightly made partakers of the
mystery of the Divine Nature, that from the enjoyment thereof, you may be made
able to know and comprehend with all Saints, what is the height and depth, etc.
And to know the fellowship of the love of God which passes knowledge, that so
you may be able to hold out to others the mystery therein contained; and then
shall you be acquainted with the Will and Mind of God; and what you know that
shall you speak, and then you should see, that all your Art and Schollarship is
not worth a straw, and that all your Uses and Doctrines from thence proceeding,
is but a mere foolish and fantastic invention, whereby the form of truth has
been upholden by you, and the power of truth kept down by that invention: From
whence it is, That the hearts of the people has been so glewed to sin and
selfness, and covers themselves from the knowledge thereof, by a fair seeming
form taught them by your art, through the help of your good thinking.

Friends fare you well, I have no more to say at present, and what you find in
these ensuing lines, make good use of them, for there is more in them then
fools can know or believe, but the wise shall reap the benefit thereof.

Yours, as you love and know the truth, as it is in Jesus. Geo. Baitman.

THe rising of the Sun, destroys the darksome night,
The Foolmerts and the Owls, thereby is put to flight,
The ravening Wolves afraid, their prey they shall not get,
The Fox with all his wiles, is putten to his wit.
All Creatures who do use, to raven in the night,
Begins to grieve full sore, at splendour of this light:
For Nature teaches them, their working time is done,
When night is swallowed up, by rising of the Sun,
Then do they hide themselves, for fear they shall be found
By him, who seeks them out, with his well-sented Hound,
Who wisely searches out, each foot-step as they went.
For why they left behind, a very stinking sent,
Which does direct unto, the holes wherein they lurk,
And taken is also, and plagued for their work.
When this is brought to pass, then may the sucking Lamb
Without being destroyed, lie safely by its Dam.
So may the old Sheep too, feed safely without fear,
For why the Beasts are slain, that off their Wool did tear.
The Epistle to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, if thou have any desire to seek after the chief good, for
the everlasting well being of thy Spirit, for thy better understanding (and
true information) I have drawn these ensuing lines; but I would not have thee
to think that I expect any praise of thee, if there be any thing in them
praise worthy, for I confess these lines had never come to thy view, (with any
consent of mine, as I am a weak and worthless creature) had it not been that
he who has the commanding power over all Creatures, by the command he has
over me, did overmaster me, and as it were forced this ensuing Treatise to be
written by me: for I confess, I did as much resist the Word of the Lord, in
commanding me to write these lines, as ever did any of his Prophets, when he
sent them to pronounce any Judgment upon any people for their transgressions;
but while I gainsaid the Lord in what he would have me to speak, I had but
little rest day or night, until I set on work, and put my Pen to paper to
draw these ensuing lines; and as far as I have declared to you the mind of
these motions that wrought so strongly in me, so far I have found rest, yet I
know I have not here declared at large what I ought to have declared, and
therefore as yet my spirit is not at that peace the which it desires, yet I
have prevailed that what I have here written may be acceptable until further
opportunity.

But what is here presented to thy view, I wish thee to weigh seriously, and
though it may seem to cross thee in that which thou do believe to be truth,
yet in questioning it I wish thee to question thy self also, and if the same
spirit be in thee which was in the Author when he wrote it, thou shall be made
to see that there is a truth in it, the which as yet has been hid from thee,
especially if thou be one that has had no other sight of truth, but what thou
receivest through the spectacles of the false Priests, and have known nothing
of God but what thou have been taught by their precepts, and so has blinded
thee of the true knowledge both of God and of thy self, and have closed thee
up within the Prison walls of weak forms, wherein thy poor soul has been
kept prisoner, and fed with Pulse and Husks: and as for that which is the
chief food of thy soul, thou have not as yet had a taste thereof.

But if thou have but any of the pure operations of the truth of God in thy
soul, by which thy desire is led out, in seeking that which is the chief
good, I hope this will be of some use for thee, for herein thou shall in some
measure see how thou have been blindly led by the blind Priests and their
precepts, and thou shall see how they had their calling into the Ministry, and
from whence their original beginning was, and how they have continued to this
day, and wherein they have been the cause how the true knowledge of God is kept
from appearing amongst the sons of men; and likewise here thou shall see
discovered the emptiness of all forms, and the ground of forms, and how the
most part of things contained in forms is but only traditionall, and therefore
but superstitions, and how the purest things in forms are but Idolatry, when
the mind of him that ordained them is unknown.

And here is set out before thine eyes that which is the mystery, and the
mind of him who left the some in dark types, and gave command for the
observing of the same, that so his mind might be found out in the mystery of
these types, whereby the soul might be drawn out of that which is the type,
into that which is the mystery of the type.

And if thou be either in the form of the Presbyterian order, or Independent
Congregation, or of the Brotherhood of the Anabaptists, if thou be not settled
on the lees in thy form, I know thou will be made to see, that there is not
that happiness in thy form, the which thou thoughtest there had been in it,
and then I hope this will partly show thee what the substance of truth is, and
where it is to be found, and how it ought to be sought; and as thy desire is
upright in the seeking of that which is the life and substance of all things,
thou will be made to accept this weak discovery of truth, but if thou be one
who is settled on the lees in thy form. I know thou will but find little
herein to please thee, for I know it will be in appearance to thee as a thief,
who would take from thee thy treasure thou live of, and delightest in, and
wilt rather snarle and fight with it (in thy wit) then to yield thy self to be
robbed by it. But whatever thou art, or in what form soever thou live, I
would have thee to understand my mind truly in what is here offered to thee;
for I would have thee to know that I am not such an enemy to forms as that I
would have them absolutely destroyed, or forsaken of any, except to change them
for that which is the chief good; and when the chief good is truly attained,
it does not destroy forms no more then true faith destroys good works; for
I confess and know, that forms in their time and places is as necessary as
the Alphabet is in the beginning, to teach Children the Art of reading, the
which is of necessary use in their time and place; but yet if the Master should
still keep the Scholar learning his Alphabet, and bring him on no further, he
would be found an unperfect, and unprofitable Teacher; and so it will appear
that those Ministers who teach, and bind up the people in forms, and bring
them no further, are as unfit, and as unprofitable as is such a Master. But as
the Master brings a Scholar out of his Alphabet by degrees to be perfect in
reading, yet can he not read without the letters contained in the Alphabet, but
even in his reading the whole letter is contained, though they be not expressed
one by one.

So it is with those who are rightly brought out and beyond the form into that
which is the substance, the substance does no more destroy the form then
reading does the Alphabet letters, though the same be acted and performed from
another ground, and in another manner; for this I know, that all those who
never sought God in any wise, but have followed their own Lusts to the full,
even the form shall judge them, and they shall be condemned for the not using
thereof; and all who have taken any form upon them, if they live in that
form, and yet be deprived of the substance, by making an Idol of their form,
the substance it self shall judge and condemn them, and in their forms they
shall perish; and what I here have holden out (if rightly understood) does not
at all make void any form, in case the form be rightly grounded upon command,
and example in Scripture, according to this present dispensation wherein we
live, and that the mind of the Commander be understood in giving out command
to observe any thing.

But that which I aim at, is to let thee see the emptiness of all forms
without the power and substance of that which is the truth, and that no form
should blind thee in seeking that which is above forms; and I assure thee,
that if ever God own thee, and draw thee rightly to himself, thou shall find
no less evil in thy form then thou have found in thy gross offenses; and
thou shall see thou have been kept, be it at a great distance, from the true
partaking of that which is the truth indeeds: but in what form soever thou
art, I would not have thee to leave off, or leap out of thy form, before thou
be truly called out of it, by that which is more excellent then thy form. For
this I tell thee, if thou leave thy form for any thing else, be sure thou shall
be found a transgressor, and I know thou will fall to a very loose
conversation, and that will prove a great abomination.

And while thou art in thy form, and yet is not called out of it, by that
which is more excellent, take it for granted, thou will settle down upon the
lees in thy form, and then thy form will be abomination.

Therefore ponder the mystery between these two, and take these few lines in
good part, and if thou have but half an eye, they shall be as a glass;
wherein thou may partly perceive the middle way between two extremes; and
if ever thou come to hit right into the mystery or middle way, I know thou
shall not miss of the way that Christ himself went before thee, and then will thou take up thy Cross and follow after him, and then shall thou know the
fellowship of his suffering, and that shall bring thee to the fellowship of the
communion of the Father, and the Son, of which thou shall see more expressed
in this ensuing Treatise, the which I freely commend to thee, and commit thee
to the fellowship of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be thy form what it
will. This is the worst I can wish thee, who am,

Thine in the love of truth, G. B.

THE ARROW Of the Almighty, shot out of the Creatures Bow, AGAINST The
uncalled Ministers of England, etc.
O Wonderful, O wonderful, folly and madness, folly and madness, deceit upon
deceit, darkness added to blindness; and yet how few knows their blindness,
but is pleased with a conceit of seeing and knowing. This blindness is not the
loss of your bodily sight, O ye sons of men, for that sight you have, and by
that sight your lusts have brought blindness upon your souls; the pure eyes
thereof being fast closed, and shut up, so that pure good you cannot see, but
in this your blindness, you grope even at Noonday. Light is come amongst you,
yet you see it not, neither have you any desire to see it; for your deeds are
evil, and therefore you love it not, but you are pleased in this your darkness,
thinking you see; and therefore your sin remains untaken from you, John 9.41.

There is a pleasant object of Light, Life, and Love, amongst you, yea, and
within you; yet do you not see it, nor are in the feeling and enjoyment of it,
no, nor knows not what it is, nor where it is; for you be in a blind-seeing
condition, and in a dead senceless-feeling condition, and in a lovely hateful
condition. O my Friends of my flesh and blood, I wish you all well, but I
hardly can know you, for you are become as Monsters in my sight; neither dare I
come so near you, as to touch you, for fear I be devoured by you, for I know
your metamorphosed condition well enough; for I my self have been in the same
shape which you are in, but then I knew it not, but now I know it, and can tell
what your nature is; therefore I will not come too near you, but will hide my
self among the bushes, where you shall not see me; and secretly I will watch
your moving, and having mine Arrow ready, I will let fly at you; and if they
be well aimed, and rightly guided, it may be (possible) they will hit some of
you. I give you warning beforehand, and in so doing I may be counted a fool;
but yet it is not so, for I know all your hiding places, and I am sure you are
so well pleased with them, that you have no mind to stir out of them.

But it is possible when you see or hear what I say, you will marvel what I
mean hereby, and may happily raise a question amongst your selves, as Christ's
Disciples did, when they said, Is it I, is it I, that he means to hit? is it
I that am a blind seeing man? is it I that am this metamorphosed man? is it I
that has a mind so fierce, as to devour any of my flesh and blood? no sure,
he means of some other, I am not the man.

But shall I tell you Friends, if you fall to reason, as Christ's Disciples did,
I wish there were no more of you, the men I mean of, then one of every twelve;
but I rather fear, that the men I mean of, be in number twelve for one; and I
will put all men out of the number, but only those, who profess Religion; for
those are the men I chiefly aim at, in this my ensuing Discourse; for I see
them misshapen and deformed in their Forms and fashion of Religion, and so are
become Monsters in the same Forms; and so are like to degenerated Plants, who
bring out fruit fit for no use at all, but only to beguile the fight of the
Passengers; but when they come to be tasted, they dazzle the head with madness,
and fill the stomach full of rhume, that it cannot digest the heavenly food;
but in what is said, do not think that I am the enemy of Religion; no, I am
not, but approve of it, so far as God is in it, and as far as thy self is out
of it; But when I find thou have chosen thy Religion, and yet left God out of
it, and have thy self in thy Religion; there I let fly at thee this my Arrow,
what ever thou art, or whatsoever thy Religion, Form, or Profession be. But
this I am sure of, that I may hit thy head often enough, before I hurt thee; for
thou have armor of proof upon it, which thou have forged out of such
Scriptures, as thou thoughtst most meet for thy use; beside, thou have hatched
and brought out some acting in thy chosen Form; and these have thou covered thy
self withal, so thou may think thy self sure enough; yet though thou be thus
well harnished all about, yet I know where thou art naked, and empty, and that
is within thee, even thy heart, and that would I aim at; for though thou be
never so well armed on thy outside, yet happily there may be an Arrow drawn at
a venture, which may pierce between the coupling of the same; but all my fear
is, that if a shot chance to pierce through, that there is something in thee
that will not let it pierce thy heart.

But I will speak no more in parables, but show my meaning openly to thee, viz.
Thou art about a work in thy Religion, which thou shall never bring to pass
with all the wit or knowledge, reading, praying, acting, in any performance
without thee, which all of them, are but things within the compass of thine own
power, to act or do, as thou art a reasonable Creature. But would thou know
what this work is, thou art about, in this thy Religion? I will tell thee what
it is (but I question thou will not believe me, when thou hear it, though it
be truth) It is that thou art about to make God and the World dwell together in
thy heart; or to say, God and thy self, to love and live together within thee;
and thou have so ordered the business, that thou can serve them both; but
thou art deceived in the matter, for Christ himself said, thou could not do
it; and I know thou know that Christ said so: But yet thou know not, that
thou art of that company that is contained within the compass of Christ's words;
but thou put it off thy self, and judge some other to be guilty herein;
for amongst you all, who are different, and one against another in your
formality, every one of you judges, and condemns them, who be not of the
same mind and judgment with you, in your chosen tenet: And who so worship not
God in your own way, you judge him to be inferior to you; for every one of you
judge your own opinion chief, and according to what you have chosen so you
worship God; and by and through the same, you can judge and condemn all others.
Are these things of God, or man, be judge your selves: do you think that God
can be divided, or his worship parted into pieces, or can Christ and his way be
severed? no, in no case. But the thing is not strange, though some in our days
do marvel to see so many several and different judgments, in and about
Religion; for those in the Primitive time was carried about, in and by such
foolish Chimeraes, which did not a little trouble the Apostle Paul, as you may
see, 1 Cor. 1.13. and 1.34. But the Apostle knew from whence this sprang, and
tells them plainly they were carnal, and herein he judged rightly; for it is
nothing but carnality and earthly-mindedness that causes differences amongst
those who profess Religion, and yet all pretend the true worship of God in the
same. O fools and unwise, when will you learn to be wise, and know what is the
worship of God? you all have heard what Christ said to the woman of Samaria,
John 4. and can rehearse the same; but to this day you have been ignorant of
the mystery in these words: And from hence it is, that you have parted the way
of God into so many several kinds of formal worships, and are so set in
Argument one against another; and hereby your speech and language is become
changed, whereby you cannot understand one another; neither can you help one
another, but much hinder one another; and the reason is, because you are all of
you in ignorance in the work you be a doing, viz. No other thing, but building
Babels Tower, whereby you think to save your selves from the flood of justice,
the which shall undoubtedly run ove rall flesh, Nah. 1.8. By this your worship,
every one of you think in your hearts to climb into Heaven, and to get a name
one above another; and who can make you believe, That all your seemly buildings
is nothing else but that Babel, which one day shall fall, and come thundering
down about your ears: But though you will not believe me at present, yet
hereafter I am sure, you shall know the same to be true, when you either come
to be delivered from the danger you are in, or else when the danger has
destroyed you; but if you chance to be delivered from the danger, as some have
been, then shall you have the promise fulfilled in you, viz. I will return to
the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord,
to serve him with one consent, Zeph. 3.9.

But I make no doubt, but every one of you in your own chosen Form, will
quickly conceit, that this promise is fulfilled on you, and among you, because
every one of the same self-chosen Form, agree in the same, and all bear witness
with one voice, That the same is the only truth you hold out; and in the same
Form you have found God, and in the same you will own God, and in the same you
call upon his Name; I know you will, all in your several Forms, conclude the
same fulfilled. O friends stay a little, and let it be known, if your
conclusions be true, yea or nay; for I something doubt you have but a false
interpretation of the words. But can thou tell what the work of the Lord is,
before he return the pure Language to any people? can thou tell what is the
voice of this pure Language? I doubt you cannot. But here I will give you a
glimpse, what they both are, if thou have but an eye to see, and a heart to
understand when the same is somewhat held out to thee. First, for the work of
the Lord, before he return to any this pure Language, is partly expressed in
the foregoing verse of the same Chapter, where the Lord says. Therefore wait
ye upon me, until the day Iarise to the prey; for my determination is to gather
the Nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms, to pour upon them mine
indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with
the fire of my jealousy, Zeph. 3.8. Have thou known thy soul brought into such
a sad sorrowful condition, being void of all help or comfort from all created
and things acted? and have thou known thy soul so set and compassed about with
sin and selfness, pleasure, praise, and profit, anger, envy, discontent both
with God and man; roving of thine imagination, thy thoughts, inclinations, and
desires, bended down to created things? has the want of the lovely presence of
God pressed thy Spirit so sore, night and day, that both thy sleep in the night
departed from thee, and thy appointed food by day refused? has thy soul known
it self in captivity thus, in and with these things; and have thou known thy
soul in the lowest Hell, under the chains of ghostly death; and have thou here
born the indignation of the Lord for thy transgressions; and have thou here
waited upon the Lord, till he arose to the prey, viz. To pluck thy soul out of
the foresaid captivity; and have thou seen all these thy ghostly captivers
assembled together, and the fierce anger of the Lord poured upon them, and
devoured them all; and have thou known the fire of his jealousy, viz. Anger
and love mixed together, that thereby all created and earthly things was
devoured in thee; so that all thy adversaries and captivers was captived; so
that Death and Hell is swallowed in victory, and that now thy soul is carried
upon the flying Cherubims; so that now thou have not a thought, inclination, or
desire, to either profit of the world, praise of men, pleasing of thy senses or
affections, with any delight; but that as a brand plucked out of the fire, or as
gold seven times refined, thy soul does so appear before thy God? and then in
the clear manifestation of the presence of God, thou shall have this pure
language restored to thee, viz. Then shall thy soul know how to pronounce
Hallelujah rightly, then shall thy soul know how to sing the new song expressed
in Rev. 13.3. then shall thou know how to call upon the name of the Lord, for
then thou shall know what is his name, because the same shall be written in thy
forehead, viz. In the noble faculty of thy soul, even thy pure understanding;
for then thou shall know truly, that his Name is Wonderful, Mighty, and
Merciful, etc. and so shall praise him according to the knowledge of his Name.
But I will proceed no further in showing the nature of the pure Language, nor
what is to be done in every soul, before it shall have that Language returned;
for by this glimpse, those that have it, can testify the truth hereof, and so
can express what I mean, because they understand my mind, by what is already
said, and then there is enough; and to those who know it not, nor believe it,
because they have not known the same, I suppose, if more had been said, it had
but been lost labor, and so to them this is enough also. Neither indeed dare I
explain any further; for now in these days, the cunning comprehending devil is
let loose, and he has got into the wit of men, and there he sits like a
God, and teaches men how they shall learn this pure Language, and new Song,
when they hear the same spoken or sung, by those who have the same returned to
them: But yet this cunning devil in the wit of men does not teach any thing,
but only a sound of words; for all the Devils in Hell, nor all the wit and
learning of men, nor all the Angels in Heaven, can return to man this pure
Language, nor teach this new Song unto any soul, until it be redeemed from the
earth and earthly things, and till it be clothed in the white robe, and follow
the Lamb whether soever he goes; and that have the white stone with the new
Name, which no man knows, but he that has it; and none can teach this
Language, but the Lamb slain from the beginning, etc. But I have digressed too
far from the thing intended; but yet in my digressing I have a secret aim, viz.
To pitch something before the eyes of those, whom I aim to shoot at afterward,
that while they be looking at what is set before them, I may come the better to
hit my mark; for my Bow is ready bent, and the Arrow of the Almighty is set in
it, and who comes first in view, I will let it fly at them, whether I hit or
miss.

A Spiritual Vision of the Presbytery, and all other Forms without God,
included in it.
BUt methink I hear a voice speaking, as though it were spoken by those who are
of the Presbytery order; and thus I hear them speak. Indeed it is true, The
Lord had need to shoot out his Arrows at the wicked, for they are mightily
increased at this time, for the poor Church, and pure Church of Christ is like
to be swallowed up by the power of strange wicked Sectaries, who are risen up
in these days; and the reason is because of an unfaithful Parliament, whom we
too much trusted to, for they have swarved from the trust we committed to them;
but if we had known, how they would have proved, we would never have acted so
against the King; for we little knew then what privilege we had, though our
power was not so great as we should have had, and which did wholly belong to
us, we being the only people of God, and had knowledge to govern both Church
and State; but the Parliament being metamorphised from the shape of Holiness,
they have given Liberty of Conscience to every one in their Religion, and will
not execute Justice upon men, when they err from the Faith which we have: And
this was their blindness and ignorance in adhering too much to that beast set
out in the Revelation 13. viz. to Cromwell and a sort of wicked Sectaries under
him, who by their power have brought the Saints into bondage; but if the
Parliament had but stood to their first principles of Faith, which we profess,
all these had been surprised; for then had our power been strong, and our power
is terrible as an Army with Banners, against all who will not worship God in
our way; For our way of worship is the only way of worship in all the world,
and all other are but erring Sects.

We helped both with our Prayers, Blood, and Purses, to overthrow the whore of
Rome, and the King, and his wicked rabble; but now far worse is risen up in
their place, and by those we be more perplexed then ever, for they have taken
away our power, by which we upheld the Faith, and so are become into a very ill
condition; for we are no more but a mock amongst the people, and we stand but
as ciphers; nay, which is worst of all, many of our own Faith declineth from
us, and adhereth to these new-come Sects: And thus the pure Church becomes
rent in pieces, and all is because we want our power to compel, and to execute
justice upon the opposers; but seeing it is so, we will wait with patience, for
this is but the trial of the Church, for we know that hereafter our God will
deliver us; for although these things be fallen upon us, yet have we not departed
from the way of our God, nor dealt unfaithfully in his Covenant; nay, we appeal
to our God for witness, who knows our hearts, that we keep close to our
Religious worshipping of him; for neither do we allow of any to be our Pastors,
but such as have come in by the right door, men chosen of God, made fit by the
godly Universities, confirmed by the approbation, and laying on of the hands of
our holy Presbytery; and such we receive according to their worth, and these
and none other can speak the Language of Christ to us, and with them we join in
hearing them both Preach, and Pray, and in the holy Sacraments, in which we
have our Faith confirmed to our souls, finding them very much comforted
thereby; so that we are made able to walk in holiness of life, and perform all
holy duties to our God; and he in his loving kindness answers us again in
giving us his holy Spirit to inspire us, and by that Spirit we are made sure of
our Salvation, and know that we are elected from eternity, and by that Spirit
we call God Father, and Christ our Brother, and Mediator; and in this we
rejoice continually, walking in the ways of our God in holy life, and Christian
conversation, making our calling and election sure by well-doing.

Hearing this voice, I mused a little, and thought in my self, there is an
appearance of some godliness here, I will hold my hand, and not shoot at such a
holy object as this, before I very well understand the truth of the matter; for
said I, it is not for me to shoot out this Arrow, but against them that God
aims it for, and those be such as are his enemies; therefore I will consider
a little, and see what the mind of the Lord is, before I let out this Arrow.

But not long had I considered hereupon, till there was brought before my sight
the object that had thus spoken; and it seemed in appearance no less then what
was expressed by the voice, and me-thought there was much of God in it: For it
had a godly garb upon it, a fair covering it was to look upon, wrought with
diverse works, and variety of colors, all of them seeming to be dyed in grain,
and well-grounded: So drawing somewhat nearer to behold this comely Garment, the
nearer I came to it, the worse it seemed; and in the skirts of it, I espied
much blood. And I likewise saw, that all the various work was but a gloss, set
on by the cunning of some witty Painter, who had been very cunning in that art:
But while I was looking, there was a voice said, Look what thou see under,
and within that garb; and so the garb was somewhat drawn aside, and under it I
saw a monstrous Creature, which is called Self; and this Monster had as many
heads and horns as the Beast which John saw in the Revelation: And this Monster
was closed fast to the heart, and kept it under its power, and captivity. I saw
also other Beasts with diverse heads and horns, and I saw several Epithites
engraven upon these heads, as namely, Cruelty, Bloodshedding, Persecution,
Pride, Love of the World, Love of praise, Love of honor, Envy, Anger,
Impatience, Murmuration, Hatred toward God and his people, Hard-heartedness,
Carnal-mindedness, Ignorance of God, Self-conceitedness, Good thinking, etc.
And out of, and from amongst these, I saw a chain come from the Monster called
Self, and it reached out to the fair seeming Garment, and kept the garment fast
about these other Beasts, so that they could not be discovered; and this chain
consisted of five links, viz. False Faith, false Love, and false Hope, and
false fear of God, and false-feeling of inward Joy; and the name of that chain
was called Hypocrisy. And I saw one of the Beasts before said, and he was like
a Leopard, and his name was Self-wisdom; and I saw another of these Beasts, and
he was like a Dragon, and his name was Self-power. And I saw another of these
Beasts, and he was somewhat seemlier then the rest, having two horns like a
Lamb; and his name was called Self-righteousness. And these three I saw in
Unity consulting together, and I heard their consultation; and it was against
the most high God, and against his own people. And I saw the work they wrought,
and all their work was to make Robes and Garbs to hide themselves under them;
and so I saw how they had wrought this Garment aforesaid, and the stuff they
used in making it; for it was made of ten several mixtures, viz. Sanctifying
the Sabbath, hearing of their Minister, Praying two times each day, refraining
from gross acting, keeping from the company of the wicked, assembling together
to repetitions, receiving the thing they call a Sacrament, otherwise called
Bread and Wine, Lords Supper, or the some small charity to those they call
godly, turning up their outward eyes toward the Element in their devotion,
reproving of other who worship not God in these things. And all these are mixed
together, and made up very handsomely by, and with a work-tool, viz. Seeming
zeal for the glory of God. And I saw who helped to put this Garment on, and he
had a look as though he had been sore frighted, and seemed as one, who was not
a very wise one; and his name was called Conscience. And I saw a Girdle that
kept that Garment close to them that wore it; and that was called Fear of Hell.
And on this Garment I saw a badge or mark, as though it had been the Livery of
some great man, and his arms engraven therein, and in that badge there was this
Epithet engraven, viz. The Saints sign, and this was called Baptism. And I saw
an hollow Pipe that was fastened to this Garment, and that went inward, and the
end that went inward, and reached to the mouth of the frighted Creature, that
help to put on the Garment, viz. Conscience, and he was pleased, and delighted
to be sucking and drawing at that Pipe; for there issued from the virtue of
that Garment, a certain sweetness, which distilled through that Pipe, and with
that was he well pleased, and by it his frighting looks was changed in smiles;
and by this he was satisfied, and sat in great silence and quietness: Now the
name of this Pipe was called Vnregarding of the heart, and the oil or virtue
that passed there-through, was called Secret reflecting upon outward actings;
and when Conscience was well satisfied by the virtue he sucketh through that
Pipe, then does he rest; and to salute him in his peace, I saw the three former
Beasts, viz. Self-wisdom, self-power, and self-righteousness: And I saw an
unclean spirit attend them, and he was like a Lamp, and shined like a
lightning, and they all were compassed about with that light; and this spirit
was called The Angel of darkness transformed into an Angel of light; and
amongst them there was great triumph and mirth, and this was called Seeming joy
in the Holy Ghost: And I saw them make a certain Law or Act amongst themselves,
to which they all subscribed, and they sealed it with the promises; and they
delivered it to the Conscience to be kept, and they grounded this act upon
antiquity, viz. Predestination, and Eternal decree: And this act was like the
Laws of the Medes and Persians, for it was concluded by them, it should never
be broken. And this Law was named, Full assurance of Salvation.

So when I had seen and heard all this, it was said unto me, Behold and
understand, for this is no other then the Great Mystery of Iniquity, hid under
outward Formality; and to this day it has been undiscovered, amongst most of
those who profess the name of Religion. Therefore bend thy Bow, and let those
Arrows committed to thee, fly abroad; if thou hit, or miss, do not thou care,
for I will be thy warrant; fear not what may be done, or spoken against thee;
be not backward in delivering what is committed to thee.

Now my Bow being ready bent, and the Arrow committed to me, I let fly at thee
thou false-hearted Presbytery, thou which couzenest them that adhere to thee.
Come and let me expostulate the business with thee; for it seems thou must be
called in question before the face of the most High; and before thou be called
thither, let me give thee warning to repent of thy folly, and learn in time to
see how thou art befooled in, and with thy own conceit. Thou will hardly
believe that this foresaid Mystery is in thy heart; for thou have never found
it there, for thou have covered thy self from it, with thy outward Formality;
and if thou have but half an eye open, I will let thee see thy forms is nothing
but things of, and within thy own power to act; and that they be all or most of
them but grounded upon rotten foundations of thy own wisdoms invention; and
that thou art carried on in them, by thine own good thinking, whereby thou art
become the enemy of God, whatever thou pretend.

And first I will draw my Bow at thy Priests; but this name they will not own,
because (say they) it does not belong to them, for it is a ceremonial
eptithite; yet I say, thou needst not dislike them; for it were well if thou
were a Priest indeed, for then should thou be that spiritually, which the
Priests in the time of the Law were ceremonially; and thou should do that
office, and offer these gifts spiritually, which they did ceremonially. And
this then should thou be (which I fear thou art not) one redeemed from the
earth, and thy sins would be washed from thee by the blood of Jesus Christ,
Revel. 1.5. But this name thou will not own; and indeed thou do well in not
owning it, for it does not belong to thee. But yet I know what name thou will
own, viz. a Minister of the Gospel; but this name thou do but assume to thy
self, for thou know not what the Gospel is, neither was (or is) it committed
to thee to deliver; therefore thou can not give to others, that which thou
want thy self; but I will tell thee what thy right name is, if thou will but
own it, and that name is a taker from men, that which thou have no right to
have: And if this should be rightly understood, thy proper name would prove
none other, then the name theft. And I am sure, if I or any other should out
take an hundred shillings from any man, which I or they had no right to take;
and yet as good right to take it as thou have to take an hundred pound per
annum, I know by the Law of the Land, I or he should be hanged for so doing;
yea, and we deserved it too: then be thine own judge, what thou deservest, for
taking so much unjustly every year. But I know how thou will avoid this, and
clear thy self of being this great theif; for thou will say, thou have nothing
but what belongs to thee of right, and thou will prove it by Scripture too,
having the word of the Apostle to back thine Argument; where he says by way of
comparison, Who goes a warfare at any time, etc. 1 Cor. 9.7. And likewise he
uses other metaphors, As he that plougheth, and thresheth, should be partaker
of his hope; and I kewise he brings in the comparison of sowing spiritual
things: And further he says, The Lord has so ordained that they that Preach
the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, etc. Here is as much as thou can
properly allege for thy self in thy doing, to keep thee from being guilty of
being a theif; and thou think this will be thy warrant for what thou do;
for I know thy interpretation of these words well enough, and thou
understandest them as well as thou do the Mysteries of the Gospel, and both
alike; but I pray thee hearken, and I will expound the same unto thee truly.
But it may be thou will not believe the truth when thou hear it spoken; for
if it please thee not, thou will question, that I have not been at the
University to get my spirit inspired, thereby to understand Scripture rightly:
But let my inspiration come from what Fountain it is come from, at present I
will not give thee account from whence I had it; but mind thou what I here
hold out to thee, and let me give thee out the truth of the thing in hand. In
the first place, I would have thee to consider who the Apostle means on, when
he spoke these words. Was it those that preached Christ by hearsay, and by
Schollership, and their own brain-knowledge gathered from the works and words
of other men, and that chused out one sentence of Scripture as thou do, and
falls to thy wit, studying the mind of God in it, and so divides one
sentence into so many several fractions, and out of each to raise out
Doctrines, Uses, etc. and so declaring the mind of God, and Christ, according
to their own Schollership, Wit, and Knowledge got from Scriptures and other
men's labors: Think thou it was such he means of, or did intend these words
for them? if thou do, thou art a fool. But I will tell thee who he aimed them
for, viz. Such as himself; who had the right knowledge of, and lived in the
power of what he held out to others, and had not his doctrine to fetch out of
his study and brain-knowledge, gotten from what others had said; but he had it
from the right Fountain, that Fountain living in him, and he in it; and he was
acquainted with that he lived in, and could witness the truth thereof truly;
and as he had heard and seen, so did he testify to others; for he had seen the
Lord Jesus in Spirit, and he had felt his love, and lived in that love; and
from thence he had his freedom, both to speak, and talk what was freely given
him by those whom he had brought to be partakers of the spiritual blessing,
viz. The shedding abroad of the love of God in their hearts; by which love,
they were more willing to give, then he was to receive: And these people he
spoke these words to, were wrought into the same condition, as himself
witnesses, 1 Cor. 9.2. And therefore knowing that he was one whom the Lord had
sent to work his work, and that the work was wrought, even upon those, upon
whom this work was fulfilled, he thought no great offense to take what they
would freely give him; and to such whom he had wrought up into the faith and
love of the Lord Jesus Christ, he shows, that if he did take any thing of
them, yet he did not transgress; and to show them how reasonable it was, if he
did so, he brings before them these foresaid metaphors, which all of them being
rightly weighed, was worthy of the reward they hoped for; and from thence he
draws this conclusion, That it was as lawful for him to take something of
them, as a Soldier to take the wages he ventureth his life for: And as
reasonable it was, as for the Husbandman to eat of the fruit of his own labor,
etc. And the Law of Reason will allow this.

Well, this may sound something as like thou would have it, but mind what is
said before, and what comes afterward, and then see where thou art; for thou
art not the man that has the right to take of any, any thing for what thou
do, for thy work is not worth a Bodwill per annum; for thou art not the man
that has any due at all to a penny for thy work; for thy work is but thy own,
and thou have learned it, as men learn other trades; and yet by what thou have
learned from others, thou will take upon thee to enter upon the work of the
Lord, and to be a declarer of his will and mind to others, whereas thou
bear but false witness of the mind of God; for thou have not seen the Lord
Jesus; neither ever did he call thee to what thou do, nor ever has the mind
of Christ Jesus been made known unto thee in the Mysterious manifestation of
his loving kindness to thy soul; neither do thou live in the life of, and
love of God, and so thou art far enough from knowing what his will is; for he
does not own thee in thy work, neither will he bless thy work, for it is none
of his, but thy own; and so thy own blessing falls upon it, and that is
nothing but a false name thou put upon it, making foolish people believe
thou art something, even Simon Magus like, who deceived the people: And thou
make some believe that thou have converted them to God, (yea, and thou art so
persuaded thy self too) when alas they are but the same they were in their
hearts, only they differ from what they were before in the outward man; and
because thou have put out their eyes, they give up themselves to be led by thy
direction; and for so doing, thou do pronounce them blessed; but yet poor
souls, their hearts are not turned to God, but live in the world.

Look back I pray thee, at the foresaid Mystery, and the fair Garment; for they
be the very emblems and just pictures of thy self, and thy converts; for all
which thou teach, and what they learn of thee, is but to work that Garment;
and both thou and they pretend what you will of God, your work is but your own,
and the creature may go so far, and farther too, by the power in them by
Creation, the common grace added to it; and all this you boast of is, but the
Creatures acting, and in this you have but made them twofold more the child of
Satan, then they were before, Matthew. 23.15. And you are the very men that heal
the wounds of the people very slightly, Jere. 8.11. But take to you, and lay it
to heart, for the saying of our Savior does belong only to you (and such as
you) for he says, If the blind lead the blind, etc. Matthew. 15.14.

And this is all you bring to pass, to deceive the souls of the people. And
thus you pay them for their hire, and this is the work you work for your wages;
and these are the spiritual things you sow to them, whereby you imbolden your
selves to take their carnal things; and this is the Gospel you preach, whereby
you get your living; and yet you cannot see how you are blinded, but run on
in your sin, strengthening your selves with the wrong understanding of the words
of the Apostle; whereas you neither be the man he was, neither inwardly nor
outwardly, neither have you the right calling into these places you are in,
neither do you work the work he wrought; and yet do you most unjustly take an
occasion from his Word, to take from the people, that which belongs not unto
you; but being partial in your own cause, you take in Scripture what may seem
to make for your own gain, and what seems to be against you, that you wave,
and will not mind it. For though the Apostle by right of his calling, and
rightness of his work, might have received something of the Corinthians, as due
to him as the Soldiers wages, yet he kept himself free from receiving any
thing of them, 1 Cor. 9. Yea, his own hands ministered to his necessity, as may
be seen, Acts 20.34. But this you take no notice of, because if you should
follow his example, your Kingdom would fall down, and that you have no mind to
let fail.

But in this your doing, I assure you, That you are the greatest thieves in all
the world, nay, you are both thieves and robbers, yea, and the greatest
cheaters in the world too, and I will prove it too.

For first, you take of the people that you have no right to take, because it
does not belong to you, as is partly showed before, and as shall be made more
manifest afterward; and so taking from others, that which is not yours, herein
are you not thieves? be judge your own selves.

And likewise you keep the people from entering into the Kingdom of Heaven; for
you neither will enter your selves, and those that would enter, you will not
suffer, Luke 11.52. For while you bind up the people under your forms, and are
not able to bring them out, and beyond these forms, you keep the people in
thick darkness, and so shut the gates of the Kingdom against them, and they
cannot enter in for you. And in this you rob God of the souls of the people, so
that he loses his honor, and praise in them. And thus are you become robbers,
both the people of the Kingdom of Heaven, and God of the glory and honor of his
people.

And thirdly, you are cheaters; for you make the people believe it is the Word
of God you Preach unto them, when it is but the froth of your own brain, and
the fruit of your studies, and an historical relation of the Scriptures, and
speakings of other men. And herein you deceive the people, for the Word of God
is his Son Jesus Christ, John 1.1, 2. and him you have not known; and therefore
the Word is hid from you.

And likewise you shape out a Faith to the people by your own fancy, and you
frame them a love of God, according to your own fashion; and you teach them the
fear of God by your own precepts, and make them believe that all is right you
deliver to them; and herein you mightily cheat the people.

But I know your blindness is so great, and your ears so dull of hearing, and
your hearts so gross, you will neither see, nor hear, nor understand the truth,
though one tell it you; for like the deaf Adder you stop your ears, so that you
will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely, Psalm. 51.5.
For I know you think your selves the only called Men, and sent Ministers of
God; and all that comes to declare the Way and Word of God, and comes not in
by your door, these will you count thieves and robbers, and that they take upon
them, that which does not belong to them; but let such as these come in at what
door they will, I pray you hearken to me, and I will tell you, in at what door
you have entered, and to this day do enter.

But I will not reckon your pedigree, or predecessory too far, for fear I draw
your line to reach to the Devil himself, who is the only or chief opposer of
the truth, as it is in Jesus; for thou would think this too harsh a censure
upon you, though I could prove the same to be true; and yet because you would
question, that I could not prove the truth of what I have intimated, I will
give you a general touch of the truth of the same, but will not meddle too far
in particulars herein, for fear I shame you too much; and far be it from me to
seek your shame further, then to let you see your folly, if so be you might be
made to see it, and forsake it. For I profess in the presence of God, I love
you so far as I see ought of God in you, and pity you, where I see you carried
from him by your own blindness, and do heartily wish your welfare: and do not
count me your enemy, because I tell you the truth, Gal. 4.16.

I know full well from whence your selves derive or pretend to have your
ground, for what you do, and what you speak; and for your institutions, I know
you will say, from the Primitive order and example: It is true, you have some
grounds from thence, for your choosing of Elders, if you were the men fit for
such a work, but as you are not the men fit for that work, those that are made
Elders by you, are but such as your selves; all of you blindly taking that upon
you, which does not belong to you; and so you only have stolen that Form, but
yet the power is wanting in you; and no marvel, For if the Fountain be corrupt,
the streams cannot be pure.

Likewise, you gather from thence your warrant for laying on of hands upon
those you think meet to be Ministers, as you call them: It is true, there was
such a thing in those days, but to whom did it belong? not to them who would
have had it either by stealth or purchase; for none had this committed to them,
but that received it of God, by the gift of the Holy Ghost; and those that had
that gift, had power to communicate the same to those upon whom they lay their
hand; but this you have not, neither can you give it to others on whom you lay
your hand, for you have not your calling from him that calls them, and yet as
in other things, you in your fool-hardinesse assume this thing to your selves;
and as you want the power, the form is but weak, and not worth a straw, nay,
the very form of these do not belong to you, for you have but stolen it; for
look into the Primitive time, and see the last institutions of the Apostle
Paul, and you shall see he left these institutions in the power and hands of
the order of Bishops, Timothy and Titus being ordained such, and to them was
both these and other orders committed, and in those days the head of
Presbytery was a Bishop, and he was first in matter of Ordination; but you have
broken off from the Bishops, and have taken that to your selves, that which was
committed to them.

But let me show you in a few words the original from whence your calling
(into the Ministry) comes: the Apostle says, When the world by wisdom knew
not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. and this preaching in those days was the holding out the
wisdom, and power, and righteousness, sanctification, and redemption in his
Son Jesus Christ, and those who were to be the Preachers or promulgaters of
these, were none but those who had received the same thing which they held out
to others, and could bear witness to the truth of what they did deliver, and
this seemed to be nothing to the wise of the world, for they savoured nothing
in it, nor heard any thing in it to please their curious ears, for it wanted
method, and eloquency, and curiosity of Art, and therefore Paul himself was
called a babbler, Act. 17.18. but to those who was called it was the power of
God, and wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.1.24. and so long as the Primitive Church
remained in purity, those who were the Ministers and declarers of the Word of
God, had the same word abiding in them, working and opperating in them, by
which they were made able to demonstrate unto others what they themselves was
made partakers of.

And as ancient Records bear witness, the Romans kept longest in that purity,
and in the institutions, but in time the beast Selfenesse begun to stir,
being moved by the Devil, and so the power of God began to withdraw it self,
and then the purity censed, and only the form of the Primitive Ordinations was
left amongst, and so in time as Self got head, and grew strong, the self
wisdom began to creep in, and added abundance more of new institutions which
remain amongst them to this day.

In which time, when the power and purity had drawn themselves, the wisdom of
the flesh got up, and invented a new way of preaching Christ; for the foolish
way, viz. the living powerful, experimental speaking was withdrawn, and then
the wisdom of the flesh invented another way, and that was the wise way of
preaching Christ, viz. by learning and study, and those that was to be the
Ministers was to be trained up in their greatest Schools, until such time as
they were able to speak, and understand Languages, and able to make Speeches
and Orations out of small grounds, and able to derive words, and divide words
and sentences into so many several parts, and to raise a large speech out of
every part, and to confirm the truth of each several speech by Authors, whom
they had and have still for that very purpose: and when any was become thus
learned and wise, then might he be admitted to preach Christ to the people, but
not else; and when they were thus fitted, and admitted into the Ministry, they
were assigned to some place to officiate in their Function, and established in
good Benefices, and thus became Christ to be taught in the wise way, and the
Preachers well paid for their labor.

And though you at this day degenerate so far from the Church of Rome, yet
your Ancestors sprung from amongst them, being somewhat refined from the gross
superstition, about which you and they make so much difference; but if you knew
your selves, you need not to differ so much with them, for you are both one in
your hearts, and you differ not but in your heads, and thus when you were a
little refined in some of your forms, yet did your forefathers choose to
themselves that which might make them great in the world, viz. power, praise,
and profit, and the wise way of preaching Christ, for that was and is the thing
that brought both praise and profit in amongst you: and though your fathers
differed with the Church of Rome about those things which cause these jarres,
yet your Fathers could follow their example in things that made for their
power, praise, and profit; and to these days in which we live, you follow the
steps of your forefathers: And thus have you preached Christ by Schollership
and Art, and so God is unknown amongst his people. because the foolish
preaching of Christ has been kept down by the wise preaching of the Flesh;
and thus are you become the blinders of the people, and lead them from the
knowledge of both God and themselves, and all under a pretense of preaching
Christ unto them; and poor souls, all this while you have but made them
believe lies, and have filled their mouths with gravel stones instead of
bread, and you have so enchanted them with your Charms, that they are pleased
with what you offer to them, and are content to be fed, and live upon those
husks you provide them; and you have so brought their pallats out of taste that
they cannot well taste any other food; but it is but now as it was some times
before, for the Prophet Jeremiah lived in such a time, as his own words
testify, where he says, The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear
rule by their means, and my people love to have it so, Jerem. 3.31. but I will
not expound these words, but leave them to your selves, and if you please you
may carry them to your Universities to expound, if you cannot expound them your
selves; but I am sure neither you, nor your Universities will say, that the
Prophet meant of either of you, or the people in your days, that love your
Doctrine so well; but though I will not expound these words of the Prophet, yet
I will give an answer to the question he asks: After these words were spoken,
he asking what the end of these things would be; to which I say, destruction
shall surely come upon People, Priest, and Prophet, etc.

But I desire you to hear a little more of your calling into your Office, for
now I will speak to your own experience, and you cannot deny that; yea, and I
will prove good what I say by witnesses, who knows that what I say is no lie,
and my witnesses shall not be any that you will take to be your enemies, for
they shall be your own natural Parents if they be alive, and will but speak
truth; but what must they witness? nothing else but what they intended when
first they put you to the holy University, to learn how you should become
preachers of Christ, and to understand the mind of God, that thereby you might
teach others Gods ways, I know if they will but speak, and bear true witness
upon this examination, they will say they knew it was the best trade in the
Land to put their Sons to, for after you had learned your trade, they knew you
might have good trading for the Art, for they knew there was good wages for the
work, for they saw good fat Benefices enough in the Land, and they made no doubt
but some of them would fall to your share; beside, you should be honored of
the people too, and be called Rabby, so if your Fathers would but speak truth,
they would witness it was their pride, and covetous intent that first moved
them to put you to the University, and this I think you will believe, and so
your Fathers having eaten sour Grapes, your teeth also is set on edge, and
your actings show what was in your Fathers hearts when they first put you to
the trade; and I assure you that you are good thriving children, and be loath
that your Fathers should miss of what they intended, for you will not let it
fall on your side, for if you have not a Benefice that is great enough, when
you have opportunity, and see way for a better, you will leave the less for
the greater; for if at present you have a place that yields fifty or
threescore pound per annum, in case one fall in your way worth an hundred or
six score pound per annum, then will you leave the less, and take the greater,
and so a hundred you will change for a hundred and fifty, and the hundred and
fifty you will change for two hundred, and in so doing, you will pretend you
are called of God from one place to another, and herein you lie not, for that
God that called you to the Office, calls you from one place to another, and
that is the god Mammon, who first with his inspirations inspired your Fathers
to make you what you are, and your Fathers god is your god also, and his
inspirations you obey, and that with all your souls and strength, for in case
you have not a benefice at present that satisfies your hungry desire, when
there is any appearance of a greater to be gotten, O what inspiration does your
god cast into your minds, and then is your desires enlarged, and your thoughts
set on work, how to answer your god in his inspirations, and then you humble
your self under the mighty hand of your god, in which humility you come
bending before this great man, and that great man, and so desires his help
and countenance in the matter; and by their means you come to get your matter
brought about to what you would have had it. Is not this true? I appeal to
your selves for witness hereof; for though you would, yet you cannot turn
your eyes from it, for your own Conscience will witness this for a truth. O
wretched, and most miserable of all men in your doings, how dare you say, that
God has sent you to speak in his Name, or take upon you the name of Christ's
Ministers, seeing how clear it is from whence you had your calling, and how
base you are in your calling, but yet you cannot see your selves in your
baseness, for your god has blinded your eyes, neither do you care for having
them opened, while you make so good a trade of your speaking, for that spirit
of divination that possesses you, brings in you no little gain by its
smooth speaking, for many of you sell your speaking at no less rate then three
or four pound a Sermon, as some call it, but let it be what it will, I say
some of you have so much for speaking one hour, and if any of you get but ten
or twenty shillings for each Sermon, you think that hardly well sold, yet you
all pretend the honor of God, and the edifying of the people, and the feeding
of their souls; O fools, for shame hold your tongues, and say not so: but you
declare your sins like Sodom, and cannot hide them from God, nor from them who
have their eyes open. And would but the Parliament of England make an Act, to
take away this hire from you, and that you might have nothing from them for
your speaking, then should you see your selves, and all the world might see
you; for then we should but hear little of you, for your preaching would be
soon at an end, and Gods honor, and the edifying of his people would quickly
cease, and then I believe you would let a Soldier take the Pulpit, for you
would not care who came in it then; then would it appear from whom, and from
whence you had your calling, and I think that the Parliament would do God a
special piece of service in making such an Act, and I am persuaded God would
mightily bless them for it, for in so doing they should overthrow as great
enemies of God, and his Truth, as ever yet was subdued (in England, Scotland,
or Ireland) and these enemies are the pride and hypocrisy of these covetous
Priests; but this is my hope, that this Act will once be brought to pass, for
God will not pass such dealing by though he suffer long, for his patience is
well nigh tired out.

Our Savior saw these men well enough, and you, whom I have written to, are
the very same in your generation, whom he calls the hireling, who runs
away when he sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep to the wolf, John
10.12. Is not this your very practice, when any poverty or suffering seems to
come upon you, which you discern by the eyes of your fleshly reason; and when
you can but know of a place to hide your selves from that apparent danger, then
away you run, and let what as will take the people, Dogs, Wolves, or Devils,
you care not; for you will fend for your selves, and you will say God calls
you from them. And thus you run from one place to another, one while for fear
of poverty, or some other suffering, and sometimes for the maintaining and
upholding of your pride. And all this is because you are hirelings, for the
sheep is not yours; for you neither were sent by God, neither do you work his
work in begetting souls to God; and as you have not the love of God manifested
in you, you cannot beget children, nor bring them forth into the partaking of
the love of God; for you have not that immortal seed of God in you, to sow in
the hearts of others: And therefore you are but barren and unfruitful, and so
your hearers are but empty souls, not knowing what the love of God is; and
therefore there can be no true love between you and them; and therefore upon
small occasions you will leave them. But were they children begotten by you,
you would lose your life before you would run away from them, and you would
spend and be spent for them, and endure any hardship for, and amongst them: But
you are but Ministers of fortune, and those that will give most for your
service, may have it; and as long as you can profit well by the people, you
will serve them, and pretend much love to them; and herein you make but a prey
of the flock, and seem like Lambs and Sheep in your appearance to them, when
you profit well by them: And thus you slily beguile the poor, and devour, and
take from them by your ravening, that which many of them might very ill spare,
and yet have it you will.

Consider I pray you of the words of our Savior, for you are the self-same he
points out, where he says, Beware of false-prophets that shall come in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves: But by their fruits
you shall know them, etc. Matthew. 7.15, 16. etc. And this very same is fulfilled
in you; for your fruits do testify what you are; for you have not brought out
fruit unto God, but unto your selves, and you are no more but like to thorns
and thistles, who tear the wool of sheep, and your fruit not worth the
gathering. The Apostle Paul before his departure had a clear sight of you, and
of your forefathers, and told the people, That after his departure should
grievous wolves arise, not sparing the flock, Acts 20.29. Is not this true in
you, in tearing and taking away the poor man's labor; and if you have but the
tenth part, you care not what becomes of the poor man's family at home; when often
it happens, that his children wants bread, and other necessaries for what you
have taken from them, to consume upon your pride and lust. I can witness to
this truth my self, and so can many others in England; but if we can but have
patience a little, all will be amended, and then shall you no longer reign; for
your desolation is not far off, and I would have you to take notice of it; for
I warrant you, what I say is no Astrology, for that you will not believe,
though never so true. But this that I tell you, shall undoubtedly come to pass,
and sooner perhaps then you look for it. I will not tell you at present, what I
believe of you, least when it comes to pass, you say I was a witch; for I know
you will not allow a true speaker the name of Prophet.

But me thinks I hear some of you object and say, In what thou have said, thou
have not spoken truth; for there has many been converted by our Preaching, and
many godly people have we begotten, and the Lord has given a blessing to our
Labors; and by this we know we are the Lords Messengers to his people, and the
true Laborers in his Vineyard.

O my Friends, do not think in what I have said, that I have any mind to
detract from you what is your due, or to wrong any of you in the least: For I
confess, Like may beget like; for that is often a truth in nature, and so in you.
For I do not deny, but many of you have a form of godliness, and as you are in
that form, you may beget others also into the same form, and so make them like
your selves; and yet all of you without the power of God, and love of God, and
wisdom of God; For if the love of God were shed abroad in your hearts, it would
turn your hearts into its own image; but as yet, you have not that love, and
therefore you have hatred in your hearts, both against God and man: And from
hence it is, That you can freely persecute and destroy all that worship not God
in your way; and this you have no order for, nor example, either from Christ,
or any of his followers; but you and all your Converts go not a jot further
then the Scribes and Pharisees; but in that you believe Christ is come in the
flesh, and have an Historical or Notional Faith of him in your head; but the
world and selfness lies in your hearts, and you are as hide-bound to the
Gospel-forms, as the Scribes and Pharisees were to circumcision, and the forms
under the Law; and as they being hide-bound or heart-bound to these forms, so
became they to be the enemies of Christ, when he appeared in the flesh. And the
very same are you, and all your Converts fast tied in your heart to the
Gospel-forms; and hereby you are become the enemies of Christ appearing in the
spirits of men, and so are you become the persecutors of Christ in the Saints;
and yet in this you think you do God good service: and the greatest perfection
in your Converts is, when they are made exceeding zealous for the honor and
glory of God (as they say) so that whosoever worships God in any other way then
theirs, then are they sure of persecution by you or them, if it be within the
compass of your power; and this you have in your generation, and that faith and
love, and full assurance of your salvation, always is accompanied with
pretended zeal for the honor and glory of God; and from hence you count all
other the enemies of God, who have not the same garb that you have. And all
this great conversion you brag of, is nothing else but a conversion from evil
to far worse; for you have turned some of your Hearers from some outward gross
offenses, and have brought them into a conformity to duty as you call it, and
by the refraining the outward grossnesse, and closing to, and with the outward
duties your Conscience begins to cease biting so long as you walk
obsequiously therein, and from hence the foul Feind transformes himself into
the Angel of Light, and secretly wraps himself in your actings, and by his
power when once gotten, rightly joined to Self Righteousness, then has he
power to work Wonders, and can work like God, and give consolation to the
Soul, and bring it into raptures, and ravishments, and can bring the Promises
to remembrance, which is suitable to confirm his workings, and from such
working he can make the Soul believe its regeneration, and its calling, and
election to be made sure, and that with a witness too; in which assurance the
Soul will often rejoice, and shall have many false flashes of Love, which the
Soul can no way know, but it is the feeling of the love of God, and if you
have brought any Soul thus far, as to this full assurance, and to be partakers
of such feeling, you think you have brought them far on in grace; and thus
far I know you may bring a Soul by your Ministry, and yet this Soul is but
twofold the Child of Satan more then it was before. I will make this plain
unto you; for when the Soul before was in the gross actings, then was that
person in a more hopeful way for God to bring it to himself by his own way
then it is now, for (then) when God would have brought these persons from their
sin, in his bringing them either by himself, or by those whom he would use
for that work; then I say there was hope these Souls might have been led in a
way whereby they should have escaped the snare of Satan.

But being that these souls are in the snare, they are more in captivity to
him then they were before, and the reason is, because then God had some power
in the Consciences of them, and often times condemned them for their outward
grossnesse, but now they being brought out of these outward sins, into the
obedience of outward forms, their Conscience loses that privilege, and now
instead thereof the Feind has power to feed the Soul, as is aforesaid, the
which he had no power to do before, and in this condition the Soul is well
pleased to be, and can stand for it self stoutly, that it is sealed to God,
and made sure of Salvation, and so is become exceeding foolhardy, rejoicing in
its fools paradise, and being fed by false consolation, and herein that person
is once more the child of Satan then before.

And secondly, whereas before these souls were converted by you, they would
not persecute, or bring any to death for not walking in their ways; but now
your Converts must seek the honor of God, and so in zeal for his glory they
must become persecutors and destroyers of their fellow Creatures, because they
will not honor God in their way, and thus are they become Murderers, and yet
they do not know it; but the same spirit that rules in them must they of
necessity be obedient to, and it is proved before, that that spirit in them
that rules is Satan, and he it is that sets them on work. For as our
Savior says, He was a murderer from the beginning, and his works will you
do, Joh. 8.44. And herein are your Converts twofold the children of Satan more
then they were before. It was not the Publicans and sinners that put Christ to
death; no, no, it was the religious zealots under the Law, viz. holy Scribes
and Pharisees; but you disclaim from their righteousness, and their actings
against Christ in their days, when he was in the flesh amongst them; and your
hearts tell you, if Christ were now amongst you, you would not do so to him;
was not the same thoughts in the Scribes and Pharisees? yea, and it seems they
said, if they had lived in the days of their forefathers, they would not have
killed the holy Prophets as they did, and yet they were never satisfied until
they had put Christ to death. Ah friends, take heed to your selves, for to this
day that Generation is alive, and shall be still until the time of their
destruction, and this portion and lot has light upon you in your Generation,
and in this blindness you are, and can no more see your selves then they did;
for as Christ in his appearing in the Flesh was hid from them, so when he
comes in spirit he shall be as far hid from you; for he shall so appear in
spirit that he cannot be known of you, nor shall you see any thing in those
whom he is, that shall be acceptable to you; for you are too wise to know his
way, and by your wisdom you have taught him to others, and others by the
curiosity of their ears have received him from you, and in this your doing you
think you have him, but you are beguiled, for the way he manifests himself
to his people you cannot know, neither the way to him can you know, and yet you
say, you see, and feel, and know him, therefore your sin remains, Joh.
9.41.

And if you desire to know any further of your selves, and of your peoples best
conversion, turn back to your emblem before, and weigh it well, and ponder it
seriously, for I assure you, that is your true picture both inward and outward;
and this is all the work you work, to convert men from evil, bringing them
to be worse, and so by your means they are twofold more the children of Satan
then they were before. And you can no otherwise do, for your calling into your
Office was of Satan, and the perfecting of the work ends in him; for if you
had been sent of God, you should have turned his people from their sin.

But this you have not done, but kept them in their sin, for even your best
Converts of whom you make your boast, are but men in their sin, and that
which you call sin, which you say you have turned them from, is but that
which a civil nature it self does loath, and is gotten by custom, and may
be left off by custom; and this may every Creature forsake, by virtue of the
power in them by Creation, having no more but the common grace in them: and
these things the Creature may forsake without your help, and these are not the
greatest sins in men though they seem so to you, because you never saw
greater in your own hearts; and the great mystery of sin, and the abomination
that makes desolation, and the Man of sin, that exalts himself above God,
or any that is called by the name of God, and the great Antichrist, or great
Opposer of Christ; these you never found out in your own heart, much less in
other; nay you know not what they mean, nor where they have their being, but
you beat your brains to find them without you, and will draw conclusions that
the Turk, and Pope, and Bishops, and Independants, and Anabaptists, and other
Sects, are the things the Scripture means of. O fools, and unwise, though
you can steal into the Ministry by unlawful ways, yet can you not steal
into Gods mind and secrets, nor once so much as have a look into the mystery
of godliness, and then be sure you shall but little be acquainted what is the
mystery of sin, but you shall have no other knowledge hereof then comes
from the teaching of the God that brought you into the places where you are,
and I am sure he will keep you far enough from the knowledge of that
mystery, for to this very day amongst you all, I have not heard either by
preaching, writing, or speaking, that any of you ever could distinctly find
out the great mystery of sin in the heart of man; but this has God laid
upon you as one of his greatest Curses, and the largeness hereof covers all
your Generations.

And if you had been sent of God, you should have known this, and should have
made the people know it also, and by knowing it they should have had power to
have overcome it, and then should they have had the pure Language returned to
them, Zep. 3.9. And they should have spoken with new tongues, Act. 10.46. And
they should have reigned with the Lamb, and sung out his praise, Revel. 14.3.
but you have kept the people in great darkness, and you have made dull their
ears, and you have been the cause of the hardness of their heart, and they to
this day are partakers of the Curse with you, for many of them cannot
understand the voice of Christ when he speaks, because they be so taught in
your Language. O fools, when will you forsake your foolishness? O forsake it,
and give over your deceiving of the people before your determined destruction
fall upon you, for I assure you it is in coming, and woe will be to you if it
come upon you, and you be found in the places where you are.

But I know you have ways enough to evade, and put off from you what I have
said, and to pluck my Arrow out of your hearts, and throw it from you; but I
would not have you to do so, but let it enter into you: for it will not
destroy you, but be a means to purge you from your filthiness, and if you do
but make right use of it, you shall in time know that I shot at a right mark,
for I would have you no longer deceived in your selves, but seek to find out
your deceit; and when you have found it out, be not ashamed to confess what
you have done, and in the very places where you have deceived the people, there
would I have you to declare how you have deceived them; think of what I have
here said unto you when you go into your Pulpits, and think no shame to
confess before all men what wickedness you have committed. But I am afraid
your pride and covetousness is so great that they will not let you do so; but
it is no matter, for whether you will or no, your sins shall be laid open before
the face of men and Angels: For I know that the God that brought you into your
places, will go about to hold you in your places, let me, and an Angel from
Heaven persuade you to the contrary; for I know that you will rather go about
to persecute me, then to be warned by me; but for that I care not, for
necessity is upon me, and woe would it be to me, if I should keep silence. I
know also how many ways you will object against what I have written to you; but
I warrant you I have an answer for every one of your objections, and I would
have answered them all before I had left you, but that I know, if you will not
lay this to heart, it had but been folly in me to write any more; for if I (as
I make no doubt, but I very well could) have stopped all your mouths in what you
could object; yet I know your will is so bent in the way, that when you had
nothing to say, you would stone me to death, if you durst; for you are of the
same generation, with whom Stephen had to do, who was not able to resist his
spirit he spoke with, yet they could stone him to death, Acts 7.58. For the
truth is, that the God of your Fathers whom you worship, viz. Self-pride,
self-praise, self-profit, self-wisdom, self-power, self-righteousness, etc.
(Self) being the first person in the Trinity, who by his spirit of wisdom does
so inspire you; and in obedience to the same, you become always resisters of
the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51.

But being past hopes of doing good to the generality of you, because I know
your blindness and hardness of heart, at present I will add no more to what I
have said, for to you who are sealed up for destruction, here is too much; but
if happily there be some amongst you, who are not sealed and settled in
blindness, having some want and emptiness in their souls, and the same lying
upon their spirits in making them to find little but ease, comfort, or
content, in any thing they either act or speak, and that can find nothing but
woe and sorrow, in all they go about, either in the world or their forms of
Religion: I say, if there be any such souls amongst you, I know they have that
within them, that will cause them to close with what I here have offered to
them; and confess, that I have said nothing but that which is as true as truth
it self: And to such souls, this I know will be useful, for one reproof enters
more into a wiseman, then a hundred stripes does into a fool, Prove. 17.10. But
for all other before-said, they are but fools, and will not believe; and
therefore, I leave them to be destroyed by their own folly, and will return to
the poor deluded people under them, and give them a friendly advice, and show
them how they have been cheated and cousened by these foul Beasts, whom the
Devil has most subtly brought into the Ministry, and have reigned by his
means so many hundred years, whereby the true knowledge of God is worn out from
amongst the sons of men, and all under a form of faith in Christ, and a
brain-knowledge of God, and performing some duties which they tell you is holy;
and therein have they strangled your souls, and made you believe you were in
the ways of God, when alas, you were but in your own ways, and the way of God,
as yet, you never knew.

Then hearken O ye poor deluded souls, who have a desire to know your own
deceit, and have a willingness in you to know what the way of God is; and where
this God is, and where the way to meet with your God is; and see and know that
your ways you have lived in, and rejoiced in, how they are but poor, weak,
beggarly things, and so long as you live in them, you live but in your self;
and as long as you live in them, you are not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven,
neither to know the Mysteries of God, nor the misery of the sin that is in you,
and without you know that, you shall not know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
God.

As I have showed you the original of the Ministers, from whence they came, so
I will show you your Religion, and your duties and observations from whence
they came; and upon what grounds your forms are pitched, and what is all that
you can reap out of the very best of your forms; and how far you may act in
your forms, and yet have your spirits deprived of the love of God, which is the
salvation of all souls that are saved; and I will show you from what principles
your performances arise, and by what power they are performed.

And first for your Religion, I find it to be nothing else but a feigned
fantastic thing, raised up, by, and through the vain conceits of your blind
Ministers, who have no grounds for what they affirm, but only false
conclusions which they draw from true principles in others; and likewise, the
best grounds they have for any thing contained in the profession, it is no more
but examples from others, who had command to observe such things, and know the
mind of him who commanded these things, and observed these things according to
the mind, and intent of him, who gave them command to observe such things; but
your Ministers being ignorant of the mind of the Commander, observe the same
by example, not knowing the mind of the Commander; and therefore, they have
given out these things to you, and their own mind in them; and from them have
you observed these things in your Religion. But now I will come to some
particulars, and I wish you to observe well what is delivered unto you by my
Pen, and the Lord give you hearts to understand the truth I shall deliver to
you.

And first I come to that which is a principal point, and part of your
Religion, viz. The observation of the Sabbath, as you call it; but that is not
a proper name for it, except you profess Circumcision, and so become one with
the Jews; for to them was this delivered amongst the other Commandments, but
instituted at the beginning; and when God had given out the rest of the
Commandments to Moses, he repeateth over this Commandment of keeping the
Sabbath, and tells Moses for what end and purpose he had given that charge of
keeping it, viz. That it should be a sign between him, and the people, that
they might know who sanctified them; and whosoever did not refrain from all
manner of work upon that day, was to be put to death, Exodus 31.13, 14, etc. And
this was to be a sign between God and them in all their Generations.

Now if it were delivered to the Jews as a sign, then was there something
signified in it, and appointed out by it to them. I will tell you what it held
out to them, it held out three things in its signification. As for the first,
it was the righteousness of God, by which he sanctified them, without any thing
in them, or by them whatsoever; and as they were to cease from all labor
whatsoever on pain of death, so were they not to look at any thing within
themselves whatsoever, whereby they should look to be made holy; for if they
did, it was the very death of their souls, and God knew it well, that they
would be looking at something in themselves, and would secretly be oblieging
him to it; and Moses gave them a caveat of the same, when he bad them take heed
to themselves, least they should say in their hearts for my righteousness, etc.
Has the Lord done these things for me, Deuteronomy. 15.9. And for this very thing the
Sabbath was to be a sign of his sanctifying them, and that sanctification was
not of themselves, but that they were as clean stripped of all righteousness to
sanctify themselves, as he gave out strict command to cease from all labor
whatsoever; and that they should always be looking out of themselves unto the
Lord their God, who sanctified them; and that they should know that
sanctification was of him, he did very often rehearse the same to them, as may be
seen, Levit. 20.8. and 21.8. and 22.9, 16. and Ezekiel. 37.28. and many other
places. And as it was given them for a sign of the sanctification of God, so it
signified a spiritual rest unto them, which rest should be in God; that as
their bodies was refreshed, in and by that rest, so should their spirits be
refreshed in him, and be at rest, when they had laid aside, and cast off all
toil and labor of spirit, viz. Caring, fearing, loving, and desiring to be
satisfied with created things, and that they were brought out of, and beyond
all their secret dependancy of what they acted or observed; which while they
lived in, they were the cause why all toil and labor happened to their spirits,
in which they were deprived of the sweet rest in God: For when the heart of man
is carried out from the rest in God, then is it in toil about some created
thing, and whatsoever it be, it affords nothing but restlessness; and this
made Solomon say, who had tried all things, and found that those who would seek
rest in any thing created, should be deceived; and that he should find nothing
but sorrow and grief, yea, his heart takes not rest in the night, Eccles.
2.23. And because the Lord knew the people would be seeking rest in other
things, therefore he gave them this sign of the Sabbath, wherein they should
know from whom the rest of their spirits should come: And when they were gone
out from him, and had not kept the Sabbath which held out to them the rest of
their souls, but were turned from him; yet he would have them to return again
to him, and ask and enquire for the way that they had left; and in walking
therein, they should find rest for their souls, Jer. 6.16. And David knew full
well what was the rest of spirit, and said to himself, O my soul return to thy
rest, etc. Psalm. 116.7.

And thirdly, This Sabbath was a sign of the eternal rest that souls should
have in him, after the end of so many several orders and dispensations, both
inwardly and outwardly, these being darkly held out to them by the number of
six days, and the seventh to be the day of rest, and kept holy to the Lord: And
that order of numbering six days, was by the Lords own example held out to them
in the first Creation, where it is said, the Lord was six days in working, and
creating all things, though God himself wrought not in that manner, but to
stoop to our weak understanding of him; that in our weak knowledge could
apprehend nothing at all of him, if he were not pleased to let out himself in
ways whereby we might darkly grope after him: And so in these several
out-lettings of himself in these weak ways, we might be brought by little and
little passing through these dispensations, that we thereby might be made fit
and able to come to a condition of persecution, wherein we should be in a
capability to behold, and stand in the presence and right knowledge of God
himself. And because to speak of these seven fold dispensations is not
suitable for you at present, and because of the ignorance of the times as yet;
else, it may be you should have heard them more clearly defined to you, for I
assure you, there is a Mystery in these numbers, which as yet the most of the
Sons of men be ignorant of, and the Mystery in them was wrapped in them in the
beginning, and was mystically holden out to the Sons of men by John in the
Revelation, by the seven Seals, the seven Angels who sounded the seven
Trumpets, and the pouring out of the seven Viols, which no man can, or ever
shall understand, until he be brought to live in the heart of God, and God to
live in his heart, for none else is fit to know his secrets.

And under these three considerations it was, that God gave out so strict
command for the observation of the seventh day, or Sabbath, and under these
considerations was Christ held out to them in his properties of Sanctification,
and spiritual rest, and eternal rest of Souls, and in this respect he was Lord
over the Sabbath, as himself testifies in Mark 2.28. And as the Leviticall or
Ceremonial Law held out, or were the shadows of the Office of Christ, both of
suffering and sacrifice, which all of them was to be excluded after his death;
so was the Sabbath to be excluded when the thing signified by it was come, and
till that time that commandment was in force; but when Christ was come, you
may observe how often himself did cross the Scribes and Pharisees, in not
observing the Sabbath according to their order, Mar. 2.23.

And when our Savior upon diverse occasions was to speak of the Laws of
Commandment which was to stand in force, and should not in any wise pass away
till they were fulfilled, as may be seen in Mat. 5. etc. yet never did he so
much as touch or give command to keep the Sabbath, because he knew the same
was fulfilled in his appearing, of which he was Lord; and whosoever does
observe the seventh day upon the obedience of the Commands, before the
appearance of Christ in the Flesh: they err, not knowing the mind of God in
his Commands, and so they are blinded from beholding Christ in his properties
therein contained, and so by, and in the observation of that day they become
that to themselves which of right does belong to Christ.

But I know you will say, you do not observe that day upon the same account as
the Jews did, but under a Gospel consideration, having the same day changed
unto another day, viz. the first day, in which Christ rose from the dead, and
in that respect we call it not a Sabbath, but the Lords Day.

It is true, you call it the Lords Day, but for that you have neither command
nor example in all the New Testament, but only as you may infer from that
saying of St. John, in Revel. 1. the which you cannot justly affirm, that it
was the first day of the week in which Christ rose from the Dead; but I would
have you to know what the Lords Day is, and how John called that day the Lords
Day; though every day be the Lords, yet he has two days which he more usually
claims for his own, as we may see in Scripture, viz. a day of his executing
his anger against sin, and man for sin, and this is called the Day of the Lord,
as you may see in Isa. 2.12. and 13.6.9. and 34 8. Ier. 46.10. Lam. 2.22, etc.
and another day he has, wherein he will show to man the Mysteries of his
Kingdom, and the favor of his loving kindness, in which day the Souls of his
people shall be glad, and rejoice, and this is the Lords Day, wherein he will be
glorified and magnified in the souls of his people, when they are made to see,
and know his wonderful loving kindness manifested in their souls, and that
his Son Jesus only rules and reigns above all Power and Principalities:
and this day you may see set out in many places of Scripture also; as in Isa.
25.9. and 26.1. and 28.5. and 29.18, etc. and 2 Cor. 1.14. and in this Day of
the Lord was John in the Spirit, where was made known to him these great
Mysteries. And well might he call it the Lords Day, for so it was, but from
thence none can justly gather that this day you observe can be called the Lords
Day more then any other, and in so doing you follow but traditions of men,
having no command for it in all the Scripture; therefore take heed you make not
the Commandments of God of none effect by your tradition; for this was the
doing of the Scribes and Pharisees by which they were blinded, and could not
know Christ to be the Son of God, when he was amongst them in the flesh.

But in calling it the first day, it may be said that is the most proper name
of it, because of some grounds in Scripture for so doing, but yet you have no
evidence, nor command in all the New Testament, for observing the first day
after the manner of the Sabbath, only you have some examples in the Primitive
time for some things occasionally which were done upon it, as one time the
Disciples were gathered together to break Bread, Acts 20.7. and all that the
Apostle gave command to them to observe upon that day was, to make a collection
amongst them for the poor Saints, 1 Cor. 16.2. for no other thing to be
observed upon that day have you any command, and this command I doubt you do
not obey upon that day, for your foolish holiness has eaten out your charity,
which you should have showed upon that day. And this was an invention of your
wise preaching Ministers, who changed the work of that day into a submissive
hearing of them speak so long upon that day, and for this they have neither
command, nor example from, or in the Primitive institutions, but from the time
of Superstition, in which time their forefathers took away the work of that
day, and erected a greater holiness upon that day, then to make collections
for the poor; and thus you have observed what they invented, and yet you cannot
see wherein you are blinded.

But you may object, that in what I have said, I seem to make void the Sabbath,
or Lords day, or first day.

It is true, I make the Jewish Sabbath void, and likewise the name of this day
to be the Lords Day more then any other, because I have no command for them in
the time of the Gospel; but as for the first day I allow of it, in ease it be
observed according to example, and command in the time of the Gospel, and
Primitive institutions, but no further may any man allow of it, in making the
observation of it like to the Sabbath of the Jews, and so place it as a
principle in their religion; this I deny, and that upon better grounds then you
have for making it what it is not; but if you will observe this day, I would
have you to set it in its right place, least in your good thinking you give
that to the day, and your duties observed upon that day, which does of right
belong to Christ, and in so doing that day becomes Lord over you, whereas
those who are in Christ are Lords over that day: And in observing of that day I
would have you to observe it as by tradition, and not by command; and likewise
in respect of the obedience to the higher Powers, who would have such a day
observed for some pious end: and in these respects I could wish, that not only
the first day of every week, but the fourth also were set apart for pious
ends, but not to make them principles in Religion. But herein is the weakness
and ignorance of men made manifest, for whatsoever has been instituted by men
in the time of their purity, and for pious ends, and was good so long as they
were used, and observed for no other end then they were aimed for; but not long
could any institution stand, until the ignorance of men through their good
thinking made more of these things, then ever they were intended for, and so
the same became to be made either a god, or a principle in men's religion, and
then the same did more hurt then good, to those who were the observers of such
things, because of their too much Idolizing of these institutions.

Likewise I know it to be good to rest one day in seven, if it were but to
cross the cruelty and oppression of Mankind, whose Lust is so great that he
would too much wrong his fellow Creatures, by keeping them at too hard, and too
long labor, as many Masters would their Servants, yea, their poor Horse and
Ox, yea and their own bodies too.

And whosoever goes about to observe that day upon any other consideration then
what is before said, does err in so doing, and is nothing else but being
beguiled, by the precepts of the Priests, in which they err themselves, and
cause all other to go astray who are led by them, and so the blind leads
the blind till both fall into the ditch, Matthew. 15.14. I might have said much
more upon this subject, but what is said may serve to make appear, that the
observation of a day without any command, for it cannot be a principle in
Religion, as blind ignorance has stated it; but letting it pass, I come to a
second principle in your Religion, viz. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but
that Sacrament is not a proper name for it, for it is but a superstitious
epithet, and there is no such name for it in all the Scripture.

Indeed for this you have a command by our Savior, it being his own
institution, and some examples also in the Primitive time for what you do
herein; but yet I would have you to know, that you have neither command, nor
example for what you affirm of the breaking of Bread, or otherwise called the
Lords Supper: for you affirm, that in the receiving of Bread and Wine, that in
that act you have your faith confirmed and strengthened; thus you have wrested
the command of Christ herein to the end he never aimed it for, for in this your
doing you differ not from the Papists themselves in the substance of this
thing, only you differ in the circumstances and that is all: for they pretend
they eat the Body and Blood of Christ substantially, and by so doing they say
they live in Christ, and he lives in them thereby; and you say in this you
eat him Spiritually, and by so doing you live in him, and he in you; and that
you have your faith much confirmed to you in this your act. O poor blinded
fools, you are herein misled by your blind Priests, for this is but one of
their own precepts, by which they have undone you, for they have played the
Mountebankes with you herein, and have made you believe lies for truth, for
this your act does not at all confirm your faith in case you have faith, but I
will tell you true what you have confirmed, viz. conceit, or fancy, and no
more, I shall prove it true, whether you will believe me or no; for there is
nothing that does confirm faith but that same that gives faith; but no act of
the Creature gives, or creates faith, or makes faith to grow in the heart of
any man, and the giving and receiving of Bread and Wine is but an act of the
Creature which is within the compass of its own power to do, or not to do;
this I think you will confess; and if this act had that virtue in it to give
faith, who would want faith? but I think you are not yet so far blind as to
say plainly, that faith is given to any by virtue of this act, but yet you may
as well say, that faith is given thereby, as say that faith is confirmed
thereby; for the giving faith, and confirming of faith is both from one and the
same fountain, and God himself is the Giver of faith, as you may see, Ephesians.
2.8. then if God be the Giver of faith, he is also the confirmer of it, without
the acts of the Creature; and this truth the Apostle affirms to the
Corinthians, and thanketh God on their behalf for the graces given them of
him, whereby the testimony of Jesus Christ was confirmed in them, and that they
waited for a further manifestation of Christ, who should confirm them, to the
end that they might be kept blameless, 1 Cor. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and as God in,
and by his Son Jesus is both the giver, and confirmer of faith; so by him he
always upholdeth the soul in faith, whenever it has need of the operation
of the same; for he is both the beginning, and the ending of faith, yea, the
author and finisher of faith, Heb. 12.2. And this the Disciples knew when they
said, Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.5. And it was Christ himself that
strengthened Peter's faith, Luke 22.32. By all which, you may see plainly, that
the receiving of Bread and Wine, is not faith confirmed, strengthened, or
completed; for you are but in blindness, in this your affirmation.

But I would have you to know wherein you are blinded, if perhaps you might
hereafter grope after the truth: For though this your act be a command of
Christ himself, yet I would have you to know the mind of the Commander in the
putting out of the command, for he put not out this command, thereby to detract
from him, what did belong to himself; and in this you affirm, you detract from
him, and give that to the acting in the command, and herein you transgress.

But to tell you the mind of Christ in this command, I would have you to take
notice of his own words, and let them not be wrested by your wit, and you shall
know that he gave out this command for no other thing, but for a help of the
weak memory of men, who are very subject to forget the love of their dearest
friends in a little time, after they be departed from them: yea, your own
experience will tell you the truth of this, that after the death and departure
of your dearest friends, how that a very short time will wear the thoughts of
them out of your memory. And so some dear loving friend at his death will leave
a Ring, or some other token of love to his beloved friend or friends, and bid
him remember him when he looks upon the same; the which beholding, does raise
or renew fresh thoughts of his deceased friend, and so becomes the weak
forgetful memory to be strengthened.

Even for this very end did Christ leave his Disciples that command, that in
the observing of the same, they should keep him (their dear loving Master)
still in their memory, and think of him when his bodily presence was taken from
them, and that they in the remembering of him should think of his example of
life, and walk accordingly in all his other commands, the which he had enjoined
them; and in the keeping of these his commands, they should be known to be his
Disciples, and should live in him, and he in them; and that they should have
communion with him, and the Father; and likewise he tells them, how the world
would hate and persecute them, and kill them, with many other exhortations to
them, and commands given them before his departure, after he had left them this
love-token of remembrance, as you may see in Luke 22.19. For Jesus knew, after
he was gone from them, that they should have many temptations and trials,
whereby they should be much troubled, and therefore he would have them to keep
him still in memory; for if such things were done to the green Tree, what would
be done to the dry Trees, Luke 23.31. But yet I know you may object and say,
that there is something more included in this command because of the act, and
the other words spoken by Christ, when he gave out this command.

It is true, for as in the time of the Law there was in their sacrifices,
things killed and offered, which was Types of the first appearance of Christ in
the Humane nature, and the life of Christ in the Humane nature, and the death
of Christ in the Humane nature, and the Resurrection of Christ, etc.

So in this act of Christ there is a Type also, in which there is something
typified.

In which Type there is these things to be observed. First, The time. Secondly,
The matter. Thirdly, The manner: And fourthly, The end.

First for the time, It was at the very same time of the Jews Passoever, which
was to be kept in their generation, until the death of Christ; which Passoever
was instituted before the death of the firstborn in Egypt, and this was the
preservation of the children of Israel from that death; so that where the blood
of the Pascal Lamb was on the posts of the door, there the destroyer had no
power; and by the slaying of the firstborn in Egypt, Pharaoh and his people
was constrained to let Israel go. And this Passover was kept of the Jews for a
memorial of what was done; and at the very time of the Jews keeping this
Passover it was, that Jesus instituted this Type, which Type holds out a more
clear beholding of himself to the world, then the other Type of the Passover
did; for that Type of the Jews Passover was but as a shadow, whereby to know
the substance; and a shadow is but a dark representation of a thing, and so
this dark shadow was to be done away; that the Image is a clearer
representation of the substance, then the shadow; and yet both the shadow, and
the image, are but representations of the substance, the one more clearer then
the other; the darker done away, and the clearer established. And this was one
reason why Christ instituted this Type or Image at that time, that after he was
departed, the sons of men might have a more clear sight of him after his
appearing in the flesh, then they had before; for then they lived under the
shadow, or dark representation, but now under the Gospel we have the Image or
clearer representation, as you may see Heb. 11.1.

Likewise, at the time of the institution of this Passover, God had a
mavelous work to do, viz. To bring the Israelites out of Egypt from under the
bondage of Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, so at this very time of Christ's
instituting of this Type, God had a wondrous work to do, viz. To bring the
souls of believers out of the captivity of the Devil, Sin, Death, and Hell; for
after the death of the Paschal Lamb, the firstborn of Pharaoh, and all Egypt
were slain; and so their proud hearts were made to stoop.

So by the death of Christ, the firstborn of the Devil, viz. Sin was
destroyed, and Death and Hell conquered, and so a way was made for all souls to
come out of their captivity; for sin is the firstborn child of the devil, his
beloved, and his power and strength.

For this is a truth in nature, that the firstborn is the strength, and power,
and dignity of the Parents, as Jacob says to Reuben his firstborn, Genesis 49.3.
So sin being the firstborn child of the devil, therein consists his power
and strength, and when this is slain, then is he overcome; and so death being
the child of sin, loses his power; for as sin is the firstborn of the devil,
so death is the firstborn of sin, for death is brought out by sin, Jam. 1.15.
And as death is the first born of sin, so Hell is the firstborn of death, and
always follows its father, Revel. So all these firstborn were to be destroyed
by another first born, and that was Jesus the firstborn of God, a Type of whom
we have in the Levitical Law by the firstborn of all things, which should be
called holy to the Lord, Numb. 3.13. And as this first born Son, or Lamb of
God, overcame the Devil, Sin, Death, and Hell, by himself, so that they had no
power over him; so by the same power he overcomes all these, for those who are
the true followers of him in his life and example, obeying his commands, and
taking up his cross and bearing it to the very death, those shall know the
power and virtue of his life, death, and resurrection, and shall live with him
in the union of the Father; and when he instituted this Type, he would have
them to remember this, whenever they would do the like.

Likewise, as the firstborn of Pharaoh and Egypt were slain, so on the
contrary the poeple of Israel was saved from the power of the destroyer, by the
efficacy of the blood of the Paschal Lamb, where it was sprinkled upon the two
side posts, and the lintel of the gate, viz. The Will, the Understanding, and
the Conscience, the Noble Faculties of the soul; for as the two posts, and the
lintel do differ in their property, yet in close joining together they make but
one, so in their properties they may be distinguished, but in unity they are
not distinguishable. And these three in their distinct properties being
sprinkled by the blood of the Lamb, the destroyer, viz. the justice of God can
have no power to enter, to destroy any of the Inhabitants, contained within the
habitation of that mind, viz. Faith, Hope, and Love, etc. In case that none of
the Inhabitants went out of door beyond the sprinkled post: and to the very
same purpose our Savior gave command to abide in him, Joh. 15 4. for herein is
the safety of the soul with all its affections, etc. And this blood of the Lamb
being sprinkled upon the posts as before said, is the mark or sign of Gods
sanctification, or setting that soul apart in the more noble parts, until he
have executed justice of, and upon the world, flesh, and devil, death, sin, and
hell, who have their habitation in the inferior parts of the soul, viz. the
sensuality, and the reason, and imagination, which by their great power have
kept the inhabitants of the noble part in bondage.

But to illustrate a little more the sprinkling of the two side posts, and the
lintel, in their threefold property, I will show you how the Scripture in other
places points at them, and first for the property of the one post, and its
sprinkling, viz. the Conscience.

First for its property; As the one post of the gate having hinges, whereupon
the one leaf of the gate is hung so, that thereby it has the glibness to open
and shut; so the Conscience has two hinges, viz. the outward teachings, and
the inward dictates of God, upon which the one leaf of the gate hangs, viz.
the fear of God. And the understanding as the other post, has other two
hinges, on which the other leaf hangs; and these two hinges is true wisdom,
and right knowledge, upon which the other leaf hangs, viz. the pure desire of
God; and these two leaves being close shut, and safely kept together, the
adversary has less power to enter. But these two posts are not fit for the
bearing of the two leaves of the gate, until the lintel couple them together.
So neither the Conscience, nor the Understanding, can be suitable for carrying
the fear and desire of God, in their right order, until the will with its
property, yiedling obedience in its ghostly acting, be conjoined to both; and
so when all their threefold properties meet in union, then are the two leaves
of the gate hung in right order.

Now to come to the sprinkling of the first side post, viz. the Conscience. As
for Conscience before it be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, it is but the
leader of men into error, as well as into truth, as may be seen in the Apostle,
who, by, and through the leading thereof, persecuted the Saints. And likewise
the Scribes and Pharisees, that put Christ to death; and though man have never
so much zeal for God, yet his conscience not struck or sprinkled, all his works
is but sin, and dead works, and this made the Apostle Paul write the same
truth, as in Heb. 9.14. And while any man's heart or will yields obedience to
such a conscience, all his obedience is evil, because his conscience is evil,
Heb. 10.22. And so long as man finds any life in these conscientious
walkings, he has but besprinkled his conscience with the blood of Bulls and
Goats, and his own mark is upon the post, and saves himself from the
destroyer, as he thinks. But the conscience being sprinkled with the blood of
Jesus, then does man truly know himself to be a sinner, and by that blood, his
peace and safety is to be procured, and full well knows that all his good
actings are as bad as his evil actings: And from hence it comes to pass, that
sin becomes to be out of measure sinful; and by this means, all the bloody
offerings, and sprinkling of his own conscience becomes to be rubbed off, and
blotted out; and then the blood of the Lamb becomes to be sprinkled upon the
conscience, whereby the same has no power to condemn. This made the Apostle
say, there was no condemnation to those that were in Christ, etc. Romans 8.1.

Secondly, the understanding as holden out by the other side post (before it be
sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb) is but dark in the conceiving of truth,
and in its darkness, man's Conscience cannot give out right commands to the
heart or will, for the right command of the Conscience proceeds from the
pureness of the understanding, and the understanding being dark, how great is
that darkness? Luke 11.35. and while man walks in this darkness he is
deceived himself, and deceives others also; his condition being nothing else
but deceiving, and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13. yea stumbleth and falls, and
knows not whereupon, Prove. 4.19.

But when man once knows his darkness, then does he cry after wisdom, and
knowledge, and seeks them more then silver; and then it is that the Lord
sends his Angel to seal, or set a mark on the forehead of such a soul
before the destroying Angels work their work, Revel. 7.2. viz. To give man
the right knowledge and understanding of the great Mystery both of sin, and
godliness, and by that the destroyer is kept out, for then he is that wise man
that fore-seeth the evil and hides himself, Prove. 22.23. and when the eyes
of the understanding are opened, the soul is sealed with the character of
wisdom, and all this is by the blood of the Lamb, which is that eye salve
spoken of in Revel. 3.18. and where the understanding is thus marked, then the
soul can truly see Christ, and close with him in the propitiation of his
Blood, but not before. But the sprinkling of the lintel which holds out the
heart, or will, is that which keeps all together, and makes the safety
complete, for it is the sealing of the heart by the Blood of the Lamb that
brings the soul into the union of the Father, and then is it with all the
affection kept in under the wings of the Almighty, and then is the Blood of the
Lamb rightly sprinkled upon the intellectual powers of the soul, viz. the
Conscience, understanding, and the will, and fitly framed; and being so marked
with the sprinkles of the Blood, the destroyer passes over, and the sprinkling
of the Blood in this manner does bring us out of all danger of ghostly enemies,
so that our souls pass safely out of Egypt, from the bondage of Pharaoh and
the Egyptians, and over the red Sea through the Wilderness into the Land of
rest; and this the Apostle affirms, where he says, We are not come to Mount
Sina, etc. but we are come to the Mount Sion, etc. And to Jesus the Mediator of
the New Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling that speaks better things
for us then the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.18, 19, etc.

And of this our Savior made a promise to his Disciples, that they should live
in the union of him and the Father, Job. 17.24. And the truth of this Promise
they were all partakers of, for having their understanding sprinkled, marked,
cleansed, or made pure by the Blood of the Lamb, thereby they were made able to
see and understand the truth as it was in Jesus; and by the clear vision of
that Light their Consciences being purified by the same Blood, did bear
witness to the truth of that Light, and their hearts being sprinkled by the
same Blood, it was freed from the power of Sin, and Death, and errors of an
evil Conscience, Heb. 10, 22. and did enjoy the virtue of that Light, so that
the love of God was shed abroad in their hearts, whereby they were made able to
love one another; and thus it was they became freed from sin both in the
understanding, in the Conscience, and in the will, and this made the Apostle
John say, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 Ioh.
1.7. And when our Savior instituted this Type, he would have them to
remember, and not to forget what was to be fulfilled in them, by the power and
efficacy of his Blood: but I fear your understanding is too weak to conceive
any further explaining of the Mystery of the second Type instituted by Christ,
else I would have proceeded further in laying open more in this particular,
therefore I give you but these short touches and glimpses, that thereby you may
somewhat grope after the great Mystery herein contained.

So I will proceed, and give you some glimpse of the manner of the preparation
of the Passover, in its signification, for the Paschall Lamb was not to be
eaten raw, nor to be sodden in water, but to be roasted with fire, Exodus 12.9.
Now I would have you to understand the Mystery in water upon this occasion, and
why the Lamb was not to be sodden therein.

First, Water in its signification here points out the overflowing of Sin and
Lust, which compasses about the Soul, and by the out-breaking of its floods
the Soul becomes in danger of drowning: and David knew this, when he prayed
to God to deliver him out of the deep waters, Psa. 69.14, 15.

Likewise, water is unstable, which signifies the unconstancy of man in
Nature, and how subject to waver, and turn from one sin to another, and how
easily to be drawn to all iniquity, and this made Jacob use these words to
Reuben, unstable as water, etc. Genesis 49.4.

Likewise water is but weak, yet of a destroying nature when man is over-head
in it, for there is no hold to be taken of it whereby man can save himself; so
is sin a weak deliverer when the soul is in the depth of it, for there is
no hold to be taken by it, whereby the soul can save it self, but rather to
be drowned in the depth thereof.

Likewise whatsoever is sodden in water it loses part of the virtue thereof,
for the water draws part of the virtue into its self. Under these
considerations the Lamb was not to be sodden in water, which points out in the
Spiritual signification, that while man is in his natural corruption, and
while lust, and love of the world, and unstablenesse of spirit, being carried
to and fro by the power of sin inward or outward, and so comes to own
Christ in his propitiation by way of an Historical believing, this is to
prepare the Paschall Lamb to themselves, contrary to the command of God, and
does boil the same in water, viz. their sin and lusts, by the fire of the
false faith, and thereby their sin, as the water, takes the virtue of the Lamb
into it self, and thus the broth is made sweeter to them then the meat boiled
in it; and from hence it is that sin is so pleasant to men, because they have
seasoned it by the virtue of the boiling of the Paschall Lamb in it, viz. by
the false application of the death of Christ, whereby they get to themselves
liberty to sin, and by so doing make Christ the author of unrighteousness,
Gal. 2.7. and can freely sin that grace may abound, Romans 6.1.

So as the Lamb was not to be sodden in water, it was not to be eaten raw, for
that was unsuitable to the digestion, and would endanger and damnifie the
bodies, by bringing several casualties upon it. And likewise, raw flesh was
counted unclean, and so when the plague of Leprosy was upon any so long as
any raw flesh was to be seen, that person was to be accounted unclean, but
when the raw flesh was wholly covered by the Leprosy, then that person was to
be pronounced whole, Lev. 13.12, 13. all which holds out to us in the
signification, that those who look upon Christ in the flesh, as he was borne
of the Virgin Mary, lived in the Body, suffered in the Body, and rose in the
Body, and so becomes to be a worshipper of God in any outward form, and goes
no further; but to apply themselves in these forms what Christ was in the
flesh, even this is to eat the Paschall Lamb raw, and so brings distempers
upon the soul, whereby it will be in danger of death, and these distempers are
such as loosen the strength of the reins, whereby it becomes to have an issue
of blood continually running, viz. The thoughts, inclinations, fears, cares,
loves, and desires, running continually into the Creature, and yet can worship
God in a form, and apply Christ in these forms, according as he was, and what
he suffered in the flesh.

And from hence it is, that though they have the Plague of Leprosy upon them,
viz. hearts full of sin and selfenesse, yet do they not know it, but by the
Physic got out of these forms, they keep down that Leprosy from their own
beholding, thinking to cure the same, and by so doing there is some raw flesh
still in the soul, viz. some good, some righteousness, some good conceit of
what is acted in their holy form, out of which there is many good thinkings
raised in the mind, of the love of God, and faith in Christ, and
sanctification of the Spirit, etc. all which is but as the raw flesh arising
amongst the Leprosy; and while that soul has that raw flesh in it, it is but
loathly in the eyes of God, and is accounted as unclean; and until man truly
know himself all overspread by this plague of Leprosy, viz. sin and
selfnesse as well in his good actings as in his evil actings, he is not in a
capacity to be pronounced clean, and the Apostle Paul knew the plague of this
Leprosy well enough when he cried out, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me, etc. Romans 7.24. And for the pronouncing of such clean as are
overspread with this Leprosy of sin, Christ came, and to save those that knew
themselves invested therein from head to foot, inside and outside, and that
bear the burden thereof continually, Mat. 11.28. And when our Savior
instituted this Type, this he included in the same remembrance.

Now the manner of the preparation of the Paschall Lamb was to be roasted with
Fire, Fire having in it these significations, viz. wrath, anger, fury, heat,
consuming, terribleness, etc. and in its better signification it holds out
good, viz. comfort, light, and love, and zeal, and life, etc. So it is to be
understood that Fire in its first significations points out sorrow and
suffering, and so it is, that when the Fire of God, or his fury, or anger, etc.
is kindled in the soul of man in the condemning property of the light which is
in the Conscience, and the spirit of man finds it self deprived of the love
of God, and nothing but the fury of the Lord poured out, and that nothing but
woe and want appears in the soul, and sin abounding, which is as fuel to
the Fire of the anger which he feels within himself; when this comes to be
truly kindled, there is great tribulation in that mind, and this fire must all
souls be brought into before they be fit for knowing how good Christ is; for
this was the way that he went himself even, under the wrathful displeasure of
the Justice of the Father, passing through the fire of his indignation: and so
as the Paschal Lamb was roasted at the fire, it kept all the sweetness and
virtue in it self, by which it was more pleasant to the taste, and truly
nourishing; so Christ by going through the fire of the anger of God, became to
be made pleasant to all those who taste him, and none can taste or eat him
rightly, but such as have their Souls brought into the same fire, or
sufferings with Christ, and so can close with Christ as a suffering Christ, and
bearing the same indignation with him, and own him in that way, and walk with
him in that way in the daily denying of self; and this Christ himself left in
command to all that would be his Disciples, and in this also would he have them
to remember him so often, as they should eat that Bread, and drink that Cup.

Likewise the Paschall Lamb was to be eaten with bitter Herbs, which holds
out the daily sorrows, and sufferings of these Souls, who do taste of the
consolations of Christ; and as the sour Sauce is used to sweet meat to help
the stomach to digest well, so that no surfeit comes by the sweetness of the
meat; so afflictions are the only preservative of the Soul, least consolation
cause distemper: and this the Apostle witnesses by the prick in the flesh, 2
Cor. 12.7. And Christ himself makes this out to his Disciples, when he told
them of the sorrow they should have in his absence; yet he bad them be of good
comfort, for he would come again to them, Ioh. 14.18. and this he would have
them to remember also. I could have proceeded further in the explanation of the
Paschall Lamb in other particulars, but what is said I hope may suffice, and
be enough for the matter in hand, speaking only of the time when Christ
instituted this Type, so I will go on a little, and speak a word of the
matter in this Type. As for the matter, you know it was the elementary things,
viz. Bread and Wine, and the Bread was such as the Passover was kept with,
viz. unleavened Bread, which was not made by Art, or had any mixture of
bitterness or sournesse in it, but had all the sweetness that the nature of
the grain afforded; as for Bread, it is to be understood in its original,
community, and properties.

First for the Original, it is of the vigor and vertuall strength of the
earth, which does give and communicate it self into the Grain cast into it,
whereby the same receives life, and so is brought out, and brought on still to
its maturity, and fitness for the use of man.

Secondly for its community, as the Grain by being cast into the earth, and
lying in the womb thereof, the earth communicates its vigor and strength
into it; so the Bread being cast into the stomach it does communicate the same
vigor received from the earth, into the corporality of the fleshly substance
of man, and so by way of communication the body has its support from its
original, viz. the earth. And,

Thirdly, the properties of Bread is to give life and strength, and keep away
weakness and death from the body, and this Bread Christ made choice of, to
typifie what was the virtue of himself, and therefore he said by way of
Metaphor, This is my Body, etc. Now the Body of Christ typified by Bread, was
not that corporal Body which was then visible amongst them, neither was it
that Body that he bad them eat, for that corporal Body of Christ it self was
but a Type, and whatsoever he acted or suffered in that Body were al typical,
having them a in spiritual signification, and Christ himself witnesses the
truth, when he said, he would give the Disciples his Flesh to eat, which
saying was a stumbling block to many that heard him; which when he perceived he
told them plainly, That his Flesh, viz. his corporal Body did not profit, but
it was the Spirit that quickens, and that the words he spoke they were spirit
and life, Ioh. 6.63. So here is to be understood Christ in the Spiritual
substance, and not in the Corporal; and this Spiritual substance is the Divine
Nature, which has in it self these things typified by the Bread, viz. its
original from the Father, and of the same nature and substance with him, oned
with him in unity, as the Grain is one with the earth, and of the same nature
and substance,, not differing in community, but they differ in matter and
likeness in the coporality; so Christ and the Father are distinct in respect
of the matter and likeness in the corporality, viz. the Flesh, while he lives
in it, but did not differ from the Father in union, as himself faith, Ioh.
14.11. which unity consists of the original communion in the eternal
substantiality of the being of God, and from the eternal, substantial, and
essential being, or Divine nature proceeds these properties held out to us
by the Bread, viz. to strengthen and give life, and to keep weakness and death
from the souls of those who have the Divine nature in them, and such souls by
the community and virtue of the same nature become incorporated into the union
of the Father, and these Souls by the properties of the Divine nature or
Spirit, brought into the same substance of its original, and receives all its
virtue and nutriment from the same, as the branch does from the Vine, Ioh.
15.1, 2, 3. and as that Bread had no Leaven mixed in it, so the Divine nature
has no mixture in it, but what is in it self, and will not admit of any
Leaven, viz. any of the Creatures Art, Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. and this
was the Leaven Christ bad his Disciples beware of, Matthew. 16, 6. and the Souls
of men becomes to be made partakers of the Divine nature by way of pure
believing, which arises out of the operation of Divine nature it self, and
not out of the observation of the Type, for that is but Historical, and
looks upon Christ in the Human Nature, and this is but the faith of
Hypocrites, and that will perish, Job 8.13. but the faith which is of the
operation of the Divine nature is that which overcomes the world, 1 Ioh. and
by it the soul lives, and abides in the Divine nature it self, and thereof
is made partaker; and in this respect the Divine nature typified by Christ's
flesh becomes to be meat indeed, Io. 6. and this would Christ have his
followers to know and live in, and thus would he have them to discern him, and
understand his saying, and what he meant when he said, This is my Body, etc.
and because the Corinthians were blind in the mystery, therefore the Apostle
Paul blamed them much, and gives them a caveat of the unworthy and not right
eating of that Bread, etc. and how that not right eating did endanger them
much, because they in their eating did not discern the Lords Body, 1 Cor.
11.29.

Likewise for the other Elementary matter, viz. Wine, its original is from the
earth, which gives life and nutriment to the Vine, whereby the fruit is
brought out to maturity, out of which the Wine is produced, and the properties
of the Wine is Paysicall, purifying, and refreshing, being seasonably taken;
but on the contrary, it is damageable and hurtful, and this fruit of the Vine
Christ used in this Type, because of the sympathizing properties thereof, with
the properties of his own Blood; now the Blood of Christ is to be understood
in a twofold sense, viz. Typical, and Spiritual, typical in the blood of the
corporal flesh, which was shed, or let out upon the Cross, but in this his
corporal Blood was no more virtue then was in the corporal flesh, and that
profits nothing being but a Type, but that Blood which is saving is
spiritual, issuing out of the Divine nature of Christ, and that is his love,
and this love is the life of Christ, and blood signifies life, as you may see,
Genesis 9.4, 5. and this blood, or love of Christ which proceeds, or is shed out
of the Divine nature of his spiritual substance, has these properties in it,
viz. Physical, purifying, and refreshing; first Physical, for those souls
who have had the same issuing out of the Divine nature into them, knows that
they have been recovered of diverse Diseases by the same, which diseases is the
bitter tormentings of the guilty Conscience, who keeps the Soul in great
pain under the lashes of Justice, and under the shadow of death, and under the
bondage of the Devil, and under the pain of Hell; all these being of power to
torment, while the hand writing of Ordinances is unblotted by the same blood,
or love of Christ, and those souls who are Soule-sick under these, stands in
need of Physic, and to them Christ becomes a Physician, Luke 5.31. by the
shedding of his blood, or love, out of the Divine nature into these Souls, by
virtue of which they come to be restored to health.

Secondly, His blood issuing out of the Divine Nature becomes purifying, and
purges the soul from that which is the cause of all its diseases and pain,
viz. sin and selfness, for that is the cause of all sorrow; and where this love
of God, or blood of the Divine Nature is shed in the hearts, there sin becomes
purged out by the power of faith, which works by love. And this faith God
uses as an instrument in the purging by love, which made the Apostle say, that
God put no difference between the Gentile and the Jew, purifying their hearts
by faith, Acts 15.9. Now this faith is always accompanied with suffering, as in
nature, purging is some cause of pain, but this faith which is grounded in
love, overcomes the World, with all the glory thereof, 1 John 5.4. And it
bears up the heart in all afflictions and tribulations, making one virtue to
arise out of another, as tribulation begets patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in your hearts, Romans 5.4, 5. So as the soul is purged
from sin, both in affection and action; so is the conscience purged from its
blindness, by which it kept the soul in bondage to outward actings; and the
captivity of weak ordinances which cause the soul to look at Christ in a
fleshly way, and in its blindness tormented the soul, when it would not know
Christ so; and the truth of this purging the Apostle witnesses, as you may see
in Heb 9.14.

And whosoever has this love of God, or blood of the Divine Nature shed in
their hearts, the virtue thereof does ingraft that soul into Christ in his
Divine Nature (by the way of pure loving, and pure believing) as the Branch
into the Vine, and every branch so ingrafted into him, and bearing fruit in
him, he purges and makes it bring out more fruit, Joh. 15.2.

Thirdly, The property of this blood of the Divine Nature, is to comfort and
revive the soul, for whom, and in whom it is shed; for when the soul has
undergone the bitterness of purging out of sin, by way of affliction, and have
passed through all the sorrows and sufferings of death, devil, and hell,
whereby the powers of the soul became much weakened, and the heart broken to
pieces, etc. then by the vertual property of this blood, the spirit is revived
and comforted, as may be seen Isai. 61.1, 2, 3, etc. And this was that water
that Christ spoke of to the woman of Samaria, John 4.10. And thus his blood
becomes drink indeed, John 6.55. And who so eats his flesh and drinks his
blood in this manner, live in the Divine Nature of Christ, and Christ by the
Divine Nature dwells in that soul, and such a soul shall not see death, John
8.51. But whosoever eats or drinks the Body and Blood of Jesus, any other way,
the same becomes a stumbling block to them; and as the effect of Wine is to
hurt and breed ill humor, and dazel the brain, when it is not taken in
moderation with wisdom in its vertual properties, (but when men's lust causes
them to drink the same) then do they befool themselves in it, for want of
wisdom, and so thereby they often become to be made weak and sickly, yea, and
many are brought to death thereby: Even so the Blood of Christ being drunk in a
wrong sense, viz. by way of the Historical faith, which looks upon Christ in
the flesh, and making applications of what he suffered in the flesh; and so
takes the efficacy from the Divine Nature, and gives the same to the humane
or corporal nature; This Faith, or looking upon, or eating, or drinking of his
flesh and blood, becomes to work no other work in these souls, but only
keeps lust, sin, or selfness alive; and so by this false faith, Christ is
made the cloak of sin, and the Minister thereof, Gal. 2.14. And because the
sons of men have neither wills, nor wisdom to examine themselves in this very
thing; therefore much weakness is in their understanding, that they cannot know
the truth as it is in Jesus, and much weakness is in their wills, in fighting
against sin; and therefore that sin being unpurged out, it becomes cause of
much sickness, viz. the soul having an issue of blood, because the veins
thereof is loosened, and so it is carried out to love, seek, and live in
created, or things acted; and by this means, such sickness, if not cured,
brings death. And this was the very thing that the Apostle Paul would have
the people to take heed of, when they were to observe this Type, 1 Cor. 9.28,
etc. But for the matters in this Type, I will let them pass with these small
hints, and will proceed and speak a word of the manner of this Type, or the
Form Christ used therein, viz. He took bread and blessed it, and brake it, etc.
By which blessing is to be understood sanctifying, which holds out the power
and virtue of the Godhead in it self, which virtue and power was in himself,
and by the same he sanctified himself, Ioh. 19.17. by which he blesses and
sanctifies all who live in him, and he in them, and in this case he is our
sanctification, 1 Cor. And likewise, he brake the bread, breaking being the
parting of a thing into pieces, whereby many may be partakers of the same,
which holds out the fullness and wholeness of the Divine Nature, which does
freely and liberally disperse it self into several particulars, that many may
be made partakers thereof, not that the Divine Nature is, or can be parted, or
divided in itself, no more then the Sun in the Firmament, which remains whole
in it self; yet all are partakers of the light and heat thereof: So the Divine
Nature is whole and undividable in it self, but by its fullness does fill so
many particular Creatures; and herein stands the division in respect of the
corporallity of the Creature, and the fullness of the Divine Nature is whole in
it self, and by its fullness and freeness, does fill all particular souls. And
this truth John Baptist verifieth, where he says, Of his fullness have we all
received, etc. John 1.16. And the fullness of the Divine Nature issuing out of
it self into any soul, does draw the same into its own nature, whereby the same
is made fit to live in the same nature, and by the living in it, that soul
becomes rooted, and grounded in the same, whereby it is made able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth and length, height and depth,
etc. And so becomes to be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.17, 18,
etc.

And when he had showed the Disciples the freeness of the fullness of the Divine
Nature, breaking out or darting it self into each several soul, typified to
them by that form of breaking the bread: Then he gave the same to them, that
they might eat it, and told them in a mystical sense, that it was his body that
was broken for them, as is partly showed before. And this form in the Type
instituted, had a sympathizing with, and to that Type of his corporal body,
ready to be sacrificed and rent in pieces upon the cross, till its coporal life
was taken from it; which holds out the renting to pieces the body of sin in
us, and the death of the same upon the cross of self-denial, which is holden
out by the form and manner of eating: eating signifies brusing or suffering,
being typified by the bitter herbs in eating the Paschal Lamb; For as eating,
bruiseth and makes the thing eaten to be fit for digestion, whereby the same
is turned into the same substance of flesh; So afflictions and sufferings
makes us partakers with Christ and of Christ, and to drink of the same Cup,
and to be baptized with him into his death, and by the virtue thereof, the body
of sin becomes destroyed, Romans 6.2, 3, 4.

And this Christ would have them to know when he commanded them to eat that
bread, that as in eating it, they bruised it in pieces; so it was that body of
sin in them that was the cause why the justice of his Father bruised and brake
his corporal Body, and to be avenged of that body of sin in them, he would make
them partakers of the Divine Nature; and that was by way of suffering, whereby
that body of sin should be destroyed: And that in these afflictions, the pure
believing might be raised in the soul, that thereby the Divine Nature might be
made suitable for digestion, and so turned into the nature of the soul, and the
soul into its nature, by virtue of the blood or love of the same nature; that
so he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, may be one, Heb. 2.11.

Likewise, the manner or form in this Type was further, viz. in taking the Cup
and giving of thanks, and bidding them drink it, etc. As for giving thanks, it
is a well-pleasingness in the soul, with what God does or will do with it, and
a free submitting to the Fathers will, wherein his goodness is made manifested,
whereat and wherein the soul rejoices, under any affliction; and so it was,
that Christ rejoiced in what was the will of his Father, and in obedience to
his will he was willing to lay down his life; and by this he showed to his
Disciples, what he would have them to do, when like afflictions should betide
them, and those who were his followers, in whom the Divine Nature was livingly
felt, and by its virtue had dashed in pieces the body of sin; and by the blood
of that nature, viz, Love, these souls was incorporated into the same nature,
these followed the same example, and in suffering could be well pleased,
witness hereof is the Apostle Paul, where he says, Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress? etc. Now in all these
things we are more then conquerors, etc. Romans 8.34, 35, 36, etc.

And further Christ told his Disciples, that that Cup was the Blood of the New
Testament which was shed for many, etc. in which typical saying, was signified
the establishing of the second Covenant, promised before of his Father, by the
Prophet Jeremiah, where he says, Behold the day comes, says the Lord, that I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Jacob,
etc. And I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people, etc. Iere. 31.31, 32, 33,
etc. Which promise our Savior came to fulfill, and at this time instituted this
Type, giving out the truth thereof, in this his mystical saying; and the
complete fulfilling hereof, is in the souls of those who be incorporated into
the Divine Nature, whereby they become to have that law of God, viz. The
righteousness of God; which righteousness is Christ, or the Divine Nature
stamped upon their hearts, by which they know the truth of God in that
Covenant, and does set to their seal that God is true, Ioh. 3.33. And by the
power and virtue of the same, they are taught to know the truth, and needs
not that any teach them; because the same anointing in them, teaches them all
things, 1 Ioh. 2.27.

And thus are these souls made to own God for their God, and live in the love
and life of him, united to him by the virtue of this Covenant, and so becoming
his people owned by him, and wholly set apart for himself, in and through the
sanctification of himself by his own Spirit.

But what might be said more upon this particular, in the manner of this Type I
let pass, because somewhat that might be said is somewhat touched before in
speaking of the material things in this Type; and I would not too much
over-load weak understandings, with too much speaking of things that be too
hard and heavy for them: So I proceed to speak a word of the end in this Type,
for which Christ instituted it, which was for this very purpose, viz. That now
when the time of his departure was at hand, and that his bodily presence was to
be taken away from the world; therefore he would not leave the sons of men
without some rememberance of himself, and what he had said unto them; the which
he would have them to take notice of, when he was gone, and that his suffering
should be kept still in mind; and though the Type of his own Body should not
abide amongst them, yet he would leave them another Type instead of that,
whereby they should still be put in mind of him. And this was to be to them as
a glimpse of light, shining in a dark place, until the Sun it self arose, and
became as a light that shines more and more, until the perfect day; and that
while the sons of men were in their weakness, before they were brought into the
pure and perfect knowledge, and full enjoyment of himself in the Divine Nature,
this was left to be as a mark in the way, least by forgetfulness men might
happily step out of their way, in following him to the death of the Cross, and
that was the chiesest thing which he commanded, and would have them to
remember: and Christ left not this Type only, but he made to them (who were his
followers) a promise of sending the Spirit to them, who when he came should
bring all that he had said into their remembrance, Jo. 14.26. and this death of
Christ in the corporal Flesh was still set before the eyes of those who were
his dearest friends, and truest followers, and it was the thing they still
pressed after, to see how near they could come to follow Christ in the way of
the Cross, that thereby the body of Sin and Self might be crucified, and dye
with the Body of Jesus, that so the Divine nature might live and grow in them,
whereby they might be made partakers with Christ in the Resurrection; and this
made the Apostle Paul weigh little of either consolation or affliction,
religious walking, or any created thing, so long as he had not attained to the
resurrection of the dead, as you may see in Phil. 3.11, 12, etc. and all that
he desired to know amongst those whom he taught, was Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. and so by the pressing after Christ in the way of the
Cross, he became dead to all things whatsoever, whether the Law, or World, or
what might be had in any thing acted, or created, and became crucified in his
affections to all with Christ, and he lived in the Divine nature of Christ, it
living in him, as may be seen, Gal. 2.20.

And further, he plainly demonstrateth, that they which be Christ's have both
their affectious and lusts crucified, Gal. 5.24. and all his own rejoicing was
in the Cross of Jesus Christ, whereby the world was crucified to him, and he
to it, Gal. 6.14. and the truth is, so long as the mind of Christ is unknown
to men in the Mystery of this Type before said, they look but upon Christ in a
fleshly way, being blinded by Lust, and what they conceive of him is but false
and feigned, and so give that to the Type which only belongs to the Divine
nature; and this is because of the faith which is Historical and Traditionall,
and from hence it is, that Christ cannot be apprehended further then he was in
the Flesh, and what he suffered in the Flesh; and these Types he left us in the
Flesh, by which he would have drawn men more near to himself in the Divine
nature, and those very things which should have been something to have drawn
us into himself, even by the policy of Sin and Satan, and false Teachers, they
have drawn us from Christ, and so places Christ in Types and Forms, and in
this very way you have been taught to know Christ, and so are become the
enemies of his Cross, and therefore for all the faith you pretend to have in
Christ, and the comfort and strength you imagine to have gotten from the Type,
is nothing but mere fancy, and the delusion of the Devil, whereby he has
beguiled you, by being a lying spirit in the mouths of your false Ministers,
for as yet the world and your own lusts, and liveliness of affections to
created things is yet in your heart, and if you had been taught in the right
way of (apprehending Christ, and) following him, it might have been, your Souls
might have enjoyed more of the Divine nature then otherwise they have done, and
therefore I cannot but pity you poor blinded Souls, and out of love I have
written these few lines unto you, if perhaps there may be some amongst you who
may thereby grope somewhat more near the understanding of the truth then
heretofore: and I make no doubt but that some will understand by what is here
written how to conceive of Christ in the Flesh, and how in the Divine nature,
and how in this Type, viz. the Passover, or his last Supper, and I hope you
will learn in time to know in a more clear way how to understand, and enjoy
more of the sufferings with Christ then you ever yet have done, and and so
become more pure and right partakers of the Divine nature it self, then ever
you have done in the outward Type, and outside form, but I something doubt,
that while your false Teachers (who have the lying spirit in them) have power
to destroy you, they will still deceive you, therefore as you love your own
Souls beware of them, and say not but that a friend gives you warning of them.

But in concluding of this Type instituted by Christ, I would have you further
to understand in brief the sum of all what has been formerly held out, viz.
the suffering with Christ according to the Flesh, and the fellowship or
communion with Christ in the Divine nature: for herein stands, and is
contained all the whole duty of every one who will be Christ's Disciples, for in
suffering we have communion with him as he was in the Flesh, in which we must
follow him to the very death upon the Cross, viz. in living in the daily
denying our selves both inwardly and outwardly; inwardly, by keeping our
thoughts, desires, and affections out of loving and living, of, and in any
thing below the communion of the Father and the Son, by the partaking of the
Divine nature; and when we by true examination of our own hearts find them
bending down into earthly objects (of what kind soever) then to draw back our
hearts from them, and beating down all the objects as they rise, or be
presented to the heart (or will) and hereby man shall come to know the evil of
his own heart, whereby his affliction inwardly shall be much increased,
whereby he shall be made a suitable companion for Christ in the way of
suffering, in which the Soul becomes to have communion and fellowship with
Christ, and in this fellowship the Apostle desired to know Christ.

And for the outward sufferings they very much help the Soul into the
fellowship of Christ, and these be of diverse sorts, viz. loss of goods, loss
of health, loss of friends, and relations, loss of the praise of men, loss
of the pleasure in the world, etc. all which man may suffer the loss of by
accident, or to say, by the hand and work of God; and to these may be added
other sufferings of the Flesh in the outward self-denial viz. by taking no more
of the Creature then will serve for the uphold and support of the body, neither
in meat, drink, nor apparel, etc. and this all men ought to observe, that
will follow Christ in the fellowship of his suffering, for whatsoever man
takes more of the Creature then is before said, the same is for keeping lust
alive, and adds fuel to the fire; but these outward sufferings will not
bring man into the true fellowship of the communion of the suffering with
Christ, without the inward suffering (before said) go along with the outward
suffering, for by both the Soul is rightly fit to be partaker with Christ in
suffering. And when the Apostle Paul had to do with the Corinthians about some
afflictions under which they were, and to let them know, that those who would
follow Christ must bear him company in suffering, and not start back from it,
nor turn aside from Christ in that fellowship, therefore he sets before them
the example of the people in the Wilderness, who were all Baptized in the Sea;
which was as much as to enter into Covenant with God, to abide all sufferings
that after should come upon them before they came to the Land of rest, and yet
the most of them proved unfaith full in, the time of their suffering, and so
came short of entering into the Land; and he tells them these things happened for
their examples and admonitions, etc. and tells them that no temptation had taken
them but such as were common to men, etc. and in the conclusion he sets before
them this Type of our Saviors, and as wise men he would have them to judge
what he said, and tells them, The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ, and the bread which we break, etc. and then
shows them that onednesse of all the followers of Christ, and with Christ by
the being partakers of that one Bread which held out to them the fellowship and
communion of the suffering with Christ; and this you may see in 1 Cor. 10.1.
etc. to the 18. But no more of this Type instituted by Christ, but I proceed on
to another principle in your Religion, and that is Baptism; and in short will
show you your error in the same, if perhaps some of you have eyes to see, and
hearts to understand the truth when it is declared, and opened plainly to you.
Now for this form of Baptism it is another Type, and John Baptist so called
was the first Minister of the same, and afterward collerated by Christ, in
coming to be Baptized himself, and afterward gave further approbation of the
same by way of command to his Disciples, Matthew. 28.19. But as in his other Type
beforesaid (instituted and commanded by Christ) you have erred, in giving that
to the Type which belongs to the thing signified by it; So in this also you
do the same, for though you have some ground in Scripture for the form of
Baptism, yet you are ignorant of the mind of Christ in his command, as you
shall see afterward; and for the very form it self you do but follow it by
tradition, received from the blind Priests, who themselves have received the
same by tradition; and so as they have received the same, so they teach you,
and so you believe, but neither you, nor the Priests have any sure ground in
Scripture for using this type in the manner, or persons to whom you have it
administered, viz. Infants, for no sure ground you have for this your act, but
only your good thinking, which leads you to do the same; and your good
thinking is but grounded upon Inferences, and consequences, drawn from
uncertainties; but I stand not upon disputations, neither do I mean in this my
discourse to dispute about forms, which is but weak and beggarly things, for I
will leave this to your selves, and to the Anabaptists to dispute, being both
you and they live in forms, and can envy one another in your forms, and
persecute one another for your forms, and therefore amongst your selves you are
the meetest to end that thing, either by your disputations, or by your swords.
But as for me, I have no calling to meddle any further in your wise disputes
about your forms; but my call is to let you both see how you are but fools in
your forms, that thereby you may both become wise in that which is the power
and true wisdom it self, without which you shall all perish in your forms.

Now in the first place I come to speak a word of your conclusions you draw
from this Type of Baptism, viz. That it is an holy thing, and that by
administering the same to Infants they become incorporated into Christ; and in
case any Infant dye before it be Baptized, you question whether it go to
Heaven or no, and in case one live and be not baptized, that he is not, or
cannot be incorporated into Christ, and so you make this type a god, or a
christ by way of consequence; though you deny the same with your tongues: and I
do positively deny all your conclusions, and the consequence drawn from your
conclusions is made a God: this I do affirm, and will prove the truth both of
what I deny, and what I affirm; now your conclusions being fourfold, I come
to the first, viz. that Baptism is holy, which I both deny, and confess; this
may seem Logical, but it is not so, as you shall see in defining my own
speech, First, I confess it may be called holy, as sometimes outward and
created things had that Epithet put upon them, when they were set apart for
somepious end, as the Vessels in the Temple, and other materials belonging to
it, Numb. 31.6. and likewise things in the times of the Law, which was chosen
and set apart for the Sacrifices, and so the Scriptures is called holy, 2 Timothy
3.15. and so the works of men is sometimes called holy, but all these are but
called holy in respect of the end, and the thing pointed out, or signified; and
this is but an outward or external holiness, and this I confess: But that
holiness which you blindly put upon outward things, or types, that I deny, and
so in this type of Baptism I deny any further holiness then what is
external, and all external holiness a man may have, and act and live in all
the particulars thereof, and yet go to bear the Devils company in Hell with
it, if he have no more, Mat. 5.20.

But yet you will deny that you give any holiness to this type but what
belongs to it, the which I shall confute in speaking of your second
conclusion, wherein you affirm, that by the administrings of the same a child
becomes incorporated, or ingrafted into Christ, the which is a false and
blind conclusion, without any ground in Scripture, and this you have received
by tradition from the Popish fictions, and in this your conclusion you have
made this type no less then God himself, as here I prove it: for there is no
act of any creature can ingraft into Christ, and this is no more I hope then
the act of a creature, and but a bodily work, and bodily service profits
nothing, 1 Timothy 4.8. And our Savior who gave out the command for observing of
this type (yet at another time) said, When you have done all, yet count your
selves unprofitable servants, Luke 7.10. And the Apostle says, Not to him that
works, but to him that believes is righteousness ascribed, Romans 4.5. and
all works of the Creature, though in the purest way in any duty, or ordinance,
which all is but external righteousness, and outward holiness, all these are
but as filthy Garments, and menstruous clothes, Isa. 64.9. then if it be true
what the Scriptures say, the which you cannot deny, then are you of those whom
you call Anti-Scripturians, for those are they that walk contrary to Scripture
by tradition, and though you confess the truth with your tongue, yet in your
actions you deny the same, for no Scripture will bear you out, in saying that
any external obedience does incorporate any soul into Christ, or to ingraft
into the Divine nature, for this is but your foolish conceit raised in you, by
the custom of tradition, by which you have made the Commands and Power of God
without effect, and hereby you make a god of this Ordinance, or Type
instituted, and give that to it which of right does belong to himself, and the
incorporating any soul into Christ, viz. to be made one in him, and live in
him, is the work of God himself, and not any act of the Creature, for herein
God gets honor to himself, in working out the salvation of souls, and his
honor he will not give to another, Isa. 42.8. and it is his own arm that
brings salvation, and it is of his own will that he begets any to
himself, Iam. 1.18. But I know you may object, that God works his work by
means, and answers you in ordinances. To which I say it is true, sometimes
he has done so, but yet these was his own ordinances, and not the traditions
of men; and yet his own ordinances he has not forsaken, as you may see by the
brazen Serpent, 2 King. 18.4. and by his Tabernacle in Shilo, Ier. 7.12. and by
his Temple in Jerusalem, etc. Ier. 42.13. and the reason was, because the
people made gods of them, and counted them holy, and so worshipped them, giving
that to the Creature which did belong to the Creator, and so became blinded in
their understanding, not knowing how to put a difference between the Ordinance
and the Ordainer; and the reason of this is, because they became vain in their
imaginations, not knowing the mind of the Ordainer in the thing ordained; and
so their foolish heart thereby being darkened, they became to serve and worship
the creature more then the Creator, and this is the very condition in this your
act, from whence you draw your foolish conclusions; and though this Ordinance
of Baptism instituted by John, and commended by Christ, be tolerable in it
self standing as a Type, yet the soul wanting the thing signified, the act of
the type is of no efficacy to the soul, for if the flesh of Christ profits
nothing, Io. 6.63. and that bodily exercise profits nothing, 1 Timothy 4.8. what
profit is it that you reap in this act of Baptizing, even now but beguiling
your selves of that which is the substance and safety of your souls, and
instead thereof you feed your fancy by conceits, and so live upon husks and
shadows, and types, and therefore the power of the substance is hid from you,
and so you living upon shadows and types, you become to dye in your sins.

Likewise you question (if not deny) that a child cannot be saved dying before
Baptized; and indeed so you may, for none shall be saved but those who be
incorporated into the Divine nature, this being the life and bliss of all
blessed souls; and in what you affirm in your first and second conclusion,
you may absolutely deny that any can be saved before Baptized; for this does
undeniably follow, and as your forms and conclusions is but error, so this
third drawn out of the two former is error also, as here I prove plainly.

First, I hope you dare not deny but that Circumcision was an Ordinance of God,
and yet you dare not conclude, that all that died before it was instituted,
were damned; neither all that under went the same Ordinance were saved. And
though this Baptism be an Ordinance, yet dare you not conclude that any was not
saved before it was instituted, neither that all were saved who were baptized.

Then if God had a way to save before the institution of any Ordinance, then by
the same way he can save without the Ordinance; and the truth is, by the same
way he saves under Ordinances, and therefore the same way he saves without
Ordinances. The Ordinance it self does not save; and that way which God saves
all souls by, and through, is his own wisdom, power, and righteousness, viz.
His Christ in the Divine Nature, by which he was in the Father from eternity,
and by the virtue of the same nature saved souls before there was any
Ordinances; and the same saves under Ordinances, and the same saves without
Ordinances; and it is the free-gift, or good will, or grace of God that saves
whosoever are saved, Ephesians. 2.8. And therefore it is not the administering of any
Ordinances, or living under any Ordinance that save: And therefore I conclude
truly, and upon true grounds, That if children dye, or any other, though not
baptized, may be saved as well as those who are baptized, and all by virtue of
the Divine Nature, who is not tied to, or given to any soul by any virtue that
is in any Ordinance whatsoever, but does gather and draw to it self whomsoever,
and at what time soever it self pleases. And therefore I would have you to
take heed and beware of the false doctrine of your lying Priests, who have
taught you these things, that thereby you might esteem highly of them, and have
them in admiration for their acting and administering of this Ordinance to you,
and making you believe you are more in favor and love of God, then if you
wanted this their poor act.

Likewise from these three former conclusions, this fourth does successively
follow, viz. that one living, and yet unbaptized, is not, or cannot be
incorporated into Christ; and as all the former is but error, so is this also,
and clear against the work and ways of God, as he has wrought, whose work is
made manifest by Scripture to the contrary; for as is before proved, it is no
work of any Creature, nor the virtue of any Ordinance that does incorporate
into Christ; but that which does incorporate into Christ, is the gift of God,
and that is faith, Ephesians. 2.8. And faith may be given of God, without the
administration of an Ordinance. If you deny this, then you deny Scripture; for
Faith was before Ordinance, as you may see in Abraham, before Circumcision; and
Faith was before the ordinance of Baptism, and in the Primitive time this
ordinance was not to be administered to any, but that was believers, (though
foolishly you do administer the same to your children, having neither command
nor example for what you do, but only a Priests precept, by which you are
guided.)

Therefore it is clear, That a soul may be incorporated into Christ, before and
without Baptism; so all your conclusions is but false, and in observing of this
Ordinance of Baptism, you know not what you do, nor what you observe; for to
this very day you and your Teachers are ignorant of what was the mind of John,
when he instituted it; and likewise of the mind of Christ in commanding, that
it should be observed; and therefore it is, that you make a god of Baptism, as
I have proved in speaking of the fourfold conclusion: And this you have placed
in your Religion as a principle, or as a mark whereby you may be known to be of
the household of God, and as a sign of those who are partakers of the promises,
and contained within the New Covenant of Grace. And thus in your deceit do you
live, being deceived, and deceiving one another: And you are as blind in what
you observe, as those that never had eyes to see the Sun; and yet by relation
of others, can believe there is a Sun: So you hear by Scripture and Relation
there is a God, and so believes there is a God; but yet the Son of God you
never saw; for as yet your eyes is fast-closed; or if some amongst you have a
little sight, it is but a dark glimpse of the Son of God in these Ordinances;
and that dark glimpse you have, is but of Christ, as he was in the flesh, and
not as he is in the Divine Nature; but as the mystery is, that you think you
see Christ or the Truth of God clearly in these Ordinances; and because you say
you see, therefore your sin remains, John 9.41.

But I know you may object, and say, That Saint Peter in his first Epistle,
Chap. 3.2. says, that Baptism saves now under the Gospel.

It is true, he says so in a figurative speech, resembling Baptism to the
Water of the Flood, which saved some when all the rest was drowned in the same;
but how did the water save some, and drowned others? it was not the water it
self that saved, but the Arc, and it was not the Arc could save, but the
living and abiding in the Arc; and the water and the Arc together did save
the persons in the Arc; for though the Apostle say, that these persons were
saved by water, how was it that they were saved by water, seeing it was water
that would have destroyed them as well as the rest, and yet the same water
saved from the destruction of it self? I will tell you how the water saved the
Persons from its own destruction, even by its weakness it had to save, and
the nature of it being known to be destroying to them that should be overtaken
with it, from whence the knowledge of the Persons directed them into the Arc;
and thus was the water an instrument, by causing fear to arise in the Persons,
by which fear they pressed into the Arc, wherein they were saved; for the
water saved as it was an instrument to drive the Persons into the Arc, but the
Arc it self was the chief cause of their saving, by their abiding in it; and
so the Apostle resembles Baptism to it, with the thing signified, viz. the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead; for as the water saved as
beforesaid from the destruction of it self, so does Baptism as an instrument
save all those who know the weakness of that type, and from the knowledge of
the weakness of it, fearing to be destroyed by abiding in it; thereby the
soul is led from depending on it, and so runs into the Arc, viz. into the
death of Christ by the cross of self-denial, and so into the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, viz. not to look at Christ in the flesh, but in
the Divine nature, by the power of which the soul is compassed about, and
saved from the danger of all things acted, or created, and thus far Baptism
saves so far as the weakness of it is known, and the danger in it
manifested, and so becomes isntrumental, to direct and drive the soul out of
it self into the thing signified; but as the water destroyed all that abode in
it without the Arc, even so does Baptism destroy all souls who live in the
form or type thereof, and yet is not enclosed about, or incorporated into the
Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and abides in him according as he is
in the Divine nature: and as the persons could not be saved if they kept not in
the Arc, no more can any foul be safe but as it abides in the Divine nature,
as the branch in the Vine, Jo. 15.1, 2. But I say no more at present of this
type of Baptism, because it may be you shall hear somewhat more of it
afterward, and I hope by what is said you may partly understand your error in
your foolish conclusions upon it, and not to be deceived by the false lying
spirit of your blind Priests; so I proceed to speak a word of another
principle in your Religion, viz. Prayer.

Now as for Prayer I know there be many commands in Scripture for it, and many
examples also; but for set times, and set forms, and in prayer you have none,
according as you use it.

As for the times of prayer which you use, viz. usually evening and morning,
you have neither command nor example in Scripture, but only this you follow by
tradition, and being led to observe the same by your good thinking, and the
obligation of your blinded Conscience being wrong informed by the Doctors of
error, who limit the holy one of Israel, and circumscribe him in a place, and
draws forms and Images of him, according to their fancy and imagination, and
so have framed a fantastical or imaginary worship to him, and in that
fantastic way have learned to call upon him, and so have set out to your
selves these set times, at which times you can call upon your imaginary God,
that he will hear your fained prayers, and forgive you your conceited sin, and
supply the imaginary want of your souls; and likewise you can praise him for
his imaginary mercies bestowed upon your souls, and adding to these a great
deal of other hypocritical repetitions, to fill up your hour, and when that
is done then all is well with you, and then heart go whether thou will with
thy affections, for holy duty it is performed, and so by this means your
hearts is let out to go a whoring all the day long, and seeks fellowship and
communion with, and in created things, and so your thoughts, fears, cares,
lover, and desires is carried after your chief God, viz. the world, or
something contained in it, for it being your treasure, it has your heart, for
where the treasure is, there is your heart, Mat. 6.21. and look what has most
of your thoughts that is your god, and if you look into your selves you shall
find, that the Creature has more of your thoughts then that God you prayed to
in the morning, but it mattereth not what your hearts be about all the day
long, for you have that at command which will cure all, and that is your
evening sacrifice, and duty of prayer; and from hence it is, that you by your
chosen times for prayer, have become ignorant of the ground of prayer, and
having forsaken the ground of prayer, and choosing to your selves a set time for
prayer, the contrary effects is produced, viz. prayer proceeding from the right
ground is a mean whereby sin is kept from the heart and affections, and the
heart with the affections is kept from sin; but when the ground is changed into
set times, thereby the heart with the affections gets liberty to sin, and
the creature has freedom to enter upon the heart, and thus your prayers is
turned into sin, and this you have by asking, and receiving counsel of your
blind Priest, and hereby you make a cover for your selves, that you may add
sin to sin; this you may plainly see in Isa. 30.1. but those who knew, or do
know the true ground of Prayer were never tied to set times, but to occasions,
and the occasions being so many made our Savior give out this caveat so often,
Watch and pray, Mar. 13.33. and the Apostle who knew the ground of prayer, and
the many occasions to pray, made him bid the Thessalonians pray without
ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. and those who know the evil of themselves shall not
need to have one to teach them when to pray, or how to pray, neither can they
be tied to set times, for they shall find that sin in themselves that cannot
be limited to times, and therefore they cannot limit themselves to pray
against it at times, for (to those) both sin and prayer is unlimitable; and
this made the Apostle utter his desire in the well-wishing of those whom he
taught in the truth, and right knowledge of God and themselves, and willed them
to pray every where, 1 Timothy 2.8.

Secondly, for the form you use in your prayer, it is but your own human
invention which causes you to strain your brain, drawing out from thence so
many words, and multiplication of speech, and to fill up your hour is often put
to use the same words over and over, and so contrary to the command of our
Savior you use vain repetitions, Mat. 6.7.

And herein you differ not from the Heathens, for they think to be heard for
their much speaking; and this your beat-braine Duty is but the sacrifice of
fools, and yet you know not that you do evil, but this your doing pleases
your self, and pacifieth your blind Conscience, and from hence you draw
conclusions, that God is pleased also, making him such a one as your selves,
Psa. 50.21. but those who know the right ground of prayer they are not tied to
times, neither are they tied to a form in prayer, for the true ground of
prayer turneeth set times into occasions, and it turns self forms and
repetitions into short and feeling expressions; yea, often times such expressions
as you could not hear, if you were besides the Persons who utters these
expressions, and those are the cries that ring and echo in the ears of the
Lord of Hosts, and these are the prayers that prevails with the Lord, in
answering and filling the desires of such souls, and these prayers and cries
are the very vigorous out-pourings of the Spirit, which makes intercession for
the Saints, and he who is a Spirit knows the mind of the Spirit, Romans 8.26.
and in this manner Moses (who knew the right ground of prayer) called upon the
Lord in his greatest distress, not so much as speaking one word that any of
the people heard, and yet his spirit cried out so vehemently to the Lord that
the Lord said unto him, Wherefore cryest thou unto me? and all that while his
spirit was calling upon the Lord with his tongue, he was admonishing the people
to believe in the Lord, as you may see, Exodus 14.13, 14, 15, etc. And in this
manner Hannah poured out her prayer to God, and prevailed with him in the thing
she desired, though Eli before he knew the truth accounted her a drunkard, 1 Samuel 1.13, 14. but the truth is, that you know not the right ground of prayer,
and therefore you cannot depart from your set times, and set forms, and
therefore you ask and receive not, because you ask amiss, Jam. 4.3, And the
reason why you have not the right ground of prayer is, because you know not God
but as a Person, and not as he is a Spirit; and you know not the wisdom,
righteousness, and power of God, viz. his Christ, but according to the flesh,
and therefore all your worship (and holy duties, as you call them) is framed
according to the knowledge that you have of God, and Christ, and this knowledge
you have is no more but by relation of others, as you have heard and seen in
the Scriptures, and the speaking thereof, by your relative Priests; and from
hence it is that you have formed in your heads an Historical faith, and
fantastic believing, for as yet you have not been in the City of God, and what
you have heard and seen therein you cannot speak of, and no further then you
have knowledge of God you can believe God, and no further then you can believe
God can you call upon him, and what God is in his Spiritual being you have not
yet believed, then how can you call on him in whom you have not believed? Romans
10.12. and why is it that you have not rightly believed, even because you have
not rightly heard of God? and why is it that you have not rightly heard of God,
even because you have not had him rightly preached to you by your Priests, and
the reason why they could not rightly declare and preach God (as he is a
Spirit, and Christ, as he was, and is in the Divine nature) is, because they
were never sent, Romans 10.14, 15.

But I know that you may object against me, and say, that you you have some
examples in Scripture, both for your set times and set forms of prayer; for you
will say, that David praised at even, morning, and at noon, etc. and that our
Savior himself prayed at sundry times, and the Apostles themselves used prayer
in this manner very often with others, etc.

It is true, I do not deny vocal prayer, and times for vocal prayer, in case
the right ground of prayer be in the person or persons praying; for I would
have you to understand what I have formerly said; for I do not deny, but
confess occasional praying, but that which I deny, is the set-times and
set-forms of prayer, which is but good thinkings, rules, and blind Priests
precepts, without any command, or example in Scripture; but vocal prayer
occasionally, the persons rightly grounded, this is all, that you or any can
gather out of any example in Scripture. And in this wise, David oftentimes both
prayed and praised, and occasionally Christ in the flesh both prayed and
praised, and occasionally did the Apostles, and the believing people in the
primitive time both prayer and praise. And according to this same rule, the
Apostle bad those that were afflicted pray, and those that were merry, he would
have them to praise in singing of Psalms, Jam. 5.13. And so I would have all
men (while they be in the body, and the body of sin in them) to use vocal
prayer occasionally, and that their expressions may arise from the very sense
of the occasion; and such prayers or expressions of desires (accompanied with
the right ground) God will hear and answer the desires of such, and will
deliver them from fear and trouble, and then shall such have cause to praise
and glorify him, Psalm. 50.15. But in drawing from example of occasions wrong
conclusions, and so making set-times, suiting to others occasions, herein you
err greatly, as also to draw conclusion from the example of others expressions
(who spoke according to the sense of the occasion.) For your formal
repetitions, this also is but foolishness and fantastic conceit, without any
ground at all; and long may you call upon your God (even like the Priest of
Baal,) before he grant what you would have; only this I know you may have
granted of God, even as you have framed him a person in your fancy, and
comprehended him in a place, so he answers you again by way of your fancy, by
suffering the Angel of Light, oftimes beguile you in making you believe you
have received a great deal of comfort, and refreshing in your souls from God,
when it is no more but the deceiveable spirit working in the imagination and
fancy.

I would have enlarged more upon this principle (in your Religion) but that I
would be at some other thing, and what is said of this may give you some sight
and glimpse of light, that you thereby may darkly see where about you are in
this your holy duty of prayer; for in case you come to see your self in this
particular, you shall know assuredly that you differ not from the Papists
themselves, for this your holy duty of prayer (as you call it) was first
instituted (according to times and forms) amongst them, and you from them,
have borrowed that fashion of prayer, and you and they are both one in the
substance though you differ in some circumstances in your forms, yet both of
you worship one and the same God in your hearts: But no more of this at present.

But to proceed, I speak a word of another principal ground of your Religion,
viz. your blind zeal in being so carried out to hear the Ordinances of God
as you call them, viz. your blind Priests, who have the lying spirit of error
in them, by which they have preached to you, and having bewitched you with
their Charms, they have made you believe lies instead of truth; and from hence
it is that you are altogether out of the way of the truth, both inwardly and
outwardly, and yet you have no more knowledge thereof, nor no more sense
thereof then Witches, whom the Devil have cheated (with his fantastic
delusions, so that they finding, or indeed conceiting, they find such comfort
and content in these delusions, (so that they cannot be sensible of the danger
they be in) even so are you cheated by your false Priests, and have no
knowledge at all of the dangerfull deceit you are in, but instead of finding
out their deceit you are in love with them for their deceiving; but no marvel,
for they have offered chanting powder to you, and you have received the same of
them, and have eaten it in your morsels, and so by the virtue (or rather
poysonable nature) thereof, you are made to go and run stark mad after them,
and in this mad zeal you have lived, and do live in, and in so doing you
think you do Gods service, and seek to honor him, by attending of his
Ordinance. O poor blind cheated souls, I pity you for your great ignorance
herein, for I was in your condition formerly, and I had as great zeal in that
way as any of you have, or can have, and I had the same thought of duty that
you have, yea and I doted in my madness upon these your false Priests, and did
very much adore them, I am sure as much as you can do, and I owned them as the
Ordinances, Oracles, and Ministers of God; but when the loving kindness of God
appeared to me, and that he was pleased to make the way of his truth known to
me, then did I see my great folly and madness, and then was manifested to me
the great deceit of the Priests, and more and more, as God was pleased to own
me, and teach me; so more and more they were discovered to me, and out of my
love and pity toward you, as my own flesh and blood, I give you warning of
them, for they are none of the Ministers of God, neither ever sent he them,
but they have been brought into their places by other means, as I have
somewhat showed you before; therefore as all the rest of your duties, and
performances taught you by them, is but by their own wisdoms invention, so is
this also; for this duty of hearing them is that which most of all exalts
them, for thereby they have both their praise, pride, and profit upholden, and
that causes them to beat so sore upon that very point, and lays load upon
your poor blinded Conscience, and by help of the lying spirit that is in them,
they have wrested all the Scriptures to, and for their own purpose in this
particular, and so have blinded you of the right sense of many places that
painted them out in their right colors, and have made use of them, and applied
them for the upholding of themselves, and for the opposing and putting down of
all who had more appearance of God in them then themselves; and beside, when,
or where they had, or have power, they took to them the help of the Sword of
Justice to uphold themselves, and destroy others who had God more clearly
manifested in them then themselves, and thus have they become the Man of Sin,
who exalts himself above God, or any that are called by the name of God, as
you shall see plainly opened afterward; but in the interim beware of them, and
think not that you perform any acceptable service to God in going to hear
them, for by this very act of yours you become transgressors against God, and
so he gives you up to be deceived, and the way of truth is hid from you.

But you may object and say, In case they be not sent Ministers of God, yet you
may hear them, for Christ bad the people hear the Scribes and Pharisees which
sat in Moses Chair, and yet they were such as were against Christ, and taught
the people to observe the Law, and yet themselves observed not what they taught
to others.

It is true, Christ bad the people observe and do whatsoever the Scribes and
Pharisees taught them, but yet he commanded not the people to hear them, but
only as you may infer from the other words; but in case he had in plain
words commanded them to hear them, that makes not for your hearing of unsent
Ministers in our days, as I shall plainly prove the same unto you. For in
these last days both the Law of Commandment, and the Law of Ceremonies, and
the observation of Circumcision was all in force until the death of Christ in
the flesh, but when he spoke these words he was in the flesh, and so the
observation of the ceremonial Law and Circumcision was tolerable, and to be
observed of the people; and those Scribes and Pharisees who then sat in Moses
seat, viz. to read the Law to the people (and to offer the gifts and
sacrifices, and had the work of ministering in the Temple) they were all of the
Tribe of Levi, and were they good men, or bad men that were of that Line, they
were to have that office by succession, and none other, as you may see, Numb.
8.14. And so long as the Law of Ordinances was in force, Christ would have them
observed, because they all were shadows of (and pointed at) himself, and the
reading of the Law could not be heard but by the Scribes, who were of the Tribe
of Levi; and as Christ was in the flesh the Law was not ended, neither the
succession of the Ministers; and as the ceremonial Law did hold out Christ
mystically, so Christ bare witness to the truth of the Law ceremonially, and
what was an Ordinance of God, and that Ordinance being in force that would
Christ have observed, and in this case he bad the Lepers go and show
themselves to the Priests, and offer to them what the Law required for their
being cleansed, Luke 17.14. and in this case he caused Peter to pay tribute to
Caesar, and he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, Mat. 5.7. and as
yet he had not fulfilled the ceremonial, for that was fulfilled by his death,
but the Ordinance of Circumcision he had fulfilled in being circumcised
himself, and the Law of the Commandment he had fulfilled in that he had not
sinned, and all those things contained in the Ordinances, he would have all the
people to observe to the utmost, until the time that all should be fulfilled
by his Death, and Resurrection, and the Priests of the Law was still to be
heard in reading, and giving out admonitions according to its requiring, as
Moses often times did unto the people in his days. But now the Ministers of the
Gospel has not the same calling into the Ministry, as we may see by Christ
himself, for he chused not any of the Tribe of Levi to be promulgaters of the
Gospel, neither any great learned men, but a few weak, silly, unlettered men,
and from that time forward those who were to be Ministers of the Gospel had not
their calling either by succession, or by greatness of Schollership; but those
was to be the Ministers who was called of God, and who had received the gift of
the Holy Ghost, and who had partaken of the Divine nature, by which they had
fellowship with the Father and the Son, and had the Mysteries of God made
known to them, and manifested in them, And what they had heard and seen, that
they declared to others, 1 Jo. 1.1, 2. and these have learned the voice of
Christ, and these can speak with the voice of Christ, and none other knows
his voice, and whosoever comes to the Ministry otherwise they are but
Thieves, and there is no engagement upon any to hear them, but rather to
refrain from them. For as for the Scribes, it is evident in Scripture they had
their calling into the Priesthood by Gods own appointment, and so by his
appointment they were to have it by succession, whether they were upright men
or not, as is aforesaid; but for your Priests they cannot plead succession,
neither can they show any calling they have at all but what was ordained by
men, and so they are no more but Ministers made and sent out by men; and
therefore as they are but the Ministers of men, you have no command to hear
them. And as they want the calling of, and by God, (the which the Scribes and
Pharisees had) that saying of Christ's does nothing belong to you, either by
command or example, whereby you are at all engaged to hear those your unsent
Priests.

But if any of them can prove it, that God commanded to make Universities, and
that those whom he would choose to speak in his name (and declare his will and
mind unto others) should be put so many years to that University, and then to
be confirmed by a Bishop, or a Presbytery, and then should they be fit men for
his work; I say, if any of them can prove this, though they be never so
wicked, I would have you to hear them, if they speak any thing that were but
like truth; but this I know they cannot prove, and therefore as they have no
calling of God, you ought not to hear them, for in hearing them you
countenance them, and uphold them contrary to the mind and will of God, and
for your rebelling against God in this very thing, God brings the curses of
these your Priests upon your selves, viz. the erring from the truth of God, and
hereby you are in danger to fall into the ditch with them; and this is like to
be all that you shall receive of God, for this your pretended zeal, and
Ignorant performing of this your holy duty of hearing Gods Ministers, as you
call them.

I could have run through all your holy duties, and performances which you
observe, upon which you have stated your religion, and could have proved them
of like nature as these I have already touched, but I let them pass at
present, and wish you to judge the rest by those that have been spoken of, and
I make no doubt but you shall find them all but Priests precepts, and you may
assure your selves if the fountain be corrupt, all the streams will prove
unclean.

And this my Message received from the Lord I here declare, and deliver unto
you, and whether you will hear it or not it is nothing to me, since I have
done what I ought to do; and in case they have had the persecuting hand; but
you for want of that case that any amongst you do believe what here is said,
and so desires further knowledge of the way of God, I know you shall not want
what you desire; but if any amongst you shall slight, or neglect what here is
presented to you, I know the same will be as a witness against you, and that
you shall have nothing to plead against God for matter of ignorance, seeing you
had a warning from him of your folly and blindness.

A word to those who are called Independents.
I Know if any of you (who are of the Church Fellowship of the Independent
order) shall happen to see these former lines presented to the order of the
Presbyterians, you will conclude that I have not spoken amiss in what I have
declared to them, both in speaking to their Priests, and to the People, for I
know many of you have the same both in your thoughts, and often times in your
words, and knowing how they are blinded in some of their forms, that has
caused you to differ and dissent from them in some things, and so in those
things you differ from them you judge them in feriour to you, and so arises so
many jarres betwixt them and you about your forms, and yet if you knew but the
truth as it is in Jesus (and from the knowledge of the truth you became to know
your own selves) you should not jarre so much with them as you do, for you,
and they, and the Papists too, are all brethren in the bottom, and all worship
one and the same God with your hearts, viz. the Creature, as I shall hereafter
show you; and you differ not but in your heads, because the God whom your
worship has his habitation there, and him you worship in your forms; and it
is about your formal worship you jarre, and whosoever worship God in forms
they cannot choose but jarre with those who be not in the same way of worship
with them; and from hence it is that so much blood becomes shed about Religion
so called, and indeed otherwise it cannot be, but that while men live in forms
they will be jarring, and live in contentions, and the effects thereof is
Murder and Blood; but where the power of God, and truth of God is manifested,
and the heart becomes established therein, it teaches men another work then
jarring with, and killing one another, and differing from them in matter of
judgment about a few weak out sid forms, which all is but acts of the
creature.

But be it known to you, I have not any intention at all to wrong you, or out
of any malice to write to you, but out of a friendly spirit give to you that
right which does belong to you in your form, and would if possible let you see
the emptiness in all forms, and would have you to press after that which is
the substance, and life, and bliss, and well-being of all souls, and this is
not comprehended or contained in any form (though never so well regulated, and
brought into the nearest conformity that possible can be according to rule, or
example in Scripture) yet I confess where men live in their weakness and
blindness of that which is the chief good, and cannot apprehend God as a
Spirit, and what worship he requires, nor can know Christ in the Divine
nature, but according to the Flesh; so long I say a form is tolerable, and
men ought to state a form according to the best rule and example in Scripture,
and in their time and place they may be good and useful, but out of their
time and place they become damageable and hurtful, viz. when they become to
be lived in, and life and peace found in them; and so men settling down in
them, then do they blind men of that which is the pure good, and so the good
(of, and) in these forms becomes evil, and this I would have all Formalists
to take heed of: But more of this you shall hear afterward; but now I proceed
to the thing intended.

It is true, I must confess your form is somewhat more tolerable, and to be
approved of in some things before those of the Presbytery order, because you
have not as yet been as rigid, and persecuting of those who have dissented from
your form, as they have been, but yet as you are but in a form, you know not
what you would do, in case you had but as much power in your hands as the
Presbyterians have had in some places, for they for these many years have had
power, and by that power have been on the suffering hand, until of late, and
as yet you are sensible of the suffering; but in case you live to have the
whole National power given into your hands, and thereby become strong, I know
then what you would do, even persecute also all those who would not worship
God in your form; but you think you would not do so, but I know you would do
so; for as you are but in a form, you would persecute if you had but the whole
power, but those whom you would persecute most would be those who had most of
the Divine nature in them; for of all other these shall be sure of persecution,
for one Formalist in some respect will bear with another, yet all who are but
in a form, of what form soever, will lend a hand to persecute those who live
in Christ, and Christ in them, for what form is the purest is but stated
according to Christ in the flesh, and all Formalists is but the Sons of the
bondwoman, and therefore they cannot cease to persecute the sons of Freedom;
but I know you cannot believe that ever you would do any such wickedness as
this, but alas, you know your own hearts no more then did Hazaell, when Elisha
told him what mischief he would do afterward to the children of Israel, 2
King. 8.13. yet at present there is no such thing apparent amongst you, but God
has used you as instruments, whereby there is more liberty to the freeborn
sons then has been heretofore, but this freedom as yet is not such to those
who are freeborn indeed; but if they come to disapprove of your forms, or
speak against them, they shall be sure of a snap by you if occasion serve for
it; but yet I confess this liberty and freedom of yours will give more
tolleration to twenty erring Sects, rather then to one who has the truth of
God truly manifested in him, in case he should come to teach your foundation,
but the best freedom of such is to keep themselves unknown, and then shall
none have power to hurt them, for indeed for all the liberty of Conscience that
is so much spoken of, yet if one should appear to declare the Mysteries of
godliness, and the great Mystery of sin and selfness in the sons of men, I am
sure he should not be long without persecution; but there be some amongst you,
yea even of your own form, who is grown so wise in their good thinking, that
they conceit, and strongly imagine that Christ's personal reign is already
begun upon the earth, because of such great wonders as they see brought to
pass, as they call them, and all is because of the liberty themselves have
gotten to use their own form with quietness, and this does so strongly work
upon the fancy of some wise fools, that from thence they conclude that the
Kingdom is given into the hands of the Saints, and that Christ shall reign
amongst them for a thousand years, and so have coted and wrested many
Scriptures to that very purpose; but if these poor blinded fools had but their
eyes opened rightly, they should rather cry out, and bid all the Nation beware,
for the Devil is let loose, and is come down amongst them, Revel. 12.12.

And this I am sure I can prove, for I can discover very much of his working
both in religion, and out of religion, not one form in England whatsoever it
be but I will prove somewhat of the Devil in it; nay, what Office or Trade
soever is in England, even from the highest to the lowest I can see the Devil
have a hand in it; yea, and in many things a great deal more of him in it then
ever; and if this be the beginning of the Personal reign of Christ, I marvel
what the height of his Kingdom will be; but I could wish those poor blinded
fools amongst you to turn their eyes inward, and look for the reigning of
Christ in them, and then I believe they shall find something that will hold
them doing, that they shall look no more for Christ without them; for the
reason why they are so carried out in their fancy is, because they found life
in the liberty of their form, and so was carried out from the meddling with the
evil that is in their own hearts, and therefore not knowing the Mystery of
selfnesse in them, the Devil has power to work in their fancy, and make them
look for such things to be fulfilled outwardly, as shall in their time and
order be fulfilled inwardly, and all this happens because of the form of
godliness without the power of God, and as yet they have not received the
truth as it is in Jesus, neither do they love the truth, nor can love it,
because they do not know it, and for this cause God sends such very strong
delusions, 2 Thessalonians 2.8, 9. But to let these pass with their fantastic
conceits, I will speak a word in general to you, as I find you stated in a
form, to which you keep as close in your order as do the Presbyterians, yea
and as hide-bound to your form as is the Papists; and though your form be
somewhat more regulated then the Presbyterians, yet do you not dissent from
their very form in most things you observe, but you shake hands with them with
the one of your hands, and the other hand you reach out to those of the
Anabaptists order, and so from the Anabaptists to you, and from you to the
Presbyterians, and so from the Presbyterians to the Prelatians, and so from the
Prelatians to the Popes, the collateral line is kept whole, and you are all
tied together with one chain consisting of so many linkes, and all of you
stand in one center, with your feet and your backs one toward another; but as
you dance the round you keep the compass, and not step out of it, and you all
dance after one Pipe, and can agree to hear its Music, for that melody
pleases you all; and this Musicioner is the Devil, and his Pipe is the World,
with its various notes of profit, pleasure, and praises, and when this Pipe is
sounded you all dance after it, as though you were all gone mad, and though you
all agree in this harmonious dance, yet are you all opposite one to another in
your manners, and breeding, and bringing up, in the courteous conges you make
in the saluting of him you call your God, and because of this difference you
cannot own one another, though you otherwise center all in one.

Yet you who are of the order of Independency, I must confess have something
amongst you in your forms which I honor and approve of you for it, as you are
Formalists, and that is, because you have not as yet tied, or constrained any
to observe the same way of worship with you, but as yet leaves every one to
his own freedom in way of worship, in case he or they be not open
blasphemers, so far all is well. And further, you are not altogether so
hide-bound to the unsent Priests as the Presbyterians be, though I know you
cannot as yet clearly see what they are, and therefore you cannot altogether
forsake them, and therefore are so far in bondage to them; I know likewise you
have some amongst you called Ministers, who is of somewhat more moderate
spirited men then those of the Presbyterian order, and that is somewhat more
enlightened in the knowledge of the truth, according to Christ in the flesh, but
yet very few I find amongst them who rightly know the truth, as it is in
Christ according to the Divine nature, yet I must confess some of them have
got a dark notion of the truth in the Divine nature, and yet all ends but in
a better regulated form, for as for the proper operation of the truth as it is
in Christ, I have not as yet seen any great effects either amongst you or your
Ministers, for the natural operation of the truth turns the heart out of
centering in forms, though never so well regulated; neither will the power of
the truth suffer the heart to be carried out to the world, or any created thing
whatsoever; but all the fears, cares, loves, and desires of any thing below
God is subdued in that soul, where the truth has taken possession in the
heart, and little comfort or content can that soul have in any thing created
or acted, where the truth as it is in Jesus is rightly known, and until the
truth in Jesus, viz. in the Divine nature be received (and from the receiving
thereof the knowledge thereof is attained) the heart of men is in bondage
either to the creatures, viz. the world, with the things contained in it, or
else the works and acting of the creature, viz. forms of Religion of some
fashion or other, and all things created, or acted, tends to bondage, and men
may be in captivity to either of these, or to both, and yet know it not, but
think themselves free; and the reason is, because they never found bondage in
their captivity, but rather freedom; and indeed while man lives in a form,
he knows not the bondage of that form, but finds freedom in the form,
yea more freedom then before he took the form upon him; for before he took
the form upon him, his Conscience had power to condemn, but now in the form
blind Conscience is satisfied, and so the heart has more liberty to center in
the created things, and yet can please conscience with acted things; and thus
the worship of God is roundly carried on in forms, and the world, and the
worship thereof goes on as roundly in the heart, and no bondage at all felt in
any of these things, no more then the Jews who boasted of being Abraham's seed,
and never were in bondage, Jo. 8. but the reason why bondage is not felt in
things acted, and things created is, because the truth of God was never truly
known amongst you, but I confess you have a zeal, but not according to
knowledge, and you have a knowledge, but not according to the truth, for that
knowledge you have is but according to Christ in the flesh, and that is but
either relative, or artificial; out of which arises an Historical faith, and
this points at, and closes with Christ as he was in the corporal, or humane
nature; and this you may have: and indeed none other can you have while you
live in forms, and this is not a knowledge in the heart, or a faith in the
heart, but this is altogether in the head, and the power of this says will not
close with Christ, nor can close with Christ in the Divine nature, for that
faith in the head according to Christ in the flesh is always an enemy to
Christ, as he is in the Divine nature, and the reason is, because that the
faith according to Christ in the flesh does not take away lust out of the
heart, but rather conformeth the heart to lust, and lust to the heart; and lust
is lovely to the heart, and the operation of the Divine nature, or faith
issuing out of (and from) the Divine nature, it kills lust in the heart, and
draws the heart with all its affections into the right center; and from hence
it is that many in their forms fall short of that which is the true center, and
becomes enemies of Christ; and yet none preach Christ, nor pretend Christ more
then those; but can you who are so completely congregated people, think that
you be any such as be the enemies of Christ? I doubt you will hardly believe
it; but let me tell you in plain terms, you had best beware, lest you be
found in the number of such, for whosoever are enemies to the Cross of Christ
shall be found enemies to Christ; but I fear you do not rightly understand
what the Cross of Christ is, and then how should you be friends to it, for I
assure you none knows the Cross of Christ but those who be rightly
incorporated into the Divine nature, and that is not an incorporating in
Kirk-fellowship as you call it, and while you are bound up in that
incorporating I may upon safe grounds conclude, that you as yet know not what
the Cross signifies.

But it may be that some amongst you would know what I mean by the Cross of
Christ, and would hear my opinion of the same, for I know this is a time
wherein man is addicted to hear new things, but yet I have not any new thing
to tell you, for what I have to say to you is no more but such old tales as
has formerly been told, both by Christ and his true follower, but when the
following of Christ ceased, then the old sayings and tales which was formerly
told grew out of fashion, and new sayings, and wise sayings, and learned
sayings, and studied fictions, being new, became to be in request. But to
answer what some of you may desire, I will bring old sayings to explain the
truth hereof to you, and these shall be the saying of the Apostle Paul, who often
insisted upon this very subject, viz. the Cross of Christ; but this was not
the wooden Cross upon the which the Body of Christ was crucified, that was a
type indeed of the other Cross spoken of by the Apostle, and in respect of the
reference the one had to the other, made the Apostle use that Metaphorical
speech (in sufferings) for suffering is this Cross, and by suffering we have
fellowship with Christ, and bear him company; but what suffering is it that
makes man have fellowship with Christ, and rightly may be called the Cross?
it is the daily self-denial of our own hearts with the inclinations,
thoughts, loves, and desires, which is daily tending, and bending down to the
creature in one kind or other, and the creature with its objects arising to
meet the affections to carry them after them, from the living and abiding in
God as he is a Spirit, and in Christ as he is in the Divine nature, or the
union of the Father, and in that union of the Father and the Son, to keep the
heart with its affections, that so the fellowship of the Father and the Son may
daily be the fellowship of our hearts, and this is that which ought to be the
center of all hearts, without which there can be no happiness in any form,
yea this leads the heart out of centering in forms, and this was that which
the Apostle would have those whom he wrote to, to enjoy, and for that end he
declared the truth as it was in Jesus, that so they might have fellowship with
them who were partakers of the truth, and he affirms, that their fellowship
was with the Father and the Son, 1 Jo. 1.2, 3.

And where the heart is rightly called, and rightly carried on in the way of
Christ (and those who were his followers) they rest not in Forms, and
Kirk-fellowships, for they find in themselves other matters to go about, and
that is to press after the fellowship of the Father and the Son, and their
longing, empty, mourning spirit is not, nor cannot be content with any thing
below that fellowship, and out of the great desire hereof the soul is set at
varience with all created things, or whatsoever may interpose or keep back the
Spirit from that which is the object of its desire, and when by pure,
inlightening the pure believing is fixed in the will, or heart, then I believe
there will be suffering in the daily striving to keep the created object from
the heart, and the heart from the creature by objects, and then shall appear
and be made manifest that which never did appear before, even the great body
of sin and selfnesse, which of necessity must be destroyed and crucified, and
made as dead as the Body of Jesus, when it hung dead upon the Cross of wood,
and this daily withstanding the body of sin in the heart and affections, is the
Cross upon which the body of sin must be crucified; for this body of sin (or
this selfnesse) in the heart must dye, or the soul must dye instead of it; and
it is not a few daily duties, or being incorporated into a congregated way,
that will destroy it; no, no, for this body of sin and selfnesse is of another
nature then so, for it will cost man the best blood in him before it be
subdued; and the Apostle who knew the evil of it, and the necessity of having
it crucified, could not rejoice in any thing more then in the Cross of Christ,
by which he was crucified to the world, and the world to him, Gal. 6.14. and
by this daily denying of the outgoings of the heart into the creature, (and
the incoming of the creature into the heart) man becomes planted into the
likeness of Christ's death, without which none can be partaker of his
resurrection, Romans 4.5. and being baptized into the death of Christ by way of
suffering in the self denial, the body of sin is destroyed, or the old man
crucified, Romans 6.6. and the Apostle counted but all things dung and dross in
comparison of knowing Christ in this manner, and to be found in him, and to
know the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his suffering, and a
conformity to his death, if by any means he might attain to the resurrection
of the dead, Phil. 3.10, 11, etc. this was the mark he aimed at, to which he
walked by the rule of the suffering and example of Christ, and in obedience to
his command, (which most was for self denial) he pressed hard after him in
the way of his suffering, that so nothing that was of self might live in him;
yea when he found that self got life and food by way of consolation, then was
he willing to part with consolation, and chose to bear Christ company in the
way of suffering, and took pleasure in so doing, 2 Cor. 12.10. But my friends,
know you what I mean by what is already said? do you know what is the Cross
of Christ, and what must dye upon that Cross? I hope you may strongly guess
at both; but friends, whether are you enemies to this Cross yea or nay? if you
be friends of the cross, then are you the friends of Christ, and then are you
in fellowship with him, either in suffering with him, or in reigning with him;
if in suffering with him, then do you obey his commands in taking upon you the
Cross, and following him to the death of the Cross; and if it be so that you
have communion with him in this way, then I know your minds is rent from, or
in renting from all created things whatsoever, no profit or gain in the world
is desired, nay the very thoughts of it is terrible to you; and in case it
sometimes dare approach to tempt, yet are you as quick in resisting and beating
down these thoughts, and then the windy praise of men is loathsome to you, and
little do you care for any approbation of any whatsoever; and then pleasures
of the senses, and the affections with, or in any thing created or acted is not
at all regarded; loss of friends, and increasing of foes is all one thing, yea
love of friends, and hatred of foes is all one; rich and poor are all one,
loss or gain all one, good report and bad report all one, duty performed our
unperformed all one, congregated or uncongregated all one, and whatsoever in
their name and nature may differ is all one; for why, God is but one and all,
and as man is in God by earnest of desire, viz. by being oned with Christ by
way of suffering, the will of man becomes transplanted out of varieties, and
differing of things into the one and only will of the Father; and this was that
which Christ himself in the flesh aimed at, and was completed in him, even
onednesse of will, and well-pleasednesse with suffering; and if you know the
Cross of Christ, and have taken it up, then are you his Disciples, and then he
teaches you to forsake your selves in all things. But I somewhat fear that
you follow not Christ in this way, no not so much as in an outward conformity,
for I doubt that superfluities of the outward man is not as yet forsaken of
you, much less the body of sin in the inward man in crucifying, for I can
believe you have learned Christ in another way then in following him by
suffering, by which the body of sin is to be destroyed, for that way you have
learned is to believe in Christ, and apply his suffering, and not to follow his
suffering, yea and that is a very cunning easy way, for by that way you can
close with Christ in what he suffered himself, and by an Historical faith can
believe that what he suffered was for you, and by that false faith can apply
Christ in the way of propitiation, and yet forsake him in the way of imitation,
and I promise you this is a handsome way if it were a sure way, for hereby God
and the world, Christ and the body of sin might stand all in one soul, and I
wish you were not cousened in this very point; and I assure you, that if you
have not followed Christ in the way of the cross, in the daily denying of your
selves both inwardly and outwardly (by that faith you have gotten, whereby you
apply Christ in his sufferings) you will be beguiled one day, for that faith is
but that which draws you into duty, and Kirk-fellowship, and not into the
fellowship of Christ, and herein you may prove the enemies both of Christ and
his Cross; but let me call to your remembrance another old saying out of date,
or at leastwise out of request, and so but little heeded, and yet it shall be
one of his who was a follower of Christ in the way of the Cross, and this was
Paul's, and let us see and judge by it who are the enemies of the Cross; and
when he gave out the saying, he gave it out with weeping tears, for though he
had preached Christ crucified so much, and himself walked by the same example,
pressing forward to the price of the high calling, viz. by bearing the cross
of Self-denial, and so bearing Christ company, having fellowship with him in
his suffering, by which he was to have the body of sin and selfnesse
destroyed, that thereby he might live in the lovely fellowship of the Father
and the Son, and this he aimed at, and wished those who were of the same spirit
with him, that they should all mind the same thing, and walk by the same
rule, and follow him as he followed Christ, and then in pity and
tender-heartednesse, and weeping, he tells them of those who were the enemies of
the cross, and painteth them out in their right color, and gives them their
portions, in the first place setting the effect before the cause, vid.
destruction, and then sets a threefold character upon them, as the cause of
their destruction, viz. Whose belly is their god, who glory in their shame, who
mind earthly things, Phil. 3.18, 19. This is an old saying little heeded, but
mark it well, for here I call it to a new remembrance, I hope God is what he
was then, Christ is now what he was then, the Cross is now what it was then,
the enemies of the Cross is such now as was then, the effect is such now as
was then; therefore my friends of the congregated order, judge your selves by
these three characters, whether you be enemies or friends of the cross yea or
nay: but it may be you hardly know how to judge your selves by them, therefore
for your sakes I will explain them a little, that thereby you may the better
judge your selves by them; but I will be short, and not tedious in explaining,
that you may be the more capable to understand; then mark the first character,
viz. Whose belly is their god, etc. This may seem an abrupt saying, and they
were sore besotted and foolish, who made a god of their belly; and it seems
such a foolish thing to do so, that few can conceive that they themselves do
any such thing; but in case there be any such who do that foolish act, yet
every one can excuse himself, and think it may belong to some other, but mark
well what shall be said, and see which of you can excuse himself when the
truth of the saying is opened. Well, what is God? he is the chief delight, and
chief treasure, and those that knows him does choose him so, and he is their
chief delight, and chief treasure, and so their hearts is with him, and all
its affections, in seeking, loving, fearing, and desiring, etc. and to witness
this truth our Savior said, Where your treasure is there will your hearts be
also; and the heart can no way be discovered but by its effects, viz.
inclinations, thoughts, fears, cares, loves, and desires, etc. then consider
whether God, or your bellies be your god, or chief treasure, and whether you
own and worship more with your hearts, and your affections; if God be your
God, and chief treasure, then your hearts with its affections is in him, and
with him all the day long, and is worshipping him either in prayer, or praises,
and all your thoughts taken up with things of the same nature, and things of
the world is but a great vexation to your spirits, and you look but upon them,
but as they serve for your mere necessity, and though it be mere necessity
(in respect of your frail bodies) yet even to have your thoughts drawn out of
God, if never so little, yet this is a detriment and trouble to your spirit,
because these thoughts do somewhat pierce between you and your God, so that
your whole conversation cannot be in Heaven, this I know will be no little
trouble to you if God be your God; and the Apostle who worshipped God, and had
chosen him to be the chief treasure, said, that both he and his upright
followers had their conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20. and those to whom he
had preached Christ, and his cross, and the rising again with him (lest they
should learn the same by comprehension, and relative believing) he gives
them a caveat in a negative speech, to which he added an affirmative command,
and said, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, etc.
and set your affections on things above, etc. Col. 3.1, 2. and God gives out
his command to love him with the whole heart; and Moses in declaring Gods
command to the people, delivers the same to them in like manner, saying, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, etc.
and thou shall cleave to him, Deuteronomy. 10.20. which intimates that there would be
something that would draw, and pull the heart from God, for he knew the body of
sin would be stirring, and the creature would be creeping into their hearts,
by which they should be in danger to be pulled from the true God, and therefore
he bid them cleave to him; and the Apostle who had chosen God for his God, and
knew the subtlety of the body of Sin and self, he was cautelous of the same,
and kept manfully to the warfare between the creature and the heart, whereby
whatsoever sought to interpose between God and his heart, that he beat down,
yea if it were but in a thought, or in an imagination, as you may see, 2 Cor.
10.4, 5. and in so doing every thought was brought into the obedience of
Christ, and this was by bearing the cross under which he rejoiced, and so
became the friend and companion of Christ.

If you can witness to this in your own spirits, and your hearts have chosen
God for your God, and that your daily exercise be in God, and your heart with
its affections be thus ordered, then God is your God indeed, and you are the
friends of Christ, and his Cross, otherwise take it for granted, you are of
those whose belly is their god: for the belly has a large signification if I
would but touch upon every particular thereof, yet I omit the most of what may
be said thereof, and will only give you a short touch thereof; as for the
belly, it is naturally consuming, unsatiable, requiring more then is meet for
it, and most of the Senses is as servants to it, and does usurp upon the
affections to serve it also, and where it is the god, it does command obedience
to its requirings, and so the affections in obedience does invent desire, and
seek what may be answerable to and for its requirings, and so the affections
(by the communion they have with the Senses, and the command over them) does
cause them to help on this work, and through the commanding power of both, the
other members of the body is carried on to act in that obedience also; and thus
is the whole man in action about the service of the Belly, and so man is made
to invent, think, and desire, and act about those things which is created for
satisfying the Belly: from hence it is that the belly being the chief god, that
all these superfluities is provided for it, and so many several dishes, when
one of them would serve Nature; and for upholding the worship of this god, what
care, fear, and desire, labor, and watching, and waiting, yea some for the
worship and service they owe to this god, sacrifice all their whole estate, and
some for this service will oppress their fellow creatures, and some for this
service labor day and night, both in body and mind, and all little enough to
satisfy this hungry god, and whatsoever belongs to the back has a relation
to the belly, and these two agree in one in their requirings, as they become
god, and so (to and) for their worship through the commanding power of lust,
put in action all the affections, senses, and members of the body and soul;
and so it is, that so many foolish fantastic fashions, and superfluous habits
becomes worn in these days, so that I much fear this god has great power,
and is much worshipped in our time, yea more then heretofore.

And as men have power in their hand, viz. the riches of this world, they
become the greater providers for this gods sacrifices, and then they become to
have the second character set upon them, viz. They glory in their shame; is not
this to be seen in our days amongst most sorts of those we call Professors,
how they are carried out to worship Back and Belly, as is before said, but
especially amongst those who be rich in the world, having such sumptuous and
excessive tables, and all things suitable, for the upholding of the lust of the
eye, and yet do they not see very many of their fellow creatures like to
starve, both for meat and clothing, and yet they can look upon them with a
light look, and very little compassion, and the reason is, that which they have
they must keep for sacrifices for their god, and the rest they must keep for
themselves to glory in, for the very sight of rich superfluities lifts up the
heart, and the thoughts thereof does yield them comfort, and the having and
possessing of these things wins the praise of such fools as themselves, and
in all these they glory, and yet all they glory in is but their shame, yea and
abominable shame too, both in the eyes of God, and in the eyes of those who are
weaned from such things, and by the Cross have crucified these things; Is it
not a shame to have the creatures of God in abundance, and so many like to
starve for want? and yet the bowels of compassion shut up against them, how
dwells the love of God in such? and in the having of these things do they
not puff up the Persons that have them, above their fellow creatures? and so
respects persons, and accounts much of such as themselves, and despise
those who be inferior to them, Jam. 2.3. is not this a shame, and yet how many
does glory herein? Nay, how many various pleasures and delights is there that
men glory in, and yet a shame to be taken up with them? How many shameful
gloryings belongs to those who are the enemies of the Cross, who have their
belly for their God? but I let them pass, and come to the third character,
viz. Who mind earthly things; Its love to that which is the god has the
mind, and no marvel if the Belly be the god, if the mind be set on earthly
things; and this is that which will try all souls whether they have God, or
their belly for their god; for though the belly cannot devour all in the
worshipping of it, yet that which is not offered in sacrifice to it, that
becomes to be gloried in; and for upholding that worship, and that glory, the
mind must of necessity be carried out to meddle about earthly things, for it
is these that must uphold all the glory, and the worship of that god, and
though the glory, and the worship of that god be the best performed by, and of
those who are rich, yet those who are not so great and rich in the things of
the world, I make no doubt but their wills is as bent to worship that god, and
to glory after that manner, and its possible the will may be acceptable for the
deed, and where the will is led out in defiring of those things, I am sure the
mind is set about earthly things; for where there is any god (but the true
God) either in possession, or in desire, the mind will be constantly carried
out about that which will please their god, and two Gods no man can serve, for
he will love the one, and hate the other, Mat. 6.24. and those who would own
the true God for their God, was not to have their minds set, or carried out to
seek any thing below him, no not so much as to have a thought of what should be
the next day; and all that any should look for in this world, is no more then
needful food and raiment, and this must not be had with either fearing,
caring, or desiring, but by way of believing, and the mind wholly carried out
in seeking the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof; these are old
worne-out sayings of Christ, and they being worn out of date with oldnesse,
they are but little heeded, for we have got a new way to the Kingdom of God,
by which we can carry the world, and the body of sin and Selfness, and duty,
and all together, and this way is by the false faith framed by the brain
knowledge of the learned Priests, and seeing they have invented such a fine
way, how can fools but love them, and think themselves happy if they can but
get incorporated into their congregations; but weigh what is hinted at before,
and see who are the enemies of the Cross, and I believe you shall find no
want of such in your congregations; and indeed I do not marvel that the
Cross has so many enemies, seeing the virtue of it would take away sin, and
destroy Self, and men loving Self so well, they cannot abide to go to heaven
without it, and this newfound way leads to heaven another way, in which
Self and all goes together.

My friends, who are of the Independent congregations, consider with your
selves whether or no you be the enemies of the Cross or not, and do not so
much pretend Christ, and talk of Christ with your tongues, and yet be enemies
to his Cross in your hearts; I know what I speak, and have some grounds for
what I say, I know where you stand, and what is your worship well enough, and I
have just cause to fear that many in your congregations be more enemies then
friends to the Cross, but I am partly persuaded that your ignorance is some
cause thereof, and the cause of your ignorance is by reason of many of your
Ministers, for I know you have abundance of them who are of the false-hearted
crew, who through cunning of their wit have played the Juglers, and seeing your
order come into request, and like to carry the sway in these times, and fearing
to be losers by such alterations, through their cunning have transformed
themselves into another shape, and so have crept in amongst you; and though
they seem to be something, yet they are but the same they were before in their
heart; and I know they have power by the great hand of their God, who first
made them Ministers, to Metamorphize themselves into any likeness, but beware
of them, for they will keep you still in ignorance, and by dissembling deceive
you; for they are many of them the enemies of the Cross of Christ, yea, and
have wrested the mind of God in the Scriptures, contrary to what he aimed it
for, and have made use of it for their own back ends, and have taught the
people contrary to the truth; and so have kept them in ignorance until this
day, and by their means the knowledge of the Cross has ceased these many
years, and so there has been the falling away from the knowledge of the truth:
And this the Apostle Paul saw clearly in his time, and told the people, that
the day of Christ should not come before such a fall, 2 These. 2.3.

I would have given you a full description of the ensuing mystery in this
Chapter, but that I would not be too tedious to you, nor too much offensive to
the order of Priests; for I assure them, they are mightily included in it, and
the true opening of it would vex them all to the very heart, and what I have
already written to them, shall suffice at present; but in case I be called to
write again, I profess whatsoever the Lord shall make known to me, on their
behalf, shall undoubtedly be uttered, though at present I have prevailed to
forbear.

And you my Friends, who are of the congregated order of what parts soever,
whether more in knowledge, or less in knowledge, this I desire of you, To aim
to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and press hard after him
who is gone before, who left us all an example of suffering; and be not
beguiled with a pretense of love of Christ, and union with Christ, before you
have born his Cross, by which the body of sin in you becomes crucified; and
that the things created, and things acted, have lost their power, so that your
spirits is not in bondage to any of them; for I assure you so long as the body
of sin and selfness is uncrucified in you, you shall not enjoy much of the
fellowship of the Father and the Son, pretend what you will. I will not enlarge
any more at present, but bid you farewell

Another word to the Anabaptists, so called.
FRiends, I mean not to dispute about the goodness or badness of your Form; for
I have oftentimes done that before, when I had no better employment: As for
your Form, I know well enough what it is, and what you can reap out of it, I
will neither commend it, nor discommend it, but leave that to your selves and
others; and as it is a form, so I let it stand in the room of a Form, and I
take it for no more, nor any more is it, though never so well regulated; but
this I know, that you may make an Idol of your Form, as do all other
Formalists; and where any form becomes idolized, the same is abomination to
the Lord; for though your Form were delivered to you by the very verbal speech
of God himself, as the Law was to Moses; yet when an Idol is made of that which
God declares (and would have observed) even that very same becomes
abomination to him; and the reason is, because when an Idol is made of any
Form, then the heart is thereby turned from God, and centreth in the Creature;
for the mind of God in all forms, and in all dispensations, shadows, and
types, was still to draw the heart of man more near to himself, and yet in all
forms, dispensations, shadows, and types, the hearts of men have been further
drawn from him; and the reason was, and is, because the mind of God (under all
these dispensations) was unknown, and then men not knowing the mind of God in
these, they became to dote upon the thing, and then the heart was ever carried
into the Creature. Then you who are my Friends of mine own flesh and blood, who
have betaken your selves into the Form of Rebaptising, and so conceive your
selves the only people of God, because of your well regulated form, and you do
so Idolize your form, that you conclude, that of necessity men must be brought
into your form, before they can have fellowship, and communion with Christ; and
that all experience is nothing but delusion, if it be not attained to under
your form. How now friends, know you where you are, or into what Region you are
flown, in your high, and well fledged conceits? are you in the first, second,
or third Heaven, or mounted unto the top of some high spired steeple, and so
from thence you look down, and see all men below you, seeming but as little
children in comparison of your selves; but yet take heed to your selves, for
those that you see walking below you, though they may seem inferior to you, yet
you know not but they both stand, and walk as safely as you; for it is possible
while you are looking down at others, and judging them for their being so below
you (and seeming so little in comparison of your selves,) that your selves may
catch a fall, from your high mounted, or conceited steeple, yea, such a fall as
will lay you level with the ground: I wish it were not lower.

Is this your Form, the Gate through which all must enter that go to Heaven? I
am sure you conclude no less; but if your conclusions could be proved true, it
were a very easy door to enter in at: But what ever you may conclude of your
Form, I am right sure, that both you and all other shall pass through a
straighter gate then your form, before ever they shall enter the Kingdom of
God. I know you find, or rather think you find freedom and liberty in your
Form, and so would engage others to be partakers of the same with you; yet
while you think you have liberty, and preach, and pretend the same to others, I
can prove that you your selves are the servants of sin, John 8.34.

I confess, for that which you observe as a main principle in your form, viz.
Baptism, is near the rule of Scripture, according as Types was instituted in
time of Scripture; and therefore for the using of it after your own order, I
leave it to your own freedom; but yet I would have you to know, that if your
spirits be not carried out of, and beyond it, into the thing signified; you
shall all perish in your form, and your form it self shall perish, as shall all
other forms of what kind soever; and so shall all things acted, ordained, or
created, all shall perish; for they were begun with time, and in time, and time
it self shall wear them out, and time it self shall perish also: then in what
or where shall the spirits of men be happy and find rest? therefore I say, woe
to those souls who live in, and contend for any thing that has its being in
time, though it be never so pure an Ordinance; for all things ordained, acted,
or created, was provided to bring the spirits of men out of these things, into
that which cannot be comprehended in time, neither is ordained, or created.

And all Forms must, and shall be swallowed up in that which is no form,
according as we understand forms, and all created things shall be swallowed up
in that which is uncreated, and all actions shall be swallowed up in that which
never acted, as we act, nor as we understand acting; but I will not fly too
high from that I would be at, for my intention is not to meddle with things too
hard for your understanding, but rather condescend to your own capacity, and
speak a word with a tongue which you may well understand, in case your form
have not stopped your ears, and made blind your eyes, and made gross your
hearts, that so you can neither hear, see, nor understand.

Well, now to the thing intended, viz. to speak a word of that which is your
main principle point in your Form, and that is Baptism. I know what ground you
have for this act, viz. From example of the primitive time, as also in
obedience to the commands of Christ. Its true indeed, Christ gave out such a
command to his Disciples, as he did for the observing of the Type instituted at
his last Supper, of which I have spoken something formerly: But my friends, do
you know what was the mind of Christ, in giving out command for the
observation? If you do say, you know his mind, I say you walk not according to
what you say you know, as will appear afterward in speaking more fully hereof;
but in case you know not the mind of Christ in this command, then take it for
granted, you cannot yield right obedience to Christ in your observing of this
command; but in your obedience in the same, you detract from Christ, and so
become his enemies, in this your obedience.

I have something touched this Type of Baptism before, yet here I proceed a
little further in illustrating the same more fully.

In the first place, I would have you to observe that Baptism is threefold, or
there is a threefold Baptism, and these three Baptisms had their times, places,
operations, and effects, and all these three did succeed and follow one another
in order, and when Christ gave out command for the observation of Baptism, he
did give out three several names, viz. the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
in which three names, or into these three names, was all persons to be
baptized. Now the threefold Baptisms, and their times, places, operations, and
effects had relation to, and did accord to the witnessing of the threefold
names, with their times, places, operations, and effects; and these threefold
Baptisms according to the threefold names in their times, places, operations,
and effects, all tended to one and the same end, viz. To draw the sons of Adam
into that which is the choice and chief good, out of all things acted or
created, which all have but a seeming good in them, as shall be made appear in
speaking of them in order.

As for the first of these Baptisms, it was but a dark Type, under which the
first name Father became to be made known to the people in that time, under
that dispensation; and in those days the threefold Name was not so much as
heard of, but the threefold Name was all included in one Name, and that was I
am, Exodus 3. whereby is to be understood the whole Deity undivided, or the
perfection of the Godhead, undistinguishable in the essentiality of its Being,
and that nothing was, but as it had an appearance of its Being in that which
was the substantial Being it self: and this I am, or undividable Deity, or
substantial Being, in our language we call God; and so when God would have
himself further known and manifested to the sons of men (then formerly) he
selected out of many, some few to know and own him as the only God, so that
his Name might be spread abroad in all the world, by the great wonders which he
would do for them.

In which time, upon the request of Moses, God gives out a more large
signification of his name, as follows, The Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, abounding in goodness and truth. Keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving transgressions, and iniquity, and sin. And will in no wise clear the
guilty, etc. Exodus 34 6, 7. Now all these are the Name or names of God, beside
other several names he puts out himself by, according as time and occasion
made way, for the declaring of his Name further to the Sons of men, and so upon
the time of the punishing men for sin, he has the name Justice; and from the
displeasure he has at man for sin, so is his name anger, and as he has a
continual watching and seeming eye toward those whom he would have to
continue in his love, he has the name of Jealous, and according to his
maryellous works he has the name of Wonderful, etc. and so it is, that
according to the present work, and present occasion, so is his name, whether in
his love, or in his anger. So when he would have his name known (or the Sons
of Men to know him by his name) and so to own him for their God, he made
himself known to them in outward acts, and wondrous works, which he showed
to them in the delivering them out of the bondage of Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, and so brought them by a strong hand out of Egypt, through the
great Sea, guiding them by the Angel of his presence in the cloudy pillar, etc.
at which time the first Baptism had its beginning, though not in name, yet in
its nature, and so the Apostle told the Corinthians, That he would not have
them to be ignorant, how that all the fathers passed through the sea, and were
under the cloud, and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea,
1 Cor. 10.1, 2. and the reason why he calls that work by the name of Baptism
is, because of the nature of the work, and so in the time of the Gospel, when
Baptism had the name put upon the act, it was derived from the nature of the
act, and though the forms in these three Baptismes differ in respect of time,
yet all of them have that name in respect of their natures, and the nature of
Baptism in its operation in the spiritual signification, is a departing from
one thing and closing with another, or the dying to one thing, and the living
to another; or the consuming of one thing, and the establishing of another, in
all which suffering is included, as you shall see hereafter; now the people who
underwent the first Baptism, by it they were preserved from the danger of
their enemies, and in the terrible work of this Baptism the people was in
great fear of being destroyed by their enemies, because they had departed from
the service of them; but when they had fully undergone this Baptism, viz.
through the red Sea, and came safe unto the other side, then were they glad,
and believed in the Lord, who had manifested his name unto them, and was then
obedient unto Moses, and was willing to be led by him, expecting shortly to be
conveyed into the Land of promise, etc. and in this respect the Apostle said,
They were all baptized into Moses, viz. they were brought out, or made to
depart and forsake Egypt, and by the terrible Wonders of God in the
manifesting of his name, brought through the Sea, and made willing to yield
obedience unto the Word and Commands of God, delivered to them by Moses; and in
further manifesting of his name appeared to them in a terrible manner upon
Mount Sinai, and gave out the Law to Moses, who was to declare the same unto
the people, and the people was to be obedient unto that Law, and unto all other
Ceremonial types that then was to be delivered unto them; in all which was
contained the first Covenant of Works, and in all the time of the Mosaicall
Law, or first Covenant of works, there was no other but the name of God, to
be known amongst men; neither any other name by which men were to be saved,
for then the Godhead was whole, and undivided into the two other names, viz.
Son, and Holy Ghost (as was afterward) yet all the vertuall properties of the
other two was included in the first name or names of God, and was the same then
which they be now, and in the vertuall communion there was never any division
at all, but as dispensations had their proper place, so God put out himself
into distinct properties, according as he would have the Sons of Men to have
a more clear manifestation of himself, etc.

And so it was, that from the time that the Fathers were Baptized, as is
somewhat said before, all their succeeding children was to be taught the
knowledge of the wondrous work which he has done, where he first made his
name known to them, and was to own no other name, but the name of that God,
and so taught all his Laws and precepts to them, that they should walk in
obedience to the requirings of the same.

And in all the time of the dispensation under the Law the whole Deity was
named by the name of God, or Father; but when the fullness of time was come,
that God would appear in a dispensation more clear, by which the Sons of
men might the better know him, then it was that the Godhead in its properties
divided it self, and united it self to Flesh, and so became the distinction
in the Godhead, but yet the Godhead was the same it was before in the unity,
and in this new dispensation; John Baptist begun the second Baptism, in which
he bare witness to the truth of the distinct property (of God the Father) viz.
Christ, or the Son of God, and that he was the Lamb of God which took away
the sins of the world, Jo. 1.29. And as Moses was the Messenger of God, sent by
him, to declare his whole name, (or the whole Godhead in his name) unto the
people, when he would deliver them out of the Egyptians bondage in the time of
the first Baptism; so John the Baptist was his second Messenger, sent by him
to declare and bear witness of the distinct property of God, and to show to
the people the name and work of God in that distinct property, viz. Christ the
Son of God. And as God did appear more near to manifest himself to men in
his Son, so the office of John was to bring men out of, and from under that
dark dispensation under the Mosaicall observations, into a more near
conformity, and clear beholding of God, in that present dispensation under the
Son; and for this very purpose both the preaching and acting of John tended,
to which God himself gave testimony also in the act of John's Baptism, by the
appearance of another of his distinct properties, viz. the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3.
and from hence it was that the name of the Son was added to the name of the
Father; and as the whole Godhead stood in one name in the former dispensation,
and in making that name known, and in giving out Laws and Ordinances to be
observed in that name, in which the Covenant of works was in force; that name
was terrible, insomuch that the people could not abide to hear God speak to
them; yea Moses himself feared that great Majesty, and quaked exceedingly,
Heb. 12.21. But when the Godhead had in its property divided it self into the
second dispensation, into the property of Christ, and so the second name of the
Son being to be declared, that name was Love, and Peace, and God with us,
Mat. 1.23. or God well pleased, and reconciled to us. And the Baptism of John,
it was called the Baptism of repentance, Acts 13.24. in which is included
sorrow, and departing, or forsaking of something, or a dying to something; and
to close with, or to live in another thing, and that was a forsaking, or dying,
or departing from the former observations wherein they lived under the first
Covenant of works, and to close with, and live to the second appearance of God
in that present dispensation wherein he would show himself in a more quiet and
peaceable manner then he had showed himself in the former.

And John, who made the way for, and pointed at Christ as he was in the flesh,
he likewise bare witness of, and foretold what Christ would do in the
spirit, viz. Baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, etc. Mat. 3.11. and
the beginning of this Baptism was after the death, resurrection, and ascension
of Christ, as may be seen in Acts 2.2, 3, etc. now this third Baptism was more
excellent then the two former, and this was the Baptism of Christ, by the
out-pouring of the Holy Ghost, and the work and operation of this Baptism is
to burn up, consume, or destroy all the remainder of what was left by the
other two former Baptismes, and likewise to comfort and establish, and make to
live in a more safe and sure union of the thing closed with; and from hence the
third name is added to the two former, and thus the whole Godhead in its
properties divided it self into the three names, viz. Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and in these three names, or into these three names was all persons to
be Baptized, and Christ gave out his command to the very same purpose, Mat.
28.19.

And as these threefold Baptismes did accord with the threefold names in
time, operation, and effect, in the outward manifestation in order, one
following or succeeding another; so they held out, or typified the inward and
spiritual succeeding one another, and this inward work and effect of these
three names, and Baptismes, is that whereby and wherein the life and happiness
of all souls consist, in having the same completely fulfilled in them. And as
I have given a little hint of the outward names, and Baptisms, in their times
and dispensations, succeeding one another, so I proceed to speak a word of
that which is the chief work, effect, and end of all these in their inward or
spiritual order of succeeding.

Therefore observe the Mystery of the first Baptism, or the Baptizing into the
first name (Father) in the first dispensation under the Law, as God in his
orderly proceeding calls, and manifests himself to us.

Now when the Lord God would deliver the children of Israel out of Egypt, from
under the bondage of Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, and to make his name known
to the people, as the whole Deity stood in the one name, so his name was made
known to them in a wonderful and terrible manner, as is before said. So it is
with us, when God begins to draw our souls out of Egypt, and Pharaoh, and
the Egyptians bondage, viz. the outward or gross actings, in which the Devil
and our Lusts have kept us in bondage, amongst the sons of men in their
common condition living in the world; and this God does by the manifesting of
his great and terrible name in the first work of the soul, whereby the soul
becomes roused up, and made to stir, and look about it self, and to
consider in what bondage it is, by being so grossly carried out into the
disobedience of the requirings of the commands of God; and from hence it is
that God appears in the terriblenesse of the condemning property of the
soul, viz. Conscience, and makes his wonderful works, aad wrathful
displeasure known in the corruptible parts of man, which keeps the spirit in
under its captivity, and this God does by the hand of his servant Moses, viz.
by sending the Law of Commandment out, and setting it home to the heart, and
yet how loath is the Devil (who has his Kingdom in the inferior parts of
the soul) to let the spirit of man go out of his captivity, from serving him
and his people, viz. gross sins, and outward transgressions, and from eating
of his Onions and Garlic, viz. in having complacence in those sins, and the
love of the fellowship of the men of the world, and eating of their dainties,
viz. pleasures of all sorts, which concerns the satisfying the corruptible
part in man; but when God goes on in his wondrous works, and showed upon
Pharaoh, viz. The Devil and his people, then the Israelites is made willing to
depart, viz. the noble faculties of the soul and affections from thence
proceeding, and when the first borne becomes slain, viz. the strength of the
will begotten in it by the Devil, then the Devil is forced to let the noble
faculty depart from the bondage of the Lusts beforesaid; then out they go to
the red Sea, whereat the people was in greater strait then ever, viz. though
the noble properties and the will be going, and departing out of the bondage
beforesaid, yet the Devil raises up all his forces, and pursues the noble
faculties of the soul, thinking to take them again into bondage in that
strait at the red Sea, viz. when the noble faculties is in departing out of
sin, then it is that temptation is more raised up then ever, and does so heap
up, and flow before the understanding, that to pass over them there is no hope
or likelihood to reason, in which strait the Devil with his army drives on
apace in the Irascible faculties, and comes on the back side of the noble
faculties of the soul, and so raises despair and secret fear, out of which
anger and passion is produced, and in the operation of which, in that great
distress of the soul, wishes it self, that it had never stirred out of its
former condition, rather then to have moved thus far, and to be swallowed up
in that present sad condition.

But when God will have his name more clearly manifested, then does he divide
the Sea, viz. all these great over-flowings of temptations, and so the noble
faculties and the spirit passes through them all, and the Devil, and sin, and
despair, is all overwhelmed in those temptations, and this is the great work
of God in the defeating of the Devil, and destroying him and sin in the same
way, wherein he thinks to destroy the noble faculties of the soul; and when
the noble faculties becomes thus delivered, having undergone this first
Baptism, or suffering, or plunging as before said, then does man begin to
fear the name of that great God, who has done these great things for his
soul, and so becomes to be obedient to Moses, viz. to the outward requiring
of the Commandment, and knowing God to be so great and terrible, the fear of
his name does cause man to yield obedience to his Law, and in the transgressing
or going astray from its requirings, the same appearance of God is manifested,
as was at the giving out thereof, and this terriblenesse of God is known in
the condemning part of the soul, viz. the Conscience, and so in the obedience
to God in his terrible manifestation in the first Baptism, under the first
dispensation, man acts in that fear to all the outward requirings of the
letter, and seeks thereby to assuage and allay the appearance of that anger,
and goes about to please God, and satissie Justice by outward sacrifices, and
so it is that man living under this dispensation, and acting zealously therein,
the condemning part or conscience becomes somewhat pacified, and quietness
begins to appear; and from hence it is that men draw conclusions, that God
is well pleased with their Sacrifices; and as under this first Baptism in the
first dispensation (wherein is contained the first Covenant of works) men
apprehend God in terror, in the manifesting the whole Deity in the one Name,
they become to yield obedience accordingly, viz. in a fearful servile manner,
like flint stone and the steel, who being forcibly beat together, from which
fire is produced, even so the heart of man in the first dispensation is hard as
the nether millstone, and will not yield any obedience, except the hand of God
by the Hammer of the Law smite upon the same, and thereby force out obedience,
to what God requires in the first dispensation.

So in time when the heart is made more willing and answerable to the
requirings under the first dispensation, then by the obedience there-under man
has peace, as is before said, from whence he concludes, that God is well
pleased with him; and so from these two grounds, viz. The terror or anger of
God (out of which arises the fear of Hell) and out of the life and peace of
conscience, (out of which arises the hope of Heaven) man works all his
works, and so is under the condition of the first Covenant of works, in which
the Deity stands in one Name, though we in our days know not the mystery
hereof; for when any soul is but under the first Covenant of works, he can talk
of the Deity as it is divided in its properties, but that is because of the
living in this present dispensation under the Gospel, wherein we have received
a Historical relation of Christ, and the Holy Ghost; by which men have got the
relative knowledge of the threefold name of the Deity, and yet know not the
power, and proper working of the Deity in the threefold names; but blindly
looking upon them as they were put out in the outward Types, and so make a
humble jumble of them according to the history or relation of the same; and
from hence it is, that men talk and Preach, and confer of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and yet live not in the power of what they preach or speak; for
they have not known the operation, and proper work (in their souls) of the
Deity in the threefold names, or three distinct properties of the Deity, in the
orderly manifestation of it self in the conditions suitable for the same.

But those who lived in the time of the first dispensation under the Covenant
of works, where they had the Law of Commandment, and the Ceremonial Law also,
and the Ordinances therein contained, they were not in the dispensations of the
Deity in its distinct properties, as we be, but the distinct properties was all
included in the whole essence of the Deity, viz. Christ, and the Holy Ghost,
was both one in the Father, and the Father in them, and all but one God; and
though the Godhead was thus whole in it self, yet God let out himself in
distinct properties into the souls of the upright people under the first
dispensation, and by the very same way they were saved as we be, and did enjoy
God in the same way that we do, though not in the same dispensation; for though
they lived under the Covenant of works, and Ceremonial observations, yet those
souls whom God had let out himself to in his distinct properties of mercy, and
loving kindness, and wisdom, by which they knew God, and felt God, as he was in
those properties, though they did observe these things in that time, yet they
knew that salvation was not in these things, but in the observing of them their
hearts was led and drawn out of (and beyond) the things they observed, and was
fixed fast in the enjoyment of the thing signified in, and by these things, as
we may see by David, Solomon, and Isaiah, and Jeremiah, and all the other
Prophets, and all other people in these days; but those who became blinded of
that which was the mystery of these things, by reason of the devil, sin, and
selfness, they became to live in the things they observed, and knew nothing of
God in the mystery, and out-letting of himself in his distinct properties; and
from hence it came to pass, that their hearts was carried out to the Creature,
and yet thought to please God in, and by these outward observations; and from
hence it was, that when the heart was turned from God in closing with him in
his distinct properties, (signified in the mystery) that the observations of
these things became abominable in his sight, as you see in Isai. 66.3, 4, 5,
etc. And so it is with us also, when it comes to pass, we being called into
the first dispensation of works and duties, as we call them, wherein we think
to please God by walking in our Gospel observations, and yet our hearts carried
out to the love, care and fear, seeking and desiring of the Creature, then it
is that our Gospel-Forms, and holy Duties, becomes loathsome and abominable in
the eyes of God, and we are in his sight no more but as the religious Scribes
and Pharisees in their first dispensation under the observations of the Law.
But when the Lord intends to bring the souls of his people more near to
himself, and that he may manifest himself more clearly to them in his distinct
property, viz. In his Son Jesus, or in making the Name of his Son to be known,
and the power of his Son to appear, then does he change the former
dispensation, and makes it void, and brings in the second dispensation,
suitable for such a manifestation. And so it was, that when the fullness of time
was come, Christ did appear in the flesh, and in that out-letting of God in his
distinct property, viz. His Son, it was in another manner, then he first
manifested himself, in making his name known in the beginning of the first
dispensation, as is showed before: For this second out-letting of himself, was
in a more mild and peaceable way, whereby and wherein he was well pleased in
the reconciling of the World to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. And those souls the which
he would call more near to himself out of the former dispensation, he so
provided, that they should be fitted, and prepared to meet him in the second
dispensation. And in those days came John the Baptist, who was to be the
forerunner before Christ, who should prepare the way for him, and should make
ready a people prepared to meet their God, Luke 1.17. And so it was, that by
him was instituted the second Baptism, and his Baptism was called The Baptism
of Repentance; and his Preaching was to make the people wait for a further
manifestation of God, then ever they had known formerly; and his Office was to
lay the Ax to the Root of the Tree, etc. And he was the voice of the crier in
the Wilderness, etc. Isa. 40.3. And he was the Messenger sent before the face
of God, in his appearing in his distinct property of the Son, Mal. 3.1. And all
the Preaching and work of John Baptist was to make a fit way for the
manifestation of Christ in the second dispensation, wherein he appeared in the
flesh.

And so it was, that all that came to be baptized of him, was to be repenting
persons, even such as the Father had wrought into some measure of want, and
falling short, in what they thought to have found in the first dispensation
under the Covenant of Works, and those that came to his Baptism in the strength
of their own conceited righteousness, and building up themselves in the opinion
of their old privileges, these he would not baptize, but gave them a repulse
according to their desert, Mat. 3.7. But so many as believed his preaching or
speakings of the Kingdom of God, was brought out of the depending of any thing
that they had formerly observed, and was made to know that life, and peace, and
salvation, was to be had in none of these things; but in the second distinct
property, viz. The Son of God, or the Lamb of God, who should take away the
sins of the world, John 1.29. And as many as he baptized, was to depart from,
or dye to all things whatsoever they had closed with (or lived in) formerly,
and was to repent and mourn for their former foolishness, in thinking to have
pleased God by their duties and sacrifices; and when the emptiness of these
things was made manifest to them by the preaching of John, then were they made
willing to forsake them, and to close with, and desire to live to, and in, the
life of the Son of God, whom he had held out to them; and that they did believe
the truth of what he preached, they gave testimony thereof by undergoing his
baptism, in which they were to look for performance of the second Covenant; and
this baptism, the which they under-went in the outward act, signified to them,
suffering or plunging, and the great afflictions to come upon them, both
outwardly in the owning and professing Christ to be the Savior; and inwardly
in the daily denying of themselves, in keeping their hearts from depending upon
any thing acted, and likewise in running out into the desire, fear, care, love,
or seeking of things created, etc. And these was the fruits to be brought out
in those (who was under the office and discipline of John) whom he had brought
into a conformity of waiting for the powerful manifestation of the Name, into
which he had baptized them.

The very same work in the Mystery becomes to be fulfilled in us, in this
present dispensation; for when the fullness of time is come that God intends
to come nearer to the souls of those whom he means to draw to himself, and to
make the Name of his Son to be known in the powerful manifestation thereof;
then does he send out John Baptist to prepare the way for his appearing in
their spirits, viz. he brings the Law home to the heart in the inward part
thereof, by which the abomination of the heart becomes manifested, both in the
things acted, and things created, and truly knows how he has deceived
himself in the performing of his holy duties under a Gospel consideration: And
from hence he shall find, that all these duties performed in great zeal, for
the honor and glory of God, as he conceived, was all wrong grounded; and
likewise he shall see his secret and false conclusions drawn from them, and how
he found life and peace in them, and thought that God would own him in, and for
these actings, and conceived himself the only man in the favor of God, and
could make use of all the promises as they were suitable; and did confirm him
in his present condition; likewise he shall be made to know how secretly he
limited God to those his Gospel Forms, and how he secretly hated and envied
all other who had Christ truly manifested in their souls, and how he could have
persecuted them, if occasion had served, because such went about to overthrow
this foundation.

And then shall he see how his heart is in love with created things, and how
far short his soul is from the true partaking of the love of God, though he
conceited he had known the same formerly, and then shall he see the great
veil spread over his heart, which keeps the heart from God, and God from the
heart; and then shall he see sin out of measure sinful, and shall have cause to
say, O Wretched man that I am, etc. Romans 7. And so it is that the soul
becomes to enter into the operation of the second Baptism, whereunder it
suffers much woe and want, in respect of the body of sin it feels alive in
the inferior parts of the soul; and likewise knowing how the Son of God, viz:
Jesus Christ as yet has never been truly manifested to the more noble parts
thereof, and so as yet the soul is but in the Wilderness, in which the voice
of the Crier is continually crying and calling, Prepare, prepare the way of the
Lord, etc. and the soul in obedience to that cry does turn it self wholly to
seek the love of God, to be made known to it, in the second distinct property,
viz. the powerful, and lovely, and peaceable appearing of Jesus the Son of
God, and to make his name known in the powerful and merciful delivering of
the soul from under that present evil of it self, by which it is so carried
captive often times into the prisons of Hell and Death.

And when the soul is thus brought to understand the Baptism of John, then it
is that faith begins to be purely operative, and not before, for now faith
has its groundwork laid in the heart, and before it was but in the head, and
from what part it has its ground, so does it work; and this faith grounded in
the heart, does carry out the soul into seeking of the virtue of the Blood of
Christ in the Divine nature, and so is made willing thereby to wait for the
out-pouring, or shedding abroad of the same, to cleanse and wash away that sin,
and Self, that does so defile it; and likewise this faith does so clearly carry
out the soul from the desire of things created, that it stands in opposition
against them, when they pierce or present themselves into the soul; likewise
by the power of this faith man is made to see the emptiness of all forms and
duties, the which it has so much doted on before; and likewise it makes the
soul truly know wherein its true life consists, and nothing is desired in
comparison of that which is the true life thereof, from whence it comes to
pass that this soul stands at variance with every thing, which keeps it back
from the enjoyment of its life: And in this manner the Ax is laid to the root
of the tree, viz. The sharp cutting part, or the Law in its inward and
spiritual requirings, whereby the bole of sin becomes cut down, viz. The
strength of desire, love, care, or fear of, or to any thing below the love and
life of the Son of God, becomes cut down, and cast into the fire, viz. into
the anger of God, by which they become burned and consumed: But yet it cannot
be truly said, that anger is in God, whereby he can be made to change or to
suffer; for anger and love is both the same in the essence of God, and that
which is love in God, the same is anger in us; and it is the love of God that
makes us feel his anger, by reason of the sin, that the love meets with in
us; and so by reason of that love of God in us, and that sin it meets with in
us, the suffering is produced which we feel, and that suffering is called the
anger of God: And thus we are rightly to judge of the anger of God.

But now the soul being brought into this suffering way, or plunging condition,
under the baptism of John, or spiritual cutting of the Law, wherein the
abomination that makes desolate begins to appear, then grows such a soul
to sink down into great humility, and in patience waits for the appearing of
the Son of God, who must in the manifesting of his Name, restore peace, and
give comfort, and deliver the soul out of that great desolation made in it, by
reason of the great abomination: And so it is, that when the soul is rightly
prepared by the second baptism of John, then in his own time and place, the
name of the Son becomes manifested in that soul; and the Lord whom it has
sought does come into his temple, Mal. 3.2. And then it is that the virtue of
the name of the Son of God becomes powerful in delivering the soul out of that
desolate wilderness, from amongst the enemies that it found there, and those
lusts that led it captive is become captived, and the shadow of death is
dissipated, and the garment of mourning is cast off, and the soul clothed in
the garment of praise; and then the soul can rejoice, and rightly sing
Hallelujah to him that has done these things for it.

And thus it is, that God in the second appearance in the distinct property,
becomes to be known in a more sweet, and loving, and peaceable manner, then he
was known in the first Name, before the Godhead had divided it self, as is
before said. And thus Moses in the first dispensation under the Covenant of
works, by his baptism reached out the soul to John, and John in the second
dispensation led out the soul to Christ; and so the soul can truly witness the
Name of the Father and the Son.

I would have enlarged more upon the baptism of John, but that I have already
spoken something thereof in a little Treatise, called The Anti-god, with his
threefold attributes, discovered in the outside religious man; and in that you
may see something which is needful to be known, the which I have omitted here.

But now I proceed and speak a word of the third Baptism, viz. The Baptism of
the Holy Ghost; and this is that which is more excellent then the other two
former, because of its time, operation, and effect; of which I shall speak
hereafter. And this baptism was witnessed by John Baptist himself, when he gave
testimony of Christ, who was to be the Minister of this Baptism, and told the
people, that he that was to come after him, etc. should baptize them with the
Holy Ghost, and with fire, whose fan is in his hand, etc. Matthew. 3. And what
John Baptist did witness herein, the same had he received of the Father, who
sent him both to baptize and bear witness of Christ, that he was the Son of
God, and what his coming was for, and what his office should be, John 1.33. Now
when Jesus Christ was in the flesh, he baptized none; for this his baptism was
to be in its time and place suitable for its operation; and that was to be
after his Ascension; though he had promised the same before his death, yet that
promise was not to be fulfilled till after his death, and at the first
administration thereof the Holy Ghost fell upon the persons baptized in a
visible form of cloven tongues of fire, Acts 2.

By which visible appearance, was held out the nature of the operation of that
Ghostly Baptism, viz. A twofold speech or speaking, rising out of a twofold
ground, viz. The sensible feeling of love, joy, and life, etc. And likewise the
sensible feeling of sorrow, suffering, and death: And from these two grounds
was to arise all their speaking, who was baptized with the Holy Ghost; and this
was the pure language that God had promised to return to the people, Zeph. 3.
And those who had this pure language returned to them in this Ghostly Baptism,
was able to speak of the wondrous works of God, Acts 2.11:

Now this third distinct property of God, viz. The Holy Ghost, or the third
out-letting of the Godhead in the third distinct property, is the most clearest
way of manifestation that man attaineth to in the flesh; for this is that which
gives man the true knowledge of the mystery of God, and the mystery of sin and
selfness; and the operation of this distinct property works the spirit of man
out of the mystery of Self, into the mystery of God; and this work it works,
by bringing man into the fellowship of the suffering with Christ, whereby the
body of that sin and self becomes to be crucified; and likewise it comfort
man, and makes him able to bear the Cross with Christ, until the death of sin
and self be accomplished; and so the spirit be made partaker of the life and
virtue of the Resurrection of Christ, and with him become ascended above all
powers and principalities, and so to reign with him.

And therefore it was necessary, that Christ should both suffer, and rise
again, and ascend, before he gave out the Holy Ghost; because as he suffered,
so he left the same example of his suffering to be undergone by those who
should be his followers: And while he was with them in the flesh, they could
not suffer as they should do afterward; for then he was the Bridegroom, and
they were the children of the Bride-chamber, Luke 5.34. And so long as he was
with them in the flesh, they could not grow up to be perfect men, nor to the
stature and fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. For while Christ was in the flesh,
his followers looked too much at his bodily presence; and therefore it was meet
that his bodily presence should be taken away, that so his ghostly presence
might be manifested to them; and therefore he told them, except he went away
from them, the Comforter would not come, John 16.7. But his Disciples being but
as yet the children of the Bride-chamber, was but young in the holy
understanding, neither being acquainted with great joy or great suffering,
because as yet they were not in a condition so suitable for either, as they
should be thereafter; but this they could not believe, but sorrow filled their
hearts when Christ told them of going away from them, John 16.6.

But herein is the great wisdom of God made known in the orderly and successive
out-lettings of himself to the sons of men, stooping to his capacity in every
condition, that so by little and little, man may be wrought and drawn up into
himself, and to live and abide in that center from whence he had his Being. And
therefore as he had made his Name known in the first dark dispensation, by
appearing in our flesh; but most clear of all by taking the two former away,
that the third might appear, wherein we might see him, and live in him in the
spiritual Life, and worship him as he is a Spirit, the which we cannot do,
while we are so much in our selves, both in reason and sense, while we are
under the first and second dispensation; and therefore it was that Christ's
bodily presence in the second dispensation was to be taken away, that made his
followers look too much upon him, as he was in that appearance, whereby their
Reason and Sense got too much life; and therefore that both Reason and Sense
might lose their lives, his first bodily presence must be out of the way, that
his ghostly presence might appear in the Divine Nature; in which, and by which,
he would become the baptiser of Souls with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, by
which baptism he would burn up and consume all the old rubbish and relics of
sin and self, both in Sense and Reason, and bring the Spirit out of, and from
the captivity of the same.

And while Christ was in the flesh, he showed them an example of life, which he
would have those that would be his Disciples to follow, and likewise he told
them how great things his followers was to suffer, under the Ghostly Baptism;
and so he left them the example of his own suffering, and death also; the which
they should have as a rule to walk by, until the body of sin should be
crucified and destroyed, Phil. 3.17. And so it was, that after Christ in the
Divine Nature began to administer the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, the person who
was baptized therewith, by the virtue thereof became so carried out after the
example both of the life and death of Christ, that they thought nothing too
dear to forsake, so that they might but attain to the fellowship of Christ,
both in his life, death, and resurrection. And this was the whole delight of
these souls who had been baptized of Christ, by the (proceeding or) coming of
the Holy Ghost out of the Divine Nature into their souls, by which they were
led out of all things, acted, or created, or enjoyed, wherein self had gotten
life, or might get life. And this the Apostle Paul witnesses, when he said, he
counted all things but dross and dung, in comparison of Christ, etc. And that
he might be lost in all things and found in Christ, by way of conformity to his
suffering and death, that thereby he might attain to the resurrection of the
dead, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, etc.

And so it is to this present day, that those souls whom God draws into a
near union of himself, he draws them out of the first and second out-letting
of himself in the first and second dispensation, and so brings them into the
third dispensation, or Ghostly Baptism; in which, the body of sin and selfness
becomes found out and forsaken; for whilst the first and second dispensation
is in force, the body of sin is not so clearly found out, nor can be so
forsaken as it ought.

But who is it that will believe the truth hereof? for the sons of men is
blinded of the right sight and knowledge of the truth, and by reason of the
love they have to lust, sin, and selfness, they are become enemies of the Cross
of Christ; and if any have attained to the first dispensation beforesaid, they
think themselves to have attained all that is necessary, and that they need no
more, and so becomes to settle upon the lees of their own performances, and so
becomes the resisters of the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. And if any be brought out
of the first Baptism under the first dispensation, which contains in it the
Covenant of works, and so be made partakers of the second Baptism, by which
they are brought into, and prepared to meet Christ in his first appearance; and
when they have known the Son of God (or God in his distinct property of the
Son) manifesting himself to their soul, by which the soul has comfort and
content, and refreshment, and deliverance from its former troubles; and now it
finding the effects of the propitiation of the Son, in covering and hiding its
sin, and in justifying the soul, and taking of the power of condemnation from
it, then does that soul conclude, That all is done, and can be pleased with
that present condition, supposing they have that which never will fail, and say
in their heart, They shall not be removed, because the Lord of his goodness
has made their mountain so strong, Psalm. 30. And from these false conclusions,
many a soul becomes to lose it self, and turn back again into the world, and
into the captivity of the Creature, from which it was delivered; and so man
foolishly concluding, That being in the Land of Canaan, he shall see the
bondage of Egypt no more; but while man is but in the enjoyment of the first
manifestation of God, in the first appearance of his Son, he is but a babe, and
but ignorant of what the mind of God is in that present condition; and
therefore they are very subject to be content with that present station,
because it pleases them so well, supposing that there is none that have
attained any further, then what they have already attained too, when as alas
they know not as yet, what it is to die with Christ on the Cross, nor what the
fellowship of his sufferings is, nor what the vertual power of his resurrection
means. And so it is, that from the idolizing of that present enjoyment, they
in a very short time become to be cast out of that enjoyment; and yet do they
not know that they are so cast out, because of the false fiend who has got
again into the house from whence he was gone out, and counterfeiteth God
through the help of the imagination; and so makes these souls believe, That
God is their present portion, and that they have such a fast hank of him, that
nothing can be able to separate them, when at that very instant of time the
heart is in captivity with the Creature.

I fear that this is the very condition of many now adays, who having known God
after this manner beforesaid, and yet have forsaken him again, and turned to
the Creature; and yet do but little know that they be so far carried away from
God, as they are.

But when God in his orderly proceeding goes on in bringing the soul through
all the dangers and difficulties of the creature and Self, then does he not
suffer the soul to have what it would have, nor enjoy what it would enjoy in
that first manifestation of himself in the name of his Son; but as the bodily
presence of Jesus was to be taken away in his appearing in the second
dispensation in the flesh, (that so he might come again in the Spirit, or
ghostly Baptism, by which they should still be led on till they were in the
nearest and safest union of the Father and the Son that could be attained to in
the body) so it is, that the ghostly presence in the first manifestation in the
Spirit must be taken away, that so the spirit may come to a further and more
sure partaking of the Divine nature then it could in the first manifestation.
For as Christ's followers could have been pleased to have still enjoyed the
bodily presence of Christ in the first appearing in the flesh; so would a soul
be pleased with the first manifestation of Gods appearing in the name of his
Son to the spirit. But as Christ's bodily presence must be taken away, that
thereby the life of Self which lived in the sense and reason (of his Disciples
under that present enjoyment) might become destroyed, and over-throwne, by the
coming again in the power of the Spirit, or ghostly Baptism: So it is that the
first appearance of God in Christ, in the first appearance of the soul must be
hidden, and taken away, because of so much life of self in the sense and
reason, and that by a further and more clear and safe way to manifest himself
in the soul, and that is by the pouring out of the Holy Ghost into it, by the
virtue of which the soul becomes Baptized into the suffering and death of
Christ, whereby the life of sense and reason becomes to dye, and the spirit
brought out of the claws of Sin, Death, Devil, and Hell, and the power of
the Resurrection of Christ becomes to be known, and the body of Sin becomes
to be destroyed, by the powerful working and burning of this ghostly
Baptism, and this was the very Baptism the Apostle Paul spoke of, when he
said, Know you not so many of us as were Baptized into Christ were Baptized
into his death, therefore we are buried with him, by Baptism into his death,
etc. For if we have been planted together into the likeness of his death, we
shall also be in the likeness of his resurrection, knowing this, that our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin may be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin, etc. Romans 6.2, 3, 4, 5, etc. And those
souls who know God in this work can witness to the truth of the threefold
name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, because they know the power and working of
God in these three Baptismes, under these three names, and none else can speak
rightly of them, because they have but the knowledge thereof by relation; and
though God let out himself in this threefold manner, as is before said, yet
God is but one and the same God; and though there be these three Baptismes,
yet they all make up but one perfect Baptism, by which the soul is perfectly
completed in one faith, Ephesians. 4.5. whereby the soul becomes led out of all
things acted or created, and all sufferings, or enjoyments in any condition,
below the enjoyment of the fellowship of Christ in his Suffering, Death, and
Resurrection, and this is the very end and effect of all former out-lettings of
God in any of the foresaid dispensations; and for this very end it was that
Christ gave out his command to teach, and discipline all Nations, and Baptize
them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Friends, I have but given you a dark glimps of these things, for the clearer
illustrating of them requires more time then I have allotted to me at present,
and would contain a greater volume then at present I mean to put out; but
this which here I have intimated may give you some sight in the whole: and I
wish that every one of you were so wise as to find out in your own heart the
whole mystery hereof; and this I have holden out to you, that thereby you may
partly see what is contained in the type of Baptism, and that it is not the
form or type that brings any happiness to the soul. But in case you say,
you live not in the outward form of Baptism, but in the power of the
Mystery; from whence is it that so little fruits thereof appear amongst you,
who are of the order of the Brotherhood in outward form of re-baptizing? for
though you may think you obey the command of Christ in this your act, yet being
ignorant of the mind of Christ in this command, you do obey him no more then
Saul did the command of Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.14. for I can as justly say to you as
Samuel said to Saul, What means the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of
these oxen in mine ears? For though some amongst you in your Brotherhood can
speak of some experiences, and say something what God has done for their
souls, yet I see the world in the heart of such, yea and the love of praise
and honor, and the liveliness of affection to created things; look to your
own hearts, and you shall find what I say is true, and if it be so, take it
for granted, you know not the mind of Christ in the mystery of Baptism: but
you content your selves with the form, and if you knew but the mystery, the
form would not be of so great value with you; but as all other forms are but
empty things, so is your form also, and they shall all perish in time, and all
souls shall be deceived who live in them. For nothing shall stand but what is
the substance and mystery of all forms; and what soul is not brought out of
forms into that which is the mystery, shall perish as does the forms, for in
all dispensations, and all ordinances in dispensations formerly there has been
a change, and the reason why former things instituted was changed, was because
of sin amongst men, who made Idols of those ordinances: for the mind and
intent of God in all ordinances was to draw the heart of men to himself out of
the creature; and so when God owned these his ordinances, and answered men in
them, then was the hearts of men in too great love with these ordinances; and
when the heart begins to cleave to any ordinance, then the heart gets
liberty to run out into the creature, and yet man can bless himself, and
quiet his blind Conscience with observing the ordinances, and so the
ordinances becomes Idolized, and so abominable in the eyes of God; and so it
is that these things God ordained to bring man to himself, by reason of the
body of sin in man they have drawn man further from his God, and there is
not any formalist in England of what form soever, that contendeth for his
form, can excuse himself in what is here expressed. But here I leave you in
your forms, and wish that God may so own you in your forms, that you may see
a clear way to depart out of your forms, and to come to close with that which
is the substance; and then you will not fall out with any who are not of the
same form with you; neither will you so much contend for your forms, for then
you shall see how all forms are but empty things, and not worth so much
dispute and contention; which has been the occasion of the spilling of so much
blood as has been spilt; but let me tell you one thing, that no hand shall be
guiltless of blood who has shed any man's blood for maintaining the
uprightness of his form: for it will be found, that that hand that has shed
the blood of any man for opposing his form, he slew but his brother that he
might sacrifice his blood to an Idol; and this one day will lie heavy upon the
heart of those that have done it. But what is this I have said? who will
believe it? for every one in his form can bless himself in what he has done,
and quiet his blind Conscience, by kissing of his Idol; but the time is in
coming, and shall shortly be, that all Idols shall cease, and all formal
worship shall be destroyed, for we who are alive are in the last dispensation,
and under the last types that ever shall be upon the earth: and when these
types under which we live shall come to be worshipped to the height, then
changed shall they be, and I leave it to you to guess what thing shall then be
established; the time shall shortly be, even so come Lord Jesus, Amen.

A word to the Free-Gracians.
FRiends, you who pretend the Free Grace of God, without the Creatures actings,
I need not write to you of your idolizing of Forms, for I know you are not tied
to any Form: But my Friends, I ask you the question, How came you to part with
your Forms? was it the Free Grace of God indeed that called you out of Forms,
or was it your subtil-self that cast you out of Forms? I much fear the devil
has played the cheater with you, and you have not seen wherein he has
deceived you; and so you are bereaved both of the Form and Power. I know you
much pretend all to be of God, and that he gives his grace freely without the
act, or desert of the Creature. I know there is a truth in what you say, but
yet did ever any of you receive grace: But first you were active Creatures, and
sought grace more then ever you sought any earthly thing? If you say you have
grace, and yet sought not grace, it is no less then a marvel to me: But in case
you say, that you sought grace before you received grace, why do you so much
cry down the Creatures actings? do you think to bring any a nearer way to
grace, then your selves have gone? if you do, you peradventure shall be
deceived; and while you by that way go about to draw men to grace, it is six to
one you keep them from grace. I know your preaching and speaking of that
subject, will beget you many a one to be of the same mind with you; for your
doctrine sounds well to the fleshly part of man, and soon is it believed, and
as soon practiced; for I know not what will hinder the success of it, for I
know the devil will not oppose it, neither will the flesh oppose it; and I am
sure the world is a friend to it, and then it is possible there is nothing that
is evil that will oppose it. And no marvel though the multitude dance so madly
after your pipe, I know you see no greater evil, then that which is the
idolizing of Forms; but that is because you know not the evil of your own
hearts, and how the great mystery of evil lies there; and because you know it
not, you are carried out to see the evil of others, who is not of the same
faith with you; and some of you, yea, those who be of your chief Teachers, are
so exceedingly carried out by the power of Free Grace (as they pretend) that
they go about to do marvels, viz. to pluck up where never any thing has been
planted, and to take away acting from these people who never troubled
themselves with acting any thing for God, or for any kind of formal worship to
God.

But if such were but half wise, they might spare their speaking; for such
people have a teacher within them, that will teach them to forsake acting any
thing for God, or the worship of God: And therefore they need not any of your
outward teaching to help them. But do you not think you do a great piece of
Gods service herein? be judge your selves. I would know of you, whether acting
or believing be the first brought out in any man; if you say Faith, I would
know what Faith it is; for the justifying Faith it cannot be, for that is
manifest after works, and never does any man know it truly, until he have
acted, and found the emptiness of his actings; and these things which he
thought should have brought out life, brings out death, Romans 7.10. And yet
when this faith is brought out, yet does not that Faith make acting void, For
faith without works is dead, Jam. 2.17.

But if you say a man may have justifying faith without works, that I deny; for
wherever faith is that justifies, the same cannot be without works. I know
man may have an historical faith without works, but the justifying faith no man
can have without works; but it is one thing to have works, and it is another
thing to be justified by works; and here is the Mystery; find it out if you
can; but for the want of the right knowledge of the Mystery, you become to make
a division, and jarring between faith and works, which in themselves do not
differ, but agrees in a sweet harmony in those souls, who have found out the
mystery in them both: And never shall you bring any soul to be a true believer,
before you have brought him into an active way before; except you can command
God to work miracles in his immediate way.

But my Friends, I know full well where you err, and what is the ground of
your opinion, even you who are the purest in this your Free Grace tenet; For
even you who have some experience of the grace of God, I know you knew it was
the goodness of God that freed your souls from what they were captived with,
and that all your actings could not do it, till God himself bestowed his
Free Grace upon you.

This I confess is truth, but did every any of you find the Free Grace of God
made known to you, before you had acted to your utmost endeavor, and was made
to see the emptiness of your actings. I know as many of you as have known true
freedom will confess this; and can you tell me truly, That if you had not
acted, and thereby seen the emptiness of your actings; whether you should have
known the freeness of grace, yea, or nay; but because that you were not freed
by your actings, is therefore actings of none effect? God forbid; for though
the Apostle were not justified by the Law, yet did he not make void the Law,
but counted it of necessary use; for thereby comes the knowledge of sin, Romans
7.13. So actings, though they do not justify, yet by them man becomes to know
the emptiness that is in them; for before any action be brought out, the
goodness or badnesse of it cannot be known; and it is as natural to man to
depend upon his actings, as the skin cleaves to his flesh; and man cannot be
freed from depending thereon, until he truly see the evil in them; and he
cannot see the evil in them, until they be brought out; and until he see the
evil in them, he cannot be justified by Free Grace: And for this very purpose
God has given man power to act, and given out commands that he should act,
that thereby man might be brought to see what was in his actings, and how far
he could recover out of his fallen condition by his actings; that so where he
came short, he might know the goodness of God in his Restoration; and
therefore while you pretend and preach Faith so much, you bring but the souls
of the people into a snare, and they are in as great danger to perish by your
doctrine, as is the souls of those people who are taught to merit Heaven by
their actings; for you run as far in your extreme, as they do in their extreme.

But I would have you to take notice of one thing, viz. In case you have been
freed by grace, whether has your spirit or your flesh got better hold of the
freedom; if your spirit have gotten the freedom, then is your flesh in bondage,
and then be sure it will be striving for freedom; and I believe you shall have
no great quiet, so long as it has any power to move: For though your spirit
may be freed from the condemning of your conscience, yet I believe your spirits
is not freed from the strivings of the flesh; but in case the flesh have stolen
your freedom from the spirit, then its possible all will be quiet within, and
then no marvel if you cry up Free Grace so fast.

But let me tell you one thing, He that knows most of Free Grace, knows
most of bondage with it. This may seem a paradox to you, but if you know not
what I mean, you may take it for granted, That your flesh has got the greater
part of your Free Grace; and then while you tell other people of freedom by
grace, you your selves become the servants of sin, 2 Pet. 2.19.

LOok into your own hearts, and try whether this be true or not; for if you
find your hearts and affections carried out to any thing below God, and that
you have any complacence, in either pleasure, praise, or profit, or what else
is below the center of Spirits, you may believe, That all is not as it should
be; but yet I know you will not greatly care, for it is God must do all, and
the Creature can do nothing; and therefore you need but only believe, and all
will be well enough; but the time will come, that every one must be rewarded
according to his works; and he that says, Lord, Lord, shall not enter into
Heaven, but he that does the will of the Father must enter.

Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with with me, and will give to every
man according as his works shall be.

FINIS.

