A DECLARATION MADE By the right Honorable the Earl of BATH, one of his
Majesty's Commissioners of Array, to the whole Country of DEVONSHIRE, With
their answer thereunto annexed;

ALSO The manner how the said Earl of BATH endeavored to put the Commission
of Array in Execution, at Southmoulton in Devonshire, and how his men were
driven out of the Town by the Inhabitants thereof.

Whereunto is added, A true Relation of the great Battle between Prince ROBERT
and the Parliaments Forces at Worcester; with their happy Victory over his
Cavaliers.

September. 29. London Printed for John Wright.

A DECLARATION Of the Earl of BATH.
AS there are disturbances in some part of this Kingdom, so I understand this
County of Devon, in many places to be falsely possessed of some arbitrary and
Tirannicall government pretended to be set up by the King, and put in practice
(among others by my self) Wherefore out of my great affection to you and my
Country, being now immediately ready to receive the blessed Sacrament, I do
solemnly in the presence of Almighty God profess and declare that I have
undertaken nothing contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom, nor prejudicial or
hurtful to any that shall observe it: and (...) do further profess that I
have no authority neither will I take the value of sixpence from any man, but
to my utmost power to protect you all, that every one may enjoy their own.

The Answer.
THe disturbances that are in this Kingdom have grown through the
interferring of the Commission of Array with the Militia ordained by Parliament.

The Officers in the Militia are the same for the most part that were before in
the Lievtenancy, the men approved by His Majesty; the Array invades the
Militia, and has been the only means of breaking the peace. So in Sommerset
Captain Preston was assailed and his Ensign slain in the execution of the
ordinance of Parliament. And for that cause the authors and fautors of that
crime are prosecuted in Sherbourne.

That many places of this County are possessed with the doubt of an arbitrary
government intended is true, That the fault thereof is laid to the Kings charge
is false, That the Commissioners of Array do for the extent of that Commission
put in practice an arbitrary and Tirannicall government is true for these
reasons.

First that which is but against the being of Parliaments is intended for an
arbitrary government, but the Commissioners of Array do bend themselves and
the power of their Commissions against the being of Parliaments.

That the suppression of this Parliament, or the drawing of the members of it
to other judicature, is against the being of Parliaments, is so apparent as it
needs no more proof.

Secondly That the Commission it self is illegal has been declared by an
authority not to be contradicted. And to put an illegal Commission in
execution as to draw his Majesty's government into the censure of Tyranny,

Thirdly the Commission of Array is most partial and in that respect
Tyrannical. By the Declaration justifying and explaining it, it is affirmed
that a man of able body and estate serving in person shall find arms but for
his person, but a man weak in body not serving shall find arms according to the
proportion of his estate, so that by this rule a man of 40 li. per. an. and
impotent shall find a man's arms and a man to wear it; and a potent man of 100.
500. or 1000. per. an. shall find no more. A man that is potent in boby owes
that ability to the Commonwealth as the rich of his substance, why else is the
poor able man bound to wear the impotent rich man's arms? It is most
unreasonable then and consequently most illegal, that the bodily strength of a
rich man which is his great advantage should be the reason to ease his estate,
and the weakness of his equal draw upon him a gross inequallity of burden.

This Declaration averreth peremptorily, that this Commission (which is the
thing undertaken) is lawful, that it is not prejudicial, that there is no
authority to take sixpence, and thereupon the holy Sacrament is solemnly
received.

For the lawfulness a single Judgment is opposed to the Parliament and the
conscience bound without reservation as surely for the truth of it.

That Is much in respect of the antiquity often his law, the variety of others
since made the difference of opinion. But that it is not prejudicial, let the
before recited partiallity answer.

And for the authority to take sixpence see the power to imprison the refusers.

With the will of any man Charity forbids to have to do, because his purposes
are hid.

But the consequences of their actions are apparent to provident men.

The Array does apparently oppose the Parliament, and intrudes upon those
offices which have been and are now possessed by others for the peace and
defense of the Kingdom.

The Militia defends the Parliament, and therein strives to maintain the King
and his posterity in the ancient and rightful government of this Realm by 3
estates.

In this there is true loyalty and constant peace.

In the other flattery and the seed of perpetual War.

The Militia protects Religion and propriety of goods, and for the Common
interest in both craves the benefit or Parliament and Church assemblyes.

The Array prevaling will not fail to bring both into single power at least
into the danger that both were lately in. But that is forgotten, neither is it
seen that the Array must embroyle this Kingdom, that the rebellion may
prevail in Ireland.

A Copy of Letter sent to a worthy Gentleman in LONDON.
Honorable Sir,
ACcording to my bo^nden duty I cannot choose but acquaint your worship with the
news at Southmoulton, I my self being present at it.

On Saturday last, the Earl of Bath sent one of his servants unto the Mayor of
the Town to know whether he should have a peaceable entrance into his Town the
Tuesday folloing, for he was minded to come there, to meet some Gentlemen upon
some occasions; the Mayor answered the messenger, that if his intent were for
peace, he should come, after better consideration, which the Ma^or had, he was
blamed by some of his friends, for tha^ he had not taken respite to give his
answer, but that advice came too late.

The Tuesday being the day appointed, there came the Eatle of Bath, my Lord
Chichester, Baronet Pollard, Sir Popham Southcot, Sir Ralph Sidneham, Master
Basset, Master John Acland, Master John Gifford, Captain Newcond with their
followers, and diverse others which I cannot name. A Banquet being provided at
Henry Hearders house the Inne-keeper, where the Earl sent store of Venison,
and his own Cook for to dress it, the common sort of the Town fell in a
great rage with the Mayor and his company, for giving license that they should
enter, and swor that if they did attempt any thing there, or read their
Commission of Array, they would beat them all down and kill them, if they
were all hanged for it; and thereupon betook themselves to Arms, both men,
women, and children, about the Cross in the Market place, I do verrily
^eleeve they were in number at least 1000. some with Muskets laden, some with
Halberts and black Bills, some with Clubs, some with Pikes, some with dunge
Evells, some with great Poles, one I saw which had heat the calke of a Sive,
and beat him out right, and set him into a long staff, the women had filled
all the steps of the cross with great stones and got up and sat on them,
swearing if they did come there they would brain them. One thing which is
worth the noting, a woman which is a Butchers wife, came running with her
lapfull of Rams-hornes for to throw at them, some of the Gentlemen were coming
toward the Cross, it was thought to publish the Array, presently the people
gave a shoute, and did cry, they be come, at which they were all ready to stand
against them, the Gentlemen seeing that, betook themselves every one to house,
and after that not one of them nor their servants, durst show themselves in the
street; it is thought of many, that if the Town had not risen against them,
they would not so soon have departed, surely whatsoever collor they put upon
it, their intent was ill, for their men gave very dangerous speeches, but God
is able with his smalest creatures to daunt the hearts of Kings, as with Lice
and Frogs and such like: so amongst this crew there were both men and women
with Clubs and Staves, which do daily beg from door to door, and when the
Earl rod forth of Town, they did throw stones after him and his men. I shall
desire your Worships to excuse my boldness in writing so large, but if you had
seen it, you would have thought this Relation to be too little. Thus with my
humble service unto you and my young Master, I commend you both with the whole
Family unto the divine protection, and ever rest

South-moulton the 15 of September, 1642.
From the Rendevouz in Worcester, Septem. 24. 1642.
SJR,
THe ^nseasonablenesse of the weather in our march with (...) Artillery,
extremely retarded our coming to Worcester which prevented us of taking the
Cavaliers, though not of the City of Worcester, which our Horse obtained with
much Honor though with great difficulty, and disadvantage; for (as I have
(...) from my comrade that was in the fight) Prince Robert with (...) Troops
came to Worcester, and joined with Sir John Byron: we had about 10 Troops
near the City, though not in a body, Prince Robert sallies out of the City,
and puts his Horse in Battal^^ on the fair Meddow, and seem^d to challenge the
Encounter; Colonel Saudis, with his Regiment of Horse, Captain Wingate, and
Captain Hales, were about half a quarter of a mile, and had n^ passage to the
Enemy, but in a lane, where they could not march five a breast: yet so keen
Colonel Sandis was, that he adventured to march up, and charged the Prince,
which he did so effectually that eleven of them quickly fell, Prince Robert, or
Prince Mauri^^ being sure wounded in the head, or on his hand: commissary VVilm
t he comes and relieves Prince Robert, and Colonel Sand^ and he had a single
encounter, Colonel Sandis received a so^^ wound, but we hope not mortal, and
run his sword up to the hi^^ in commisary VVilmots body, as it is reported,
then Captain VVingates Troop came on, and did most desperate service, and
after him came Captain Fines, and Captain Hale, then came up Captain Austins
Troop, who could not all this while get out of the Lane, and gave a most
desperate charge, which the enemy being sensible of, aad seeing more troops
coming, retreated into the City of Worcester, and Captain Austin followed
them into the City, and did execution on them, and took 26 Prisoners, Serieant
Mayor Douglas was slain on our side, we lost no man of note else, the number
slain on both sides are much alike, not exceeding thirty on each side: the
Lord General is now in the City of Worcester, and the Mayor has bin twice on
his knees to the Lord General for his pardon in betraying the City into the
hands of the Cavaliers, but cannot obtain it.

FINIS.

