Prince CHARLES Sailing from Callice, toward the North OF ENGLAND In a great
ship of 35 piece of Ordnance with five ships more, with Prince Rupert, General
Ruthen, the Earl of Branford, the Lord Hopton, the Lord Wilmot, and diverse
other Lords and Gentlemen.

ALSO The Princes Warrants, taken by Sir MILES LIVESLEY.

AND A further Victory against the Duke of Buckingham, by Col: Scroop, who has
slain Sir Lionell Digbey his Son, 2 Colonels, and taken Sir Gilbert Gerrard,
and 5 Colonels and Majors, and Col: Coventry taken with a Coach and 6 horses,
and the Duke of Buckingham fled with 60 Horse.

With a List of the Colonels and Officers names killed and taken.

Also the Earl of Holland his Speech to the Soldiers when they took him in his
Chamber.

LONDON, Printed for the general satisfaction of moderate men.

M DC XL VIII.

A Letter from Henly, imparting much good News, Dated July 11 1648.
SIR,
OUr active Collonell, Sir Miles Levesey goes on with much gallantry and
resolution, for the reducing of the Cavaliers in these southern parts, and
has made a fair progress to the business, I suppose you had the particulars
already at Kingston, long since; I have here sent you enclosed the Copy of a
List of what was done by Collonell Scroope at St. Needs on Monday the 10
Instant.

Sir Miles Livesey has taken Collonell Coventry an eminent man employed
concerning Commissions, from Prince Charles And in his Pocket was found two
Blanke Commissions, nothing at all written, but all blanke, and at the bottom
of each



Subscribed, CHARLES P.
Sended with Prince Charles his Seal
Colonel Coventry was taken with his Coach and six Horses, Sir Miles Livesey
has sent up the blanke Warrants, in which might be written what they pleased
that had them. Prince Charles, we are advertised from France, sailed from Callis
on Thursday last, and went toward the North of England, as some guessed.

But those of better judgments, suppose that he is rather gone toward Holland.

And it is the more likely because diverse English Officers are gone by land
toward Holland expecting to meet him there.

The Prince went in a great Dutch vessel with 35 piece of Ordnance.

There went also off from Callis at that time five other small ships.

There were that waited on Prince Charles and are gone with him, several
persons of note viz.

Prince Rupert the Polsgraves brother.

The Earl of Branford, that was the Kings General; Forth:

The Lord Hopton (alias Sir Richard Hopton) that surrendered the Horse.

The Lord Wilmot, that was condemned to dye in the West, with diverse others.

The Earl of Yarmouth (alias Harry Jerman) returned back to Paris or St.
Jermans.

The three Castles Waymor, Deal, and Sandwich, are still resolute for the King,
and I see little hopes of reducing them at present. But if it please God that
they were reduced, and our Neighbors at Colchester in Essex, I doubt not but
these Southern parts would be in a good condition.

But in the Castles they at present (as we are informed) do rail against the
Parliament and Committees.

As for Collonell Scroope he is still in pursuit of the Duke of Buckingham.

When the Earl of Holland saw himself near taken in St. Needs he betook
himself to an Inn, and shut the gates, and they shot some three or four
pistolls at our men, but the gates were soon broken open.

The Earl of Holland then fled into a chamber, and when he was taken in the
chamber, he made a speech to the Soldiers very short, but the effect of it I
have sent you here enclosed, with the List of the particulars.

and am Your most humble Servant, Henry Bate.
Henly July 11. 1648. The Earl of Hollands speech when he was taken prisoner at
St. Needs.
Gentlemen Soldiers,
I Am a Gentleman, and desire you that I may be used as a Gentleman, I pray you
let me have quarter for my life, I am your prisoner, and desire that I may be
civilly used, And that you will show your selves soldiers and Gentlemen
toward me, I offer you no opposition, but freely surrender my self your
prisoner.

The Soldiers gave him quarter, used him civilly, and delivered him to
Colonel Scroope who gave Orders to send him away by a Coach, which was done
accordingly.

A List of the Particulars of the great victory obtained by Coll. Scroope
against the Duke of Buckingham at St. Needs on July 11. 1648.
Slain of the Duke of Buckinghams party. Sir Lionel Digby his son Collonell
D^lbier, Another person of quality 14 killed, whereof 7 in the Town. Many
drowned in flying away. Col. Lee mortally wounded and prisoner
Taken Prisoners. The Earl of Holland. Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Coll: Lee Coll:
Shrimson Lieutenant Coll: Goodwin, Major Holland, 2 Captains Lieutenant Wheeler
Several other Officers. Most of the Duke of Buckinghams servants Most of the
Earl of Hollands servants, 100 common Soldiers.
Taken besides. 200 Horse. The D. of Buck. Sumptor. The E. of Hol. Sumptor.
Rich clothes of the Lords 600 li. in Gold from the Earl of Holland. The Earl of
Hollands rich saddle of 20 li. Much gold and silver besides. The E. of Hollands
white charging Horse, Other good booty. 150 fire Arms. 100 Horse scattered
several ways. The Duke of Buckingham fled with 60 Horse. The Earl of
Peterborough fled away privately. Of Col. Scroops party 2 were slain. And his
Cap. Lieutenant. 3 more wounded.



FINIS.
fleet of ships


