THE TRUE RELATION OF Capt: WILL: BATTEN: Admiral of the Fleet now at Sea, in
the Service of the King, Parliament, and KINGDOM.

TOUCHING The manner of the transportation of the six MEMBERS;

Viz: Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir Will: Lewis, Sir Will: Waller, Sir John
Clotworthy, Mr. Long, and Mr. Hollis
beyond the Seas.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1647.

THE TRUE RELATION OF Capt: WILL: BATTEN: TOUCHING The transporting of the six
MEMBERS.
WHereas the Reports are various concerning the going beyond Se^s of six or the
eleven Members: And that some has undertaken to put it in Print concontrary to
Truth: I shall therefore briefly and truly set it down, as follows.

Sir Philip Stapleton: Sir William Lewis: Sir William Waller: Sir John
Clotworthy, and Mr. Long: hired a small Ketch to transport them to Holland:
which Ketch belonged unto one Green, being let to them for twenty pounds,
half whereof was paid in hand, and the other half at their landing, and
sixty pounds security: given for to Insure the Ketch: All this was done by
the consent of the said Green: The place where they were to be received: was
Should-Haven, a little below Tilbury-Hope: where four of these Gentlemen came
by Land, and Sir John Clotworthy in a pair of Oars by Gravesend: who all met
there, and embarked themselves; Green like a crafty fellow, having received
the moitie of his Money, puts in another Master to go over with the Vessel,
and as soon as the Gentlemen were embarked, goes up to the Block-house to
Gravesend, and there informs Captain Redman, that they were gone away with
his Vessel, with a great deal of Treasure.

Whereupon, the said Captain gives him a Warrant to pursue, and make stay of
them, and to that purpose sent a Trooper with him, who coming down into Kent,
before Marrget espied this Ketch and there told the Marrget men that they were
run away with his Ketch, and had fifteen Portmantuas of Treasure abord.

The men of Marrget very readily beat up their Drums, and manned A Doggerboate,
that was bound to New Castle, and one Roger Lamings had the command of her, who
a little before had a Commission from some of these Gentlemen, to raise a
Company against the Army, and received ten pounds in Money, and had raised
some force.

This Lamings pursued after them thorough the Downs; but they were gone two or
three leagues a head of: so calling to the Nicodemas, a Frigate under my
Command: who presently let slip, and followed him, and half Seas over brought
her up: who very readily and willingly came back with them to me: so that she
was not brought back by Laminges as is suggested.

This sixteenth of August, at night, the Nicodemas brought back the vessel,
with the Members, whom I took abord the Ship, and secured the Vessel, and
about eight a clock at night, sent away Lamings to Marget, to see what Green,
or any others had any pretenses against them: charging him to be back in the
morning early.

The seventeenth, in the Morning I called a Council of War, the Result
whereof was, that in regard these Members had all several passes, from the
Speaker of the House of Commons: dated the tenth, and eleventh of August, and
an Order of both Houses to the Speaker for granting them: It was held fit to
dismiss them; After their Vessel was searched by Sir Georg Askew, Captain
Crandley, Captain Moore, Captain Passey: the Master of the Ketch, and diverse
others, where was nothing found, but five Portmantuas: with a suit for each of
waring Apparel, and the like necessaries, and not a penny of money as was
suggested; and about twelve a clock, no man appearing from Marget, they were
dismissed, in regard of the extreme sickness of Sir Phillip Stapleton, that he
might not lie another night on the water, but land at Callis before night,
where he is since dead: About two a clock that afternoon, Lamings returned
with Green, and the Trooper with Captain Redmans Warrant; the Vessel then
being near half Seas ove, And whereas it is reported, and printed, that they
were reviled, and basely used, it is utterly false; the Trooper was showed their
Passes, who was therewith satisfied, and drank a cup of Wine: It is true, that
I told Green and Lamings of their knaverie.

And for Mr. Hollis, he came not to me till the twenty one, and brought the
Speakers Pass of the eleventh: and an Order of the Commit of the Admiralty
of the thirteenth, for a Ship to transport him, who went out of the Downs the
two and twentieth in the morning, upon the Leopard: who was bound toward St.
Mallo, on another design.

Thus have I given a short and true Relation of the business, which I will
justify to the world: and have all their Passes and papers to make it good.

Aboard the St. Andrew in the Downs, Aug. 26. 1647. Will Batten.


