PPOOL TS ALTHEIAS OR The BUL-WARKE of TRUTH, BEING A Treatise of God, of Jesus
Christ, of The Holy Ghost, and of the Trinity in Unity, against Atheists and
Heretics.

By ROBERT BAYFEILD.

(...),
(...).
Serapis ad Thulem. Magna est veritas, and praevalebit. Tertull.
Veritas laborare potest, vinci non potest, Hier. Dialog. adversus Pelag.
For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth, 2 Cor. 13.8.

Him that is an Heretic, after the (...) s^^o^d admonition reject, Tit. 3.10.

LONDON, Printed by T.R. for Edw. Dod. at the sign of the Gun in Ivy-Lane. 1657.

Vera Effigies Roberti Bayfeild. Aetat: Suae. 27.


A PREPARATORY Advertisement to the READER,
Dear Christian Reader,
AFter I had finished, and put forth my Enchiridion medicum containing the
causes, signs, and cures of all those diseases, which do chiefly affect the
body of man, my thoughts ran upon some second work, whereby I might benefit my
Country; but whilst I was thinking upon what subject to pitch, I happened into
the company of certain Atheists and Heretics, who by their blasphemous
discourse, quite altered the stream of my intentions, and instead of another
physical piece, put me upon these sublime p^i^^ ^f divinity. Indeed it is a
truth, not more deplorable then manifest, that this our Island, which may
justly contend with most parts of the Earth, for the priority of Conversion to
Christianisme, and might not, many years since, have challenged the Garland
from the whole, for the orthodox, zealous, and sincere profession thereof: has
of late produced, and does at this unhappy day foster more swarms of
Heretical and Atheistical monsters, then any age, then any Nation has been
infested withal, such at least whose licentious practices, and insolent
discourses in public, do equally declare their wild Ambition to be so
accounted, as if the only way to acquire the Reputation of being Transcendent
Wits, were to seem able with bold and specious arguments, to impugn the
greatest and most sacred verities. Yea, these proud Wits and curious heads are
so extremely in love with their own shadows, and do so highly admire their
own conceits, that they despise all the understanding and learning of other
men, and as Saint Bernard says, do think, Nusquam lucere solemn nisi in cella
sua, That all knowledge must live and dye with them: For the Devil says in
every heresy, in every error, Ego sum Christus, and apud me est veritas, I am
Christ, and the truth is only here with me, as Athanasius shows against the
Arrians: Athanas. orat. 1 contra Arrianos. Alexander Episcopas Alexander in Ep.
ad Alexand. Constantinop.
And Alexander Bishop of Alexandria writing to the Bishop of Constantionople,
of the transcendent pride and disdain of the Arrians says, Neminem volunt ex
antiquis patribus sibi comparari, ne unum quidem collegarum nostrorum vel ad
mediocrem sapientiam pervenisse censent, sed solos se sapientes, and sibi solis
patefacta esse mysteria arbitrantur veritatis, That they think none of the
ancient fathers to be comparable to themselves, that none of them which are
contrary to their tenants, have attained to any measure of wisdom, and that
they alone are wise, and have the mysteries of truth revealed unto them. And
therefore this despising of other men's knowledge, added to that high conceit
which they have of their own, is the cause they persist in those errors, which
their pride and ignorance have most impiously hatched, to the spoiling and
destroying of themselves and others.

Alas, it is sad and lamentable to consider, how multitudes of people are led
away into dangerous and fearful errors, by these cursed and heretical
monsters, who come unto them in sheeps clothing; that is, a religious habit,
like zealous and holy Christians: For they have many times more works of piety
and charity, then many of the most orthodoxall professors of the Faith, their
Almsdeeds are many, their Prayers frequent, and the strictness of their life
might seem to proceed from Angelical hearts; but in all this they cannot be
said to be virtuous, because these deeds, that are virtues in themselves, are
directed by them to wrong ends, and are effectual to bring others into their
errors. And therefore these holy Heretics are most profitable instruments for
the Devils advantage, and most excellent Factors to enlarge his Kingdom: For
had they been more wicked they had done less evil, when men would have more
suspected them less followed them, and less believed them then they do: A
most lamentable thing, to make virtues the steps and stairs for themselves,
and others to descend down to hell.

Mat. 4.6.
Again, as the Devil cited scripture to our Savior Christ, to pervert the
Truth of the scripture; so do these men use, Adaptare ca, quae been dicta sunt
ijs quae male adinventa sunt ab ipsis, To apply those things which are well
spoken in scriptures, to those things which themselves have mis-invented, says
Ireneus, Iren. cib. 1. c. 1.
for so Valentinus misapplyed scriptures, to cofirme his error of the thirty
couple of Gods: so Manichaeus alleged scriptures to defend his Duo principia,
two fold God, or rather two Gods, good and bad, so Arrius, Appollinaris, and
Eutiches, and all the brood of heretics, were not ignorant in the books of
scripture; and so all heretics at this day do with the Hiaena's voice, bring
nothing else but scriptures, to kill souls with scripture misapplyed; and
therefore least with those fishes that are sportingly carried with the pleasant
streams of Jordan, until they do fall into the dead sea, where they do
suddenly perish; so we be led with their mis-interpreted scriptures, until
we do unexpectedly fall into destruction, we should beware of them and take
heed we be not seduced by th^^ ^ea, we should mark them and avoid them, Romans
16.17. Iren. l. 2 c. 19. Epiph in contra Marcosias her 34.
and shnn them as men wont to run away from venomous and ravenous beasts; for
Epiphanius tells us they are like unto the serpent called Dypsas, that
poysoneth all the pooles wherein he drinks, so that all the beasts which
drink of those pooles, are suddenly poisoned and killed: Tertull. de praescrip.
c. 42.
Because, as Tertullian says, This has ever been the desire and study of
heretics, Non Ethnicos convertere, sed Christianos evertere, not to convert
infidells, but to pervert and throw down Christians from the faith, and
therefore Saint John seeing the heretic Cerinthus in a bath wherein the
Apostle bathed himself, ran away from him as it had been from a Lion: Iren. l.
3. c. 3.
And Ireneus says, that Tantum Apostoli and eorum discipuli habuerunt timorem,
ut neque verbo tenus communicarent alicui eorum qui adulteraverant veritatem,
the Apostles and their Disciples did so warily shun all heretics, that they
would have no communication with any of them that had depraved the truth of
Christ. And no marvel, for as errors in practice are like a fretting
Lep^^s^e, of a contagious and spreading nature, so errors in judgment are
very diffusive also, Cor. 5.6. ^ Tim. 2.17.
A little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump, and heretics false Doctrines fret
and spread like a Gangren, for no opinion is so monstrous, but if it has a
Mother, it will also get a Nurse: Woeful experience in these times, wherein the
golden reins of Church government are wanting, does clearly evince the truth
thereof. But yet the Lord does seldom suffer the Authors, and chief fomenters
of heresies even in this world to go unpunished, as fully will appear in these
ensuing examples.

Blasphemous Arrius, that denied the consubstantiality of the son of God with
his Father, did, by the dreadful Judgment of God, Ruff. l. 1. c. 13.
burst in sunder, and after the manner of Judas Iscariot his bowels gushed
out, so when diverse of the Arrian Bishops intended to meet in a town of
Nicomedia to consult about the propagation of that wicked heresy, Socrat.
Eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 25.
the Lord to prevent their purposes, did overthrow the town by a fearful
Earthquake, Idem l. 1. c. 22. and l. 2. c. 39. John 16.7.
so Montanus that proclaimed himself to be that Paracletus the comforter which
our Savior promised to send unto his Church, and his two femenine Prophets,
those lewd Dames Priscilla and Maximilla did end their lives on Judas his Tree:
Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 5. c. 13. and 14.
so Paulus Samosateneus that denied Christ to be the natural son of God, was
miserably plagued by the hands of God and being deprived from his usurped
Bishopric, he was excommunicated from all the Churches of God. Hieron. in
catalog. scrip.
so Manes of whom the sect of the Manichees took their denomination, that had
congested together many odious heresies, as saint Augustine shows was at last
taken and imprisoned by the King of Persia, and by his commandment he was
flead alive, and his skin filled full of chaff, and set up as a woeful
spectacle before the gate of a certain City in Mesopotamia, Eusebius. Eccles.
hist. l. 7. c. 30.
says Eusebius, so Simon Magus that taught many abominale heresies, attempting
to show his power to the people by flying in the air, fell down, brake his
Thigh and dyed miserably; so Nestorius who spoke against the union of the
divine and humane nature of Christ had his blasphemous tongue rotted in his
mouth, and consumed with ^^^mes, and at length the earth opened her mouth and
swallowed him up; so Cerinthus an arch heretic, being in a Bath at Ephesus,
the bath fell upon them and his associates and killed them; so Heraclius the
Emperor infected with the heresy of the Monothelites, having raised a great
Army against his enemies, fifty thousand of them dyed in one night, whereupon
he presently fell sick and dyed: So Constance the Emperor a Monothelite was
slain hy his own servants, as he was washing himself in a Bath. And so I
might recount many others, whose tragical ends from Gods Judgments do
sufficiently show Gods hatred against all heresies.

Now touching profane Atheists, they are so addicted to the world that you
shall never persuade them to think that there is a God, or a Christ, or a
Devil, or a heaven or a hell, Psalm. 53.1.
but these Fools have said in their hearts there is no God, and with the
Sadduces they believe that there are neither angels nor spirits, first nor
second, Seneca in O^dip. Claud. in Ruff.
good nor bad; omnia certo tramite vadunt, all do run in a certain cross
path, or as Claudian says, incerto fluerunt mortalia casu, all fall out b^ ^ab
nab; all by chance, and that is the end of all; and so this cursed and
atheistical crew of incredulous men, Pejores and tardiores ad credendum, quam
ipsi daemones, are worse herein, and slower to believe then the very Devils,
as Saint Augustine says: And therefore the death of an Atheist, commonly is
most miserable: Paul. Diacon. l. 15.
Either burnt as Diagoras; or eaten up with lice, as Pherecides, or deveured by
dogs, as Lucian, or thundershot and turned to ashes as Olympius, or eaten up of
worms as Herod Agrippa, Acts 12.22.23.
or thrown down from an high place and broken in pieces as Daphida, val. Max.
l. 1. Fulgen. l, 1. c 2.
or slain by his servants as Commodus, and Heliogabalus, or slain with a
thunderbolt, as Tullus Hostilius, or struck with madness as Francis Ribelius,
or kills himself, as Strozze and Periers, or pined to death, as Jodelle.
However descending impenitent into hell, there he is an Atheist no longer, but
has as much religion as the Devil, to confess God and tremble: nullus in
inferno est Atheos, ante fuit.

On Earth were Atheists many,
In Hell there is not any.
All s^^ak truth when they are upon the rack; but it is a woeful thing to be
hells convert. And so you see how the justice of God never preserves Atheists
and Heretics even to the extreamost execution.

Against both these implacable, though always foiled enemies to divine truth,
have I built this Bulwark, which wants neither the strength of Ordnance,
provision of victuals, nor the policy of most worthy Captains and good
soldiers. For,

First, Against the wretched Atheists I have placed the Learning of the
Gentiles, because that to allege scripture to an Infidel, is to no more
purpose, then if he alleged the Jewish Cabalist, or the Turkish Alcaron unto a
Christian. And that it is lawful for us to use the learning of the Gentiles, is
easily proved: For we find, that not only the Fathers of the primitive Church,
as Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian,
Lactanctius, Firmianus, Ambrose; Hierome, Augustine Fulgentius, Venerable Bede
and all the rest did allege the authorities of their precedent Fathers, and of
the best heathen Authors, but also the Apostles and Prophets themselves did
allege the sayings and testimonies of the Heathen writers: For Moses was
learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, Clemens Alex, strom. lib. 2. Dan.
4. etc. 6 Ezra 1.
and was therefore likened by Clemens Alexandrinus unto Plato, and Daniel
recites the Decree of Nebuchadnezzar, and the Decree of Darius, and the Edict
of Cyrus King of Persia, and Saint Paul uses the Testimony of Aratus against
the Athenians, Acts 17.28. 1 Cor. 15 33 Titus 1.12.
of Menander against the Corinthians, and of Epimenides against the Cretians,
and out of the Jewish Talmud he borrows the names of the Magicians of
Egypt, Jannes and Jambres that resisted Moses, for they are not found in all
the books of the Old Testament. And therefore as it was lawful for the
Israelites to rob the Egyptians of all their Jewels, and most precious things
that they could get of them, so it is lawful for us to take the best things
that we can find, either witty saying, fitting similitude, or memorable story
in all the writings of the Heathens, and to transport them, (as Solomon did the
wood of Lebanon for the building of Gods house, and the gold of Ophir to make
the Temple of Jerusalem the more glorious) from the pr^^h^ne use of the first
Authors unto the divine edifying of Gods Church.

Besides, It is the cleerest evidence in the world that can be produced, to
convince any man when he is made a party in the proof, a witness in his own
case, and a Judge against himself: For what can any Gentile object for
himself against us, that he does not believe in Jesus Christ, when he
perceives our truth confirmed, and himself convicted out of the learning of
the Gentiles? what can the Philosopher say, when he sees himself confuted by
Philosophy? Job 15.5.6.
or what testimony can a Jew require better then a proof produced out of his
own Cabballs and Talmud? and therefore as Eliphaz says of vain boasters, that
their own words condemn them, so humane arts being divine gifts, we may
lawfully use them, to cut off Goliahs head with his own sword, or to beat down
Hercules with his own club, that is, to confute the Gentiles out of the
learning of the Gentiles, and so we find, that not only in former times the
Prophets, Apostles, and Fathers of the primitive Church have practiced the same
course; but also in later times, Aquinas, Mornaeu^, Doctor Fotherby, late
Bishop of Salisbury, and diverse others, have out of Trismegistus, Homer,
Plato, Aristotle, Cicero and the rest of the Gentile Doctors, confuted the
superstitions of the Heathens, and confirmed the truth of Christian Religion.

Secondly, Against the wicked and cursed heretics, I have used the sacred
scripture, whose excellency above all humane learning, I shall briefly set forth
and conclude. Such is the excellency of scripture-learning, which contains in
it florem delibatum, the flower and very Quintessence of soule-saving wisdom,
that we may say of it, as the Philosopher sometimes spoke concerning the
knowledge of the soul of man, Aristotle de a^ l. 1. and praf antiq. lect.
praestatpauculo ex meliore scientia degustasse, quam de ignobiliore multa.
A small and dim knowledge of it, is to be valued far above a greater measure
of cleerer insight in any other science. For the inspired scriptures is the
infallible rule of Faith, the unmovable ground of Hope, the perfect guide of
Life, the souls storehouse of Provision, the spiritual Magazeen of Munition,
the sacred fuel of Devotion, the divine subject of Contemplation, and the
everlasting spring of celestial consolation. It is (as saint Gregory says)
like the deepest Ocean, wherein the greatest Elephant may find sea room enough
to swim, and yet never sound the depth thereof, and like the shallowest foord,
wherein the silliest Lamb may easily wade without any danger of drowning: And
as Fulgentius says, Fulgent. Ser. de confess. Habet and quod robustu^ comedat,
and quod parvulus sugat. Basil in Psalmum primum.
it has strong meat for the best stomachs, and sweet Milk for the tenderest
babes. It is a pavoury of wholesome food against feigned Traditions, a
Physicians shop against poisoned heresies, a pandect of profitable Laws
against rebellious spirits, a treasury of most costly Jewels against beggarly
rudiments; and it is wisdom without folly to direct us, riches without poverty
to honor us, and strength without weakness to maintain us: For that it will
instruct us in life, comfort us in death, and glorify us in heaven. The
canonical books of the Old and New Testament, are exact Maps of the heavenly
Canaan, drawn by the Pencill of Holy Ghost, the authentical records of the
Church, the deeds of Almighty God, and Evidences of man's salvation. Yea, The
arguments to prove the divinity of scriptures are, the venerable antiquity,
matchless majesty, lively efficacy, beautiful harmony, incomparable purity,
invincible perennity, and continuance of them, mauger the injury and iniquity
of times, and Tyrants who have sought to suppress them, Besides, the
confirmation by miracles, confession of Martyrs, destruction of oppugners,
fulfilling of prophesies, consent of Churches; yea, assent of adversaries: As
first of heretics, who in oppugning of scriptures do yet allege scripture to
their own utter destruction. 2 Pet. 3.16.
Secondly of Jews. Gods Library Keepers, as Saint Augustine calls them, who
studiously read and curiously kept the Books of the old Testament, by a
singular providence of God, for our benefit and behoof. Thirdly, many heathens,
being convinced in their consciences, have sealed to the truth of the
scripture, by their testimonies, and confessed them to be divine, for Porphyry
testifies that Moses has written the history of the Law truly, and Numenius
the Pythagorist recites Moses's history, almost word forword, testifying that
he was a great Divine.

But we have better testimonies, even the holy scriptures themselves, which do
not only establish our faith, 1 Pet. 3.15. Isa. 1.18. Eze. 18.25.29.
but also instruct our Reason, furnishing us with arguments, rationally, to
prove their truth to be sacred and their authority divine: Yea further, The
scripture is proved to be the word of God, by the Majesty of it, which, besides
the stately plainness of the style, far surpasses the creatures capacity; the
fathom of flesh and reach of reason. There is no jot or tittle of of it that
savours of earthlinesse: Every word of Gods mouth is pure precious and
profitable, not a syllable superfluous. The very majesty of the sentence is
such as cannot be conceived, and yet its always more powerful in matter, then
in words. Humane writings may show some faults to be avoided, but give no power
to amend them: What words of Philosophers could ever make of a Leopard a Lamb;
of a Viper a Child; of a Lecher a chaste man; of a Nabal a Nadib, or of a
covetous carle a liberal person? Philosophy may civilize, not sanctify; hide
some sins, not heal them; cover, not cure them: But the efficacy and virtue of
the scripture is such, that it produces the love of God, and our enemies; it
purifieth the heart, pacifieth the conscience; rectifieth the whole, both
constitution, and conversation of man; yea it takes him off from the delights
of the world and the flesh; makes him glory in afflictions, sing in the
flames, and triumph over death. All these, and more do necessarily conclude the
divine verity and authority of the sacred scriptures.

Moreover, if we will open our eyes to see and bring our Judgment to discern;
we may soon perceive that, besides the truth of scripture, which will admit no
comparison with any writings, there is more learning in Moses, then in all the
learned men of the Gentiles, more Rhetoric in Esayas Prophesies, then in all
Tullies Orations; more Logic in Saint Paul's Epistles, then in all Aristotle's
Analiticks; there is sweeter music in King David, then in all the Lyrick Poets
of the heathen; there is better Philosophy in Job, then in all the Philosophers
of Greece; there is truer Morality in Solomon, then can be found in all humane
Ethiques, and there are more heroic virtues, and martial prowess in Joshuah,
Judges and the C^^^nicles, then can be fetched out of all the Greek and Roman
stories, and you shall find more patheticall expressions of sorrow and grief
in a little more then one leaf of Jeremiahs Lamentation, then you can find in
the mournful Elegies of the Poets; you shall read such ravishing Encomium's of
true love, in eight little Chapters of the Song of Songs, as the like are not
to be found in all the Epithalamium's of the world and you shall see more
elegancy of expressions, more excellency of demonstrations, and more admirable
allusions in our Saviors Doctrine, then can be collected out of all the
millions of volumes that are extant. And therefore by Gods word, Hushai was
made a wise Counselor, Solomon a wise King, Joshuah a wise Captain, and
Timothy a wise divine. Gideon overcame the Midianites, David the Philistines,
Jehoshaphat the Amonites, the Isralites the Canaanites, and all godly men the
Flesh, the Devil, and the worlds vanities. By it Kings reign, Princes decree
Justice; all things are governed, the Foundations of the Earth were laid, the
Heavens established, Treasures and substances are inherited. Also by it Man is
blessed, his Faith is increased, his soul is converted, his Vnderderstanding
enlightened, his heart cheered and changed, his corruptions mortified, his
thoughts purged, his affections sanctified, his memory with good lessons
stored, his will to Gods will conformed, his speech with grace is seasoned, his
days are prolonged, his years augmented, his sleep is secured, his walkings
guided, and all his actions to Gods glory wholly directed.

Yea further, By Gods word, The ignorant men are instructed, disordered men
reformed, the afflicted in heavinsse comforted, the dull in memory quickened,
the cold in zeal inflamed, and the distressed in want releived, by it, the
Righteousness of God is revealed, the Church is sanctified, truth is preached,
error convinced, vice corrected, good life directed, death avoided, and life
eternal through Christ obtained. In keeping then of Gods word, there is great
reward; therefore it will be worth our pains to sequester our spare time, from
the n^cessary duties of our calling, to the reading hearing, and meditating
upon the word, which through the spirit of grace and devout prayers, will
enlighten our understanding, with the knowledge of God, inflame our affections
with the love of God, and establish our hearts with the promises of God; yea,
it will moderate our joys with the fear of God, mitigate our afflictions with
the comforts of God, and regulate all our thoughts, words, and deeds with the
precepts of God. Theodosius the Emperor, and Alfred King of England, are
renowned in hystory for their assiduity in reading of the scriptures, and
concerning Alphonsus King Arragon, it is recorded that he did fourteen times
read over the Old and New Testament, with Commentaries upon the same. It is an
exercise well beseeming the highest as well as the lowest, to be well versed in
the book of the high God; which alone is able to make a man wise unto
salvation. Let us not therefore dive continually in humane arts and secular
sciences, full of dregs and dross, but let us rather digg into the mines of
gold of Ophyr, where every line is a vein of precius truth, and every page a
leaf of Gold. Indeed, in other books some truth is taught, some good
commended, and some kind or part of happiness promised: but in the inspired
Oracles of God, all truth is taught, all goodness commanded, and all happiness
promised, nay we may invert the words with Hugo de sancto victore, and say,
Quicquid ibi docetur est veritas, quicquid precipitur bonitas, and quicquid
promittitur faelicitas, All that is there taught is truth, all that is there
commanded is goodness, and all that is there promised is happiness.

Amongst the Ancients, Chrysostom likens the holy scripture to a Treasury, to
a Fountain, to an Apothecaries shop, Jerome to a Table richly furnished with
variety of delicates, Ephrem to an armory, Basil to a looking-glass Chrysostom.
to a pleasant garden, and Cassian to a fruitful field. But to what purpose
serves a Treasury, if we make no use of it? or a Fountain, if we draw no
water thence? or an Apothecaries shop, if we fetch no Medicine thence? or a
Table furnished with varieties, if we taste not of them? or an Armory if we
take no weapons thence? or a looking-glass, if we behold not our faces
therein? or a pleasant Garden, if we gather no flowers or herbs thenein? or a
fruitful field, if we reap no fruit therein? Surely to no purpose at all. That
we may then make use of this Treasury, draw water from this living fountain,
take medicinal confections from this Apothecaries shop, taste and eat of this
well furnished Table, weapon our selves from this armory, behold our faces in
this glass, gather fragrant flowers in this Garden, and fruit from this
fertile field, Let us be diligent in perusing the sacred writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, let us write them in the table of our hearts; yea, let
us teach them diligently unto our children talk of them when we sit in our
house, Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.
and when we walk by the way, when we lie down, and when we rise up; so shall
we shine every day more and more gloriously in all sanctity, and at last be
able to look death in the face without dread, the Grave without fear, the Lord
Jesus with comfort, and Jehovah blessed for ever with everlasting Joy.

Thus Gentle Reader, I thought good to tennder thee a preparatory Advertisment
of some things, (whose precognition is necessary) before thou entrest this
Bulwark of truth, which I know will pass under the censure and judgment of
diverse sorts of men, some are ignorant and cannot judge, Et ideo grave judicium
est ignorantis, and the ignoranter man, the severer Judge, others are, too rash
and are ready to censure it, before they read it; others are malicious,
maligning and depraving other men's labors, and I know there be many Momus
like, Aug. contra Faust. l. 22. c. 43.
Qui, vel non intelligendo, reprehendunt, vel reprehendendo non intelligunt,
that do show their folly in reproving others, when out of envy or ignorance
they blame that good of others, which they have not or know not themselves: and
for these there is none other help, but to be careless of their censures, and
to pray against their wickedness. Yea, Let them go on, say what they will, Ego
sic vivam ut illis fides non habeatur, I hope God will give him grace to fear
him and not them: And I hope the Godly Reader of this little Tract of mine will
find some profit by it, for the most necessary, and sublimest points of
divinity, are here briefly and yet fully handled, and I rejoice in this, that I
deliver what I learned, and not what I invented, as Lyrinensis speaks. Let no
man how challenge me for usurping another man's Office, or Trespassing upon
Divines; I cannot see but Divines and Physicians may well agree together. Both
are busied about curing of diseases, either spiritual or corporal, and here
is a medicine for both. Besides, although I have thus labored out of my
calling, as I am a Physician, yet I am not out of my profession as I am a
Christian. What I have written, I intended for a public benefit, and I do
willingly submit it to the judgment of Gods Children, they must all confess, it
is the last hour of the worlds age, wherein iniquity is increased, impiety is
enlarged, and all charity is almost abandoned, all things growing worse and
worse by continuance, Et Satanas tanto ferventior ad saevitiam, quanto se
sentit viciniorem ad paenam; and Satan having the greater rage to drive us to
transgression, by how much the nearer he perceives himself to destruction, and
therefore, let men say what they will, yet seeing we may truly demand of them,
quid audiam verba, cum videam contraria facta? What booteth all our knowledge,
seeing we do nothing that we know, nor know nothing indeed as we ought to
know, I say that it cannot be amiss to do what we can, to express those
things that may best make for our happiness, and I know these points are
necessary to be known, and most profitable to be practiced by all Christians:
Read them then, and I will pray to God that he will give the grace, Faeliceter
currere and faelicius in Christi pietate cursum tuum cousummare, to understand
what thou read, to believe what thou understandest, and to practice what
thou beleivest, that so thou may attain unto everlasting life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Robert Bayfeild.
From my Study in Norwich, Feb. 3. 1656.
The Stationer to the READER,
Reader,
IF in this Tractate, the Quotations of Greek and Latin do offend thee, let
them be unto thee as country styles, stepping over them, thou loosest not thy
way by them; for their Expositions follow them.

Imprimatur

Edm. Calamy.

CHAP. I. OF GOD.
IT must be the chiefest care of all that would be happy, to know God, The
chiefest happiness of man is to know God. Joh. 17.3.
which is the chiefest happiness of all; and therefore our Savior says, That
this is eternal life, to know him to be the only true God, and whom he has
sent, Jesus Christ: Yet the misery of man's nature is so great, that whereas it
was created to the bright knowledge, and even the very image of God, it is
fallen so far, as it is not only ignorant who, and what God is, but also
makes disputation, whether there be any God in Heaven or no; who has care
over the World and humane affairs; as Ovid confesses of himself, Ovid Amor.
l. 3. Eleg. 8.
Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos. And indeed it is very sad and dreadful,
that these solicitations and suggestions of Satan have prevailed, not only
with diverse of the Heathens, but also with many Christians, even in these our
days, which as Justin Martyr observes, Justin Martyr in dial. cum Tryph. p.
153. Vide etiam Theodoret. de Provident. Ser. 1. to. 2. p. 576. Psalm. 14 1.
are so called, and yet are nullius numinis cultores, no better indeed then
plain Atheists, though not such, as Diagoras and Theodorus that did plainly
deny all Deity, but such as the Prophet David speaks of, that say in their
hearts, There is no God, because they cannot see him: yet let all such fools,
Atheists, Heathens, and wicked persons know, that they err and are deceived,
Matthew. 22.29. Exodus 33.20 Joh. 1.18. Joh. 4.24.
not knowing the Scriptures. No man can see God and live: No man has indeed
seen God at any time with the bodily eye (and yet there is a God) who as he
will be worshipped with the worship of the spirit spiritually, so will he be
seen with the eyes of the spirit inwardly. Thou have a soul and yet thou see
it not, there is a wind and yet thou perceivest it not. So there is a God
though thou see him not. The which to averr (contrary to the fools saying, Genesis
1.1. Deuteronomy. 4.35. and 6.4.
Atheists living, Heathens worshipping, and wicked persons thinking) there are
in general six things that do manifestly and apparently prove that there is an
everlasting and incomprehensible One, to wit, Elohim, El, 1 Cor. 8.6. Psalm.
83.18. and 86.10. Psalm. 68.4:
Ejeth, Shaddai, Jah, Jehovah, God alone in persons three, but in essence only
one, 1 John 5.7.

1. Gods Works of Creation, Psalm. 19.1 Romans 1.20.
which is a long Volume, and especially above all the rest, the Soul of Man
breathed by God into him.

2. The Word of the Lord, the holy Bible, being a brief Compendium, wherein
thou may read of Gods nature and being.

3. The Incarnation of the Son of God, an engraven Table, Heb. 2.16.
in which thou shall see God himself manifested in the flesh of man.

4. The Consent of all Nations, who worship any God rather then no God: for
there is no Nation so barbarous, but it beleives that there is some Divinity;
or holds opinion that there must needs be an Essence or a first efficient
cause, the producer of all things else whatsoever; because the virtue of the
Godhead has such powerful efficacy, that it very manifestly declares it
self, to all such as have the least taste of reason.

Exodus 8.19. Romans 2.15. Dan. 4.4. and. 5.6.
5. The Terrors of Conscience, which makes the most ungodly miscreants, will
they nill they, to acknowledge him, and to tremble at his judgments sent upon
them.

Prove. 16.33.
6. His Power in sustaining, his Providence in maintaining, his Love in
correcting, his bounty in promising, his faithfulness in performing, his grace
in giving, and his mercy in taking away, makes the faithful to confess him,
and in all his proceedings to justify his wisdom.

So that we may plainly see God left not himself without witness sufficient
at all times, and in every place, to prove unto every one that there is a God:
And seeing Atheists believe not the Scriptures, we have more testimonies then
them to testify the same.

Acts 14.17.
Search among all the Precepts of the Heathens, and you shall find this was
their chiefest lesson, (...), know God. Take the testimonies of the wisest men
and of the sharpest apprehensions in the world, whom Plutarch distinguishes to
be either Philosophers, Plutarch in amat to. 3. moral. p. 416.
Lawgivers or Poets, and hi omnes uno ore dicunt Deum esse, and all these with
one voice, do say that There is a God. Plato de legibus l. 10.
Plato not only says it, but also confirms it by many invincible reasons.

Aristotle, though a man, Aristotle in l. de mundo p. 1566. and in l. 1.
Metaph. to. 2. c. 2. p. 1371.
says Grotius, not very credulous in this kind; yet we find in his later
works, he does most plainly affirm God to be the cause, and the beginning of
all things, and in his last book of natural Philosophy, after he had written
five before (of eight that he writ in all) only of Motions and the affections
of it, Molinaeus de cognit. de^p. 8. S. 17.
he does end his last Book in the First Mover, who is immovable; for seeing
all things that are moved, are moved by some one thing, and that again by
another, and so forward, it must needs follow that in such a chain of Motionary
things, because we cannot proceed to what is infinite; we must needs stay at
one first mover, who though he moves all things yet is himself immovable.
Zeno which Cicero calls the Father of the Stoics, does not only affirm that
there is a God; but says further, Vnum Deum esse, ipsumque and mentem and
fatum and Jovem multisque aliis appellari nominibus, Cicero de Not. Deor. l. 3.
D. Laertius in vitae Zenon.
that there is but one God, which is sometimes called by one name, and
sometimes by another: And Epicurus, Quem nihil pudendum pudet, tamen Deum
negare pudet; Mornoeus de verit. relig. c. 1.
who was not ashamed of any shameful thing, yet was he ashamed to deny that
there is a God, as Du-Plessis says.

2. The Lawgivers affirm there is a God, Plut. to. 3. cont. colot. moral. p.
532.
for Plutarch says, that in Constitutione legum, facilius ^rbem condi sine
solo, quam civitatem coire sine Religione, in the making of their Laws, it is
not so impossible for a man to build a City without a foundation, as it is for
him to gather and guide his Citizens without Religion; and therefore all the
ancient Lawgivers gave it out among their people, that they composed their
Laws by the assistance of some one or other of the Gods, Diodor. Sicul. ^. 1.
c. 5.
as Menes, the Lawgiver of the Egyptians, from Mercury; Minos, the Lawgiver
of the Cretians, from Jupiter, Lycurgus, the Lawgiver of the Lacedaemonians,
from Apollo; Zaleucus, the Lawgiver of the Locrians, from Minerva; and so all
the rest derive their Laws from their Gods: And no wonder; because as Job
says, Job 36 22.
Nullus est similis in Legis-Latoribus, there is none like him amongst all the
Lawgivers, nay he is the Only Lawgiver which is able to save and to destroy,
James 4 12 Prove. 8.15.
as Saint James testifies; and God himself says, By me Kings do reign, and
Princes decree Justice: And therefore Plato says, It is not man but God, Qui
legum condendarum est causa, Plato de leg. l. 1
which is the cause of making all good Laws.

3. The Poets teach there is a God, for it is a common thing with them all. A
Jove principium, to begin their Works with the invocation of the Gods, as Ovid
says, -- Dij ceptis --

Aspirate meis -- O Gods I crave your help to assist me in this my work; and
Manilius says, Ovid Me^. l. 1.
that Caelo carmen descendit ab alto: Manilius l. 1.
the whole faculty of Poets depended more upon a Divine Incitation, then any
humane gift or art^^^ciall instruction, and therefore Martial in his scoffing
vain says of Cicero, Carmina quod scribis, Martial. l. 2. Epigr. 89 in Gaur.
musis and Apolline nullo,
Laudari debes, hoc Ciceronis habes.


That he was no Poet because he wanted Apollo's help

Now I have given you the Testimonies of Philosophers, Lawgivers, and Poets, I
proceed next to the testimony of every man's Conscience, and especially of all
or most wicked men, that continually affright them for their odious facts, does
sufficiently show unto them that there is a God, which will one day call them
to a strict account for all their wicked Deeds; for there is an imbred fear of
God in all men's hearts, and according as they live virtuously or viciously, so
is this fear augmented or diminished; Cicero de Not. Deorum l. 1.
Quis enim non timeat omnia providentem, and cogitantem, and ad se omnia
pertinere putantem Deum? For who can choose but fear a Provident, remembering,
and an all observing God, that professes all things to belong to himself? and
therefore every one that is adicted to Vice, is many times afraid at the
shaking of a leaf. And although in the course of his Prosperity he shakes off
all thought of God; yet in any sudden Danger, he will cry out, O God, and crave
his assistance to be releived whom in all his former actions he profanely
despised.

Moreover, let us consider the End, and the Cause efficient of all Creatures.
Does not Experience tell us, that every thing brought forth in Nature has a
peculiar end, by Nature the Bird is directed to build her Nest, and the Fox to
make his Den: Now the Philosopher asks here, what thing is that that
directs Nature her self, seeing each thing must have somewhat to direct it to
its end? And no answer can be made, but that the Director of Nature must be
something above Nature, which is God himself. This argument of the final end,
is most excellently handled by Phylo Judeus in his learned Treatise of the
workmanship of the World. Phylo lib. de Opific. mund.
Concerning the Cause efficient, the Philosophers dispute thus, It is evident
by all reason, in respect of the Corruptions, Alterations, and perpetual
Motions of all Creatures, that this world had a beginning, Vide Plutar. de Pla.
Phylos.
and all excellent Philosophers that ever were have agreed thereupon, except
Aristotle, who for a time held a fantasy, Aristot. lib. De Mund.
that the world had no beginning, but was from all Eternity; albeit at last in
his old age, he confessed the contrary in his book to King Alexander. This then
being so, that this World had a Beginning, it must needs follow also, that it
had an Efficient cause, now then is the question, Who is that efficient cause
that made the World? if you say that it made it self, it is absurd, for how
could it have power to make it self before it self was, and before it had any
being at all? if you say, that something within the world made the world, that
is, that some one part thereof made the whole, this is more absurd; for it is
as if a man should say, that the finger (and this before it was a finger) or
part of the body, did make the whole body. Wherefore we must confess by force
of this Argument, that God is the Efficient cause that made the World.

A Maxim in Metaphisick. Aristot. lib. 8. Metaphis. ca. 2.
Yet further, The Philosopher in his Metaphisicks, says, That every thing which
is by Participation, must be reduced and referred to some other thing, that is
not by participation, but of it self, as for Example, Water, or any thing else
that is heated by the Fire, is hot by participation, and not of it self. And
therefore is reduced (concerning its heat) to the heat of the Fire, as to its
Original: Now then (says the Philosopher in his Metaphisicks) we see by
experience, that all the creatures and Parts of this World, are things by
Participation only, and therefore they must of necessity be referred to some
higher cause that is infinite in perfection, and consists of it self alone
without participation from others: And this is God, who being Absolute,
Endless, and without all limitation of perfection in himself, deriveth from
his own incomprehensible infiniteness, certain limited Natures and
perfections to every creature; which perfections in creatures, are nothing else
but little Particles, and Participations of the Bottomless Sea of Perfections
in the Creator, whereunto they are to be referred and reduced, as the Beam to
the Sun, and the Brook to the Fountain.

I might here accumulate many arguments more, which prove to every man that
there is a God, but I do not this to satisfy the doubting minds of wicked
Atheists, that believe there is no God; because I think such deserve rather to
be Executed by the Tormentor, then instructed by any Philosopher, but we bring
these things to show how far they are beyond excuse, that having so many
arguments before their eyes to prove that there is a God, will notwithstanding
not glorify him as God; Rom 1.21.
and therefore, as by the operation of our Souls, we do know that we have
Souls though we see them not; so by the works of God in our selves, and in
all things else we do assuredly believe, and most certainly know, there is a
God, though our blind eyes cannot see this great light; and though the
negligence of the Heathens, and their wickedness that blinded all their light,
which Nature had ingrafted in their Souls, made them multitudes of Gods, that
in Hesiods time they amounted to the number of thirty thousands; yet to us that
are guided by the light of Gods Word, and are inspired with the Graces of Gods
Spirit to believe that word, it is most apparent that there is but One God; and
this, Deuteronomy. 6.4.32.39. Isa. 44.6. 1 Cor. 8.4.
not only the Scriptures, but also Reason it self can make it plain. For,

If there should be many Gods, it must needs then ensue as an especial Maxim,
that they must needs be all alike, or different in their powers. If they be all
alike, or equal, why then they can be but all as One: For Dissimilitude makes
the diversity of things only.

But if there were many Gods differing in their equality; it is apparent that
they could not justly be called Gods, if there be any imperfection in one, more
then is in the other. A note worthy observation.
For he that is Absolute and most perfect, must needs be God, in regard there
is no imperfection found in him, and then, the other (being impotent or
imperfect) cannot be termed Gods, but must needs submit their utmost power, to
the others perfect privilege: It is necessary therefore that there should be
but One God only, (as in very truth) there is no more then one; who is the sole
Beginning of all things; and yet notwithstanding has no beggining or ending.

Anselm. in lib. De Memb. Dei.
If any man (says Anselme) do believe that God has Humane members and Motions,
or Perturbation of Soul as we have, assuredly he does but forge mere Idoll^
in his Heart. And therefore we are to know that such phrase and manner of
Language in the sacred Scriptures, is properly used to make our rude and dull
understanding the more apprehensive of the unspeakeable Majesty of God. For he
being invisible, and yet willing to manifest himself unto his People, does
accommodate his presence to men, by an Analogy of such things as are most
frequent and familiar to them. For Example,

God is said to have A Soul By which is meant His life together with his
Essence. Isa. 1.14. A head The Essence of his Deity and Godhead. Dan. 7.9.
Eyelids The incomprehensible judgment of God. Psalm. 11.4. Eyes His providence,
knowledge and favor. 2 Chronicles. 16.9. Apple of the eye That which is dearest
unto him. Deuteronomy. 32 10. Ears His willingness in hearing our prayers Psalm.
31.2. A face His presence and favorable kindness. Psalm. 31.16. A nose His very
anger against sinners. Jer. 25.32. Nostrills His favorable acceptance of
Sacrifices. Genesis 8.21. A mouth His Commandments given unto men. Jer. 91 12. An
arm His power, strength, and fortitude. Genesis 49.24. A hand His might,
protection and justice. Job 19.21. A right hand His authority and his
fortitude. Psa. 110 1. A finger His spirit, virtue and efficacy, Exodus 31 18.
Feet His strength and presence to govern. Psa. 110 1. God is fayd to have A
footstool By which is meant His authority over the ungodly. Isa. 66.1.
Back-parts An imperfect representation of him. Exodus 33.23. Senses His
Providence over the Creatures. Psalm. 14 2. Oblivion That he imputes not our
sins unto us. Psalm. 32.2. His face hid That declares his severity. Psalm. 30 7.
A heart His lively Essence and his Decree. Genesis 6.6. Memory That he remembers
mercies. Psalm. 25 6. A Shade His Protection over all his creatures. Psalm.
121.5. A Throne His Princely Power and Majesty. Isa. 66.1. A Way The course of
all his Actions. Psalm. 103.7. Wings His defense in preserving the Godly. Psalm.
17.8.

And he is said to God is said to Sorrow By which is meant The dislike of the
things which causes it. Genesis 6.6. Smell His acceptance of man's doings. Genesis
8.21. Repent A change of the thing purposed on man's repentance. Jon. 3.10. Rest
That he cease from creating. Genesis 2.2 Sleep That he is slow in succouring.
Psalm. 44 23. Sit That he plays the part of a Judge. Psalm. 2.4. See That he
knows all things that are done. Psalm. 11 4. Breathe That he does infuse the
soul into the body. Genesis 2.7. Hear That he accomplisheth man's request. Psalm.
5.2. Descend That he is not ignorant of the things on e^^th. Genesis 11.7. Come
unto us That he causes us to feel his grace. Psalm. 6.4. Dwell in us. That he
confirms us in the trust of his grace. Joh. 14.23. God is said to be Angry By
which is meant His threatening of punishment. Hos. 11.9. Patient His willing
forbearance to punish till sins be ripened. 2 Pet. 3.9. Exalted That his
Majesty is exalted. Psalm. 57.11. Zealous The love that he has to his Church.
Isa. 9.9. Jealous His great indignation against Idolatry. Number. 25 11. Weary
That he cannot abide something. Isa. 1.14 Justified That he is justified, being
just and good. Luke 7.29. Silent That he hears not our prayers. Psalm. 28.1.
Full That he is not delighted in a thing. Isa. 1.11

So that whatsoever is attributed to God, must evermore be interpreted
spiritually; Damas. in 1. and 2. cap. de fide Orthodox.
as Damascene very well declares in these words, Multa igitur quae ad Deum
spectant tenui quadam and obscura cognitione percipiuntur commode, and proprie
nequeunt efferri. Itaque loquentes de iis quae supra nos sunt, cogimur uti
verbis nobis congruentibus. Ex quo fit ut Deo and somnum, and iram, and
securitatem, and manus, and pedes, and alia ejusmodi tribuamus. There are many
things which concern God, that insignification do carry an obscure
construction, and cannot properly be delivered. Wherefore, in speaking of those
which are above us, we strive to use apt and congruent words to our capacity,
whereby ensues, (...).
that sleep, anger, ease, hands, feet, and other such like, may seem to be
ascribed unto God.

We find also in the sacred Scriptures many Epithets and Appellations
answerabe to the manifold effects of his power, rule, and Divinity. His
Epithets are, Almighty, Strong, Exodus 6.3. Matthew. 1 7. Psalm. 86.10. Jam. 1.17.
Deuteronomy. 7.21. and 10.17. 1. Tim. 1.11. Genesis 21.33. Psalm. 31.2. Isa. 42.13. Isa.
28.5. Isa. 42.14. Hos. 13.7. Hos. 11.10. Deuteronomy. 32.11. Lam. 3.10. Job. 16.4.
Great, Vchangeable, Dreadful, Terrible, Wronderfull, Blessed, Everlasting,
Favorable, Eternal, Faithful, Gracious, Good, Holy, Jealous, Invisible,
Just, Merciful, Pitiful, Righteous, True, uncorruptible, Incomprehensible,
most Powerful, etc. He is compared unto a strong Rock, a man of War, a Diadem
of Beauty, and unto a woman Traveling. He is also compared unto a Leopard, a
Lion, an Eagle, a Bear, a Giant, and a Moth, Hos. 5.12.
and he is compared unto a righteous Father, a strong Lord, a Lawgiver, a
righteous Judge, a Cart pressed down, a Counselor, a friend, a House of
defense, a lender, a mighty man, a Mother, a Purifier, a Purger, and a Refiner
of Gold, etc. Lastly his Appellations are as follows, God is called A Father:
Mal. 1.6. A Creator. Isa. 40.28. A Builder. Heb. 3.4. A Compasser. Psalm. 32.7.
A Nourisher. Isa. 1.2. A Planter. Genesis 2.8. A Record. Job. 16.19. A Rebuker.
Hos. 5.2. A Redeemer. Isa. 43.1. A Rewarder. Genesis 15.1. A Rock. Psalm 18.2. A
Sanctuary. Isa. 8.14. A secret place. Psalm. 32.7 A Shadow. Isa 25.4. A
Shepherd. Psalm. 23.1. A She^d. Psalm. 115.11. A Spirit. Joh. 4.24. Truth. Deuteronomy.
32.4. A Husband. Isa. 54.5. A just Judge. Psalm. 9.8. God is called The holy one
Job 6 10 A Helper Psalm. 10 14 I am that I am. Exodus 3 14 A Keeper Psalm. 121 5 A
Leader Deuteronomy. 32 12 A Maker Job. 32 22 A Master Ephesians. 6 9 A Man of War Exodus 15
3 A mighty one Isa. 1 24 Only wise Romans 16 27 A Habitation Psalm. 90 1 A
Deliverer Exodus 18 4 A Captain 2 Chro. 13 12 Almighty Rev. 1 8 A Fortress
Psalm. 18 2 An Elector Romans 8 33 An Avenger Psalm. 94 1 Abba Father Mark. 14 36 A
Witness Jer. 29 23 A Treasurer Isa. 33 6 A Succourer Psalm. 22 19 A Sure trust
Psalm. 71 7 A Strong hold. Nah. 1 7 God is called The searcher of the hearts
Romans 8 27 A Savior of Israel Jer. 14 8 The Rock of Salvation Deuteronomy. 32 15 A
Revealer of Secrets Dan. 2 47 A Refuge for the oppressed Psalm. 9 9 God is
called The Portion of Jacob Jer 51 19 A ponderer of the hearts Prove 24 12 A
Preserver of men Job 7 20 The lifter up of man's head. Psalm 3 3 The light of
Israel, Isa 10 17 The life of man. Deuteronomy 30 20 An everlasting King. 1 Timothy 1 17
An eternal King. Jer 10 10 An invisible King. 1 Timothy 1 17 A great King. Psalm 95
3 The Sword of Excellency. Deuteronomy 33 29 A stay in calamity Psalm 18 18 The
Fountain of all living waters. Jer 2 13 The Fountain of Jacob. Deuteronomy 33 28 The
former of all things. Prove 26 10 The first and the last. Isa 41 4 An
everlasting strength. Isa 26 4 A consuming fire. Heb 12 29 Christ's head. 1 Cor
11 3 Author of Peace. 1 Cor 14 33 The arm of the Godly. Isa 33 2 A living
Father John 6 57 The fear of Isaac Gen 31 42 Lord of The Hebrews The Harvest
Heaven, and Earth Hosts Kings
Exodus 7 16 Luke 10 2 Matthew 11 25 Idem Isa 14 27 Dan 2 47 God is called Lord of
Salvation The vineyard
Psalm. 88 1 Matthew 21 40 The Guide of our youth Jer 3 4 A great reward Gen 15 1
The habitation of Justice Jer 50 7 The holy one of Israel Isa 1 4 The horn of
Salvation Psalm 18 2 Alpha and Omega Rev 1 8 The Judge of the world, etc. Gen 18
25

Moreover, It is observed, that almost all Nations do write and pronounce the
name of (God) with four Letters. A remarkable note.
He is called in Hebrew (...) (...)
Jehovah, In which word there are contained all the Vowells, a.e.i.o.u. without
some of which no word can be spoken, no name can be uttered; and that in it
there is nothing but Vowels, excepting h, which is no letter, but the
aspiration of the word; to note unto us, that as the Vowels, together with the
aspiration, are the Life, and, as it were, the Soul of every word; so is
Jehovah, the Lord God, the very Life, and being, as it were, of every creature
that can be named; because that of him, and for him, Romans 11 36.
and through him, are all things. Non quod illa sunt, quod ipse est, sed quia
ex ipso sunt; Not that they are the same that he is, but because they have
their existence and perfection from him, Bern. in Cant. Ser. 4.
as Bernard says, God is called in Greek (...), a currendo, of running; Quod
ubique dum opus sit accurrat, adsit, opemque ferat; sive ab urendo, quod
improbos habitus comburat, quando, ex ea re and ignis consumens dicitur. That
every where (while need requires) he runs, is there present, and gives
help: or else of Burning, that he will burn the dwelling of the wicked, when
he is said to be a Consuming fire to them. The Latins breaking the Greek word,
instead of (...), say Deus.

God is called in English Godd, with a double Letter d, as has been observed
in antiquity. In Spanish he is called Dios, in French Dieu; in Italian Idio, In
Dutch Got, in Chalde and Syrian Eloho, in Arabian Alla, in Ethiopian Ahilah;
in Egyptian (...) or (...); in Assyrian Sure, or Adad, in Persian (...); in
Dalmatian or Illirian Orsi, In Turkish Abgl; In New found land Zimi, and
lastly, the Wizards of Persia do write (...). Thus you see that the name of God
is contained in four letters, as some think to demonstrate thereby, that it is
he that has made and formed all things, that they are composed of Four
Elements, and that he made also the four Elements themselves, which do rule
over all things created in this world. Now for the understanding and knowledge
of this one eternal and omnipotent being, we must first note, that no creature
can define what God is, because he is incomprehensible, Psalm. 115.3.
dwelling in the Heavens, that none can attain unto; and this the very Heathens
knew full well, Vide Na^^ell p. 54.

Ita etiam allusit Plutarchus in Iside de theologia Aegypti^rum.

Vide Job c. ^2. Psalm. 18.9.11.


when Orpheus speaking of God could say, (...). I cannot see him, because he is
compassed about with darkness; and Damascius the Platonist, speaking of the
wise men of Egypt, says, (...), they call the first beginning of all things
darkness, unknown darkness, passing all our understanding, answerable to that
place of the Psalmist, He made darkness his secret place, and all to this end,
to show that he cannot be seen or comprehended by us, Quia secundum essentiam
in cognitus and secundum Majestatem immensus; because his Majesty is
immeasurable, and his being is unconceivable, Thalas. apud Paulinum Presbyt.
Job 28 24
says Thalassus, (...), for he is every where, and sees every thing, when as
nothing can see him: and as the sun is in it self most visible, so is God in
himself most intelligible; Why the nature of God is not to be comprehended by
the understanding of man.
and therefore that the sun dazeleth the eye, and God the understanding, it is
from the abundance of glory in both, in respect of our weakness to see, and
insufficiency to apprehend; so that our defect of knowledge in the Nature of
God, is not so properly from the Excellency of the Object, as from the
deficiency of the Faculty; John 1 18.
our understanding being too narrow to comprehend the incomprehensible Essence
of the Godhead; as whatsoever is finite must needs be too short, either to
reach, or to fathom that which is infinite.

1 Timothy 6.16.
Wherefore God dwelling in that light of Glorious Excellency, and inaccessible
Glory, which no eye of humane Reason can approach, or enter into, Psalm. 144 3.
we not being able to comprehend him in a full Knowledge, have some
apprehensions of him by a divine faith, for it has pleased him in his word
revealed unto us, to reveal himself so far, as our weak capacity can
conceive him, and that by giving himself (as you have heard) many Names,
Titles, and Attributes, to show what a one he is, who being a most simple
essence, void of al composition, not subject to any accident, or quality, uses
in the Scriptures to entitle himself by many qualities, the which we must so
understand, that whatsoever he is, whether Good, Wise, Powerful, etc. he is
the same by Essence not by quality.

Now although God cannot be defined, 1. Because he is immense, and his Essence
unknown unto us, 2: Because, as Aristotle says, Aristot. Topicor. l. 1.
(...), the definition of any thing is the expression of what it is in its own
nature and virtue, and so we cannot possibly show what he is, yet some way he
may be described, and therefore his description according to Philosophy is on
this wise; God is an eternal mind or intelligence, The description of God
according to Philosophy.
sufficient in himself to all felicity, most good, and the cause of good in
nature. The description of God according to the rules of Divinity.
But Divinity has taught us a more full and ample description of him, which is
in this sort: God is an Essence spiritual, intelligent, Eternal, infinite,
different from all the creatures, without body, parts, or passions,
incomprehensible, most perfect in himself, immutable, Omnipotent, of exceeding
wisdom and goodness, just, true, chaste, merciful, bountiful, most free,
wroth and angry without sin. Or thus, God is a Spirit, in and of himself, Joh.
4.24. Exodus 3.14. Exodus 24.16. 1. Tim. 1.11. Mat. 5.48. Genesis 17.1. 1. Tim. 1.17.
Mal. 3.8. 1. King 8.27. Psalm. 139.1. to 13. Rev. 4.8. Heb. 4.13. Romans 16.27.
Isa. 6.3. Deuteronomy. 32 4. Exodus 34.6. Nancelius l. 1.
infinite in being, Glory, Blessedness, and perfection, all-sufficient,
Eternal, Unchangeable, Incomprehensible, every where present, Almighty,
knowing all things, most wise, most holy, most just, most merciful and
gracious long, suffering and abundant in goodness and truth.

We find three special ways of expressing what he is; first, by way of
Negation, by removing from him what we find in the creatures, as when we say
and affirm him to be, (...), Immortal, Invisible, Incorporeall, Immovable,
Infinite, Unchangeable, and so forth. And because, Dionys. de calest. hierarch.
c. 2.
as Dionysius the Areopagite says, (...). Negations are true in God, but
affirmatives are not always agreeable to him, therefore this is the best part
of our knowledge of him (as S. Augustine says) when we know rather what he is
not, then what he is.

Secondly, By way of perfection.
by way of affirmation and perfection, as when we do analogically and in
respect of certain similitudes, ascribe unto God the best and most excellent
things that can be found in any of the creatures whatsoever; and so we say, he
is Great, Strong, Fair, Merciful, Just, etc. So Hermes says, (...), God is
an indefatigable Spirit, (...), the highest King of Kings, and a most good God,
and Thales Milesius calls him (...), the most ancient uncreated God: Cicero
in Tuscul. 1. Lactan. lib. 2. cap. 5.
And Cicero (so well as he could) defined him^ in manner following. Deus meus
est vis quaedam soluta and libera, segregata ab omni concretione mortali, omnia
sentiens and movens, ipsaque praedita motu sempiterno, God is a certain
intelligence or spirit, free and ready, separated from all mortal mixture or
concretion, knowing and moving all things, and having in himself an eternal
motion: and Plato defines God to be (...), Plato in Phoedone.
a divine Godhead, immortal, and good, and wise, and understanding of one and
the same manner, indissoluble, having himself always after the same way, and
most like unto himself: And in another place, he says, that God is (...), The
chiefest good, the shape or Idea of the chiefest good, the King of all kinds,
and of that invisible and inaccessible place that none can attain unto, the
maker of the Sun, beyond all substance, the beginning of the Universe, from
whom are all the beings and substances that are known to be: But we must
remember (as I said before) that all these Definitions and many more beside,
can give us no true knowledge of the Essence of God, because it is wholly
incomprehensible. Solus Deus est altissimus, S. Aug. in lib. de mor. Eccles.
quo altius nihil est: Only God is most high, above whom there is nothing
higher, and besides, the Philosophers say, that Definition may wholly specify
the Proportion of a thing, or his Kind, Quality, Difference, or some Peculiar
accident: all which several things are not to be found in God, which is the
reason that he cannot be defined or comprehended, as very learnedly the
Philosopher Symonides answered, for he being demanded concerning the Essence
of God, and having many days given him to resolve the question, at last he
said, The more I strive to consider what God is, the more difficult I find the
matter to be, therefore we ought to take great heed that we wade not too far
into this depth; but let us learn, Chrysostom. hom. 2. in heb.
Potius glorificare eum, qui est, quam investigare quid est, Rather most
faithfully to serve him, which is, then too curiously to search what he is: for
as S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. quo supra hom. 2. in Heb.
Neque ad loquendum digne de Deo lingua sufficit, neque ad percipiendum
intellectus praevalet; our tongues are not able to speak worthily enough of
God, and our understandings are not sufficient to conceive of him as we ought
to do; therefore we should never think upon God without great reverence, says
Musculus.

Thirdly, By way of supereminency, and transcendent excellency; as when we
ascribe to God whatsoever excellencies that are or may be spoken of him; far
above all the excellencies of all creatures whatsoever: as when we say not only
in the Concrete, that God is just, merciful, wise, strong, good, and such
like; but also in the Abstract, By way of supereminency That the abstract names
all excellencies, are only proper to God.
that he is Justice, Mercy, Wisdom, Strength, and Goodness it self, which
cannot be said of any of all the creatures, for that all the best excellencies
of the chiefest creatures, are but as little sparks in respect of a huge
infinite fire, or as a few drops of rain, in comparison of the whole Ocean Sea,
if we should compare them to the excellency of God; Nay, we should find their
wisdoms Folly, their strength Weakness, their beauty Baldness, and all their
goodness to be nothing in respect of the goodness of God; Job, 4.18.
for He charge his Angels with folly, and the Heavens are not clear in his
sight.

Now according to these three ways God is described to be an Immortal, A
description of God by way of 1. Negation 2. Affirmation. 3. Supereminency.
invisible, incomprehensible, spiritual, infinite, Eternal Essence, the cause
of all causes, and the author of all excellencies.

So here you see a boundless Ocean, and a very large Description of God, and I
may sooner loose my self in the prosecuting of the same, then find him fully
as he is, in any place, which is fully and truly in every place. In a sober
sense Bernard says true, Nusquam est and ubique est, God is every where by his
Essence repletively, no where inclusively.
he is no where because no place whether real or imaginary can comprehend or
contain him, he is everywhere, because no body, no space or spiritual
substance can exclude his presence, or avoid the penetration (if I may so
speak) of his essence. He is in Christ spiritually in himself Alpha and Omega:
In the world a Governor, in Angels as Beauty, in his Church as an Householder
in his Family, in the Soul as a Bridegroom in his Marriage-chamber, in the
Righteous, as an Helper, in the Reprobate, as fear and horror, in the Godly, to
defend them, and in the wicked, to punish them. There are indeed four degrees
of Gods presence, Jer 23 24. Psalm 19.1.6.
1. An Universal, 2. A Special, 3. A more special, 4. A most special.

Psalm. 130, 7.
1. The Lord is present by his Essence, in all places.

1 Cor. 3.16.
2. He is present by his Glory, in Heaven.

Joh. 15.26.
3. He is present by his Grace, in his Saints.

1 Pet. 3.18.
4. He is present by his Spirit, in Christ.

Heb. 9.14.
He is every where, replenishing the place with his being, no where by
Circumscription, and local definition. So that Curiosity, in this highest
point of Divinity, is very dangerous; for God is one, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Isa, 44.5^ 1
Cor. 8.4. Iam, 2.19. Deuteronomy. 4 15 16 1 Samuel 15.29. Act. 14.15. Matt. 5 48
single, pure, and perfect Being; single, without parts, pure without passions,
and perfect without infirmities; being in measure unmeasurable, in Majesty
inscrutable; in Nature incomprehensible, in Power irresistible, in Will
unchangeable, in Place not circumscript, in Time indefinite, in Love immutable,
1 John 1.5. August. Med. cap. 12.
in favor unspeakable, and in Promise inviolable, Good without quality, Great
without quantity, Creator without want, in Act without motion, every where
present without sight, the First and the last without time, making all things
mutable, without any passive mutability in himself. So that here we must needs
acknowledge it impossible, that a Finite understanding should comprehend an
infinite, eternal, spiritual Essence, and therefote I desire to remember that
excellent rule of Saint Augustine, Aug. de Trinitate l. 5. c. 1.
Cavendum est, ne dum de Deo cogitamus, and non possumus invenire quid sit,
aliquid de eo sentiamus quod non sit; we must take great heed, least in seeking
to know what God is, we think him to be what he is not. And in another place.
Quid est Deus? August. lib. 1. de Quaest. nov. and vet. Testam.
est id quod nulla attingit opinio. What is God? He is that which no opinion
can reach unto. That it is not safe to enquire too far into the being of God.
To search then too far, is perverse curiosity, to believe the word, is
infallible security; and to see him as he is, is most absolute felicity; Climb
not too high ^or falling, Dive not too deep for drowning; and soar not too
high for dazeling, labor to know so much as is revealed in the scriptures, in
which we are to search for all points, much more for this, and therefore that I
may not err in this point, I will say no more, but with himself which knows
himself best, that he is Jehovah, whose Knowledge is infallible, Romans 11.33.
Psalm. 107. Job 10, 7. Heb. 6.17. Romans 1.18. 1 John 4.10. Romans 15.16. Prove. 2
10. Psalm. 83.18: Isa. 28.29.
Providence inexplicable, Judgments inevitable, Decree immutable, Wrath
terrible, and Love unspeakable, whose Spirit does sanctify us, Wisdom teach
us, Counsel guide us, Favor compass us, and Power govern us, the most High
over all the earth, wonderful and great in Counsel, mighty and excellent in
works, Ephesians. 2.4. Exodus 15.11. Ezeck. 36.26. Tit. 3.5.
rich in mercy, glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises. The Regeneratour of
our Nature, our Defense in Adversity, Perseverance in the faith, Ephesians. 1.4.
the Life of them that believe, and in the end is Eternal life, it is he that
elected us to salvation, promising remission of sins by beleiving in Christ,
Joh. 3 15.16 Acts 8.37.
being the first person named in order, not in power nor time, existing of
himself, and of no other, is called Father, Isa 63 16.
first in respect of his natural Son Christ, begotten from eternity. Secondly
in respect of the Elect, his Adopted Sons, Gal. 4.5.
who being not sons by Nature, are made sons by Grace. Ephesians. 2.5.


CHAP. II. OF JESUS CHRIST.
God has fixed many impressions of hi goodness in the creatures.
WHosoever will religiously and seriously observe those manifold impressions of
the Divine goodness, which the Lord God has planted in the nature of all
living creatures; he shall surely find so much matter of reverence, love, and
admiration, that he shall never be able sufficiently to comprehend the
excellency of so huge an ocean of goodness, within the strait and narrow
compass of his understanding. For the Kingly Prophet David being as it were
ravished or wrapped in an ecstasy, at the inexplicable expression, and
unconceivable consideration of the plentiful and far-spread goodness of God,
he breaks forth into these heavenly acclamations, saying, O Jehovah, Psalm
36.5.6.7
In coelis est benignitas tua, O Lord our Governor, How excellent is thy Name
in all the world, thou that have set thy Glory above the Heavens, thy
Faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds, thy Righteousness is like the strong
Mountains; thy Judgments are like the great deep, thou savest O Lord both man
and beast. But I will not at this time enter into that infinite Ocean of Gods
Goodness, whereby he gives Food unto all flesh, Psalm 147. Gods infinite
Goodness.
and adorneth the feilds with all kind of fruitful trees and pleasant flowers;
neither will I enter into any part or parcel of his excellent Providence,
whereby he governs the whole world by his Wisdom, sustaineth all things by
his Power, and releiveth all things by his Goodness: But I will rather bathe
my self in those chiefest Fountains of Gods admirable Love, whereby he
embraced Mankind, the Epitome of the whole Universe. For God so loved the
World, Joh 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten son: That whosoever believes in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life. Indeed there is no comfort in the Father
without the Son, neither can any believe in him, and through believing come to
him, but by the Son, for he dwells in light inaccessible, whom none can
know, till the Son who is (...), the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1 3.
and ingraved form of his person reveal him. Yea, without the Son, he is a
consuming fire, but in him has proclaimed himself to be well pleased: So that
the knowledge of Jesus Christ is the only thing that makes us happy; Nam omnia
habemus in Christo, and omnia in nobis Christus; because we have all things in
Christ, and Christ is all things unto us. He is a Legis, and o Evangelij, the
beginning of the Law, Quicquid est veteris Testamenti Christum sonat.
and the end of the Gospel; Velatus in veteri, revelatus in novo Testamento;
veiled and shadowed in the Old, revealed and exhibited in the New Testament;
promised in that, preached in this; there showed unto the Fathers in Types,
here manifested unto us in Truths; All the men of note, and all the names of
Dignity, were but types of Jesus Christ.
for the Tree of Life, the Arc of Noah, the Ladder of Jacob, the Mercy Seat,
the Brazen Serpent, and all such Mystical Types, and Typical figures, that we
read of, what were they else but Christ obscurely shadowed, before he was fully
revealed? And so all the men of note, Noah, Isaac, Joseph, Moses, Aaron,
Joshuah, Sampson, David, Solomon, Kings, Priests, Prophets, titles of
Dignities, names of Honor, or whatsoever else was any ways ascribed to any of
them to express their sovereignty, were only used to express those
transcendent excellencies which these personal Types did adumbrate, and show
most properly to belong unto this King of Kings, Isa 9.6.
this mighty Counselor, and this Prince of peace.

Now if we well consider, how all those things which the Prophets of old
prophesied, were to be done by the promised Messiah, are all accomplished in
the person of Christ; we shall find the Word like a light shining in
darkness, clearly declaring unto us, that Jesus the son of Mary, is the true
Messiah: For the Scriptures foretell every particular act, accident, and
circumstance, that should fall out of importance at his coming, incarnation,
birth, life, death, resurrection, and assention. Matthew. 1
As for example, at what particular time he should appear, Matthew. 1 18. Matthew.
2 1
Genesis 49 10. that he should be born of a Virgin, Isa: 7.14. That the place of
his Birth should be the town of Bethlem, Matthew. 2 16.
Mic. 5 2 That at his Birth all the Infants round about should be slain for
his sake, Jer. 31 15. that the Kings of the East should come and adore him,
Mat. 2 11
and offer Gold and other gifts unto him, Luke 2 22.
Psalm. 72. that he should be presented by his Mother in the Temple of
Jerusalem, Mat. 2 13 14
Mal. 3.1. that he should fly into Egypt, and be recalled thence again. Mat.
2 21 Luke 1 17. and 3.3.
Isa 19.1. Hos. 11.1. that John Baptist should go before him, and cry in the
Desert, Isa 40.3. Mal. 3. Mat. 4.12 etc. Mat. 5.
1. After this, that he should begin his own Preaching in Galilee, Isa. 9.1. and
that with all Humility, Quietness, Mat. 4 23.
and Clemency of spirit. Isa. 42 2. that he should do strange Miracles, Mat. 8
Mark 8
and heal all diseases, Isa, 35.5, 6. that he should dye for our sins Isa. 53
That he should be betrayed by his own Disciple, Mat. 26. Mat. 26 and 27.
Psalm. 41 9. that he should be sold for thirty pieces of silver, Zach. 11 12.
that with those thirty pieces there should be bought afterward a Potters field,
Zach. 11 13. Math 21.7. Matthew. 26. and 27.
that he should ride into Jerusalem upon an Ass before his Passion, Zach 9.9.
that the Jews should beat and buffet his Face, Mat. 27.
and defile the same with spitting upon him. Isa. 50 6. that they should whip,
rent, and tear his Body before they put him to death, Luke 23 33
Isa. 53 5 that they should pierce his Hands and his Feet Psalm 22 16. Mat.
27.38.
that they should put him to death among Theives, and Malefactors, Isa. 53 12.
that they should scorn him and nod their heads at him, Mat. 27 39 40 41 42 43.
saying, He trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him, etc. Psalm. 22.7. Mat.
27.34.
8 that they should give him gall in his meat, and in his thirst, Vinegar to
drink, Psalm. 69.21. Mat. 27.35 Mat. 27 57 etc.
that they should cast lots about his Vesture, and part his Garments among
them, Psalm. 22 18. That he should lie in the Grave of a rich man, Isa: 53 9.
Luke 29
that he should rise again from death the third day, as was shadowed in his
Figure, Jonah, chap. 1 verse 17. Matthew. 12.40 Luke 11 30. Psalm. 16 10 that he
should ascend to Heaven, Luke 24 51. Act. 21.55 56.
and sit at the Right hand of God his Father for ever, Psalm. 68 18 and 110.1.4.
All these Particularities, and a number more were revealed in Scripture, some
four thousand, some two thousand, and some one thousand years before the
Nativity of Christ, the true Messiah, on whom all the Fathers since the first
beginning fastened their Hope, and of whom all the Prophets have spoken,
pointing him out as it were with the Finger, how he was to come to work the
work of our salvation, which in all circumstances we see performed by him, as
was prophesied by them to our everlasting comfort.

Moreover, because there is a Generation of men in these our days, that
blasphemously deny our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and his Deity, and so
consequently the Scriptures, I shall hereunto add some testimonies of the
Gentiles, yea and of the Jews themselves, (a people that are our greatest
enemies) to prove and testify that Jesus is the son of God, the true and
promised Messiah.

Vide Clem. Alex. l. 1. Strom. and Orig. l. 6. contra Celsum, and Procl. l. 2
and 3. in Par. Plato.
First in the writings of that ancient and learned Zoroaster, there be-found
very significant speeches of the son of God, whom he calls, Secundam mentem,
the second mind. And Hermes Trismegistus (who received his Learning from this
Zoroaster) calls the second person in the Trinity, Mercu. Her. in Poemand.
cap 1 and de incept.
The first begotten son of God, his only Son, his dear, eternal, immutable,
and incorruptible Son, whose sacred name is ineffable. This Hermes or
Mercurius, surnamed (...), thrice great, did often describe the Power and
Majesty of Jesus Christ; and as S. Augustine says, Aug. l. 5. c. 3. de
hae^esibus.
did compose a book, whose Title was (...), The perfect word, that is Christ,
which he calls (...), the very same word that our Evangelist uses; and
Lactantius says, that Zeno affirmed (...), the word (Christ) to be the Maker
of this Universe, so that he is rightly called Expectatio Gentium, the hope and
expectation of the Gentiles, for those many multitudes that became Proselites
of the Jewish Religion, and those Magi that came from the East, to worship him
as soon as ever he was borne, do sufficiently prove, that the Gentiles
expected the coming of this promised Messiah before his incarnation. Besides, I
cannot truly think, That the Gentiles expected the coming of a Messiah.
that Plato, that ancient Writer should be ignorant of these things, for
Theodoret, Clemens, Alexandrinus, and Justin Martyr do plainly affirm, that he
read the books of Moses, and the Prophets, insomuch thot Numenius a Platonist
was wont to say, Plato a Grecian Moses.
(...), that Plato was none else but Moses in the Grecian tongue.

The ten famous Sybills, viz. Persica, Libyca, Delphica, Cumaea, Erythraea, Sam
a, Cumana, Hel^spontia, Phrygia, Tiburtina.
Secondly, Among the Gentiles there were certain Prophetesses, or women
Prophets, called Sybils, who were endued (as it seems) with a certain spirit
of prophecy, and did utter from time to time most wonderful particularities
of Christ to come, agreeing (as it were) wholly with the Prophets of Israel; one
of them called Sibylla Erythraea, makes a whole discourse of Christ in Greek
Accrostick Verses, at the latter end of which she says, that he is Immortal
Savior, and a King that must suffer for our sins. But I will leave these
Sibyls a little while, and proceed to other Authorities: Yet first I think it
very fit to make mention of some admirable accidents which happened at the
birth of our blessed Savior. Paulus Orosius and Eutropius, both Historians in
the time of Octavius, Paulus Orosius and Eutropus, Writers belonging to
Octavius.
does say, That at such time as Jesus Christ was borne, on earth, there
happened in Rome, that in a common Inn or Tavern, A spring of Oil arising out
of the ground in Rome when Christ was borne.
a well or spring of pure and excellent Oil brake up out of the ground, which
for the space of a whole day, ran and issued forth incessantly in great
abundance.

How excellently may this allude to Jesus Christ, who was not only Christus
Dei, the anointed of God, but also Christus Deus, God himself anointed.
Eutropius adds moreover, that in Rome and the neighboring places thereabout,
even in the full calm, and clearest time of the day, A bright circle seen
about the Sun in the day time.
a circle was seen about the Sun, of as bright splendour and radiancy, as the
sun it self. The same Paulus Orosius further says, that at the very same time,
the Senate and people of Rome made free offer to Octavius Augustus, to entitle
him chief Lord, which he refused, and by no means would accept;
prognosticating to himself, that a much greater Lord then he, was then on the
Earth, to whom that Title more worthily appertained. Commestor in lib de Hist.
Scholiast.
Commestor in his Scholiastick History, affirms, that in Rome upon the same
day: The Temple dedicated by the Romans to Peace the Goddess, Templum pacis
fell to the ground at the Birth of Christ.
fell in ruins to the earth. For they had formerly consulted with the Oracle
of Apollo, to know how long the Temple should stand in good estate, and answer
was made them, Until a Virgin should bring forth a Child, which they reputed
to be utterly impossible, and therefore their Temple should stand for ever,
notwithstanding at the Virgins Deliverance, Mother to the King of Heaven, it
fell to the ground.

Suidas in vitae August. Niceph. lib. 1. Hist. cap. 17.
Suidas also records, that Augustus inquiring of the Oracle of Apollo, what
man should rule after him, received this Answer from Satan.

(...),
(...),
(...).
An Hebrew Child, the King of Gods,
Commands me to avoid
This place, and forthwith to return,
To Pluto's darkesome shade.
From these our Altars bid thou art,
In silence therefore to depart.
Augustus having received this answer, went away, and set up an Altar in
Capitolium, with this Inscription in Roman Letters.

(...) THIS IS THE ALTAR OF THE FIRST BEGOTTEN OF GOD.

So that it is worthy of great consideration, The Devils plain manifestation
of his foil and overthrow.
to note how evidently the Devil showed himself (even suddenly) to be
overcome and conquered: For after Christ's coming, and suffering on the Cross,
the Oracles of the Devils were altogether silenced, the Groves, Altars, and
Temples of the false Gods began to lie Wast, yea the Gentiles detesting the
impostures of satan, embraced the Faith of Christ, giving over their Magical
books to Vulcan: A remarkable Example whereof we read touching the Ephesians,
Acts. 19. Act. 19.8. etc.


Moreover, Plutarch does report, that in the later years of the Reign of the
Emperor Tyberius, a strange voice and exceeding horrible clamor, Plut. de
defectu Oracu. Pan. some Master Devil that lost his Dominion.
with hidious cries and howlings, were heard by many in the Grecian sea,
lamenting and complaining, that the great God Pan was now departed. In so much
that all the sea resounded their dreadful Echoes. Of this you may see more at
large in Eusebius to Theodorus. Eusebius. in Hist. Eccle. and ad Theodo.
And in his sixth book, De preparatione Evangelica, you shall find that Apollo
oftentimes exclaimed Hei mihi, congemiscite: Hei mihi: Hei mihi: Oraculorum
defecit me claritas. Woe unto me, lament ye with me, woe unto me, woe unto me,
for that the honor of Oracles has now forsaken me. Suidas in Thulis, and
Porphyr. and Plut. de Ora.
And being demanded, (by a Priest of his own) concerning God and true Religion,
he gave this answer, O thou unhappy Priest, why do thou ask me of God, that
is the Father of all things, and of this most renowned Kings dear and only
son, and of the spirit that contains all, etc. Alas that spirit will
enforce me shortly to leave this habitation and place of Oraces. The Devils
complained our Saviors Nativity.
Whereby it is plain and manifest, that (even in all parts) the Devils
complained on the Nativity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, because it was
their utter destruction. Joseph. in Antiquit. Jud. l. 4.
And at, or a little before his passion, (as Josephus writes) a voice was
heard in the Temple of Jerusalem, (albeit there was then no living creature in
it) Let us speedily be gone, and leave this Country. Beside, it is marvelous to
consider, how this puissant Authority of Christ was imparted to Christians, in
so much that it extended it self so far forth, that not only their words and
commandments, but even their very presence did shut the mouths, and drive
into fear the miserable and damned spirits. So Lactantius shows, that in his
days, Lact. lib. 2. de Inst. cap. 16.
a Serving-man that was a Christian following his Master into a certain Temple
of Idols, the Gods or Devils rather, cried out, that nothing could be well
done, as long as that Christian was in presence. The like records Eusebius,
of Dioclesian the Emperor, who going to Apollo for an Oracle, Eusebius. lib. 5.
de prep. Evan.
received answer, That the just men were the cause that he could say nothing.
Which just men, Apollo's Priests interpreted to be meant of Christians, and
thereupon Dioclesian began his most feirce and cruel persecution. Lastly, The
Pagan Porphyrie, Porph. lib. 5. eont. Christ. apud Eusebius. l. 5. ca. 1. de
praep. Evangel.
that of all other, most earnestly endeavored to impugn and disgrace us
Christians, and to hold up the honor of his enfeebled feebled Idols, yet
discoursing of the great plague that reigned most furiously in the City of
Messina, in Cicilie where he dwelt, yielded this reason, why Aesculapius the
God of Physic (much adored in that place) was not able to help them. It is no
marvel (says he) if this City so many years be vexed with the Plague, seeing
that both Aesculapius and all other Gods be now departed from it, A marvailous
confession of Porphyrie.
by the coming of Christians. For since that men have begun to worship this
Jesus, we could never obtain any profit by our Gods. Thus has the Deity of
Christ been declared and approved by his omnipotent power, in subduing
infernal Enemies. It remains now that (according to my promise) I endeavor
to manifest the same by other Testimonies and Authorities.

Justin. l. 1.
First that famous Zoroastres King of the Bactrians, a man excellent in all
learning, Sybil. Samia. apud Betul.
as ( Justin says) left this as a Tradition among the Gentiles, and afterward
it was more plainly published by the Sybils, that a day Star should appear
before the arising of the Son of Righteousness; Chalcid. apud Marsil. Ficin.
tract. de stella Magi.
and Chalcidius a Platonic does say, that the Chaldaean Astronomers did gather
by contemplation of this star, that some God descended from Heaven, to the
benefit of Mankind. And Fulgentius says, Fulgent. fol. 657. in Octavo Ser. de
Epiphan.
That Puer natus novam stellam frabricavit; Christ being horn, did of nothing
frame this new starr; which did bear such evident witness of him; for the wise
men being upon the mountain Victorialis, worshipping their God, Chrysostom. hom.
2. op. imperf. in Mattheum 2.
(as Saint Chrysostom says) a star did appear unto them, in the likeness of
a little child. Now though Ammonius Alexandrinus, and Nicephorus think, Ammon.
Alex. in harm. Niceph. l. 1. c. 13
that this star appeared two years before the Nativity of Jesus Christ, that
so they might make preparation for so long a journey; because these Magi were
Kings themselves, as Saint Cyprian delivers it from the tradition of the
Church, Cyprian. ser. de Baptist. Chrysostom: hom: 6. in 2: Matthew.
and Saint Chrysostom seems to consent, and Bosquierus labors to confirm
it; Yet I think rather with S. August., that these three wise men, Iter unius
anni in tredecim diebus peregerunt, Did perform that journey, which was enough
for a whole year, in thirteen days, because (as Remegius says) Puer ad quem
properaverunt, potuit eos in tam brevi temporis spacio ad se adducere; That
Child unto whom they hastened, might help and further them forward to come unto
himself, in so short a space: And therefore this their diligence and speedy
haste to come to Christ, does sufficiently show that they believed this new
born Babe, to be the true and eternal God, so that these wise men were wise
indeed; not because they had all the wisdom of the Gentiles, but because they
did both seek and find him, In whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge:

Also their behavior being come, does plainly show, Chrysostom. quo supra.
that puerum quem viderunt hominem, agnoverunt Redemptorem; the child which
they saw to be a man, they did acknowledge to be their God; for though they saw
him dandled in the lap of his poor Mother, wrapped about with mean clouts,
and having not the least sign of any humane Kingly dignity, yet they did
homage unto him, as unto the King of Kings: For they fell down, to show their
humility; they worshipped him, to show their faith; they offered their gifts,
to show their charity. Quid? In gremio pauperis matris positum, and pannis
vilibus involutum, and nullum regiae dignitatis humanae signum habentem.
adorant regem nuper natum, etc. And what is this, that they adore this Child
newly borne, and sucking on his Mothers Breasts, and would not adore that King
which had been long ordained, and was most gloriously reigning on his Kingly
Throne? What is the cause of this? Ille natus in pallatio contemnitur, iste
natus in diversorio quaeritur; that he which was born in the Palace should be
contemned, and he which lay in the Manger should be adored? S. Chrysostom,
Leo, Fulgentius Ser. de Epiphar.
and Fulgentius, do all agree it was, because the Wise men knew, that he Quem
dixerunt regem Judaeorum erat Creator Angelorum, and quem viderunt parvum in
praesepio, erat immensus in Coelo; whom they had called King of the Jews, was
the Lord and Maker of the Angels, and whom they saw little and poor in the
Cratch, was rich and immeasurable in Heaven. Lastly, the cruel murder
commtited by Herod, on poor harmless Innocents, does sufficiently prove the
birth and coming of the true Messiah: Philo Judaic. in Abbrev. Temp.
For Philo, the learned Man that ever wrote among the Jews (except the
Writers of holy Scriptures) in his Abridgement of times does say, that Herod
caused certain Children to be slain, and his own Son with them; because he
had heard, that the Christ a King promised to the Hebrews, was then borne.

Secondly, As for his life and conversation, by the testimony of his greatest
adversaries, it was more admirable then his Doctrine, his life being a most
lively Table, wherein the perfection of all his Doctrine was expressed: A Man
of such gravity, as never in his life he was noted to laugh, of such Humility,
as being the son of God, he scarce used in this world the Dignity of a Servant,
of such sweet and mild behavior, as all the injuries of his Enemies, never
wrested from him one angry word. And as the Prophets did foretell the virtue
and sanctity of this Messiah, so the Devils themselves could not but confess
the same to have been fulfilled in the person of Christ; as is most evident by
Porphiry, Porph. lib. de laud Phylo.
a professed enemy of the Christian name; who after consideration of diverse
Oracles uttered by his Idols, touching Jesus, he breaks forth into this
confession; It is exceeding wonderful, (says he) what testimony the Gods do
give of the singular piety and sanctity of Jesus, for which they avouch him
rewarded with immortality. And Josephus, Joseph. in lib. 2. de Antiq.
not only a Jew by Lineage and Nation, but also by his Life and Profession,
writes thus of Christ, At the same time lived Jesus, a very wise man, if it be
lawful to term him a man, because in deed and verity he did wonderful things,
and was Master and Doctor to such as loved and sought for truth. He assembled
and was followed by great troops of Jews and Gentiles, and he was Christ. By
which testimony of Josephus, we see mention is made, not only of Jesus, and his
life, but also of his miracles, which were plainly foretold and published by
the Sibylls, among whom, one of them (as- Lactantius records) wrote thus of
Christ to come, Lact. lib. 4 divina. Instit. cap. 15.
He shall do all by his only word, he shall cure all infirmities, He shall
raise the dead, he shall make the lame to run and skip, the deaf shall hear,
the blind shall see, and the dumb shall speak: In five loves and two fishes,
five thousand persons shall be satisfied, and the fragments shall fill twelve
baskets to the hope of many. He shall command the winds, and walk upon the
furious sea with his Feet of Peace.

To these predictions of Sibylla, do agree the Doctors of the Jews themselves,
in many places of their Thalmud, to wit, that the Messiah should be wonderful
in working miracles. And in their public Commentary upon Ecclesiastes,
Misdrach, coheleth, cap. 1.
they have these words, All the former miracles of Prophets and Saints, shall
be nothing to the miracles of the Messiah when he comes. And thus much of the
foretelling of Christ's Miracles, but now for the fulfilling thereof in Jesus,
that is, how these Predictions were performed in the stupendous works and
actions of our blessed Savior, there is no difficulty. For that besides the
former testimony of Josephus, The confession of Jesus miracles by his enemies.
(which were sufficient in this case) the Jews themselves do grant and record
Jesus miracles in diverse places of their Thalmud, yea, they make mention of
many wonderful things that Jesus did, which are not written by our
Evangelists. The same does Mahomet in his Alcoran, Tha. in teact. Auadozaera
Misdr. coheleth Alcoran Az^^r 14. 11. 13.
affirming Jesus the son of Mary, to have been a great Prophet, and to have
wrought his miracles, by the only Power and spirit of God.

Thirdly about his Passion, there is little or no controversy, and therefore
the testimony of Josephus may suffice, whose words are these, Joseph. lib. 18.
antiq. cap. 4.
That the principal Jews of his Country, having accused and delivered over
Jesus to Pilate, (that was Governor of Jurie for the Roman Emperor) he
adjudged him to the Cross. The same do other Jews and Gentiles record. Also
the particulars of Christ's passion was plainly foretold by Sibylla, for these
are her own words, set down by Lactantius, He shall appear miserable,
ignominious and deformed, Lactan. l. 4. Deum instit. cap. 16. and 18.
to the end he may give hope unto the miserable. Afterward he shall come into
the hands of most wicked and faithless men: they shall buffet him with their
sacriligious fists, and shall spit upon him with their unclean mouths, he
shall yield his innocent back to the whip, and shall say nothing while he
receives the stripes, to the end he may speak to those that are dead. He shall
bear a Crown of thorns, and they shall give him gaul to eat, and vinegar to
drink. And this shall be the hospitality he shall find among them.

Thal. tract. Sanhica helec. Misdr. Ruth. Rab. Josep. in lib. Siph. etc.
Neither do the ancient Rabbines and Teachers among the Jews dissent from this.
For that in their Thalmud, that was gathered above one thousand and two hundred
years agone, the plain sentences of diverse are set down, That their Messiah at
his coming shall be put to death. And what can be more plain then the written
words of Rabbi Simeon, which are as follows, Rab. Simeon Ben. Jehai. lib. de
spe.
Woe be to the men of Israel, for that then shall slay the Messiah. God shall
send his Son in man's flesh to wash them, and they shall murder him. Yea in
their Commentary upon Daniel, Rab. Haedar. in Dan. 9.27.
they have these words, Three years and a half shall the presence of God in
flesh cry and preach upon the Mount Olivet, and then shall he be slain: And
Sibylla adds further two particular miracles that should fall out in the said
passion of the Messiah, to wit, Lact. lib. 4. Divin. inst. capit. 19.
That the Veil of the Jews Temple should break in two: And that at midday
there should be darkness for three hours over all the World. Which thing to
have been fulfilled at the death of Jesus, not only Saint Matthew does assure
us in his Gospel, Matthew. 27.
but also Eusebius affirms, that he had read the same word for word,
recorded in diverse Heathen Writers.

Phlegonius a Greek Historian, Phlegonius a Grecian, borne in Asia, recorded by
Suidas.
of whom Suidas makes mention, reports for a wonderful thing, That in the
fourth year of the two hundred and tenth Olimpiad, (which by just account, was
in the eighteenth year of the Reign of Tiberius, and at which time our Savior
suffered) there was an Eclipse of the Sun, the very greatest that ever had
been seen, or ever found to be written of, and that it continued from the
sixth hour, until the ninth hour. And that during this Eclipse, the
trembling of the Earth was so great in Asia, and in Bythinia, that infinite
strong built houses fell to the ground.

It appearteh moreover, that besides this Phlegonius, Plin. in lib. 2.
Pliny also felt and wrote of the self same matter, for he says, In the time
of the Emperor Tiberius, the quaking of the earth was much greater then ever
before had been. Twelve Cities ruined by the Earthquake at Christ's passion.
By means whereof (says another) twelve Cities were ruined and overthrown in
Asia, with infinite other goodly buildings and houses, so that the
Historiographers amongst the Gentiles, (albeit they knew not the cause) did not
forbear to write of the miracles of Christ.

Orig. cont. Cells. lib. 6.
Furthermore, Aesculus an old Astronomer, does prove by the situation and
constitution of the Sun and Moon at his Passion, that no Eclipse could then be
naturally, and therefore it was very miraculous, contrary to the Order of
Nature, Dionysius was 25 years old at the death of our Savior, and lived a
long time after with the Apostles, as himself records in the 11. Epistle
Apollophanes.
and only done by the omnipotency of God, who deprived the sun of his light for
all that space of time.

Dionysius Areopagita being on that day in Athens, and beholding the Sun to be
so strangely obscured, knowing also (as a man learned and skillfull in
Arstology, and the Celestial courses) that this Eclipse was contrary unto the
rule of Nature, he cried with a loud voice, saying; Aut Deus Naturae patitur,
aut mundi Machina dissolvetur, either the God of Nature does now suffer, or the
Frame of the whole world shall be dissolved: And to another he spoke of that
Eclipse in these words, Ignotus in carne patitur Deus, Michael Syngellus in
Encomio S. Dionysij.
cujus gratia rerum universitas densa hac caligine obscurata est atque
concussa, God unknown in the flesh did suffer; for whose sake the universe was
struck and covered with thick darkness. S. Dionys. in Epis. ad Polyc.
And this Dionysius in an Epistle written to Polycarpus, being asked what this
great Eclipse might portend, said, That it showed a change, and a great
alteration, and that he did seriously observe the day and hour.

The other Miracle, Joseph in l. 2. de antiq.
of the Veil of the Temple which rent in sunder, Josephus also gives
faithful testimony thereof.

Finally, I will conclude this discourse with the authority of learned Philo,
who does plainly confess the Deity of Jesus Christ, and the necessity of his
suffering. This man that was the learned among the Jews, made a special
book of the banishment of his countrymen, where he has this discourse
ensuing: Philo: lib. de exulibus:
What time may be appointed (says he) for return home of us banished Jews, it
is hard to determine. For by tradition we have, that we must expect the death
of an high Priest. But I am of opinion, that this high Priest shall be the very
word of God, which shall be void of all sin, both voluntary and involuntary:
Whose Father shall be God, and this word shall be the Fathers wisdom, by which
all things in this world were created. His head shall be anointed with Oil, and
his Kingdom shall flourish, and shine for ever. This wrote Philo Judaeus at
that time, when he little imagined, the same high Priest, whom he so much
expected, and the same word of God, whose Kingdom he describes, was now
already come into the world. Fourthly, As Jesus Christ, did declare himself
truly to be the Son of man, by yiedling unto Death; so he did declare himself
mightily to be the Son of God, by his Resurrection from the dead: And this
Resurrection of him was exactly foretold, not only to the Jews, but also to
the Gentiles; for these are the words of Sibylla, He shall end the necessity
of death by three days sleep, Lactan. lib. 4. inst. Div. c. 19.
and then returning from death to light again, he shall be the first that shall
show the beginning of Resurrection to his chosen, for that by conquering death,
he shall bring us life. What thing can be more plainly described then this?
but now to prove the truth and certainty of his Resurrection. Our first and
most evident testimony shall be derived from our greatest enemies, among which
number is Josephus, that learned Jew, Joseph. in lib. 2 de Antiq.
whose words are these, Although he was accused by the principal men of our
faith, and crucified, yet he was not abandoned of them which had formerly
followed him; but three days after his death, he appeared alive again unto
them, according as the Prophets (inspired of God) had foretold, and prophesied
of him. Which express plain and resolute words, we may in reason take, not as
the confession only of Josephus, but as the common judgment, opinion, and
sentence of all the discreet and sober men of that time, laid down and recorded
by this Historiographer. In whose days there were yet many Christians alive,
that had seen and spoken with Jesus after his Resurrection; and infinite
Jews, that had heard the same protested by their Fathers, Brethren, Kinsfolks
and friends, who had been themselves eye witnesses thereof.

Ignatius was twelve years old when our Savior suffered, and for certainty,
that he did see Christ after his Resurrection, take his own words. Ego vero,
In Ep. ad Smyr. and ad Polycarp.
and post Resurrectionem in carne eum vidi, and credo quia sit: And truly I did
see him after his Resurrection in the flesh, and I do believe that it is he;
yea, he sets down the time and persons, when, and before whom it was: Et quando
venit ad Petrum, and ad eos qui cum Petro erant. And when he came to Peter, and
to those that then were with him; he said, Touch and see, for a spirit has not
flesh and bones, as you see me have, and they touched him and believed, so that
his own words are sufficient proofs, but yet it is the consent of all the
Church-Historians, as Eusebius, Saint Jerome, Ruffin. cap. 6.
and Ruffinus testify.

Moreover, Dionysius the Areopagite, Saint Bernard, and others, report a famous
saying of Saint Ignatius, which he uttered with sighs, and is extant in his
Epistle to the Romans, and it is this, (...), Amor meus crucifixus est, that
is, My Love is crucified. Indeed this holy and pious Bishop, Mirandula de motre
Christi l. 1. c. 10.
did so continually meditate upon those great things, which Christ had done and
suffered for him, that he was thereby brought so entirely to love him, as when
he was demanded, why he would not forsake and forget Christ, rather then
suffer himself to be torn and devoured of wild and savage Beasts? He
answered, The story of Ignatius at his Death.
that he could not forget him, because the sufferings of Christ, were not only
words transient in his mouth, or removeable objects before his eyes, but they
were indeleble characters, so engraven in his heart, that all the Torments of
the Earth could never raze them out: And therefore being commanded by that
bloody Tyrant Trajane, to be ripped and unbowelled, they found Jesus Christ
written upon his Heart, in Characters of Gold. He is styled Divinus Ignatius,
Biblioth. Patrum, Tom. 1. page 76.
Inclytissimus and ferventissimus Martyr, Divine Ignatius a most famous and
fervent Martyr. Nay Nicephorus goes beyond that title, and calls him (...), one
that saw God, and one that was carried of God; for when he was a child,
Niceph. Hist. li. 2. cap. 35.
Nicephorus reports, that our Savior would take him up in his arms, and show
him to his Disciples. And it may be that this was one of those little children
that were brought to Christ to touch them, or that little child whom Jesus took
and set in the midst of them, to learn them humility. Aug. de vera religione.
Indeed as Saint Augustine says, Tota vita Christi in terris, per hominem,
quem gessit, disciplina morum fuit; The whole life of Christ, which he spent
here on earth, was, and is, a pattern for all Christians, Christ despised all
worldly vanities.
Nam omnia bona mundi contempsit, for he despised all the pomp and vanity of
this world, to teach us, In his mundanis faelicitatem uon reponere, that we
should not greedily seek, nor childishly place our delight in these vain and
worldly toys, he suffered all the sorrows of this world, Christ suffered all
miseries.
hunger, thirst, cold and nakedness, lyings, slanders, spittings, mockings,
whippings, and death it self, to teach us, ut nec in illis quaereretur
faelicitas, ita nec in istis infaelicitas timeretur; that as we should place no
felitity in the vanities of this life, so we should not fear all the miseries
of this world, Judge. 6.12.14
but to say with Deborah, March valiantly, O my Soul, and with the Angel unto
Gideon, Go on thou mighty man of War, and pass through all the ranks of
miseries. To be breife, if we do but seriously look into the life of Jesus
Christ, we shall easily find, that (as St. Bernard says) True Wisdom is found
in his doctrine, Bernard Ser. 2. super Cantic. Prud^ntia vera in ejus doctrina,
justitia in ejus misericordia, temperantiae in vita, and fortitudo in ejusdem
passione reperiuntur.
Righteousness in his mercy, Mercy in his Justice, temperance in his life,
truth in his words, fortitude in his sufferings, and all virtues in all his
actions, all the Ethics of Aristotle, all the morality of Seneca, and all the
wisdom of Greece, can no ways describe virtue so perfectly, as we see it
expressly pourtraied in the lively example of our Saviors life: yea, such was
the piety of Jesus Christ, that even his greatest enemies were forced to
acknowledge and confess it, Suidas upon the word Jesus
for the talk of one Theodosius a Jew with a christian merchant man named
Philip, in the time of the Emperor Justinian, is here worthy to be noted. In
the Temple of Jerusalem (said the Jew) there were two and twenty ordinary
Priests; and as soon as any of them dyed, the residue chose another in his
place. Christ's Piety is acknowledged and confessed by a Jew.
Now it happened, that Jesus for his singular Piety and Doctrine was chosen by
them. And to the intent they might know the name of his Father and Mother, and
inregister it according to their custom, they sent for them, and Mary came
thither alone, Joseph dyed before the Virgin Mary.
because Joseph was then dead. She being asked the name of the Father of Jesus,
answered upon her Oath, that she had conceived him by the holy Ghost, and
reported to them the words of the Angel. Moreover, she told them the names of
the women that came to her labor unlooked for; upon due inquisition whereof,
when all things were found to fall out true, they registered his Name in the
Register of the Priests in these words, Jesus the Son of the living God, and of
the Virgin Mary. A proof of Christ's Divinity.
And this Register (said Theodosius) was saved at the sacking of Jerusalem,
and afterward kept in the City of Tyberias, where it is preserved in secret,
and I have seen it as one of the chief among the Jews, and as one from whom, in
respect of my degree, nothing was restrained. And I believe thereby that it is
not ignorance that holds me in the Jewish Religion, Why Theodosius the Jew
would not embrace Christ.
but the honor which I have among my countrymen, the like whereof I could not
have elsewhere. Thus we see that the Jews themselves were forced to acknowledge
and declare the Piety and Deity of Jesus Christ. And as for the family from
whence he descended, it remains registered in the Jews Thalmud, that Jesus of
Nazereth Crucified, Thal. Tact. San. ca. Nigmar had.
was of the Blood Royal, from Zorobabell of the house of David. Thus much by
way of digression.

But now to return to the foregoing Subject of our discourse, namely the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ; although the Testimony of Josephus and Saint
Ignatius might suffice, to prove the truth and certainty hereof, against all
the Atheists of the World, yet hereunto I will add some other testimonies and
circumstantiall proofs, that do infallibly prove the Resurrection of Christ,
and so consequently that Jesus is the Son of God, the true and promised Messiah.

1. atth. 28.1. The Angels testify the resurrection of Christ. Luke 24.4.
First, the Angel said unto the women, why seek ye the living among the dead?
he is not here, but he is risen, Et si non credideritis Oraculo, credit
oculo, and if you will not believe us, believe your own eyes, for you may see
the place where he lay.

2. That Christ appeared twelve several times after his resurrection.
2. Truth it self confirms this truth unto us, by those manyfold apparitions
that he made after his resurrection, during the space of forty days, that
before he ascended into Heaven, he walked here on earth. And these (if I be not
far deceived in my reckoning) were at least twelve times, according to the
number of his 12 Apostles.

First to Mary Magdalen. Mark. 16.9.
First, He appeared unto Mary Magdalen apart; where we must observe, that he
appeared first unto a woman, that no woman should thenceforth be any ways
reproached for their first transgression and seduction of man; Quia ut culpam
viro transfudit, Ambros. l. 10 in Luc. 24. Beda in cap. ult. Luc.
transfudit etiam and gratiam, veterisque lapsus aerumnam resurrectionis
indicio compensavit, because that as a woman was the first instrument of death,
so she was the first messenger of life, and brought the first tidings of the
resurrection of Christ, which is the surest argument of man's salvation. And he
appeared to this woman, first, quia dominum prae caeteris dilexit, Aug.
Meditat. cap. 35.
ideo prae caeteris videre meruit, because she loved him above all, therefore
she obtained to see him before all, she rose early, Joh. 20.1.11.15.
she sought him carefully, and she wept bitterly, not with those undiscreete
women for Tammuz, which was a brazen image with leaden eyes, Ezech. 8.14.
that being molten with heat, did seem to weep, and so caused the women to
sympathize in tears, and to weep (as is thought) for Adonis, but she weeps
for Adonai, for her Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, a rare example of great
piety, and therefore though she had offended much, yet because she sorrowed
much, and loved much, she had much forgiven her, and much love showed unto her,
Revel. 1.8.11
for he which is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, did show himself
first unto her.

2. Secondly, To the three women returning homeward. Matthew 28, 9.
He appeared to all the women together, as they returned homeward from the
sepulcher, to teach us, that never any man truly sought for Christ, but with
these women, he should be sure to find him.

3. Thirdly to Simon Peter alone. 1 Cor. 15.5.
He appeared to Simon Peter alone, the first among the men, says Chrysostom.
because S. Peter was the first Apostle whom he called first, and who confessed
him first to be the Son of God, and therefore he appears first to him, and
bids the women tell his Disciples and Peter, that is, and Peter especially,
that he was risen, and went before them into Galilee. But when or where, or
after what manner he appeared thus unto Peter, because the scripture does not
express it, we can no wages determine it, Theoph. in Mar. 1.16.
as both Theophylact and Saint Gregory do observe, and therefore it being a
question, Plus subtilitatis quam utilitatis habens, that has more subtle
scrupulosity, then any comfortable Vtility, I will peaceably pass it over.

Fourthly, to the two Disciples traveling to Emaus, Luke 24.13.
Fourthly, He appeared to the two Disciples, journeying toward Emans; the name
of the one was Cleophas, and many think the other to be Saint Luke himself,
who out of his modesty concealeth his own name, Theoph. Suc. Luc.
says Theophylact. These two Fugientes civitatem sanguinolentaus slatim
inveniunt Christum, flying this bloody city, did presently find their Savior;
to show unto us, that while we live among the wicked, we shall live separate
from God, but as Elias when he left Jezabe^^, was presently accompanied by the
Angel, so these two, and all those that forsake the World, or shun the wicked,
shall presently find their God.

Fifthly, Fifthly to the eleven Apostles together. Mark 16.14. Luke 24.33. etc.
Joh. 20.19.
He appeared unto the eleven Apostles, and all the rest of the Disciples that
were with them, when the doors were shut, and standing in the midst of them,
he said, Peace be unto you; to show, that he was the Prince of Peace, which had
now purchased their Peace indeed; and he demanded, why thoughts should arise in
their hearts, to show unto us, that he was a God; because he knew the very
secrets of their hearts.

Sixthly, He appeared to the same company again, Sixthly to the same company when
Thomas was with them. Joh. 20.24, 26.
within eight days after, when Thomas was with them, and then he showed them
the wounds of his sacred body, which he suffered to be handled, and which he
kept (says Saint Augustine) Non necessitate, sed potestate, not for any
weakness in himself, that he could not heal and whole up those wounds that he
received, but through his power he reserved them.

Why Christ reserved his wounds.
1. To show the greatness of his love, that would suffer so much of, and for
wretched men.

2. To show the greatness of man's malice, that would, Diomedes like, so cruelly
deal with so merciful a God.

3. To strengthen the weak says of his waving servants, ut vulneribus corporis
sanaret vulnera incredulitatis, that they seeing the wounds of his body, might
thereby have the wounds of their unbeleeving souls healed.

4. To show the certainty of his Resurrection, when they saw he had the same
body which was crucified and peirced by his enemies.

Seventhly, to seven men together. Joh 21.2
7. He appeared to Peter, James and John, Nathaniel, Didymus, and two other
disciples, when they were a fishing at the sea of Tyberias, and there he proved
unto them the verity of his Deity, by that miracle of providing fishes for them
to eat, and the truth of his humanity by eating with them.

Eighthly, to Saint James. 1 Cor. 5.7. Hieron. in Catall.
8. He appeared unto James the brother of the Lord, that is, the cosen-Germane
of Christ, according to the flesh, being the son of Mary, that was sister until
the Virgin Mary (as Saint Hierome says) and not the son of Joseph, by another
wife (as some would have it) and he was called James the just, in regard of his
upright and innocent life. Ninthly, to the eleven Disciples on Mount Thabor.
Mat. 28.10.16 Tenthly, to more then 500. Brethren at once. 1 Cor. 15.6.

Eleventhly, to all his Disciples in Mount Olivet.

Acts 1.9.12. Twelfthly, to Saint Paul, going to Damascus, 1 Cor. 15.8.




Ninthly, He appeared unto the eleven disciples at one time upon mount Thabor
in Galilee.

Tenthly, He appeared to more then five hundred brethren at once.

Eleventhly, he appeared to all his Apostles and Disciples upon Mount Olivet by
Jerusalem, when in the presence of them all he ascended up to Heaven.

Twelfthly, He appeared unto Saint Paul traveling to Damascus, as unto one
born out of due time, as himself confesses.

Thus he did appear unto his Apostles and Disciples, which by his eternal
wisdom were pre-ordained to be witnesses of his glorious Resurrection; and
methinks the plainness of their declaration, and the smalnesse of their
expectation of any manner of profit in the world, for the testifying of these
things, should be sufficient to make all men give credit to their testimony.
Besides all this, there be many other circumstantiall proofs and demonstrations
of his Resurrection. For,

First the great Earthquake, Cajetan in Mat. 28.
First, at the very moment of time, that he rose from his Sepulcher, and the
Angels descended from Heaven, there was a great Earthquake, the earth either
dancing for joy that Christ was risen, or trembling for fear, that men would
not believe it.

Secondly, the apparitions of the raised bodies Mat^ 27.52.53.
Secondly, Many that were dead, came forth from their graves, and appeared unto
many in the City of Jerusalem, to testify unto them, and assure them of his
Resurrection. Dives thought, if one were sent from the dead, his Brethren
would believe him; and behold here are many sent, and yet the Jews, the
brethren of Christ, will not believe them: And yet notwithstanding, when they
read that one Erus an Armenian, that one Aristeus, or that one Thespesius rose
again to life; they think no evil of Plato, Herodotus, or Plutarch for
reporting it.

Thirdly, the testimony of Pilate, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Thirdly, Pilate himself that condemned him to death, did testify of his
Resurrection unto life, in a letter that he wrote unto Tiberius Caesar.

Fourthly, Fourthly, The sudden courage of the Apostles.
Whereas a little before the resurrection of Jesus Christ, his Apostles and
Disciples, durst not peep out of doors, because they did but waveringly think
that this was he, which should have redeemed Israel, they do now courageously
compass the whole world, and confidently teach and avouch, There is no other
Name given under Heaven, whereby men may be saved, but the Name of Jesus.

Fifthly, Fifthly, The sufferings of the Martyrs.
All Martyrs have most boldly confessed this truth, and sealed it with their
blood: Tertullian does most excellently show the Difference betwixt the Martyrs
and Malefactors, saying, Mali apparere devitant, deprehensi trepidant, accusati
negant, condemnati maerent, evil doers are loath to be seen, being taken they
tremble, being accused, they deny it, being condemned they deplore themselves;
but with the Martyrs, there is no such matter, for they are neither ashamed of
their profession, neither do they greive at their apprehension, but if they be
noted for Christians, they rejoice at it, if they be accused, they confess it,
if adjudged to dye, they deem it better then life: And therefore (says he)
Quid hoc mali est, cujus reus gaudet, cujus accusatio votum est, and cujus
poena faelicitas? What evil is this, when the guilty of the fact rejoices in
his accusation, and is made happy in his condemnation.

Sixthly, the heavy punishments that were inflicted upon Christ's persecutors.
Sixthly, the great Plagues and punishments that were presently inflicted, and
have still to this very day continued upon all the Persecutors and denyers of
Jesus Christ, do sufficiently prove the truth and certainty of his
Resurrection, and that he is the true and promised Messiah; for Pilate being
accused by the Jews, was enforced to appeal from Vitellius the chief Governor
of Syria, and to go to Rome, Joseph. antiq. l. 18. cap. 11.
to defend himself before Casar, who before Pilate came there, was dead; and
therefore he had none other remedy, but to wander as a pilgrim and a forlorn
creature, till he ended his days in extreme miseries: So Agrippa suffered
intolerable calamities, Cap. 17.
so Herod the Tetrarch was spoiled of his goods, deprived of his Kingdom, and
banished from his Country: so Herod that killed James, was miserably eaten up
of loathsome worms, Cap. 18.
and to the Jews was measured the same measure, as they had measured unto
Christ before; for as they had sold him for thirty pence, so thirty of them
were sold for one penny; and five hundred of them were nailed to Crosses in one
day: It were too too lamentable to relate more of those doleful Tragedies,
which Josephus, Eusebius, Evagrius, and others have written of them, and what
they suffered at the final ruin and destruction of Jerusalem, and what heavy
bondage, (far worse then that Egyptian slavery) they have endured to this very
day: Hence it is that Rabbi Samuel, In aureo tractatu Rabbi Sam. de miserimo
statu Judaeorum,
about six hundred years agone, wrote a Tractate in form of an Epistle, unto
Rabbi Isaac, Master of the synagogue of the Jews, in Subjulmeta, a City of
Morocco, wherein he does excellently discuss the cause of their long
captivity, their great blindness, and extreme misery: And after that he had
proved, that this punishment was inflicted upon them for some great and
grievous sin, he shows that sin to be the same whereof the Prophet Amos
speaks, Amos. 2 6.
For three transgressions of Israel, and for four, What Rabbi Samuel says
concerning Jesus Christ.
Non transferam eos, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they
sold the Righteous for silver: And though he says, that their Rabbis do
understand this Righteous to be Joseph, that was sold by his Brethren into
Egypt; yet because the Prophet puts this for the fourth sin, and the
greatest sin of Israel, and because he cannot find any three sins of the sons
of Israel, before the selling of Joseph, therefore he makes the selling of
Joseph to be the first sin of Israel, the worshipping of the Calfe in Horeb to
be the second, the abusing and killing of Gods Prophets to be the third, and
the fourth to be the selling of Jesus Christ. For the first, they served four
hundred years; for the second, they wandered forty years in the Wilderness,
until they that came out of Egypt were all consumed and brought to nothing,
excepting only Caleb and Joshuah; for the third, they were held captives
seaventy years in Babylon; and for the fourth, the said Rabbi Samuel
confesses that they were held in most pitiful captivity to this very day,
because he was most unjustly sold, and most shamefully delivered to death, as
he shows in the seventh Chapter of the said Tractate. Many more
circumstantiall proofs and declarations of his Resurrection, might be produced,
to show him to be the true Messiah; but I hope these will serve, to show also,
that our forefathers have not, and we do not believe these things without more
then abundant and unanswerable proofs thereof; and to convince that malicious
obstinacy and infidelity of all those, whether professed Jews, plain
Atheists, or seeming Christians, which notwithstanding such an Army of
arguments, and such a Cloud of witnesses, will still continue blinded and
hardened in unbeleif.

Fifthly, and lastly, as for his Ascension whosoever sees and acknowledges,
that Jesus being dead, could raise himself again to life, will easily believe
also, that he was able likewise to ascend up to Heaven. Whereof notwithstanding
saint Luke alleges one hundred and twenty witnesses at the least, Acts 1.
in whose presence he ascended from the top of Mount Olivet, after forty days
space, which he had spent with them from the time of his Resurrection.

He alleges also the appearing of two Angels among all the people for
testimony whereof. Likelyhoods of truth.
He names the day and place, when, and where it happened. He recounteth the
very words that Jesus spoke at his Ascension. He tells the manner how he
ascended, and how a Cloud came down, and received him out of their sight. He
declares what the Multitude did, whither they went, and in what place they
remained after their departure thence.

And finally, he sets down so many particulars, as if it had been the
easiest matter in the world, for his enemies to have refuted his narration, if
all had not been true. Wherefore to conclude this Discourse, of the Birth,
Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus: seeing nothing has happened
in the same, which was not foretold both to Jew and Gentile, nor any thing
fore-shewed concerning the Messiah, which was not fulfilled most exactly in the
person of Christ, as have been proved by the foregoing testimonies; we may most
certainly assure our selves, and confidently affirm, against all the
unbeleiving Jews, and wretched Atheists of the world, that Jesus is the son of
God, the true and promised Messiah.

Moreover, Touching the excellency of this Person, I shall yet further prove,
first, That for time, he is God, co-eternall with his Father, and this both
apparent scriptures, That Christ is a true God is proved.
and unanswerable reasons drawn from thence do make plain. For,

First, First from the Scriptures.
The scriptures call him the true Jehovah, as we may see by the collation and
comparing of these places, viz. Exodus 3.2.13.4.14.24 20.2. And Acts 7.30.32. 1
Cor. 10.4.9 etc. And so the scriptures call him God, as Genesis 32.28. Psalm 45.7.
Isa. 7.14. Matthew. 3.3. Heb. 1.8. 1 Timothy 3.16. Joh. 1.1. Acts 20.78.
And therefore saint John says, (...), And the word was God, Also Thomas says
unto Christ, My Lord and my God: 1 John 3.16. 1 John 5.20.
And so we find the same truth expressed in many other places of the Scripture.

Secondly by unanswerable reasons drawn from scripture.
Secondly, We may show the same by infallible and unanswerable reasons, drawn
from scripture. As,

First, From those incommunicable properties of the Deity, which are properly
ascribed unto him: as, 1. To be omnipotent, Joh. 3.31. Heb. 1.3. Phil. 3.21.
Apo. 1.18. Mat. 16.11. Mat. 28.20. Joh. 16.15.
2. To remit sins, Matthew 9.6. Mar. 2.5.7.9. Luke 5.20. Joh. 20.23. 3. To be in
many places at the same instant, Matthew. 18.20. 4. To have the same equal power
with the Father, Joh. 5.17. 5. To raise himself from the grave, Romans 1.4. Joh.
10.18. 6. To send forth, and to give the Holy Ghost, Zach. 12.10 Joh. 16.7.


2. From those Epithites, which are ascribed unto him, and are only agreeable
to the divine nature; as,

Joh. 13.18. Joh. 1.9. Mat 9 4.5. Joh. 14 14.
To be the Author of our Election. To illuminate us. To know the secrets of our
hearts. To hear the prayers of them that call upon him. To judge the quick and
the dead. To give unto his servants everlasting life. To be truly rich, and so
able to do, Joh 5.22.24 2 Cor 8.9. Psalm, 50.12.
and to bestow these great rewards upon his servants, Joh. 16.15.

Thirdly, From those relations that he has with God, as to be (...), J h.
1.18. Heb. 1.3.
the only begotten son of God the brightness of his glory, and as the Poet
says, If God had once no son, then once must he
Without the brightness of his glory be.


Also to be the arm of God, Isa 53 1. Joh. 14.7.8 9. Phil. 2.6.
which the Fathers do expound of Christ, to be the Image of the Father, 2 Cor.
4.4. Col. 1.5. and to be the very form of God, which is most simple and
essential, not compounded or accidental, for that in God there is no
composition, no accidents; Et nihil est in Deo, quod non sit ipse Deus, nor any
other thing which is not God, because the Divine Essence Identificat sibi omnia
que sunt in Divinis, does identifie, Gabriel. ^iel. super 1. sentent. did. 1.
q. 5.
or deifie all things that are in the Deity.

4. From the universal effects, Genesis 1.1. Pal 45.6. Psalm. 102.25. Joh. 1 2.3
Col 16 17. Heb. 1 2 3. Joh. 5.17.
and proper works of God, for he that created, preserves and governs all the
things that are created, is the true and everlasting God, but Christ created
all things, and does still sustain and govern all things, and therefore he
must needs be the true and eternal God. To be brief, He is the Son of the
Father, the Wisdom and the Power of God; A Proof of the co-eternity of the Son
with his father.
and therefore either the Father was without a Son, (and then he could be no
Father) and God was without his Wisdom, and without his strength, or else he
was never without his Son; but to say that God was without his wisdom, or
without his strength, is most absurd: Ergo, non ex tempore genitus est, qui
cuncta tempora condidit, and therefore he was not begotten in time, which
created all times, Aug. Ep. 6.6.
says Saint Augustine.

That Christ is co-essential with God, is proved.
Secondly, it follows, that I should prove and show, how for Nature he is
co-essentiall with his Father, touching which point, Athanasius says, Non res
quaepiam extrinsecus ad inventa est filij substantia, neque ex nihilo inducta
est, sed ex Patris essentia nata est, The substance of the son is no outward
thing, either found or created, but begotten of the very Essence of his Eather,
even as you see the brightness springing from the Light, or the Vapor from the
Water, Neque enim splendour neque vapor est ipsa aqua, aut ipse sol, neque res
aliena; For neither the light is the Sun it self, nor the vapor the water it
self, and yet they are none other things, of another kind then be the
Substances from whence they spring; even so the Son issues from the substance
of his Father, Et tamen Patris substantia non perpessa est partitionem; And yet
the substance of the Father admits no partion; for as the Son remains still
the same, and is no way lessened or diminished, Athanas. in Ep. Cont Eusebium.
in respect of those beams that flow from him, so the Father suffers no
mutation, by having and begetting, Suam ipsius imaginem filium, this his Son
and eternal image; but remaining still the same, he begets his Son of the
same Essence, and we find not only all the Orthodox Fathers, but also the
scriptures, are plain enough to confirm the same truth; for our savior says,
Joh. 10.30.
I and my Father are one, and so saint John having spoken of the Father, the
Word, and the spirit, says, That these three are one, 1 John 5.7.
and reason it self must needs confirm the same thing, for seeing the Divine
Essence is most simple, impartible, and indivisible, and that the Father is God
(as none denies) and that the Son is God, (as I have already proved) and that
the Holy Ghost is God, (as all the holy Fathers have sufficiently confirmed)
and yet there are not three Gods, Athan. in Sym.
but one God, (as Athanasius shows) therefore it must needs follow, that all
three have but one and the self same Essence, and consequently, that the son
is (...), Patri, consubstantiall or co-essentiall with his Father: And
therefore hence also, it must needs follow that our Savior Christ is (...), A
God of himself, independent, as absolute as the Father is.

And yet for the better understanding of this point, how Christ may be said to
be (...), God of himself, we must consider, Them. p. 1. q. 33
that Aliud est habere essentiam Divinam a seipso, aliud habere essentiam
Divinam a seipsa existentem; How Christ is God of himself.
It is one thing to have his divine Essence from himself, and another thing to
have his Divine Essence existing of it self, to say that the person of the son,
has his divine Essence, that is his personal being from himself, we cannot,
because it is from the Father, the Father communicating his whole Essence unto
the son, and therefore we say that the son, Ratione (...) in respect of his
personal being, is not (...), God of himself, but God of God, and Light of
Light, (as the Nicen Council has it) because the person of the son, existeth
from the person of the Father, but to say that the son has his divine essence
existing of it self, is most cerrain; Idem ibid.
Quia remota relatione ad Patrem, sola restat essentia, que est a seipsa, for
taking away the relation of the Son unto the Father, there remains but the
Essence, which is of it self: And therefore we may say, that the Son, Quoad
essentiam absolutam, in respect of his absolute Essence, is (...), A God of
himself, because the Essence of the son is the very same, that the Essence of
the Father is, and so to this truth set down by Calvin, Bellar. de Chr^sto.
Bellarmine himself subscribeth.

Thirdly, It remains that I show how for Dignity he is Co-equall with his
Father: That Christ is co-equall to the Father, is proved.
And this point is as clear as the former, because in an Essence most simple,
there cannot be so much as imagined, more or less, and therefore Fulgentius
says most excellently, that seeing Christ is from everlasting, because he is
the eternal Wisdom and Power of God, Baruch 3.25.
seeing he is immeasurable, because he is great and has no end, and seeing he
is most high, as Zacharias shows in his speech of John the Baptist, Luke 1.76.
That he should be called the Prophet of the most high, that is, of Christ, he
must needs be in all respects equal unto his Father, Nam quid anterius
sempiterno, quid majus immenso, quid superius altissimo? for what can be before
him, that has been before all things? what can be greater then that which is
immeasurable? or what can be higher, then that which is highest? and so saint
John says, That the Jews sought the rather to kill him, because he did not
only break the Sabbath, but said also, that God was his Father, Joh. 5.18.
making himself equal with God.

How maliciously Heretic have d^nyed the Godhead of Christ
Many Objections are made by Heretics, against the Co-eternity,
Co-essentiallity; and Co-equal^ty of the son with his Father, but they are all
so trivial, that they deserve no answer, and they are all deduced from those
places, that are spoken of Christ, as he is a man, and misapplyed by them, to
deny his Excellency, as he is a God. Yea such is the Perverseness of Heretics
and Atheists that they will be wicked, (...), in the higstest degree, by
searching so far into the Nature of Christ, that at last they will deny him to
be a God.

And therefore, that we may be the better able to withstand their Heresies, and
discover their falacies, let us observe the words of Gregory Nazianzene, and
Fulgentius, who does most excellently show, how the properties of both his
Natures concurred together, and might be easily discerned in him, from the very
beginning of his days, to the last end of his being here on Earth. For,

He is borne of his Mother, Luke 2.7.
and wrapped in swaddling clouts, as being a man, but a Star does manifest him,
and the wise men adore him, Matthew. 2.11.
as being a God; He is laid in a Cratch, as he is a man, but he does
wonderfully work in Heaven, as he is a God, he suffers himself to be carried
in their arms, Full. Ser. de Epiphan. Iste puer in praesept quidem parvulus
collocatur, sed magnus in coelo mirabiliter operatur; permittit se manibus in
terra portari, sed praecipit sibi caelestia familiari.
as he is a man, but he supporteth all things, and Commands all the Host of
Heaven to do him service, as he is a God, he is Mat. 3.16. Mar. 1.12. Joh. 4.6.
Mat. 8.24.25.
baptized in Jordan, as being a man, but the Holy Ghost descends upon him from
heaven as being a God; he is tempted of the Devil, as he is a man, but he
overcomes and expells the Devils, as he is a God, he travels and is thirsty,
he is hungry and is weary, as he is a man, but he refreshes the weary, he
seedeth the hungry, and he gives drink unto the thirsty, as he is a God: He
sleeps in the ship, Mat. 8.26.
and his Disciples awake him, as he is a man, but he rebukes the winds, and
stilleth the rage of the Seas, as he is a God; he is poor and needy, Mat. 8.20.
and has not an house to put his head in, as he is a man, but he is rich and
mighty, and cannot be contained in the heavens, as he is a God: He is
sorrowful and sad, Mat. 36.38.39
he weeps, and he prays, as he is a man, but he hears our Prayers, Joh.
14. Isa. 53.
and comfort the sorrowful as he is a God; he is subject to infirmities,
as he is a man, but he heals all our infirmities, Math. 27.51.45.
as he is a God; he is whipped and crucified, as he is a man, but he renteth
the veil of the Temple, and causes the sun to hide his face for shame to see
him crucified, as he is a God; he says, Eloi, Eloi, Math. 27.46. Luke 23.43.
Lamasabachthani, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? as he is a man,
but he says unto the Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, as
he is a God; Math. 27.50.60.
He yeildeth up the Ghost, and he dies, and is buried, and lies in his
Grave, as he is a man, but he overcomes Death, and destroys the Devils,
and raises himself unto Life again, as he is a God, and being risen, Luke
24.15.31.51.
he appears unto his Disciples, and eats and talks with them as he is a man,
but he vanishes out of their sight, and ascends up unto heaven, as he is a
God; and so now the Heavens do contain him, and he sits there on the right
hand of God, as he is a man, but he sustaineth the Heavens, and rides upon
the same, Psalm. 68.4.
as upon an horse, as he is a God.

And so we see, that maugre all the spite of Hell, it is most apparent, that
the person of Christ so subsisteth, Vt cum in homine Christo videtur veritas
hominis, Fulg^nt. de persona Christi l. 2. ad Trasim.
in eodem Deo Christo cognoscatur paternae veritas Deitatis, as when we see the
verity of the manhood in the man Christ Jesus, we must know and acknowledge the
Eternal Deity in the same God Christ Jesus, because he is still a perfect God
and a perfect man, and of these two Natures subsisting in one person inconfused.

Moreover, We find in the sacred scriptures, many Names, Titles, and
Attributes, answerable to the manifold effects of his Humanity, Power, Rule,
and Divinity: For example.

Jesus Christ is called Shiloh, Genesis 49.10. Immanuel, Isa. 7.14. Michael, Dan.
10.13. A Nazarite Mat. 2.23: A Prophet Deuteronomy. 18.15. A Priest Heb. 7.17. A King
Zach. 9.9. A Savior Joh. 4.42. A Mediator Heb. 9.15. A Physician Mat. 9.12 A
Ransom 1 Timothy 2.6. A servant Isa. 42.1. Jesus Christ is called A Shepherd
Heb. 13.20. A Samaritane Luke 10.33. A sanctuary Isa. 8.14. A Reconciliator
Romans 3.25. A Foundation. Isa. 28.16. Wonderful Esa 9.6. Welbeloved Cant. 1.13.
Righteousness Jer. 23.6. Redemption 1 Cor. 1.30. Salvation Luke 2.30. A
Teacher Joh 3.2. A Way Joh. 14.6. A Vine Joh. 15.1. A spirit 1 Cor. 14.45. A
Reaper Rev. 14.15. A Passover 1. Cor. 5.7. A Master Mat. 10.24. A Justifier
Romans 3.26. A Husband 2 Cor. 11 2 A Fountain Cant. 4.15. A Feeder Mat 2 6
Sanctification 1 Cor. 1 30 A Deliverer Romans 11 16 An Apostle Heb. 3 21 An
Advocate 1 John 2 1 Amen Rev. 3 14 God Joh. 1.1. Man Romans 5 15 Flesh Joh. 1 14.
David Jer. 30.9. Jesus Christ is called A Governor Mat. 2 6 Rabbi Joh. 6 25
Ointment Cant. 1 3 A forerunner Heb: 6 20 A Child Isa: 9 6 A Babe Luke 2 16
Wisdom 1 Cor: 1 30 Truth Joh: 14:6: Life Joh: 14 6 Light Joh: 1 9 A just one
Acts 3 14 A great one Isa: 19 20 The new man Ephesians: 4 24 Gods son Mat: 2 15 The
Beloved Cant: 5 6 Gods Messenger Mal: 3 1 Gods Elect Servant
Isa: 42 1 Gods beloved Mat: 12 18 A Bridegroom Mat: 9 15 A true Witness Rev:
3 14

And he is called A Plant of Renown, Ezec. 34 29 A polished shaft Isa. 49.2. A
Messiah the Prince Dan 9.25: A Golden Altar Rev. 8.3. A righteous servant Esa.
53 11 A green Tree Luke 23 31 A bright morning star Rev: 22 19 A faithful
Witness Rev. 1 5 A wedding garment Mat. 22 12 A Well of Life Joh. 4 14 A stone
to stumble at 1 Pet. 2.8 A Corner stone. An Elect stone. 1 Pet. 2 6 A Precious
stone. A branch of the root of Jesse Isa. 11 1 An Angel of the Lord Zach. 1 12
An everlasting Father Isa. 9 6 The Ancient of days Dan. 7 2 The Captain of
the Lord of Hoasts Josh. 5 15 The Covenant of the people Isa. 42 6 Jesus Christ
is called The generation of David Rev. 22 16 The Desire of all nations Hag. 2 7
The Door of the Sheep Joh. 10 7 The Bread of life Joh. 6 51 The Consolation of
Israel. Luke 2 25 A ruler in Israel. Micah 5 2 The glory of Israel. Luke 2 32
The scepter of Israel. Numb. 24 17 The finisher of our Faith Heb: 12 2 The end
of the law, Romans 10 4 The judge of quick and dead Acts 10 42 The Head of all
power Col: 2 10 The Head of Principallity The Head of the church Ephesians. 5 23
The Head of every man 1 Cor. 11 3 The horn of salvation Luke 1 69 The heir of
the world Rom 4 13 The Elect of God Isa. 4 1 The Image of God Col. 1 15 The
wisdom of God 1 Cor. 1 24 The Power of God Idem The lamb of God Joh. 4 10 The
gift of God Joh. 1 29 The lion of Judah, Rev. 5 5 The light of the Gentiles
Isa. 49 6 The Prince of Kings Life Peace
Rev. 1 5 Acts 3 15 Isa. 9 6 A purger of sins Heb. 1 3 A quickening spirit 1
Cor. 15 45 A merciful High Priest Heb. 2 17 A faithful High Priest A holy High
Priest Idem A harmless High Priest An undefiled High Priest Heb. 7 26 The star
of Jacob Numb: 24.17 A Minister of The sanctuary The Tabernacle. Circumcision
Heb: 8 2 Rom: 15 8 The second Adam, 1 Cor: 15 45 A Beloved Son Mat: 3 17 A
Dear Son Col. 1 13 The first born Son Mat: 1 25 And he is called A Messenger of
the Covenant Mal. 3.1. Eternal life 1 John 1.2. One Lord Zech. 14.9 Captain of
Salvation Heb. 2.10. King of Israel Saints The Jews Kings Glory
Joh. 1.49 Rev. 15.3 Mat. 27.37. Rev. 19.16. Psalm. 24.10. Childrens Bread Mat.
15 26. Lord of Quick and dead Hoasts Lords The Sabbath
Romans 14.9. Jsa. 44.6. Rev. 19.16. Luke 6 5 The light of men Joh. 1 4
Resurrection of the Dead Joh. 11 25 The Son of Abraham David Joseph God Man A
Virgin Righteousness
Mat. 11 Joh 1 45 Luke 1 35 Mat. 12 8 Isa. 7.14 Mal. 4 2 And he is called
Anointed of the Lord Psalm. 2 2 Spiritual Meat Drink Rock
1 Cor. 10 3 4 The seed of the woman Genesis 3 15 Author of Peace Faith Salvation
1 Cor. 14 33 Heb. 12 2 Heb. 5 9 An innocent man Luke 23 14 A Curse for man.
Gal. 3 13 Sin for man. 2 Cor. 5 21 The Son of the most High Luke 1 32 Lord of
Glory 1 Cor. 2 8 Branch of righteousness, etc. Jer. 33.14. Jesus Christ is
compared unto A stone cut out of the Mountain Dan. 2 45 A Roe and Heart Cant. 2
9 A brazen serpent Number. 21 9 A worm Psalm. 22.6. A Thief Rev. 3 3 An apple tree
Cant. 2.3. A cluster of Camphire Cant. 1 14 A goat Lev. 16 22 A lilly Cant. 2
2. A laddar Genesis 28 12 Jesus Christ is compared unto A snare Isa: 8 14 A Net
Idem Melchisedek Heb: 7 3 Moses Acts 3 22 Solomon Cant. 3 11 Tirzah Can: 6 4
Jerusalem Idem The Paschall lamb Exodus 12 Rain and showers Psalm: 72 6 The
Mercy seat Exodus: 25 17 Lightning Mat: 24 27 Fullers soap Mal: 3 2 Purging fire
Idem A Hen Mat. 23 37 A Carcass Mat. 24 28 A bundle of myrrh Cvn-. 1 13 A
lamb with out spot 1 Pet: 1 19 A lamb undefiled Idem An Army with Banners
Cant. 6 4 And he may be called Our Eye Mouth Hand
Because by him we see speak to offer unto
the Father John 14 6

True it is, All the things of this world without Christ, will avail us
nothing.
that as the Bird cannot fly without her wings, nor the body move without the
Soul, so no more can any man do any thing that is good and acceptable unto
God, without the help of Jesus Christ; for, all our Knowledge is but
heathenish science, able to make us proud, not to make us happy, if he be not
Objectum adaequatum, the chiefest, yea, and the sole object of the same; all
our Faith in God is but ungrounded confidence, if it be not grounded upon Jesus
Christ; all our righteousness is but as Pollutio Panni, menstruous clouts, 1 John 1 2.
if it be not washed in his blood; and all our patience, temperance, chastity,
and all other virtues, that either Nature planted, or education effected in us,
are but splendida peccata, glistering gilded sins, unacceptable unto God, and
unprofitable unto our selves, if they be not guided by the grace, and directed
to the glory of Jesus Christ, who is indeed the most perfect pattern of all
virtue.

And as there is no way for us to find true virtue but only in him which is
virtue it self, The knowledge of, Christ the only means to suppress all vices
so there is nothing in the world, that is so availeable to suppress all Vice,
as is the true knowledge of Jesus Christ; Nam haec irae impetum cohibet,
superbia tumorem sedat, For this will refrain the violence of anger, when they
consider how he suffered all violence and villainies, Isa. 53.7.
and yet as a sheep before his shearer was dumb, so opened he not his mouth;
This will allay the swellings of Pride, when they consider how he was the
noblest of all creatures, and the fairest among the sons of men, and yet was
he meek and lowly in heart, Psalm. 45 2. Matthew. 11.29.
this will heal the wounds of envy, it will stop the streams of Luxury, it
will quench the flames of Lust, it will temper the thirst of Coveteousnesse,
and it will keep thee from the itching desire of all filthiness, when we
consider how much he loathed these, how free he was from these, and how
earnestly he diswaded us from all vices whatsoever.

Ne spiritu mendacii and erro^is seducaris lucescat tibi veritas christus, and
ne adversitatibus fatigeris, comfortet te virtus Dei christus.
And therefore, Ne mundi gloria seu carnis voluptatibus abducaris dulcescat tibi
pro his sapientia Christus, least thou should be withdrawn from God, through
the pompous vanities of this world, or the lustful and delightful pleasures
of thine own flesh, let Christ, the true wisdom of God wax sweet unto thee,
least thou should be seduced by the spirit of lies and of errors, let Christ
the true light shine unto thee, and least thou should be wearied and wax
faint under the burden of adversities, let Christ the power of God refresh
thee, because whatsoever we do want, he alone is alsufficient to supply our
need. For if thou art sick with sin, and thy soul wounded, or poisoned unto
death, and would be healed, Christ is thy best and alone Physician, only he,
and no one but he can cure thee, if thy soul does hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, and would be satisfied, he is the bread of Life; Joh. 6.35.
Chap. 7.38.
and the Fountain of living waters; if thou art as naked of all goodness, as
thou were of all clothing, when thou came out of they Mothers womb, and
would be adorned with the best robes of virtue, Christ is the Garment of
Righteousness; Romans 13.14.
or whatsoever thou want, and would have, thou may fully and freely have
the same from him; yea, if thou be simple, he is thy wisdom, if thou be
sinful, 1 Cor. 1 30.
he is thy Righteousness, if thou would be holy, he is thy
sanctification; if thou be the slave of hell, and held captive by the
Devil, he is thy redemption, and thy redeemer that has led captivity
captive, Ephesians. 4.8.
and to comprehend all in a word, This Jesus is All in All; Vt qui omnia
propter Christum dimittit, unum inveniat pro omnibus Christum; That he which
forsakes All for Christ his sake, might find all in Christ, and Christ instead
of all, far better then all unto his soul; that so he might joyfully sing with
the Psalmist, The Lord is my portion, Psalm. 23.1.
and I have a goodly heritage, the Lord is my shepherd, and therefore I can
want nothing; yea as all the accessions and accumulations of all worldly
things, can add nothing unto the felicity of a Christian, so all the defects
or wants of the same things, can detract nothing from the happiness of him,
that has Jesus Christ, Vita ab errore, gratia a peccato, and mors a morte
liberabit; for his life will preserve thee from error, if thou will follow it,
his grace will free thee from sin, if thou will receive it; and his death will
deliver thee from eternal death, if thou will believe in it. So that he is
truly called the way, without wandering in our Peregrination, whereby our paths
are directed; Truth without shadowing in our deliberation, whereby our Errors
are corrected, and Life without ending in our remuneration, whereby our
mortality is eternized.

In that he is Our Righteousness to justify us. Ephesians. 1.7 Romans 3.24 Col.
1.20 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb. 10 9. Col 2.13. 1 These. 1.10.
Our Wisdom to teach us. Our Reconciliation to reconcile us. Our Holiness to
sanctify us. Our Redemption to free us. Our Reward to glorify us.
So that by him our sins are discharged, we cleared, the debt paid, the score
is crossed, the creditor satisfied, and the debtor acquitted. In that his
condemnation is our Absolution, and Passion our payment, his death is our life,
and blood our purgation, his sacrifice is our satisfaction and curse our
blessing, his Grave is our mortification, and Ascension our Glorification. Thus
much by way of digression, therefore now to come back to the foregoing subject
of our discourse, namely the Deity of Jesus Christ, If all the testimonies of
the forenamed Jews and Gentiles, of all the Evangelists, Apostles, Fathers,
Martyrs, and of all the holy men of God, be not sufficient to prove Jesus the
son of Mary, That God himself testified Christ to be his son.
to be the Eternal Son of God. We find God himself the creator of Heaven
and Earth, testifying the same; for though the testimony of John was
sufficient, to satisfy any man, because he was a burning and a shining Light,
Joh. 5.35
in whom the Jews themselves were willing to rejoice for a season, as our
Savior witnesses, yet Christ needed not to receive testimony from man, Joh.
5.36.
because he had a greater Witness then that of John, even the Father himself
which sent him, he bare witness of him, and with an audible voice he
proclaimed the same twice from Heaven, Mat. 3.13.17.
saying, first at the river Jordan, and then on Mount Thabor, Matthew 17.5.
That he was his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased: So that these are
sufficient witnesses, Quia dicta Jehovae dicta pura; Because the words of the
Lord are pure words, as the Psalmist says. And lastly, That Christ appeared
diverse times before his incarnation.
Christ himself confirms this truth unto us, by those manifold apparitions
that he made before his incarnation: For it is most certain, that he appeared
and conferred with the Fathers, in the visible form and shape of man; Et
praestantissimi theologorum dicunt quotiescunque Deus immortalis hominibus
apparuit, Petrus Cunaeus de re pub. Heb. l. 3. c. 3. p. 406.
apparuisse personam secundam, id est, filium; quod sane ab illis recte
existimatum est, says Cunaeus: the most excellent Divines do say, That
whenever the immortal God has appeared unto mortal man, it was the second
person of the Trinity, that is, the son of God, Christ Jesus, that did appear,
which in truth is most rightly said of them, in the judgment of that learned
man, and therefore it is not improbable, nor to any men incredible, that he
assumed upon him, the form and shape of man, when he created man, and so made
him not only in his own Image, which he had as God, That Christ diverse times
assumed the form of a man, before he was made man.
that is, in holiness and true righteousness, but also like unto himself, in
respect of that form and shape, which he then assumed, and which he intended
to be made himself thereafter: And this may be collected out of Moses, where
he says, Genesis 3 8.
That Adam heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden; For God, as
he is a God, has neither voice to speak, nor feet to walk, but assuming the
form and shape of a man, he did both walk and talk with him, and in respect
of this bodily presence of God, the man did specially seek to hide himself
among the trees of the Garden, when he heard his voice and not before. But to
Abraham it is apparent, that he appeared.

Genesis 18.13.20. verse. 25.
First, In the Plain of Mamre, for Moses says, not only that the Lord talked
with Abraham, but he says also, that Abraham calls him, The Judge of all
the world, which can be ascribed to none but Christ, which is the Judge of
quick and dead.

Secondly, It is the opinion of some, that he appeared unto Abraham in his
return from the conquest of the four Kings, for though some of the ancient
Jews in their idle fancies have imagined him to be such a person, Illegitimus
as is much derogatory to the Majesty of so glorious a Priest, and such a
super-excellent King, because he is only named by Moses, Hi^ron. in Epist. ad
Evagrium. Petrus Cunaeus de repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 3. p. 396.
without any mention of his Descent, and saint Hierome, with diverse others old
and new writers, of good esteem in the Church of Christ, do reject the
judgment of one, which in Saint Hieroms time did say, that Melchisedech, which
met Abraham and blessed him, was the Son of God; and though some of our latest
Divines have imagined him to be Sem the son of Noah; yet some learned men agree
with him in Saint Hierome, That Melchisedeck was the son of God
whose name he does not set down, and whose arguments to confirm his speech,
he does neither relate nor confute, that it is most probable unto them, and
most agreeble to the Apostles mind, that he was none other then Jesus Christ,
the Son of God.

First, Because the Apostle says, Heb. 7.7.
That he was greater then the Patriarch Abraham, who is said to be the Father
of the Faithful, which Epithete, with the words (...), do sufficiently show
him to be, Divinioris cujusdam naturae, of a far more excellent and diviner
nature then Abraham was.

Secondly, Because the Apostle going to speak of this Melchisedeck, says,
Heb. 5.11.
That he had many things to say concerning him, which were (...), hard to be
explained, which certainly he would never have said, had he not understood
this Melchisedech to have been some excellent and ineffable person.

Thirdly, Because the Apostle says not, whose death is not mentioned by Moses,
for so he might be dead, though his death is not spoken of; but he says, that
David testifies of him, (...), that he lives, to show the difference betwixt
this Priest, and those Leviticall Priests which dyed; yea they say he can be
none other then Christ, because he was of an endless life, or else the
similitude does not hold that Christ was of an endless life, (...), after the
likeness of Melchisedech. Heb. 7.3.


Fourthly, Because he says, That this Melchisedech was like unto the son of
God, even as Nebuchadnezzar says, Dan. 3.25.
That the fourth man, which walked with the three children in the fiery
furnace, was like unto the son of God, so here the Apostle saying, that he was
(...), like the son of God, means that he assumed a body of the same
likeness and habit, and countenance, as afterward he meant to unite personally
unto himself.

Fifthly, Heb. 7.2.
Because Abraham did give unto him Tithe of all, as perceiving under that
visible form and shape of man, an invisible Deity to subsist, to whom Tithe is
only due, and everlastingly due, because he is an Everlasting Priest.

Sixthly, Because all they, which do affirm this Melchisedech to be either,
Shem or any other King of Salem, and a mortal man, Fateri coguntur ea omnia,
quae de illo Apostolus dixit etiam Messiae convenire; are compelled to
confess, that all those things which the Apostle speaks of Melchisedeck do
very well agree with Christ And therefore they say, that this Melchisedeck was
no mortal man, but the immortal son of God, which assuming this visible
shape, did appear unto Abraham, and offered (as a Type of our blessed Sacrament
of the Lords Supper) Bread and Wine unto him, after his victory over his
enemies: And it may be that our Savior had respect hereunto, when he said,
Joh. 8.56.
that Abraham saw his day and rejoiced, that is, Not only with the eyes of
faith, (as all the rest of the Patriarchs and Prophets did) but also in a
visible shape which he assumed like unto that, whereunto he was afterward to
be united. But that man which wrestled with Jacob, was none other but the man
Christ Jesus; for he himself said, Genesis 32.28.30
That Jacob should be called Israel, a wrestler and prevailer with God, and
Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, because he had seen God Face to
face; and so that man, which appeared unto Joshuah, Josh. 5.14.
and came as a Captain of the Host of the Lord, was none other then Jesus
Christ, as Peter Martyr does most excellently by many arguments confirm.
Whereby you see Christ did heretofore assume unto himself humane forms,
wherein he appeared unto the Fathers, to be as a Praeludium of his incarnation,
which is the greatest benefit that ever man received from God, Quia in
Creatione dedit te tibi Deus, Because in thy creation, he did but give thy
being unto thee, but in his incarnation, he gave himself unto thee.

Now if it be demanded how these things can stand together? that the Father of
eternity should be borne in time? that the Son of man speaking upon Earth*
should yet at the same instant be in Heaven? and that the mighty God should
become a child, which is the weakest state of man himself? we must call to
mind, that the first letter of his great name, Isa. 9.6.
is wonderful. When he appeared of old to Manaoh, his name was wonderful,
and he did wonderously, Judge. 13.18.19. But that, and all the wonders that
ever were, must give place to the great mystery of his incarnation; Greatness
of this mystery.
Nam mysterium singulariter mirabile, and mirabilitor singular, for it is a
mystery singularly wonderful, and wonderfully singular.

So that neither the Creation of all things out of Nothing, which was the
beginning of the Works of God (those six working days putting, as it were,
an end to that long Sabbath that never had beginning: Wherein the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, Joh. 17.5. Prove. 8.30.
did infinitely glorify themseves and rejoice in the fruition one of another,
without communicating the notice thereof unto any creature) nor the
Resurrection from the dead, and the Restoration of all things, the last works
that shall go before that everlasting Sabbath, (which shall have a beginning,
but never shall have end) neither that first, I say, nor these last, though
most admirable pieces of work, may be compared with this, wherein the Lord was
pleased to show the highest pitch (if any thing may be said to be highest in
that which is infinite and exempt from all measure and dimensions) of his
Wisdom, Power, and Glory.

Gal 4.4. Joh 1 3. Col ^.16. Act^ 3.21. 1 Kings 8.22.
A notable wonder indeed, and great beyond all comparison. That the Son of God
should be made of a woman; even made of that woman which was made by himself.
That her Womb then, and the Heavens now, should contain him whom the Heaven
of Heavens cannot contain. That he who had both Father and Mother, whose
Pedigree is upon Record even up unto Adam, who in the fulness of time was
brought forth in Bethlehem, Mic. 5.2 Isa. 58.8.
and and when he had finished his course, was cut out of the land of the living
at Jerusalem; should yet notwithstanding be in truth, that which his shadow
Melchisedech, was only in the conceit of the men of his time, Without Father,
without Mother, without Pedigree, Heb. 7.3.
having neither beginning of days nor end of life. Joh. 14.28.
That his Father should be greater then he, and yet he his Fathers equal. That
he is before Abraham was, and yet Abraham's birth preceded his, well nigh the
space of two thousand years. And finally, That he who was David's son, should
yet be David's Lord; Joh. 5.18. Phil. 2.6. Joh. 8.58. Matthew. 22 42.43 etc.
a case which plunged the greatest Rabbis among the Pharisees; who had not yet
learned this wisdom, nor known this knowledge of the holy. The untying of this
knot, depends upon the right understanding of the wonderful conjunction of
the Divine and humane Nature, in the unity of the person of our Redeemer, Col.
2.9.
In whom dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, that is to say, by
such a personal and real union, as does inseparably, and everlastingly
conjoyn that infinite Godhead with his finite manhood, in the unity of the
self same individual person, who is both perfect God, Luke 1.35. Pro.
8.22.23.25.
begotten of the substance of his Father, before all worlds; and perfect man,
made of the substance of his Mother in the fulness of time: And the reason
why he was borne of a woman, Amb. in Luc. 24.
(as Saint Ambrose says) was Ne perpetui reatus apud viros opprobrium
sustinerent mulieres, least women should still suffer the Reproach of the
perpetual guiltiness and blame in the sight of men, Why Christ was borne of a
woman.
for their first transgression; for her yiedling unto the Serpent, and the
seducing of her Husband, made her and all her sex to be deservedly subject
unto much Reproach: And therefore, though because the Mankind is more noble,
Christ would be made a man; yet because Women should not be contemned, he was
contented to be borne of a woman, Aug. cont. Faust.
Et sic formam viri assumendo, and de famina nascendo utrumque sexum hoc modo
honorandum indicavit, and so he did sufficiently honor both sexes, the men, by
assuming the form of a man, and the women, by taking his flesh from a woman;
that as a woman was the means to make him a sinner, so she might be the
instrument to bring him a Savior; but, Licet secundum conditionem naturae
natus est ex faemina, Thom. p. 3. q. 31 art. 5.
tamen supra conditionem naturae natus est ex virgin, he would, beyond the
condition of Nature, be borne of such a woman that was a Virgin; because it
became not God to have any Mother, but a Maid; and it beseemed not a Maid to
have any Son, but a God, Barrad. l. 7. c. 10.
says Barradius: And so he was made of a Woman, of a Woman that was a Virgin,
and of a Virgin without the help of man.

But now, (...). Joh. 1.14.
That we may truly understand this point, how Christ was made flesh, the word
(...), used by our Evangelist, does plainly show unto us (as both Saint
Chrysostom and Tolet do observe) Mirabilem ejus conceptionem, non virili
virtute, sed divina potentia; eum esse conceptum, his wonderful Conception,
that he was made, not by any virtue of man's seed, Two things to be considered
for the understanding of Christ's conception. First, Of the manner how Christ
was conceived,
but by the power of Gods spirit, and therefore we must well consider,

First, The manner of this wonderful and divine conception.

Secondly, The matter, or substance from which he was framed.

First, Touching the Agent, and the manner of the act, how this substance
should be framed, and this Child should be conceived without the help of man,
Saint Luke does most plainly and fully declare unto us, saying, The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, Luk 1.35.
and the Power of the highest shall overshadow thee, which words are not to be
understood so, as if he were begotten, spermatic^s per concubitum, by any
carnal effusion of seminall humor, as Jansenius seems to imagine, nor of the
Essence or substance of the Holy Ghost, as some heretics have said, for so the
Holy Ghost being God, should have begotten him, not man, but God; Quia omne
generans generat sibi simile, because every begetter begets his like, and that
which is borne of the Spirit is spirit, Joh. 3.6.
(...); but he was conceived by way of Manufacture, that is, by the handy work
or operation, or by the virtue of the Holy Ghost, whereby the Virgin did
conceive, as Justin Martyr says, Just. Martyr Apol. 2 pro. Christianis. Aug.
Ser. 3 de temp.
or else by the energeticall command and ordination of the holy Ghost, as Saint
Augustine says, or by the Benediction and blessing of the holy Ghost, as Saint
Basil says, Basil. ser. de nativitate.
whereby that part of the Virgins blood, or seed, whereof the body of Christ
was to be framed, was so cleansed and sanctified, that in it there should be
neither spot nor stain of original pollution, and then was so composed and
framed, that it became a perfect Christ, and though the substance and parts of
other men, in ordinary generation be framed successively by degrees; for the
seminall humor, first becomes an Embryo, then a body in-organicall, then are
the Liver, heart, and Brain fashioned and then the rest one after another
perfected, and it is at least forty days, before the body of any Child in the
womb be fully formed; That Christ was conceived a perfect man in the first
moment of his conception.
yet Christ in the very instant of his conception, Quoad perfectionem partium,
non graduum, in respect of the perfection of all parts, was made a perfect man
in body and Soul, void of sin, and full of Grace, and so in a moment, Totam
naturam humanam uniendo formavit, and formando univit, he was perfectly framed,
and instantly united unto this eternal Christ, because it is the property of
the Holy Ghost, subito operari, to work instantly and perfectly.

And therefore, When we consider how wonderfully and inexplicably Christ was
made flesh, how a star gave light unto the Sun, a branch did bear the Vine, a
Creature gave being unto the Creator, how the Mother was younger then what
she bare, and a great deal lesser than what she contained, and how this
Child was suddenly, perfectly, and holily made, without the help of man, we
may well say with the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.16.
that great is the Mystery of Godliness, and we should say with Saint
Augustine, Rem credo, modum non quaero, I do most faithfully believe the
matter, but I will not curiously search into the manner of his Conception,
Tertull. de resur. carnis.
Quia ratio facti est potentia facientis, ideo considerans, autorem, tollo
dubitationem. Moreover, touching the end and final cause of this his extraord
nary and miraculous Conception, it was, Christ was conceived of a Virgin, that
he might be free from all sin.
That he might be pure and free from all Original sin, because it was
requisite, that he which should save sinners, should be himself free from all
sin. For this end his Mother was sanctified with the fulness of Grace, with
overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, and with the Inhabitation of the son of God,
and therefore Saint Bernard says, That she was, Mariam non libido impregnavi^
sed fides.
Sine pudore foecunda, sine gravamine gravida, and sine dolor puerpera: great
with Child, without breach of Chastity, a Mother and yet a Maid, a woman, and
yet escaping the Curse of all Women, for the Law had accursed them all;
Vrigins, Luke 1.25. G^n. 3.16.
because they were barren, and the married wives, because they should bear in
sorrow, but the blessed Virgin escaped both: Quia virgo genuit and dolorem non
sensit: for that she conceived without sin, and was delivered without pain,
as Saint Augustine shows by the example of the Sun, that shines through a
Glass, and yet breaks it not, and of the fire that Moses saw in the bush, and
yet consumed it not; but whether she felt any pains or not, I cannot tell;
only this we may be sure of, that the greatness of her joy and gladness, to
bring forth such a son, might well swallow up the greatest pain and grief, and
as she conceived a Virgin, so she continued a Virgin, as all the most judicious
writers have affirmed; for it is neither piety to speak, nor Reason to think,
that Joseph being so just and so godly man as the holy Scriptures do testify
of him, and being eighty years old when he was espoused unto Mary, That the
blessed Virgin continued a Virgin.
(as Epiphanius says) should have any desire to know her, whom he knew did
bear his Savior, or that she especially should yield to the desire of any
man, after she had conceived, and brought forth a God.

2. Of the matter whence Christ his flesh was composed Romans 1.3.
Secondly, Touching the matter from which the flesh of Christ was formed, Saint
Paul says, he was made of a woman, that is, of the flesh and blood, and
substance of his Mother; and so he says, That he was made of the Seed of
David, Heb. 4.15.
and therefore it must needs follow, that he was made in all things like unto
his brethren, sin only excepted, for the seed of the parents is the first
matter and substance whereof the man is made: And if it be true what Aristotle,
and the Philosophers do affirm, That we take the substance of our flesh from
our mothers.
that Semen patris in substantiam faetus non cadit, sed ad menstruum mulieris
se habet tanquam artifex ad artificium, the seed of the man does not fall into
the substance of the Child, but does so dispose the seed of the woman, as a
workman frames and disposes his work, to make the same into the form of man
(as this is most probable to be true, although Galenus and most Physicians say
the contrary) then have we no reason at all to think that he took not all
the whole nature because he had another Worker to dispose and to frame the same
substance into the form of man, yea, seeing he had a far more excellent Agent
to work the same, then any seed of man can be, and because the effect is ever
better, Ibi potior effectus, ubi nobilior est causa.
where the cause is more excellent, Reason it self shows, that we have no
reason to think that he was defective in any thing, that pertained to the
perfection of humane Nature, or of the natural properties of the same: And
therefore, seeing he was made of a woman, as all other men be, differing only
in the manner of his conception, or in the Agent and worker of his Substance,
it is most apparent that he assumed all our humane nature, What Christ assumed.
because the whole nature of man, that is, both body and Soul was to be
redeemed; for that both body and Soul were captivated unto satan: but the son
of man came to seek and to save that which was lost, Mat. 18.11.
therefore he must consist both of body and soul, for seeing the Divine pity
was content to deliver all, it behoved the Divine Majesty to assume all,
Fulgent. l. 1. de mysterio redemp. ad Trasim. That Christ had a true humane
body. Gen 3.15.22.18. Luke 24.39.
says Fulgentius, and more particularly, that he had a true and perfect
humane body, it may be easily proved, for when the Apostles thought that they
had seen a Phantasme, or a spirit, he said unto them, handle me and see,
because a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have: Besides, it may
be proved by the uniform consent of all Orthodox antiquity, as the great
Council of Chalcedon, that had in it 630 Bishops, the Council of Lateran, the
Council of Toledo, Fulgentius in his second book, Basil. in. l. de hum.
Christi gener. Aug. de Trin. l. 13 c. 18. Beda in 11 Luc. l 4. c. 48.
De persona Christi, Saint Basil, Saint Augustine, Tertullian in his book De
carne Christi, venerable Bede, and diverse others, whose pithy sayings and
unanswerable arguments to prove this point, I could here allege: But above
all, the words (...), Gal. 4.4.
used by Saint Paul, and (...) used by the Evangelist, which signify to take
our nature upon him, and to be made flesh, if they be well and truly
understood, do make it most apparently plain, that the Son of God took unto
himself personally the true nature of man and the very substance of his
Mother, Luke 1.31.42. Heb. 2.14.
for the Apostle does not say, factus de muliere, sed factus ex muliere, made
in a woman, but made of a woman, Gorrham super Galat.
(as Nicolaus de Gorrham well observes) and therefore though Christ had his
Principium formale, his formal beginning from the Holy Ghost, yet it is most
certain, that he had his Principium materiale, his whole matter and substance
from the body of his mother: And as he had a true humane body, so he had a
perfect reasonable Soul; That Christ had a true reasonable soul. Mat. 26 38.
Luke 23.46.
for the testimonies of the Scriptures are most plain herein; As my Soul is
heavy unto death, and again, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit: Also
the whole School of Divinity, did ever teach the same truth; for Nazianzen
says, Quod non assumpsit, non salvabit, either he had a soul, or he will not
save a soul, and Saint Augustine says, Totum suscepit ut totum liberaret
verbum. Aug. de tempore. Ser. 145.
Christ took all upon him, that is, both body and soul, that he might save
them both. And so you see, that Christ had not Ideam humanae naturae, An
imaginary pattern of humane nature, (as some in these our days would have it)
but the whole nature of man, In uno individuo, consisting both of body and
soul.

That Christ was subject to all our humane frailties which are without sin.
Moreover, As Christ had all the parts of a true and perfect man, so he had all
the propertyes that do concern man's nature, or do belong either to the soul or
to the body of man, as length, breadth, thickness, understanding, will,
affection, etc. And all other infirmities that we have, sin only excepted. Why
he undertook our infirmities. Ambros. in Luc l. 10. c. 22.
And it was requisite (says Saint Ambrose) Vt infirmitates nostras susciperet,
That he should take upon him our infirmities.

First, To demonstrate the truth of his assumed humanity.

Secondly, To strengthen, and under-prop the weakness of our declining Faith;
and yet here we must distinguish and understand, that those infirmities which
are not sinful, are either Personal or natural. Those that are Personal, we
say not, That Christ took no personal infirmities upon him.
that he took; for though many of us be affected with maladies, infeebled with
infirmities, and disfigured with deformities, yet the body of Christ being
framed by the Holy Ghost, of the purest Virgin blood, was proportioned in most
equal Symmetry and correspondency of parts; and therefore he was speciosus
forma prae filijs hominum, fairer then the sons of men, wholly pure, more pure
then the body of Absolon, 2 Samuel 14.25.
in whom there was no blemish, so Cassiodorus says, Forma ejus lactei coloris
de core illuxit, Cassidor in Psa^. 45.
and insigni statura prae-eminuit; his body of the best composed stature, did
excel all other men, Christ of a ravishing beauty.
and so Saint Hierom says, that his countenance carried hidden and vayled in
it a star like shining brightness, which being but a little revealed, it so
ravished his Disciples hearts, that at the first sight thereof, Mat. 19.27.
Joh. 18.6.
they left all and followed him, and it so astonished his enemies, that they
stumbled and fell to the ground. But now those that are natural or common
infirmities, That Christ took upon him all natural and common infirmities.
Heb. 2.17.4.15. Damasc de fide Orthodoxa. l. 3. c. 20. Discipulus in ser. de
temp.
we affirm that he had them in all things, like unto us, for we confess, says
Damascen, that Christ took all the natural passions of man, which are without
sin; and Discipulus says, that every man was subject unto twelve natural
defects and infirmities, whereof (says he) our Savior Christ has undergon ten
of them, and has suffered the same, Luke 22 43.
even as we do.

First Cold, Secondly, Heat
Two infirmities incident to every man, and denied by no man to be in Christ.

Mat. 21.18.
Thirdly, Hunger, as when he came to the fig tree and would have eaten.

Joh. 4.7. c. 19. 28
Fourthly, Thirst, As when he asked Drink of the woman of Samaria.

Fifthly, weariness, Joh. 4.6.
As when he sat by the well side to rest him.

Sixthly, Weakness and pain, Mat. 27.32. Joh. 19.17.
as when he was not able to bear his cross any further.

Seventhly, Heaviness and sorrow; Mat. 26 38. Luke 16 41.
as when his soul was heavy unto death.

Eighthly, Shamefastness, Mar. 6.6.
and admiration, as when he marvelled at the infidelity of the Jews.

Ninthly, Fear, Heb. 5.7.
as when his Father heard him in that which he feared.

Tenthly, Anger, Mat. 21.12.
as when he drove the Buyers and sellers out of the Temple.

These are the ten infirmities which Discipulus says, were in our savior
Christ.

The other two which he denies to be in him, are sin and ignorance. For the
first, that is sin, we all know and are sure, that he had none; but for the
second, we must distinguish and understand that there is first, Ignorantia
pravae dispositionis, That there is a two fold ignorance.
An ignorance of a wicked disposition, as when men know not, or will not know,
the things that they ought or might, and this we say was not in Christ.
Secondly, Ignorantia merae privationis, an ignorance of mere privation, Et
ignorantia negativa, seu nescientia plurimorum, and a negative ignorance, or
the not knowing of many things, which are not of absolute necessity to be
known, and this ignorance we say was in our Savior Christ, according to his
humanity.

Ignatius in Ep. 2 ad Trallian.
First, Because Adam in the state of his innocence was ignorant of many things
that God did know, and he knew not, that he should be seduced by the Serpent.

That Christ was ignorant of some things Damasc: l 3 Nazian. l 2 defil. Amandus
Polanus in Sym pho: catholica Thesi 7 c: 9
Secondly, Because he did increase in wisdom and knowledge; that is, in his
acquisite and experimental wisdom, and not in his infused or divine, for he
had that perfect from the very first moment of his conception, and therefore by
his acquisite and experimental wisdom, he learned some things that he knew
not before; so that in this respect we may lawfully say, That Christ was
ignorant of many things in his youth, which afterward he learned in his age.

Thirdly, Mat. 21 19. Mark 13 32
Because he knew not that there were no figgs on the fig tree, until he
went and saw there was none, and he knew not the hour and the day of Judgment.

And yet we say, that although the man Christ Jesus knew not these things, Ex
natura humanitatis, Scotus in sent: did. 14 q 1 and 4.
by the manhood; yet he did know them in natura humanitatis, in the manhood,
because he was hypostatically united unto that eternal son of God, which made,
and sees, and knows all things: And so you see, that as Christ assumed our
Nature, Christ assumed our imperfections.
so he assumed our natural imperfections, that are void of sin.

But here we must observe that he assumed them all (as Saint Augustine says)
not by any imposed necessity, Non miseranda necessitate, sed miserante
voluntate.
but by a voluntary assuming of them to deliver us from them, when as no Law
could have compelled him to undergo them.

So that from hence we may clearly see, this son of God was not made flesh, to
dignifie or to better himself, for if it had been so, then he would never have
assumed all our humane frailties: Besides, He was before his incarnation (as I
have showed) a God in the best and highest degree, from everlasting, (...), a
God of himself, How greatly God loved us, that he would be made man for our
good.
co-essentiall and co-equall unto his Father: What therefore should he merit,
or wherein could he be dignified by his incarnation, more then he was before,
Gloria ejus augeri non potuit, nothing could be added unto his Glory, or if it
could, his love to us could not be so great, A love like himself
incomprehensible.
for then it might be said, he did it not only for our sake, but also for his
own, that himself might thereby be the more dignified and exalted, but seeing
he was so high before, that he could not be higher, so great that he could not
be greater, and so good that he could not be better, it is most certainly
apparent, that he descended from the height of his dignity, unto the very depth
of humility, to be made flesh, only for our sake: And as Hugo says, Hugo in l.
de Sacrament.
Nulla causa veniendi fuit nisi peccatores salvos facere, Toll morbos, toll
vulnera, and nulla est causa medicinae, there was no cause that he should come
to us, but to save us, for where there are no wounds, where there are no
Diseases, there is no need of Medicines, there is no use of Plasters, because
the whole need not the Physician; Non eum de coelo ad terram merita nostra, sed
peccata nostra traxerunt. Aug in Joh. and gloss. in 1 Timothy 1.
which may serve to show, it was not our Goodness, but our wickedness, our
grievous sins that brought down Jesus Christ out of heaven, the place of
eternal happiness; so that from hence also we may see, his rare and singular
humility, in that he being the eternal Son of God, and the head of all
Principality and Power, How Christ humbled himself.
that could have commanded all the Angels, and by his stretched out Arm,
without the assumption of our Weakness, have made all his enemies his
footstool, was notwithstanding contented, Exinanire seipsum, The greatest sign
of Christ his love.
to empty and dis-robe himself, as it were of all his royal dignities and
divine Riches, and to cloathe himself with our humane Nakedness only for our
sake, to free us from under the tyrannical Bondage of the Devil: And therefore
we may well say, that greater love then this cannot be, that he which is the
highest, chiefest, Joh. 15.13.
everlasting God, should descend and be made the son of man, that we through
him might be made the sons of the immortal God, for by his incarnation Naturam
humanam nobilitavit, he has so ennobled our humane nature (as Saint Augustine
says) that we which were worms and no men, 2 Pet: 1 4
are now (...), partakers of the divine nature: So that now our nature being
repaired, it is exalted far above the dignity of its first original, That we
attain to a far better state in Christ (by his incarnation) then we lost in
Adam. Bernard, ser: 1 1 de Epiphan:
and it has obtained to a far better state in Christ, then it had, and lost in
Adam; because Adam was but in the Image of God, but we are joined and made one
with God, as Saint Bernard says. And therefore Faelix culpa, quae talem meruit
redemptorem, happy was that fault (as it happened unto us) which brought forth
such a Savior, to be made partaker of our flesh, that we might be Partakers
of his Spirit, as Saint Gregory speaks.

But now it will be here demanded, (as Saint Augustine says) Quare non potuit
Dei sapientia aliter homines liberare? Why God decreed the incarnation of his
son, for the salvation of man.
etc. Why could not the Wisdom of God devise, and the Power of God effect some
other way to deliver and save sinful men, then by sending his son to be made
man, to be borne of a woman, and to suffer such shameful things of shameless
sinners? to this saint Bernard frames this witty answer, That as in the
creation of man, God did as it were consult with his wisdom, how to make him,
when he said, Genesis 1.26.
Let us make man in our image, so after the transgression of man, there was (as
it were) a consultation in heaven what should become of man; for Truth and
Justice stood up against him and said, that man had sinned, Cap. 2.27.
and therefore man must dye, but Mercy and Peace rose up for man, and said, Quo
quisque est major, magis est placabilis ira:
Regia (creed nobis) res est succurrere lapsis, it is a royal thing to relieve
the distressed, and the greater any one is, the more placable and gentle he
should be, and that God himself had said, he was the God of Peace, and the
Father of mercies, and therefore they concluded, that although man had sinned,
yet man must be pardoned or else abandoned, therefore the wisdom of God became
an umpire, and devised this way to reconcile them, that as one man had sinned,
and thereby destroyed all men, so Vnus homo nobis patiendo restituet rem,
Bosquier. de pass Dom: ser 13. p. 793.
one righteous man should suffer for all men, and so Justice should be
satisfied; and then all that believed in that man, should be pardoned, and so
mercy should be showed: then, all thus contented, God looked down from heaven
upon the children of men, to see if there were any that would understand and
seek after God, Psalm. 14.2.3.
but they were all corrupted; and therefore the Wisdom of God, that had found
out this way, was contented to perform this work himself and to be made man,
that mercy might be extended, and to suffer death for man, that Justice might
be satisfied: and so in him mercy and truth met together, Psalm. 85.10.
righteousness and peace kissed each other.

Aug. de Trinit. l. 13. c. 10. Gregor. Moral. l. 20. c. 26.
But Saint Augustine and Saint Gregory do more solidly answer, saying, Omnia
Deus poterat si voluisset, That in regard of his Wisdom, God could have
devised another way, and in respect of his Power, he could have performed the
salvation of man, without the incarnation of his son, but if he had done it
otherwise, it would, no doubt, have likewise displeased our foolishness; for
God appeared visibly (says Saint Augustine) that he might prepare us to
invisible things, How hard it is for the wisdom of God to please foolish men.
and therein he displeased the covetous man, because he brought not a body of
Gold; he displeased the lascivious, because he was borne of a woman; he
displeased the Jews, because he came so poor; and he displeased the wise men
of this world, because he erecteth his Kingdom by the foolishness of
Preaching; and so he should have displeased man, what other way soever he had
invented for to save him. And therefore, Aug. de Annunt. Dom. ser. 3.
Sic voluit ruinam vasis fragilis reformare, ut nec peccatum hominis dimitteret
impunitum, quia justus erat, nec insanabile, quia misericors; so God would
repair the ruin of frail and fickle man, that neither the sin of man should
escape unpunished, because God is just, nor yet miserable man remain uncured,
because he is merciful; and although he could otherwise have saved man,
Quantum ad potentiam medici, in respect of the power and skill of the
Physician, yet he saw there was no fitter way to do it, Quantum ad medicinam
aegroti, and quantum ad Justitiam Dei, in regard of the state of the Patient,
to free him from sin, and to satisfy the Justice of God, for it behoved the
Mediator between God and man, Ne in utroque deo similis long esset ab homine,
aut in utroque homini similis long, esset a Deo
to have something like unto God, and to have something like unto man, least
that in all things being like unto man, he might be so too far from God, or
being in all things like unto God, he might be so too far from man, and
therefore Christ betwixt sinful mortal men, and the just immortal God, did
appear a mortal man with men, and a just God with God; and so the mediator
betwixt God and men, 1 Timothy 2.5.
was God and man Christ Jesus.

That in Christ there are two distinct natures. Romans 14.19.
The distinction of these two natures, the Deity and the humanity of our Savior
Christ is most excellently showed by saint Paul, where he says that Christ
was made man, (...), according to the flesh, and declared mightily to be the
son of God (...), according to the Spirit of Sanctification, for that according
to his humane nature only he was made of the seed of David, which according to
his Divine nature was declared still to be the eternal Son of God, so that
here saint Paul shows two Natures to be in Christ, that is, his divine and
his humane Nature, still remaining entire after his incarnation; because as he
was made only of the seed of David, in respect of his manhood, (for that his
Godhead was not made of the seed of David) so was he declared only to be the
Son of God, in respect of his Godhead, for that his Manhood was not the
omnipotent and the eternal son of God.

This truth of the two natures of Christ, Two natures in Christ proved.
may be confirmed by most apparent and unanswerable arguments, for the Jews
said, Joh. 5.18.
that he did not only break the Sabbath, but also said, that God was his
Father, making himself equal with God; And Christ himself said, Joh. 10.30.
I and my Father are one, and therefore the Pharisees did rightly collect, that
Christ by these words had affirmed himself to be a God, and yet he says, Joh.
14.28.
My Father is greater then I, but it cannot possibly be, that Christ according
to the same Nature, should be equal, nay one with the Father, and yet
inferior to the Father, and therefore it must needs follow, that he has one
nature, according to which he is equal to his Father, and another nature, in
respect whereof he is inferior to him.

Joh. 8 58.
Besides, our Savior says, Before Abraham was, I am; and yet saint Luke says,
Luke 2.7.
He was born in the days of Augustus Caesar, but it cannot be that Idem
secundum idem, the same one, in the same respect, should be before Abraham, and
after Abraham: And therefore he must needs have two natures in him, according
to one whereof, he was before Abraham, and according to the other he was after
him.

And further, we find the same confessed by all Antiquity; All orthodox
Antiquity confessed two natures to be in Christ. Vigil l 2. cont. Eutych.
Philip. 2. mirum est, etc.
for Vigilius writing upon those words of the Apostle, Who being in the form
of God, took upon him the form of a servant, says, It is a wonder to think,
why some are afraid to say, that Christ had two Natures, when as the Apostle
says, that he had two forms; and the great oecumenicall Council of
Chalcedon, left this confession unto all potesterity; Council. Calced. Act. 5.
in Symb. fidei.
Confitemur in novissimis diebus, filium Dei unigenitum in duabus naturis
inconfuse, immutabiliter, indivise, inseparabiliter agnoscendum, nunquam
sublata differentia propter unionem; We confess, that the only begotten son of
god, which came in the last days to be incarnate, is now to be acknowledged, to
be, and to subsist of two natures, (that is, Divine and humane) inconfusedly,
immutably, inseparably, and undividedly united together, and that the
differences or disjunction of these natures is never to be abolished and taken
away, by reason of the union of the same.

And here we must observe, That the two natures do make but one person in our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
that although this eternal son of God, was so made flesh, that is, a perfect
man, of the seed of David, as that still each nature remains entire and
inconfused; yet we must not imagine that he is therefore two sons or two
persons (as Nestorius thought) but that he is one only person, consisting of
both these natures: so that he in whom the fullness of manhood dwells is not
one, and he in whom the fullness of the Godhead another; but he in whom the
fullness of both those two dwells, is one and the self same Christ, that is,
one Christ, one person; and here we must consider, that the divine Nature did
not assume an humane person, but the divine person did assume an humane nature:
The son of God assuming into the unity of his person, that which before he was
not; and yet without change, (for so must God still be) remaining that which he
was: And so Gregory Nazianzen says, Permansit quod erat, and assumpsit quod
non erat. Nazian. Orat. 3* de Theolog.
He remained what he was, and he assumed what he was not, because Christ was
made flesh, Non deposita, sed seposita Majestate, not by cancelling or laying
away, but as it were, by concealing and laying aside for a time, the most
glorious appearance of his divine Majesty, Emyssen. hom. 2 de nativiatte.
as Eusebius Emyssenus does most excellently declare, and the Poet as wittily,
saying, That which he was, he is, yet once was not
That which he is; a nature he has got
Fitz. Jeffrey p. 17.
More then he had; and yet he still retains
That which he had; and having both remains
But one: and though he took one nature more,
Yet is he but one person, as before.


This truth of the union of these two natures may be confirmed by the holy
scriptures, The unity of Christ his person most clearly proved from Scriptures.
for when Christ asked his Apostles, Whom do men say that I, the son of man,
am, Saint Peter answered, that he was Christ, the son of the living God;
therefore he is but one person, because Saint Peter confesses the son of man
to be the son of the living God: Mat. 16.13.16
And the Angel said unto the Virgin, Luke 1.35.
That holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of God;
therefore he is but one person, because he which was born of the Virgin, was
and is none other, but he that is truly called, Joh 20.31.
and is the true son of God; and Saint Paul speaking of Christ, as he was the
eternal son of God. Romans 1.8.
(...), in respect of his Godhead, and as he was the Son of David, (...), in
respect of his manhood, yet does he not say of his sons as of two, 1 John 1 1.
c: 2. v. 22. Chap. 3. v. 16. Chap. 4 v 3.
but of his son made and declared to be his son, to show unto us, That as
before his making, so now after his making, he is still but one son, one
person, of the two distinct natures subsisting: And this is confessed by all
antiquity; All our Creeds and all antiquity confesses the same truth, touching
the unity of Christ his person.
for in the Apostles Creed, we say, that we believe in Jesus Christ his only
son our Lord, which was conceived of the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin
Mary, and therefore he is but one person, because he which is said to be the
only son of God, is said also to be born of the Virgin Mary; and in the Creed
of Athanasius, it is said, That although Christ be both God and man, yet he is
no more twain but one Christ; and that not by confounding of the substances,
but by the unity of person, that is, by the uniting of both natures into one
person.

Council. Calced. Council. Nicen. Si quis non confitetur carnisecundum
subsistentiam unitum Dei Patris verbum anathema sit.
Also the third Council of Ephesus, the Council of Lateran, and all the
ancient Orthodox Fathers, as Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Saint Basil, saint
Nazianzen, saint Damascen, saint Hillary, saint Ambrose, saint Hierome, saint
Augustine, and the rest of them, have most truly and learnedly confessed this
truth; that although Christ has two natures, yet do these two make but one
person, one son of God, one Savior of men.

So that this we may safely say, and must firmly hold, that as the distinction
of the Persons in the Holy Trinity, hinders not the unity of the nature of the
Godhead, although every person entirely holds his own incommunicable
property, so neither does the distinction of the two Natures in our Mediator
any way cross the unity of his person, although each nature remains entire
in it self, (...).
and retains the properties agreeing thereunto, without any conversion,
composition, commixion, or confusion.

Now for the clearer understanding of this point, we say that the understanding
of these two natures, is, 1. Inconvertible 2. Indivisible 3. Inconfused 4.
Insepar^ble 5. Substantial 6. Ineffable.


Frst, Inconvertible, 1 Inconvertible.
Because neither the di^ine Nature is turned into the humanity, ^^r the
humanity into the Deity.

Secondly, Indivisible, 2. Indivisible.
Because the natures are so united into one person, that they can never be
separated, unless we divide the person of Christ, which is most heretical.

3. Inconfused.
Thirdly, Inconfused, Because the natures remain still entire, without
confounding either their Essence, or their properties, or their wills, or any
other operations whatsoever; therefore we do affirm, that in Christ there are
two Natures, How the properties of each nature do remain entire and inconfused
to each nature.
two Wills, two Natural proprieties, and operations, entire and unmixed, that
we may not confound them with Eutyches; for since the natures are neither
confused nor transfused each into other, the properties also must needs remain
entire to either nature, and as a man has his soul and body both united and
inconfused, Ita multo magis Christus habens divinitatem cum corpore, habet
utraque permanentia, and non confusa, so much more Christ having his divinity
united with our flesh, has them both remaining entire and inconfused, for that
rule can never be disproved, Confundens proprietates essentiales, confundit
naturas, confound the natural or essential properties of any things, and you
take away the nature of the things: And therefore in that one and selfsame
subsistence of Christ, there must needs be a divine and a Jo^. 10.17.
humane nature, a divine and a humane wisdom, a divine and a humane will, and
so of all other properties of each nature, they must be as well inconfused, as
indivisible

Fourthly, inseparable, 4. Inseparable.
because the natures are so inseparably united, that the humane nature can
never be separated from the divine person that assumed it, and therefore when
Christ dyed, subtraxit visionem, sed non solvit unionem, the soul parted from
the body, Psalm. 16.10. When Christ dyed, and body and soul were parted, the
Godhead parted from neither.
but the Deity was separated from neither, as Leo says; but as a tree cut in
twain, the sun cannot be cut, but that it may still shine on either part, so
the body and soul of Christ being parted, the Deity was still united unto them
both, and could never be separated from the manhood, after he had once assumed
the same into the unity of his person.

Fifthly, substantial, 5. Substantial.
because he is a true and perfect man, whose being is no accident, but a
substance.

Sixthly, It is ineffable, 6. Ineffable.
so absolutely perfect, and so exceedingly mystical, that it can never be
perfectly declared by any man; for though the Fathers sought by many examples
and similitudes, That the mannet of the uniting of the two natures, is
ineffable.
to express and to illustrate the same, as by the union of the body and soul,
of a Branch ingrafted into a tree, of a fiery iron, and such like, yet all come
too short, for the full expressing of this inexplicable mystery: And therefore
Saint Bernard compares this ineffable mystery of the uniting of these two
natures, unto that incomprehensible mystery of the Trinity, and so indeed that
of the Trinity is the greatest, and this of the incarnation is like unto it,
far exceeding man's capacity rather most faithfully to be believed, Psalm. 77.19.
then too curiously to be searched into, because God has overshadowed this
mystery with his own veil, that we might not presume, 1 Samuel 6.19.
with the men of Bethshemesh, to look into this Ark of his; least for our
curiosity, we be smitten as they were: Or least whilst we make too strict a
scrutiny to find out the depth of this mystery, we forfeit that small and weak
knowledge, which by divine bounty is bestowed upon us; and therefore what we
cannot comprehend by reason, we should apprehend by faith, because as Heinsius
says, Omnia in Deo supra rationem, nihil supra fidem, The mysteries of our
religion are to be believed by faith, rather then to be searched out by reason.
though many things may be above the reach of reason, yet nothing beyond faith;
Nam quicquid solus Deus potest facere, sola fides potest credere, For
whatsoever God alone can do, faith alone can believe the same, and faith is the
compendium of our salvation, and humane wisdom the chiefest obstacle of the
same. Therefore indeed it should be our chiefest care to keep our selves within
the limits of Faith, and because I find the Creed of blessed Athanasius,
concerning the Incarnation of the son of God, to be pure and clear from all
Error and heresy whatsoever, I shall here insert the same.

1 It is necessary (says he) unto eternal salvation, Joh 3.36.6.40. 1 John
4.3. Heb. 2.16.
that whosoever will be saved, do believe rightly the incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

2 This then is the right faith, Joh. 1.1. Luke 24.39.
that we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God is
God and man.

3 He is God, Joh. 1.14.18. Prou. 8.22.23.25.30. Luke 1 35. Gal 4.4. 1 John
5.20.
of the substance of his Father, begotten before the world, and man of the
substance of his mother Born in the world. Perfect God Perfect man, of a
reasonable soul and human flesh subsisting. Luke 24.39. Mat. 26.38. Joh.
5.17.14.18.
Equal to the Father, according to his Divinity: Inferior to the Father,
according to his Humanity.

4. Who though he be God and man, yet he is not two but one Christ. One, not by
converting of the divinity into flesh, Hebr. 2.14.16. Damasc. l. 3. Orthod.
fidei c. 3. Council. Chalc. Act. 20.
but by assuming of the humanity into God. One altogether, not by conversion of
the substance, but by unity of the person. For as the reasonable soul and flesh
are one man, so God and man is one Christ.

5. Who suffered for our Salvation. Went down to Hell. The third day rose again
from the dead. Romans 4 25. Phil 2.8. Psalm. 16.10.116.3. 1 Cor. 15.17. Acts.
1.11. Psalm. 110.1. 2 Timothy 4.1.
Ascended into Heaven. He sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
From thence he shall come to judge the quick and dead.

6. At whose coming all men shall rise with their bodies, and shall give an
account of their own deeds. 1 These. 4.16. 1 Cor. 15.52.53. Mat. 12.36. Rev.
20.12 Dan. 12.2. Joh. 5.28.29. Mar. 16.16. Heb. 11.6. 2 These. 1.8.9.
And who have done good, shall go into life eternal, but who have done evil
into everlasting fire.

7. This is the Catholic Faith, which except every one do faithfully and
firmly believe, he cannot be saved.

Many other points of great moment I might here show unto you, as the effects
and benefits of the hypostaticall or personal union of the two natures,
Oftentimes it comes to pass, that by reason of the personal union of the two
natures, each one of them does interchangeably take the concrete or compounded
names each of other in predication, Acts 20.38.
the communicating of the properties, which is nothing else but a form of
speech, whereby those things are spoken, sometimes of the whole person of
Christ, which indeed are proper to either one nature, and not to the other; yet
by reason of the strictness of this personal union, whatsoever may be verified
of either of those natures, the same may be truly spoken of the whole person,
from whethersoever of the natures it be denominated; but that to write or speak
all that I might of this point, would enlarge this Treatise into a great
volume, Joh. 3.13. 1 Cor. 2.8. That it is impossible for any one man to
express all the particulars of Christ his incarnation.
and that indeed the wit and learning of any one man is no more able to
express all the Mysteries and most excellent points that we might collect and
learn from the Incarnation of Christ, then one poor fisher man is able to
catch all the fishes in the ocean sea.

And therefore thus much shall suffice concerning this discourse of the
Incarnation, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ* who is (as has been proved) the true and promised
Messiah, the only son of God, the brightness of his glory, the express image
of his Person, heir of all things, Heb. 1.2.3.4. etc.
more excellent then the Angels, having honor glory, Power, strength, Praise,
2 Pet. 1.17. Rev. 5.12. Colos, 2.3.1.18. Psalm. 2.8. Ephesians. 1.20.21.22. Psalm.
72.8.17. Phil. 2 9.
Dignity, Riches, and Wisdom, (yea all treasures of knowledge and wisdom) the
heathen for his inheritance, the Earth for his possessions, and the Heavenly
places for his seat, far above, all Power, Might, Dominion, and
Principalities, with a Name given him above all Names, (at which every knee
should bow, etc.) Being the second Person in Trinity, begotten of his Father
from Eternity, Gal. 4.4.
in one Person the Son of God, and very man; Man, (Non exeundo quod habuit, sed
induendo quod non habuit) not by loosing that he had, but by accepting what he
had not our miserable nature, conceived of a Virgin by the Holy Ghost, called
of his Father ever since the fall of Adam, to be a Mediator between God and
man, desired of the Patriarchs, prefigured in the Law, foretold by the
Prophets, accomplished in the time of Grace, manifested in the flesh, justified
in the spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16.
seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and
received up into Glory: For man he became a King to rule, a Prophet to teach,
and Priest to sacrifice.

CHAP. III. OF THE HOLY GHOST.
Wherein the greatness of Gods goodness does appear.
WHEN we think upon the infinite goodness of the great Jehovah, how gracious he
is in all respects, amiable in himself, placable unto men, and liberal unto
all his creatures, none is so stupid and dull as not to admire it in him, such
is the never-dying streams of the goodness of God; it is like a boundless
Ocean, there is no end of his Goodness, and therefore Saint Bernard in
admiration thereof, breaks forth into these heavenly acclamations, saying,
Quam dives es in misericordia, and magnificus in Justitia, and munificus in
gratia; Domine Deus noster! O how rich art thou in mercy, how magnificent in
Justice, and how bountiful in Grace, O Lord our God! For thou art a most
liberal bestower of heavenly gifts, Nam tu munerator copiosissimus,
remunerator aequissimus, and liberator piissimus. Bernard.
a most righteous Rewarder of humane works, and a most gracious Deliverer of
all that trust in thee, yea so great is the goodness of God, it is beyond
expression, beyond our imagination, our words are beneath our thoughts, and our
thoughts far lower then the truth thereof: Deuteronomy. 32.49. and 52.
Yet as Moses from the top of Mount Nebo, beheld the borders of the land of
Canaan, so if you please to ascend with me to the Mount of Contemplation, I
will show you some glimpses of Gods goodnesses, Certain glimpses or shadows
of Gods goodness.
for he elected us before we were, he created us of nothing, he redeemed us
when we were lost, he preserves us being found, and that he might bring us
to eternal life, he has given us the Author and Fountain of all temporal
and spiritual gifts, even the holy Ghost, What the holy Ghost is. 1 John 5.7.
Joh 15.26. Gal. 4.6. Psalm. 139.7
who is the third Person of the true and only Godhead, proceeding from the
Father and the Son, and co-eternall, coquall and consubstantiall with them
both. Mat. 28.19. Isa. 6.8.9. Act 28.25.26.
He is called by the name of spirit, proceeding from the Father and the son, to
show the Essence and Nature that he is of; for as the spirit of man must needs
be truly of man's nature, and is the most formal and Essential part of man: 1
Cor. 2.11.12.
So and much more it must be thought of the Spirit of God, upon whom no
Composition falls.

And yet some have been so bold, as most impiously to affirm, that the holy
Ghost was but a created quality, or a godly motion in the hearts and minds of
Righteous man. Isa 6.8.9. Acts 28.25.26
But if we do compare the words of Isaias, with the words of Saint Paul, they
will sufficiently confute this damnabe ^rrour, and most manifestly show unto
us, this holy spirit to be the true and eternal God. Besides, the scripture
says, That the spirit of the Lord fills heaven and earth, Sap. 1.7.
whereupon Saint Basil, Ambrose de S. S. l. 1. c. 7.
Saint Augustine Saint Ambrose, and others have most plainly proved against all
heretics whatsoever, that the holy Ghost is a true God by Nature, That the
Holy Ghost is a true God by nature.
because that to be every where, cannot by Grace belong to any, but only to him
that is by Nature God, which reserveth this unto himself to be every where,
and therefore Saint Augustine writing against Maximinus an Arrian Bishop,
says, Aug. cont. Maxim. l. 3. c. 21. Epist. 66.
I cannot express how much I marvel what a heart you have, so to extol the
holy Ghost, as to make him every where present, to sanctify the faithful, and
yet that thou dare deny him to be a God, for is not he a God which fills
heaven and earth.

Also Dydimus in his book, Basil. de spiritu sancto c. 22.
and Saint Basil in his treatise, De spiritu sancto, declare that to be God,
Didym. lib. 1. de spiritu sancto.
which can be in diverse places at one time: Which thing is not agreeable to
any creature. But that the holy Ghost was present with the Apostles and
Prophets in sundry parts of the world at one time, no man professing the faith
of Christ does in the least doubt the truth thereof: Wherefore it follows,
that he is a God. Job 33. Mat. 28.19. 1 John 5.7. Joh 14.1.16. 1 Cor 3.16. 2
Cor. 13.14. Psalm. 33.6.104 30
The Symbolum of Nice out of the holy scripture teaches, That the holy Ghost
is he that makes alive, and he that together with the Father and the son
is worshipped, and with them is honored; therefore the holy Ghost of necessity
must be true and everlasting God with the Father and the son in one only
essence; touching which point, the holy Fathers powerfully did set themselves
against the Heretics, and out of holy scripture stoutly maintained the same.

Plato, Aristotle, Proclus, Suidas, Orpheus, Pherecydes, Parmenides,
Porphyrius, Numenius, Amelius, Chalcidius, Avicen.
As for Atheists which deny the scriptures, and are altogether ignorant of this
blessed spirit, if they will but look into the writings of the Ancients, they
shall surely find, that as the Gentiles did understand many things concerning
God and Jesus Christ his only son, so some of them have delivered some things
(although but darkly) concerning this holy spirit: For Hermes Trismegistus has
these words, All kind of things in this world (says he) are quickened by a
spirit, one spirit fills all things, the world nourishes the bodies, and the
spirit the souls; and this spirit as an instrument, Mercu^ie in his
Esculapius, c. 3. and 7.
is subject to the will of God. And further he says, That all things have need
of this spirit, it bears them up, it nourishes them, it quickneth them,
according to every of their capacities, it proceeds from a holy Fountain,
and is the maintainer of all living things, and of all spirits. Here we see
the reason why we call him the holy Ghost, namely, because he proceeds from
the fountain which is the very holiness it self. And least we should think
him to be a creature, Mercury in his Sermon in his Poemander. c 3
there was (says he) an infinite shadow in the deep, whereon was the water,
and a fine understanding spirit was in that confused mass through the power of
God. From thence there flourished a certain holy brightness, which out of the
sand and the moist nature brought forth the Elements and all things else. Also
the Gods themselves which dwell among the stars took their place by the
direction and appointment of this spirit of God,

In the writings of Plotinus, Plotin. Enn. 5. lib. 2. and lib. 3. cap. 35.
there be found very significant speeches of the holy Ghost, whom he calls,
Vniversi animam, Plotin. Ennead. 3. lib. 9. cap. ult. and E^n. 6. lib. 8 cap.
13. 15. 27. and Enn. 3. lib 8. c. 10. lib 9. cap. 1.
the soul or life of this whole universe. This soul (says he) has breathed
life into all living things in the Air, in the Sea, and on the land, it rules
the Sun, the stars and the Heaven; it has quickened the matter which once was
nothing, and utterly full of darkness, and all this has it done by the only
will of it self. It is all throughout all, like to the father, as well in that
it is but one, as in that it extends it self into all places. All which does
most apparently prove, that the Gentiles themselves were not ignorant of this
holy spirit, whom they clearly show to be the true and eternal God. And
therefore how may this serve to shame the wretched Atheists of this world,
which notwithstanding such a cloud of witnesses will still continue ignorant
and hardened in unbeleife.

Why the holy Ghost is called a spirit.
Moreover, This third person of the true and only Godhead, is called a spirit,
not only because he is a spiritual, (that is) an immateriall and pure
essence, (for so likewise is the Father a spirit, and the son as well as he)
but first, in regard of his person; because he is spired, and as it were,
breathed both from the Father and the son. Secondly, In regard of the
creatures; Psalm 33.6 Jo^h 20 22.
because the Father and the son do work by the spirit: who is, as it were, the
breath of Grace, which the Father and the son breaths out upon the saints;
blowing freely where it lists, Joh 3.8. 1 Cor. 2.12.13. Act. 2.^.3.4.
and working spiritually for manne^^, means, and matter, where it pleases.
Thirdly, In regard of his Property, because the property of him is to move, to
set forward, to persuade, to comfort, and to enlighten the spirits and hearts
of men, and at length to work in them such things as pertain to our
sanctification. And indeed the saints have such trial of the mavelous
effects thereof, as neither reason nor man's wisdom is able to comprehend those
things, neither can they be discerned by the eyes of men: So that (as Peter
Martyr says) we believe in the holy Ghost, as in a thing that far exceeds
the capacity of our nature, and yet is distinctly set forth unto us in the holy
scripture, Job. 14 26. and 1.33. Joh. 16.13.14.15. Mat. 28.19. That the holy
Ghost is distinct from the Father and the son.
for the Apostles are commanded in the Gospel, that they should baptize in the
name of the Father, of the son, and of the holy Ghost. Which place does most
plainly express the distinction of the three persons, and do signify nothing
else, but that we be delivered from our sins, by the name, authority, and power
of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And in the baptism of
Christ, Luke 3 21 22 Mat. 3 16 17
as Luke rehearses, the Voice of the Father was heard, and the holy Ghost
appeared under the form of a Dove, whereby is signified, that the holy Ghost
does so differ from the Father and the son, as he is derived from them both. In
John it is said, I will pray the Father, Joh. 14 16
and he shall give you another Comforter. Here the son prays, the Father
hears, and the Comforter is sent. Now if the Father shall give such a
Comforter, then the Father himself cannot be that Comforter, neither can
Christ (that prays) be the same. So that very significantly the three persons
herein are plainly set forth unto us. For even as the Father and the son are
two distinct and several (though not sundred persons) even so the holy Ghost
is another distinct person from the Father and the Son. Joh. 15 26 Luke 1 35


That the holy Ghost is a person proved, Luke 3 22
And further, that the holy Ghost is a person is proved. 1. By his apparitions,
because he has appeared visibly; for seeing he descended in bodily shape upon
Christ, and sat upon the Apostles, Acts 2 3
it follows that he is subsisting. 2 He is proved to be a person, 1 Cor. 3
16 Acts 5 3 4 Isa. 40 7 30 Ephesians. 4.4.30. Acts 28.25 1 Cor. 12 11 Luke 12 12
Joh. 16.13 Luke 2 26 Mat. 10 20
because he is called God. 3 Because the properties of a person, are attributed
unto him; as that he distributeth gifts even as he will, that he teaches,
comfort, confirms, rules, reigns: Likewise, that he sends Apostles,
and speaks in them: So also he declares the things to come. Acts 16 and 10
39 and 20 24 1 Timothy 4 1
He gives prophesies of Simeons death, of Judas the Traitor, of Peter's journey
to Cornelius, of Paul's bands and afflictions which should betide himself at
Jerusalem, of a falling away, and of the deceiver in the last times, Heb 9 8
and 10 15
of the meaning of the high priests entrance into the holiest of all, of the
first Tabernacle, of the new Covenant, 1 Pet. 1 11
of Christ's sufferings, and his glory which should follow after them, and such
like: He makes request for us with sighs which cannot be uttered; Romans 8.29
he cries in our hearts, Abba, Father; he is tempted by them who lie unto him,
he is a witness in Heaven with the Father and the son, Acts 5 9
he commands and wills that the Apostles be separated: Act. 13.2. Acts
20.28.
And lastly, He appoints teachers in the Church: All these things are proper
unto a person existing, intelligent, endued with a will, working and living.

That the holy Ghost is God co-eternall with the Father and the son proved.
Col. 2.9. Joh. 10.30. 1 John 5.7. Jer. 23.24. Joh. 1.18. Romans 8.9. 1 Cor. 6.19.
Romans 8.11. Genesis 1.2. Joh. 15.26. Aug. lib. de Trinitate 15. cap. 26. That he
proceeds from the Father and the Son. Gal. 4.6. Joh 15.26. and 20.22. Joh.
16.14.15.
Now that the holy Ghost is God co-eternall with the Father and with the son, it
may be proved by the unity of the divine Essence, because there is but one
Godhead, and by the incomprehensiblenesse of the three persons, the same is
also proved by the essential union of them, that is, because he is often
called the spirit of the Father and of the Son: but the Father and the son were
never without their spirit, therefore he is God co-eternall with both: Also
that which saint John says, that the spirit proceeds from the Father: The
ancient Fathers holding the right faith, do understand, chiefly to be spoken of
the everlasting proceeding of the spirit from the Father. And he proceeds
from the son first, because he is called the sons spirit. Secondly, Because the
son together with the Father, gives him. Thirdly, Because the holy Ghost
receives the Wisdom of the son, which he reveals unto us, wherefore he
proceeds of the substance of the son, because he receives that of him which
is the sons. By this it appears, what is the proceeding of the holy Ghost;
namely, the communicating of the divine essence, whereby the third person of
the Godhead alone receives the same and whole or entire essence from the
Father and the son, as from him whose spirit he is; for there is nothing in
God which is not his essence; and seeing that is indivisible, it must needs be
whole, and the same communicated unto him, which is in the Father and the son.
That the Holy Ghost is consubstantiall with the Father and the Son, proved.
Romans 8.9. Lev. 16.1.34 and Heb. 9.7.8.9.10. Psalm. 95.7. and Heb. 3.7. Isa. 6
8.9. and Acts 28.25.26.
As the spirit of man which is in man, is of the Essence of man, so the spirit
of God which is in God, is of the Essence of God, which divine essence is but
one, that is, but one Jehovah or eternal being, one essentially; who alone is
of none, but himself, communicates his being to all things, and preserves it
in them. Now the Holy Ghost is Jehovah, and therefore he is the same with the
Father, and the son, not only God co-eternall, but also con-substantiall, or
God co-essentiall with both.

That he is co-equall with the father and the Son, proved. Genesis 1.2.
And further, That he is co-equall with the Father and the son is proved by
those divine Attributes and properties which are attributed and communicated to
the holy Ghost. As, first eternity, because he created heaven and earth, and
because God was never without his spirit. Secondly, Immensity, or
unmeasurablenesse, as who dwells whole and entirely in all the elect.
Thirdly, Omnipotency, because he, Psalm. 33.6. 1 Cor 12.11. 1 Cor. 2.10.
together with the Father and the son, created and preserves all things.
Fourthly, Omnisciency, that is, the knowledge of all things. Fifthly, Acts
1.16. Psalm. 143.10.
unchangeableness. Sixthly, Infinite goodness and holiness, and the causing
of goodness and sanctity in the creatures. 1 Cor. 6.11. Joh. 15.26. 1 John
5.6. Romans 5 5. and 8.26. Isa. 63.10. Mat. 12.31. Acts 5.9 Ephesians. 4.30.
Seventhly, truth not to be doubted of, and the fountain of truth. Eighthly,
Unspeakable mercy. Ninthly, Indignation even against hidden sins. All which do
sufficiently prove, that the holy Ghost is God, coequall with the Father and
the son. Besides, the same divine works which are attributed to the Father and
the son, Mat. 12.28. 1 Cor. 12 4.
are also attributed to the holy G^ost, as the general creation, preservation
and government of the whole world. Likewise those works which properly belong
to the salvation of his Church; Job ^^.13.33 4. Joh. 3.5. 2 Cor. 3.18. Joh,
14.26. Acts 9.31. Isa. 48.16. Acts 20.18. Luke 12.12. 1 Cor. 12.7. 2 Pet. 1 21.
Mat. 28 19. Heb. 9.8. Joh. 16 13. Acts 11 28 Ephesians 2 22 1 Cor. 12 13 Joh. 14 26
Ephesians. 1 17 Romans 8.14. Acts 16 6 Isa. 11 2 John 14 16 Rom 8 15 1 Cor 6 11 Joh.
6 63 Romans 8 11
as the calling and sending of Prophets. The bestowing of competent and fit
graces for the Ministry on Ministers. The publishing of the Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles. The instituting of sacraments. The foretelling and
prophesying of things to come. The gathering of the Church. The enlightening of
men's minds. The governing of the Actions, and whole life of the Godly. The
strengthening and preserving of the regenerate against the force of temptation,
even unto the end: The pardoning of sins, and adopting the sons of God. The
bestowing of salvation and life everlasting. All these divine works being
attributed to the holy Ghost, do likewise clearly prove, his co-equality with
the Father and the son.

Moreover, Diverse titles of the holy Ghost.
We find in the sacred scriptures many Titles and Appellations, answerable to
the manifold effects of his Power, Office, and Divinity: For example, The Holy
Ghost is called Jehovah Isa. 6 9 Act. 28 25 The earnest of our inheritance
Ephesians 1 14 The power of the most high Luke 1 35 The Teacher of the Faithful
Joh. 14 26 The earnest of the spirit 2 Cor. 1 22 The Oil of Gladness Psalm. 45
7 The seven spirits of God. Rev. 4 5 The spirit of Interpretation.
Sanctification Supplication Consolation Revelation The grace of God Knowledge
Adoption Counsel Eternity Wisdom Prophecy Holiness
1 Cor. 12 10 Romans 1 4 Zach. 12 10 2 These. 2 16 Ephesians. 1 17 Acts 14 26 Isa. 11
2 Rom 8 15 Isa. 11 2 Heb. 9 14 Isa. 11 2 1 Cor. 12 10 Romans 1 4 The Holy Ghost
is called The spirit of the Father Joh. 15 26 The spirit of the Son Gal. 4 6
The spirit of the Lord. Isa. 1 12 The earnest of Gods spirit. 2 Cor. 5 5 The
teacher of Truth Joh. 14 46 The mind of Christ. 1 Cor. 2 16

And he is called An Eternal spirit Heb. 9 14 A Comforter Joh. 14 16 A
heavenly gift Heb. 6 4 The holy spirit Ephesians. 4 30 The spirit of Christ God
Right working miracles Power Life Truth Promise Grace Love
Romans 8.9. Genesis 1 2 John 16 8 9 10 11 13 1 Cor. 12.10. 2 Timothy 1 7 Romans 8 2 Rev.
11 11 Joh. 14 17 Ephesians. 1 13 Heb. 10 29 Zech. 12 10 2 Timothy 17 The hand of God
Job. 26 13 Luke 1 66 A free spirit Psalm. 51 12 A Good spirit Nehem. 9 20 And he
is called The finger Of God. Luke 11 20 Mat: 12 28 The pledge Of God. 2 Cor 5 5
Joh 14 16 17 18 26 The witness Of God. Rom 8 16 The seal Of God. Ephesians 4 30 2 Cor
1 22 The kiss Of God. Cant 1 2 Seed of God 1 John 3 9 The Intercessor, etc. Rom
8 29

1 John 2.27. Act 2.2. Mat. 3 16. Act. 2.3.
He is compared unto Ointment, a mighty wind, a Dove, and unto cloven tongues
like fire. He is also compared unto a Cloud, to seed, to water, fire, and
wind.

To what the holy Ghost is compared, and why. 1 To a cloud Exodus 13.21. 1 King.
18.45.
First; unto a cloud, Because that, as the cloud betokneth a shadowing from
heat, and a sending down of Rain (as both Philosophy and experience shows)
so the spirit of God does overshadow us from the heat of the wrath of God, it
cools and refreshes our scorched souls, and as the Rain makes the barren
earth fertile, and fruitful, so does the graces of Gods spirit, make our
barren hearts plentiful in all goods works.

Secondly, to seed, Because that, 2. To seed.
as in our natural birth, we are begotten by the seed of our Parents, so in
our new birth we are begotten by those Graces, that are sown in our hearts by
the holy Ghost.

Thirdly, to water, Because that, 3 To water. The properties of water.
as water mollifieth the hard earth, fructifieth the barren ground, quenches
the greatest heat, and cleanses the foulest things, so does the spirit of God
soften our hard hearts, fructify our barren souls, quench the heat of lust,
and cleanse us from all our sins. And so make us to become fit Temples for
himself to dwell in, or like the trees that are planted by the water side,
Psalm. 1.3.
which bring forth their fruit in due season.

Fourthly, to Fire, 4. To fire. 1 Cor. 3.13.
Because he does consume away the dross of sin, and illuminate our
understanding with the light of truth, and inslame our hearts with the zeal of
Gods glory, and with unfeigned love, The properties of fire.
both toward God and man, yea, as the fire has in it (says Oecumenius) these
three special things.

That is 1. Calorem 3. Splendorem 3. Motionem


1. Heat, to warm, mollify, and purify.

2. Splendour, to give light, and to illuminate.

3. Motion, to be always working.

Even so the spirit of God, first warmeth and heateth the hearts of the Godly,
with a fervent and a fiery zeal of all godliness, he mollifieth their hard
and stony hearts, and purifieth their souls from all kind of filthiness
whatsoever. Secondly, he illuminateth their hearts with the knowledge of God,
and heavenly things. Thirdly, he makes them always to be in action, and
never idle. Finally, he is compared to wind, and that, for these five reasons.
5. To wind. Joh. 9.8. Exodus 33.19.


wind blows where it lists, so the gifts and graces of Gods spirit are
given to whom soever it pleases him.

wind scatters the dust, and drives the chafe away from the Corn, so the
graces of Gods spirit does winnow the consciences of the saints, and drive away
all wicked thoughts and cogitations from their hearts.

wind cools, comfort and refreshes all those that are scorched with the
heat of the sun; so does the grace of Gods holy spirit recreate all those
distressed people that are scorched with the heat of troubles and afflictions,
or burned with the concupiscence of their sins.

wind carries away the ship against the maine and mighty stream; so will the
grace of Gods holy spirit, carry a man against the current of his natural
inclination.

wind will pass unresistably; so will the grace of Gods blessed spirit, work
its own effect, and all the power of darkness is not able to resist it; and
therefore he is compared unto a mighty wind, because that as the mighty wind
(we read of in the sacred scripture) did rend the Mountains, and break the
rocks before the Lord; Why the holy Ghost is compared to a mighty wind. 1 King.
19.11.
so the grace of Gods holy spirit, and the word of the great Jehovah is mighty
in operation, able to shake the stoutest and the proudest man, and to break in
pieces the stoniest heart.

The gifts of the holy Ghost 1 Cor. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
All these several operations which this holy spirit works in the hearts of
the elect, and all those foregoing Titles and Appellations which the sacred
scriptures do give unto the holy Ghost, do certainly prove him to be the true
and everlasting God. Besides, if we further search the holy scriptures, we
shall find, that by the holy Ghost,

First, The word of wisdom, the word of Knowledge, Faith, Gifts of healing,
working of miracles, Prophecy, discerning of spirits, diverse kinds of
Tongues, and the interpretation of Tongues, etc. is given,

Heb. 6.4, 5.
Secondly, By him the godly are sanctified, and the very Reprobates have a taste
of heavenly gifts, and of the good word of God, and of the promises of the
world to come.

Exodus 13.3, 4, 0. 1 Samuel 11.6 etc.
Thirdly, By him, all excellency in common gifts of Nature and reason, as
strength, courage, arts and sciences, Policy and government is given unto man,
yea unto many that never heard of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Joh. 6.63 Joh. 14.17.
Fourthly, Influence perpetual, effectual, and vital of saving grace from
Christ is the head of every true member is given to believers, 1 Pet 1.2.
in which sense, the world cannot receive or know the same.

Fifthly, By the holy Ghost, virtues charity, constancy, benignity, faith,
goodness, joy, longanimity, mildness, modesty, love, patience, Gal. 5.22.23.
and peace of conscience are gotten, with seven other principal virtues, (to
wit) wisdom, understanding, counsel, fortitude, knowledge, godliness, Isa.
11.2.
and the fear of God. All these gifts being given by the holy Ghost, do
likewise prove him to be a God.

Many of the gifts and graces of Gods holy spirit, are excellently well
deciphered and set down unto us, under the properties, and conditions of those
forms and figures, wherein the holy Ghost did appear. As,

First, he appeared like a dove, when he descended upon our Savior Christ;
because his dove-like properties were to be showed; that he was innocent meek,
and lowly in heart; for as of all the beasts of the field, the little silly
lamb is, in most respects, best qualified, and therefore is Christ called, the
lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world; So of all the fowls of
Heaven, the Dove in most respects is most excellent: In what respects the holy
Ghost is like a Dove.
For she is annunciator pacis, the messenger and proclaimer of peace; she
brought the Olive Branch unto Noah; Fell caret. Rostro non laedit. Optimum
granum elegit. Gemicum pro cantu habet. Juxta flumi^a aquarum sedet. Innocentia
valet. Volatu praestat. Thom. Aquin. de proprietat. columbae.
she wants Gall; she has no bitterness in her; she never hurts with her
bill nor claws; she is full of Love, and yet she never sings any wanton tune,
but woo, woo, is her matutinus and vespertinus cantus, her mournful morning
and evening song: and therefore the holy Ghost descended on Jesus Christ like a
Dove; to show these dove-like qualities of this Lamb of God, and to teach that
we must be thus qualified like Doves, if we should have and enjoy the sweet and
comfortable presence of this Heavenly Dove, this holy spirit of God, Joh.
14.16.17.18.26. Romans 8.15.16. Joh. 16.13. Ephesians 1.13. and 4 30. Romans 8.23.
who is in the hearts of the elect, as the pledge of Christ's presence, the
witness of their adoption, the guide of their life, the comforter of their
soul, the seal of their redemption; and the first fruits of their salvation.

Secondly like cloven tongues of fire.
Secondly, He appeared like cloven tongues of fire.

First, Like tongues, because (as a Father says) Symbolum est lingua spiritus
sancti, a Patris verbo procedentis; The tongue is a symbol of the holy Ghost,
proceeding from the word of the Father; for as the tongue has the greatest
cognation, 1. Why the holy Ghost appeared like tongues.
and the nearest affinity with the word, and is moved by the word of the heart,
to express the same by the sound of the voice: (says Saint Gregory) so the
holy Ghost has the nearest affinity that may be with the word of God, and is
the expressor of his voice, and the speaker of his will, Joh. 16.14.
that receives of him, and reveals all unto us.

Secondly, Like cloven tongues, 2. Why he appeared like cloven tongues.
because all tongues and all languages are alike known and understood of God,
and because this holy spirit can teach all men all Languages, and the gift of
tongues is a gift of God.

Thirdly, 3. Why he appeared like cloven tongues of fire.
He appeared like cloven tongues of fire; because the spirit of God delights
rather in the zealous and the fervent tongues of saint Paul and Apollo's that
warm the heart, then in those eloquent tongues of Cicero and Demosthenes that
delight the ears; for this is the desire of Gods spirit, to kindle the hearts
of men, and to set them on fire, with the love of God, and to make them zealous
in all good things: Indeed zeal derived (...); is a word that is framed from the
very sound and hissing noise, that hot burning coals do make when they meet
their contraries in any moystned substance, and so zeal expresses heat, and
zealous men are said to be (...), such as burn, or such as wax fervent in
spirit; Acts 18.25. Psa. 39.3.
so, as the Prophet says, The fire kindled, and at the last I spoke with my
tongue, and zeal is the highest degree of affection good or bad, therefore he
that does any thing moderately, though he may be called (...): a Lover of that
thing, yet he cannot be called (...), because a Zelot is so intensive, Vt
quicquid vult, valde vult, as that to all the objects of his affections, he is
excessively disposed, Omnis animi impetus a ratione, vel recta, vel perversa,
proveniens ad destruendum vel ad s^uendum aliquid; sub hoc verbo, zelus
significatur.
and most earnestly, stretching himself to the very height of his abilities;
his love is fervent, his desire eager, his delights ravishing, his hopes
longing, his hatred deadly, his anger fierce, his grief deep; his fear
terrible, and so of all the rest of his passions, he has them all in the
highest pitch, so that such a man, all the men in the world had most need to
have his biasse right, and to be furnished with that most necessary pair of
spiritual endowments, nam^^ Wisdom and understanding, Of wisdom and
understanding by way of digression, first, what they are,
two excellent graces and gifts to be desired above all the wealth of this
world, if we would but consider the difference betwixt a Wise man and a fool
that is void of understanding: Now there are two sacred scriptures which do
tell us what is Wisdom and Understanding, for in the Book of Job it is said,
Job 28.28.
Behold the fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from evil, is
understanding: Deuteronomy. 4.4, 5, 6.
And Moses shows the same also, saying, Behold, I have taught you statutes
and judgments, etc. Keep therefore and do them, for this is your Wisdom and
your Understanding in the sight of the Nations; which shall hear all these
statutes, and say, surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding people.

Moreover, Sap 7.22.
concerning wisdom, the wise man says, that in her is an understanding
spirit, 2 Of the sundry properties in wisdom
holy, one only, manifold, subtle, lively, clear, undefiled, not subject to
hurt, plain, loving the thing that is good, quick, which cannot be let,
ready to do good: Kind to man, Sap. 7.23.
steadfast, sure, free from care, having all power, overseeing all things, and
going through all understanding, pure and most subtle spirits For wisdom is
more moving then any motion; Sap. 7.24.
she passes and goes through all things by reason of her pureness. 25.
For she is the breath of the power of God, and a pure influence flowing from
the glory of the Almighty. Therefore can no defiled thing fall into her. 26.
For she is the brightness of the everlasting light; the unspotted mirror of
the power of God; and the image of his goodness. 27.
And being but one, she can do all things, and remaining in her lelf, she
makes all things new, and in all ages entering into holy souls, she makes
them friends of God, and Prophets. 28.
For God loves none but him that dwells with wisdom. 29.
For she is more beautiful then the Sun, and above all the order of the
stars; being compared with the light, she is found before it, so that as
Menander says, (...); Wisdom is a more precious possession then all riches,
and therefore Nihil sapientia ardentius diligitur, nihil dulcius possidetur,
nothing is loved, nothing is desired more than Wisdom; and though one man
affects honor, another desires wealth, and a third loves his pleasure,
Aristot. Me^a. l 1.
yet all men affect wisdom, which as Aristotle says, is Cognitio primarum and
altissimarum causarum; Cicero Tusc. l 4.
or as Cicero defines it, Sapientiae est divinarum and humanarum rerum
scientia, and it is the greatest glory and eminency of any man, because a wise
man in rags is more to be respected then the greatest Peer, that is arrayed in
gold and pearls, if he be destitute of understanding.

Saint Basil says, Ille intelligens est, Basil. sup. prove. 1
qui secundum mentem and rationem vivit, he is an understanding man, not which
knows things, but which lives according to the dictate of his reason and
understanding, which is an habit, Per quem animus ea perspicet quae sunt, by
which the mind of man does perceive and see those things which are principia
intelligibilia, Cicero in Rhetor. l. 2. Aristot. Aethic. in l. 5.
intilligible principles, as Aristotle says; and Plato has one excellent
observation of the understanding, Quod infinitam virtutem in se habet, cum nec
humana, nec divina respiciens satiatur, nisi infinitum Deum capiat, qui
capacitatem ejus, ab eo manantem, Mag. Mor. c. 34. Intellectus est habitus
principiorum.
impleat infinitam, that it has a most large extent, and is never satisfied
with the knowledge of any hamane or divine things until it lays hold upon
the most infinite God, which has enlarged that capacity unto our souls, and
is only able to replenish the same himself, and therefore the more that any
man understands, the more he coveteth to understand, until he understands
God, The understanding how insatiable.
without which we understand nothing, but are most truly compared unto the
beasts that perish; the whole world being no more able to satisfy our
understanding, then a peck of corn is sufficient to fill up all the Vast
Regions that are under the circumference of the highest heaven. For the
understanding of natural things, indeed this eye of the soul is very peircing
sharp, its like the Eagles eye that can behold sub frutice leporem, How sharp
our understanding is in natural things.
and sub fluctibus piscem, a hare lurking under the shrub and a fish playing
under the wave, we will presume to understand the times and seasons,
Intellectus est vis animi quae invisibilia perspicit. Aug. de spiritu and anima.
and the secrets of all Natures works, heaven it self, and all the host
thereof, is within the reach of our understanding, it tells you how far it is
to every sphere, and it sets forth the dimensions of every star, even to an
inch. And yet blind man, I dare be bold to say it, that Aristotle himself that
great Philosopher knew not all the knowable things in a straw, Joh. 3.12. The
least entity or invisible being, not wholly known by any man.
and therefore, if our understanding be so dimmed and so dulled, that we can
but scarcely perceive natural things, how shall we be able to understand
spiritual, which are supra intellectum humanum, above all humane
understanding, because Reason cannot pierce into spiritual things: yea all our
understanding, though it be the eye of our soul; yet it is full of darkness,
How dull our understanding is in sprituall things.
and would soon bring us into the pit of ruin and destruction, if the same were
not Dei verbo directus and spiritu divino illuminatus, directed by Gods word,
and illuminated by this spirit of God, which is the spirit of understanding, so
that indeed, it is most truly said of Caelius Rhodiginus, Ludovicus Caelius
Rhodig. leg. antiq. l. 3. c. 1. de intellectu agente and passibili.
That although the soul of man needs no other extrinsecall light, but only
that which is innate, if negligence or vice did not corrupt the same, to
understand those things which are within it, as is the soul it self, powers,
habits, faculties, and all the virtue thereof; yet, Ad ea percipienda quae sunt
supra ipsum, to understand those things which are above it, and do exceed all
humane understanding; indiget omnino anima irradiatione ab ipsa luce veritatis
primae, The soul does altogether require to be enlightened with the bright
beams of of the first truth, Our souls must be enlightened to understand God.
which is God himself; or else man shall never be able to attain unto the
least measure of the understanding thereof; and this irradiation of light from
God upon our souls, to the inlightning of our understanding, is called infusio
gratiae ad divina contemplanda, the infusion of Gods Grace to enable us to
contemplate and to understand spiritual and divine things; for we find the
very Apostles themselves could not understand the scriptures until the spirit
of God had opened their understandings; Luke 24. 1 Cor. 2.14.
because the carnal or natural man, cannot perceive the things of the spirit
of God, and therefore Saint Paul says, No man can say that Jesus is the Lord
but by the holy Ghost, no man can believe the incarnation, passion,
resurrection and assension of our Savior Christ, and the rest of the mysteries
of true Religion but by the special help and illumination of the spirit of
God; nay more, Psalm. 119.18.34. verse 73.125.14^. Rom 7.14
the Prophet David shows, that we cannot understand the Law of God, which
seems to be plain enough without any secret meaning or hidden mysteries,
unless we be guided and enlightened by this holy and blessed spirit; who is
the Instructor which teaches us, Joh. 14.26. and 16.13. Romans 8.2. Joh. 6.63.
Ezeck. 47.1. Joh. 3.5. 1 Cor. 3.13. Romans 8.26. Joh. 15.26.
the spirit of life which quickneth us, the water which renews us, the fire
which inflames us, the comforter which helps us, the Advocate which speaks for
us, and the everlasting fountain and spirit of Truth, from whom all truth and
celestial riches do flow unto us, and by whom our infidelity is turned into
faith, our thraldom into freedom, our poverty into plenty, our barrenness
into fruitfullnesse, our sorrow into solace, our darkness into light, our
misery into mercy, our weariness into strength, our mourning into mirth, our
death into life, our affliction into glorification, and our Hell into heaven;
yea finally, by him the Angels are replenished, Prophets inspired, Scribes are
instructed, the word is quickened, the Church sanctified, the hardness of heart
suppled, the weakness of faith cherished, the darkness of the soul
enlightened, and the mist of discomfort dispersed, so that by his presence
darkness is expelled, and by his favor, souls from death and hell are
delivered.

CHAP. IV. OF THE TRINITY IN UNITY
GOD is so wonderful says Saint Gregory, Vt semper debet confiderari per
studium, How comprehensible is our God. Greg. in quadam homi^a. Esa. 6. Ambrose
de spirit sanct. l. 3 c 22.
sed nunquam discuti per intellectum; that he ought always to be considered,
and admired in our thoughts, but never pried into by our understandings, for as
Saint Ambrose speaking of the Seraphims which Esayas saw both standing and
flying, says, Si volabant seraphim, quomodo stabant, si stabant, quomodo
volabant? If they did fly, how could they stand, and if they stood how did
they fly? surely this must pass our best capacities, and therefore, si hoc
comprehendere non possumus quod videmus? quomodo deum comprehendere valemus
quem non videmus, if we cannot apprehend that which we do see, how how can we
comprehend him whom we cannot see? What the knowledge of God from a natural
light. Romans 1.19.30.
As for the Knowledge of God which is from the light of nature, that does take
its rise from sense, and can ascend no higher then it is supported, nor go any
further then it is led by sensible objects, which give us no clearer knowledge
of God, then the effects do of their cause; namely, that he is, and that He is
not such as they are; but far excelling them in Essence and in Attributes; as
not being compounded, not depending, not finite, not mutable, and the like; but
now the knowledge of God which is from a supernatural light, What from a
supernatural light. Joh 1.18. Exodus 33.^3
that is merely by divine Revelation, as that God is the Father of Christ, and
the Holy Ghost the ineffable bond of both. Yea, such is our Knowledge of God
(through the apprehension of faith) in the glorious mystery of the Blessed
Trinity, whereby we believe the same God which is One in nature or being, Deuteronomy
6.4. Isa. 45.5. 1 Cor. 8.4 6 Genesis 11.7. Isa. 63.7 9.10. 1 John 5.8. Genesis 1.26.
and 3.22.
is also Three in persons or manner of subsisting, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
for so the scriptures plainly teach us; as, Let us make man in our image, and
behold the man is become like one of us, says the Lord himself; to show that
in this unity of Essence, there is a plurality of Persons; Mat. 3.16. and
28.19. Genesis 19.24.
and again, The Lord reigned upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah from the Lord out of
Heaven, that is, the Son rained from the Father, as Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Epiphanus, Cyprian, Ironaeus, Eusebius, Cyrill, and many others do so expouud
that place: And so the three men that appeared unto Abraham, Genesis 18.1, 2, 3.
and that heavenly Harmony of Cherubims, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Isa. 6.3.
Lord God of sabbath, do sufficiently declare the Trinity of Persons in the
unity of Gods Essence,

Now a Person is a distinct subsisting of the whole Godhead, What a person is.
Joh. 1.1. and. 5.31. Chap. 14.5.16.
and an individual understanding, and incommunicable subsistence, living of it
self, and not sustained by another: So that the three persons in the Trinity,
are not three several substances, but three distinct subsistences, Col. 2.9.
or three diverse manner of being of one and the same substance and divine
Essence.

And here we must consider, that the Essence does not beget an Essence, Psalm
2.7. Heb. 1.5. Joh. 15.26.
but the Person of the Father begets the Person of the Son, and the Person
of the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son by an Eternal and
incomprehensible spiration, Athanas. 2. Dialog. de Trinit.
as if it be lawful to compare great things with small, in the reasonable
faculty of man's soul, when the understanding considers it self, it begets
an image of it self, Thom p. 1. q. 27 ar. 1. and 3. Mornaeus de verit. Christ.
Relig. c 5. Keckerm. S^st^m. Theol. l 2. c. 2.
it being in that reflected action, the proper object of it self; from the
desire or appetite of which image, so produced, there arises a mutual love
and delight betwixt the understanding and his image; so in the eternal essence
of the Godhead, the Father looking upon himself, begets the image of
himself, which is his son, and from the mutual love and delight of both these
persons one to another, the holy Ghost proceeds, as the common beam of these
two incomprehensible lights: And as in one sun there are, the body of the sun,
the sun beams, and the heat, the beams are begotten of the sun, and the heat
does proceed from both; Aug. de Trinit.
but the sun it self proceeds from none; Even so in the one Essence of God,
there are the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, the son is begotten of the
Father, the Holy Ghost proceeds from both, but the Father is of himself alone;
and as the son does always beget his beams, and both sun and beams do send
forth the heat; so the Father from all eternity ever did, now does, and ever
will beget his son, and both Father and Son do spire and breathe forth the Holy
Ghost, and therefore Origin says excellent well, Origin. hom. 6. in Jerem.
Salvator noster splendour est gloriae; splendour autem non semel nascitur, and
deinceps desinit nasci, etc. Our blessed Savior is the brightness of Gods
glory, but the brightness of Glory, Sed quotiescunque ortum fuerit lumen ex
quo splendour oritur, toties oritur splendour gloriae. The Father does ever beget
the son.
is not once begotten, and then afterward ceasing to be begotten; but as often
as the light rises from whence the brightness springs, so often does the
brightness of glory arise: And our Savior (says he) is the wisdom of God,
but the wisdom of God is the brightness of that eternal light: Et ideo
salvator semper nascitur, and therefore as the scripture says, Ante colles
generat me, Before the mountains were laid, he begets me, and not (as some
do erroniously read it) Generavit me, He has begotten me; so the truth is,
that the son of God is ever begotten, Aug. de verbis Domini.
and the Holy Ghost ever proceeding. Also as the Fountain begets a brook, and
both the Fountain and brook do make the poole, and yet all three is the same
water, so the Father is the Fountain which begets the Son, and from the
Father and the Son proceeds the holy Ghost, and yet is the Deity of all three
the same: That there are certain similitudes of the Trinity, to be seen in the
creatures.
In like manner, the fire has Motion, Light, and Heat, and yet but one fire,
and in all other creatures, we may behold certain glimps and similitudes,
that do after a sort adumbrate, Why Power is ascribed to the Father, wisdom to
the Son, and goodness to the Holy Ghost, seeing all and each of the three
persons have the same power, wisdom, and goodness.
and shadow out this ineffable and expressible mystery; for by their
greatness, we may consider the Power of the Father, by their beauty we may
see the wisdom of the Son, and by their utility we may note the goodness of
the holy Ghost: Now amongst the creatures it is wont to be observed (as Saint
Augustine says) that in a Father is found a defect of Power, by reason of his
Antiquity, in a Son is seen ignorance by reason of his youth, and in experience
of things, and in the name of a spirit, there seems to be a kind of fearful
vehemence as Quiescite ab homine, cujus spiritus in naribus ejus, rest not in
man, whose spirit is in his nostrills: and therefore least the like might be
thought to be in these divine persons, we find Power ascribed to the Father,
(...). Justia Martyr in expos. fide^, Cy il. l. 8 cont. Jul.
Wisdom unto the Son, and Goodness unto the Holy Ghost, whereas indeed each one
of them is of the same power, wisdom, and goodness as the others be: so we say
with Justin Martyr, according as God has revealed himself unto us both in his
word and his works, that the unity is understood in the trinity and the Trinity
is acknowledged in the unity.

Moreover S. Cyril says, that the Philosophers have affirmed the Essence of
God to be distinguished into three subsistences, and sometimes to have
delivered the very name of Trinity, and the Jewish Rabbis, Gala^in de ar. can.
fide. l. v. 2. c. 11. and 12
as Galatinus says, have observed this mystery out of the Hebrew names of God,
that there are three in one and but one in three, Vide. N. N n celium i^
p^^^mio, p 20.
and so Hermes Trismegistus affirmed that there was one divinity or deity, in
the Trinity in these words, (...) (...), There was an intellectual light
before the intellectual light, A mind full of light.
and there was always an enlightened mind of the mind; and this was nothing
else then the unity of these, and the spirit, which contains all things;
besides this, there is no God nor Angel, nor any other substance, because he
is the Lord and Father, and God of all things, and all things are under him and
in him, Verbum ejus ^^^sectam ^^sum ins^^ (...) natura, and aqua secunda
prolificam fecit aquam. Quae verba, quia sunt in eis quaedam carminum vestigia,
deinde restituta qui dam Orpheo vindicarunt.
for his perfect word existing and being fruitful, and a worker or maker of
all things, fallen in a fruitful nature, has plentifully produced all things:
And then having said these things, he prays unto this God, saying, (...); O
Heaven, the most excellent work of the great God, I do adjure thee, and I do
adjure thee, the voice and speech of the Father, which he first uttered and
spoke, when he established all the world, and I beseech thee by thine only
begotten word, and the Father which contains or upholdeth all things, be thou
favorable and merciful unto me. There is no man but he would wonder to see in
this Author the very words of Saint John, and yet notwithstanding his books
were translated by the Platonists a long time before the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ: And it is no marvel though we find sayings of his in diverse
places which are not written in his Poemander, considering that he wrote six
and thirty thousand, five hundred and five and twenty Volumes, that is to say,
Rolls of Paper, Jambilicus in his 39. chap. of mysteries.
as Jambilicus reports. This Hermes or Mercurius surnamed (...), was the
greatest Philosopher, the chiefest Priest, and most prudent Prince of Egypt,
he flourished before Pharaoh in the time of Moses, and was called Ter Maximus,
thrice great, because he writ of the Trinity, yea, Saint Augustine affirms,
Aug. l. 5. c. 3. de haeresibus.
that he did compose a book, whose Title was (...), the perfect word, and
that therein he left written, Monas genuit monada, and in se suum reflexit
ardorem, which is as much as if he had said, the Father begat the Son, or
the mind begat the word, and from both proceeded the Holy spirit.

Also Theodorus the Platonist, as it is in Proclus, affirms that there are
three chief workers, whereof he calls the one a substantial mind, the
other a mental substance, and the third the Fountain of all life, and
Theodoret does affirm, That Plotinus and Numenius have collected out of Plato,
That there are three eternities, Bonum, and mentem, and universi animam,
Goodness, which answers the Father, that is the Fountain of the Deity, the
mind, which signifies the Son, and the soul or life of this whole Universe,
which is the holy spirit; that as in the beginning of the Creation, Genesis 1.2.
he presently moved upon the Waters, to sustain the same; so ever since he
spireth and preserves every living thing; and so Amelius and many others, are
as full and as plain in this point as may be, as any man may see, that will
look into Nancelius his Proem, Nancel. in Proem Chalcidius Avicen.
which he confesses to have taken out of Eugubinus. Thus we see how the
Ancient Philosophers, were all of one Opinion and judgment in the Doctrine of
the Trinity, The Gentiles did conceive a certain kind of knowledge and
understanding, though undigested and imperfect, overshadowed (as it were) with
humane reasonings, concerning this mystery.
wherein they had so much knowledge, as not only was able, I say not with
Clemens Alexandrinus, to bring them to salvation, but to make them without
excuse in the day of Tribulation, because that they knowing God, glorified him
not as God, but also as does exceed the knowledge of many, which make
profession of Christianity, and will no doubt rise in judgment to condemn them
in the later day.

Yet further, God ^oe and indivisible.
as the Philosopers have affirmed the essence of God to be distinguished into
three subsistences, so likewise they have acknowledged the divine Essence to be
only one impartible and indivisible. For,

First, Hermes Trismegistus teaches, Although many of the Ancient Philosophers
(through custom) did celebrate the plurality of Gods, yet notwithstanding they
did acknowledge bu^ ^ne only true God by nature. Du. Plessis.
That there is but one only God: That One is the root of all things and that
without that One, nothing has been of all things that are: That the same One
is called the only good and the goodness it self, which has universal power
of creating all things: That it is impossible that there should be many makers:
That in Heaven he has planted immortality, in earth, interchange, and
universally life and moving: That unto him alone belongs the name of Father
and of God; and that without blasphemy those titles cannot be attributed either
to Angels, Fiends, or to men, or to any of all those whom men do call Gods, as
in respect of honor and not of nature. He calls him the Father of the world,
the Creator, the Beginning, the Glory, the Nature, the End, the Necessity, the
Renewer of all things, the worker of all powers, and the power of all works,
the only Holy, the only unbegotten, the only everlasting, the Lord of
everlastingnesse, and the everlastingnesse it self. Unto him alone will he
have us to offer up our prayers, our praises, and our sacrifices, and never to
call upon any other.

Secondly, Pythagoras teaches, Alleged by Cicero, Plutark, Clemens of
Alexandria, and Cyrillus.
That God is but one, not as some think, without government of the world, but
all in all: He is the orderer of all ages, the light of all powers, the
original of all things; the Cresset of Heaven, the Father, Mind, quickner and
mover of all. Yea, and he calls him the infinite power, from whence all other
powers do flow, which cannot be verified but of him alone.

Thirdly, Philo the Jew and Jambilicus of the sect of Pythagoras.
Philolaus a Disciple of Pythagoras says, That there is but one only God, the
Prince and guider of all things, who is always singular, unmovable, like
himself, and unlike all other things. Also Architas says, That he esteems
no man wise, but him which reduces all things unto one self same original,
that is to wit, unto God, who is the beginning, end, Hierocles against the
Atheists.
and middle of all things. And Hierocles one of the same sect, says, That the
same is he whom they call by the name of Zena and Dia, the Father and maker of
all things, because all things have heir life and being of him. Aristot. 14.
Metaph. cap. 4. and 1. Phis. cap. 10 lib. 13.
To be short, Pherecydes the syrian, the Master of Pythrgoras, Empedocles his
successor. Parmenides and Melissus, they all taught the same truth, and so did
Xenophanes the Colophonian, as we be credibly informed by the verses of
Parmenides rehearsed by Simplicius; Simplic. l. 1. Phis.
in the which verses he calls him the unbegotten, the whole, the only one,
not which has been or shall be, but which everlastingly is altogether and all
of himself. Du. Plessis.
Besides, Of the like opinion were Thales, Anaxagoras, Timeus of Locres, Acmon,
Euclide, Archaevetus and others of the ancientest Philosophers.

Socrates the scholmaster of Plato, has confessed only one God, Academicks.
and (as Apuleius reports) was condemned to drink poison, for teaching that
the Gods which were worshipped in his time, were but vanity: He calls God,
The Father of the whole world, who only is or has being, and who made the
heaven, the earth, the sun, the moon the times and seasons, and all other
things both heavenly and earthly, high and low, and whatsoever else is, Plato
in his 13. Epist. to King Denis. Damascius. (...).
and Plato the Disciple of Socrates taught the same truth. And Damascius the
Platonist says, The one brings forth all things, The one ought to be
honored by silence: The one (like the sun) is seen dimly afar off, and the
nearer the more dimly. Jambilicus in his book of the Sect of Pythagoras.
Also Jambilicus surnamed the Divine, acknowledged every where a divine cause,
which is the beginning, end, and middle of all things: That there is one God,
Master of all, at whose hand welfare is to be sought: That the end of all
Contemplation is to aim at one, and to withdraw from multitude unto unity: And
that the same One or Unity is God, the ground of all truth, happiness and
substance, yea, and of all other grounds themselves.

Proclus in Platoes divinity.
Proclus, (after the manner of the Platonists, which was for the most part wont
to be very superstitious) turns himself often times aside to many Gods, but yet
his resolution is this in express words. Who is he (says he) that is King of
all, the only God separated from all, and the producer of all things out of
himself, which turns all ends unto himself, (...)
and is the end of ends, the first cause of operations, (...)
the author of all that ever is good and beautiful, the englightner of all
things with his light? if thou believe Plato, he can neither be uttered nor
understood. (...)
And anon after, Then is it this first simplicity which is the King; the
sovereignty and superexcellency of all things, incomprehensible, not to be
matched with any other thing, uniforme, going beyond all causes, the creator of
the substance of the Gods which has some form of goodness. All things go
after him and stick unto him: for he produces and perfecteth all things that
are subject to understanding, like as the sun does to all things that are
subject to sense. To be short, it is the unutterable cause which Plato teaches
us under two names, in his commonweal, calling it the very goodness it self,
and the fountain of truth, which uniteth the understanding to things that are
understood. And in his Parmenides, (...)
The One or Unity whereupon all the divine unities are grounded, and which is
the Original of all that is, and of all that as yet is not. Proclus in his
Book of the soul and the spirit. chp. 32. 42. 53.
In his book of the soul and of the spirit, he teaches us a way to attain
from many multitudes to this super substantial unity, which he calls the
nature grounded in eternity, the life that lives and quickneth the waking
understanding, the welspring of all welfare, the ifinite both in continuance
and power, etc. Also Simplicius says, Simplicius upon the Edictetus if Arrian.
Whatsoever is beautiful, comes of the first and chiefest beauty: All truth
comes of Gods truth* and all beginnings must needs be reduced to one
beginning; which must not be a particular beginning as the rest are, but a
beginning surpassing all other beginnings, and mounting far above them, and
gathering them all into himself, yea and giving the dignity of beginning to
all beginnings, accordingly as is convenient for every of their natures. Also
the good (says he) is the wel-spring and original of all things, it produces
all things of it self, (...).
both the first, the middlemost, and the last. The One goodness brings forth
many goodnesses; The One Unity many Unities, The one beginning many beginnings.
Now, as for the Unity, Beginning, Good, and God, they be all but one thing. For
God is the first cause of all, and all particular Beginnings or Grounds, are
fast settled and grounded in him. He is the cause of causes, the God of Gods,
Popphyrius in his 2. book of Abstinence, and in his book of occasions, chap.
^1.
and the goodness of goodnesses: Also Porphyrius acknowledged the one God, who
alone is every where, and yet in no one place; by whom all things are, both
which are, and which are not. This God does he call the Father, which reigns
in all: And he teaches us to sacrifice our souls unto him in silence, and
with chaste thoughts. Plotin. in his first E^nead. lib. 8 c. 2. En- 6. lib. 4.
cap. 1, 2, 3, 4 and in the whole 6. book and in the 3. Enn. l. 8.
And Plotinus says, That there is one Beginner of all things. That this
Beginner dwells in himself, is sufficient of himself, and of himself
brings forth all manner of Essences. That by his unity he produces
multitude, which could be no multitude, unless he abode one.

Moreover Aristotle, The Author of the books De caelo and mundo, not certainly
known. The Peripateticks.
or whosoever he was that wrote those books, De mundo, did find, that in this
rare piece of work, and frame of the world, there is a most excellent
conveighance without confusion; great variety, concurring in unity; and
diversity of all things without disorder; all which he attributes to the
powerful working of the invisible God, of whom the said Author conceives, That
for his power he is most mighty, for his beauty most excellent, for his life
immortal, and for his virtue most absolute; yea, the same Philosopher entering
into further consideration of Gods nature, says, That although God be but one,
yet we call him by many names, as (...) and (...), because we live by him,
(...), because he is often of an immutable nature; (...), because nothing is
done by chance, but according to his most certain decree, (...), because no
man can possibly avoid him, or fly from him, (...), because he abides for
ever; and as for that fable (says he) of the three sisters of the Destiny,
Clotho filum bajulat. Lachesis net, Atropos occat. These destinies are but the
actions of God.
Clotho that spinneth, Lachesis that draws out a just length, and Atropos
that cutteth off the thread of man's life, it is to be understood of God only,
who is the beginning, midst, and end of all things. He likeneth him to the
great King of Persia, who from out of his privy Chamber, governed his whole
Empire by his power and Officers; saving (says he) That the one is God
infinite in power, Mornaeus de verit. relig. c. 3.
and the other a very base and feeble wight. And further he says, That all the
names which are attributed to the Gods, are but devices to express the powers
of the only one God, the Prince and Father of all. And Theophrastus says,
Theophrastus in his Metaphisicks, and in his book of savours.
That there is one divine beginner of all things, whereby they have their
beginning and continuance. But in his Book of Savours, he passes further, and
says, That God created all things of nothing. But to create of nothing,
presupposes an infinite power, Alexander of Aphrodise, in his book of
Providence, and Cyril against Julian the Apostate.
and again, that power presupposes an unity. And Alexander of Aphrodise
attributes providence over all things, unto one only God, which can do
whatsoever he lists, as appears by all his whole discourse. And he was of
such renown amongst all the Aristotelians, that they called themselves
Alexandrians after his name. To be short, the most part of the Interpreters and
Disciples of Aristotle, found it so needful to acknowledge one only beginner,
and so absurd to maintain any more then one, that to the intent they might not
confess any such absurdity in their Master, they do by all means possible
excuse whatsoever might in his works, be construed to the contrary.

As touching the Stoics The stoics.
of the ancientest time, we have no more then is gathered into the writings of
their adversaries; who do all attribute unto them (the maintenance) of the
unity and infiniteness of God, according to this which Aristotle reports of
Zeno, whom Cicero calls the Father of the Stoics, namely, That there must
needs be but one God, for else there should be no God at all, because it
behooveth him to be singularly good and also Almighty, which were utterly
unpossible if there were any more then one. Also Cleanthes as Simplicius
reports acknowledged but one God, the cause of all causes.

Epictetus in Arrianus.
Epictetus the Stoic (whose words Lucian and others held for Oracles) speaks
of one only God. The first thing (says he) that is to be learned, is, That
there is but one God, and that he provideth for all things, and that from him
neither deed nor thought can be hidden: He teaches us to resort unto him in
our distresses, to acknowledge him for our Master and Father, to lift up our
eyes unto him alone, if we will get out of the mire of our sins, to seek our
felicity there, and to call upon him in all things, both great and small.

Seneca every where.
As for Seneca, he never speaks otherwise, What does God (says he) to such
as behold him? He causes his works not to be without witness. And again, to
serve God (says he) is to Reign. God excerciseth us with afflictions to try
man's nature: And he requires no more, Seneca in his book of the happy life,
and in his Treatise of Comfort.
but that we should pray to him. These ordinary speeches of his show that he
thought there was but one God. But he proceeds yet further. From things
discovered, says he, we must proceed to things undiscovered, and seek out him
that is ancienter then the world, of whom the stars proceed. And in the end he
concludes, That the world and all that is therein contained, is the work of
God. So Cicero and Plutarch speak ordinarily but of one God. The nature of the
Gods, says Cicero, Cicero in his book of the nature of Gods.
is neither mighty nor excellent, for it is subject to the self same (be it
nature or necessity) which rules the Heaven and the Earth, and the Sea. But
there is not any thing so excellent as God, who rules the world, and is not
subject to nature; but commands Nature it self. Plutarch in his treatise of
Isis and Osyris of Oracles that are ceased, of calmness of Mind, etc.
And Plutarch Although he suffers himself to range over often into Fables,
yet in good earnest he speaks thus, Let us not worship the Heaven, the Sun,
the Moon, etc. for they be but looking-glasses for us, wherein to consider the
cunning of him that ordained all things, and all the world is but his Temple.
Moreover, he says, That although there were many more such worlds as this is;
yet notwithstanding the one only God should govern them all.

Poets. Justin to the Gentiles. Athenagoras in his Treatise concerning the
Resurrection.
Orpheus among the Poets, was the first that opened the gap to the plurality of
the Gods. And yet there is a recantation of his in his Hymn unto Musaeus, which
is called his Testament, that is to say, his last Doctrine, whereunto he would
have all men to stick. Lift up thine eyes (says he) to the only maker of the
world, He is but One, and of that One are all things. He is all in all; he
sees all and is seen of none; He only gives both welfare and woeful tears
and war; He sits in Heaven governing all things, with his feet he touches
the earth, and with his right hand the utmost shores of the sea. He makes the
Mountains, Rivers, and deep sea to quake, etc. This is the Recantation of
Orphaeus, who is called the Author of the plurality of the Gods. Also
Phocilides Phocilides.
follows him in these words, There is but only one God, mighty wise, and
happy. And again, Honor the only God. And so Theognis, Homer, Hesiodus,
Sophocles, Euripides, Aratus, and many others have delivered the same truth:
And as touching the Latins, Ovid Ovid.
in his Metamorphosis, attributes the Creation of the world, and of all things
therein unto the only one God. Virgil in his fourth book of Husbandry, and in
other places.
And Virgil does ordinarily call him the King of Gods and men, and he
describes him shedding forth his power to the uttermost Coasts of Heaven and
earth, and with his virtue quickening the world, and all that is therein. Thus
we see that the Gentiles did conceive a certain kind of knowledge and
understanding, though undigested and imperfect, overshadowed (as it were) with
humane reasonings, concerning God, and that although (through custom) they did
celebrate the plurality of Gods, yet notwithstanding they did acknowledge but
one only true God by Nature.

This Truth of the unity of the Godhead, The unity of the Godhead proved from
Scripture.
may be yet further proved and confirmed by express testimonies of sacred
Scripture; as hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God, Deuteronomy. 6.4.32.39.
Isa. 44.6. 7, 8.
and therefore know you that I am God alone, and besides me there is none
other, says the Lord himself; to show the truth and certainty of the unity of
his Essence; also Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 8.4 6.
We know that there is none other God but one, and so we find the same truth
expressed in many other places of the Scripture, as Deuteronomy. 4 35 1 Samuel 2 2 Psalm
18.31 Isa 37 16 and 45 5 21 and 46 9 Hos 13 4 Mal 2 10 Mark 12 29 32 Rom 3 30
Gal 3 20 Ephesians 4 5 1 Timothy 2 5 Jam. 2 19. Reason shows that there can be but
one God.
etc: Besides, reason it self shows; that there can be but one God, for if
there were more Gods then one, then they must be either all without beginning,
or one must proceed from other, either by creation or generation: That they
should be all without beginning, is impossible; for then it must needs follow,
that there should be multa principia prima, disp^rata, in una voluntate non
convenientia, many first causes, and unequal beginnings, that could never
agree; and be of the same mind and will: and therefore to say they should be
all without beginning is most absurd, An unaswerable argument that there is but
one God.
If one be from the other by Creation, then is the second a creature, and
therefore but one God uncreated; and if one be from the other by generation,
then the first gave the second, either a part or his whole substance; if a
part, then is God partible, and may be divided, which cannot be said of such a
spiritual indivisible substance, and if the first gave the rest his whole
essence, then have all the same deity, and so all must be the same Godhead.
Secondly, There can be but one infinite.
God is infinite, and therefore but one, because that which is infinite
comprehends all things within the circle of it self. Thirdly, Deuteronomy. 6.4.5.
Mark 12.29.30.
we are charged to give unto God all our heart, all our strength, and all our
soul; if one must have all, there is none left for any other. Fourthly, there
is but one first cause of all things. God is that first cause, therefore he is
but one. Fifthly, But one first cause. Acts 17 28. Exodus 3.14.
God is summum ens, the first and chiefest being, as himself professes, I am
that I am, and we have learned that of the Prince of Philosophers, that there
can be but one chiefest Being, But one chiefest being.
Quia ens and unum convertuntur, because that being and one are all one.
Lastly, It is impossible there should be many Gods; for seeing it is absolutely
necessary, that he who is God, Why there can be but one God.
have all perfection of being in himself; to make many Gods, were to make them
all imperfect, and so they can be no Gods, To allow of Polutheism (then) is to
admit of Atheism, he cannot worship any God, who acknowledges many Gods,
seeing there can be but One most perfect, But one most perfect. Tertul. l.
contra Hermog. c. 17.
as but one first mover, one first efficient, and therefore this one God is so
absolutely One, that he is One alone, besides whom there can be none other; for
we deny all number in the Deity, Or (...) Only one.
unless you mean in the personal proprieties: And therefore Gregory Nyssen
says well, Quod in multitudinem extendere numerum Deitatum, eorum duntaxat
est, qui laborant multitudinis deorum errore. N^ssen. ad Eustach. l. de Trin.
Basil ep. 141. ad Caesarium.
That to extend the number of the Deities into a multitude, belongs only unto
them, which do erroneously maintain a multitude of Gods; for the Catholic
Faith is this, That we should worship the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in
Trinity, that is, The Trinity of Persons, and the unity of Essence, because all
number is to be rejected from the Essence of God, says Saint Basil, for the
divine Essence is so simple, and so numerically one, that no diversity can be
given, The father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are one by nature.
whereby the very Persons do differ in regard of the Essence, so that
whatsoever the Father essentially is, the Son is the same, and the Holy spirit
is the same.

How the persons are distinguished.
But now here we must observe, that although the Godhead cannot be divided in
its Essence; yet the persons may be distinguished by their properties; Quia hoc
est proprium Patris, quod solus est Pater, and quod ab alio non est nisi a se;
and hoc est proprium Filij, quod a Patre genitus est solus a solo, and hoc est
proprium spiritus sancti, quod nec genitus, nec ingenitus est, sed a patre and
filio, aequaliter procedens.
for this is the property of the Father, That he alone is the Father, and that
he is not from any other, but only of himself; and this is the property of the
Son, that he alone is begotten of the Father alone, co-equall unto him, and
co-essentiall, and this is the property of the Holy Ghost, to be not made, not
begotten, but from the Father and the Son equally proceeding: And therefore we
say, that these incommunicable and proper operations of the persons, do so make
the true and real distinction of the Persons, that the Father cannot be the
Son, nor the Holy Ghost; that the Son cannot be the Father, nor the Holy Ghost;
That the distinction of the persons hinders not the unity of the Nature of the
Godhead, although every person entirely holds his own incommunicable property
and that the Holy Ghost cannot be the Father nor the son, so that in a word,
all Three is the same Essence, and yet neither of the three can be the person
of the other. Also from these inward actions or operations of these persons do
proceed the nominall relations of the one unto the other, as Father; Son and
Holy Ghost, which do likewise make a true and real distinction of the Persons,
for the Father is not a name of Essence, but of relation unto the Son; and the
Son is not a name of Essence, but of relation unto the Father; and so the Holy
Ghost proceeding, is not a name of Essence, but of relation to the Father and
the Son; and therefore these names are so proper to each person, that the name
of the one cannot be ascribed to the other.

Ob. But you will say that the Son it called Father, as Esa 9 6 He is said to
be the Father of eternities.

Sol: I answer, that the name of Father is taken two ways, The name of the
father is taken two ways
1 (...), Essentially, 2 (...) Personally


First, Essentially, and so in respect of the creatures, each person of the
Trinity may be rightly termed Father:

Secondly: Personally, and so the first person only is Father, because he only
does beget his son: How the father is the first person. Mat. 28 19. Joh. 5.26.
Joh. 10.30.38. Mat. 11.27. Joh. 16.14.15.


And here by the way we must remember, that the Father is the first person, not
in priority of dignity, or of time, but of order as being the fountain of the
Trinity, communicating (not alienating from himself) the whole nature and
essential attributes of the Godhead to the son, and with the son to the Holy
Ghost:

Now as touching the outward actions or operations of these persons, Outward
operations not altogether sufficient to express the differences of the three
subsistences, and why.
we find they are not altogether sufficient to express their differences, for
as Nazian: truly affirms of the three persons themselves, Non possum tria
discernere quin subito ad unum referar nec possum unum cogitare, quin trium
fulgore confundar; so may we say of their outward operations, that although
they be affirmed of one, yet may they presently be referred to all three, Acts
20.28. 1 Pet. 1.2. Joh. 1.3. 1 Cor. 1.2. Psalm. 33.6. Ephesians 4.30. Opera Trinitatis
ad^extra sunt indivisa
and so we find them in many passages of the holy scriptures, as redemption and
sanctification to the father, creation and sanctification to the son, and
creatino and redemption to the Holy Ghost: So that indeed these outward works
of the Trinity are so indivisible, that we cannot so properly ascribe them to
any one, but you see, that they may likewise be ascribed to any other, And
besides we must observe, that whereas the inward actions of these persons are
permanent and necessary, Outward works voluntary.
these outward operations are transient and voluntary; for that God in these
things is Liberrimus Agens, A free Agent, so that he might have chosen, whether
to do them or not do them; and therefore in all these works, Election,
Creation, Gubernation, Redemption, Sanctification, Glorification, there can be
ascribed none other cause, Psalm. 135.6.
but Quia voluit, because he would; For whatsoever pleases the Lord, that did
he in Heaven and in Earth, in the seas, and in all deep places, And therefore
I say, these outward actions, and so likewise those Names which are given unto
these Persons in regard of these actions, as Creator unto the Father, Redeemer
unto the Son, Comforter, and Sanctifier unto the Holy Ghost, are not altogether
sufficient to express the differences of these persons, because they are
common to all three in one Essence.

And yet we find, that when any Action is determined to the Father, according
to the manner of his existence as Father, then do the Scriptures say, a quo vel
ad quem, from whom, Jam. 1.17. Prove. 16 4. Ephesians. 3.21.
or for whom, or to whom, and when any action is ascribed to the Son, according
to the manner of his existence as son, then do the scriptures say, Per quem,
and in quo, Ephesians. 3.21. and 1.3.
by whom, or through whom, and in whom; and when any action is assigned to the
Holy Ghost, according to the manner of his existence as Holy Ghost, then do the
scriptures say, Quo and ex quo, by whom, Romans 8.14. Joh. 3.6.
and of whom, and in regard of these expressions, of the works of God by such
Phrases, Basil de spiritu sancto c. 14.
Saint Basil does expound that place of the Apostle^ in Romans 11 36 Of him, and
through him, and for him are all things, to be a plain distinction of the three
persons, by the manner of their Actions, as well as their existence, because
all things are of the Holy Ghost, by the Son for the Father, as the same Author
speaks.

And thus you see, That although the divine Essence is only One impartible and
indivisible, Athan^s. 2 Dialog. de Trinit.
yet that there are three persons in this one Essence; not that the Essence
begets either Essence or person; but because the person of the Father begets
the Person of the Son, and both Father and son do eternally spire and send
forth the person of the Holy Ghost.

But now if any shall further enquire of the manner how the father begets
the son, and how the father and the son do spire and send forth the holy
spirit, Galenus l. 15. de usu partium. (...)
I must answer as Galenus did, in a point far inferior to this, which is of
infinite profundity; How this is done, if you enquire, you will be taken for
one that has no understanding either of your own infirmity, or of the power of
the Creator, And the fathers do often dehort us from the curiosity of
explaining the manner of divine mysteries, (...)
for that worthy Nazianzen says, Nazian. Orat. 1 de Theolog. (...)
You hear the generation of the son, be not curious to know the manner, you
hear the Holy Ghost proceeds, be not busy to enquire how; That we should not
enquire too far into the manner of divine mysteries A finite understanding not
possibly able to comprehend this infinite mystery.
And in another place he says, Let the generation of God be honored with
silence; it is much for thee to have learned, that he was begotten, as for the
manner how, we grant it not to be understood by Angels, much less by thee. So
that here we must acknowledge it impossible that a finite understanding should
comprehend that mystery which is infinite in its Glory, and therefore when the
mind soars high to conceive the truth of the unity, it is dazzled with the
Glory of the Trinity, and when it would conceive the mystery of the trinity, it
is overcome with the glory of the unity. Not to be illustrated by any instances.
And to illustrate this mystery with instances, is to shadow out the light with
colors, though the instances are that of the same sun in its body, beams, and
light, the same water in its fountain, spring and river, yea the same soul in
its understanding, memory and will. And therefore in this mystery of the
Trinity, how in that most simple and single Essence of God, there be certain
Persons truly subsisting, Three in One, and One in three, differing but not
divided, several but not sundred, many and yet the same; all one for their
Nature, all distinct for their persons, is a secret of all secrets, passing all
reach and understanding of man, rather reverently to be adored, then too
curiously to be searched into, Deuteronomy. 29 29.
for that secret things belong unto the Lord, and things revealed unto us. Let
us not therefore, I say, be too curious to enquire how these things can be, but
let us faithfully believe them to be a Trinity of Persons, in the Unity of the
Divine Essence, and each person to have the whole divine Essence, so
communicated unto it, as that all the three persons must needs be co eternal,
co essential and co-equall. Yea finally because it must be our chiefest care
to keep our selves within the limits of Faith; We must keep within the limits
of faith.
I will hereunto add the Creed of Blessed Athanasius concerning this most
sacred and ineffable mystery.

Mar. 16.16. Mat. 28.16.
1 Whosoever would be saved, before all things it is needful that he hold the
Catholic Faith, which except every man keep whole and inviolate, Heb. 11.6 2
These. 1.8.
he shall doubtless perish everlastingly.

Deuteronomy. 6 4. 1 Cor. 8 4. 1 John 5.7. Isa. 6 3.
2 And this is the Catholic Faith, That we worship one God in Trinity, and the
Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons nor dividing the Essence.

Joh. 5 32. and 14, 16. and 14. 26 chap. 1^1 and 5 31. Joh. 10.30. and 5.7.18.
3 For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, another of the
Holy Ghost: But the Divinity of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost is one, the
glory equal, the Majesty co-eternall.

Joh. 1.1.3. Heb. 1.2. J^^. 14.23. Ephesians. 3.17.
4 Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost, the
Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate, Mat. 28.20.
Prove. 8 25. Rev. 1.8. and. 21 6. Gen, 1.2. Job 33.4. Romans 8.9.
the Father immense, the son immense, and the Holy Ghost immense, the Father
eternal, the son eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal, and yet not three
eternalls, but one eternal, as there are not three uncreated, nor three
incomprehensible; but one uncreated, and one incomprehensible.

5 Likewise the Father is almighty, Joh. 16.15. Rev. 1.8.4.8. 1 John 5.20. Romans
9.5. 1 Cor 12.11. Acts 5.3.4 Luke 2.11 Acts 4.24. 1 Cor. 8.6.
the son almighty, and the Holy Ghost almighty, yet there are not three
Almighties, but one Almighty, even so the Father is God, the son is God, and
the Holy Ghost is God, and yet there are not three Gods, but one God: so the
Father is Lord, the son is Lord, and the Holy Ghost is Lord, yet not three
Lords, but one Lord.

6 For, As we are compelled by the Christian verity to confess severally each
person to be God or Lord, so we are forbid by the Catholic faith, to say there
be three Gods or three Lords.

7. The Father is made of none, Joh. 1.14. Prove. 8.25. Psalm. 2.7. Heb 1 5. Joh
15.^6. Romans 8.9 Gal. 4.6.
nor created nor begotten, the son is from the Father alone, not made nor
created but begotten, the Holy Ghost is from the father and the son, neither
made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding. There is then one Father, not
three Fathers, one son, not three sons, one Holy Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts.

8 And in this Trinity, none is before or after other, none lesser or greater
then other, Joh. 5.18. and 10.30. and. 16.15 Gen 1.2.26.
but all the three persons are co-eternall among themselves, and co-equall, so
that in all things, as is said, the Unity in Trinity, 1 John 2.23. Romans 8.9. 1
Cor. 12.3.
and Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped; He then that will be saved, must
thus think of the Trinity.

(...).
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for, and sold by Edw. Dod. at the Gun in
Ivy-lane.
AN entire Commentary upon the whole Old Testament, in 4 Vol. in fol. wherein
the diverse Translations and Expositions literal and mystical, of all the most
famous Commentators both Ancient and Modern are propounded, examined, and
judged of, for the more full satisfaction of the studious Reader in all things,
which compleateth the Authors Comment on the whole Bible, a work, the like to
which has never yet been published in English by any man, written by John
Mayer, Doctor in Divinity.

The Expiation of a sinner, in a Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Fol. by T L. DD. a learned and reverend Divine.

The justification of a sinner, being the main Argument of saint Paul's Epistle
to the Galathians fol. written by the Author of the Expiation of a sinner.

Thomae Leshintonii Logica analytica, de principiis, Regulis and usu Rationis
Rectae. 8.

The Angel-Guardian, proved by the Light of Nature, beams of scripture, and
consent of many ancient and Modern writers, untainted with Popery; By Robert
Dingley Master of Arts, late Fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford, 8.

America, or an exact description of the West Indies, especially of those
Provinces under the dominion of Spain, in which, not only the nature and
climate of the place, with the Commodities it affords is fully described, but
also plain and full directions given for the right ordring of the same, so as
to fit them for the use of the Inhabitants, and also for transportation, the
like never yet published in English, faithfully related by N N Gent. in 8.

Natures Paradox, or the innocent Impostor, a pleasant Polonian History,
translated out of French into English, by Major John Wright: 4

Poems, Songs and Sonnets written by Richard Lovelace Esquire; 8.

The life and death of Mr. Carter, with other Tracts written by his son Mr:
John Carter, Minister of Gods word in the City of Norwich, 8.

Directions for writing true English by Richard Hodges in 8.

The Breviat of saving Knowledge by 5 Brinsley of great Yarmouth, the second
Edition, corrected and much enlarged by the Author, in 8.

Heavens Alarm to all Jurors, especially false swearers, in 12 by Tim:
Woodroffe.

The surfeit to A, B, C, in 12 being a very ingenious thing.

The Reign of King Charles, faithfully and impartially delivered and disposed
into Annalls by A L Esquire; Fol: And newly Enlarged and Corrected by the Author.

Judgment and Mercy; or the Plague of Frogs inflicted, removed delivered in
nine sermons by that late Reverend and learned Divine, Mr. Josias Shute 4.

The safe way to Glory; in several exercises of general use, by William Smith
Mr of Arts, R. of Cotton in Suffolk.

The Triumphs of Rome over despised Protestancy in 4 by a person of eminency
in the Church of England:

(...)
