The Kings Majesty's REMONSTRANCE TO His Subjects of England, touching the
Great Work, and present Affairs of the Kingdom; Consisting of Eight s veral
B^^nches: S^^t^i^on^ the Kings most Excellent Majesty [now r^si^ent n the Isle
of WHEIGHT] and Sub^cribed, CHARLES REX.

Together with His Majesty's Prop^sition to Col^onel Hammond Govern^u^ of the
sa d Island) concerning His Royal P^rso^, the Army, and Kingdom. And the
Governors Answer thereunto With a Copy of the new Protestation, to be tendered
to each respective Regiment throughout the ARMY.

Imprimatur,

G^b. Mabbort.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y (...)

LONDON, Printed by J.C. for G. HORTON, 1647.

His Majesty's last MESSAGE TO The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
to be communicated to His Subjects of Scotland.
Sent in a Letter from His Majesty's Court in the Jsle of Wight, November. 20.
1647.
SIR,
HIs Majesty is somewhat more pleasanter, then at His first coming, and begins
to recreat himself, taking his pleasure abroad in the Island, both in hunting,
and other delightful Sports, being much sati fied in mind, touching his
entertainment in this Island. Most of the Gentry, that are resident here, has
visited the Court, and diverse been admitted to kiss his Majesty's hand.

Great joy is made throughout the whole Island, at his Majesty's safe arrival,
and much loyalty showed by the Inhabitants thereof, especially by the Gentry of
Newport, who at his Majesty's coming to that Town, entertained his Royal
Person very gallantly, and declared themselves with much loyalty, promising
security to his Majesty's Person, and to preserve and defend His gracious
Majesty from all danger whatsoever.

His Majesty has declared his gracious will and pleasure to our Governor,
touching the respective Regiments in the Army, who has divided and separated
themselves from the obedience and command of the General, A Copy whereof I
have here sent you enclosed; together with his Majesty's Proposals to both
Houses of Parliament, both which I have hereunto annexed, viz.

HAmmond, after an intolerable restraint to my Person it Hampton Court, I
found there was a further design against my person by a dividing party in the
Army; and having an earnest desire of settling of the Kingdom, in such sort as
might best conduce to a lasting peace throughout my Dominions, and not to be an
instrument of stirring up a new war, I have thought good to declare, that I am
confident of your fidelity in protecting my person from danger, until by such
addresses as shall be made unto Us by the parliament, there be a mutual
agreement concluded, and Our Kingdom settled.

To which our Govervour replied, that he tend ered his Majesty's person above
his own life, and would not fai^e i^ doing his utmost in fulfilling his
M^jesties Desires, in relation to the orders and directions which he should
receive from the Parliament.

Then his Majesty proceeded on in sending new propositions to the Parliament,
the chief heads whereof, I have here sent you enclosed, viz.

1. His Majesty conceives himself bound not to abolish Episcopacie, both as he
is a Christian, and as he i^ a King; As he is a Christian, it being instituted
by Christ and his Apostles: And as he is a King, being bound to maintain them
by the Oath which he swore at his Coronation; And by them the Doctrine of
Religion, the Government and Discipline of the Church, which has under his
predecessors been maintained.

2. For sale of the Bishops Lands, his Majesty holds it high sacrilege, they
hav^ng been given to them by diverse Benefactors.

3. His Majesty offers to call in all his Proclamations, and Declarations,
against the parliament and those who have adhered to them; and will give order
for withdrawing all Inditements against those who have adhered to the Part. And
his Majesty offers to pass an Act of Indemnity and general pardon.

4. For the A^mie, his Majesty undertakes with the moneys received, and due,
and to be received out of Sequestrations, to pay 400000. l. for payment of the
Army their Arreares; and if it will not do it, his Majesty will make it up out
of Forest Lands.

5. His Majesty is content to part with the Mili i^ of the Kingdom, during his
own life, but t^ a after his Reign; it may return again ^o its proper place.

6. For the publigue Debts of the Kingdom, his Majesty will confer wi^h his
two Houses of parliament for the payment of them. And his Maj. is content to
confirm^ such Officers of State, as the two Houses of parliament shall
nominate, ctc. 7. That the Proposals of the Army be taken into consideration by
the two Houses of parliament.

8. That his M^je^^y be admitted to come to London, to consult with his
Parliament, for the settling of a firm and lasting peace.

Subscribed, CHARLES REX.

Sir, Thus have I given you the chief substance of his Majesty's Propositions,
sent to the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, etc. as also the late
circumstances, which passed betwixt the Kings Majesty, and our Governor, being
all at present, from

Your most affectionate friend, Edward Baynton.
Newport, in the Jsle of Wight, Nov. 17.
The Copy of a Letter from the Army, touching the proceedings of the Souldicry.
SIR,
THe late proceedings of the Army, at their Randezvouze betwixt Hartford and
Ware, tends much to unity and concord, and a most happy compliance begins to
take impression in the hearts of the Majorality, for the storm is almost over,
and the dismal Cloud dissolved, for those who appeared, and seemed most
forward in the late Engagement, begins now to be visible in a contrary
character, and has declared very unanimously to be conformable and obedient to
the commands of the General, being resolved to subscribe to the late
Protestation, agreed upon by his Excellency, and his Council of War, a copy
whereof I have here sent you enclosed. Those Regiments which seemed most
opposite and refractory against the Generals commands, were col. Harrisons and
col. Lilburnes, who appeared in the field in a very strange posture, ^^^ing
quite cont^ary to their former principles, The General declared himself very
satisfactory at the head of each Regiment, which gave great content to the
Soul^iery, insomuch that a happy compliance proceeded throughout the greatest
part of the Army, for continuance whereof, is the earnest desire of

Your obedient servant, Robert Rishton.
Hartford Nov. 19!
The Protestation
WE the Officers and Soldiers of (...) Regiment of (...) whose Names are
subscribed, do hereby declare, That we are satisfied in his Excellency, the
General, continued conjuction with the Army, in the lawful, prosecution of
the things formerly declared, to be prosecuted for the Soldiery and Kingdom
respectively* And (for the particular circumstances of them) we shall
(according to the general Engagement of the Army above mentioned) acquiess^ in
what shall be agreed unto by the General Council of the Army, to which that
Engagement referres; and for matter of the ordering, conduct, and government of
the Army, we shall be observant of, and subject to his Excellency, his
Council of War, and (every one of us) to our Superior Officers in this
Regiment and the Army, according to the Discipline of War.

FINIS.

