A LEGACY left to PROTESTANTS, Containing Eighteen Controversies, viz. 1. Of
the Holy Scriptures. 2. Of Christ's Catholic Church, etc. 3. Of the Bishop and
Church of Rome, 4. Of Traditions needful, etc.


DOWA, Printed 1654

To the Reader.
THese ensuing Controversies were found in a learned man's study dead nine years
since, and commended to the care of a Friend, who dyed soon after him; or
otherwise they had been printed long since with the foresaid Title, by the
Author himself, prefixed u^ to them: desiring not to have his name or any
dedication added unto them, but this, That many learned Friends had read and
approved them, and that he heartily wished they might help to convert unto the
true faith of Christ's Catholic Church, such Protestants as should read them,
which I wish also: his Friend,

Whil^st he lived, T. B.

A Table of the several Controversies.
1. OF the Holy Scriptures, page 1. 2. Of Christ's Catholic Church in general,
not colourably now among Christians, the first part, page 14. The second part,
page 30. 3. Of the Bishop and Church of Rome page 48 4. Of Traditions needfully
added into the Canon of Scripture page 69 5. Of Protestancy begun here in
England under Queen Elizabeth. page 82 6. Of the holy Eucharist, page 92 First
part concerning our Saviors real presence therein, ib. Second part, page 101
7. Of honoring Saints and praying to them, page 109 8. Of reverencing of
Saints Relics, page 116 9. Of holy Images kept and honored by us, page 120
10. Of Purgatory and Prayer for the dead, page 131 11. Of Sacramental
Confession, page 135 12. Concerning the number and effects of Sacraments, page
145 13. Of Free Will, page 157 14. Of Calvin's Solifidian Justice, page 16^ 15.
Concerning the merit of good Works, page 169 16. About the possibility of
keeping Gods Commandments, page 177 17. Of Feasts and Fasts Apostolically
ordained, and neglected both by English Calvinists and Independents, page 183
18. Concerning praedestination, page 191
THE First Controversy, Of the holy Scriptures.
WHerein our Adversaries do notoriously wrong us, and make simple people
believe that we, Catholics, yield no more authority to sacred Writings, then
our Church allows them: Whereas we firmly believe them to have been inspired
by God, and therefore attribute a divine and infallible authority unto them,
when they are sufficiently declared to be such, and truly Expounded unto us.
For without the former condition, to wit, an undoubted knowledge of them, no
man can securely rely on any doctrine contained in them; and without the latter
condition of being rightly understood, all Heresies have been formerly, and may
now also be drawn pernitiously from them: So as about these two points, our
Adversaries and we chiefly, and indeed only differ.

They (for example) Calvinists especially, for a certain knowledge of them,
rely upon-their own private Spirit, and an imaginary light shining to all
faithful Readers of them; no less clearly distinguishing true Scriptures from
false, then light by our eyes from darkness is discernable by us: which
internal light is a mere Chymaera, (say we, and other great Protestants with
us) by Calvin purposely devised, to accept or reject what Scriptures he liked,
and interpret them as he pleased, without any authority to control him: which
is (as St. Austine told Faustus his Manichean Lib. contra ^um 13. c. 5
Adversary) to take away all authority both of Church and Scripture, licensing
every man to believe what he lifte^h.

Whereas we Catholics, for a certain knowledge of true Scriptures rely upon
the exterior and infallible t^stimony of Christ's Church, by himself warranted
unto us, when he commanded us to hear and obey, such as he appointed therein
to govern and guide us, no less then himself.

And whereas Calvin deemeth it a thing very inconvenient, and against the
Majesty of Scripture, to be subjected to men's judgments about declaring the
sacred authority thereof: we say no, and prove it to be no more inconvenient
for Scriptures then for other points of Faith to be made known by the Church's
testimony unto us. And if the holy Scriptures have been written by men divinly
inspired, and guided in the penning of them, (as assuredly they have been) why
may they not also by men assisted by the holy Ghost be made known infallibly
unto us? especially sithence they cannot give testimony of themselves (as
Hooker and other chief Protestants Lib. 2. sect. 14. Lib. 2. sect. 4, and 7.
Lib. 3. s^ct. 8.
have proved) because if part of Scripture should give credit to the rest, that
very part might be doubted of likewise: Unless, besides Scripture there were
something els^ that might assure us, which he acknowledges to be the authority
of Christ's Church: Insomuch as Egidius Hunnius a chief Colloquio Ratisbonen si.
Lutheran Divine, and sixteen others with him at Ratisbone, before sundry
Princes of Germany, were by Gretzerus and Tanner, Catholic Divines, enforced
to admit the Church's testimony, and historical tradition (as they c^lled it)
altogether needful for an undoubted knowledge of Scripture; as heretofore many
forged Scriptures have been rejected and others approved by it: Albeit they
proceed not conformably therein, by not admiting into their Canon all Books and
parts of Scripture so approved. For if the Churches testimony be false in
declaring some Books, surely it cannot be certain in declaring others, and so
we can receive no infallible assurance from her.

Turtullian notwithstanding prescribes Lib. 1. praescript c. 6.
this for an undoubted truth, that what the Apostles preached, and Christ
revealed unto them, cannot be testified unto us, but by the Churches which they
founded: and St. Austine so affirmed the same, as he says, He Tom. 6. contra
Epist. fundament. cap. 5.
would not believe the Gospel, were it not that the Church by her authority
commended the same unto him. So far was he, and other Fathers from dreaming of
Calvin's inward light, communicated to all faithful Readers of Scriptures;
wherein the Lutherans might claim an equal share with him, as his Companions,
and so they might agree about their Canon of Scripture, as now they do not, nor
with any ancient Church before them. Lib. 33. contra Faustum cap. 6.
Whereas St. Austin speaking of our Canon, which himself amongst other African
Bishops, had declared in the third Council of Carthage, as St. Innocentius the
first, had done before him, and many both Popes and Councels Epist ad Exup^rium
have done since; those Books, (says he) by the consent of Christian Churches
and Bishops of them succeeding each other downwards from the Apostles, have
been warranted for true Scriptures unto us, and are only denied by you
(speaking then of the Manicheans, as we do now of Protestants) few in number,
and lately risen, because they make not for your Doctrine.

And whereas they provoke us to the Originals, to wit, the Hebrew and Greek
Texts of the old Testament, and seek by what means they can to disgrace our
Vulgar Edition: We answer them first, that they themselves in their
Translations of Scripture, follow sometimes the Greek, sometimes the Hebrew,
and sometimes neither, but other extravagancies; yea, and often our Vulgar
Translation, as they find this, or that, or a third, or fourth most convenient
for them. Secondly, we tell them, that we hold it more wholesome for us, to
drink the water of a pure stream, then of a troubled fountain; for that all
learned, and impartial men know the Hebrew, and Greek Originals, to have been
by Jewish Rabbis, since St. Hierom's time; and Grecian Heretics altered and
corrupted in many places; whereas our Vulgar Edition is held in most parts
thereof to be the same, which that great Doctor at Pope Damasus entreaty
corrected in the new Testament according to the Greek; and translated in the
Old out of the Hebrew, by St. Austin in sundry places, Lib. 10. de Civit. dei
cap. 43.
highly extolled; thu^ also mentioned by Doctor Whitaker against Reignalds,
Hierome I reverence, Damasus I commend, and the work I confess to Page 241. in
cap. 1. Luc. v. 1.
be godly and profitable for the Church: So as Beza himself is enforced to
confess our Interpretor to have translated the holy Books with marvelous
sincerity and religion. And Pelicanus in his Preface on the Psalter, which in
our Edition is not St. Hieroms, affirms the Interpretor thereof, to have
expressed the Hebrew Text with great learning and fidelity, not doubting him to
have been some prophetical person.

And many other chief Protestants have highly commended the whole Edition
generally used in the Church; as Doctor Covel against M. Burges has affirmed
for 1300. past: whereas Protestants with sharp and virulent censures, mutually
condemn each others translations; Zuinglius (for example) and very justly
condemns Luther for having, in his German Bible, changed, and left out, not
only words, but whole Sentences: And Oecolampadius his Bible printed at Bazil,
is censured by Beza, to be a sacrilegious corruption of Scripture. Betw^en
himself also and Castalio like censures have passed, and been published of
their different versions with greater bitterness then beseemed Christian
Doctors. Carolus Molineus condemns Calvin, and says, that in his Harmony, he
makes the Text to leap up and down as he pleases. Broughton has noted
multitudes of errors in all our English translations; and King James in the
conference at Hampton Court affirmed plainly, that he had never amongst them
all seen a good one; and judged that of Geneva to be the worst amongst them: So
full of incertainties are these new Doctors in the total sum (as I may say)
of their Religion, wholly depending upon the true knowledge of Scripture: For
that in their opinion no point or practice of Faith, is to be admitted, which
is not expressed, or gatherable by a clear and immediate consequence out of
Scripture; a tenent which shall be by me afterward in every controversy
disproved.

In the mean time, to their pretense, that St. Hierome denied those very Books
to be of a sacred and infallible authority, which they have rejected from the
Canon of Scripture. I Answer first, that St. Hierom, as a private Doctor, might
easily err in his opinion of these Books, before our Churches Canon was fully
declared and accepted. Secondly, I Answer, that when Ruffinus objected this
unto him, In Apologia 2a. contr^ Russinum.
he called him Sycophant, and said, that he had only uttered what the Jews,
not himself, thought of those Books, and professed to translate Judith, because
the first Nicene Council had declared the same to be canonical, albeit the Jews
then denied it to be so. Neither does it make much against the sacred authority
of those Books, that the Jews admitted them not into their Canon of Scripture,
because all, or most part of them were written since Esdras composed their
Canon, and who can doubt but that Christ's Church might better from them
Apostles, than from the Jews come to know true Scriptures.

And whereas some Protestant Divines pretend against those Books, because they
were not written in Hebrew; as though no Scriptures could be written in any
other tongue: I can tell them here also, that it has been discovered and
confessed of late even by Protestants themselves, that the two Books of
Machabees, were first written in Hebrew, and so was Ecclesiasticus, which S.
Hierom testifies himself to have seen in Hebrew, bound up together with the
Proverbs of Solomon. As for the absurdities pretended by our Adversaries to be
found in those Books of Tobias, Judith, and Hester, many of our chief Divines,
as Canus, Bellarmine, Serrarius, and others have cleared them, and showed no
less difficulties to be found in other confessed Books of Scriptures. That
some ancient Fathers also, when many forged Scriptures were extant, and not
distinguished from canonical writings doubted of, or denied the authority of
some Books admitted by us, is an argument that proves over much, or just
nothing: for that we know many undoubted parts of Scripture have been
questioned in a lik^ manner, the Churches Examen having in time discovered the
verity of them.

And albeit no one of those Books denied by Protestants wants the testimonies
of ancient Fathers to prove the said sacred Authority; yet are there two of
them (in former times especially) so approved, Sapientia and Ecclesiasti^us;
the first of them was written (as St. Hierome witnesses in his Preface on the
Books of Solomon) by Philo a Jew, long before our Saviors time, wherein he
compiled the Sentences of Solomon not contained in his own Books, but by
tradition other wise conserved; this Book is cited for true Scripture by S.
Hierome himself, yet with this restriction Cui In c. 8 and 12 Zacha. iae in
cap. Esaiae and in 18. H^^r^^iae.
tamen place^ librum recipere, if any man will receive this book; and without
it in his latter Writings; for then perchance, he saw the Canon of Scripture
more fully declared. St. Ireneus Apud Eusebi um li. 5. Hist. c. 8. l. 5. and 6.
stomatum bomil. 12. in Leviti. cum and lib. 8. in epist. ad Romanos. He^^si.
63. homilia 33. and 34. in Math.
also long before him cited it for sacred, so did St. Clement of Alexandria, so
did Origin, so did S. Athanasius in Synopsi, and orat. 2. contra Arianos, so
did S. Basil lib. 5. contra Eunomianos, so did S. Gregory Nissen in testimoniis
ex veteri testamento cap. de Nativitate Christi ex virgin, so did S.
Epiphanius, S. Chrysostom, S. Ciprian, S. Hilary in Psalm. 127, S. Ambrose li.
de Salomone cap. 1. S. Austin and others highly extolling the Book, as
Exhortatione ad martyrium.
teaching all sorts of virtue under the general notions of Wisdom and
Justice, and containing in the second Chapter thereof a clear Prophecy of our
Saviors Passion, killed by the Jews, because he made himself the Son of God,
etc. which alone is sufficient to prove the divine authority of this Book.

Ecclesiasticus also was written by Jesus the Son of Sirach in Hebrew, and
translated by his Grandchild into Greek, as appears by his short Prologue,
before it worthily called by some Authors Panaretes, a receptacle, to wit, or
storehouse of all virtues, fit to instruct all sorts of Persons, and
containing, as I have said, of Sapientia Salomons dispersed Sentences
diligently by the Author collected, held by some also to have been one of the
72. Translators, and divinely inspired to write this book cited for Scripture,
by St. Clement of Alexand^ia, by Origin, Lib. 1. paedagogi. c. 8. hom. 8. in
numer. and homil. 1. in Ezechiel. O^at. 2. in Julianum
by S. Cyprian de opere and Elcemosina, by S. Athanasius in Synopsi and li. de
virginitate, by S. Basil in regulis disputatis responsione 114. by S. Gregory
Nazianzen by S. Epiphanius heresi 76, and in Anchorato, by S. Hilari, by S.
Ambrose, by S. Chrysostom, by S. Austin, and sundry in Psalm. 144 lib. de bono
mortis c. 8.
other chief Fathers; yet able to prevail nothing at all with men heretically
swayed to the contrary. So as the Nicene Councels Decree about the Book of
Judith, is slighted also, and regarded nothing at all by them.

The second Controversy, Of Christ's Catholic Church in general, not
colourably now amongst Protestants.
The first Part.
FOr a good beginning of this Controversy, I wish my Reader, if he be no
Catholic, seriously to consider with himself, how much it imports him to
find out Christ's true Church, and to make himself a member thereof; because a
Christian man (says S. Austin) ought not to fear any thing more than to be
separated from Christ's mystical body, for that so he remains no more a
member of him; nor can he be quickened with his holy Spirit, nor receive any Li.
de unit. Eccl^.
Light or Life of Grace from him; they remain not (says St. Cyprian) with God,
who live not concordiously in the Church of his Son: for should any out of the
same fry in flames; that Death would be no crown of Faith, but a punishment of
infidelity: such may be killed, but not crowned.

This Church was to be that Hill cap. 1.
of our Lord prepared on the top of mountains, which Esaias spoke of raised above
other hills, whereunto the Gentiles should flow as a Sea, saying unto each
other, come let us ascend unto the hill of our Lord, and to the house cap. 54.
of Jacob, to wit, Christ and his Church etc. willed by the same Prophet to
enlarge the place of her Tents, to spread out the Curtains of her habitation,
for that she should increase on the right hand, and on the left: and cap. 60.
that her Seed should possess the Gentiles; that her gates should be open day
and night, and never shut; that the people might enter continually into her;
that Kings should be her cap. 42.
nursing Fathers, and Queens her Mothers, etc. And it cannot be doubted, but
whatsoever is spoken in the Psalms and Prophets in a hundred several places,
concerning the propagation, greatness, glory, and continuance of Christ's
Church and Kingdom here on earth, wherein all Psalm. 71. and 2.
Princes to the ends thereof were to adore him, and Nations serve him, has
been and shall be accordingly fulfilled.

To say therefore, as commonly our Adversaries print in their Books, and preach
in their Pulpits, that this once glorious and Catholickly dilated Church of
Christ has fallen away from the true faith and service of him, by becoming
Antichristian, Idolatrous, and abominable in her Rights, and Superstitions,
some say 800. some say 1000. some 1360. years together; yea, and to have
declined in her Doctrines, from the very time of the Apostles first Planters
thereof, and only Enarrat. in Psalm. 101.
to have remained in a few hidden Believers of Protestancy, but not daring to
profess it in our Churches, is (as S. Austin termed it) a most false,
temerarious, blasphemous, and witless assertion; contradicted by many plain
Predictions of the Prophets, and Promises of Christ himself, showing that this
City built upon a hill cannot be hidden, that this Tabernacle of God placed in
the Sun to illuminate the world with the heavenly Rays of her doctrine cannot
be obscured. That the blood of Christ once shed to redeem souls, shall never
for that purpose be fruitless and un-effectuall. That Hell gates shall never
prevail to overthrow that building, by himself on a rock firmly established,
against them. That Gods Covenant made with men to save the world by his Sons
death and passion, should never be frustrated, and made void by any power of
the Devil, or wickedness amongst them.

Because God himself speaking thereof, says thus, The heavens shall Esaias c. 9.
vanish away like smoke; the earth also shall ^remble and wear away like a
garment; but my salvation shall last for ever; and my justice shall never fail;
and again (says he) I will place my tabernacle amongst men, and be their God,
and they shall be my people; and the Gentiles shall know that I am their Lord,
when my sanctification shall be for ever amongst them. Daniel likewise speaking
of Christ, says, That his power shall be an everlasting power, and his
kingdom shall never be broken, or taken from him. Cap. 2.
Micheas also speaks most plainly of Christ's Church, whereunto cap. 4.
all people shall flow, and our Lord shall reign over them for ever. Our
Redeemer (says Esaias) shall come, and remove all iniquity from Jacob, and this
says God shall be my league, my spirit which is in thee, speaking to his Son,
and the words which I cap. 59.
have put into thy mouth shall not depart from it, nor from the mouth of thy
seed, nor from the mouth of thy seeds seed, from henceforth and for ever.

Which Texts so plainly proves the continuance of Christ's Church, and the
truth of heavenly Doctrine therein remaining to the worlds end; as Calvin
himself in his Exposition thereon writes thus; Here God promised that the
Church should never be deprived of that inestimable blessing of being still
governed by the holy Ghost, and maintained in the truth of heavenly doctrine;
because it would have little availed us, to have had the Gospel once preached,
or the holy Ghost for a time only given unto us, unless he remain continually
with us, etc. Wherefore our Lord promised here to remain still with his Church,
and to have a care that it shall never be deprived of true Doctrine: which
being Calvin's own words, may well serve to show his plain contradictions in
other places about the Churches having fallen away for many ages together from
the truth of heavenly doctrine, first planted in her; and to prove likewise,
that all pretended reformers of her catholic, and ever continued faith, have
been impostors only, and produced naught else but heretical innovations from
the first, to the last of them.

For if Christ had a will and power to build this house of God, and firm
foundation of truth as St. Paul calls the Church, so surely on a Rock as
Hell-gates, Heresies, to wit Schisms, Scandals, Persecutions, or any hellish
power else, should not prevail against it (as he expressily promised): if he
Mat. 6.
likewise intended to remain with it to the worlds end, by his power, to wit,
of guiding and protecting it: if he Mat. 28.
performed his repealed promises of sending the holy Ghost to abide ever with
it, for no other end but to comfort Jo. 16. and 17.
guide, and lead it unto all truth, how without blasphemy, and plainly accusing
him of falsehood in his promises: Can any Christian affirm her to have been
idolatrous and Antichristian in her Religion for many ages together? evacuating
so the glory of Contra Luciferianos.
our Saviors Cross (says St. Hier^m) and subjecting himself to the Devil,
as able to bereave him of his Church and Kingdom. God forbid (says the same
Father) that Christ should be said to have died in vain, and his Passion become
at any time fruitless and ineffectuall to save us: No, no the eternal Fathers
promise is fulfilled, willing his Son to ask him, and he would give for an
inheritance all nations of the Gentiles unto him, and the utmost bounds of the
earth for his possession; Esaias 62.
called therefore by the Prophet Esaias, Lord of the whole earth: and it will be
Apo^. 7.
a jo^f^ll and eternal cry of Saints in Heaven, Thou have redeemed us, O Lord
God out of every Tribe, Tongue and People, etc.

So as I may say here to Protestants, what St. Optatus told the Donatists, if
you seek to shut up the Catholic and Universal Church into corners, and Lib.
2. co^tra Parmenionem.
seclude all nations besides your selves from the communion thereof, where is
that then, which the Son of God has merited for us? How then will his Fathers
promise be fulfilled of giving all Nations unto him? Why do you infringe his
promise, and seek to streighten his ample Kingdom? why do you deny his Fathers
great love and bounty to him? why do you war against his merits? and not permit
him to enjoy what was promised unto him? why do you limit to places and times
his Universal and everlasting Dominion? Wherefore to find out this true Church
of Christ, and distinguish the same from heretical conventicles, and
Congregations, the Apostles in their Creed, and the two first general Councels
of Nice, and Constantinople have fitly assigned these four marks of being,
one, holy, Catholic, and Apostolical; which no other Church, but ours, can in
their true sense colourably claim, here briefly declared by me.

She is said to be one and the same in her Faith amongst all Nations,
communicating Lib. de unitat. Eccl^s.
with her, so that illuminated by our Lord (says St. Cyprian) as a Sun she
spreads her Rays throughout the world, yet so as her light is one: as a
fruitful Vine she extends widely forth her branches; but as from one root,
and body which they grow in: as a full and flowing fountain she powers out her
streams, yet so as there is still one head and origin of them. And according
to St. Optatus his comparison, the multitude of particular Churches remains
in her, as many fingers in one hand distant in places, but united in Doctrine:
for that the very name of a Church imports Union and collection of many
together, in faith, government and practices of Religion, as all those things
do, unto which Christ's Church is likened; for example to a kingdom, to a City,
to a house or family, to a flock, to a body consisting of different members
ordered, and compacted together. She is one by a continual Succession of
Pastors and faithful people in her, still professing the same faith: whereas
Heretics are choosers of what they will believe, and divided into so many
sects, as there are heads almost amongst them.

She is called holy as the mystical body of Christ vivificated by his holy
Spirit, governed by a holy Law, sanctified by Sacraments continually by him,
having none but faithful servants of their divine Lord remaining within her,
amongst whom there are still to be found, many holy Persons; whilst others are
like fruitless branches in a Vine and dead members in a living body.

She is said to be Catholic for her large extent, embracing many Countries and
Kingdoms of the world united in faith, and governed by her; so that she is
still greater than any sort or Sect of Heretics opposite unto her.

She is Apostolical in her descent, as being able to prove her Origin from the
Apostles themselves, according to Tertullians prescription, saying, The

Apostles founded Churches in diverse Cities, and appointed Bishops to govern
them; and from these, latter Churches, by receiving and persevering in their
faith, become Apostolical also: which prescription is used by ancient Irenaeus,
instancing against Heretics Lib. 3. c. 3. lib. 4. c. 36.
of his time, the succession of Roman Bishops in one Sea and Faith, without any
mutation different from that first professed by them. St. Optatus likewise, and
St. Austin have done the sam^, and pressed the Donatists, with this
prescription, who like to the Heretics of this time wanted antiquity, and had
no unity amongst them.

Wherefore our Adversaries fly from those ancient marks of a true Church, and
assign two others of their own devising, true preaching of Gods word, and a due
administration of Sacraments, against which we object first, that the essence
rather than the sig^es of a true Church consists in them. Secondly, that all
sorts of Heretics do equally claim them, so as no Church can be known to be a
true Church certainly by them. Thirdly, that any man, desirous to be a
Christian, must first know the Church, before he can know the truth of her
Doctrine etc. Fourthly, that this judgment of the Churches true doctrine, and
due manner of administration of Sacraments, cannot be made by ordinary persons,
but by such as are learned; whereas the sign^s of a Church are to direct all
sorts of persons to the knowledge of her. Fifthly, these marks may be found
amongst Schismatics, damnably separated from a Catholic, and charitable
communion with other Christians, as S. Austin in sundry places proved against
the Donatists, who (at their first rising at least) wanted neither a true
Doctrine, nor Sacraments; but a will only to live peaceably with their
Brethren: so as to speak truly, Protestants have purposely devised these marks
of a Church, as otherwise knowing, that the great division, which is amongst
them in points and practices of faith, novelty of rising, the smalness of their
extent hitherto in the world, and want of pastoral succession, would convince
them to be a rabble only of Heretical Conventicles, jarring one against
another. Yet rather than they will admit ours to be the true Church of Christ,
in whom these signs may be found confessedly by themselves, and all
predictions of the Prophets exactly fulfilled, concerning the amplitude, glory,
and continuance of Christ's earthly inheritance and kingdom: they will make him
a King without any Dominion, a Head without a body, a Father without a family,
and a Pastor without a flock, for many ages together: Y^a, if we will believe
some of them, Christ's Church was no sooner settled in the truth of heavenly
Doctrine, but it d^clined superstitiously and wickedly from it. The Centurists
(for example) in their second ^^p* 4.
Century, after a denial of Saint Denis Areopagita his known Works, because
they contain many points and practices of Doctrine against them, have accus^d
St. Ignatius, who lived with our Savior himself, and wa^ both for his life and
death gloriously renowned for speaking of Priests, Altars, Sacrifice, and
several Orders of Church Ministers not admitted by them, of Colleges, of
Virgins and Widows, vowing to live chastely; concerning the merit of good
works, and other declinings, from the first purity of Christian Doctrine. They
accuse St. Irenaeu^ for mentioning a Sacrifice according to the Order of
Melchisedeck instituted under the forms of Bread and Wine by our Savior
himself in his last Supper, taught by him to the Apostles, and offered since in
all parts of the World according to Cap. 1.
Malachies prediction thereof, and figured long before by Melchisedeck's
oblation, etc.

Others say Christ's Church failed in Constantines time, when it first began as
a bright Sun to break out of the ^ark clouds of ten horrible Persecutions, and
spread its beams clearly throughout the world to the excessive joy of
Christians; as if at that very time Antichrist had begun his reign, when
Christ's Church most flourished: because then Pope Silvester, a most glorious
Confessor of Christ, had the City of Rome for his residence assigned unto him,
by that glorious Emperor; and they are enforced to this Blasphemy, or else to
allow of our present Church and Religion undoubtedly professed in Constantines
time, by the Sacrifice of the Mass solemnly celebrated with lights on the
Altar, with Prayer for the Dead, Honor done unto Saints, adoration of the
sacred Host, and kneeling before it, images used in Churches, etc. as is in the
Protestants Apology for Catholics, plainly proved in a whole Chapter together.

Others affirm the utter overthrow of Christ's Church to have happened in the
time of Pope Boniface the third; so as it has been no where since vouchable,
and visible in any part of the world, but wholly r^tired to the hearts of some
faithful Persons knowing, but not daring to profess true Religion; members
indeed of a Church framed only by imagination, and fancy, and living perchance
in the land of Faries, or ^ome inchant^d Islands, or in Concaves of the Moon out
of this world, where there is no memory to be found of them: whereas our
Catholic Church, even in the horriblest times of persecution, was by the
glorious Martyrdoms of innumerable Saints, men and women, children also amongst
them, Apologies written in defense of our Christian Religion, meetings of
Bishops, learned expositions of Scriptures, and in many other manners
maintained, as is now testified unto us.

Wherefore, other Protestant Doctors not to trouble themselves with such
fopperies of an invisible Church, remaining still in ours for so many ages
together, affirm our Catholic Church at all times to have been the only
Catholic and known Church of Christ; but not to have been altogether free from
erroneous Tenants, and practices of doctrine, reformed forsooth by them since
Luthers and Calvin's departure from it. Yet so as the Authors of this opinion
differ about the imagined errors of our Church: some affirm them to have been
fundamental, damnable, idola^rous, and Antichristian, which is the same, as to
say, that during so many ages, Christ had no true Church at all: whilst others
make a milder judgment of them, and say, that the being of a true Church was
not hindered by the belief and practice of them, so as they agree not in the
very being, before Luther of their Church and Religion.

The second part.
AND because they pretend our Church and Religion to have been resormed by
them, they shall give me leave here, Comment. in cap. 1. ad Galatas.
orderly, my Reader must know, that the first father of these Reformers, was
Martin Luther an Apostate Friar, of St. Austins order; who as he writes
himself, lived chastely and well in his Monastery for fifteen years together,
but after his departure from it, he became S^^m. de Matrim.
by his own confession a very monster of Lust; no more able to live without a
woman, than he could leave to be a man, or forbear natural necessities of
eating, drinking, spitting, and c. and luxury at one time so raged in him as
for eight days together, he could neither pray nor study; and shortly after to
assuage the heat thereof, one night after Supper he married forsooth, and took
for his Bedfellow, Katheriue Bore a lusty Nun, after eight years of her
religious profession: which troubled so much his friends, and Melancthon
chiefly, that in an Epistle to Camerinus, You know, says he, the manner of
Luthers life; wherefore I had rather you should conjecture the rest, then I
write thereof; only I may say Luther is not a man made to live without a
woman: which surely was no great commendation for an apostolical man, as he by
his discip^es is pretended to have been.

Carolastadius, Luthers first Scholar, Priest and Dean of Wit^enberg Church,
and Father of modern Sacramentarian Here^icks, fierce, unlearned, and void
almost of common judgment, as Melanct^on described him, prevented his Master
in a like marriage, and was quickly followed therein by Peter Martyr a Priest
and Canon Regular, and by Martyr Bucer a Dominican Friar, who both took Nuns
for their B dfellows: and soon after Oecolampidius a Brigitan Monk did the
same, and Bernardius Ochinus a Capuchin with him, drawing others like
themselves to follow their example: insomuch as Zuinglius Priests and Canon of
Constance, Operum ejus tom. 2. sol. 110.
with the rest of his f^llows in Swizzerland so much longed to have this
Evangelical liberty of wiving also granted unto them, as they humbly petitioned
the M^gistrates of that country for the same; as having already, not without
scandal of others, experienced their own infirmity, and unablenesse to live
without women.

Calvin in like manner an under-Pastor of Noion, after he became Luthers
disciple, had his Idoletta, a Widow of Strasburg, and Beza his Candida, truly
called Claudia de Nossa, with whom he lived four years before he married her,
enjoying her and Audibert his boy at the same time; as himself in a wanton Poem
expressed his lustful delights, wherein he seemed to have had most pleasure in
his Boy, and to be much troubled, that he could not enjoy them both together.
So as men may truly say with St. Paul of these men, that sowing in the flesh,
they reaped corruption. And if in the mean time you ask them, who dispensed
with their Vows, that of Chastity in particular, whereby they were doubly tied
to live continently, most of them, at least Priests and religious Persons.

Luther forsooth, will tell you for his part, in a whole Book together; Lib. de
votis
that the law of Christ is of Faith alone, and binds no man to the observance
of Vows, as not warranted in Scripture unto him. Peter Martyr also in a like
treatise will make you believe Lib. de ^^e^^. bat. and ^o^^^
if you list, that Vows are Judaical observances, and belong not to Christians.
Zuinglius will answer you, that St. Paul dispensed with all Vows of Chastity
sufficiently, by saying, It is better to marry than to burn.

And Calvin more cholerickly will tell you, that Continency ordained In
harmonia ad cap. 10. Matt. and in cap. 7. 1. Epist. ad Co^inthios.
for Priests, was an Antichristian Tyranny; and Vows of Chastity the Devils
nets to ensnare souls, pronouncing with great Authority all Christians to be
free from the observance of them.

But St. Paul was not of these men's mind, when he pronounced such Widows, as
had given their faith to 1 Timothy 5.
the Church of living chastely, and married afterward, to have acquired
damnation to themselves: and the Apostles, as Saint Epiphanius testifies,
Heresi. 61.
taught it to be grande scelus, a heinous crime to marry after Chasti^y vowed
unto God. The same also is expressly Can. 6.
defined in the great Council of Calcedon. St. Basil likewise, and St. Austin
on these words of the Psalmist, Vow you and render your Vows to God, affirm the
same: and many other chief Fathers have taught, that the observance of Vows
rightly made, is both a natural and divine Obligation, seconded by all School
divines in that Assertion, and particularly St. Chrysostom, Epist. 2.
writing to Theodorus a fallen Monk; St. Austin also unto Armenterius, one of the
same stamp, expressly affirm the very thought of wiving after their Vow of
Chastity, to have been sacrilegious and sinful in them.

Concerning their manner of reforming our Church, diverse great Authors have
observed, that Luther began not the same in an Apostolical way, as a Sheep
amongst Wolves; but rather as an enraged Woolf, seeking to devour the souls and
bodies of men together: as when for example, against Tom. 2. Jenensis. 132.
the Bishops of Germany, he published this roaring Bull: Now you Bishops and
ma^ked Devils, look to your selves, for Martin Luther will publish a Bull of
Reformation, which will trouble you: whosoever shall help to destroy you, and
root out your Authority, are true Christians and Gods Children, etc. and
contrarily such as seek to defend and maintain you, are damned persons, and
Imps of the Devil, and c. So as presently upon the publication of this Bull,
the Clowns of Germany armed themselves, and invaded the Territories of Bishops,
not sparing likewise some t^mporal Lords supposed to favor them, but with such
ill success, as more than a hundred thousand of them are said to have been
slain in sundry places by troops of expert Soldiers sent against them, so
little pitied by Luther afterward, as he would have them killed like Dogs
without mercy, because they had somewhat exceeded his Commission: whose
railings in the mean time against sundry great Princes, and our King Henry the
eighth amongst them, only for being opposite to his new Doctrine, were
scurrill, filthy, ribauld, and wholly unbeseeming the tongue or pen of any
Christian man, and much more of an Apostolical Person; and his especial hatred
to the Pope and Church of Rome was such, and so impotently expressed by him, as
should it (said he) be decreed in a general Council, that Priests might marry,
I for my part, would think him more holy that Tom. 2. Jenensis. 214.
k^pt a Whore or two, and would not marry, then do as the Council permitted
him; and I would counsel all mine to do so.

Calvin also began his Sect with Rebellion at Genua, as the same also was Vide
Gasparem Valenbergium cap. 8.
maintained in France, Scotland, Poland, and other places: and so did Zuinglius
with war against his own Country, wherein himself was killed and many other
armed Ministers with him: so unlike were they at their first coming to
Apostolical Persons.

The Vocation likewise of these new Evangelists was neither immediately from
God, nor mediately from men, by any orderly lawful H^b. 5.
succession from Pastors before them; against that of the Apostle, No man
assumeth honor, or spiritual government unto himself, but called as Aaron
was: So Christ glorified not himself to be our high Priest, etc. and as he was
sent by his Father, so sent he his Disciples, saying unto them, As my Father
sent me, so do I send you. And this mission has been by a continual
succession of Pastors, In Locis communibus class 4. cap. 20.
still continued in the Church. So as like Thieves they enter not by the door,
who intrude themselves into Ecclesiastical Offices, and charge of Souls without
it: Wherefore Luther himself, speaking of such as stole into the Office of
Preaching, being not lawfully sent; examine (says he) whether they can prove
their Vocation; for God never sent any man, but either by others lawfully
called, or by miracles able to prove their Vocation, no not his Son himself.
And Writing to the Senate of Melhuse, he repeateth the same Doctrine, and
concludes, that wheresoever God changes the ordinary manner of calling, he
always miraculously testifies his Mission.

Let then our Adversaries, according to this rule, tell us whether they were
sent mediately by men, or immediately Lib. de ne^essitate reformandi Ecclesiam
ad Carolum 5.
by God to reform our Church? Calvin I know writes that he, and his fellows,
in a pure zeal of glorifying God, and saving Souls, were enforced to depart
from our Church. And Beza affirms it to have been lawful for them, to follow
an extraordinary calling, when no ordinary was to be found or scarcely any. But
with these answers they satisfy not Luthers demand; where are those Miracles,
wholly necessary to testify this immediate Vocation? Has now for these
hundred years past, any Protestant Minister, cured so much as a lame Dog to
prove his Vocation? Wherefore Doctor Seravia in his Defense against Beza,
writes thus, That Vocation, which is immediately from God, is never without
Miracles and extraordinary signs done in proof thereof. For that it is a thing
full of danger; and all sorts of Heretics (albeit never so absurd) may claim
it in a like manner, and rely upon that alone, no man ought to thrust himself
into Ecclesiastical Offices.

Wherefore Bullinger, writing against the Anabaptists, You pretend (says he)
to be sent as the Apostles were, prove your Vocation by signs and miracles,
which you will never do: wherefore your calling is naught and pernicious to
Christ's Church. The like is written by Amandus. Polanus, Andreas Musculus, and
other chief Protestant Writers. And therefore the holy Fathers St. Athanasius,
St. Hilary, St. Hierom, St. Austin, and Tertullian doubted not to call such as
took upon them ecclesiastical ministeries without being lawfully called unto
them, false Prophets, Wolves in sheeps garments, thieves, entering not by the
door, to kill, and destroy the flock of Christ, Children without fathers, etc.
Those Lib. 4. c. 43.
(says St. Irenaeus) being only true Doctors, and securely in Christ's Church
to be followed, who with the truth of heavenly Doctrine have had their
Succession from the Apostles.

The Ordination likewise of these men was, and is still suitable to their
Vocation in all Sects and Assemblies Lib. de doctrina and moribus Secta.
of them; of which George Wicelius, a learned man, who lived in Luthers time,
and saw the beginnings of them, writes thus, They reject the Roman Rite of
Ordination, and without more ado, he, whom the Visitors like, is sufficiently
called to the ministry, elected and ordered amongst them. Neither is their
manner of Ordination yet fully agreed upon: so as since that time, several
Sects therein observe different fashions; and particularly amongst the
Calvinists, the Elders are to choose and approve such as are to be ordered, and
together with their Minist^r, Impose their hands on them, wher^in their
O^dination chiefly consist^th: neither holy, nor much to be regarded according
to Luther^ Doctrine, who to vilifi^ the Sacrament of O^der, and take away all
use thereof in Christ's Church, expressly affirms all sorts of Persons, men,
women, and children to be in their very Baptism m^dePriests and Bishops;
admitting no Tom. 2. Wit^enb^rgens^ sol. 90. and l. de capt. Babiloni^a.
distinction at all between Clergy men and Lay persons, as Tertullian in his
Prescriptions said of Heretics in his time. One is a Bishop this day, and none
to morrow; another a Priest now that was none yesterday, for that all amongst
them, are admitted to Priestly Functions. Neither does Luther stay his madness
here, but says, that the Devil himself in humane shape may conescrate the holy
Eucharist, and administer other Sacraments if he will have a right intention
therein, and do what Christ commanded, neither (says he) would I lay a wager
to the contrary, but that he has at one time or other played so the part of a
Pastor, perchance in their Churches, who have scarcely any thing but Baptism
sacred amongst them.

Lastly, Concerning Church Government, and particularly that of Geneva,
craftily devised by Calvin to gain thereby to himself and his Ministers the
government of that City, as Hooker in his Preface of his Ecclesiastical Policy,
modestly declares it; and Bancrost more roundly relates the manner thereof; I
may after many learned men's judgments written of the same, rightly affirm it
to be a politic confusion of Civil and Ecclefiastical power together. A
diabolical invention of establishing Christ in his Throne, as they term it; but
indeed of disturbing the peace of States, and subverting the government of
Christian Kingdoms under a color of propagating the Gospel insomuch as
Bullenger, who had somewhat helped Calvin in his erection thereof, seeing the
inconveniences ensuing from the same, and writing to the Bishops of England,
compared these Consistorial Lords, not in title, but in power, to the seditious
Tribunes of Rome, wont to gain power and honor unto themselves, by moving
tumults amongst the people.

Gualterus likewise his successor in Zuirick, admonished in one letter the
Bishop of London, and in another the Bishop of Eli, to look in time to that
Genevian Hydra, rising then with new heads amongst them; in whose Consistories
each Minister has Pretorial, and Episcopal power enjoined together, as able
with his ignorant Elders, to examine and punish with Excommunication first, and
greater penalties after wards, if he be not obeyed, all sorts of Delinquents:
And these Elders are in Cities, Towns, and Vilages, for the most part ignorant
Tradsmen, chosen and put in authority for a year only, and then returned to
their shops again: without any manner at all of consecration, yet able that
year, whilst they are in Office, to determine with their Ministers, and
conclude seditious Councels of War against Princes and States, which they live
in; of which France, Flaunders, Scotland, Poland, and other places are able to
affo^d dreadful examples.

And in setting up this Destruction (as I may rightly ^erm it) of all ancient
Church government, Calvin has misappli^d the word Presbyter, and giv^n it to
his Elders. For albei^ according to the Gre^k and Gramm^tical signification
thereof, it may signify any E^d^^ in ag^ or authority: yet according to the
Ecclesiastical, and sacred use thereof, even in scripture it self, it
signifi^th a Priest consecrated and ord^in^d to offer the sacrifice of our Lord
bod^, and blood at the Altar, administer S^craments, and preach I ad Tim. 5.
to the people, according to St. Paul's words, affirming such Priests to be
worthy of double honor, as labor in the word and doctrine, d^stinguish d from
the Laity, and ^x^rcis^^g their hi^^^ Office of governing under Bishops,
Christian People committed in several Churches to the government of them, having
under them for the ministry of the Altar; Deacons, Subdeacons, and other
inferior Church Officers, as glorious St. Igna^ius in his Epistles
particularly m^ntioneth them. What (says he) Epist. ad Trallian^s.
is the Bishop but Father, Prince and Head of the Clergy? What is Priesthood,
but a holy institution of being Counselor, and assistent to the Bishop? What
are Deacons, and c. but helpers of Bishops, and Priests in performing a clean
and immaculate work, as most blessed Stephen did to James, Timothy and Linus to
Paul, Anacletus and Clement to Peter in serving them at Mass, distributing the
Chalice to the people, keeping and dispensing the Treasures of the Church, as
St. Laurence told Sixtus his Bishop desirous to be Martyred with him. Priests
are good and Preachers of Gods Word; Epist. ad Smi^nenses.
but the Bishop is better than they: honor him as the Father of Priests, and
chiefest of them, resembling God himself, and like unto Christ amongst his
Disciples, and c. And writing to his own Church at Antioch, I salute (says he)
the Priests and Deacons, Subdeacons, Lectors Acolathists, Cantors, Doorkeepers,
and c. your College of Virgins, etc. having then particularly written unto
Hero his Deacon, and told him how our Savior had revealed unto him, that he
should next in that See succeed him. So as the whole order and form of
Ecclesiastical government used in the Apostles time, is there according to all
degrees thereof declared by him.

Calvin therefore and his Companions in changing the same, have done, as if a
few Rebels invading some part of a great and well s^tled kingdom, should
change the old laws and government thereof, to be new in that as in other
points of their Doctrine, and refusing to follow those therein, of whom Christ
said, He that hears Epist. 1. c. 4.
you hears me, and of whom St. John said, He that knows God hears us, and
ho who knows not God hears us not; in this we know the spirit of truth and
the spirit of error. Christ having before told his Apostles, and such no doubt
as succeeded them in the government Joan. 15.
of his Church, I will send unto you the Holy Ghost, and he shall give
testimony unto me, and so shall you, etc. joining so together the inward
teaching of the Holy Ghost, and outward teaching of the Church both to be
embraced, and obeyed by all her children. For albeit (says St. Austin) he
uttered all Enarrat. in Psalm. 47.
these promises to his Apostles, cum illis loquebatur, no^ intelligebat, yet
speaking to them he meant us also, who were to the worlds end to succeed them,
for whom he prayed, and obtained the Holy Ghost of his heavenly Joan. 77.
Father, not to remain for a time, but for ever with them.

The third Controversy, Of the Bishop and Church of Rome.
NOt as it is the Patriarchial, and particular Church of that City, but as it
is head and chief of all other Churches subjected unto it. And I do not here
without hearty grief ent^r into this Controversy, whilst I consider with my
self how violently, and virulently our Adversaries, have after the accustomed
manner of other Heretics before them, by preaching, and writing slanderous
untruths, made not to men and women only, but even unto very children, the name
of Pope, Papistry (as they call our Catholic Faith) hateful, and scarcely
with patience to be mentioned amongst them; notwithstanding all learned men
know, that anciently the Church of Rome has been for the profession of her
faith, and glory of her Martyrs renowned above other Churches: so as thirty
three Bishops successors of S. Peter in that Chair, were slain in that City for
Christ amidst their flocks, and innumerable Martyrs with them, after the two
chief Apostles Peter and Paul had planted by their preaching, and watered with
their blood the true Doctrine of Christ, therein thus extolled by Calvin
himself, after many Lib. 4. insti. tut. c. 6, and ^
untruths uttered by him.

I deny not (says he) but that the ancient Fathers do yield every where great
reverence to the Church of Rome, and speak highly of her, calling her, for
honors sake, the Apostolical S^e of the West, as freer from troubles, and more
firmly retaining her first Faith, than other African or Grecian Churches:
W^ence it came to pass, that holy Bishops injured, and driven from their Sees,
retired thither as unto a Port of Safety, and have been from time to time, by
the Authority of Popes, righted and restored to their Churches. Others also in
questions and doubts of Religion have repaired unto them: St. Policarp (for
example) Disciple to John, and ordained Bishop of Smyrna by him, came to Pope
Anicetus about the due observance of Easter, a^ St. Iren^us, Eusebius, and St.
Hie^^me have left written. And St. Irenaeus after him came to Rome, as
Tertullian recounteth, about condemning some Heresies then n^wly rising. Origin
likewise, as St. Hierom testifies, submitted Epist. ad P^machiu^ and Oc^anum
himself to Pope Fabian, and recanted some doctrines written by him. Saint
Cyprian in like manner wrote many Epistles to Pope Cornelius, about sundry
businesses of his Church; and the Novations then beginning to be troublesome
unto him. St. Athanasius and many other Bishops of Egypt, and Libia together
addressed themselves by a most humble and earnest Epistle to Pope Foelix the
second to crave of him a true Copy of the Nicene Council, which the Arians had
in all places burned and suppressed, to demand also a restitution to their
several Churches, and to be redressed in other wrongs done unto them: for that
the relief of wronged Bishops, and other chief businesses of the Church, for
the eminency of hi^ authority over all Churches and Bishops, belonged unto him,
as it had been declared by the Father^ of the Nicene Council, at which some of
them selves had been present. And accordingly he that will read the Epistles of
St. Leo, and St. Gregory, both surnamed great, for that high and holy esteem
which the Christian world is known to have had of them, shall find them, as
other Popes had done before, to have exercised authority over all Eastern and
Western Bishops as Causes happened, even Patriarchs themselv^s without
exception, howsoever this certain truth be by Calvin impudently denied.

Insomuch that the very next Popes to St. Peter, so holy in their liv^s, and
glorious in their Martyrdomes for Christ, that it would be an impious temerity
for any man to object (as some of our Adversaries have done) any affectation of
Pride and Ambition unto them, are known by the prerogative of their Chair to
have both claimed, and exercised this Universal Authority: Tom. 1. Conciliorum
Epis. 3.
Saint Anacletus (for example) the fourth Pope after S. Peter, has these
words, This holy and Apostolical Church of Rome has obtained, not from the
Apostles, but from our Savior himself a Supreme and eminent power over all
Churches, and the whole flock of Christ, when he said unto the most blessed
Apostle, Thou art a rock, and upon this rock, I will build my Church, etc. S.
Victor likewise so claimed this power and exercised the same over other
Churches, as he excommunicated all Bishops of the lesser Asia, for their
Judaical and obstinate observance of Easter; for which S. Irenaeus blamed him,
not because he wanted authority, but for that he had used therein overmuch
severity. S. Calixtus in his Epistle ad Benedictum expressly affirmed the Church
of Rome needfully to be obeyed and followed by all Churches, as Head and chief
of them. The like authority was challenged, and exercised by all these holy
Popes, living within the first 300. years after Christ, Antherus, Fabian,
Lucius, Dionysius, Foelix the first, Marcellus, and others.

Neither were holy Fathers in that time, less earnest in defending the Supreme
and Universal Authority of the Roman Church, than Popes themselves. S. Irenaeus
(for example) calls Lib. 3. c. 3.
the Church of Rome the great^st, most ancient, and best known Church, founded
by the two most blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, etc. Whereunto for her more
powerful principality, all other Churches were to be conformed in the doctrine
of Faith, and practice of Religion, naming Popes until this Li. de pudicitia.
time succeeding each other. Tertullian likewise from the succession of Bishops
in that See numbered by him, prescribes against Heretics the truth of
Christian Doctrine, calling the Bishop of that Church, Episcopum Episcoporum,
Bishop of Bishops, and Father of the Catholic Church. S. Cyprian, in a like
manner; after he had declared how Christ promised to build his Church on S.
Peter, and commended the government Lib. de unitat. Eccles.
of his flock unto him, says, that albeit, all the Apost^es received like
Authority from Christ, yet that Peter was ordained chief of them, and that all
faith was from his Chair chiefly to be received, saying, That no Heresi^s would
rise in the Church, if this one Priests Authority were duly acknowledged, and
obeyed as it ought to be.

S. Hilary having praised S. Peter for Can. in Mat. 16.
his Confession of Christ, cries out, Oh happy foundation of the Church,
designed by that new name Cepha^, a rock, imposed on him worthy of that
building, which shall stand firmly against Hell gates, etc. Saint Chrysostom
in more than ten several Hom. 87 in J^. and ad populum Antioch. 39, 42, 49. 80.
and 87.
places* plainly acknowledges the pre^minency of the Roman Church, and Bishop,
above other Churches and Bishops, by the dignity of Peter's Chair therein
continued. S. Hierome professed himself albeit he lived in the East, under
other Patriarcks; to be a sheep of Peter's flock, and to be conjoined Epist. 2.
ad Damasum.
with his Chair, and succession of Roman Pastors therein, as knowing Lib. 2. c.
51.
Christ's Church on this Rock to have been raised: And S. Austine demanded of
Petelian a chief Donatist, why do thou call this Apostolical Chair the Chair
of Pestilence? as now our Adversaries do the Seat of Antichrist, the Beast of
seven heads, whereon the Whore of Babylon is said to have ridden; not
distinguishing between that City, and Church therein, ever most holy and
renowned, whilst that City Mistress of the world, when S. John wrote his
Apocalips, persecuted the same for 300. years together, purpled her self with
the blood of Martyrs, making all Nations of the earth drunk with the poisonous
cup of her Superstitions, so as Rome was to the Church of Christ in that City
and other places, as Babylon was an^i^ntly to the Jewish Temple, a powerful
and hateful Enemy, and is called therefore Babylon, by S. Peter, in the end of
his Epistle, when he wrote, The Church which is in Babylon, saluteth you.

Which is so clearly acknowledged in her supreme and Universal Authority by S.
Austine, S. Optatus, S. Ambrose, and a multitude of other Fathers, as I could
produce here a double Jury of them: Wherefore Calvin dissembled and lied
notably, when in his Epistle to Cardinal Sodalet, he pretended to aim at no
other reformation of our Church, but to reduce it to that belief and practice
of Religion, which was in the Greek Church, whilst Basil, Chrysostom, and the
Fathers of that time lived, and used in the Latin Church, whilst Ambrose,
Austine, and Hierome were in it. Whereas he rejects in innumerable places the
confessed doctrine both of these and more ancient Fathers; and many times with
plain con^umelies and reproaches vented against them, as will appear af^erwards
in each Controversy. When also he professed no less fraudulently, and falsely
to believe and admit of all doctrines, and practices embraced in the Church of
Rome, during the first 500 years after Christ: he meant nothing less; for that
when the Belief, and practice of the Church in the three first Ages is objected
against him, and new points of his Doctrine; his answer is, that even then the
Church of Rome was not so pure, as it might in all doctrines, and practices of
Religion be securely followed.

With the same fraud also he makes Lib. 4. instit. c. 9. number. 8.
profession to embrace the first four general Councels, as teaching and
decreeing nothing but conformable to Scripture. Yet where it is urged against
him, even in this very Controversy, that in all these four Councels the Popes
supreme and universal authority is plainly acknowledged, Chastity enjoined to
Priests, Vows taught to bind in Conscience, and the like points of Catholic
doctrine proved out of them, he rejects their authority farther, than it is
by Gods word warranted unto him; and not only deni^th what they teach of the
Popes authority, but most impudently averreth many notorious falsehoods: For
example he denith Saint Peter's having been at Rome, no less testified by
ancient Authors and monuments, than that Augustus once reigned in that City;
and despairing to make good such an impudent assertion, he denies him at least
to have been Bishop of that City for 25 years together, against the clear
testimony of S. Hierom, following Eusebius, writing In Cronic* Anno 44.
thus long before him, Peter a Galilean by his country, the chief Bishop of
Christians, after he had founded the Church of An^ioch went to Rome, where
having preached the Gospel as Bishop of that City for twenty five years, was
crucified there under Nero with his head downwards, because himself desired to
die so.

Sermon. de SS Petro and Paulo.
And S. Leo, of S. Peter's first coming to Rome, m^keth this speech unto him,
Thou had already, most blessed, Apostle established the Church of Ant^och,
and by thy evangelical p^eaching converted unto Christ's law, Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia and Bithania, when thou broughtest the Trophy of Christ's
cross into the Roman arches, whether by divine ordination the honor of power,
and glory of thy passion went before thee, that the faith of Christ might there
chiefly flourish, where the Devils Tyranny had chiefly raged, extending from
thence thy spiritual Power into more kingdoms and Countries, than formerly
the Roman Captains by their many conquests had Ser. 3. de ass^m. ej^s ad
Pontific.
obtained; Christ having especially chosen thee to govern all Nations converted
unto him, and preferred thee before the other Apostles and governors of his
Church, when he thrice committed the feeding and government of his flock unto
thee, and promised to build his Church firmly upon thee.

Which high Office and Power was no doubt to be extended to all true and
lawful Successors of him: For as Christ's Church and Flock was still to
continue, as has been already proved, to the worlds end; so were the
Governors, and government thereof to be in the same manner still continued,
and not during S. Peter's time only, whose authority given by Christ, differed
in this from that which his fellow Apostles received likewise from him, that
theirs was delegated only, and to end with their Persons, whereas his was
ordinary, and to be derived (so far as the government of the Church required)
to his Successors after him, which whosoever denies proudly unto them, says
S. Leo, he damneth himself, but lesseneth not that authority, which is given by
Christ unto them. And that which was uttered by our Savior, and understood
chiefly of himself, may be truly applied unto S. Peter, and all lawful
Successors of him, Vicarial heads, and secondary foundations of his Church
established on them, wherefore he that falls on this Rock shall be bruised,
and on whom it falls, it shall crush him.

For that all such as have at any time heretofore forsaken the unity of this
Church, and refused obedience to S. Peter's Successors in that Chair, departing
from the faith thereof, have dashed themselves against this Rock, and only
foamed out their own confusions, as may be instanced in all ^^^^ticks of former
times; whereby the other three Patriarchical Seats of Alexandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem, have been first corrupted, and afterward with Mahumeti^m
overwhelmed; as now likewise has almost happened unto the Churches of Greece,
after they had been ten several times unit^d to the Church of Rome, and fallen
again from it; who yet never arrived unto that fra^^tick and witless folly of
Protestants, affirming the Succession of Popes in S. Peter's Chair, even almost
since the Apostles time for 1000. years (at l^ast) past to have been
Antichrist, that single man, and professed enemy of Christ mentioned by S.
Paul, who is certainly to be received by the Jews to reign in Jerusalem, and
tread the holy City under his feet; to sit as a God in the Temple reedified by
him, to kill Enoch and Elias there, the two faithful witnesses of Christ, lying
afterward three days together naked in the Streets of that City: the glory of
whose reign is to continue but three years and a half, called by Daniel, and S.
John, a time, two times, and half a time, numbered by forty two months, or which
is all one by 1260. days; when Christ shall shorten the rage of his
persecution for the good of his elect, and kill this wicked man with the breath
of his own mouth. All which particulars contained in Scripture, one by one, can
no more agree to the whole Succession of Roman Bishops, than to the Turkish
Emperors, for these thousand years past; nor indeed so much, because these
have had the possession of Jerusalem for many ages together, and ever have
been enemies to Christ and Christians: whereas Popes have ever been his
faithful Servants, his Vicars here on earth, and chief Pastors of his flock by
his own Ordination.

So as nothing could have been devised more injuriously to Christ, or more
derogating from his glory in redeeming us, than to affirm (as in effect they
do) that the Devil timely prevailed against him, for the overthrow of his
Church, and that also by the Roman Bishop and Chair of Peter, whereon as a
Rock he promised to build, so firmly, as hell gates, to wit, no power of men,
or Devils, should prevail against it. In the mean time, if ad These. 2.
we will with holy Fathers and all ancient, or modern Interpreters examine that
obscure place of S. Paul, concerning the mystery of iniquity working in his
time, it was not understood of Popes: but of Heretics beginning then to rise,
and preparing a way for Antichrists coming; for which cause they are called by
S. John Antichrists, as by corrupting the true faith, forerunners of him. And
never any Sect or sort of Heretics, did perform this wicked Office against
Christ and his Church, more than modern Heretics have done in their pretended
reformation of our Church and Religion.

Whose malice against the Bishop of Rome is so far extended, as even that
blessed Apostle himself, whose Chair they succeed in, is so undervalued by
them, that they seek to deny many especial privileges of our Saviors love
toward him, magnified by all ancient Fathers, and Interpreters of Scripture
before them; as his having been from his first calling by the imposall of a new
name, designed by Christ to be the head and foundation of his Church; and under
the title of his Flock, thrice commended the same to his government; prayed for
him that his faith might not fail; willing him to confirm his Brethren. He
prayed not In quaest. Novi testamenti q. 75.
(says S. Austin) for James or John, or any of the rest, but for Peter alone,
that his faith might not fail; because on him, as a sure foundation next to
himself, the firmity of his Church chiefly depended. So as from this Text the
un^rring judgment of him and his Successors in points of Faith, has been as
well by ancien^ Fathers, as later Divines, rightly gathered. Neither can it be
convinced that any Bishop of Rome has, as a private Doctor, erred in any point
of Faith; much less guided the Church amiss, by falsely declaring any point,
or practice of Christian Doctrine.

And if amongst such a multitude of most Learned, Holy and eminent Persons,
which in the Sea of Rome, have from age to age succeeded each other, some few
have been blamefull in their lives, as one amongst the twelve Apostles was a
Judas, and another amongst the first seven Deacons, is commonly held to have
been horribly vicious in his life and doctrine; yet prejudiced not the sanctity
of the rest, nor the holiness of their Function; for why should the glory of
other good Popes come to be obscured, or the high authority of that See be
lessened by them; Such scandals being some of those gates of Hell, which were
permitted by Christ to be opened against his Church, but never to overthrow it.
Yet I may truly say here, that in numbering and naming such Popes, Protestants
have notably erred; and with great malice made Boniface the eighth, and other
Popes, black and abominable in their lives, who by the certain testimonies of
most holy and learned persons, living in the same age; and time with them, were
very good, holy, and zea^ous Bishops, and wrongfully defamed by unconscionable
wicked men, professed adversaries unto them.

And should any Pope swarve in any point from the professed and known faith of
Christ's Church, and in any public manner prof^sse his error; there would not
(as our Adversari^s teach) be wanting in the Church, authority or means enough
to ^e^ose, or rather declare him to be no true member of the same, and so no
more h^ad thereof: which is spoken of a thing in the air, and that will never
h^ppen. Neither is it to be marvelled at, that we Christians should b^lieve
that the chief Pastor and Head of Christ's Church* for whom himself prayed that
his faith might not fail, for the confirmation of his Brethren in their
Christian and Catholic profession, should be in^allible in his public
teaching; sithence the High Priest of the Jews, a type only and figure of
ours, was to be so strictly followed and obeyed in his doctrine, as the
refusers of his sentence were by death, and no less penalty to be punished:
and such as sat in the Chair of Moses, and exercised that power, which was
provided by God for the instruction of his People, were by our Saviors
command, notwithstanding their bad lives, to be followed in their doctrine, and
can we think that he would leave his Church void of such an external, and
infallible means in all points and practices of faith to rely on?

For should the Churches teaching be held fallible and uncertain, even
scriptures themselves might be questioned in their authority, approved (as I
have said before) by her testimony and tradition, as other declared points of
doctrine. And to say that this infallible authority should be more in the flock
than in the chief Pastor thereof, more in the body than in the head, more in
the family than in the father and governor of it, more in a general Council
than in the Pope, who has authority to call and confirm it, is an extravagant
opinion of some divines, and has little color of truth in it: especially
considering that sundry great and general Councels, not following the Popes
sentence and directions, given either by their Letters, or Legates in them, have
perniciously in their Decrees, and scandalously erred: Whereas it cannot be
proved that Popes alone have in their doctrines so failed. Neither has it in
former times been held necessary for resolving doubts in matters of faith, or
for condemning Heresies risen against them, to have a general Council
presently called; but Popes alone have commonly performed that Office,
acknowledged by chief Fathers in all ages to belong unto them; so as amongst
many others, which might here to that purpose be instanced by me, St. Hierom
writing to Pope Damasus, about admiting 3 hypostasies in the deity, or not,
because that word then was of a doubtful signification, tell me (says he)
whether I shall admit them, or not, as a sheep I ask help of my Sheapherd; I
know not Vitalis, I refuse to believe M^lesius, I am joined to your beatitude
alone, and c. And in this kind of language have other ancient fathers written
to sever^l P^p^s to have qu^stions and doubts of faith resolved by them: which
they would not have done, had they not believed our Saviors prayer, that their
faith should not fail, to h^ve been heard for them by his eternal Father, and
that a peculiar assistance of the Holy Ghost was promised unto them.

The fourth Controversy, Of Traditions needfully added into the Canon of
Scripture.
OUr Adversaries, under a specious pretense of following, in the Doctrine and
practice of Faith, Gods word alone contained in Scripture, seek to overthrow
amongst Christians all true belief, and Religion, for admitting what scriptures
they list themselves, and interpreting them as they please, is in effect to
have a Religion of their own making; no less absurd, than if in Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, Subjects were permitted to interpret laws of themselves without
admitting Judges to determine of them, or any authentical Declaration of them;
so as every man may to his own advantage in suits and controversies expound
them, and defend any cause, how bad, and unjust soever it be by them: And that
pretense of Protestants to believe nothing which is not either expressed in
Scripture, or by a clear and immediate consequence gatherable from it, is a
false brag and purposely devised to exclude the Churches teaching, and deceive
ignorant people, unable to note how ungroundedly, and without sense many times,
texts of Scripture are cited by them, to prove their own and impugn our
doctrines; insomuch as the Catholic and learned Pastor of Chaventon, a place
allotted unto the Hugonits near Paris, has in sundry Volumes discovered the
fraudulent proceedings of Protestants, about maintaining points of their
Religion: and particularly showed, that no point thereof can be without false
Glosses of their own convinced out of Scripture.

For example, when S. Paul affirms, all scripture divinely inspired, to be
profitable to teach, to correct, to instruct in justice, that the man of God
may be perfect. He does not say, as our Adversaires falsely gather from this
place, that scripture alone can make him perfect in the knowledge of heavenly
truth: for that revealed and unwritten doctrines may serve likewise to increase
this knowledge in him; as when S. Paul willed the Galatians to stick firmly to
cap. 1.
his doctrine, by writing or preaching delivered unto them; and exhorted the
Thessalonians to keep those traditions, which either by his Epistles, or by 2 Thessalonians. 2.
speech they had received from him, pra^sing the Corinthians for observing such
precepts as he had given unto them: When also against Apostolical and certain
tradition they urged those texts, wherein our Savior reprehended Pharisaical
and wicked doctrines, teaching plainly observances against the Law of God;
sometimes also vain things and of no moment; their arguments are mere
fopperies, and prove nothing against unwritten doctrines, such as are the Creed
of the Apostl^s, the translation of the Jewish Sabbath into our Sunday, the
Feasts of Easter, and Pentecost anciently observed, not for the celebration of
Jewish but Christian mysteries, and many other Feasts and Fast^, kept in the
Church from Apostolical tradition; the Baptism of Children, the matters and
forms of Sacraments; and many other doctrines and practices of faith, not
expressed in Scripture.

Where in the mean time, I will ask those m^n, is it either plainly express^d
or by clear consequencies gathe^abl^ from Scripture; that the Commandments of
God are impossible to be observed, that men have no free will to do good or
evil, that the just^st men do mortally offend in their best actions, that
there is no inherent justice or sanctification in us by heavenly graces
communicated unto souls cleansed from sin, but that all are holy by Christ's
justice alone apprehended by faith, and imputed only unto them: that each
faithful man is by an Act of faith to believe, that he shall be saved; no
less surely than Christ himself; that Christ dyed for none but the Elect, and
that others were to have no share in the fruit of his death and passion for us;
that Christ's body and blood are not really and corporally present in the
Sacrament, but by says only: that Sacraments of the new law are signs and
seals of faith only, no graces are communicated at all to such as receive
them, and many such Protestants Tenants besides, which have no true ground at
all in Scripture for them.

And in this pretense of gathering, and proving the faith out of scriptures
only, they imitate many anci^nt Heretics before them: So Maximus the Arian,
as S. Austin in his first In principio.
book against him recounteth, rejects the word Homousion, because it was not
expressed in Scripture; and so did Epist. 174.
Pascentius, (as the same father recounteth) and as S. Gregory Nazi^nzen
relates of Eunomius, he was wont to ask his Christian Adversaries, why they
did name a God, meaning the Holy Ghost, not mentioned for such in scripture,
making so (says he) the sacred Act. 3.
writings of God, a cloak of their impiety. Acasius the Arian, in the Council
of Selevica, used the same words; and so did Eutiches in the Council of
Constantinople under Flavianus, asking the Fathers therein assembled, in what
scripture they found expressed, that cap. 6.
Christ had two Natures conjoined in his Person; neither could he be drawn from
those words commonly used by Protestants; I follow only the scriptures, and
regard not the Fathers Exposition Lib. de natura de gratia cap. 39.
of them. The Pelagians also (as S. Austin cit^th their words) made profession
to believe no more than Anathetisma 7.
what they read in Scripture: So did the Iconomachi, or Image-breakers in the
second Council of Nice; and the Albigenses said the same to S. Bernard, Hom.
66. in Cant.
as himself recounteth. So did the Wiclifests, as Waldensis cites their words,
and proves it still to have been the custom of Heretics, to cloak their
Novelties under a specious and fraudulent pretense of embracing only the Lib.
2. de doctrina fidei cap. 9.
Scriptures by themselves falsely expounded; which is (as there he says) to
follow their own judgments, and not Scripture; consisting (as S. Hierome told
the Luciferans) not in the words, but in the true meaning of them: an
adulterated sense being no less harmfull, than a forged letter to be embraced.

So as this learned Author demanded well of Wicklif, Why said he, should we
believe your lately devised Interpretations of Scripture to prove your
Heresies, more than you believe all the ancient Fathers and Doctors of Christ's
Church in all places of the world and ages before you? for if you tell us that
they were men and might err; I may answer, that you are not Angels, or Doctors
sent from heaven; that Christians now after 1300 years should learn a new Faith
and Exposition of scripture from you; wherein also you differ no less among
your selves than you have done from all antiquity before you; as having no
certain rule of Faith to determine differences between you. And those very
Scriptures, out of which you pretend to gather your Faith wholly, neither are,
nor can be but by the Churches testimony certainly notified unto you: for as
they cannot give testimony unto themselves, nor any one part to the rest; so as
Calvin's inward light pretended to be given unto all faithful persons, for the
knowledge of them, is a mere fancy, as elsewhere I have proved.

And whereas Protestants affirm, that we have in our Church many vain and
unprofitable traditions; yea, repugnant unto Scripture; yet in their authority
equalled by us unto them, they do herein affirm many untruths together; for
that with us all Traditions are not equal in their authority; and such as are
truly Apostolical, and have had their origin from the Apostles, are we say of
no less authority, as the Church retains a memory still of them, than if
they had been by their first Authors written: and we have certain rules whereby
they come to be known infallibly by us The first is taught by S. Austin in
these words, that point or practice Lib. 4. contra Donat.
of faith, not taught in Scripture, nor decreed in Councels, yet ever retained
by the Church, is rightly believed to have from Apostolical authority descended
to us; such is the Baptism of Children, and c. The second Rule is this, if any
point of faith has been unanimously taught by the holy Fathers, and yet not
mentioned in Scripture; it may be securely embraced as an Apostolical
tradition: such is the perpetual Virginity of the mother of God, the number of
the Gospels, etc. The third Rule is, if any thing has been practiced, and
believed still in the Church, which could not be at first by humane authority
introduced, and established, it is to be thought to have come from the
Apostles; such are the matters and form^ of Sacraments, their number, and the
proper effects of them, prayer for the dead, etc. The sign of the Cross used
in Baptism, and other such religious customs, which if as things of light
moment, they should come to be neglected (says S. Basil) and not regarded, the
Lib. de Spiritu Sancto.
belief and practice of the Church in points of greater moment would totter
also, and become weakened in their authority; sithence the Gospels themselves
are not more certainly, than by the Churches tradition, and authority confirmed
unto us. Tertullian with S. Basil teaches such traditions, and Lib. de
pudicitia and de coronam clitis.
so does S. Ambrose, S. Austin, and many other chief Fathers, even such as
lived with, or near the Apostles themselves, as S. Dennis, S. Ignatius, S.
Irenaeus, S. Justin Martyr, Origin, and S. Cyprian, blamed therefore by the
Calvinists 2. cent. cap. 4. 3. cent. c. 4.
for this doctrine.

Eusebius also affirms Hegesippus a disciple of the Apostles themselves, to
have wrote five Books in a simple style, but with great sincerity of such
traditions, as had been left to the Church by them against Calvin's impiety,
peremptorily after his manner, and proudly condemning for sacrilegious and
superstitious, all external rites used in the Service of God, and not expressed
in Scripture. Yet we find that himself in the order of his Genevian
Congregation, has many new rites and ordinations of his own appointment, no
where mentioned in Scripture: presuming so of a power in himself, above the
Apostles themselves to ordain them, for that his must be embraced, and theirs
condemned, and deemed sacrilegious, albeit Lib. 3. ^4.
never so authentically testified unto us. Perchance he had never read, or
little regarded that important question, which ancient Irenaeus proposed about
Traditions, and verities of faith believed by all good Christians, yet not
expressed in Scripture. What (says he) if the Apostles had left no Scriptures
at all behind them, ought we not to have followed the order of Tradition,
which they left unto those Bishops, unto whom they recommended those Churches,
which had been founded by them? and to speak no more hereof, even now in our
time, we know many barbarous Nations, to have received by their preaching, the
faith of Christ, and to persevere holily therein, flying and detesting all
Heresies contrary in any sort unto the same, who as wholly unlearned never had
any Scriptures at all, but only stick unto the Traditions, which were at first
by the Apostles themselves delivered unto them.

And if such Traditions, as are now in our Churches retained, and observed for
the order of divine Service, and decency therein to be used, should be
accounted sacrilegious and abominably superstitious, as Calvin would have them.
The use for example of s^cred Vestments, the sign of the Cross in Baptism,
Prayers said at the burial of the dead, bowing at the name of Jesus, and other
like Ceremonies; that admonition of S. Paul's would come to be neglected,
charging the Corinthians to do all things honestly, or in a seemly 1 Cor. 14.
manner, and according to order in the Church, as we can prove from assured
testimonies the Primitive Christians did, during the first hundred years after
Christ in their public sinaxes, or meeings at divine Service, and Sacraments
together recounted by S. Dennis of Areopagita in his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy
in the 2 or 3 chapters together, by S. Justin Martyr in his second Apology for
Christians to Antonius Pius the Emperor, and by S. Ignatius insinuated plainly
enough in many places of his Epistles, by Tertullian also in his book ^^
pudicitia, and other fathers living in or near unto the age of the Apostles.

And such Ceremonies as are by Calvin so rejected, and condemned in the public
order of divine Service, are thus by S. Austin approved in such things as are
not determined in Scripture, the customs of Gods Church, Epist. 87. ad
Casulanum.
and ancient Ordinations, are to be maintained and observed as laws prescribed
unto us. Neither does Calvin's denial of them to be lawful, because they are
not expressed in Scripture, derogate any thing at all from the anciently
allowed authority of them; and the want of them in his reformed or rather
deformed Conventicles is a notable blemish unto them: insomuch as a great Lord
of France, beholding another H^gonet Lord his friend, after a Pompous Funeral,
caft like a Dog into the Earth, by two ordinary laboring men, without any
Prayer or Ceremony used in the Burial of him, swear that Calvin's Religion was
like a bald man's head without any hair upon it; and another Lord there present
said merrily in answer of him, not without an Oath, that it was a Religion (if
you will call it so) fitter for Beggars than Gentlemen.

The fifth Controversy, Of Protestancy begun here in England under Queen
Elizabeth.
ANd since continued until now, when Puritanism by covert means at home, and
help of Scottish neighbors abroad, came to overtop it, and made an open way to
the destruction of all settled, and constant professions of Faith, by the power
of such as call themselves Independents, as depending on none but themselves in
the choice of their Religion. Queen Elizabeth intended not this freedom of
Sectaries now licensed unto them; nor did she of her self so dislike Cath^like
Religion, but that she could have been contented to have continued the same in
her kingdom, if the Flaw of her Mothers marriage, contrary to the Popes order,
and the act of her own father excluding her from the Crown, had not caused King
Henry the second of France, whose eldest son Francis had newly then married
Mary Queen of Scotland, and next heir to the Crown of Engand to proclaim her a
Bastard, and resolved to maintain the right of his Daughter in law against her.

By which unfortunate occasion her ears were opened unto bad Counselors then
about her, and for their own ends busily persuading her, that if the Popes
power were still obeyed, and Catholic Religion continued among her Subjects,
she could not have any certain hope of enjoying her Crown quietly: and upon
this ground chiefly she was moved to change the ancient Religion of her
Kingdom, which could not be done, but in Parliament; of which I have seen a
daily Relation gotten from Mr. Camden by a Protestant Bishop, and lent by him
for some days unto me.

So as out of the same, I can truly affirm, that such Burgesses and Knights
were cunningly packed out of every Shire and Burrow-town in the lower House; as
for their inc^ination to Protestant Religion, or other private respects, would
easily conform themselves to the Queens intentions. And amongst the Lords in
the highe^ House many great ones, loath to be long absent from their Country
Sports, or by their first Acts to distaste the young Queen, absented themselves
from Parliament, and gave their Proxies to the old Earl of Arundell, a known
Catholic, and the Duke of Norfol^^ his Son in law; not doubting but that they
would do all things to maintain their Religion against all uncermining thereof.
But it proved not so, for the Earl put in to a vain hope of marrying the Queen,
when by his age he might have been more than her father, and the Duke of
Norfolk being neither sound in Religion, and for other ends of his own not
sincere in his proceedings; prevailed by their many Proxi^s, to exclude the
Bishops from sitting in Parliament, all holy and learned men able to have
turned the business as they listed; after which Vote passed, the Queens party
in both houses still prevailed; so as not long after new Bishops in place of
the old were chosen, some come ^r^m Geneva, others out of Germany of different
Religions, yet contented for honor, we^lth, and wives to join in any
profession: Seven of them were Apostata Monks and Friars, and most of the rest
mere Laymen, having neither Ordination nor Jurisdiction, besides that which
the Queen and Parliament could give them: commonly therefore called the
Parliament Bishops, and Patent Prelates.

I know they have tried many ways and fained an old Record to prove their
ordination from Catholic Bishops; but it is false, as I have received from two
certain witnesses; the former of them was Doctor Darbishire, then Dean of S. of
Paul's, and Nephew to Doctor Bo^ner Bishop of London, who almost sixty years
since lived at Meuse Pont, then a holy religious man very aged, but perfect in
sense and memory; who, speaking what he knew affirmed to my self and another
with me, that like good fellows they made themselves Bishops at an Inn, because
they could ^^t no true Bishops to consecrate them. My other witness was a
Gentleman of known worth and credit, dead not many years since, whose Father a
chief Judge of this Kingdom, visiting Archbishop Heath permitted, by Queen
Elizabeth his godchilde, to live in Surrey at the Parsonage House of Cobham,
saw a letter sent from Bishop Bonner out of the Marshalsey by one of his
Chaplains, to the Archbishop, read whilst they sat at Dinner together,
wherein he merrily related the manner how these new Bishops (because he had
dissuaded Oglethorpe Bishop of Carlisle from doing it in his Diocese) ordained
one another at an Inn, where they met together. And whilst others laughed at
this new manner of consecrating Bishops; the Archbishop himself gravely, and
not without tears expressed his grief, to see such a ragged company of men come
poor out of Foreign parts, and appointed to succeed the old Clergy in rich
Deanries, Prebendaries and Canons places: who had such ill luck in meeting with
dishonest Wives, as an Ordination was put out by the Queen and Parliament, That
no woman should for a wife be commended to any Minister without her honesty
could be testified withal sufficiently unto him: and many, who had been
Clergy men before, were urged either to take Wives, or loose their Benefices,
as many were contento do, and follow these Bishops examples.

The Tenants of Faith embraced by the Queen and Parliament were Calvinian
Doctrines, but the form of Church Government was seemingly Catholic, and the
Title of Lord was to the new Bishops constantly to be continued, and all other
Officers under them, as Deans etc. And when some for their own ends would have
had the new Bishops put to pensions, the Queen would not hear of it, as
affecting the ancient splendor in her new Clergy. And albeit Altars were
pulled down, and in place of the Mass, a Book of Common Prayer ordained; yet
the Bishops were to keep their habits, and the Ministers appointed to use Caps
and Surplices, for Decencies sake in time of Service, much disliked afterward
by Puritans at home, and Protestants abroad: So that such professors are called
usually by them Calvino-papiste: Calvinian Papists, Samaritans, half Jews and
half Gentiles.

And the Queen her self was for such ecclesiastical authority assumed by her,
so much disliked abroad, as a chief Protestant Doctor wrote thus to the Elector
Brandeburg of her; Elizabeth Queen of England, has with a temerity never
before heard of, made her self Papissam, a she Pope in all Churches in her
kingdom: And all her Subjects must under great Penalties swear it to be so.
And had she not been for her power useful in those times to the Heretics of
France, Scotland, and the Low Countries in Rebellion against their Sovereigns,
she had been more than she was cried out against by them.

So as it is evident, that in this change of Religion, secular policy chiefly
prevailed to the perpetual disgrace, and shame of such as since have embraced
it.

And a mixture was made therein of many Religions, as the Queen and her bad
Counselors list^d, wholly different from any other Protestant Reform^tions;
d^sli^^d therefore extremely by all several Professors of them; yet so by
prejudice of opinion, education, and custom embraced by many in their
affection at least thereunto; albeit the use thereof be in these times debarred
unto them, as with those foolish Id^laters they still cry out, that their gods
are taken from them: some affecting it the more, because it is forbidden unto
them; others also because the Elizabethian Church Service and Government
carried a greater decency, and outward show of Religion with it, than that
which amongst later Sectaries is now used, in a Song and a Sermon only ended,
without any set form of praying together, not barer of ceremony than void of
devotion; and many times in ex tempore praying and preaching wholly ridiculous,
like it so much as they cannot be drawn from it, even now when it is taken from
them by a prevailing power, unexpectedly raised to depresse Protestants, and
Puritans together, to end also Bishops and Bishoprics with them.

Insomuch as in these miserable times, I deem it to be a needful and high
point of Christian wisdom, for Dialogo ultimo contra Luci^^rianos.
each one, according to S. Hieroms rule, to leave all new Sects, and betake
themselves to that Church, which has unalteredly continued one and the same
profession of faith, since the Apostles time; whilst Novilists have in vain
labored to change it, and are come themselves to nothing: so as wise men will
in succeeding ages with grief and compassion, conclude and deplore the eternal
damnation of such, as have lived and died in the profession of them.

Was there ever (for example) any Heresy since Christ's time, so powerfully
broached and subtly defended, so lastingly continued, as the Arian Heresy for
a long time together; and in so many parts of the world by whole Countries, and
Nations embraced with such a show of Scriptures making for it, and other
arguments produced by learned men to prove it; yet we see now the same by all
good Christians worthily hated and detested, as all modern Sects of Protestants
will after an age or two come to be abhorred, and accounted to have been
miserable Seductions of Souls, and damnable professions of different beliefs
before in the world not so much as heard of, time and truth prevailing to
discover the falsehood of them.

The sixth Controversy. Of the Holy Eucharist.
1. PART.
Concerning our Saviors real Presence therein. PL^inly imported in these
words, when of br^ad blessed in his last Supper, he said, this is my body, etc.
and of Wine, this my ^loud of the new Testament, which shall be shed for many
in remi^sion of Sins, ever literally understood, and believed (says Luther)
L^b. de interpret. v^rborum Caenae.
by Christian Past^urs and People, since the Apostles, calling his
S^cramentari^n Advers^ries Corrupt^rs of Christ's plain words, and mu^derers of
souls by new and false interpretations of them: and I would have (says he)
these brave men, who from Sense and Reason chiefly im^ugn the literal
understanding of them, to tell me why God by his infinite and unconceiveable
power cannot make the same body to be at once in many places; sithence our
Saviors r^peated and express promises of giving us his flesh to ^at, and his
blood to drink plainly require this miracle to b^ done by him for the
fulfilling ^f them. Not distributed by parts, and in their proper forms, as
the Carpharnites carnal^y and gross^ly understand them; but Sacramentally, and
hiddenly under the forms of Bread and wine communicat^d unto us. In which s^nse
St. Paul asked of the Corinthians, the Chal^ice of benediction which we ble^^e,
is i^ not the communication of Christ's bl^ud? and the Bread which we break, is
it not the participation Ep. 1. c. 10.
of our Lords body? to wit under the forms of B^ead and Wine, wont t^ be
cons^crat^d by the Apostles themselves, and distributed to the People,
according to St. Justins words: where speaking of the Primitive Christians,
Apologia 2. ad Antonium.
in their Sinax^s, and public meetings, we receive not in them (says he)
common Bread and Wine, but we believe them to be the Flesh and blood of our
incarnat Lord. For the Bread Sermon de Coena.
(says St. Cyprian) which our Lord gave unto his disciples, was not in show,
but in the nature thereof changed, and made flesh by the omnipotency of Christ's
words, from whom we are warranted to drink blood by Moses, in his law so
strictly forbidden. And St. Catech. 1, 3, and 4.
Cyrill having affirmed the same Doctrine, adds, albeit sense suggesteth the
contrary unto thee, yet let faith confirm thee, that Bread and Wine, after the
invocation of the blessed Trinity are made the Body and Blood of Christ; and he
who refuses to believe In ancorato
so of them (says Epiphanius) loses grace and salvation.

St. Ambrose likewise thus plainly Lib. 4. de Sacramentis. c. 4, and 5.
delivers the same Doctrine; Bread distributed at the Altar is Bread before
Consecration, but after Consecration of Bread, is made the Flesh of Christ, and
let us certainly believe it. But how can that which was Bread be made so? by
Consecration, by what words then, and by whose, is Consecration made? by those
words of our Lord Jesus, this is my body, etc. for when the venerable Sacrament
is to be made, the Priest uses not his own words, but the words of Christ,
etc. and St. Hierome to the same purpose, that Bread (says he) which our Lord
brake and gave to his Disciples, was, as Epist. 1^0. quae est ad Hedibiam.
we believe, his own flesh; and the Challice which he blessed was his Blood:
neither is it man now that consecrateth the Bread and Wine laid on the Altar,
and makes them the Body Homil. de proditione, Judae.
and Blood of Christ, but himself who was crucified for us. (Says St.
Chrysostom) the words are pronounced by the mouth of the Priest; but the
Elements are consecrated by the power of Christ's words, and as the speech of
God, increase and multiply, once pronounced, has force still to effect what he
intended by them; so have Christ's words, this is my body, still power at all
Tables of the Church to perfect the Sacrifice.

He (says Gaudentius) who descended In cap. 2. Exodi.
from heaven, said, the Bread which I will give shall be my Flesh, who being
Lord, and Creator of all things, a^ he produces Corn from the earth to make
Bread, so both he can, and promised of Bread to make his Body. And he who of
Water made Wine, can of Wine make his Blood, etc. think not therefore that to
be earthly which is heavenly. Truth cannot lie, etc. St. Orat. magna
Cate^hetica.
Gregory Nissen likewise bids us to consider; how Christ's Body, received in
many places, and by thousands together, can wholly and entirely be communicated
^^ ^^ch one of them: wherefore I do rightly believe, Bread by Gods word to be
transmuted, or wholly changed into the Body of Christ, and not to remain both
together in the Sacrament; as Luther even Harmoni^ in cap. 26. Matthew.
in Calvin's opinion absurdly affirmed. And indeed all the Authorities of
ancient Fathers hitherto alleged by me, do plainly prove a total change of
Bread into the body; and of Wine into the blood of our Savior, fitly called in
the great Laterane counc^l Transubstantiation.

And that in the distinct Consecrations of our Saviors Body and Blood at the
Altar; under the forms of Bread and Wine is celebrated, his misterious
Sacrifice, according to the order of Melchisedech, and foretold by Malachy the
Prop^et, is so plainly and frequently testified by Ancientest and Chiefest
Fathers of Christ's Church, as when we cite the Testimonies, even of such as
lived Lib. de vera reformatione Ecclesiae,
with the Apostles themselves, Calvin passes on us this mild and modest
censure, Solemn est istis nebulonibus, etc. It is the custom of these knaves,
to rake up out of the ancient Fathers, whatsoever has been written
erroniously, and ^alsly by them: when therefore they object Malachies
foretelling a continual Sacrifice, etc. We answer (says he) that these
Fathers also taught Chri^^s bodily presence in the Sacrament; but so
ridiculously as Reason and Truth enforce us to leave them. Could a Devil in
human^ shape have more proudly or contemptuously censured St. Irenaeus, St.
Justin, St. Cyprian, St. Alhanasius, St. Chrysostom, St. Ambrose, St. Hilary,
St. Augustine, and many others, chief lights of Christ's Church in their time,
for learning and Sanctity highly renowned.

And elsewhere I see (says he) the Fathers, Lib. 4. In^it. cap. 28. Sect. 11.
even the ancientest and chiefest amongst them, to have wrested the memory of
Christ's sacrifice on the Cross, and to have acknowledged therein the face of a
renewed oblation, more than was agreeable to the institution thereof; imitating
so the Jewish manner of sacrificing, more than Christ ordained, or the Gospel
permitted. as if he alone knew better than all ancient Doctors before him, what
Christ ordained in his last Supp^r, even such as had known the Apostles
themselves, or conversed with some of their chiefest Disciples, in his
Commentary also on St. Paul's Ep. to cap. 6. v. 9.
the Hebrews, he has these words, I cannot but wonder to see the ancient
Fathers so preoccupated with the opinion of Christ's corporal Presence in the
Sacrament; but a^ one error draws on another, when they had forged a
sacrifice in the Lords Supper, and adulterated thereby the sam^, they labored
to gather colour^ble Arguments, whereby they might seem to maintain their
error. So as mentioning no further his impudent and unchristian boldness in
accusing so many glorious Saints, now reigning with Christ in Heaven, of
Judaisme, Idolatry and Superstition practiced by themselves, and taught to
others, I will accept here what he so plainly confesses, that all the
ancientest and chiefest Fathers of Christ's Church, held the real presence of
our Savior in the Eucharist, and acknowledged a true sacrifice in the daily
Consecration thereof celebrated still by us, after their example, and our
Saviors institution; mentioned also by St. Paul, blessing Bread and 1 Cor. 10.
Wine, and distributing them as the Body and Blood of our Lord, according to S.
Irenaeus his words, our Lord, saying of Bread, this is my Body, and Lib. 4. c.
32.
confessing the Challice, which he consecrated to be his blood, taught us a new
oblation of the new Testament, which the Church, having received it from the
Apostles, offers to God throughout the whole world, as Malachy had foretold,
and c.

And not to speak of those ancient Li^urgies extant in Greek and Latin under
diverse Apostles names, and proved to have been truly theirs, by many grave and
learned Authors; one^y because Protestants are not pleased for such to accept
them: I will boldly here affirm, that no point or practice of faith can be more
faithfully made known and testified by all manners unto us, and even in
Protestant Authors themselves more plainly confessed, than that this great and
only sacrifice of Christians, has still in all ages since Christ, even until
this very time, both in our Western, and those Eastern Churches of Greece,
Syria, Armenia, E^ypt, and India it self been celebrated: so as yearly out of
those and other parts of the world, Christians come with their Priests unto
Jerusalem, many thousands of them together, having no other public service of
God, but the celebration of this sacrifice used amongst them, never but in
their first Apostolical Conversions taught unto them, and since still retained
by them. And albeit Nestorisme, besides other ancient and condemned heresies,
have crept in lamentably amongst them; yet in a Catholic belief of ^ur
Saviors presence in the Sacrament, and sacrifice of the Mass ordained by him,
there is no disagreement at all between them: and this concord of many Nations
remote from each other, and void of all commerce between themselves for many
ages together, Lib. de Pr^script.
according to Tertullians rule, non error sed traditio est, is no error but
tradition still continued amongst them.

The second Part.
FOr proof of the Mass also I could here, if Calvin's former confession, that
the ancientest and chiefest Fathers acknowledged and celebrated the same, saved
me not that labor; heap up many pregnant testimonies out of their authentical
works truly collected: that being most true, which S. Epiphanius affirmed, that
all the Apostles severally prescribed the order of celebrating this sacrifice.
And St. Isidorus lib. 2. Officiorum, tells us that the Mass used in his
time, in these Western parts of the World, was according to St. Peter's
Ordination, which mysterious and unbloudy sacrifice, albeit in the Host it
self, and chief Offerer thereof it be all one with the sacrifice of the Cross;
yet is it far different in the manner and ceremonies thereof; for whereas, in
that his body and blood were painfully parted, and his death thereby caused, in
this they are only by distinct consecrations of them mysteriously severved.

So as to distinguish these sacrifices we may fitly call that other, the
sacrifice of our redemption, consummated indeed fully by it, and this latter a
sacrifice of Religion, for that thereby the divine persons are highly honored
and religiously served. By that our Savior merited all graces for us, and by
this other, they are applied unto us in a most liberal and loving manner, not
without a most grateful acknowledgement of his effused love, and bounty
exhibited in the other unto u^. So as such a Sacrifice dignifying above measure
Christ's new Law and the Priesthood thereof, well became the infinite, wisdom,
power, and goodness of him that ordained it, ending by his painful death on
the cross the Priesthood of the old Law, and all Sacrifices thereof, and
establishing a new Law, and a new Priesthood therein, according to the order of
Melchisedech, whose sacrifice of Bread and Wine was a Type of this wherein
Christ's Body and Blood consecrated under the forms of Bread and Wine, were
first offered by himself, when he instituted this Sacrifice, and are now still,
and shall be to the worlds end offered by the Ministry of his Priestly
servants, authorized in the oblation thereof to do as he had done before them,
hoc facite in meam commemorationem, do this in remembrance of me.

And whereas Protestants admit this mysterious King of Salem, to have been a
lively type of our Savior in his person, but not in his sacrifice, they
contradict David's plain testimomony instanced by the Apostle, Thou art a Priest
for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech, not of his Person only,
because a new order of Priesthood supposes a new Sacrifice; no less than a
new sacrifice proves a new Priesthood, and by both together a change of the
old Law, is by St. Paul necessarily inferred. For says Ad Heb. 7.
he, the Priesthood being transferred or changed, the Leviticall into that of
Christ, according to the order of Melchisedech; it was needful also, that the
Law should be translated and changed. And those who deny this new sacrifice,
deny Christ's Priesthood also, both by David and St. Paul expressly averred; and
lessen thereby the force of his argument, used thereby to prove the old Lib. de
missa A^gulari.
Law altered and changed, dreadfully making that a negative Article of their
faith, which the Devil taught Luther, when the Sacrifice of the Mass was by
him first denied and impugned, as himself has particularly related* the
disputation then passed between them, who indeed was a fit Master for such a
Scholar; and the Lesson which he learned of him was a blasphemy left by a
Devil, delivered unto him: alb^it the arguments, whereby h^ sought to prove it,
as Luther recounteth them, were inde^d far from concluding what the Devil
sought to prove by them. How much more happily then had Luther blessed himself
from such a teacher, and retained his ancient faith of this h^ly Sacrifice, the
greatest, and gratefullest to God, that by him, who was wisdom it self, could
have been devised: never offered (says St. Chrysostom) by the Priest at the
Lib. de Sacerdotio.
Altar; but Troops of Angels are invisibly about him, ready to adore their
heavenly Lord, God and man offered unto his eternal Father by him, Hom. 5. in
Epiph.
(himself having had the Grace to see them) as Nilus his Disciple recounteth of
him, ordained says St. Eucherius, by the Son of God, that as he offered
himself once for our Redemption, he might in a mysterious sacrifice be daily
offered for us, jugiterqu^ coleretur per mysterium, quod semel offerebatur in
pretium, perennisque illa victim^viveret in memoria, uni^a and perfecta hostia
fide aestim^^^^ non specie corpus effecta, and sanguis Sacerdotis nostri: as a
perpetual sacrifice to make Christ's bloody and painful sacrifice, whereby we
were redeemed daily to be remembered by us, and represented unto us by Saint
Dennis Areopagita in his Ecclesiastical Cap. 3.
Hierarchy, and particularly declared in the whole order thereof, called by
Calvin therefore, to deny the authority of so great a Father, a counterfeit
Hom. 34. in Evangelia.
babbling Author, albeit St. Gregory the Great, more than a thousand years
since, citing a Testimony out of him, called him ancient and venerable Father.
Hom. 2. in diversos.
Origin also long before that cited him by the name of great Dionysius
Areopagita: and Dionysius Alexandrimus his Scholar is affirmed by Saint
Quaest. 4, cad Antiohum. Epist. ad Car^lum calvum.
Maximus, Abbot and Martyr to have written Annotations on his works. St.
Athanasius likewise produces his authority to prove nine orders of angels,
called by St. Chrysostom, as Anastatius Bibliothecarius testifies, the bird of
heaven. And St. John Damascene often cites him under the title of Dionysius,
amongst Divines, the greatest and holiest, to omit innumerable Lib. 2. de fide
cap. 12. and lib. 2. Titulo de Synaxi, etc.
like testimonies of both ancient and latter authors.

This great Father then, in his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, mentions the
Bishops coming unto the Altar, calling it, aram divinam: his incensing likewise
thereof; his intoning the Psalms sung by the Clergy, attending him in the
celebration of the sacrifice, and then causing the Catechumes to be put out of
the Quire, he makes an Oblation of the bread and Wine then to be blessed, and
consecrated by him; washes his fingers at the midst of the Altar, with the
Priests kneeling by him, and after the praising of God in his works, ea
quaesunt divinissima rite perficit, etc. He performs, to wit in consecrating
the Bread and Wine, most divine things, under the Signs then adored by him,
crying out unto Christ, tu dixisti, hoc facite in meam commemorationem thou
have bidden us to do this in remembrance of thee, humbly acknowledging himself
unworthy to celebrate so great a Sacrifice, and beseeching him to open those
sacred coverings and signs unto him, and spiritually clear his eyes, for the
better understanding of himself present under them: which testimony alone of so
great a Father, cap. 3. Apologia 2. ad Antoninum Imperatorem.
confirmed by Saint Justin Martyr, and repeated in all other Apostolical
Liturgies, would be abundantly ^ufficient; to prove our whole Doctrine, and
belief of the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, were not our Adversaries obstinately
bent to reject all such proofs, though never so convincing.

The seventh Controversy. Of honoring Saints, and praying to them.
THe Honor, which we Catholics yield unto Saints, is not that high Honor
called Latria, due unto God only, but such an inferior honor, Genesis 18.
Numeri 20
as Abraham and Joshua yielded to angels appearing unto them, which Honor
being infinitely inferior to the other, given unto God himself, cannot but
falsely and foolishly be called Idolatry, such as Painims yielded to their
Idols, by ascribing Divinity unto them. Whereas Saints are as friends only and
Servants of God, inferiourly respected and reverenced by us, according to
David's words, Thy friends O Lord, are much honored. This kind of honor was in
the purest times of Christ's Church yielded to Saints, as S. Justine Apolog. 2.
ad Anteninum.
witnesses in these words, we are called (says he ( athiests, because we
worship not your Gods: it is true, we acknowledge no such Gods, but one true
God alone, and c. and his only Son, who came from him and taught us to se^ve
him: we reverence the whole Army of his angels, and blessed Spirits of the
Prophets, etc. which honor yielded unto Saints, is by St. Deunis in his
celestial and Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, by St. Ignatius in his Epistles, and
in all ancient Liturgies peculiarly expressed: and in this we believe communion
between them and us, that as we rejoice in their felicity and greatness, so they
secure now for themselves (says St. Cyprian) are sollicitous for us: and the
higher they are now in their own Heavenly glory and greatness, the more
clearly do they know our necessities, and are ready from their divine Lord and
ours to obtain remedies for them.

And if whilst they lived here on earth they might lawfully pray for us, why
may they not now do the same in their happier estate? not hindering, but
increasing their Charity toward us: sithence especially their local
remoteness from us, hinders not their hearing of our prayers directed unto
them; no otherwise than angels know by the testimony of our Mat. 22. Lucae 10.
Savior himself, the secretest conversions here of sinners, and rejoice in
them, Saints being in their blessed estate, like and equal unto them, and
those, who together behold the Charity of their heavenly Lord, in whom Morali
14. and lib. 4, Dialog.
all things are contained, can be ignorant of nothing (says St. Gregory)
belonging unto them, in which sense St, Paul tells us, that we are come to
Mount Sion, heavenly Jerusalem, and City of the living God; to the frequency of
millions of Angels, and the Church of those, who were first conscribed amongst
them, etc. so gone before us, as we are hopeful to arrive unto them, and
become as now they are, fully united unto him, qui est caput super omnem
Ecclesiam, who is head of his whole Church, so as they and we belong to one
body, and have some communion as fellow members under one and the same head
together. Calvin therefore without book, and out of his own heretical fancy,
affirmed the Saints of heaven to be secluded from having any commerce at all
with us, and that they pray in general, but not in particular for us, because
forsooth they cannot hear us: for how (says he) has it been revealed unto any
man, that Saints have ears so long, as to reach down from heaven unto us whilst
we pray unto them?

Which Question had been better made by some Infidel, than any Christian
Author of learning or judgment proposed: for who knows not that pure
Spirits (such as are souls separated from bodies) have a spiritual manner both
of hearing and speaking without ears, tongue, or other corporal senses: so as
it would be no absurd thing, if I should tell Calvin, that Lucifer in hell knew
him very well, and such Heresies as were to the ruin of souls broached by him,
albeit he had no eyes to view his papers, or ears to hear his Doctrines
preached, by the natural light of his understanding in absence also penetrated
by him; which is as ears and eyes unto him: whose substance as we conceive not,
so is the spiritual manner of his understanding things hidden wholly from us,
wherein Angels and Saints in heaven do far, no doubt, exceed him, because they
have a purer and higher light, to wit of glory communicated by God unto them;
and according to his absurd question of long ears for Saints to hear our
prayers directed unto them, a man may well conceive him to have scarcely
believed, that our Savior as Man according to his humane and glorified soul,
hears the prayers of men here on earth directed unto him, or knows their
actions according to which notwithstanding he shall judge them.

Calvin in the mean time could not but know, when he impugned our invocation of
Saints; that we in our addresses unto them, intend nothing else but to obtain
more easily at Gods hands by their intercession blessings, and benefits
needful for us. For if the joint Prayers of two or three here on earth, be
more grateful to God, than of one alone, and more effectual to obtain what we
ask of him; how can it be but profitable for us, to have with our own prayers
the suffrages of Angels and Saints holily conjoined? we of our selves b^ing
sinful wretches, and wholly unworthy to obtain any thing of him; Wherefore as
Malefactors here on earth, think themselves happy, when any favorite of their
Prince will be pleased to solicit their pardon for crimes committed against
him; so are we in a like manner humble suitors unto these Courtiers of heaven,
to become unto their divine Lord and ours, Mediators and Intercessors for us.

Neither does this Mediation of Saints derogate any thing at all from the
mediation of Christ: For that he immediately by himself and in the right of his
own merits advocateth and obtains at his fathers hands what graces he will
himself, and blessings for us. Whereas Saints in a mediate and subalternate way
of Mediation, by him, to wit, and his merits who redeemed them and us also,
become intercessors for us. And this custom of praying in this manner unto
Saints has been so anciently used in Christ's Church, as all Greek and Latin
Fathers almost, whose works are now extant, have approved and practiced it.

Angels (says S. Ambrose) are to be Lib. de Vidu^^.
invoked to our help; the Martyrs are to be sought unto, whose bodies we keep
as pledges of their love toward us. And S. Hierome disputes thus against cap.
3.
Vigilantius, as now I may do against Calvin or any other Protestant, Thou
say in thy Book, that whilst we live, we may pray for each other, but not
after death: But I tell thee, that if the Apostles and Martyrs living here in
bodies, could pray for others, when they cared for themselves, how much more
may they now do that, after their Crowns and victories.

So that if our Adversaries would admit any true Church, or pr^ctice of
Religion before them, they could not but acknowledge this doctrine and custom
taught and practiced in our Church to have ever been truly Christian and
Catholic: but as their heretical Conventicles are newly raised, so will they
have a new Religion believed, and practiced in them.

The eighth Controversy. Of reverencing of Saints Relics.
AS we yield not unto Saints themselves now in heaven a divine honor; but only
a reverend respect, infinitely inferior unto it: so likewise their Relics
are not, but by the same reverenced by us: And our Adversaries sencelesly abuse
words, when they accuse us of Idolatry for yielding this reverence unto them,
these Relics being not false Gods, or things belonging unto them; but
Relics and parts of their bodies, who were Gods true Servants, and either
lost or spent their lives in the service of him, moving us by their very sight
to a like practice of Piety, Fortitude, and other virtues eminent in them. So
as in honoring their Relics, we magnify chiefly Gods graces in them.
Wherefore S. Ambrose speaking of Nazarius, and Celsus bodies, then found out
newly by him, and freshly as it were bleeding in their wounds, why (said he)
should not faithful people honor their bodies, sithence Devils do fear them,
which once with torments they afflicted? Wherefore I honor that body which
honored Christ under the sword, and which shall reign in heaven with him.

So as it is a notorious untruth of the Centurists first, and of Calvin after
C^nt. 2. c. 3. l. de necessitate reformandi ecclesiam.
them, when they affirmed the custom of honoring Relics not to have begun
in the Church during the first five hundred years after Christ; for that Cajus
living in the age next unto Lib. 2. Historiae c. 24.
the Apostles, as Eusebius recounteth, told Proclus his Cataphrigyan Adversary,
that he could show unto him in Rome the trophies of the two Apostles Pete^ and
Paul honored by Christians. And the Chuch of Smyrna in their Epistle of S.
Policarps Martyrdom, disciple to the Apostles themselves, wont for edification
to be read in Christian Churches (according to S. Gregory Turinensis)
recounteth, how the Jews got his body to be burned into Ashes, and thrown into
a River that his Relics might not be honored by Christians, as were in that
very age the De viris illustribus in Ignatio.
remnants of S. Ignatius bones gathered and sent unto Antioch, as S. Hierome
recounteth. Eusebius likewise relates De viris illustribus in Ignatio l. 7.
cap. 14.
great honors done to the body of Marinus by Christians, and how miraculously
Apphianus his dead corpse was brought out of the Sea, and cast on Lib. 8. c. 14.
Lib. 13. praeparat. Evangelit. ^ cap. 7.
shore to have due honors yielded unto it, as being meet (says he elsewhere)
that Gods Friends and Champion^, should have at their Tombs honors yielded
unto them.

Orat. in Theod^si^m O^at. in Julianum Catechesi 18.
Saint Basil in sundry places teaches this honor to be due unto the Relics
of Saints, and so does his Brother S. Gregory Nissen. S. Gregory Nazianzen
likewise and S. Cyril of Jerusalem. S. Hierome also against Vigilantius,
particularly mentions, how solemnly Samuels body was brought in time of
Areadius out of Jury into Thracia, with a continual procession of Bishops,
Priests, and People honoring the great Prophet in his Relics, until they
brought it to Calcedon. St. Et Homiliis de S. Babild S. Ignatio Iuliano, etc
Chrysostom in many of his Homiles ad populum Antiochenum, mentions great
honors done unto the Relics of Saints. And Saint Austine in a whole Chapter
together recounteth those great miracles, which he had seen done at S. Stephens
Relics all condemning by their testimonies the contrary doctrine Lib. 22. de
civit. c. 8.
of Protestants, detesting, destroying, and defacing in several manners Saints
Relics; whereas David tells us, that God will keep all the bones of his
Servant^.

The Nineth Controversy. Of holy Images kept and honored by us.
AMongst other Heresies anciently condemned in Christ's Church, this against the
Catholic use, and veneration of Images has been by modern Heretics
pernitiously again revived; and fitly served them to make us, with ignorant
Persons, seem guilty of Idolatry, by yielding, as the ancient Painims did a
divine honor to stocks and stones, and praying unto them as if they could hear
us: in which imputations they do slanderously, and notoriously belly us, abusing
many ways, simple Persons hearing and believing those assertions against us.
First, for example holy Images representing Christ, or his Saints, or some
other Mystery of faith are falsely called Idols by them; for that an Idol
according to S. Paul is nothing in the world, meaning according to the person,
or thing represented by it, to wit, a God or something else, made only by
imagination and Fancy. Whereas the incarnate Son of God, his blessed Mother,
and Saints, now glorified in heaven, are in our Images or Statues represented
still, or such Mysteries of faith, as were in the great work of our Redemption
really performed: for example, a Crucifix represents Christ, as he hung upon
the Cross painfully nailed unto it, and dying for us, more movingly so
objected to our eyes, than if that sacred Mystery were by an ample discourse
declared unto us. In which true sense St. Gregory called Images, the books of
unlearned Persons, for this and other mysteries of Faith represented in them.

And our Adversaries must be stupidly absurd, if from Scriptures themselves
they learn not to distinguish Images from Idols in their proper signification:
Christ for example is o^t aid to be the Image, but not the Idol ^^ the Father,
the m^n to be the Image, not the Idol of God. And there are many places wherein
the word Idol in place of Image, could not be but absurdly and abusively used.
And who but can blasphemously affirm the two Statues of Cherubins in the inmost
tabernacle, covering with their wings the Arc and propitiatory T^ble, to have
been Idols?

And whereas our Adversaries object against us, that we cut off the second
Commandment, and divide another into two, because our Images a^^ ^o^bid in it,
they belly us, because in ou^ Bibles the holy T^xt is no less in^^r^ than in
theirs, only in our Cate^hi m^s, and books written for the instruction of
common Christians, and Children amongst them, we print not that which they call
the second Command^ment, and we affirm to be a part and e^plication of the
first, commanding particularly the Jews not to make the likeness of Calves,
or any thing ^lse; least then prone to Idol^try, they should yield divine
honor unto it, by adoring it as God himself: of which now there is no danger
among Christians, and so no use of that part of the first Commandment; and
even Calvin himself Exodus 20*
in his explication thereof is enforced to grant, that all sorts of Images or
Statues are not forbidden by it. And it is well known to all learned men, that
many holy Fathers have, as now we do, divided the Commandments, the ancient
Hebrew Text having no division at all in it.

In the mean time concerning that reverend respect, which is yielded unto
Images by us: First, it is not absolutely due, or given to the material Images
or Statues themselves, but as holy Persons and mysteries are represented by
them, unto which our minds and intentions in beholding them ^re carri^d. So
that in such acts the Im^ge or Statue is respectively honored for the person
or mystery represented in it, and they are likewise honored in them. In which
sense S^. Basil said Rex dicitur regis imago non duo Reges, the image of a King
is called the King, nor is he and his image called two Kings, nor is the honor
divided between them; because the honor done to the Image ascends to the
exemplar.

And as in Images different persons are represented, so are different honors
yielded unto them: For example, to the Image of Christ, a higher ^espect is
intended by us, then to the Image of any Saint; because himself is therein
honored; which our dull Adversaries either will not, or do not understand: and
therefore they exclaim against us, and make ignorant people believe that we
adore a Crucifix, as Christ himself. Whereas according to St. Basil's doctrine,
Christ himself is chiefly adored, because the honor ascends unto him.

Concerning the timely use of Images Act. 2. and 4.
amongst Christians, St. Basil, as his words are cited, in the seventh general
Council, affirms them to Lib. 7. hist. dap. 4.
have been ordained by the Apostles themselves: so as Eusebius mentions how
the woman at Paneada cured of a bloody flux by our Savior with the touch of
his garment, erected a brass Statue of him, with a miraculous flower growing
under it, curing all sorts of diseases, when it rose so high as to touch his
garment: which she would not have done had she deemed it Idolatry to erect such
a Statue, or Image of our Savior in memory of that great benefit received from
him. Neither would almighty God have miraculously graced the same, if it had
displeased him, Tertullian Lib. de^pud.
mentions the Image of our Savior carrying on his back the lost sheep, to
be usually engraven on the Chali^es. and St. Methodius in the next age Orat. de
re.
after him, comparing holy pictures of Angels with profane Images of the
G^^tiles, affirms them to have been made for the glory of God. Minutius Felix
likewise blamed the Gentiles In suo Oct.
for hating Christ's Cross (as Heretics now do) albeit such a kind of picture
was fastened on the top of the Imperial Standard, which complaint would not
have been made by him, if the picture of our Savior nailed on his Cross had
not been usual amongst Christians. St. Gregory Orat. de St. Theod.
Nissen tells how much pleased the people were to see St. Th^odorus his
Chapel with holy pictures decently adorned. and St. Basil his brother
inviteth painters to express in a lively manner St. Barlaam, behaving himself
Him. 8.
victoriously in ^^s torments, more perfectly than he could declare them. St.
Austin speaks of our Saviors Image Lib. de con. Evan. c. 11.
wont to be drawn with St. Peter and St. Paul in the same Table.

Neither are the Images of Christ and his Saints more fitly any where placed,
than in Churches, for that as ill pictures are apt to raise ill motions in such
as behold them, so are holy pictures apt to cause in men's minds looking upon
them pious thoughts, and affections.

Neither are the simplest persons or very Children amongst us ^o stupid as to
think them Gods, or to yi^ld, as our adversaries falsely pretend, divine honor
unto them, as the Painims did anciently to their Idols. And indeed the heresy
of the I^onoclasts under two or three wicked Emperors, troublesome sin some
Churches of Greece, by Jews and Negromanticks first introduced, and chiefly
maintained, was at length with so full a consent of the whole Christian world
condemned and derested; as the same Div^l surely was powerful with such
h^reticks, as since again have revived it.

And as they chiefly detested the Image of our Savior hanging on his Cross, so
is the same by Protestants chiefly hated, and was at the first rising of their
Sect pulled down in all Churches, and solemnly burnt, as the proper Dagon and
God of the Epist. ad Phil^d.
Papists: Whereas that holy Trophy of Christ's victory (as S. Ignatius calls
it) and sign of our Redemption, fearful to our infernal Adversaries,
vanquished by the Cross, was so holily reverenced by the devouter sort of
Christians, from the very time of the Apostles, as they usually signed their
breasts and foreheads with it, accounting themselves from all power of Devils
protected by it: so as Tertu^^ian by an exaggeration affirmed Lib. de cor.
milit. ca. 3. and l^b. 2. ad ux. c. 5.
Christians in his time, by frequent making of this sign, to wear out Catech.
4^ and 13.
their foreheads; by which says St. Cyril Christ triumphed over all infernal
powers, and made the very sign of Cross terrible unto them; willing therefore
all Christians frequently on their breasts and fortheads to sign Lib de Is.
and anima.
themselves with it. And so does St. Ambrose give the same advise: and St.
Epist. 8. c. 6.
Hierom writing to Demetriades a virgin, wills her that the exterminator may
have no power to hurt her, to guard her self by this sign as by the letter Tau
(which was a Cross in the old Hebrew Characters) made in the Israelites
foreheads, they were from the Ezech. 9.
killing strokes of the Angel protected. Tertullian uses the same comparison,
and so does Origin, asking Lib. contra Nar^i.
this question, what do Devils fear and tremble more at than to see the Hom.
6. in Exodus
sign of the Cross, by which their power was destroyed, made faithfully by
us? St. Cyprian also says, that Cont. Jud. lib. 1. c. 8. and lib. 2. ^. 22.
Moses held up his arms in form of a Cross, whilst Joshua overcame Amalek.

And that Ezechiel showed, how safe we are when in our foreheads we make it.
Saint Cor^elius Pope says, that Novatian received not the Holy Ghost, because
he was never with the Seal of our Lord signed by any Bishop, Epist. ad Fabium
Anti^chenum. Lib. 4. c. 27.
to wit in Confirmation, wherein this Sign is essentially used. Lactantius
declares the virtue of this Sign in many occasions, and especially in
dissolving Magical Incantations, and silencing Oracles. And Saint Athanasius
affirms the same to Orat. de incarnat. Christi.
have been proved by many examples. Saint Gregory Nazianzene, recounteth
likewise how Julian the Apostata, in an Idolatrous Temple, being terrified at
the fight of many Devils, raised by a Sorcerer before him* ad crucem vetusque
remedium confugit, had recourse to the Orat. 3. in Julian.
Sign of the Cross, a sure remedy against them; and at the making thereof, the
Devils vanished before him. And to say as Protestants do, that Devils fain this
fear, to make Christians continue in this superstition, is a senseless
assertion: as if Devils had been careful that wi^ked Julian, Christ's professed
enemy, should leave his Superstition, or as if that hellish Impostor could so
easily deceive Christian Pastors, and people, using to make that Sign for 1500
years together, yea, and the Tract. 3. in Jo. and 36. in Psalm, 30. concione 3.
and Sermon. 19 de Sanctis.
Apostles themselves, who first (as I have said) caused this Sign in
Administration of Sacraments, and all sorts of blessings to be used, as is by
Saint Augustine in many places expressly affirmed. And he who will read the
life of Saint Anthony written by Saint Athanasius, and of Saint Hillarion
written by Saint Hierome, shall see what a heavenly force they ascribed to the
Sign of the Cross, either made upon themselves, or in the air against Devils,
in dreadful apparitions troublesome unto them, so as by the contempt thereof,
any man may conclude Protestants to be no good Christians, or devout
rememberers of Christ crucified for them.

The tenth Controversy. Of purgatory and Prayer for the Dead.
CAlvin says, that with Voice, Lib. 3. Instit. c. 5, and 6.
Throat, and Sides together, Purgatory is to be exploded, as a damnable
invention, evacuating the death of Christ, derogating from Gods mercy, and
causing many Scandalls and impieties to be practiced amongst Christians. With
like fury also he condemns Prayers for the dead, calling it an abominable
superstition, a profane Invocation of God, an inconsiderable credulity, timely
(he confesses) brought into the Church, and so timely indeed as the Apostles
themselves were authors thereof.

For that S. Dens S. Paul's Disciple in a whole Chapter together, declares
the manner of Christian burial used in his time, with particular prayer made
by the Bishop for the party deceased. And Calvin could not but know, that
Aerius was anciently condemned, and is by S. Epiphanius, S. Augustine, and
others ranked amongst heretics, for denying this pious and laudable custom,
ever used in Christ's Church before him, of praying for the Dead, full of
charity toward souls departed, and no ways tending, either to evacuate the
merits of Christ's death, or to lessen Gods mercy toward us purchased by it,
but rather extolling both: sithen^e to satisfy his Justice, and to lessen the
rigor thereof against sinners, and sins in this life, not satisfied for by
them, he is contented to accept the prayers of living persons, and to have
Christ's merits, and satisfactions in several manners, as by Alms, Pennances,
Sacrifices, and other means as holy Suffrages offered for them. Which made the
Holy Ghost truly no doubt Machab. l. 2
to tell us, that it was a holy and wholesome thought to pray for the dead,
that they may be absolved from their sins. But by these new Doctors,
Scriptures themselves must be denied, and all other testimonies rejected, if in
any part they serve to disprove their novell, and groundless fancies. For if
we tell them that S. Dennis of Arepa^ogita affirmed Prayers to have been
offered for the dead, even in the Apostles time, they will call him a
counterfeit prattling Author, whom S. Gregory 1000 years since, called an
ancient and venerable Father, acknowledged by other Popes, Fathers, and
Councels to have been S. Paul's learned Scholar, and the greatest amongst
Christian Divines, as S. John Damascen calls him. If we tell them that
ancient Tertullian Lib. de Corona milit.
numbered Sacrifices for the dead 1400 years since, amongst Apostolical
Traditions: that Origin plainly taught Hom. 6. in Exodum.
a purgation of Souls, and by fire after death; that S. Cyprian held it a
different Epist. ad Antonium.
thing for martyrs to be crowned in their deaths, and for others to pay the
last farthing, and after lasting torments to be freed out of prison; That all
ancient Liturgies have prayer for the dead in them Apostolically In colloquio
cum sorore de resurrectione.
ordained; that S. Gregory Nissen, taught a purgation for souls after death,
and so did S. Augustine in his Enchiridion, and in many other of his works;
That S. Ambrose prayed for Cap. 110.
Theodosius and Valentinian Emperors, in both his funeral Orations of them;
that sundry ancient Fathers out of S. Paul's words, 1 Cor. 3. have gathered,
that such as build upon Christ the Foundation stubble and straw, shall come not
withstanding to be saved, yet so as by fire; they will not to all these and
other like testimonies stick to say, that all these chief Fathers of Christ's
Church, were in this point over credulous, and swayed by the bad custom of
their time, in allowing and practicing such superstitions, and particularly
Calvin, if you tell him that S. Monica desired to be prayed for after her
death, and remembered at our Lords Altar, will answer, that it was anile votum,
an old woman's tale, and dislike S. Augustine himself for recounting it.

The eleventh Controversy. Of Sacramental Confession, and Priestly Absolution.
CAlvin asks us, with what face Lib. 4. Institut. c. 15. Number. 3.
we can affirm Confession of sins to a Priest, to have bin a divine
Institution, and affirms also elsewhere with In Antid. Sect. 6. c. 15.
a notorious falsehood, that Confession was free to be made or not, until
Innocent the third, with a few horned Lib. 3. Institut. 6. 4. number. 17.
beasts, ordained this snare to make a general intanglement of Christian
people, calling in another place Confession of Penitents made to their Pastors,
lib. 3. c. 3^ number. 1. etc. 4. nu. 12.
^ ^iring and tearing of men's Consciences; and no less absurdly than Luther
had taught before him, he denies the Priests to have received any greater
power from Christ to absolve sins, than all other Persons, men or women,
only by their age and wisdom they are able to afford direction and comfort
unto such as come afflicted in conscience unto them.

Lib. 4. c. 1. number. 21. and 22.
Yet afterward changed in his doctrine, he affirms by Christ's meri^s and
power of the holy Ghost, this benefit of the Churches Keys, and remission of
sins to be daily imparted unto the faithful people by them, who as Legates
of Christ, Lib. 3. c. 4. number. 13, and 14. 17, and 18.
have the ministry of reconciliation committed unto them: exhorting in another
place each one burdened with Sinfulness of his conscience, to confess them
privately to the Pastor, and particularly as he can remember them: and esteem
it no small benefit, that he can repair unto one, who has this power of
reconciling souls committed unto him. And from this doctrine, the use of
private and public penance has been brought into all Calvinian Cosistories,
not without frequent defamings of such as fit in the stool of pennances to be
absolved of sins confessed by them. Whereas in our Church, men burdened in
Conscience, come to their Ghostly Fathers, and are heard, whilst they confess
their sins charitably by them, secure to have nothing revealed afterward
which has been confessed unto them.

So that our incarnate Lord and Redeemer never opened the inmost bowels of his
mercy and bounty more widely toward us, than when in his Church he erected
this high Tribunal of Justice (as I may well call it) and mercy conjoined:
ordaining Priests and Pastors of Souls to be Judges thereof, with most ample
Commission given unto them to absolve all Crimes whatsoever committed against
him, not once or twice, but so often as men fall into them, and came penitently
to confess them with a purpose no more to fall into them: which kind of
clemency was never used by any earthly Prince toward his Subjects, nor
scarcely by any father toward his children, frequently and hainously offending
him.

This Commission was by Christ after his Resurrection given unto his Apostles,
and all those no doubt, who were in the government of his Church afterward to
succeed them, when after he had said, ^^ my Father John 20.
sent me I send you, he breathed upon them, and bad them receive the holy
Ghost: whose sins you remit shall be remitted unto^ thems and whose sins
you retain shall be retained: having first, so by breathing out of himself the
holy Ghost into them, communicated a divine power to perform what his words
imparted, excluding Calvin's corruption of them, by affirming this power of
remitting sins to signify nothing else, but to delcare by Christ's merits and
mercy abundant remission for them: which were the same as to say, that Judges
in their circuits receive from their Prince no power at all to free or condemn
Malefactors brought before them, but only to declare (as Notaries and Cryers
are w^nt in Courts) the Princes pleasure in freeing or condemning them: than
which nothing can be more falsely or foolishly affirmed.

And If Christ's words signified no more, St. Paul said not well of himself, and
theother Apostles, that Christ had committed the Ministry 2 Cor. 5.
of Reconciliation unto them, and made them his Legates, absolving such as had
offend^d him, the effect of a Legate ever importing power granted with it.

S. Ambrose therefore said well against Lib. de poenitentia, c. 2
the Novatian heretics, revived now again in modern Protestants, that under
a pretended reverence yielded unto God, by leaving all power of remitting
sins unto himself, they more highly injured him, by not doing what he
commanded them, asking afterward this question of them, why do ^ye baptize,
if men cannot remit sins? for that this is performed fully in Baptism, and
what imports it Lib. 2. c. 10.
whether by Penance or Baptism this be performed, the power of Priests given
by God being alike in both Scraments. St. Leo in the same manner extolled Gods
mercy in this, Epist. ^1* ad Theodorum.
that as he had ordained Baptism, ^^r the first sanctification of Souls, so
likewise was Penance ordained by him, that Graces lost by sin after
Baptism, might come to be restored by the gate of reconciliation and priestly
Adsolution after Confession of our sins opened unto them.

The use of this Sacrament is mentioned Cap. 19.
in the Acts of the Apostles, where many of the faithful are said to have come
and confessed their sins with terror no doubt of conscience (says Calvin on
that place) and a desire to be absolved by the Apostles from them, and in that
very age S. Dionis in his Epistle to Demophilus, sharply reprehended him for
striking away with his feet, a poor penitent kneeling before Lib. c. 9.
a Priest to receive pardon of sins from him, and rev^ling the Priest because
he would absolve him. S. Irenaeus speaking also of a woman corrupted by one
Mark a Sorcerer, says, that after the brethren had with much difficulty
converted her, she Lib. de poenitentia c. 10, and 12.
spent a great time in making her Confession, weeping and deploring what she
had suffered from him. Tertullian likewise blames such, as through shame hide
some sin in Confession to the Priest, choosing so, rather to be damned, than
in their foulness discovered: reprehending others likewise, for coming not at
all to this needful remedy for sins, after baptism graciously prepared for
them. S. Clement of Alexandria Lib. 2. Strematum. Homil. in Psalm. 37.
in like words almost delivers the same Doctrine, by Origin more largely
declared, comparing Confession to the opening of festered wounds, that by the
Priests power they may be cleansed, cased and cured. S. Cyprian exhorts most
earnestly some Christians fallen in persecution to confess Sermon. de lapsis.
their sins unto the Priest, and receive Absolution from him; and commends
some who had done so with many tears, and Signs of contrition. Lactantius
condemns the Novatians Lib. 4. instit. cap. 30.
for heretics, because they denied the power of Priests to absolve sinners
coming unto them, and by the use of Penance distinguishes Catholic Can. 28.
in Matthew.
Churches from Heretical Congregations. S. Hilary expressly affirms the
sentence of Priests absolving sinners here upon earth, to be ratified in
heaven. In regulis, etc. ad quaest. 288.
S. Basil teaches the same Doctrine, and S. Gregory Nissen his brother,
advises a sinful woman to l^y Orat. de non judicandis aliis.
open her whole soul and conscience to some charitable Priest, who will have a
care to save her honor, and help Epist. 65.
her. S. Hierome is blamed by Calvin for calling Penance a second table Lib.
2. and 3. de sacerd^ti^.
after shipwreck. S. Chrysostom highly and frequently extolleth the power
which Priests have to absolve sins. And S. Augustine teaches expressly, Lib.
2. de ^isitat. infirmorum cap. 4, and 5.
that sorrow alone without Confession and Absolution of the Priest, is not
sufficient to free men from their sins; because otherwise, Christ had given the
Keys in vain, if there were not in his Church a needful use of them: and let
not any man tell me (says he) that he con^esseth them in his heart to God, who
knows them; for Christ will have us humbly to subject our selves to the
sentence of his Priestly servants, for remission of them. Di^dain not therefore
(says he) to open thy conscience fully and clearly unto them, who as Christ's
Vicars and Legates have power to absolve thee.

So great a Lie was that of Calvin, when he affirmed Sacramental Confession to
have been left free for every man to make it, or not, until Pope Innocent the
third, cum pauculis cornuti^ suis, with a few horned beasts, imposed a Precept
thereof to ensnare all Christians, and this, either ignorant or malicious man,
might well have blushed, when he asked with what face we could affirm
Confession of sins to a Priest to have been as by the Son of God, divinely
ordained; who by giving such a power as he did unto Priests to absolve sins,
tied guilty souls to confess them: for that without a revelation, otherwise
Priests could not prudently exercise their power, and know what sins were to be
remitted, or retained by them, or how they might best direct the consciences of
Penitents coming unto them, or enjoin them to make a due restitution of fame,
goods, etc. taken from others by them.

And whereas our Adversaries object that Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople,
and S. Chrysostoms predecessor, took away the use of Confession and Penance in
his Church, for a Scandal which had happened by it. I answer, it was not of
private Confession, and Penance ordained by Christ himself as parts of a
Sacrament: but that which was publicly made by Penitents, before the whole
Congregation, by a holy zeal of Prelates, and Penitens together anciently
introduced; which might, and has been taken away, not only by Nectarius in
his City, but by S. Leo, and other Bishops; because as the fervor of
Christians became cooled, sundry inconveniences happened by occasion of it,
which are not wanting in all Calvinian Consistories, making their stool of
Penance ridiculous, and of little benefit to such as are brought unto it.

The twelfth Controversy. Concerning the number and effect of Sacraments.
CAlvin seems in words to extol In Antideto Sess. 7. c. 5, and 6.
the Sacraments of the new Law, as fountains of our Savior, ordained to
cleanse and sanctify souls; yet when he comes more clearly to express his
Doctrine, he affirms them, with the rest of his fellows, to be no other than
bare Signs of faith, and Seals, as it were, of Christ's gracious and liberal
promises made in the Gospel unto us. And therefore in the holy Council of
Trent, they were justly condemned, declaring them, as the General Council of
Florence had done before, not only to be Signs, but true causes of such graces
as are signified by them, as fountains flowing from Christ's wounds, and
graciously ordained by him, to apply easily, and efficaciously for the
sanctification of our souls, such graces as by his life and death he merited
for us.

Wherefore S. Augustine, against Faustus, ^ib. 19. c. 10
his Mainchean Adversary, affirms them to work after an unspeakable manner
their effect of heavenly graces in us. And elsewhere he asks, Tract 80. in
John.
how water in Baptism comes to have that force, by touching the body, to
cleanse and sanctifi^ the soul, but by being raised above its own force, and
made the water of a Sacrament ordained by Christ for that purpose. In Orat. de
S. Baptis.
which sense also S. Gregory Nissen comparing the seed of man, and the water of
Baptism together, says, that as the natural body of a man is framed by the
one, so is the soul and supernatural man framed by virtue of the other,
causing graces in him. And S. Lib. 2. in Jo. c. 42.
Cyrill teaches that as water made hot by fire, scaldeth and warmeth as fire
it self does; so the water of Baptism is by the Holy Ghost, as a heavenly fire
raised to have a divine virtue in it, of sanctifying souis washed with it,
called therefore by Saint Paul the Laver of Regeneration, and Renovation,
because we are renewed in our souls, and supernaturally regenerated by it.

And the same in a proportionable manner, may be said of other Sacraments,
seven in their whole number, because the Son of God ordained seven Ceremonies
to be used by us, with promises of Graces annexed unto them, if we preparedly
and worthily Ad Ephesians. 5.
receive them. Baptism for example, is said to be the Laver of life cleansing
souls. Confirmation is spiritually Acts 8.
to strengthen us, given with imposition of hands by the Apostles first, and
since by Bishops, not without the Holy Ghost visibly heretofore, and now
invisibly no doubt given by it. The holy Eucharist is as a heavenly food, and
ordained to nourish John 6.
our souls, declared by Christ himself in the gracious effects thereof.
Penn^nce is also a wholesome medicine to cleanse and cure the wounds and
diseases of men's souls, by remission of sins promised to such as worthily
receive it. Order, conferreth Graces to dispose and make men fie for
Ecclesiastical Functions; for which Reasons S. Paul will^d Tim^thy, made
Bishop by him, to resuscitate, and make use of that Grace, which by imposition
of his hands had been given unto him. Matrimony is called by the same Apostle a
great Sacrament, representing the union which is between Christ and his Church,
not perfectly signified without Grace given, that the beginning of man^ life
might (says S. Cyrill) become sanctified by it. Extreme Unction is mentioned
by S. James, and remission of sins declared to be the effect thereof.

The council of Florence gathered this numher of seven Sacraments, from seven
conveniences in our spiritual and corporal life equally required: a generation
to wit in the on^, and a regeneration in the other, growth and increase of
strength: medicines to cure diseases, Superiors to govern Subjects, means of
procreation, and a comfortable departure out of thi^ world, and c. That these
Sacrament^ give grace of themselves beyond the disposition of such as receive
them, i^ proved by S. Augustine, from the effect of Baptism in little
children; which proceeds neither from the sanctity of him that baptiseth, nor
from any disposition in the children themselves, but merely from the virtue of
the Sacrament, ex opere operato, as Divines express it. And whereas our
Adversaries term this expression barbarous, In Psalm. 138.
I will answer them with S. Augustine, melius ^st ut nos reprehendant
Grammatici, quam ut non intelligant Populi, it is better that Grammarians
should reprehend us, than that the people should not understand us. And in this
^fficacity of Sacraments a chief dignity of our Christian Religion properly
consists; for that never any other exterior Sacraments had power in
themselves, to sanctify souls. For which cause S. Paul comparing the
Sacraments of the old Law with ours, calls them egena and infirma elementa,
barren and infirm Elements.

Neither do our Adversaries duly consider, as they ought, that in the denying
the number and efficacity of Sacraments, they detract from the merit of our
Saviors death, and power which it had to sanctify souls in several manners,
and to communicate by Sacraments heavenly Graces unto us, according to our
Adversaries Doctrine, Lib de captivitat. Babilonica titulo de Baptismo.
to little or no effect at all, ordained by him, Luther having written thus of
them, the signs justify not, and as S. Paul said, Circumcision avails
nothing, so I say of Baptism, it is nothing, nor is the Participation of our
Lords Table any thing, they In locis commun. tit. de signis. part. 8.
are testimonies only, and Seals of Gods love toward us. Melanctthon taught
the same Doctrine, and albeit many Lutherane Divines do now depart In Antid.
and l. 4. in stitutionum.
from it, yet Calvin and his Adherents constantly still maintain it. Infants
(says he) are holy from their Mothers womb for Gods promise made to Abraham, I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee. Beza likewise maintains
the same Doctrine, In 2. Des^nsione de Sacram.
and other chief Authors amongst them. So as Baptism with them (says John
Skutts a great Lutherane Divine) is as Radling to Lib. 50. causarum c. 17.
mark sheep with, that their owners may know them.

And this Doctine has been by the Devil himself (I doubt not) purposely
suggested unto these men for the d^mnation of innocent children dying without
Baptism, by occasion thereof, as not held necessary for their salvation,
expressly against the words of our Savior, Joh. 3. Unless a man be born
again of water and the Holy Ghost, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of
heaven; so literally understood by all Christian people and Pastors, that the
very Pelagians (as S. Augustine has in sundry places affirmed of them) albeit
they denied original finne, and consequently the necessity of Baptism, for the
remission thereof; yet by the plainness of Christ's words, they were convinced,
that children without Baptism could not enter into the Kingdom of heaven,
albeit otherwise saved.

And Calvin's explication of Christ's Antidotis in cap. 3. Joan.
words is so strained against the plain meaning, as Stapleton rightly calls
it a ridiculous corruption of them.

And supposing what all good Christians believe, that Adam by his sin, lost
grace for himself and his whole posterity, how can it be reasonably proved or
believed, that this supernatural gift should be trausfused into children, by
their very carnal generation; so as to make them holily united with Christ,
without being by Baptism regenerated in him: for that Gods promise made to
Abraham, and so much insisted upon by Calvin, I will be thy God, and God of thy
seed after thee, literally proves no more, than that as Abraham himself was
dear to God, so should his Posterity be an elected People, and favored
particularly by him. And if we understand spiritually those words of Abraham's
faithful Posterity, it proves nothing at all for Calvin's Doctrine against the
necessity of Baptism for children: yet has this bold and blind Doctor
adventured to draw from this Text alone, or chiefly at least, the
sanctification of Christian children from their Parents without Baptism,
against the Catholic belief, and practice of ^^ithfull people, and Pastors i^
all ages before him. In mean while I will ask him here, whether God may not be
truly said, a God of Abraham's faithful Posterity by the death of his Son, and
his merits, as well by Sacraments as diverse other means applied unto them;
unless in their natural or^gen he infused sanctity into them* I cannot truly
but wonder how his followers, such especially as have learning and judgment,
can in a main point of faith, embrac^ such a new Doctrine as this is, so
slenderly, or not at all proved unto them.

S. Cyrill a greater Doctor, than proud Calvin can be presumed to have been,
on this place of S. John treating of Baptism and the necessity thereof,
expressed so clearly by our Savior, says, that water and the Holy Ghost were
therein ^^tly conjoined by him, because man consisting of ^ soul and body,
whilst the one i^ washed by water, the other by the Holy Ghost is sanctified
and cleansed, of which Sanctification and cleansing, S. Paul speaks thus,
Christ loved his Church; and gave himself for it, that he Ad Ephesians. 5.
might sanctify the same; cleansing it by the Laver of water in the word of
life, in few words so expressing the matter, from and effect of this Sacrament,
ordained to cleanse and sanctify such as receive it; by Calvin's Doctrine
flatly denied, for that all children born of Christian Parents are holy,
cleansed, and adopted Gods children without it.

That other saying, likewise of S. Paul, is denied by Calvin's Doctrine, God
(says he) according to his mercy has saved us by the Laver of regeneration
and renovation of the Holy Ghost, abundantly powered on us through Jesus Christ
our Savior, that being justified by his grace, we might become Heirs,
according to the hope of Eternal life. Teaching so plainly, that not by our
natural births, but by Baptism we are regenerated, renewed by abundant
graces, and have the right of Gods children to an eternal life conferred on
us, and that these supernatural blessings purchased by Christ's death and
passion for us, cannot without Baptism be obtained, has been in diverse
ancient Councels against the Pelagians expressly declared, and often taught by
S. Augustine in his books against Tom. 7. operum.
them, do not believe (says he) do not say that children dying before they are
baptized can be saved, for that they are only by the Sacrament made
Christians, Lib. de pecmeritis, c. ultimo l. 3. de anima and origin ejus, c.
9. Lib. 1. de Abraham c. ultimo.
and faithful persons, no otherwise, than by the habit of faith, and heavenly
graces infused into them. S. Ambrose teaches the same Doctrine and says, that
Gods promise to Abraham of being his God, and God of his Posterity, is not so
extended to the faithful, as to sanctify their children, and make them Heirs
of eternal life without Baptism, whereby they are as branches to a Vine
united with Christ, and begin to live in him.

And whereas in Calvin's School, it is commonly affirmed, and taught, that our
Saviors Baptism was no more powerful to give grace than S. John's was. I may
truly say here, that S. John himself taught the contrary in these words, I
baptize with water, Mat. 3.
etc. but he that is to come after me, etc. shall baptize with the Holy Chost.
And we know that the Apostles baptized Act. c. 9.
again such as had received S. John's Baptism, and they received the Holy Ghost
thereby, which before they had not heard of, which heavenly gift sufficiently
declared the excellency and sanctifying force of our Saviors Baptism above S.
John's, senselesly and against plain Scripture, by Calvin, and his followers
denied, extenuating thereby our Saviors gracious Bounty and Mercy toward us.

The thirteenth Controversy. Of Free Will.
REason is the directing, and Freewill the commanding power of man's soul in all
humane actions; and the excellency of our nature therein chiefly consists,
whereby our will has a freedom in it self to do, or not to do what is
proposed unto it, without being enforced to either, and without this liberty,
nothing either belonging to conversation or government in man's life could
orderly be performed; but all Laws and power in some of commanding others must
be taken quite aw^^^: rewards, punishments, admonitions, consultations, and
reprehensions cease amongst men. For why should Parents and other Superiors
admonish their children, servants, or Subjects; reprehend or punish them when
they offend, if they have no power to do the contrary more than beasts, or mad
men? according to one of Luthers articles condemned by Pope Leo the tenth,
affirming man by the corruption of his nature to have lost all liberty of his
will, so as he can neither choose, nor desire, nor do any good thing: as if by
the sin of our first Parents, men were so degenerated from the nobleness of
their nature, as to become beasts and devils together. Calvin also taught the
same doctrine, so absurd in it self, and against faith and reason, as many of
his disciples are known to have left him; and some of them are come so far as
to embrace in this point Catholic doctrine; which is to admit a natural
freedom of our will in all natural elections and actions, but in others
supernatural and belonging to the service of God, the help of grace is so
required, as it must first incite and move us to do them: and assist us so in
the performance of them, as neither our will without grace, nor grace without
our will does any thing ever free and never enforced in them.

Both these liberties of our will in natural and supernatural actions so
declared, may evidently be gathered from a hundred clear places of Scripture;
Moses (for example to instance Deuteron. 3.
here some few of them) speaking unto his people, I invoke heaven and earth
(says he) that I have proposed unto you life and death, benediction and
malediction, choose therefore life etc. Joshua likewise said to the same
people, cap. 24.
thou have thy cboyce, choose this day what pleases thee, and whom thou will
serve chiefly: on which words Calvin l. 2. instit. cap. 2. n. 7. and cap. 3. n.
10.
unmindfull of what he had taught in other places against Free Will, and the
very name thereof hateful unto him, says, God gave them this liberty of
choosing, that being tied by their own wills, they might blame only
themselves if they performed not what they had chosen.

God likewise proposed unto David 2 Reg. 24.
three sorts of Punishments for his sin of Pride, in numbering his people, and
bad him choose which of them he would.

And elsewhere David says of himself, I have chosen to be an ^bject in the
house of God, rather than to dwell in the Tabernacles of sinners. Because I
have spoken (said God to Is^^^ 65.
his people) and you have not heard me, but did evil before me, and have
chosen what I would not have you done, for this therefore, etc. like to this
Speech, was our Saviors cry unto Jerusalem, Math. 13. and S. Stephen told the
Jews, that they ever rejected the Holy Ghost; which without freedom in their
wills they could not have done: insomuch that St Augustine, in his Book of
grace and Freewill, heapeth more than thirty pregnant places of Scripture
together, to prove this Catholic point of Doctrine, so evidently gatherable
from reason it self, and experienced daily both in our selves and others, as S.
Irenaeus truly affirmed, that a man is Lib. 4. c. 9. and 29.
not to be accounted reasonable, who will deny the freedom of man's will,
without which he could neither be Lib. 1. 6. 5.
justly damned nor saved. Tertu^ian against Marcian proves, that man loft not
the liberty of his will by sin, and that the likeness of God ingraffed in
his nature chiefly therein consists. And Origin in these words, and Homil.
22. inn Numeros.
now O Israel, what does thy Lord God ask of thee? writes thus, let them blush
at these words, who deny the freedom of man's will; for how could God ask any
thing of men, if they had not power to offer it unto him: and to omit the like
testimonies of Other Fathers, S. Augustine in three Tom. 7.
whole books together, of Free Will clears this Controversy, for (says S.
Hierome) where necessity inforceth, Lib. 2. contra Jovinianum.
nec condemn^tio, nec caro^a est, men are neither damned nor crowned.

The fourteenth Controversy. Of Calvin's Solifidian Justice.
AS Calvin absurdly denied Freewill proved against him in my former
controversy, so has he not lib. inst. c. 14. number. 9. 10. 11.
showed himself a Christian Doctor in many Tenants about the manner of our
Justification, averred and taught thus plainly by him.

First, that before God our best actions are not only void of merit, but
mortally also defiled and sinful in the justest persons.

ibid. c. 17. and 18. c. 3. n. 10.
Secondly, that the holiest Souls are never cleansed from sins by any
interior graces insused into them: but only by Gods mercy, they are not unto
the elect imputed to damnation.

Thirdly, that good works are as fruits of faith gratefully by us performed,
but concur not in any sort to our salvation, and that faith alone withont
them does justify u8; ib. c. 11. ^. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. etc. 2. n. 1. 9. 10.
and by this faith he^m^aneth not that whereby revealed verities are believed
by us, little valued by him: but that particular faith, whereby each elected
person is to believe and firmly to persuade himself, that he is beloved of
God, and sure to be saved, defined by him to be a certain assurance of
enjoying eternal life, freely by ib. c. 2. n. 38. and 40. and lib. 4. 6. 17.
n. 2.
Christ promised, and interiourly by the holy, Ghost revealed, and signed unto
him.

And in his farther declaration thereof, he confesses that many heretofore,
lib. 3 c. 11. n. 13. 14.
meaning the holy Fathers, conceived and taught, that by faith and good works
together men were c. 14. n. 16.
justified in Gods sight. But we say this justice to be gained by faith alone,
and that it cannot stand where good works are valued and joined with it, or
confided in, even such as are spiritual and best performed by us. Which
doctrine was an heresy in the Apostles time, and condemned by them, as St.
Austin affirms, lib de fid. and open. c. 14
chiefly gathered then, as it is now from an ill understanding of hard places
in S. Paul's Epistles, which unlearned and unstable persons (says St. Peter)
depraved, as they do other Scriptures to their own perdition. Which Heresies,
so anciently condemned, ought now also to be banished from all Christian hearts
(says the same Father) as tending to make them careless to live well. And
when S. ad Romans 3. 5.
Paul said, I think a man to be justified by faith without works, he means
not works by the faith and grace of Christ holily performed, but works of the
Law, which the Jews were apt to glory in, even after their conversion to
Christ, as if by them they had merited far above the Gentiles to be called by
him: Which false persuasion St. Paul does refute in them.

Neither are the Apostles (says St. Austin St. Paul and St. James) contrary to
each other, when the one affirms, a man to be justified by faith without
works, and the other teaches faith without works to be dead and worth nothing:
because the one speaks of works done before faith in Christ, and the other of
works by the grace and faith of Christ duly performed. Which true explication
of so great a Doctor, and by many other ancient Fathers embraced, Calvin in his
wonted l. 3. instin. c. 21. number. 10. 1 Cor. 13.
modesty calls subterfugium ineptissimum, a most foolish evasion: albeit St.
Paul in confirmarion thereof, says, that if he had all faith able to remove
mountains, yet if he wanted charity it were nothing: for, says he, in Christ
Jesu neither Circumcision, nor Prepuce avails any thing, but faith that
works by charity. And if Calvin had ^scribed our justification to this faith,
he had taught true doctrine: But his particular faith and certain persuasion
which every one must have, that he is one of Gods elect, and that Heaven is no
less sure unto him than that Christ himself enjoys it, is a most desperate
fancy overthrowing all true Faith and Religion.

For whereas St. Paul wills us ad Phil. 2.
with fear and trembling to work out our Salvation: and S. Peter wills
Epist. 2. c. 1.
us to strive by good works, to make sure our vocation, and he that stands
i^ bidden to look that he fall not, these and other like exhortations about
fearing Gods Judgments, keeping his Commandments, walking as Children of
Light, and the like, have no place at all where Calvin's faith is admitted.
Yea, which is more absurd, such as have it cannot pray to obtain of God
perseverance in his love, and service, without being shaken in their most
certain assurance of eternal life prepared for them, no less surely than for
Christ himself; and why then should they pray for it or any thing belonging to
the attaining thereof. But from what place of Scripture this particular faith
may be gathered, by each party conceiving himself to have it revealed by the
holy Ghost, and signed in his heart, I could never learn, nor any man of
Judgment. For albeit Christ's promises are sweet, able to afford great help and
comfort unto such, as by a true faith and good life do seek to deserve such
eternal blessings as are promised in them; yet is there no one of them made
unto any man in particular: nor, as they are made in general, do they want
conditions needfully to be performed for the attaining of them: as when Christ
said to the young man, if thou will enter into life, keep the Commandementss.
And when he told his Mat. 5. and 19.
discipl^s, you are my friends, if you do these things which I command yeu:
telling them elsewhere, that if their justice did not abound more than that of
the Scribes and Pharisees, they should not enter into the kingdom of heaven:
requiring so not faith alone, but deeds also.

Because the beginning of eternal life (says S. Ignatius) is faith, and the
Ep. ad Ephesians.
perfect attaining thereof is Charity, Tract. 3. in Mat.
and those (says Origin) who have faith without good works, have Lamps
without Oil, like those foolish Virgins. Faith teaches us our duties to God,
but Charity C. in Mat.
performs them: St. Hilary affirms all men to be saved by rightly believing
what God has revealed, and doing what he commandes. m. cap. 2. Epist. 8. Jac.
St. Gregory Nazianzen, show thy faith by works to be alive, and the soil of
your Soul to be fruitful, that you may hope to gather from it a plentitull
haryest. Remember o^ Christian Catech. 4. 15.
(says St. Cyril) that in thy judgment thou shall not by thy faith, but by
thy works be saved or condemned. They are the oil which will keep thy Lamp
flaming, when the heavenly spouse shall come to call thee. But by faith (says
St. Chrysostom) ^om. 9. in
we are invited to the wedding feast; but Charity is the wedding garment, with
which we must come clothed unto it, when Calvin's particular faith shall prove
a fancy.

The fifteenth Controversy. Concerning the Merit of good Works.
CAlvin is so great an enemy to the Lib. 3. inst. c. 15. n. 5.
very name of merit, as he wishes that the ancient Fathers had never troubled
the Church, and corrupted the true doctrine of Faith by it: and he is so far
from granting any power of meriting unto us, as he deny^th the same unto Christ
himself; if we simply oppose him to the Judgment of his father, and his reason
is, quia non reperitur in homine dignitas, qua posset promereri Deum: Because
there can be Lib. 2. c. ^7. n. 1.
found no worth in man to merit of God any thing. Using so a Nestorian manner
of speaking, as if Christ had been man only, and not God also, according to
St. Paul's words saying, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself; so that by the subsisting of humane nature in a divine. person, the
actions and passions were Theandricall, and of an infinite value, because an
infinite majesty was humbled in humane nature, by doing and suffering them for
us.

And that Christ merited by his obedience unto Death, and the death of the
Cross, the glory of his body, and exaltation of his name above all names; so
as at the name of Jesus all knees in heaven and earth below it likewise should
be bowed, is by St. Paul expressly affirmed.

And that question which Calvin propounds, quibus meritis assequi posset
ibid. n. 5.
homo, ut judex esset mundi, caput Angelorum etc. Argues him guilty of folly
and blasphemy together, as unwilling to have any honor, how due soever,
granted unto God and Man our heavenly Redeemer. And I can answer his question
in our Savior's own Mat. 28.
words, saying all power in heaven and earth is given unto me, thus explicated
by Calvin himself, he speaks not here of his eternal power, but of that
which he had newly received, when he was ordained Judge of the world, a little
before denied absolutely unto him; albeit the continual cry of Angels and
Saints in heaven shows this dignity, both to have been given unto him, and
merited by him. The Lamb which was slain is worthy to receive all honor and
glory, etc.

But it is no novelty for Calvin to c. 5. n. 3. etc. 11. n. 18. and cap. 15. n.
3.
contradict himself by affirming and denying the same thing in a hundred
places of his Institutions only. For example in the third book, he expressly
affirms that there can be no justice of faith, but where good works and the
opinion of merit gained by by them are excluded. Albeit before c. 17. n. 1.
in his second book he had blamed the overmuch niceness of some, who albeit
they acknowledge us by Christ's merits to be redeemed, yet love they not to hear
the name of merit pronounced, as co^ceiving his grace to be obscured by it: But
(says he) Christ's merits lib. 3. cap. 15. n. 3.
are foolishly opposed to Gods mercy for between subalternated things, there
is no opposition, Gods mercy, to wit, in freely justifying us, and his Sons
meriting such mercy for us. God in mean time calls those works done by his
help ours, and promises both to accept and reward them, and c. good works
therefore please God, and are not unprofitable unto such as perform them, which
is Catholic doctrine, denied in other places frequently and expressly by him.
Are there no merits (says S. Augustine) of just persons? Epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
Yes, assuredly because they are just; but that they are just, proceeded not of
their own merits; for where grace precedeth not, merits cannot follow or be
gained by any man: so as when God rewards our works, Epist. 46.
he crowns his own mereies in us, and he makes himself indebted to us, not
by receiving any thing from us in psalm. 83.
but by promising to reward our actions done for his service.

And in this sense we affirm all worth and merit of our Actions to proceed from
Christ, and that union which by Faith and grace we have with him; as branches
in a Vine receive all growth and fruitfulness from it; whilst he infuseth his
holy spirit into us, according to that of the Apostle, the charity of God is
diffused into our bearts by the holy Ghost, who is given unto us; whereby we
become the adopted children of God, and brethren of Christ, as partaking the
same spirit with him, and come so to have a right unto a heavenly inheritance
purchased for us by him. Being likewise raised to so high a dignity, our
actions as done by Gods adopted children, and with help of grace, become
dignified also in the value of them, and worthy of that reward which God has
promised unto them; so as from first to last, Christ is the Origin, source and
fountain of all merit in them.

And to prove the merit of holy actions so performed by us, there are so many,
and such pregnant places of scripture, as any wise man may wonder at Calvin's
contrary doctrine. St. Romans 2.
Paul for example, says that God shall render unto every one according to ad
Gal. 6.
his works: and teaches us, elsewhere that each one shall receive a reward
according to his labors; for what a man so weth, that he shall r^ap. Call Mat.
5.
(says Christ) the workmen, and give them their hire, etc. St. Paul for his
labors and combats expected to be 2 Timothy 4.
crowned. Our Savior bids his Apostles to rejoice at judgment approaching,
because the reward of their labors and suffering shall be great in Li. 4. c.
28.
heaven: Who (says S. Irenaeus) wants not our services, yet requires them
of us, that for them he may bestow his blessings upon us. And how In scorpiaco
cap. 6.
else (says Tertullian) do Saints in heaven differ in their glory as stars do
in their brightness, but by the variety of their merits. S. Hillary has a
whole In Psalm. 2.
discourse concerning the merit of good works, taught by S. Chrysostom, and by
more than a Grand Jury of other c. 7. part 3.
Fathers: Insomuch as S. Dennis in his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, after
particular provings of rewards due to holy actions, concludes that Gods
justice consists in this, that every one according to his work good or bad,
is to be rewarded or punished. And whereas many actions are pleasing unto God
if they be done, and yet not commanded by him, as to embrace Virginity or
continency of life perpetually for the greater freedom to serve God; to
profess poverty in a holy imitation of our Savior, and embrace other
evangelicall Councels, cum omni alacritate adimplendo ea, que non sunt
praecepta, with all alacrity fulfilling things not commanded unto them: as S.
Basil cap. 22. constitutionum.
said of his Religious, that as men offend not in omitting them; so do they in
observing them please God, and merit graces for them. And such works as these,
we call works of supererogation, not that we pretend (as our Adversaries affirm
falsely of us) to do services above our duty to God, and what he has by his
infinite bounty deserved from us; for to think or say so, were folly and
blasphemy joined together, but because knowing our frailty and unablenesse to
love and serve him, as the majesty of himself, and his infinite goodness
meriteth love and services from us: he was pleased to command the performance
of some duties under pain of being punished if we omit them, and to leave
others free unto us, which we may by the assistance of his grace supererogate,
and add over above those which are by him commanded strictly unto us, not
without singular rewards promised by Christ unto them: as when he told S.
Peter, You that have left all and followed me, shall have a hundred fold in
this life, Mat. 19.
and after it life everlasting: which words (says S. Bernard) have filled the
world with contemners thereof, and replenished Monastaries, and desert places
with men and women, leaving the earth to gain heaven, accounting poverty their
riches, and living as Angels pure in their minds, and chaste in corruptible
bodies; accounting it their greatest glory to be humbled for Christ unto
Superiors chosen by themselves, and obediene in all things unto them. And such
works of supererogations, are not only performable by religious, but by
secular Persons also, by exercising the spiritual and corporal works of mercy,
also when they are not tied to the performance of them: as in fasting for
mortification of their bodies, on days and times not commanded unto them, etc.

The sixteenth Controversy. About the possibility of keeping Gods
Commandments.
I will not mention here a horrible Sect of Luthers Disciples, called commonly
Antinomi, because they wholly reject the Law of Moses; according to moral
precepts also, and as the Decalogue is therein contained, blasphemously
affirming it to be better nailed to a G^llows, than proposed to Christians. Nor
will I affirm here (as I might truly) that from Luther himself they learned
this doctrine, albeit afterward disclaimed by him: who (as a German Author of
known sincerity cites his own words) spoke thus of Moses and his law; We hear
them not, they belong to Jews, and not to Christians; so as if any one
proposes him Vlenbergius c. 18. ex ^o^^. 3. Germanico Jenensi f. 40, 41.
with his commandem^nts unto thee, and would have thee to observe them, bid him
go with his Moses to the Jews, for thou art none: will him not to troublethee
with them, for that he is Colloqui is mensalibus Ger. fo. 152, 153.
an enemy to Christ, etc. teaching in many other places that the law of Christ
is a law of faith only, and not of other precepts, intangling men's Consciences
against Christian Liberty.

But omitting his grosness, I will come to treat with Calvin more In luca c. 10
versum 26.
smoothly, and in covert phrases teaching the same d^ctrin, as where he has
these words, The law can do nothing but condemn us, because it is not possible
for us to perform what it commands, against that saying of our Savior, My
yoke is sweet, and my burden is light: and against S. John saying of Epist. 1.
c. 5.
Gods commandments, gravia non sunt, they are not heavy: making God more cruel
than any Tyrant amongst men can be, in commanding unto men things impossible to
be observed by them; yet punishing with eternal torments, such as do not
observe them: and (as Calvin affirms) that he regards not in the precepts
of his law what men can do, but what menshould do: whereas in many plain texts
of Ezech. 36.
Scripture against this Blasphemy, God promised to put a new heart and a new
spirit into us; whereby we should be enabled to walk in his precepts, and
observe his commandments. And it is said of Joshua that he Cap. 11.
fulfilld all the commandments, which Moses gave unto him, and omitted not all
precepts which God had given unto him. And of S. John Baptists parents it is
said, that they were just, and walked in all the commandments and
justifications of our Lord without complaint: for which reason also Noah,
Abraham, Job, David, and others are called in Scripture just persons and
faithful servants of God, loving him with their whole heart: in which love the
observance of his law, and commandments is certainly included, according to S.
John's words, He who says he loves God, and observes not his commandments,
is a liar, to wit, according to that degree of love, which is in the first
commandment required of him, not meaning an infinite love, as God is in himself
worthy to be beloved nor such an ardent and incessant love, as is in the
blessed of heaven toward him, nor such a love as a holy man on earth may by
any helps of grace possibly attain unto; But only so far as in our love no
creature be preferred before him, or for the love of any created thing we be
drawn to offend him. And to this degree of divine love every man is tied, and
cannot attain heaven without it, according to S. John's words, qui* non diligit,
manet in morte, he is dead that loves not: and for what more he adds to this
love, he shall in heaven be glorioush^ ewarded.

Neither can any reasonable man conceive so foolishly of our heavenly Redeemer,
the Word and Wisdom of his Father, that after his last Supper, he would more
than once require of his Disciples, so dear as they were unto him, that they
should show their love toward him in keeping his commandments, if he had known
it to have been (as Calvin affirms) impossible for them or any man to observe
them: nor had he so sweetly required of them the obfervance of them, If you
love me keep my Commandments. For had they believed Calvin's wicked doctrine,
they might have replied and asked of him, Lord how can thou require of us,
if we love thee to keep thy commandments; if it be impossible for us to observe
them? And when the young man in the Gospel told him That he had kept them from
his youth, our Savior denied not what he said, but rather loved him for it, as
the Evangelist tells us, and proposed a higher course of Sanctity unto him.

Moreover, were Calvin's doctrine true, when the young man asked our Savior,
what he might do to possess life everlasting? his answer was dreadful to him
and us also, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. For if this
condition be needful, as Christ's speech imports, and impossible to be Sermon.
attend attend tibi.
performed (as Calvin affirms) how can any man hope to be saved? Wherefore S.
Basil rightly affirmed it to be a wicked saying, that Gods Commandments were
impossible to be observed. S. Hierom said well, that Christ commanded In Mal. 5.
perfect things, not impossible. St. Lib. de not. and gratia c. 43. and 69.
Austine in sundry places averreth and proves this doctrine thus declared,
more then 1200. years since, in the 2. Arcasican Council: We believe as a
Catholic point of faith, that men baptized by the help of Christ, and
assistance of his grace, if they labor faithfully with it, may perform what to
Hom. 8. de paenitentia.
the attaining of eternal life is required of them. S. Chrysostom moreover
adds, that many do more than is required of them to be saved.

Reason likewise it self teaches us, that if Gods commandments were impossible
to be observed, no man could offend by the breach of them, because no man can
be reasonably tied to what is impossible to be observed by him: whence it would
follow that sin, consisting in the transgression of Gods law, should be no
sin at all, as not voluntarily but necessarily incurred. Neither has Christ
provided sufficiently for our salvation against many texts of scripture, if by
his grace he neither has nor can enable us to fulfill his law and
Commandments under pain of damnation required of us, not without a manifest
cruelty against his known goodness, and mercy toward us, and against the very
end of his coming to reedeem us: that as holy Zachary sung in his Canticle,
Being delivered out of the bands of our enemies, we may serve him in sanctity
and justice all days of our life.

The seventeenth Controversy Of Feasts and Fasts Apostolically ordained, and
neglected both by English Calvinists and Independants.
AMongst whom no feast at all is observed but Sunday; whereas in all Provinces
belonging to the Low Country States, those, who profess Calvin's doctrine, and
decline not unto the utmost strictness and impiety thereof, are yearly
accustomed with great solemnity to observe for two days together, the feast of
our Saviors Nativity, and in like manner the festivities of Easter and
Whitsuntide. Our Saviors Presentation also, his Incarnation, and the Epiphany
are amongst them festivally observed, and so are the Feasts of All Saints, and
of the Apostles, with some other chief Festivities: and in other of less note
Servants and Tradesmen abstain from work, as I have noted in several Cities
whilst I lived amongst them, and hereby they retain some show of Christianity
amongst them. Ask likewise of any Pastor or intelligent person amongst them,
(as I have done of many) why they celebrate, for example, Christ's Nativity?
they will tell you, it is to honor his coming into the world to redeem us.
Ask also, why they keep Easter? they will answer it to be in memory of his
Resurrection, after he had by his death on the Cross redeemed us. And ask
them, why they celebrate Pentecost? they will say because on that day the Holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles and Disciples of our Savior, to write his
law in their hearts and make them able to preach and teach it unto others also
and Pastors in their sermons on such days have, as I have said, a commendable
care to declare unto the people the mysteries and meanings of such festivities,
affirming them to be no good Chistians, nor worthy to partake in such blessings
received by the Son of God, who will not in such feasts gratefully and
particularly acknowledge them.

All which religious manner of observing Lib. ^. instit. cap. 8. n. 8. and
sequent.
Feasts for the signification of them, and chief Mysteries of faith remembered
in them; is held by Calvin himself, and other pure professors of his doctrine
to be plainly Judaicall and superstitious. Yea, and that Sunday it self is for
orders sake only in the Church to be so indifferently observed, as Christians
may, if they will, choose any other day in the week in place thereof. So
willing is he and his followers to blot out of men's memories all benefits and
blessings by the Son of God con^^rred on us; yet they cannot but know, that
Christians made in the Apostl^s ^^^e their Synaxes and meetings on Sunday
called in the Acts by St. Paul after Act. 20. 1 Cor. 16. Apoc. 1.
an Hebrew manner of speaking, una Sabbati, one or the first day of the week:
and by St. John our Lords day, and by St. Ignatius, who lived to see Epistol.
ad Magnet. can. 16. Apost. Apolo. 2. de coron. milit. lib. 7. strom. hom. 7. in
Ex^d.
Christ, the chief and Queen of all days, mentioned by St. Clement, by St.
Justin Martyr, by Tertullian, by St. Clement of Alexandria, by Origin and other
ancient Fathers, as Apostolically ordained, and wont to be kept in memory of
our Savior's Resurrection.

And if the Apostles had authority to translate the Jewish Sabbath, which was
Saturday into our Sunday, and command the observance thereof, why should not
other Feasts likewise certainly ordained by them, Lib. 5. c. 13.
be by us equally observed? The day for example of our Lords Nativity,
mentioned by St. Clement, and graced by many homilies and sermons preached
thereon by many chiese Fathers. The day likewise of the Epiphany, the feasts of
Easter, Pentecost, and our Saviors Ascension in their Apostolical antiquity
testified unto us: and so are the feasts of St. Stephen, St. Clemens lib. 8.
constit. cap. 39.
of the holy Innocents, and many days of Apostles, and Martyrs kown to have
been in Christ's Church timely observed. The church of Smyrna for example
solemnly observed the day of St. Polycarp's martyrdom, as Eusebius recounteth;
Origin mentions the Lib. bist. 6. 15.
the feast of Innocents celebrated in his time etc. And if the Angels in heaven
hom. 3. in diversos
rejoice at the conversion of Sinners on earth, why may we not as well rejoice
and praise God in the glorious martyrdom of his Servants, and their happy
entrance into heaven; whereby God is more glorified, and the number of blessed
Souls increased ready to pray for us.

And whereas it is objected by our Adversaries, that St. Paul feared the
Galatians, because they did observe days months and years; willed the
Colossenses also that no man should judge them either in meat or drink or part
of any festivity: it is certain that he spoke of Judaical observances about
meats, days, new moons, and other like Festivities.

^^ c. Mat. ^ lib. 4. instit. c. 12: n. 19, 20, 21.
When Calvin likewise after his accustomed boldness concerning the solemn
Fast in Lent, mentioned by St. Ignatius and other chief Fathers after him, as
an Apostolical institution, exhorting people to a strict and religious
observance thereof, he calls it a mere foolery, and detestable wicked
mockery of Christ, and uses this brainlesse argument to prove it, because
forsooth Christ's miraculous fast, without any meat or drink at all, is
obscured by it. And for that we proudly adorn our selves with his spoils,
only because in a holy imitation of him we make fewer meals, than we are
accustomed a^ other times, and abstain from fleshly meats most nourishing and
pleasing unto us: As Daniel, to hasten the return of his c. 10.
Peoople out of their Babylonian captivity, fas^ed, and abstained from Bread
desiderable, or most desired by him.

And when he objecteth that in our fasts, by abstaining from flesh we imitate
the Jews in the legal difference of clean and unclean meats, he lies against
his Conscience: for when he was an under-pastor of our Church at Naion, he was
bound to know and teach the contrary; to wit that in Lent and on fasting days
we abstain from fleshly meats to mortify our selves, not because we conceive
such meats in themselves to be unclean and unwholesome, but because they are
on such days by a just praecept of the Church, and an ancient custom of all
good Christians forbidden unto us: And such as are sick, or have any just cause
freely do eat them, without any uncleanness at all conceived of them.

And why is it that he and his fellows are such professed enemies to all
public fasts, and other exercises of mortification used anciently among
Christians, but because under a false pretense of evangelicall liberty they
seek after commodities of their belly. Whereas our divine Lord himself
promised, that his children Mat. 9.
should fast when he was taken from them: and St. Paul counseled married 1 Cor.
couples to make at times their and prayer more acceptable to God by living
continently together, as in other places he wills Pastors and Guides of Souls
to exhibit themselves Gods ministers in much patience, 2 Cor. 11.
in vigils, injejuniis multis, in patience in labors, in watchings, and much
fasting: And whilst that praecept did last of abstaining from blood and
strangled meats, it was by all good Christians strictly observed. Lib. 4.
instit. c. 12. n. 14.
And if that be true which Calvin affirms himself, that in the Church by the
power of the keys, Pastors for just causes may ordain solemn fasts,
supplications, and other exercises of Christian Piety, albeit not expressed in
Scripture, and that this power was usually, and lawfully practiced, not only
by the Apostles, but Prophets likewise before them: Why might not the Apostles
also by the same power ordain the fast of Lent and Ember days: Vigils also
before great feasts for the glory of God, and spiritual benefit of faithful
souls throughout the whole Church constantly and continually to be observed.

The Eighteenth Controversy. Concerning Predestination.
WHerein Calvin's doctrines are horribly blasphemous in themselves, and
injurious to the known goodness and mercy of allmighty God: for whereas he
was said in Scripture, not to have made Death, Sap. 1.
nor to rejoice in men's perdition. That he would have all be saved, and none to
perish, 1 Timothy 2.
but by penance to have all return unto him. 2 Pet. 3.
That God is never angry with any man (says Fulgentius) but first offended by
him; Calvin expressly affirms Lib. 3. cap. n. 1. and 2. etc. 21. n. 4.
him in sundry places of his Institutions, of his own free will without any
respect of their actions good or bad, ^o have praedestinated the greatest rart
of men to be eternally ib. c, 23. n. 4. 7. and 9. etc. 24. n. 8. and 1^*
damned, and ordained them to commit many and grievous sins, that they might
become vessels of his wrath sury and indignation justly executed upon them.
Yea, and that Christ died not to save them, or to purchase faith, grace or any
benefit at all for them.

And if you ask him with what justice Lib. instit. c. 17. and 15 Lib. 2. c. 4
Lib. 3. c. 23. In Mat. 13.
God can punish sinners, whom himself ordained to offend him, yea, which is
more, whom he incites, moves and enforces, so as they cannot resist him to
commit such sins as are most heinous and displeasing unto him? he will tell
you that it is areanum Lib. 2, c. 8. n. 3.
quoddam humanae mentis perspicacitatem longissime excedens a secret far
surpassing man's wit to be conceived, making God not only Author of men's
damnation, but of those sins likewise for which he condemns them, and so
consequently a greater Tyrant than ever was amongst men, or can be imagined.

First against plain authorities of Scripture, wherein God is said non Ps. 5
volcns iniquitatem, no willer of iniquity, but a hater of the wicked and all
Sap. 14. Ps. 44.
their impiety. That he loves Justice and hates all iniquity. That his eyes
are clean, and cannot approve evil. That he delivers men from temptations,
but tempts no man. Habac. 1 Jacob 1.


Secondly, against the light of Faith and Reason together, by changing the
nature it self of Sin, and making it a holy work; as b^ing done according
to the will of God, inciting and moving men unto it, taking so away all
difference between good and evil actions, by making the greatest sins of men
Gods, especial works: and destroying the high attribute of sanctity in God,
whereby all his Counsels, Will, and Works are said to be holy, as ever
conformable to the highest rule of rectitude, his own wisdom, to wit, and
goodness, which he cannot go against without denying himself in any wicked
will, or action done by him.

So as Eusebius said well, he amongst Lib. 6. de praep^rat. Evangilicae
men must certainly be the wickedest, that will affirm God to move men to
commit Adulteries, Rapines, and other Sins: because if this were so, not men,
but their Creator himself should be chiefly Author of sch sins, and men not
blameable at all in doing them, as enforced by him to commit them: which seemed
so hellish a doctrine to the Magistrates of Bern, Calvin's next neighbors, as
under great penalties they have forbidden their Pastors to hold or teach it.
And Amandus Polanus, chief Professor at Basil, has written a whole book against
this execrable doctrine. And Graverus, a chief Lutheran Divine, has in a
particular Treatise, proved Calvin's whole doctrine of Predestination, impiam
esse and absurdissimam, to be most wicked and absurd. Jacobus Andraeas Luthers
successor at Wittenberg, has made the like judgment In Epitome Colloquii
Montis gradensis.
thereof, and so have the Tigurin, and Bernian Divines in their several
confession^ of faith. Bullinger likewise himself has particularly impugned it,
besides other Authors, and c.

And against Calvin's horrible doctrine, that Christ died only for the Elect,
without any benefit at all intended for others by him. Hemingius has written a
book entitled, De gratia Universally, of Universal Grace, wherein he proves
by many clear texts of Scripture, that Christ was sent by his Father to redeem
the whole world, to save all mankind, to take away the sins of the world, to
call sinners, to cleanse them with his blood and c. that his death was in it
self sufficient to redeem all men, made for that purpose by themselves
ineffectuall. And that nothing can be more certainly and plainly testified in
Scripture, then that great graces have been given unto many, who
notwithstanding are damned, because they did not rightly and perseverantly make
use of them.

God is good (says S. Austin) and Lib. 3. in Julianum de articulis illi fa. so
impositis.
he is just, he can save some without any merits, because he is good, and he
cannot without demerits condemn any man, because he is just, ejus
praedestinatio nunquam extra bonitatem, nunquam extra justitiam est, his
predestination ever includes goodness and justice; he knows before they are
done the good, and evil actions of all men; yet so (says S. Fulgentius) as he
predestinateth Lib. ad Nonymum.
the former, and the latter are permitted only by him. And this is true
generally, that he is never angry with any man until he has by his iniquity
provoked him. And when he is said to be Author of evils in Scripture, it is to
be understood of penal evils, and punishments of such, as have offended him:
when likewise he is said to have hardened Pharoahs heart, and caused the
Egyptians to hate his People, to have commanded Simei to revile David; these
and the like manner of speakings are to be understood, not only of permitting
such persons to will and do wicked things, but of withdrawing also for just
causes the light of his grace from them, and suffering the Devil more
powerfully to tempt them: ordaining still to his own greater glory the
wickedness of them.

Let us not therefore conc^ive so hardly of him, who is mercy and goodness it
self; that the only chief cause why he permits men's sins, to be this,
that he may punish the Authors of them: for albeit amongst other reasons S.
Paul assigns this for one, yet are there other causes to be yielded for his
permission, as to leave men to the freedom of their own wills, to show greater
mercy unto them, after they have offended him; that his Sons merits may be
useful in his Church, by being applied to the remission of men's sins by
Sacraments, for that purpose ordained by him, whose incarnation was by Adams
sin, as the Church sings on Easter Eve, happily occasioned; Blessedly
therefore permitted by God, not absolutely willed or decreed by him, as is by
Calvin falsely and wickedly affirmed: from whose patient loving and merciful
proceedings toward Sinners, here in this world, after they have often and
hainously offended him, we may well gather how far he is now, and ever he has
been from hasting his judgments, or delighting himself in executing the rigor
of his justice on them, according to Calvin's doctrine; against which we
Catholics deny not Gods Predestination and Reprobation of Souls to be chief
parts of his general Providence over Creatures, to their several ends
directed by him: but acknowledge that by the sormer, all ordained to salvation
are certainly saved by him, and by the latter others are no less certainly
damned: the one is an Act of Gods mercy freely and graciously without any
desert at all unto some aabove others afforded by him, and the other is an act
of Justice, and a will to punish such as have offended him, that is the Origin
and Source of all blessings and means of attaining salvation for us in this
life prepared, as St. Austine has defined it. The other is the cause not of
sin (as Calvin affirmed) but of all pain and punishment due to it, that is of
Gods free election, not supposing any good in our selves before it: but this
other is neither decreed nor inflicted by God, all goodness and mercy, but for
some evil formerly committed. Those were not more worthy or better disposed to
be chosen by God, than these other, who made themselves worthy by their ill
deeds to be damned by him.

As those by congruous and effectual graces are helped unto their lives end to
attain Salvation, so these others want not sufficient graces, and helps to be
saved with a free liberty of their wills to make use accordingly of them. God
for his part does most seriously exhort, command, by threats likewise and
promises seek to draw sinners unto him out of a will to save them; so as it
must be imputed unto themselves, when for their sins they justly deserve to be
damned by him. And to conclude this doctrine, as a crown is prepared according
to the merit of such, as are freely predestined and chosen, so are
punishments prepared and inflicted on those, who are reprobated and not chosen,
as by wicked facts they have deserved them. And herein consists the abyssall
depth of Gods mercy to ward his elect, that in a like estate of damnation
incurred by all mankind, he will have mercy of some to save them, and not of
others according to his high pleasure without any wrong at all done to them.

This doctrine destroys the dilemma, or mad arguument of some careless of
their eternal salvation. Either I am predestined or not? If I be, sure I
am, let me do what I will, to be saved. If I be not, let me live never so
holily, sure I am to be damned: because nether part of this collection is true;
for if thou art predestined to glory, it must be by living well, and serving
God as thou should do: and if thou failest in doing so, thou may assure
thy self that thou art predestined, nor can thou have any hope to be saved.
And if thou art not predestined, thou shall, I deny not, certainly be
d^mried, but it shall be for thy own sinful life, which thou might have
ordered otherwise by Gods grace, not denied unto thee, and so have come to be
predestined and saved.

And this free election and predestination of some, and not of others to grace
and glory, increas^th true piety in holy souls, by perfectly subjecting them to
the high will and pleasure of God; and relying on his grace, make them with
fear and trembling work their own salvation, and strive as St. Peter wills
them, by living well and doing good works to make sure their election; not
presuming of their own forces or merits, but solidly grounding themselves in
an humble and confident hope of Gods gracious love and goodness for his sons
sake, and by his inexhausted merits procured for them. Leaving his secret
judgments unto God himself with love and veneration, and without overcuriously
diving into them, so resolved, that during their life (whatsoever shall happen
unto them afterward) they will strive as they can, by the help of his grace to
please, love and serve him.

FINIS.

