AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST IMMODERATE SORROW for the Death of our Friends: Taken from
an assured hope of our Resurrection to Life and Glory.

DELIVERED In a SERMON preached in the Parish Church of North-Wraxall in
Wiltshire, The 12th. of April 1660. At the FUNERAL of S WILLIAM BVTTON Baronet.

By FRANCIS BAILEY his Household Chaplain.

Transfertur vitae morte, non aufertur: Chrysologus. All the days of mine
appointed time, will I wait till my Change come.

Job. c. 14.14. St. Aug. Sermon. 33. de ver. Apost. Deus factus homo, mori and
resurgere voluit, ut and qued futurum esset homini, in hominis carne
ostenderetur, and deo tamen, non homini crederetur.

But now Christ is risen from the dead, and is become the first fruits of them
that slept.

1 Cor. 15.20. London, Printed by W. Godbid for Richard Thrale at the Cross
Keys at St. Paul's Gate entering into Cheapside. 1660.

An Antidote AGAINST IMMODERATE SORROW.
THE TEXT.
1 Thessalonians. c. 4. v. 14. For if we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again, even
so them also who sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.


CUratio funeris Vivorum solatium, the funerals of the dead are then best
performed, St. August. civit. dei. l. 1 Cap. 12.
when the living are most comforted; and what greater comfort at a funeral,
then to treat of a Resurrection, without the hope of which, Christians of all
men were the most miserable; for this is it which does recompense our wet
seeds-time with a serene and joyful Harvest. Should I therefore study to cheer
your drooping spirits, and wash away those briny tears from your blubbered
Cheeks for the loss of our dear friend, or to comfort and fortify your hearts
against the sad approaches of impartial death, which way could I better
compass my design, then by telling you, though we must dye, yet we shall rise
again* that this mortal must put on immortality, and that those that sleep in
Jesus, God will bring again with him to glory; When the Ship wherein our
blessed Apostle St. Paul floated upon the raging billows of the foaming Ocean,
was driven by a tempestuous Euroclydon, insomuch that not only the Soldiers,
but Mariners despaired of safety; how comfortable think you (if credited) was
that saying of the Apostle? there shall not be the loss of any man's life, save
only of the Ship; and shall it be less to us, that though for a time, Acts
26.22.
out body, the Ship of the Soul, which carries her about in the raging Sea of
affliction, be at length swallowed up of the grave, yet our souls shall safely
arrive at the haven of happiness, and at the last day, the Sepulcher that
devouring Leviathan must disgorge her self of her prey, that so the happiness
both of Soul and body may be consummate and complete, and both together partake
of that inheritance, which is laid up for those that love his appearance: With
what cheerfulness does the laborious husbandman undergo his Winters
employment, out of an expectation of a Summers return? would the Soldier think
ye undergo the Battle with so much courage and resolution, were it not to
gain the Victory and wear the Crown? an Heir, though in present want to day,
yet receives comfort from the expectation of a next days Inheritance; we
though by nature we are the children of wrath, yet by grace and adoption we are
the Sons of God, and Heirs to heaven, and death does but convey us to the
possession: well therefore might St. Peter term the hope of life after death
Spes viva a lively hope; for the hope of life immortal is the very life of this
life mortal, and that joy and gladness with which it does affect the heart, is
vitae eternae initium, the very beginning of eternal life: That answer
(doubtless) of the Angel at the Sepulcher to those early, but superfluously
pious women, who came to reimbalme the body of our Savior, resurrexit non est
hic, he is risen, he is not here, was received by them, not only (...) but
joy, and may still sound much of comfort to us, his being the very pledge and
assurance of ours, who by the Apostle Saint Paul is termed primitiae
dormientium, the first fruits of them that sleep; Sen. Not. Quest. lib. 6. cap.
1.
the Stoic therefore erred when he said, non majus mortalitatis solatium quam
ipsamertalitas, that there is no greater comfort against mortality, than
mortality it self, for the consideration of our immortality is a greater; it is
indeed a strong encouragement against mortality, to think that we must dye yet
it is a far greater, that we shall live again; that may cause us to neglect the
stroke of death, but this to embrace it: for the best way to make death seem
easy, is to look through death at glory, not to think so much that we shall
dye, as to believe that we shall rise again; the former may take away the fear
of death, this mitigates our sorrow: I would not have you ignorant brethren,
concerning those that are asleep, that ye sorrow not as others that have no
hope, for if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so them also that
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

The sum of my Text is a reason pressing Moderation of Sorrow, taken from the
certainty of Resurrection to life: of it he lays two grounds; First, The
Resurrection of Christ, If you believe that Christ dyed, etc. Secondly, The
power of God, will God bring with him, and withal limits out the persons to
whom this blessing belongs, those that sleep in Jesus. Having now showed you
the sum of my Text, and drift of the Apostle, give me leave to explain the
meaning of some of the words, as they lie in order, and then I shall lay down a
proposition or two, to enlarge my self upon.

Si enim, if ye believe, and your minds are not infatuated; but Lyra would
have si, to be taken here for quia because, because ye believe; for says he,
it belongs unto the Articles of Faith, to believe that Christ dyed and rose
again, even so those that sleep or depart out of this world, for so the word
(...) in the Original, to sleep, signifies likewise to dye, to depart out of
this world; and it is a word which is proper to express the death of the
righteous, whose death is but a repose of their Bodies in their Graves, and a
rest of their Souls in Gods hands.

But why does the Apostle express the death of Christ and the faithful, by
two several names? he says of Christ who rose and shall never dye, mortuum
fuisse, that he dyed, if ye believe that Jesus dyed? but the faithful he only
calls dormientes, sleeping: Haino gives this reason, Christum appellat mortuum,
says he, he calls Christ dead, because whilst we hear and know that he was
dead and rose again, we also may hope that we shall rise again by virtue of
his Divinity: but he calls the Elect dormientes, sleeping, because no man can
so easily stir up his friend from sleep, as they shall be raised from the sleep
of death.

In Jesus, some would have (...), in Jesus, for (...) for Jesus, because when
men dye for Jesus, by occasion of him, or for Christianity sake, God will bring
them with Christ to a glorious Resurrection. But others take the preposition
(...) to signify the same with (...) in Jesus, that is, in the faith of Jesus;
sub spe fidei hujus, says Saint Ambrose.

Adducet cum eo, shall bring with him into Heaven, to enjoy that blessed
immortality; not that the Resurrection shall be partial, that the wicked shall
not rise, for all shall rise, but all shall not be brought with him; for
[adduci] significat raptum and inductionem undique in nubibus cum honor ad
judicem, says Oecumenius upon this place: for true believers shall be snatched
up in the Clouds to meet Christ with honor, but unbeleevers shall exspect him
coming down, as unworthy to meet him: for all which I shall observe these three
things;

First, The Resurrection of Christ is not only the pledge and assurance, but
the effective principle, and the procuring cause of our Resurrection.

Secondly, Those, and only those, who by a true and living Faith have an
interest in Christ, shall God bring with him to glory.

Thirdly, The death of the faithful is but a sleep, a repose of their Bodies in
their Graves, and a rest of their Souls in the hand of God.

I shall first of all and chiefly insist on the first of these, treating of my
second in the close of my first, and refer the last to a particular
Application, and first of the first of these.

The Resurrection of Christ is not only the pledge and assurance, but the
effective principle, and the procuring cause of our Resurrection.

If ye believe that Christ dyed and rose again, even so those that sleep in
Jesus will God bring with him.

But stay, here seems to be a rub at the entrance, and that on which all is to
be built is questionable, for all depends upon a for, and an if; for if ye
believe, the Family of Love believe it not, accounting the Histories of Christ's
death and Resurrection a mere allegory. Cerinthus the Heretic, acknowledged
that Christ should rise, but not that he was risen; so thought, and so think
the Jews at this day, grounding their belief upon the false relation of those
suborned Soldiers, his Disciples came by night and stole him away. O infelix
astutia, says S. Augustine; O unhappy craft! O insana stultitia, says
Rhemigius, fond dream of sleeping Watchmen; O sleepy and sottish spirits that
can believe such drowsy witnesses, and give no credit to them that were
waking: Si milites dormicbant, says Chrysostom, if the Soldiers slept, how
could they perceive the theft? if not perceive it, how could they witness it?
how came the Grave clothes to be laid in such order? if they had taken away the
body, linteamina non reliquissent, they would not have left the Linen clothes;
if stolen, sudarium involvere non curassent, they would not have taken such a
care to have laid them in order: and therefore the same Father concludes, non
enim adeo stultus fuisset fur, ut in re superflua tantum laborasset, if the
world had a thief so honest, yet not so foolish to have taken such care in a
matter so superfluous; yet if both, quam oportunitatem habuisset? what time
could he have to strip off those cleaving Cere-cloths; so many Soldiers, so
many Watchmen being present; and therefore not taken away, nor yet stolen, but
is risen; not (...) is raised, but (...), is risen, and as it is in my Text
(...) who rose again; and this shows us the difference between his and the
Resurrections of others; others, before were raised, but he rose again; we
need the help and power of another, but Christ by his own power; for says he,
Have not I power to lay down my life, and to take it up again? they rose,
iterum morituri, to dye again, and therefore says Aquinas, that was but an
imperfect Resurrection; but Christ rose to dye no more, Death has no more
dominion over him, says the Apostle; it was impossible, says the Psalmist,
that he should be holden of it, or that his holy one should see corruption: It
is for a sinner to say to Corruption, thou art my Father, and to the Worm thou
art my Mother, but for our Savior he took no Corruption with his Flesh, the
Flesh therefore that he took, felt no Corruption; he had not lived among us,
had it not been to dye for us; he had not dyed, but to rise again; a necessity
there was for both, ought not Christ first to Suffer, and then to enter into
his glory? a Grave could not engrosse him, whom a Throne did expect; the jaws
and belly of Hell could not alter, much less consume his substance, for this
mortal must put on immortality; not that the Humane nature was changed into the
Divine, but the substance being the same, the qualities were altered;
resurrectio domini non finis fuit carnis, sed commutatio, says Leo, the
resurrection of the Lord was not the annihilation, but the change of the Flesh:
The Body was adorned with refined qualities, but not divested of its former
nature; that body which before could be wounded, is now incorruptible; that
Body which before could be slain, is now immortal, therefore says Chrysologus,
gloria resurrectionis, sepelivit morientis injuriam, the glory of the
Resurrection, has buried the disgrace of the Grave. To Mary Magdalen he said,
noli me tangere, touch me not; to signify, he had clothed his body with
immortality: to his Disciples, videte and palpate, see me and handle me; to
give security he had not changed the substance but the quality; in the one
says Aquinas, he showed gloriam resurgen is, the rare endowments he had
adorned it with upon his rising; Aq. 3. p. q. 55. art. 3. in corp.
in the other he declared veritatem resurrectionis, the evident truth of his
resurrection.

But suppose that Christ dyed, and rose again, and we believe it; Quid nobis?
What benefit is all this to us? Yes, very much, because we by Faith have an
interest in both for says Calvin, Non sibi Christus, sed nobis mortuus est,
and resurrexit; Christ dyed and rose again, not for himself, but us; for all
the hope of ours depends upon that of his, so says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.3. We
are begotten again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead; and the Prophet Isaiah tells us, there goes an influence from this
resurrection, which shall have an operation like that of the dew of the Spring;
which when he will let fall, the earth shall yield her dead: on the Cross we
may see him suffering for sin; in his Resurrection triumphing over Death;
although by his death he merited, and by his suffering the curse was taken
away, yet by his resurrection, the hope of life is begotten again in us; Calvin
gives this reason, Quia ut ille resurgendo, etc. because as he by rising became
deaths Conqueror; so the victory of our Faith does consist in the
resurrection; agreeable to that of the Apostle, who dyed for our sins, but rose
again for our justification. It Is true, the death of Christ is the fundament,
but his resurrection is the complement of our salvation, and therefore Aquinas,
amongst other reasons why he gives that it was necessary that Christ should
rise again, makes this the last, but not the least; ad complementum salutis
nostrae, for the perfecting of our Salvation; for says he, Christ by rising
himself, bequeathed unto us an everlasting one, he is therefore termed the
resurrection and the life, because to us he is the Author of both. Hence St.
Paul, Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then ye also shall
appear with him in glory; and as it is further expressed, Heb. 5.9. He being
made perfect, became the Author of eternal salvation, to all them that obey
him, for as in Adam all dyed, so in Christ shall all be made alive, therefore
Col. 3.18. he is called head of the Church, and firstborn from the dead; not
only because he raised himself from death to immortal glory, but because he is
principium effectivum etc. the effective principle, and cause of the rising of
all his Members, not only the meritorious cause, who by his passion and victory
over death, merited a glorious resurrection for us; as it is Romans 8. Not only
the exemplary cause, for the glorious resurrection of Christ, does show unto us
an example of our future Resurrection unto glory, is it is Phil. 3.21. Who
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body; but the efficient cause, hence by the Apostle he is called primitiae
dormientium, the first fruits of them that slept, 1. Cor. 15.20. But now is
Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept. now
he is called the first fruits of them that sleep, because as under the Law, the
offering of the first fruits was the cause of blessing and consecrating all the
rest of the fruits; primitiae enim frugum non consecrabantur Deo ut solae
essent sanctae, sed ut reliquus anni proventus sanctificaretur. Zanchie; the
first fruits were not consecrated unto God, that they alone might be holy, but
that all the increase of the year might be blessed, for thus were they made
sacred; one sheaf is taken out from the rest, which sheaf was called the first
fruits, that in the name of the rest in lift up alost and shaken to and fro
before the Lord; that done, not only the Sheaf so lifted up was holy, but all
the Sheaves in the Field were holy no less than it; and the rule is, Romans
11.16. If the first fruits be holy, all the lump is so too and thus fares it
in the resurrection, We are all dead (says the Apostle) dead sheaves, all,
one, and that is Christ, was in the manner of a sheafe taken out of the number
of the dead, and in the name of the rest, lift up from the grave, by virtue
whereof, the first fruits being restored to life, all the rest of the dead are
entitled to the same hope in that he was not lift up for himself alone; for
Christ rose not as a private person to himself alone, but as a public example
representing and effecting it to us all: the same nature and property shall be
derived from the roots to the branches, from the head to the Members; the
rising were untoward and preposterous, should not the head rise first; it were
imperfect and fruitless, should not the Members follow after; decet
quemadmodum praecessit caput, says St. Bernard, it is but natural proportion
that as the head is gone before, the Members should follow after, which are
quickened by the same spirit, First to the life of grace, then of glory; But if
the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in your mortal
bodies, he that raised up Jesus from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies; Romans 8.11. Whereas Oecumenius observes, he says not (...), but (...),
to put a difference between raising the just and the unjust; all shall have
(...), their rising again, but all shall not be quickened; (...) is of a larger
extent then (...), it is not to life alone, but (...), to life and glory; and
they are those that sleep in Jesus, says the Apostle, that adducet cum eo, God
will bring with him, such who have an interest in him by faith; which is the
limitation of the persons, to whom this blessing belongs, my next part, which I
promised to handle, and now offers it self to our Consideration, which I
reduced to this proposition.

2. Only those who have an interest in Christ by faith, will God bring with
Christ to glory.

The wicked shall awake out of the dust, and rise again, but to endless
torments; it were well with these wretches if the Sea and Grave might still
retain them; better still to say to the worms you are my brethren and Sisters,
and to corruption, thou art my mother, then having broke alliance with them, to
be in a far worse family of the damned Spirits, when God shall dismiss them
with a go ye cursed into Hell fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels; it
is remarkably set down, Matt. 27.52. That when Christ rose many dead bodies of
the Sts. arose, not one wicked man, to premonish us, that none shall rise with
him to glory, but such who are incorporated into him by faith. Therefore says
he, whosoever beleiveth in me, shall never dye, Joh. 26. That is the second
death; for he that has part in the first resurrection, over him the second
death has no powen; it was to the faithful Servant that Christ said, enter
into the joy of the Lord, but cast the unprofitable Servant into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Matt. 25. It was the
Interest of St. Paul, had in Christ by faith, that enabled him to his cupio
dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved; and therefore was he assured of the Crown,
because he had kept the faith; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith, henceforth, there is laid up a crown of glory
for me; nothing can unty this knot, or break this union which a true faith
makes between Christ and a Christian, nor life, nor death, nor powers, nor
principalities, says the Apostle; this enabled Moses to contemn the pleasures
of Pharaohs Court, because he knew that in heaven he had a better and a more
enduring substance. True, St. Paul tells us, that he is the Savior of all, but
especially of them that believe for he is the Savior of all, in that he
offered up a full price for an universal redemption, but the wicked have lost
their interest, by reason of unbeleif; all shall rise to judgment, the wicked
to the judgment of condemnation, but the faithful to the judgment of
approbation, or absolution; which in Scripture is termed the judgment of
life, Joh. 5.28. for the hour shall come, in the which all that are in the
graves, shall hear his voice and come forth, the good to the resurrection of
life, and the evil to the resurrection of condemnation; he knows how to
distinguish between the rares and the wheat, between the Sheep and the Goats,
as he has a burn for the one, so he will burn up the other with
inextinguishable fire; as hehath a venite for those on his right hand, so he
has an ite maledicti, go ye cursed for those on his left hand, for he is
judge of all, and shall raise all; he is head of his own Body, and shall
quicken them; as Judge he shall draw all to his Tribunal seat, and in flaming
fire shall render vengeance to them that have not known God; as it is 2 These.
1. as head he knows his own Members, and the Clouds shall catch them up, and
they shall for ever remain with the Lord, for the very Spirit of our
Regeneration, is the very earnest of our Resurrection to Glory, giving unto us
a beginning of Spiritual life, and a right unto the Resurrection of life
eternal. Therefore says Tertullian, per regenerationem corpora nostra
inaugurari huic resurrections, by Regeneration our Bodies are consecrated to
this Resurrection, and Death conveies us to the possession of that place which
is prepared for those that believe on him; therefore says our Savior, I go to
prepare a place for you, that where I am, there you may be also; which in
Scripture is called an Inheritance, to show the right and title we have unto
it, not by Purchase, but of Grace; not according to our merits, but the
abundance of his mercy; a Kingdom, yea (...), the Kingdom of Heaven, to which
the faithful only have a right and title, and that by deed of gift. Fear not
little flocks (says our Savior) for it is your Fathers good pleasure, to give
you the Kingdom; which the Apostle calls (...), which cannot be shaken; such
whose joys Eyes has not seen, nor Ears heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of Man. Indeed we read Heaven sumptuously set forth unto us, Rev. 21.18.
the gates and foundation thereof of Pearl and Precious Stones, not that there
is any such thing in Heaven, or that Heaven is any such thing; but God is
pleased to condescend so far to our weakness, yea to sense it self, as to
pencil and limn it forth unto us, by such things as seem most precious unto us;
for God need not be beholding to Stones, though precious, to make Heaven
glorious, for God himself sills Heaven with glory, and makes it infinitely
glorious; God in glory, is the glory of Heaven; to conclude, it is the fruition
of God the Father, it is the fruition of Christ, that Pearl of price; it is the
fruition of the holy Ghost, the Spirit of Comfort, it is the perfection and
fullness of Grace; it is an eternal Sabbath, a Rest, a Rest in the Lord, in
whom there is all Rest; it is a Rest after all motions; all pantings after him
here, are but Rests in him there. But I shall not spin out the small scantling
of my time, into those thin and aerie discourses with the Schoolmen, by
describing the rare qualities that our Bodies shall then be adorned with; let
that of the Apostle suffice, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. It is sown in Corruption, it is
raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, it is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power. Nor with others, positively and
presumptuously, by defining the Time and Place of our Resurrection, since my
Text mentions neither, only it says it will be, but when, God only knows;
for non vobis datum, says our Savior Christ to his Disciples, to you it is
not given to know the times and the seasons, which the Father has put into his
own hands; Acts 1.7. The Angels are ignorant of it, yea the Son of God knows it
not as Man (say some) or, ut nobis aperiat, that he may declare it unto us (say
others;) novit sibi, nescit mihi says Saint Ambrose, he knows it for himself,
but not for me, and by it checks our curiosities, that we might not endeavor to
fathom that, which the Angels are content to be ignorant of. The omniscient
wisdom of God keeps us ignorant of the time, that we might not always be
sleeping in the bed of security, but by an holy preparation to make our selves
worthy of Christ's invitation, whenever he shall be pleased to call us; for we
are apt to defer things to the last period of time, and like those foolish
Virgins, whose sloth and security debarred their entrance: ideo nescis, ut
semper sis paratus, says Saint Augustine, thou art therefore ignorant, that
thou may always be prepared? and this was our Saviors meaning in the 13 of
Mark, Take heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is; that so
whenever it shall be, we may be found in him by Faith, and then we may be
sure that God will bring us with him to glory.

Sadduces, who held that there was no Resurrection, nor Angels, nor Spirits,
Act. 23. some such there were in Saint Paul's time, how say some among you, that
there is no Resurrection? 1. Cor. 15. and I fear me too many in this our age,
and so take away all hope of happiness, all encouragement unto goodness. Qui
enim arat, arat ut metat, qui pngnat, puguat, ut vincat, Chrysostom, in every
action the virtue of working is from a thing to come; he that ploughs, ploughs
to reap, he that fights, to overcome; take away the hope of the Resurrection,
and farewell all care of godliness; dispossess men of this hope, then
farewell Faith and Honesty, and welcome that Epicurean Song, Let us eat and
drink, what though to morrow we dye. Calvin therefore tells us, that whosoever
denies the Resurrection, Ecclesiae jugulum recte petit, cuts the very throat of
Religion. Saint Paul therefore tells us the many inconveniences that follow
this absurdity once granted; 1 Cor. 15. if the dead rise not, Christ is not
risen, then our Preaching and your Faith is in vain, then those that are asleep
in Christ are parished, Christians then of all men are most miserable: why then
that custom of being baptized for the dead? to what end are these Funeral
solemnities, if the dead rise not at all? for so Beza, taking the word in the
middle voice, understands this place, eur ablutione utuntur? why do you wash
the dead? do men give respect where there is no hope? if the Corpse shall for
ever perish, to what end do you wash them? either down with these Funeral
solemnities, or else confess a Resurrrection. Nay, says he, why do we every
day stand in jeopardy? why have I endured so many afflictions, if the dead rise
not? Sola spe pius in hac vita differt ab impio; qui futuram spem tollit,
tollit pii, impii differentiam; in this life the godly and the wicked only
differ in hope, he that takes away this hope, takes away the difference, pares
crunt, then they that do, and they that suffer injury are alike, then had
Jacob been more foolish then Esau-Noah more brutish then the old world, Moses
sottish to leave the Court, and the Disciples senseless to leave all to follow
a Crucified Christ: But Saint Paul to make all sure, and to stop the mouth of
Cavil it self, tells us that this mortal must put on immortality, upon which
says Testullian, he could not have spoken more plain, nisi cutem suam in
manibus teneret, unless he had taken his flesh, and held it in his hand. And
Saint Cyprian writing upon the Apostles Creed, tells us, that it was a custom
in the Eastern Church to sing, credo resurrectionem hujus carnis, I believe the
Resurrection of this flesh; for truly, if the same body arise not, it should
not be called a Resurrection, but a transformation, uisi anima idem corpus
numero resumeret, says Aquinas; for Resurrection of resurgere, is denuo
surgere, quia surget, quod cadet; for why should not the flesh which has been
co-worker, and joynt-martyr with the Soul, participate a proportionable guerdon
with the Soul? or how can it stand with the justice of God, that one body shall
victoriously fight his battails, and another which never appeared in the
quarrel be honored with the crown? for the Body and the Soul have here
together been common actors either of vice or virtue, and therefore it is but
justice and reason, that they should communicate together the reward of their
good deeds, or the punishment of their evil.

But yet there is no truth so positive, but has found contradictions, this the
Atheist nor the Heretic can be persuaded to believe: let Paul preach it at
Athens, they account him a babbler, for they had learnt it from their old
Master Aristotle, that a privatione ad habitum non datur regressus, that from a
privation to an habit, from death to life, there can be no return. Heathen
Doctors could not be persuaded, that a thing once perished and gone, could in
the same nature be restored again unto it self: those that dreamed of a
transformation of Body, and a transmigration of Souls, could never think of
the Resurrection both of Soul and Body; when we see that Flowers fade and live
again, Seeds are not quickened unless they dye, dies in noctem moritur, says
Tertullian, each night is the last days Funeral, and then what is the morning
but a Resurrection? Sol quotidie nascetur, quotia^e moritur. Chryso^. Sermon.
^13. the Sun is every day born, and every day dies, and daily rises again; the
times whilst they pass away perish, when they return they revive. This Seneca
the Philosopher found out, mors intromittit vitam, non eripit, venit iterum qui
nos in lucem reponet, die^; death is an intermission, not a loss of life,
there shall come a day of restoration, and these eyes shall enjoy their former
light. Tertullian therefore endeavors to demonstrate it from the Phaenix
springing up new-lived out of her own ashes; from Flies lying dead all the
Winter, and reviving with the heat of the Sun in the Summer, and so concludes,
omnia pereundo servantur, omnia interitu reformantur, all things are preserved
by perishing, and perfected by dying: this Saint Paul thought so apparent, that
he accounts him little less then a Fool that perceives it not: Thou fool, that
which thou sowest is not quickened unless it dye, 1 Cor. 15. Why should we
think that God to whom nothing is impossible, cannot as well renew as create
us? for who sees not minus est reparare quod erat, quam fecisse quod non erat,
it is a work of much less power to restore that which sometimes was, then to
create that which never had been; he that once made it of nothing, can easily
raise it to it self again: therefore says Chrysostom, Quid enim est, dic
quaeso facilius, an ex nihilo ad hoc, ut sint deducere, aut dissoluta excitare,
and restituere? I prithee tell me which is easiest, either from nothing to
bring them to this that they be, or being resolved to restore them again? God
can fetch our Members wheresoever they are, that could make them when as yet
they were not: what then though thy body be overwhelmed of the Sea, and the
Fishes devour it, entombed in the Earth, and the Worms consume it? since they
must one day justly restore what they have robbed thee of? insomuch that a true
Christian, even then, when he is expiring, may say with Job, I know my Redeemer
lives, and though after my Skin, Worms consume my Body, yet in my Flesh I
shall see God: Thus Martha believed her brother should rise again. Paul
confessed before Foelix, that he had hope of the resurrection; and forbids the
Thessalonians to mourn as men without hope, because the dead should rise again;
yea Christ dyed and rose again, and therefore likewise shall we rise again.

Secondly, since we believe that Christ is risen, and that we shall one day
rise with him to glory, this should teach us to set our affections on those
things that are above, that where our treasure is, there our hearts may be
also, and not to door on these things below, which moth can corrupt, and
Theives break thorew and steal; for says the wise man, riches are no: for
ever, Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not, for riches
certainly make themselves wings, and fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven.
Habent (says St. Augustine) si non finem tuum, finem suum, si non finem suum,
finem suum; they have either thy end, or their own end, if not their own end,
thy end; that is, either they will be taken from thee, or thou must one day be
taken from them; and as Parisiensis has it, nec plenitudinem confer possunt
continenti, etc. They can neither satisfy those that have them, nor defend
those that trust in them, nor being fruit to those that labor for them; what
therefore shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and loose his own soul.

Thou voluptuous wretch, and prodigal Spend-thrift, who do spend all thy time
in hunting after the vanities of this world, whose God is thy belly, and glory
thy shame, what felicity, what contentment can thou find in it? perhaps son:
a time thou may please thy palace with some delightful vast, delight thine
eye with some exquisite Beauty; and hug thy self with that Eplcure an Lull^bie;
ed^, bibe, lude, soul ear, drink, and take thy rest, thou have much good lay
drup for thee for many years, but what follows? thou sool, this night shall thy
soul be taken from thee; Thou covetous wretch and griping miser, thou that are
always gaping after the much of this world, and knows no other God but thy
wea^^, who does not use but serve the world, what foelicity can thou find in
that wherein there is no fullness; why do thou (...) after that with so much
eagerness, which is to be preserved with so much care and trouble? why do
thou become thus cruel to thy self, that thou may be beneficial to thou
know not whom? and heapest up riches, and know not who shall enjoy them?
therefore our Savior Christ to take away this carking and caring out of the
minds of Christians, having first sent them to School to the fowls of the Air,
and the Lillies of the field, who could read unto them a lecture of Gods
providence; makes this inference, therefore take no thought, what ye eat, or
what ye shall drink, or wherewith ye shall be clothed; but seek ye first the
Kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof; majora quaeritis ad majora
nati; ye are born for greater things, and therefore seek them upon which, says
Chrysologus, miserumcui cum detur regnum suspirat panem; miserable is that man
on whom a Kingdom is bestowed, who is still carking and caring for bread: that
saying of Alexander the great when but a Prince, was a notable one, and may
serve for our instruction, who when he was invited by some to run in a race
with certain Plebejans, replied, regis filio non convenire, ut in stadio
curreret nisi cum regibus; it became not the Son of a King to run with any but
such who were like himself, Princes: Is it for one who is running a race for
some rich prize, to catch at every fly, or to stoop to take up every pebble? or
for an heir apparent to the Crown, to play with toys, or to delight with
rattles? no, the child of God moves in a higher Sphere, and fixes his
contemplations on better objects; they account heaven their home, this life a
pilgrimage, and themselves but strangers, therefore says our Savior Christ to
his Disciples, ye are not of this world, the wicked are of this world, as well
in mind as body; the children of God, although they live in this world, yet
they are not of this world; for says St. August. Qui non diligunt mundum, non
habitant in ^o qu^d non diligunt; they that do not love the world, may not
properly be said to dwell in that which they do not affect; for our
conversation is in heaven, says St. Paul, whence we look for the coming of our
Lord Jesus: who shall change our vile bodies, that it may be made like unto his
glorious body. Phillippians 3.20.21.

Thirdly, Lord, if he sleep he shall do well, (said the Disciple of Christ,
concerning Lazarus) upon which says St. Aug. Solet enim somnus aegrotantium,
salutis indicium, The sick man's sleep is a forerunner of his health; and Death
is no more to Gods Children, for it not only mitigates, but wholly takes away
our griefs; Ut remedium videatur non paena; St. Amb. de Cain. et Abel lib. 2.
cap. 10. that it might seem a remedy, and not a punishment. Chrysologus tells
us that death is therefore called a sleep, because no one can so easily raise
his friend from sleep, as God can us from the grave; for says the Text, it is
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye: But Aquinas on my Text, tells us that
death is called a sleep because it resembles it in these two things, first,
because he that lays down to sleep, does it spe resurgendi, out of an hope to
rise again, and Death is but asleep somewhat longer then ordinary; Man, says
Job, if he dye shall not be awakened again, until the heavens be no more, Job.
14.12.2. Men usually rise from sleep refreshed with it, in a better plight then
they were before, so says the Apostle, this mortal when it awakes, shall put
on immortality; when I awake up after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied with
it, Psalm. 17.15. Why then these blubbered cheeks, this immoderate Sorrow for
the death of our friends, since they are but asleep in the Lord, and shall be
brought with him to glory? plangere non est eorum qui spem habent, tu autem qui
expectas resurrectionem, cur luges and lamentaris, let wretched and hopeless
infidels lament, why do thou grieve, that expects a resurrection, yea, it is
the very reason why the Apostle calls death here but a sleep in the Lord,
because from the hope of the resurrection we might moderate our Sorrow. I would
not have you ignorant brethren, concerning them that are asleep, that you
sorrow not as men without hope, for the godly deceased are not lost for ever,
but left for a time; not gone away from us, but sent to heaven before, and
there secure of their own immortality, and sollicitous of our safety, desire
our society. For if that be true, that life without Christ is death, then this
is as true, that death in Christ is life, for blessed are the dead that dye in
the Lord: Have thou then lost a Son or a father, a wife or a husband? why
should thou grieve at their advancement, for they have but changed a cross
for a crown, a vale of misery, for eternity of happiness; who could they now
speak with us, they would advise us with our Savior, weep not for me, but weep
for your selves, I have lost a Clod of earth, and inheritance of a Span, but I
have found an everlasting Crown of Glory. Mourn indeed we may, so says St.
August. Contristemur in nostrorum mortibus, we may mourn for the death of our
friends, because we have lost them, but comfort our selves, because we shall
one day enjoy them. Mourn indeed we may for them, but moderately, so says the
son of Sirach; thus did Abraham for Sarah, the Children of Israel for Moses,
and 'twas a custom among the Jews, no less venerable then ancient, man goes
to his long home, and the Mourners walk about the Streets, Ecclesiast. 12.15.
'twas accounted no less then an act of love in our Savior when Lazarus was
dead, because he wept, see how he loved him? Pietas plorare jubet, for love
indeed commands a tear, but faith forbids a deluge. That Counsel which Seneca
gave his friend Polybius, may serve for a Christians imitation; reason has
done enough if she restrain the Excess of Sorrow, but to have it wholly rooted
out, no man ought either to hope or desire it; let our hearts flow, let them be
stayed, let our sighs be drawn from the bottom of our hearts, but let them
have an end; for though we may enbalme our dead friend with a charitable tear;
yet we (...) take heed that we deluge not our faith in the Gulf of despair:
Sorrow we may so far as it is agreeable with the rules of humanity and true
piety, but if it exceed the bounds of Christian moderation, we show our selves
rather hopeless Infidels, then believing Christians; That advice of the Son of
Sirach is good and remarkable, Ecclesiasticus 38.16.17. My Son pour forth tears
over the dead and begin to mourn as if thou had suffered great harm thy self,
and then cover his body according to his appointment, and neglect not his
burial; Make a grievous lamentation and be earnest in mourning, and use
lamentation as he is worthy, and that a day or two, least thou be evil spoken
of, and then comfort thy self for thy heaviness, and as it is verse 23. seeing
the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest, and comfort thy self again for
him, when his Spirit is departed from him; where he shows that there are three
things that are due to the dead, Sepulture, mourning, and moderation in
mourning; the two former you have and are still performing; it is my part,
though interessed in the loss, to moderate the last; not to persuade you to
become senseless Stoics, unconcerned in the loss of a friend; but true
Christians, Nam non lugere inhumanum est, nimium lugere muliebre; illud rigidi
est pectoris, istud mollis and abjecti, not to be sensible of the loss of a
friend is little less then inhumanity, to grieve above measure, womanish, the
one argues a flinty, the other a faithless heart.

But perhaps thou will say I have lost a dear friend, a most loving husband,
one in whose breast dwelt nothing but goodness and piety; shall thy passion
still make thee senseless? will thou make that an argument to increase thy
grief, which should be the chiefest motive to augment thy comfort, for thus
dying they are happy, for the death of such are precious in the sight of God;
who therefore takes them out of this miserable world, that he might take them
to himself; could you love them and yet greive that they are happy, could they
be thus happy and not dye? in truth, nature knows not what she would have, we
can neither abide our friends miserable in their stay, nor happy in their
departure; True, if they were perished or utterly lost, I could not blame you,
if you then took up Rachels complaint; but since Death is their preferment,
such love which moves you still to lament, is injurious. Saint Chrysostom puts
this question, why Children and Patents, Wife and Husband, enjoy not one the
other so long now, as in the days of the Patriarchs? and gives this reason,
speaking of Sarahs behavior toward Abraham: Quoniam e^ vivente deum
praetulit, because whilst he lived, she preferred God before him. And again,
speaking of Abraham toward Sarah, Quoniam ca etiam viva deo magis audivit qua
ipsam; because whilst she lived, he hearkened more, to God then her: Neither for
the love of Husband nor of Wife, nor for the care of Child, did any one
provoke God to anger; and concludes, ne diligas maritum plusquam deum, and
nunquam senties viduitatem; love not thy Husband more then God, and thou shall
never feel Widdowhood, for thou shall either enjoy him, or God who will be
better to thee then ten Husbands; for God many times robs us of those friends
which we, nay which God himself loves best, and that both for their, and our
sakes: for their sakes he takes them from the evil to come, for our sakes
weaning us from the love of the World, by depriving us of those Jewels, which
did seem most precious unto us, and therefore let God have them with
cheerfulness, and we shall one day enjoy God with them in glory. Thus David
comforted himself for the death of his Son, I shall go to him, but he shall not
return to me.

Lastly, Is Death but a Sleep? Jacob. and he will rell that life is not only
short but sour: For and evil are the days of my Pilgrimage; here how prettily
St. Augustine emblemes it in his tender Infant, nondum loquitur, and tamen
prophetat, Tears are the first Rhetoric that he uses, by which, before he can
speak he Prophesies, and by a dumb kind of Divination, wailes out the story of
Man's sorrow here. Well therefore might the Grecian call the first day of our
life (...), the beginning of conflicts, and therefore the Thracians did
celebrate the day of their Death with Mirth, and the day of their Birth with
Mourning; yea, says the wise Son of Sirach, better is the day of our Death,
then the day of our Birth: Saint Augustine gives this reason for it, quia per
vitam transitus ad mortem, because by Life we pass to Death, and by Death we
return unto Life; some therefore derive the Greek word (...), Death, from
(...), because it brings us unto God that made us; for death does not only free
us from miseries, but conveighs us to happiness, here we have but arrham
spiritus, the earnest of the Spirit, there we have pretium, the full price;
here we dwelt but in Cottages, whose foundation is in the Dust, but Death
brings us to an habitation made without hands; now we have conversed with Men,
there we shall have the communion with Saints, and fellowship with the Angels;
enjoy visionem illam beatificam, the immediate fruition of God and Christ; let
them spruce Agags cry out, amara mors, Death is bitter; faint-hearted Adrians
expostulate with their trembling Souls, Quaenum abibis in loca? whether art
thou going O my doubtful and trembling Soul? whilst confident and faithful
Hilarions cheerfully resign their Souls into the hands of him that gave them,
with an egredere anima mea, quid times, egredere, quid dubitas? get thee gone O
my Soul, what do fear? get thee gone, what do thou doubt? have thou served
Christ almost these seventy years, and now do thou fear to dye? Christians
should be of that courage, that they should fear nothing but fin; for why
should a man fear Death, which does but restore him to him that made him? time
at mortem, qui deum non timet; sed si sperare desideras, desine timere: Let him
fear Death that fears not God, for nothing makes Death so terrible, as a bad
Life. Let then the fear of God enlarge thy heart, and then thou needst not fear
the day of Death: for here is the difference, the good Man's hope is ever in
Death, but the worldling ends his hope and happiness when he dies: As Ahab
said to Elias, so says he to Death, have thou found me O mine enemy? whereas
the other says as David said to A^imaaz, let come and welcome, for he is a
good Man and comes with good things. Aristotle indeed was wont to call Death,
(...) the most terrible of all terrible for so it is to the Faithless and
wicked Man, to whom it is but the beginning of endless torments; but not to
the child of God, to whom it is but a change, a passage to a better life: it
cannot be terrible unto them, for sin, the sting is pulled out, and though it
may kiss, yet it cannot hurt them, therefore Christ bids them, be of good
cheer, for I have overcome death mors morte redempta, O Death, I will be thy
Death: so that now to Gods children it is an advantage. That which was the
wages of Sin, is now made the reward of Righteousness so says Nazianzen, ita
paena ipsa in m^ser cordi^m ^essit: These were therefore the comfortable words
of a Mother to her dying Son, peto nate suspice coelum etc. I prithee my Son
look up into Heaven, for thy Life is not taken away, but changed or a better:
for says Chrysologus, transfertur vita morte, non aufertur, Life is but
changed, not taken away by Death; when the Sun Sets, he Rises he Sets in our
Hemisphere, and Rises in another: so the faithful, though he Sets here, yet he
Rises in Heaven. O then, the more then thrice happy condition of Believers who
can look Death in the face with a smiling countenance, whilst they look through
it at Glory: who can behold God as their Father? the offended, their surety?
the Judge their Savior? who can therefore resign their Souls with that
Swan-like Simeon, into the hands of their Redeemer? Now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. Consider this
and tremble thou profane Atheist, whose destruction draws nigh, for whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness; scoff not too fast, Christ shall have his
(...), his appearing, desuper ac superne, says Chrysostom, above and below;
the appearing of his Glory, the brightness of his coming, rendering vengeance
to such who know not God, but mock at his coming. Consider this thou careless
and secure Christian, and do no longer dally with thy Repentance, for after
Death there is no place left for it; think not to be of the Church Triumphant,
unless by Faith thou art a Member of the Militant; think to dye the Death,
unless thou do strive to live the life of the Righteous, for he that will
dye comfortably, must live piously; a lively Faith in this, provides Salvation,
which after is not to be obtained. Death is a summoner to Judgment, this Life
is the way, whilst we are in the way let us make our atonement, and defer not
says the Son of Sirach, til Death, to be justified. O consider this, all you
that hear me this day, and neglect no opportunity to have an interest in Christ
by Faith, that when Death shall come to summon us, it may prove but a sleep,
the Grave a Down Bed, and the Resurrection a triumph, at which time we shall be
caught up in the Heavens to meet the Lord, and ever remain with him in
everlasting bliss and happiness.

I have now done with my Text, and come to speak something concerning the
present occasion.

The Papists tell us, that Images are laicorum libri, Laymens Books; I am sure
that dead Bodies are vivorum libri, living men's books, wherein every every one
may read a true lesson of his inevitable mortality; sero aut citius, sooner or
later to the same place, for Death is impartial, and spares neither Peasant nor
Prince.

When I look upon your habit and countenances, I cannot but read in them the
Emblemes of true grief and sorrow: but when I behold this pious Ceremony, it
doubtless bespeaks not only your Charity, but likewise your hope and
expectation of a Resurrection to life, else why this Funeral pomp and
solemnity? indeed Tears and Lamentations are opposite to hope, but a
ceremonious respect does both manifest and bespeak it; for if the dead rise
not, why are ye then Baptized for the dead? why do you wash them? Calvin on the
9. of the Acts intimates the reason, ut in morte ipsa visibilis aliqua
resurrectionis imago piorum animos in bonam spem erigeret, That in Death it
self some visible representation of the Resurrection might erect the minds of
the faithful unto a good hope, undoubtedly believing, that that very Body
should hereafter appear as unblameable before the Tribunal of Jesus Christ, as
after washing, it seemed clean and spotless before the eyes of men. Tell me
says Saint Augustine, De Civ. Dei, 1. Why was Tobyt registered for burying the
Dead? why the Women for anointing? Joseph for embalming the body of our
Savior? Non quod ullus cadaveribus sensus, not that the Bodies were sensible
of this courtesy, but to show that our Bodies though dead, belong unto the
Lord, and to confirm our Faith in the Resurrection: Thus whilst our Faith
adorns a Funeral, a Funeral may increase our Faith. Those dispositions
therefore are little below Barbarous, which snarle at a decent interment of the
dead, for whom notwithstanding. I have not so much charity to pray, that it may
not be their fate to be buried like an Ass, having neither Sepulcher nor
Sexton; as it was said of Jehoiakim, they shall not lament for him saying, Ah
my Brother, or Ah my Sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah Lord, or
All his glory! but shall be Buried with the Burial of an Ass, drawn and cast
forth beyond the gates of Jerusalm.

I doubt not but it is expected, that I should speak something concerning this
our deceased brother; but I wish there had been choice made of one, whom
custom had better versed in these funeral Panegyricks, and parts enabling, to
have lim^'d forth his worth in a more lively Chararacter, But since it is my
task, give me leave to strew some flowers upon his Hearse, and be your
remembrancer of his virtues; whose name shall not rot like the wicked, but like
a jewel shall remain unto posterity, for the righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance: So that to mention, yea to commend the dead, we have
warrant not only from the custom of the Greeks, the Romans, but Gods ancient
people the Jews, and the Primitive Christians, whose funeral Orations are still
extant; nay that little good we find in bad men deserves a register; David
himself penned Saul an Epicaedium, Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant
in their lives, and in their death they were not divided, ye Daughters of
Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in Scarlet with other delights, a Sam.
1.23.

To begin therefore from whence he had his beginning, he was descended from an
ancient and Worshipful Family, which has been always accounted no small
blessing, as a strong obligation, and spur to Worthy and Noble actions, which
were such in him, that his personal Virtues, did add a luster to his natural
Honor. After the care of his Parents and Master had fitted him for Oxford, he
spent some time there under the care and tuition of Dr. Prideaux. Thence
travailing in the company of Sir Arthur Hopton, the Kings Agent, through France
into Spain, and returned by Geneva, having his soul untainted either with the
pompous superstition of the one, or the Phanatick novelty of the other; neither
affecting the supercilious gravity of Spaniard, nor the fantastic levity of
the French, the usual disease of travail; but returning with so much of either,
as might serve to make him an accomplished Gentleman and serviceable to his
Country, had he not lived in an age wherein honesty and loyalty has been
accounted a crime, and a bar to honorable Employments. Afterward marrying
with a virtuous and pious Lady, descending from an ancient and worshipful
family in Devonshire, living together all their time in true Love and Amity,
having not only their hands in marriage, but as it is said of Jonathan and
David their souls knit together in true affection; and though God blessed them
not with any offspring, yet his love was such to her, that he might well have
said as Elkannah did to to Hannah, am not I better to thee then ten Sons, and
though he had none of his own, yet some Orphans might say of him, that they
found in him a father, witness his care and expense toward his Nephews and
Neeces, whose Charity was not only confined to his own relations, but that it
overflowed to others; breeding up the child of a neighbor deceased minister at
School, and not leaving him there, but maintaining him at Oxford, whose
necessity I doubt not, will still be supplied by his charitable Lady.

Yea such was his charity in general unto all, not only those of his own and
neighboring parishes, but whomsoever else necessity does comprize under that
title, that I believe none ever went away unsatisfied, or not having ample
occasion to bless God for him; so that I may say of him as Nazianzen said of
himself; ne mihi accidat, ut dum pauperes egeant, ego ditescam and illorum
inopiae non succurram; the necessity of whom he charitably supplied, so far
from ostentation or pharisaical pride, that I may say of him, that his left
hand knew not what his right hand did, stealing opportunity to supply the
necessity of those, who formerly had lived in a condition to supply the wants
of others.

For his Hospitality toward all, rich and poor, that which St. Paul so much
commends, and Abraham so loved; yea so loves still says Chrysologus, Sermon.
121. ut parum se beatum eredidit, etc. that he would scarce think himself happy
in heaven, if he were deprived of the use and exercise thereof, it was such,
that by it together with his prudence and affability, he won so much upon the
affections of all, that he became the love and darling of his Country; who
doubtless would have testified it in an ample manner, by their free and
voluntary choice of him, to have served as a Member in this succeeding
Parliament; on which the eyes of most (next under God I hope) are fixed for the
settlement of this distracted and almost distructed nation; had not God thought
it fitter, by a writ of remove, to take him from this Lower to that Upper
house, and to make him a Member of his own heavenly Court.

For his Piety toward God, he was a constant frequenter of his Ordinances,
making his house a little model of a Church, where (besides his own private
Devotions) Morning and Evening Sacrifices were daily offered unto God, and I
doubt not, acceptably, they being presented unto him in the same language and
form, which the Church prescribed, greatly admiring at the Piety and Prudence
of the Church in her choice composure, from the which none of his Servants
could presume to be absent, without a severe check, resolving with Joshuah, I
and my household will serve the Lord.

But when his Sickness, which began with a Cold, and continued with a violent
Cough, had confined him to his Chamber, and his Friends became more fearful of
his recovery; I began a serious discourse with him concerning Death and
Mortality, and a due preparation thereunto: he replied, that if God thought it
fittest to take him out of this world, he could patiently submit to his Will;
but if God would be pleased to spare him, he should be thankful, and was
resolved by Gods grace to spend that time which he should add to his days,
more to Gods glory; much like that of the Prophet David, O let my Soul live,
and it shall praise thee; returning me hearty thanks for my spiritual advice
and Counsel; telling me withal, that the oftener my discourse was to this
purpose, the welcomer I should be into his presence; which encouraged me unto
the performance of my duty, with the greater cheerfulness and alacrity; ever
finding his discourse so full of Piety and true contrition, enough to have
confirmed a Christian, and converted an Atheist.

But growing weaker in Body, but increasing in Spiritual strength, he desired
to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which he did with Humility,
Devotion and Cheerfulness, spending the remainder of his time, which was some
two days and nights, almost wholly in Prayer, which was performed by my self
and a neighbour-Minister: he in the interim preaching unto us, such Sermons of
Piety and Contrition, expressing so much grief and sorrow for his sins, such a
true and and lively Faith in the Mercy of God, for the merits of his Savior,
for the pardon and remission of them, that it were little less then
uncharitableness it self to doubt his Salvation.

And when his loving and careful Consort, who would never leave nor forsake
him, until Death writ the Bill of Divorce; lay by him, bemoaning her loss,
and bathing his Pillow with her Tears: he prayed her to be more cheerful, and
not endeavor to keep Death from him, which would soon bring him to Christ: the
like he said to his Servants standing about his Bed, lamenting their loss in
him.

But when his Tongue, which had been an instrument to bless and praise God,
could no longer perform its office, his eyes and hands became his Orators to
Heaven for mercy, with which emploring the assistance of those that stood by in
prayer, which being ended, he turned aside, and not long after fell asleep,
resigning his Soul into the hands of his Redeemer.

In fine, he was, I had almost said what was he not? he was a good Christian, a
loyal Subject, preferring his duty and a good Conscience, (of the which too
many have made Shipwreck) before his F^^are; (...) Son of the Church, a lover
of the Orthodox Clergy, a releiver of the wants of those that suffered for the
testimony of a good Conscience, a most indulgent Husband, a loving Brother, a
fast Friend, a good Landlord, a just man, a charitable benefactor to the Poor,
loving and liberal to his Servants, and now doubtless is entered into his
Masters joy.

But perhaps thou will reply, what, no dross among all this gold? yes
doubtless, otherwise he had been more then Man; he had no question his
failings, his sins and infirmities, so had, and so have the best of Saints,
which he did acknowledge with humility and sorrow: what they were, is not my
business to proclaim, if thou know any, let me advise thee to learn by him
to amend them in thy self; and since he had so much grace to repent of them,
God so much mercy to forgive them, do thou have so much Charity to forget them;
burying them in his grave, where we are going to lay his body, that chamber of
rest, until Christ (...) to awake him, and us altogether with him, to the
(...) bliss both of Body and Soul. Amen.

(...).
FINIS.

