THE PRIVILEGES Of the House of COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT Assembled.

Wherein it is proved their Power is equal with that of the House of Lords, if
not greater, though the King join with the Lords.

However it appears that both the Houses have a Power above the King, if He
Vote contrary to them.

All which is proved by several Presidents taken out of Parliament Rolls in
the TOWER.

By P. B. Gentleman.

December 31 London, Printed for J. R. 1642.

Tudor rose French fleur-de-lis Scottish thistle
The Privileges of the House OF COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT.
WHen after the period of the Saxon time, Harold had lifted himself into the
Royal Seat; the great men to whom but lately he was no more then equal,
either in fo^tune or power, disdaining that Act of Arrogance, called in William
then Duke of Normandy, a Prince more active then any in these Western-parts,
and renowned for many Victories, he had most fortunately achieved against the
French King, then the most potent Monarch in Europe.

This Duke led along with him to this work of glory, many of the younger Sons
of the best Families of Normandy, Picardy, and Flaunders, who as undertakers,
accompanied the undertaking of this fortunate man.

The Usurper was slain, and the Crown by this Duke was gained; and to secure
certain to his posterity, what he had so suddenly gotten, he shared out his
purchase, retaining in each County a portion to support the Dignity, Sovereign,
which was styled Demenia Regni; and assigning to the rest of his Adventures,
such portions as suited to their quality and expense, he retained to himself,
dependancy of their personal service, except such Lands as in free Alms were
the portion of the Church; and these were styled Barons Regis, the Kings
immediate Freeholders, for the word Baro imported then no more.

Now as the King to these, so these to their followers, subdivided part of
their shares into Knights Fees, and their Tennants were called Barons C^mites,
for we (as in the Kings Writs) in their writs, Baronibus suis and Francois and
Anglois, the Sovereign gifts for the most part extending to whole Counties, or
Hundreds; an Earl being Lord of the one, and a Baron of the inferior Donations
to Lords of Townships or Manors.

And as the Land, so was all course of Judicature divided, even from the
meanest, to the highest portion, each several had his Court of Law; preferring
still the manner of our Ancestors, the Saxons, who jura per pages reddebant;
and these are still termed Court-Barons, or the Freeholders-Court, twelve
usually in number; who with the Them or chief Lord were Judges.

The Hundred that was next, where the Hundredus or Aldermanus, Lord of the
Hundred, with the chief Lord of each Township within their Lymits were Judges.

The County or generale placitum was the next, This was to supply the defect or
remedy, the corruption of the inferior Courts. Vbi curiae Dominorum probantur
defecisse, pertinet ad vicecomitem provinciarum; and the Judges here were
Comites, Vicecomites, and Barons Comitatus quiliberas terras habebant.

The last and supreme (and upon which I am to treat) was generale placitum apud
London, Vniversalis Synodus in the Charters of the Conqueror, Capitalis curia
by Glanvile, or magnum and commune consilium coram rege and magnatibus suis.

In the Rolls of Henry the third, It is not Stative but summoned by
Proclamation, Edicitur generale placitum apud London, (says the Book of
Abingdon) whether Epium Duces principes, Satrapae rectores, and causidici ex
omni part confluxerunt ad istam curiam, says Glanvile. Causes were referred,
propter aliquam dubitationem quae emergit in Comitatu, cum Comitatus nescit
dijudicare. Thus did Ethelweld Bishop of Winchester, transfer his suite
against Leostine from the County, ad generale placitum; In the time of King
Etheldred, Queen Edoine against Goda from the County, appeald to King Etheldred
at London, Congregatis principibus and Angliae sapientibus, In the tenth year
of the Conqueror, Episcopi, Comites, and Barons Regni ad Vniversal^m Synodum
pro causis audiendis and tractandis convocati, faith the Book of Westminster;
and this continued all along in the succeeding Kings reign, until toward the
end of Henry the third.

As this great Court or Council, consisting of the King and Barons, ruled the
great affairs of State, and controuled all inferior Courts: So were there
certain Officers, whose transcendent Power seemed to be set to bound in the
execution of Princes Wills, as the Steward, Constable, and Marshall, fixed upon
Families in Fee for many Ages; They as Tribunes of the people, (or ex plori^
among the Atherians) grown by unmanly courage, fearful to Monarchy, fell at
the feet and mercy of the King, when the daring Earl of Leicester was slain at
Evesham.

This chance, and the dear experience, Henry the third himself had made at the
Parliament at Oxford, in the fortieth year of his reign, and the memory of the
many streights his Father was driven unto (especially at Rumny-Mead near
Stanes) brought this King wisely to begin what his Successor fortunately
finished in lessening the strength and power of his great Lords; and this was
wrought by searching into the Regality they had usurped over their peculiar
Sovereign, whereby they were as the Book of Saint Alban^ terms them, Quot
domini tot tiranni; and by the weakening that hand of Power which they carried
in the Parliaments, by commanding the Service of many Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, to that Magnum consilium, or generale placitum, which we still call
Parliament.

Now began the frequent sending of Writs to the Commons, their assent being
used not only in Money, Charge, and making of Laws, (for before all Ordinances
were passed by the King and Peers) but their consent is likewise used in all
Judgments of all Natures, either Civil or Criminal: In proof whereof, I will
produce some few presidents out of Record.

When Adamor that proud Prelate of Winchester, the Kings half Brother, had
grieved the State by his daring Power, he was exiled by joint sentence of the
King, the Lords and Commons; and this appears expressly by the Letter sent
from Pope Alexander the fourth, Expostulating a Revocation of him from
banishment, because he was a Churchman, and so not subject to any censure; to
this the answer was, Si dominus Rex and regni Majores hoc vellint (meaning his
Revocation) Communitas tamen ipsius ingressum in Angliam nullatenus sustincret.
The Peers subsigned this answer with their names; and Petrus de Mountford vice
totius communitatis, as Speaker of the Commons. Lib. S. Alban. fol. 20. Anno
44. H. 3.

And by that style, Sir John Tiptofe, Prolocutor, affirms under his Arms, the
deed of intail of the Crown by King Henry 4. in the 8. year of his reign for
all the Commons.

The banishment of the two Spencers in Edward the seconds time, praelati
Comites and Barons and les auters Peers de la terre and Communes de be
Roialme, give consent and sentence to the Revocation and Reversment of the
former sentence; The Lords and Commons accord, and so it is expressed in the
Roll.

When Elizabeth the Widow of Sir John de Burgo complained in Parliament, that
Hugh Spencer the younger, Robert Boldock, and William Clift his Instruments had
by duresse, forced her to make a writing to the King, whereby she was despoiled
of all her Inheritance; sentence is given for her in these words, Pur ceo que
avis est al Evesques Counts and Barons and les auters grandes, and a tout
Cominalte de la terre que le dit escript est suit encounter le ley, and tout
manner de raison si suist le dit escript per agard del Parliament dampne
elloques al liver a le dit Elizab.

In Anno the fourth of Edward the third, Prarl. Prim. rot. 11. It appears by a
Letter to the Pope, That to the sentence given against the Earl of Kent, the
Commons were Parties, as well as the Lords, or Peers; for the King directed
their proceeding in these words; Comitibus Magnatibus Baronibus and alliis de
Communitate dicti regni ad Parliamentum illud congregatis injunximus ut super
his discercerent and judicarent quod rationi and justitiae conveniret, and
haberent pro oculis solum deum qui eum concordi, etc.

When in the fortieth year of Edward the third, the Lords had pronounced the
sentence against Richard Lions, otherwise then the Commons agreed to. The
Commons appeald to the King himself, and had redress, and the sentence entered
to their desires; Yet this does not prove that the Kings Power is so far
beyond the Parliaments, as that he can do what he will, notwithstanding them.

When in the first year of Richard the second, William Weston, and John
Jennings, were arraigned in Parliament, for surrendering certain Forts of the
Kings; the Commons were parties to the sentence given against them as appears
by a Memorandum annexed to that Record.

In the first of Henry the fourth, Although the Commons referred by
Protestation, the pronouncing of sentence of deposition against Richard the
second, unto the Lords; yet they are equally interressed in it, as it appears
by the Record. For there was made Proctors or Commissioners for the whole
Parliament, one B. one Abbot, one Earl, one Baron, and two Knights, Gray and
Erpingham, for the Commons; and to infer, that because the Lords pronounced
the sentence, the point of judgment should be only theirs, were as absurd as
to conclude, That no authority was left in any other Commissioner of Oyer and
Terminor, then in the Person of that man solely that speaks the sentence.

In the second of Henry the fifth, The Petition of the Commons imports, no
less then a right they had to Act and Assent to all things in Parliament, and
so it was answered by the King; and had not the adjournall Roll of the higher
House bin left to ^he sole entry of the Clark of that House (who either out of
his neglect to observe due form, or out of purpose to obscure the Commons
right, and to flatter them, which he immediately served) there would have been
frequent examples of all times to clear this doubt, and to preserve a just
interest to the Commonwealth; and most conveniently does it suite with
Monarchy to maintain this form, least others of that well framed body, knit
under one head should swell too great and monstrous: Monarchy again may sooner
groan under the weight of an Aristocracy as it once did, then under Democracy,
which it never yet either felt or feared.

FINIS.

