Certamen Religiosum: OR, A CONFERENCE Between His late Majesty CHARLES KING
of England, and HENRY late Marquess and Earl of Worcester, concerning Religion;
at His Majesty's being at Raglan Castle, 1646.

Wherein the maine differences (now in Controversy) between the Papists and
the Protestants is no less briefly then accuratly discussed and bandied.

Now published for the worlds satisfaction of His Majesty's constant affection
to the Protestant Religion.

By THO: BAYLIE Doctor in Divinity and Sub-Deane of Wels.

Mutare vel timere sperno. Printed by H. Hills in S. Thomas's Southwark, and are
to be sold by George Whittington, at the Sign of the Blew-Anchor in Cornhill
near the Royal Exchange. 1649.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
NEver was there a greater conflict within my breast, then concerning the
publishing of this controversy in Religion: between His late Majesty, and the
late Marquess of Worcester: If I did not publish it, I thought I bereaved the
late King, of the praises which were due unto Him; relating to His constancy in
Religion: If I did, I thought (that in regard His late Majesty's immergencies
drew him away from Raglan, so that he could not possibly stay to answer the
last paper) I should be unmannerly, to set out a book, that should present a
subject, giving his Sovereign the last word, whilst homage, controverted with
Majesty.

Neither did I think it loyalty, to seem, so much, to make a Crown, the Anvile,
whereon so many arguments should be wrought, by a contrary hand: wherefore I
once intended to have left out the Marquesses last paper, and to have ended
with His Majesty's: this wariness of seeming to present a King worsted any
way, had almost persuaded me, to be no less injurious to the Reader, then to
truth her self, and partial in my undertaking.

But when I considered, how that the greater the temptation, the stronger the
resistance; and how thar it would declare to the world, His late Majesty's well
groundednesse in His Religion, as not to be shaken with the strongest winds:
and when I considered, how that Charles King of England, was the first man in
the World, who was not believed, cordially, to have been of that Religion,
which at His death, he made so solemn profession, to have lived, and dyed in:
And when I considered, the many scandals, and obloquies cast upon Him, in that
particular (both by writings and rumors of the People; both before and after
His death; and called upon by diverse, to whom I had, upon occasions given,
communicated these particulars recited in the Controversy) I could do no
less then (in the vindication of the dead King, and to testify so much of
truth as lay in me) pin these papers upon his Hearse, whereby you may read Him
otherwise, then according to the impression, which those false papers had
received, and their publications had spread abroad; and how in this discourse,
and controversy, the late King, showed himself, not only able, constant, and
resolute in His Religion; but, as the case then stood with Him, resisted a very
strong temptation; for at that time the King was low, and wanted help: poor,
and wanted money: and no man in the Kingdom was then, likelyer to help to
both, then he, who, to the utmost of his power, never denied Him either; and
would at this time, willingly, have parted with all, if His Majesty could have
been guilty, but of so much dissimulation, a thing by some thought necessary in
Princes, as not to have left the Marquess altogether in despair, of ever
accomplishing his design upon Him: but such was His Majesty's constancy in
Religion, as to exchange freedoms with him: His Majesty rather choosing that His
necessity should not ask his Lordship any thing, then that any hope, which His
Majesty should give his Lordship, should, in the least, oblige his Lordships
expectation to a lapse; but slided off the temptation, with such a regardlesse
taking notice of it, as if moneys could have been raised out of the name of
King, and contribution could be had out of the Kings flesh; as if, like the
great Pompey, who being asked by his friends, in his great distress, what he
would do for men, made answer, that he would but stamp with his foot upon the
ground, and men should rise out of the earth, Plut in vit Pomp. as if he meant
through impossibilities to cut out and plain himself away to a relief, that was
beyond all hope, but that, which trusted to a reserve, that should drop down
from Heaven; rather then to follow a plain and chalked out way, guided by all
the necessaries requisite for such a journey, which tended not to the end, that
was agreeable to His former professions. Thus whilst the King was upon the
refusing posture in Raglan Castle to maintain His constancy; false friends (in
other Garrisons) were upon the taking hand to betray their trust: thus the
helmet of salvation, (which only preserves the head) is not a sufficient
panoply for a Christian warfare, where the shield of faith and the breast plate
of righteousness are both wanting in the members.

Reader, I here present you with a conflict, between the two greatest assertors
(between the four Seas) of the Roman and the Protestant Religion: I make no
question, but several censures will pass upon the work: some will censure
because they cannot otherwise choose, it is so natural to them, that they needs
must, they cannot help it: these men are most to be excused; yet their censures
are least to be regarded: Others (really judicious and ingenuous) will commend
(where they see cause) yet not any must expect it (at their hands) without a
But: for then it is possible a work may be so perfect, as to be above theit
censures: these are not to be blamed; Authors must be behoulding unto such, for
dealing so favorably, as to confer some acts of grace on those, who are wholly
at their mercy.

But there are a sort of censurers who can root-and-branch a cause, and give
reasons for their unreasonableness, who (parhaps) say, there was no such thing
as such a controversy; this is none of the Kings style; it is unpossible the
Marquess of Worcester should be such aschelar. As to the first: I say there
was such a controversy, here I show it: what is become of his negative? He
will give a reason why there was not, viz. It is none of the Kings style: to
which I answer, that it is well if my memory could recollect all the series of
arguments, as they were urged by His Majesty, though I could not the very
words whereof they were so directly composed: And you must abate them some
alowance (in their excellency) by reason of the tainture they must needs
receive by running through so mean a quill: and you must grant me this also,
that the late King was not altogether so good an orator, as He was a penman:
and I write only what He spoke, I transcribe none of His writings.

For the Marquess of Worcesters learning, he that knew him well, knew him to
be more then ordinarily versed in controversy, especially for a man who was no
professed Scholar, and a nobleman; besides, you must imagine, this to be a
business of long deliberation (on his part) and that he was not without those
helps that could (and no question did) assist him, with all the force that was
in argument.

If any shall say, that the publisher of this controversy, did ill to present
the Church of Rome, dressed in such specious apparences of truth, to the
startling of men's consciences.

I answer, that if that Champion of the Philistians, had not been discribed
unto us according the full height of that stature he was of, nor the
description of his armor according to the substance of his headpiece, and the
weight of his coat; nor the formidablenesse of his weapon, according to the
vast dimension of his staff: nor the terribility of his speers head, according
to the many hundred shekels of Iron whereof it was made; we should wonder why
the soul of Jonathan should be so knit unto the soul of David; why Saul should
honor him so much, and the people so much admire him; and the women praise him
so many degrees beyond Saul.

but as the posture of the Giant, hightened the admiration of David, so the
force of those arguments, was but an improvement of the Kings conquest over the
temptation: They did ill who fomented jealousies in the hearts of the People,
upon this score, viz. that the late King was a Papist in his heart; and that he
intended to bring in popery, whereby he so lost the hearts of his people, upon
that false ground, that all the veines-akings of so many thousand hearts to
one, could not recover him whom they had lost* with a mere frolic, nor a more
plentifulnesse of tears then had been shed for all the Princes since the
Conquest, could recall him: The Author did not this, to startle men's
consciences; but to prick the consciences of those, who were the Authors of
this.

Wherefore I shall desire this only favor at your hand, that you will believe
me, that it was neither that Insanabile scribendi Cacoethes, nor ostentatio
eruditionis, nor the effascination of any popular applause; nor any intention
to boulster up any cause or faction, that invited me to this publication, but
merely because I would not have the wind to get into your ears, that blows from
so could a quarter, where charity is so frozen that she wants life, to believe
so favorably of the dead as truth requires; and, so doing, you have done him
right, who has done you service.

Thomas Bailey.

Certamen Religiosum: OR, A CONFERANCE BETWEEN The late King of England, and
the late Lord Marquess of Worcester, concerning Religion, at His Majesty's
being at Ragland-Castle, 1646.
IT is not to be imagined otherwise, but that every man, who pretends unto
Religion* makes the same Reli^ ^ich he professes, (...) Jacobs Ladder, or his
fiery (...) ascend to heaven. Neither is (...) supposed, but that the same man
(...) ^hought any other Religion better (...) his own, or his own not the only
way to heaven) would forsake that Religion which he had formerly embraced, and
matriculate himself a member of that Church, whose purer hands were likeliest
to give him the truest blessing: Wherefore burning zeal is not to be blamed
(though the fire be misplaced, if it operate according to its own nature, which
is to congregate homogeneall beings, and make them love to sit by the same fire.

Thus affected was that Noble, and indeed (in his way) heavenly disposed, Henry
late Marquess of Worcester: to play the greatest prize that ever was played
between any two, that ever entered within those lists. Three Diadems were to
encounter with the Tripple Crown; and the Tripple Crown with three Scepters;
opportunity that lucky gamster, that hardly loses a game in twenty, was on the
Marquesses side, time and place directed him, how to take points in his own
Tables; the King at that time being in the Marquess own house at Ragland, and
necessitated to borrow money to buy bread, after so great a loss at Nazeby:
the King being thus put to play the after game, with the old Marquess, was a
little mistrustful, that he had not played the fore game with him so well, as
that he had not thereby prejudiced the latter: for though the Marquess and his
son, were the two ablest, and most forward'st shoulderers up of the declining
Throne, especially the chip of the old block, whose disposition expressed it
self most Noble in not caring who had loved the King, so that he might be but
permitted to love Alexander; whom he affected, not only with the loyal
respects of a subject toward his Sovereign, but also, with such passionate
ways of expressions, and laboriousnesse in all good offices, as are wont to be
predominant in those, in whom simpathy is the the only ground of their
affections: yet there were not wanting some kind of men, who made the
averseness of this Noble-mans Religion, an occasion of improving their own
envies: which though it could never lose him the least ground in his Masters
good opinion of him (who never would judge no more a Saint by his face, then a
Devil by his feet, but both according to their several engagements) yet there
were some things which happened, as having relation to this family, which were
not altogether pleasing; however, though His Majesty came thither, ushered by
necessity, yet he came neither unwelcomed, nor uninvited; and entertained as if
he had been more King, by reason of some late atchivements, rather then
otherwise: and though money came from him like drops of blood, yet he was
contented that every drop within his body should be let out at His command, so
that he might perform so meritorious a piece of work, as (he thought) the
being an instrument of bringing the Father of of his Country, to be the Son of
his Church) would be unto his souls health. The Marquess having these
resolutions within himself, thought to give them breath at the same time, that
His Majesty should make his motion for a further supply of money, which he
daily and hourly expected, but was deceived in his expectations; for the
relation already having reached the Kings ear, how an accident had made me no
less fortunate to his Lordship, then in being the means of preserving his
Lordships person, and no inconsiderable fortune then in the same venture with
him, and how that I preserved both the one and the other in concealing both:
for the space that the Moon uses to be twice in riding of her circuit (the
particulars hereof, here to insert, would tend rather to much arrogance, then
any purpose, wherefore I further forbear) until such time as the trust that
providence had reposed in me, was crowned by the same hand, with such success,
as brought the Marquess safe to his own house in peace; which I had no sooner
brought to pass, hut the Marquess drew from me a solemn engagement, never to
leave him so long as we both should live, which I was so careful for to
observe, that I neither left him in life, nor death, fair weather, nor foul,
until such time as he led me; and I laid him, under the ground in
Windsor-Castle, in the Sepulcher of his Fathers.

And it was a strange thing, that during the time that I was thus a
bond-servant to his Lordship, which was for the space of 12 months thrice
told; the difference in Religion never wrought the least difference in his
disposals of trusts of the highest nature upon me, but his speeches often
showed his heart, and his often lending me his ear, that they were both as much
mine, as any man's, of which (it seems) His Majesty being informed, I must be
the beetle-head, that must drive this wedge into the Royal stock; and was also
told, that no man could make a divorce between the Babilonish garment, and the
wedge of gold, sooner then my self: to be brief, I was engaged in the
business; I could neither deny the employment, nor well tell how to go about
it, I not knowing the Marquesses drift all this while, thought the Marquess
had feared nothing more, then what I my self was most afraid of, viz. That I
should be made an instrument, to let the same horse bleed, whom the King
Himself had found so free, that he was unwilling to give him the least touch
with his spur: howsoever I went about it, and thus began to tell his Lordship;
My Lord: the thing that I feared, is now fallen upon me; I am made the
unwelcome messenger of bad news, the King wants money: at which word, the
Marquess interrupted me, saying, hold Sir, that is no news: go on with your
business: my Lord (said I) there is one comfort yet, that as the King is
brought low, so are his demands; and like His Army, are come down, from
thousands to hundreds; and from paying the Soldiers of His Army, to buying
bread for Himself and His followers: My Lord, it is the Kings own expression,
and His desire is but three hundred pound: whereupon my Lord made a long pause,
before he gave me one word of answer (I knowing by experience, that in such
cases it was best leaving him to himself, and to let that nature that was so
good, work it self into an act of the highest charity, like the Diamond which
is only pollished with its own dust) At last he called me nearer to him, and
asked me, if the King Himself had spoken unto me concerning any such business:
to which I answered, that the King Himself had not, but others did, in the
Kings hearing; whereupon he said, might I but speak unto Him (but I was never
thought worthy to be consulted with, though in matters merely concerning the
affairs of my own Country) I would supply His wants, were they never so great,
or whatsoever they were: whereupon I told his Lordship, that if the King knew
as much, he might quickly speak with Him: then said the Marquess, the way to
have Him know so much, is to have some body to tell Him of it: I asked his
Lordship, if he would give me leave to be the informer: he told me he spoke it
to the same purpose; I hastened from him, with as much fear of being called
back again, as I did toward the King, with a longing desire of giving His
Majesty so good an account, of my so much doubted embassy.

Half going, and half running through the Gallerie, I was stopped in my way, by
one Lieutenant Colonel Syllard, who told me, that if ever I had a mind to do
My Lord Marquess, and the Garrison, any good, now was the time: for even now,
one of the Kings Ships, had run her self on ground, under the Town of
Chepstow: Calling unto me the Captain of her (one Captain Hill,) who related
unto me, that upon the surrender of Bristol, he was forced to fly into the
sanctuary, of the Kings Quarters, having formerly revolted from the
Parliament, (or rather returned to her due obedience) telling me, moreover,
that she was fraught with store of goods, and rich commodities, as Sugar,
Tobacco, Linen of all sorts, etc. and that the Law in such a case
appropriated the King, to such a part of her lading, which I better understood
then, then I can relate unto you now, and that she had many fair brass, and
iron Guns, in her, with proportionable Ammunition, useful for the Garrison, and
that for a word speaking, I might have all this of the King, for the use of the
Garrison, I (considering, that it would be nevertheless the Kings, for being
converted to such an use, as also the business I was about) made no doubt, but
that I should easily beg all this for the Marquess, in Consideration of the
great charges, his Lordship had been at, in entertaining His Majesty so long:
neither was I deceived, for the King granted it willingly.

But as to the matter in hand, I told His Majesty (a part) that I had moved
his Lordship in matter of money, but found him a little discouraged, in regard,
that His Majesty having been twice at Ragland, a month at a time, and that at
neither of those times, he ever vouchsafed his Lordship so much honor, as once
to call him to Council, though it was in his own house, and must needs be
acknowledged, to be one who knew the Country and the Constitution of the
inhabitants, better then any other man, that was about His Majesty, had reason
to understand; wherefore I told the King, I thought his Lordship lent my motion
a deffer ear, then he would have done, if his Lordship had not been thought so
useless a creature: and that I perceived his Lordship had a desire to have
some conference with His Majesty, which being obtained, I believed, His
Majesty's request would be easily granted, and his expectations answered, in a
higher measure, then it may be His Majesty did believe. The King said, withal
my heart: and as to the other business, which so much troubles my Lord, in
troth I have thought it a neglect in Us heretofore: but the true reason, why I
did forbear to do so, was, because I thought, my Lord of Worcester, did not
desire it; by reason of his retiredness, unwildiness of body, and
unwillingnesse of mind to stir abroad; and therefore I thought it a contentment
to him, to be let alone. I told his Majesty, that I did verily believe, that
His Majesty was in the right, in both respects, both of His Majesty's, and his
Lordships: and that if His Majesty had called him to Council, I do verily
believe, his Lordship would have desired, to have been excused, but yet he did
expect, he should have been called: whereupon the King said, I pray tell my
Lord of Worcester, that I did not forbear that respect unto him, out of any
disestimation I had, either of his wisdom, or loyalty, but out of some
reasons I had to my self, which indeed reflected as much upon my Lord, as they
did on me. For had he used to have come to the Council board, it would have
been said, that I took no other Council, but what was conveyed unto me, by
Jesuits, by his Lordships means: and I pray tell him, that that was the true
cause. I told His Majesty that I would, and that I thought it an easy matter
to cause him to believe no less, but withal, I intimated to His Majesty, that
I knew, the Marquess had an earnest desire to have some private Conference with
His Majesty, this night. Which if granted, it might conduce very much to His
Majesty's behoof. The King said, how can that be? I told His Majesty, that my
Lord had contrived it before his coming to the Castle, and told His Majesty
of the privacie of the convieghance, and that therefore his Lordship had
appointed that for his Bedchamber, and not in the great Tower, which was the
room he most esteemed of in all the Castle. Hereat His Majesty smiled, and
said, I know my Lords drift, well enough: either he means to chide me, or else
to convert me to his Religion. Whereupon I told His Majesty: I doubted not,
but that His Majesty was temptation proof as well as he was correction-free,
and that he might return the same man, he went, having made a profitable
Exchange, of gold, and silver, for words and sleep, at which the King suddenly
replied: I never received any of the Marquess gold, but it was all weight, and
I would have my words to be so with him, which cannot be, because I have no
time to weigh the matter, much less the words, that I shall speak concerning
it; I must expect to find my Lord very well prepared, and all the force that is
in argument against me. Had I been a ware of it, or could stay, I would have
taken some days labor, to have been as hard for my Lord as I could, and not to
have given him such an extemporarie meeting, as both of us must be feign to
steal from sleep. Sir, said I, I am employed by you both, and I must do Your
Majesty's service as I may. This way I can, otherwise I know not. I do not
think his Lordship expects disputation, but audience; what he has to say I
know not, neither did I know, that he had any such intention, until the time
that I moved his Lordship in Your Majesty's behalf; Well, said the King, my
Lords desires are granted, and if he have any such intention, I hope to let him
know, that I will not be of a Religion, that I am not able to defend against
any man; and let me hear from you concerning the time and place. So I departed
his presence, giving this pleasing account unto the Marquess, who transported
with joy, commanded me to have unto the King, and tell him, that at eleven of
the clock that night he would not fail to attend His Majesty in such a
place, whether he had given me direction to light His Majesty, which place of
meeting was known by the name of my Lord Privy-seales Chamber, who was father
to this Marquess, and died in it, wherefore this Marquess would never suffer
any man to lie in it afterward, or scarce any body, so much as to come into
it, which was the reason, why this Chamber, at this time, was so conveniently
empty, when all the rooms in the Castle were more then full. And withal his
Lordship instructed me to attend near upon the time, in the withdrawing room,
which was next unto his Lordships Bedchamber, and to clear the Parlour, and
the withdrawing room, if any Company should chance to sit up so long, which
was usual at that time, through both which rooms my Lord of Worcester was to
pass, unto the place appointed: where, when I had once brought him, I should
leave him, and wait for the Kings coming forth, giving me the Key of his
Bedchamber, wherewith he used always to lock himself in, and never to his
last would suffer any man to lie in the same Chamber with him, which happened
well for the private managerie of the business. And that in the interim, he
would lie down upon the bed, and see if he could take a nap. I promised his
Lordship, that I would be punctual in my endeavors; only I made this
Objection unto his Lordship, that it might be, that it might prove, more then I
could perform at such a precise time, as we were necessitated unto; if they
should be either unwilling, or think it strange, to be hurried away all upon a
sudden; and besides, so doing would draw suspicion with it, that may set
watchmen over the event of our affairs; whereat the Marquess hastily made
answer, I will tell you what you shall do, so that you shall not need to fear
any such thing, go unto the Yeomen of the Wine-seller, and bid him leave the
Keys of the Wine-seller with you, and all that you find in your way, invite
them down into the seller, and show them the Keys, and I warrant you, you
shall sweep the room of them if their were a hundred. And when you have done,
leave them there. I thought that Objection sufficiently salved, so took my
leave, disposing my self to a removeall of all the blocks, that might be cast
in our way, I found not any. The time drawing near, that the Dominicall Letter
was to dispute with the golden Number, I opened the Marquesses door, so softly
(fearing, to wake the two young Gentlemen which waited upon my Lord, and were
in bed and a sleep in the next room, through which we were to pass, and were
resolved to put it to a venture, whether we could do so, or no, but we past and
repast, without any their taking the least notice of us,) that the Marquess
himself did not hear me, when I came to him, I found him a sleep, whom I so
wakened, by degrees, that he would needs persuade me, that he had not slept at
all. Yet telling him how the time was come wherein he was to meet the King; in
a mazement and a kind of horror, he asked me, what time? and what King? at
first, I thought it so strange to him, because he was as yet but a stranger to
himself, as not being thoroughly awaked; but when I saw his fears begin to
increase, by how much the more he came to himself, and to lay stronger and
stronger hold upon him, expressing a great deal of unwillingnesse, to that
which he formerly so much desired; and with such a kind of reluctance, as might
very well spread an appearance of some remorse: I my self began to be a fraid
of being made an instrument in a design, that carried with it, such a conflict
within the bosom of the actor; until my second thoughts, banished my first
apprehension, and seconded my confidence of his Lordships innocence, being
confirmed by this following expression of his, God bless us all: what if we
should be discovered? what construction would they make of our doings? what
advantage would they be ready to take of such constructions? what if this
harmless and innocent design of mine, should be thought a Conspiracy, such a
one as Gowries? then they will take an occasion to Plunder me of all that I
have: I protest I never thought of this, I wish I never had attempted any such
thing: whereupon I told his Lordship: that it was too late now to entertain
any such fears, neither was there any ground for any such jealousy: whereat
the Marquess replied fie, fie, I would to God that I had let it alone. I
perceiving this tergiversation to proceed out of an awfulnesse, which his loyal
heart, ever carried with it, toward His sacred Majesty, which might very well
raise doubts of a high nature, out of the manner of the fact, thus spoke unto
his Lordship: My Lord, you know your own heart hest, if there be nothing in
your intentions but wbat is good, and justifiable, you need not fear, if
otherwise; it is never too late to repent; at which words the Marquess seemed
to be much troubled, saying, Ah! Doctor, I thought I had been sure of one
friend, and that you would never have harbored the least suspicion of me, God
knows my heart, I have no other intention toward His Majesty, then to make Him
a glorious Man here; and a glorified Saints hereafter. Then (said I) my Lord,
shake off these fears together with the drowsinesse that begat them: Honey soit
qui male pense, O (said my Lord) but I am not of that order, but I thank God, I
wear that motto about my heart, to as much purpose, as they who wear it ahout
their arms: and began to be a little pleasant, and took a pipe of Tobacco, and
a little glass full of Aqua Mirabilis, and said, come now, let us go in the
name of God, crossing himself, I had no sooner brought my Lord to the door of
the meeting Chamber, but the Clock struck a eleven, whereupon I presently left
my Lord (in the portall, where he would needs be, until such time as the King
were entered the room, and should send for him in) and went to the place where
I was to expect the King, according to the Intimation, which I had formerly
given His Majesty. I had not been long there, before His Majesty came forth,
saying unto me, softly: I have escaped one danger, none within my Chamber
knows of my coming abroad, this night: to which I answered, that if it were
discovered, I hope there is nothing in the exploit so dangerous, as to deserve
such a word, which His Majesty made answer (as I waited upon His Majesty)
Misprisions, evil Constructions, and false Judgments, are dangers worth
escaping at any time, and therefore, where I run a hazard, I always escape a
danger. They who carry only their own eyes in their head, and have no other
upon them, may go which way they please; but he that has all the peoples eyes
upon him, must look which way he goes, (by this time His Majesty was come
into the Chamber, who continuing on his saying, spoke further) neither is it
sufficient for him to lead theirs, according to the perspicuitie, and quickness
of his own, but he must allow them, the abatements, which either the Distance
of the Object, the Indisposition of the Organ, or the Mis-disposition of some
bad Mediums may require in vulgar Spirits, by reason of their incapacitie of
looking further then appearance. I answered the King in these words, May it
please your most excellent Majesty, to give me leave, to speak under the
highest Correction, I conceive these to be singular good Caveats, and Antidotes
against real evil; but not against apparances, for the King of Kings, and
Savior of the world, sought not to avoid them, but was contented to be
accounted a friend to Publicans, and a Sinner himself, so that he might unlade
them of their sins, and to be thought a bibber of their wine, so that he might
infuse into them his Divine grace; desiring his Majesty to pardon me, further,
in regard, that I had left my Lord Marquess in the dark. O (said the King) you
should have spoke sooner, bring him in: I left His Majesty, and brought in the
Marquess, who coming in, leaning upon my arm, (as he used to do,) he thus
merrily began the Discourse.

THE CONFERENCE.
Marquess. SIr, I hope if they catch us in the act, it will not be deemed in
me an act of so high Conspiracy, in regard that I enter the lists, leaning upon
a Doctor of your own Church.

To whom the King replied a (as merrily) C. R. My Lord, I know not whether I
should have a better opinion of your Lordship, for the Doctors sake, or a worse
opinion of the Doctor for your Lordships sake, for though you lean much upon
his arm, yet he may lean more upon your judgment.


Marq. Sir, It conduces a little to the purpose we have in hand, to be a
little serious in the thing you speak of, your Majesty knows the grounds of my
acquaintance with the Doctor, and my obligation to him, which difference in
opinion, shall never mittigate in point of affection; but I protest unto you, I
could never gain the least ground of him yet, in persuading him from his
principles.


King. It may be your Lordship hopes to meet with a weaker Disputant of me.


Marq. Not so, and if it please your Majesty, but I think thus: that if it
should please God to make me so happy an instrument of his Churches good, as to
be a means to incline your Royal heart to embrace the truth; I believe that
he, and thousands such as he, would be soon brought to follow your Majesty in
the right way, who are so constant followers of your steps whilst you are in a
wrong path: the oaths which they have taken, the relation which their Hyrarchy
have to the Crown, which must be no longer so, but whilst the government of the
Church and souls, stand as a reserve to the regiment of lives and fortunes,
the preferment which they expect from your Majesty, and the enjoyment of those
preferments which they have already, which they must no longer enjoy, then
whilst they are, or seem to be of your opinion, causes them to smother their
own knowledge, whilst their mouths are stopped with interest, whereas if the
strong tide of your Majesty's opinion were but once turned, all the ships in
the river, would soon turn head:


Hereupon the Marquess abruptly fell from his subject, and asked the King,
Sir, I pray tell me what is it that you want? The King smiled a little at his
sudden breaking off, and making such preposterous haste to ask that question,
answered.

King. My Lord, I want an Army, can you help Me to one?


Marq. Yes, that I can: and to such a one, as should your Majesty commit your
self to their fidelity, you should be a Conqueror, fight as often as you
please.


King. My Lord, such an Army would do the business: I pray let me have it.


Marq. What if your Majesty would not confide in it, when it should be
presented unto you?


King. My Lord, I would feign see it, and as feign confide in that, of which I
had reason to be confident.


Marq. Take Gidions three hundred men and let the rest begone.


King. Your Lordship speaks mistically, will it please you to be plain a
little.


Marq. Come I see I must come nearer to you: Sir, It is thus, God expected a
work to be done by your hands, but you have not answered his expectation, nor
his mercy toward you, when your Enemies had more Cities and Garrisons, then you
had private families to take your part, when they had more Cannon then you had
Muskets; when the people crowded to heap treasures agaidst you, whilst your
Majesty's friends were feign here and there to make a gathering for You, when
they had Navies at Sea, whilst Your Majesty had not so much as a Boat upon the
River; whilst the odds in number against you was like a full crop against a
gleaning, then God wrought his miracle, in making Your gleaning bigger then
their vintage; he put the power into your hand, and made You able to declare
Your self a true man, to God, and grateful to Your friends; but like the man
whom the Prophet makes mention of, who bestowed great cost and pains upon his
vineyard, and at last it brought forth nothing but wild grapes; so when God
had done all these things for You, and expected that You should have given his
Church some respit to their oppressions, I heard say, You made vows that if
God blessed You but that day with Nazeby Fight.
Victory, you would not leave a Catholic in Your Army; for which I fear the
Lord is so angry with You, that (I am afraid) he will not give you another day
wherein you may so much as try your fortune: Your Majesty had forgot the
moneys which came unto you from unknown hands, and were brought unto you by
unknown faces, when yau promised you would never forsake your unknown friends;
you have forgotten the miracalous blessings of the Almighty upon those
beginnings, and how have you discountenanced, distrusted, dis-regarded, I, and
disgraced the Catholics all along, and at last vowed an extirpation of them:
Does not your Majesty see clearly, how that in the two great Battles, the
North and Nazeby, God showed signs of his displeasure, when in the first, your
Enemies were even at your mercy, confusion fell upon you and you lost the day,
like a man that should so wound his Enemies, that he could scarce stand, and
afterward his own sword should fly out of the hilt, and leave the strong and
skillful, to the mercy of his falling enemies; and in the second (and I fear me
the last Battle that e're you will fight) whilst your men were crying victory,
as I hear they had reason so to do, your sword broke in the air, which made
you a fugitive to your flying enemies: Sir, I pray pardon my boldness, for it
is Gods cause that makes me so bold, and no inclination of my own to be so, and
give me leave to tell you, that God is angry with you, and will never be
pleased, until you have taken new resolutions concerning your Religion: which
I pray God direct you, or else you will fall from naught to worse, from thence to
nothing.


King. My Lord, I cannot so much blame as pity your zeal; the soundness of
Religion is not to be tried by dint of sword, nor must we judge of her truths
by the prosperity of events, for then of all men Christians would be most
miserable; we are not to be thought no followers of Christ, by observations
drawn from what is cross or otherwise, but by taking up our cross and
following Christ; neither do I remember my Lord, that I made any such vow
before the Battle of Nazeby concerning Catholics, but some satisfaction I
did give my Protestant Subjects, who on the other side were persuaded that God
blessed us the worse for having so many Papists in our Army.


Marq. The difference is not great, I pray God forgive you, who have most
reason to ask it.


King. I think not so my Lord.


Narq. Who shall be judge?


King. I pray my Lord, let us sit down, and let reason take her seat.


Marq. Reason is no judge.


King. But she may take her place.


Marq. Not above our Faith.


King. But in our arguments.


Marq. I beseech your Majesty to give me a reason why you are so much offended
with our Church?


King. Truly my Lord, I am much offended with your Church, if you mean the
Church of Rome, if it were for no other reason, but this, for that she has
foisted into her legend, so many ridiculous stories, as are able to make (as
much as in them lies) Christianity it self a fable, whereas if they had not
done this wrong unto the tradition of the primative Church, we then had left
unto us such rare and unquestionable verities, as would have adorned, and not
daubed the Gospel, whereas now we know not, what is true, or false.


Marq. Sir, if it be allowed to question, what the Catholic Church holds out
for truth, because that which they hold forth unto us seems ridiculous, and to
pick and choose verities according to our own fancy, and reject as novelties
and forgeries what we please, as impossibilities and fabulous. The Scriptures
themselves may as well suffer by this kind of tolleration, for what more
ridiculous then the Dialoge between Balaam and his Ass, or that Sampsons
strenght should be in his hair, or that he should slay a thousand men with the
Jawbone of an Ass. The Disputation betweeen Saint Michael and the Devil about
the body of Moses; Philip's being taken up in the air, and found at Aroties
with a thousand the like strange, and to our apprehension (if we look upon them
with carnal eyes) vain and ridiculous, but being they are recorded in
Scripture, which Scripture we hold for truth, we admire, but never question
them; so the fault may not be in the tradition of the Church, but in the
liberty, which men assume to themselves to question the tradition. And I
beseech Your Majesty, to consider the streakes that are drawn over the Divine
writ, as so many delenda's by such bold hands as those: the Testaments were not
like the two Tables, delivered into the hands of any Moses, by the immediate
hand of God, neither by the Ministration of Angels, but men inspired with the
holy Ghost writ, whose writings by the Church were approved to be by
inspiration, which inspirations were called Scripture, which Scriptures most of
them as they are now received into our hands, were not received into the Cannon
of the Church, all, within three hundred years after Christ, why may not some
bold spirits call all those scriptures, (which were afterward acknowledged to
be Scripture, and were not before) forgeries. Nay have not some such (as blind
as bold) done it already? Saint Hier was the first that ever picked a hole in
the Scriptures, and cut out so many books out of the word of God, with the
penknife, of Apoccrypha, Ruffinus challenges him for so doing, and tells him
of the gap, that he has opened for wild beasts to enter into this field of the
Church, and tread down all ill corn. Jerome gives his reasons, because they were
not found in the Original Copy, (as if the same spirit which gave to those,
whom it did inspire the diversities of tongues, should it self be tied to one
language) but withal he acknowledges this much of those books, which he had
thus marked in the forehead, Canonici sunt ad informandos mores, sed non ad
confirmandam fidem, how poor a Distinction this is, and how pernicious a
president this was, I leave it to Your Majesty, to judge: for after him Luther
takes the like boldness, and at once takes away the three Gospels, of Mark,
Luke, and John; Others take away the epistle to the Hebrews, others the epistle
of Saint Jude, others the second and third epistles of Saint Peter, others the
epistle of Saint James, others the whole book of the Revelation. Wherefore to
permit, what the Church proposes to be questionable by particular men, is to
bring down the Church, the Scriptures, and the Heavens upon our heads; there
was a Church, before there was a Scripture, which Scripture (as to us) had not
been the Word of God, if the Church had not made it so by teaching us to
believe it. The preaching of the Gospel was before the writing of the Gospel,
the Divine Truth that dispersed it self over the face of the whole earth,
before i'ts Divinity was comprised within the Cannon of the Scripture, was
like that Primeva Lux, which the world received before the light was gathered
into the body of the Sun, this body so glorious and comfortable is but the same
light, which was before, we cannot make it an other, though it be otherwise,
and therefore though the Church and the Scripture, like the light that is
concomitant and precedent to the Sun, be distinct in terms, yet they are but
one and the same; no man can see the Sun, but by it is own light, shut your eyes
from this light, and you cannot behold the body of the Sun. Shut your eyes
against one, and you are blind in both, he never had God to be his Father, who
had not the Church to be his Mother, if you admit Sillogismes, a priori, you
will meet with many paralogismes, a posteriori cry down the Churches,
Authority, and pull out the Scriptures efficacy, give but the Church the lie,
now and then, and you shall have enough will tell you the Scripture is false
here and there; they who have set so little by the tradition of the Church,
have set by half the Scriptures, and will at last throw all away: wherefore in
a word, as to deny any part of the Scripture, were to open a vain, so to
question any thing, which the Church proposes, is to tear the seamlesse Coat
of Christ, and to pierce his body.


King. My Lord, I see you are better provided with Arguments then I am with
memory, to run through the series of your Discourse; satisfy me but in one
thing, and I shall soon yield to all that you have said, and that is
concerning this Catholic Church you talk of, I know the creed tells us, that
we must believe it, and Christ tells us, that we must hear it, but neither tell
us, that that is the Church of Rome.


Marq. Gracious Sir, the creed tells us, that it is the Catholic Church, and
Saint Paul tells us in his epistle to the Romans, that their faith was spread
abroad through the whole world.


King. That was the Faith, which the Romans then believed, which is nothing to
the Roman Faith, which is now believed.


Marq. The Roman Faith then and now are the same.


King. I deny that my Lord.


Marq. When did they alter their Faith?


King. That requires a library, neither is it requisite, that I tell you the
time when, if the envious man sowes his tares, whilst the husbandman was
asleep, and afterward he awakes and sees the tares, are they not tares,
because the hushand-man knows not when they were sown?


Marq. And if it please Your Majesty in a thing, that is so apparent, your
similitude holds good, but in the differences between us and the protestants
are not so without dispute, as that it is yet granted by the major part of
Christians, that they are errors which we believe contrary to Your Tenants;
and therefore the similitude holds not, but I shall humbly entreat Your
Majesty, to consider the proofs, which the learned Cardinal Peroone has made
concerning this particular, in his answer to Your Royal Father, his Apology
to all Christian Princes, where he proves, how that all the Tenants which are
in controversy now between you and us, were practiced in the Church of Christ,
within the first three hundred years; wherefore I think, it would be no injury
to reason to require belief, that that which has been so long continued in the
Church, and so universaly received, and no time can be set down, when those
Tenants or Ceremonies did arise, must needs be Catholic for time and place,
and Apostolical for institution, though we have no warrant from the Scriptures,
to believe them to be such. For the Apostle Saint Paul commanded Timothy to
keep fast the things which he had delivered unto him, as well by word as by
writ. Wherefore if we will believe no tradition, we may come at last to believe
no writings.


King. That was your own fault, wherefore I blame your Church, for the way to
make the Scriptures not believed, were to add unto them new inventions, and
say they were Scriptures.


Marq. If the Church of Christ had so mean esteem then, as amongst some, she
has now, certainly the former books received into her Cannon, would have been
much prejudiced by the admittance of the latter, wherefore if the Church be
questionable, then all is brought in question.


King. My Lord, you have not satisfied me, where this Church is: and as
concerning the Cardinals book, I have seen it, and have read a part of it, but
do not remember, neither do I believe, that he has proved that which you say.


Marq. It may be the proofs were in that part of the book, which Your Majesty
did not read, and as for my proving the Roman Church to be this Church, by
which we should be all guided, I thus shall do my endeavor, That Church whose
Doctrine is most Catholic and universal, must be the Catholic Church: but
the Roman Church is such. Ergo.


King. My Lord, I deny your Minor, the Roman Church is not more universal,
the Grecian Church is far more spreading; and if it were not, it were no
Argument, for the Church of the Mahumetanes, is larger then both.


Marq. First, This is no Argument, either for an English Man, or a Protestant,
but for a Grecian, or Mahumetane, not for an English Man, because he received
his Conversion from Rome, and therefore he in Reason should not look beyond
Rome, or the Doctrine that Rome practiced then, when they converted England,
nor for a Protestant, because he is as far distant from the Grecian Church in
matter of opinion, as from the Roman; and therefore he need not look for that
which he has no desire to find: besides, the Greek Church has long ago
submitted to the Church of Rome, and there is no reason, that others should
make Arguments for her, who are not of her, when she stands in no competition
her self; besides, there is not in any place where ever the Greek Church is, or
has been planted, where there are not Roman Catholics; but there are diverse
Countries in Christendom, where there is not one Professor of the Greek
Church; neither is there a place in all the Turks Dominions, where there are
not Roman Catholics, nor in any part of the world, where there are not
multitude of Romans; neither is there a Protestant Country in Christendom,
where there are not Roman Catholics numberless, but not a Protestant amongst
the Natives, neither of Spanie or Italy. Show me but one Protestant Country in
the world, who ever deserted the Roman Faith, but they did it by Rebellion,
except England, and there the King, and the Bishops were the principal
reformers: (I pray God, they do not both suffer for it.) Show me but one
reformed Church, that is of the opinion of an other, ask an English Protestant,
where was your Religion before Luther, and he will tell you of Hus and Jerome of
Prag: search for their Tenants, and you shall find them as far different from
the English Protestant, as they are from one another; run to the Waldensis for
your Religions antiquity, and you shall find as much difference in their
Articles, and ours, as can be between Churches that are most opposite. Come
home to your own Country, and derive your descent from Wickliffe, and search
for his Tenants in the book of Martyrs, and you shall find them quite contrary
to ours, neither amongst any of your modern Protestant shall you find any
other agreement, but in this one thing, that they all protest against the Pope.
Show me but any Protestant Country in the world, where Reformation, as you
call it, ever set her foot, where she was not as well attended with sacrilege,
as ushered by Rebellion, and I shall lay my hand upon my mouth for ever.


King. My Lord, my Lord, you are gone beyond the scope of your Argument, which
required you to prove the Roman Church more Catholic then the Greek, which
you have not done; you put me off with my being English, and not a Grecian,
whereas when we speak of the universality of a Church, I think that any man who
is belonging to the universe, is objectum rationis. And if that be the manner
of your Election, then I am sure most voices must carry it: for your alleged
submission of the Greek Church unto the Roman, I believe it cannot be proved,
but it may be the Patriarch of Constantinople, may submit unto the Pope of
Rome, and yet the Greek Church may not submit unto the Roman.


Marq. Sir, it is no dishonor for the Sun to make its progress from East to
West, it is still the same Sun, and the difference is only in the shadows,
which are made to differ according to the varieties of shapes, that the
several substances are of; East and West are two divisions, but the same day:
neither can they be said or imagined to be greater, or more extending one or
other, and the one may have the benefit of the Suns light, though the other may
have its glory; and I believe, no man of sober judgment can say, that any
Church in the world is more generally spread over the face of the whole world,
or that her glory shines in any place more conspicuously, then at this day in
Rome.


King. My Lord, If external glory be the Sunshine of the Gospel, then the
Church is there indeed; but if internal sanctity, and inward holiness be the
Essences of a Church, then we may be as much to seek for such a Church within
the Walls of Rome, as any where else.


Marq. Who shall be Judge of that? I pray, observe the Injustice and Errors
that will arise, if every man may be admitted, to be his own judge; you of the
Church of England left your Mother the Church of Rome, and Mother to all the
Churches round about. You forsook her, and set up a new Church of your own,
Independent to her: there comes a new generation, and does the like to you; and
a third generation, that is likely to do the like to that; and the Church falls
and falls, until it falls to all the pieces of Independencie. It is a hard
case for a part to fall away from the whole, and to be their own judges. Why
should not Kent fall away from England, and be their own judges, as well as
England fall away from Christendom, and be their own judges? why should not a
Parish in Kent fall away from the whole County, and be their own judges? why
should not one Family fall away from the whole Parish, and be their own judges?
why should not one man fall away in his opinion from that Family, and be his
own judge? If you grant one, you must grant all; and I fear me in doing one,
you have done all. So that every man dispiseth the Church, whilst he is a
Church to himself; rayles against Popery, and is the greatest Pope himself,
dispiseth the Fathers, and will enthrone his own judgment above the wisdom of
the ancient; refuses Expositours, that he may have bis own sense; and if he
can start up but some new opinions, he thinks himself as worthy a member of
Christianity, as if he were an Apostle, to some new found land. Now Sir, though
some do take the Church to be the Scriptures, yet the Scriptures cannot be the
Church, because the Scriptures send us to the Church, audi Ecclesiam, dic
Ecclesiae, others take, the Elect to be the Church, yet this cannot be, for we
know not who are elect, and who not, that which must be the Church, must be a
visible, an eminent society of men, to whose Authority, in cases of appeal
and matter of judgment, we are to acquiesse and subscribe. And I appeal to
Your Royal heart, whether there be a Church in the world, to whom in these
respects we ought to reverence, and esteem more then the Church of Rome; and
that the Church of Rome is externally glorious, it does not follow, that
therefore she is not internal holy; for the Kings daughters clothing was of
wrought gold, as well as she was all glorious within; and though she had never
so many Divine graces within her, yet she had honorable women without her, as
her attendants: and for the question, whether this inward glory is to be so
much sought for within the gates of Rome, is the question: and not yet decided.


King. My Lord, I Will deal as ingeniously with you as I can. When the Roman
Monarch stretched forth his arms from East to West, he might make the Bishops
of Roms oecumenacy as large as was his Empire, and all the Churches in the
world were bound to follow her Laws and decretalls, because God has made such
Emperors, nursing Fathers of his Church, as it was prophesied by the Divine
Esaias; always provided, that the child be not pourtractured greater then the
Nurse, (as has been observed by the pride of your Bishops of Rome,) but when
the several Kingdoms of Christendom shook off the Roman Yoke; I see no reason
why the Bishop of Rom should expect obedience from the Clergy of other
Contreies, any more then the Archbishop of Canterbury should expect obedience
from the Clergy of other Kingdoms. And for your deriving your Authority from
Saint Peter; I have no reason, why we may not as well derive our Authority from
Simon Zelotes, or Joseph of Arimathea, or from Philip, of whose planting the
Gospel, we have as good warrant, as you have for Saint Peter, his planting the
Gospel in Rome. But, my Lord, I must tell you, that there are other Objections
to be made against your Church, which more condemns her, if these were answered.


Marq. May it please Your Majesty, to give me leave to speak a word or two, to
what I have said, and then I shall humbly beg Your further Objections, as to
that of the Christian Kingdoms, shaking of the Roman Yoke and falling to
pieces, which was so prophesied it should, yet the Church should not do so,
because it is said it shall remain in unity, and for Your Majesty's Objection
concerning Simon Zelotes, Joseph of Arimathea, etc. It is answered, that there
were two conversions, the first of the Britains, the second of the Saxons; we
only require this Justice from you, as you are English, not Welch-men, for the
Church of England, involves all the Britains within her Communion: for the
Britains have not now any distinct Church from the Church of England. Now if
Your Majesty please, I expect your further Objections.


King. My Lord, I have not done with you yet, though particular Churches may
fall away in their several respects of obedience to one supreme Authority, yet
it follows not, that the Church should be thereby divided, for as long as they
agree in the unity of the same spirit, and the bond of peace, the Church, is
still at unity, as so many sheaves of corn are not unbound, because they are
severed. Many sheaves may be long to one field, to one man, and may be carried
to one barn, and be servient to the same table. Unity may consist in this as
well as in being hudled up together in a ricke with one cocke-sheave above the
rest. I have a hundred pieces in my pocket, I find them something heavy, I
divide the sum, half in one pocket, and half in an other: and subdivide them
afterward in two several lesser pockets; The moneys is divided, but the sum
is not broke, the hundred pounds is as whole as when it was together, because
it belongs to the same man, and is in the same possession; so though we divide
our selves from Rome, if neither of us divide our selves from Christ, we agree
in him, who is the Center of all unity, though we differ in matter of
depending upon one another. But my Lord of Worcester, we are got into such a
large field of discourse, that the greatest Scholars of them all can sooner
show us the way in, then out of it; therefore, before we go too far, let us
retire, lest we lose our selves; and therefore, I pray my Lord, satisfy me in
these particulars: Why do you leave out the second Commandment, and cut another
in too? why do you with-hould the Cup from the Laytie? why have you seven
Sacraments, when Christ instituted but two? why do you abuse the World with
such a fable, as Purgatory, and make ignorant fools believe, you can fish
souls from thence with silver hooks? why do you pray to Saints, and worship
Images? Those are the offenses which are given by your Church of Rome unto the
Church of Christ; of these things I would be satisfied.


Marq. Sir, Although the Church be undefiled, yet she may not be spotless, to
several apprehensions: for the Church is compared to the Moon, that is full of
spots; but they are but spots of our fancying; though the Church be never so
cumly, yet she is described unto us to have black eyebrows, which may to some
be as great an occasion of dislike, as they are to others foyles, which set her
off more lovely. We must not make our fancies, judgments of condemnation to
her, with whom Christ so much was ravished. For Your Majesty's Objections, and
first, as to that of leaving out the second Commandment, and cutting another in
two; I beseech Your Majesty's, who called them Commandments? who told you they
were ten? who told you which were first, and second, etc. The Scripture only
called them words: those words, but these: and these words were never divided
in the Scriptures into ten Commandments, but two Tables. The Church did all
this, and might as well have named them twenty as ten Commandments; that which
Your Majesty calls the second Commandment, is but the explanation of the
first, and is not razed out of the Bible, but for brevitie sake in the
mannualls it is left out, as the rest of the Commandment is left out concerning
the Sabbath, and others: wherefore the same Church which gave them their Name,
their Number, and their Distinction, may in their breviats, leave out what she
deems to be but exposition: and deliver what she thinks for substance, without
any such heavy charge as being blottable, out of the book of life, for
deminishing the word of God.

For withholding the Cup from the Laytie; where did Christ, either give or
command to be given, either the bread or the wine to any such? drink you all of
this: but they were all Apostles to whom he said so; There were neither lay
men, or women, there: If the Church allowed them afterward to receive it
either in one, or both kinds: they ought to be satisfied therewith,
accordingly: but not question the Churches her Actions. She that could alter
the Sabbath into the Lords day, and change the dipping of the baptized over
head and ears in water, to a little sprinkling upon the face, (by reason of
some immergencies, and inconveniences, occasioned by the difference of
Seasons, and Countries) may upon the like occasion, accordingly, dispose of the
manner of her Administration of her Sacraments. Neither was this done without
great reason the world had not wine in all her Countries, but it had bread.
Wherefore it was thought for uniformity sake (that they might not be unlike to
one another, but all receive alike, that they should only receive the bread,
which was to be had in every place, and not the Cup, in regard, that wine was
not every where to be had. I wonder that any body should be so much offended at
any such thing, for bread and wine do signify Christ crucified; I appeal to
common reason, if a dead body does not represent a passion, as nuch, as if we
saw the blood lie by it. If you grant the Churches Power in other matters, and
rest satisfy therein, why do you boggle at this? especially, when any Priest
(where wine is to be had) if you desire it, he will give it you. But if upon
every man's call, the Church should fall to reforming upon every seeming fault,
which may be but supposed to be found, the people would never stop, until they
had made such a through Reformation in all parts, as they have done in the
greatest part of Germany, where there is not a man to preach, or hear the
Gospel, to eat the bread, or drink the wine: you never picked so money holes in
our Coats, as this licentiousness has done in yours.

For our seven Sacraments, she that called the Articles of our Faith 12, the
Beatitudes 8, the Graces 3, the Virtues 4, called these 7, and might have
called them 17, if she had thought it meet. A Sacrament is nothing else but
what is done with a holy mind, and why Sacrament either in Name, or Number,
should be confind to Christ's only Institution, I see no cause for it; If I can
prove that God did institute such a thing in Paradise, (as he did marriage)
shall not I call that a Sacrament as well as what was instituted by Christ,
when he was upon the Earth? If Christ institutes the Order of giving and
receiving the holy Ghost, shall not I call this the Sacrament of Orders? If
Christ injoyns us all repentance, shall we not say repentance is a Sacrament?
If Christ blesses little children, and says, Suffer them to come unto me and
forbid them not; shall we not say, that such Confirmation is a Sacrament? Truly
I do not understand their meaning; They have taken away five, which five,
either by God or Christ, or the holy Ghost (who are all one) were instituted;
and yet they say, they are not Sacraments, because they were not instituted by
Christ: And the two that are left viz. baptism and the Lords Supper; for the
first, you hold it necessary to Salvation; and for the second, you do not admit
the real presence: so that of the two remaining, you have taken away the
necessity of the one, and the reality of the other, so fare well all.

Now for Purgatory, I do believe, we have as good ground for it out of this
place of Scripture, viz. He shall be purged, yet so as if it were by fire: as
you can prove a Hell out of this place of Scripture: He shall be cast into
utter darkness, and into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, where
shall be weeping and knatching of teeth. Neither can you make more exceptions
to our inference out of this place of Scripture, to prove Purgatory, then the
Atheist (if wits may be permitted to roame in such things, as these once settled
(and believed generally) will find ground enough to quarrel at your burning
lake; and the vain Philosopher, Contradictions enough, in the description, of
the effects of those hellish Torments, viz. weeping and knashing of teeth: the
one having its procedure from heat, the other from cold, which are mere
Contradictions, and therefore fabulous; take heed, we do not take away Hell, in
removing of Purgatory. You see not, how your laughing at Purgatory has caused
such laughing at Hell, and Devils; until at last, you shall see them bid the
Heavens come down; and pluck the Almighty out of his Throne; If a Text of
Scripture with the Churches Exposition be not sufficient for a man to rest,
both his Science and Conscience upon: I know not where it will find a resting
place, it may shoot at Random, but never take so right an aim; and for the
silver hook you talked of, I do not justify the abuse of any, I know there is
a great difference between the Court of Rome, and the Church of Rome, and if
these Errors were in the Church it self, yet the tares must not be hastily
plucked out of the field of the Church, least the wheat be plucked up with it.

Now for our praying to Saints, there is no body that prays to any Saints,
otherwise then as we on earth desire the benefit of one another prayers. We do
not believe, that they can help us (of themselves) or that they have power to
forgive sin, but we believe that they are nearer to God, his favor and more
dear unto him: and therefore we believe, that he will hear them with, or for
us, sooner then he will hear us when we pray upon our own account: as we desire
the prayers of some good and holy man, (whom we believe to be so) hoping it
will be a benefit unto us; all that can be said against it, is, that they do
not hear us. I will not trouble Your Majesty with the Schoolmens Speculum
Creatoris, but I shall desire to be plain, when there is joy in heaven over
every sinner that repents: do you think that the Saints which are there, are
ignorant of the occasion of that joy? or do they rejoice at they know not what?
If the Saints in heaven do cry, how long Lord, how long holy and just, do
thou not avenge our blood upon them, which dwell upon the earth: if they know
that their blood is not yet avenged, do they not know when a sinner is
converted? and if they know the time of conversion, do they not know the time
of prayer? If Abraham knew that there were such men as Moses and the Prophets,
who was dead so many hundreds of years before their time, can we say, that they
are ignorant? think ye, that those ministering Angels who are called
Intelligencers, give them no intelligences? or that they gather nothing of
intelligence by looking him in the face, who is the fullness of knowledge, and
to all these the practice and opinion of so Catholic a Church; God can only
forgive sins, Christ can only mediat, but Saints, whether in heaven, or on the
earth, may intercede for one another.

Lastly, for our worshipping of Images: confounded be all they that worshipped
them, for me, God is only worthy to be worshipped; but if I kneel before the
Picture of my Savior, I worship him kneeling before his Picture; the worship
is in the heart, and not in the knee, and where the true God is in the
intention, there can be no idolatry.

O Sir, Christian Religion is not a Protestation, but a Gospel: it would better
consist with unity, then opposition: we hold it a piece of popery to knock our
own breasts with the fists of constitution, whilst we hold it most
Evangelicall, to knock at our neighbors with a Counstables staff: a pious
care in a mother Church, labors to educate her own daughter, and having fed
her at her own breasts, all the gratitude she returns her mother, is to call
her whore, Antichrist, Babylon, and all the spiteful and vile names that can
be imagined, they forget that saying of the Apostle St. James: If any man among
you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own
heart, that man's Religion is in vain; Pure Religion, and undefiled before God,
and the Father, is this: to visit the fatherless and widows, in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world. What should I say
more, the Scriptures are made a nose of wax, for every bold hand to wring it
which way he pleases, they are rejected by private men, by whole books, The
Articles of our Creed are said not to be of the Apostle framing, the
commandments not belonging to Christians, impossible to be kept, the Sacraments
denied; Charity not only grown cold, but quite starved, and they will be saved
by means, quite contrary to what the Gospel (which they seem to profess) sets
down, viz. by Faith without good works, only believe and that's enough, where
as the holy Apostle Saint James tells us, that faith profits nothing without
good works --


Here the Marquess was going on, and His Majesty interrupted him.

King. My Lord, you let a flood-gate of Arguments out, against my naked breast,
yet it does not bear me any thing backwards; you have spoken a great many
things, that no way concerns Us, but such, as we find fault with, as much as
you, and other things, to which I could easily give answer, If I could take but
some of that time and leisure that you have taken to compose your Arguments. It
is not only the Picture of our Savior, but the Pictures of Saints which you
both worship, and adore, and maintain it to be lawful and not only so, but
the Picture of God the Father, like an old man, and many other things which I
forbear, because I fear, you have done your self more hurt then me good, in
depriving your self of the rest, to which you are accustomed; for whilst our
Arguments do multiply our time lessons, to that of Saint James, where it is
said, that faith profits nothing without good works; I hope the Doctor here
can tell you, that Saint Paul says, that we are justified by Faith, and not by
the works of the Law.


Marq. Sir, I believe the Doctor will neither tell Your Majesty, nor me, that
Faith can justify without works.


King. That question the Doctor can soon decide, what say you to it Doctor? you
must speak now.


Doctor. If it may please Your Majesty, it would be as great a disobedience to
hold my peace, now I am commanded to speak, as it would have been a presumption
in me to speak before I was commanded; I am so far from thinking that either
Faith, without good works, or that good works, without Faith, can justify:
that I cannot Believe that there is such a thing as either. No more then I can
imagine, that there may be a tree bearing fruit, without a root: or that the
Sun can be up, before it be day: or that a fire can have no heat; for although
it be possible, that a man may do some good without Faith, yet he cannot do
good works without it; for though we may naturally incline to some goodness,
as flowers and plants naturally grow to perfection; Yet this good cannot be
said to be wrought by us, but by the hand of Faith; and Faith her self (where
she is truly so) can no more stand still, then can the Sun in the Firmament or
refuse to let her hight so shine before men, that they may see her good works,
then the same Sun can appear in the same Firmament, and dart no beams. And
whilst Faith and good works strive for the propriety of Justification; I do
believe, they both exclude a third, which has more right to our Justification
then either. For that which we call Justification by Faith, is not properly
Justification: but only an apprehension of it: as that which we call
Justification, by good works, is not properly Justification, but only a
Declaration of it, to be so: exempli gratia: I receive a pardon: my hand that
receiv's it, does not justify; it is put in execution, and read in open Court,
all this did not procure it me. Doubtless there is a reward for the righteous,
doubtless there is a God that judges the Earth, wherefore upon this ground of
belief, I work out my Salvation as well as I can: and do all the good that lies
in my power. I do good works. Doubtless this man has some reason for what he
does: it is because he has store of Faith, which Believes, there is a God, and
that that God will accept of his endeavors, wherefore to him alone who has
given us Faith, and has wrought all our good works in us, can we properly
attribute the term of Justification: Justificatio apprehensiva, we may
conceive and bear in our hearts: Justificatio declarativa, we may show with
our hands: but Justificatio Effectiva, proper and effectual Justification none
can lay claim unto, but Christ alone that as our sins were imputed unto
Christ, so his righteousness might be ours by imputation.


King. Doctor, I thank you in this point, I believe you have reconciled us
both.


Doctor. May it please Your Majesty, if the venom were taken out, there is
no vvound in the Churches body, but might soon be healed.


Marq. Hereat the Marquess somewhat earnestly cried, Hold Sir, You have said
well in one respect, but there are two ways of Justification: in us, and two
without us: Christ is a cause of Justification by his grace, and merits without
us; and so we are justified by baptism: and we are justified by the gifts of
God in us, viz. Faith, Hope and Charitity.


Whereupon the King spoke as quickly.

King. But my Lord, both Justifications come from Christ, according to your own
saying: that without us, by his grace and merit: that within us, by his gifts
and favor; therefore Christ is all in all, in the matter of Justification; and
therefore though there were a thousand ways, and means to our Justification:
yet th^re is but one effectual cause, and that is Christ.


Marq. How is it then, that we are called by the Apostle, Cooperarii Christo?
Fellow-workers, together with Christ?


King. The Doctor has told you, how, already. If you lie wallowing in sin, and
Christ helps you out, your reaching of him your hand is a working together with
Christ; Yet for all that, it cannot be said, that you helped your self out of
the ditch: for then there had been no need of Christ. Your apprehending the
succor that came unto you, no way attributes, the God have mercy to your
self: no more, then the declaring your self to be alive, by action; is the
cause of setting you upon your legg's, so that we may divide this threefold
Justification, as Peter divided his three Tabernacles, here is one for Moses,
and one for Elias: I pray let us have one for Christ, and let that be the
chief.


Marq. And Reason good.


King. I wish that all Controversies betwixt you and Us were as well decided: I
am fully satisfied in this point.


Doctor. May it please Your Majesty: A great many Controversies between us and
the Papists might be soon decided, if the Churches revennues (which were every
where taken away, more or less, where differences in Religion, in several parts
of the world, did arise in the Church) were not an obstacle of the reunion;
like the stone, which the Crab cast into the Oyster, which hindered it from ever
shutting it self again; like the division, which happened between the Greek and
Latin Church* Photinus intrudes himself into the Patriarch-ship of
Constantinople over the head of Ignatius, the lawful Patriarch thereof, whom
the Pope preserved in his Communion, and then the difference of the Procession
of the holy Ghost, between those two Churches, was fomented by the said
Photinus: least the wound should heal to soon, and the patient should not be
held long enough in cure, for the benefit of the Chyrurgion, Sacrilege has
brought more divisions then the nature of their causes have required: and the
universities play with edged tools, whilst hungry stomachs run away with their
meat; wherefore since Your Majesty was pleased to discharge the watch, that I
had set before the door of my lips: I shall make bold to put Your Majesty in
mind of houlding my Lord to the demand which Your Majesty once made unto his
Lordship concerning the true Church; for if once that Question were througly
determined, all Controversies not only between Your Majesty and his Lordship,
but also all the Controversies that ever were started, would soon be decided at
a short race end, and without this, we take away the means of reconciliation.
For I must confess ingeniously (yet under the highest correction) that there
is not a thing that I ever understood less, then that assertion of the
Scriptures being judge of Controversies, though in some sense I must, and will
acknowledge it: but not as it is a book consisting of papers, words, and
letters; for as we commonly say in matters of civil differences, the Law shall
be the Judge between us: we do not mean, that every man shall run unto the Law
books, or that any Lawyer himself shall search his Law-cases, and thereupon
possess himself of any thing that is in question, between him and another,
without a legal trial and determination by lawful Judges, constituted to that
same purpose; In like manner saving knowledge and Divine Truths are the
portion, that all Gods children lays fast claim unto: yet they must not be
their own carvers, though it is their own meat, that is before them, whilst
they have a mother at the table; They must not slight all Orders,
Constitutions, Appeals and Rules of Faith! Saving knowledge and Divine Truths,
are not to be wrested from the Scripture by private hands, for then the
Scripture were of private interpretation: which is against the Apostles Rule!
neither are those undefiled incorruptible and immaculate inheritances, which
are reserved for us in heaven, to be conveyed unto us by any Privy-seales.
For there is nothing more absurd, to my understanding, then to say, that the
thing contested (which is the true meaning of the Scriptures) shall be Judge of
the Contestation: no way inferior to that absurdity, which would follow,
would be this, if we should leave the deciding of the sense of the words of the
Law, to the preoccupated understanding of one of the Advocates; neither is this
all the absurdity that does arise, upon this Supposition: for if you grant
this to one, you must grant it to any one, and to every one: if there were but
two, how will you reconcile them both? If you grant that this judicature must
be in many, there are many manyes, which of the manyes will you have? decide
but that, and you satisfy all. For if you make the Scripture the Judge of
Controversy, you make the reader Judge of the Scripture: as a man consists of
a soul and body, so the Scripture consists of the letter and the sense, if I
make the dead letter my Judge, I am the greatest, and simplest idolater in the
world: it will tell me no more, then it told the Indian Emperor Powhaton, who
asking the Jesuit, how he knew all that to be true which he had told him, and
the Jesuit answering him, that Gods word did tell him so. The Emperor asked
him, where it was? he showed him his Bible. The Emperor after that he had held
it in his hands a prittie while, answered, It tells me nothing; But you will
say, you can read, and so you will find the meaning out of the significant
Character; and when you have done, as you apprehend it, so it must be; and so
the Scripture is nothing else but your meaning: wherefore necessity requires
an external Judge, for determination of differences besides the Scriptures. And
we can have no better recourses to any, then to such as the Scripture it self
calls upon us to hear, which is the Church, which Church would be found out.


King. Doctor, Saint John in his first Epistle tells us, that the holy
Scripture is that, to whose truth the Spirit bears witness. And John the
Evangelist tells us, that the Scripture is that which gives a greater
Testimony of Christ, then John the Baptist. Saint Luke tells us, that if we
believe not the Scripture, we would not believe though one were risen from the
dead: and Christ himself, who raised men from death to life, tells us; they
cannot believe his words, if they believe not in Moses writings: Saint Peter
tells us, that the holy Scriptures is surer then a voice from heaven: Saint
Paul tells us; that it is lively in operation, and whereby the Spirits
demonstrates his power; and that, it is able to make a man wise to salvation;
able to save our souls; and that it is sufficient (too) to make us believe in
Christ, to live everlasting, John 20. As in every seed, there is a Spirit,
which meeting with earth, heat, and moisture, grows to perfection: so the seed
of the word, wherein Gods holy Spirit being sown in the heart, inlivened by
the heat of faith, and watered with the tears of repentance) soon fructifies
without any further Circumstance.


Doctor. It does so, but Your Majesty presupposes all this while, husbandmen,
and husbandery, barnes and threshing flowers, winnowing and uniting these
several grains into one loaf, before it can become childrens bread. All that
Your Majesty has said concerning the Scriptures sufficiency, is true,
provided, that those Scriptures be duly handled, for as the Law is sufficient
to determine, right and keep all in peace and quiteness, yet the execution of
that sufficiency, cannot be performed without Courts and Judges: so when we
have granted the Scriptures to be all that the most reverend estimation can
attribute unto them, yet Religion cannot be exercised, nor differences in
Religion reconciled, without a Judge; For as Saint Jerome tells us, who was no
great friend to Popes or Bishops: Si non una, exors quaedam, and iminens detur
potestas tot efficerentur in Ecclesia schismata quot Sacerdotes. Wherefore I
would feign find out that which the Scripture bids me hear, audi Ecclesiam: I
would feign refer my self to that to which the Scripture commands me to
appeal, and tells me, that if I do not, I shall be a heathen and a Publican,
dic Ecclesiae: which Church Saint Paul in his first Epistle calls the pillar
and foundation of Truth, of which the Propbet Ezekiel says: I will place my
Sanctification in the midst of her for ever: and the Prophet Esaias, that the
Lord would never forsake her, in whose light the people shall walk, and Kings
in the brightness of her Orient; Against which our Savior says: The gates of
Hell shall not pervaile: with whom our Savior says: he would be always unto
the end of the world. And from whom the Spirit of Truth should never depart.
For although the Psalmist tells us, that the word of the Lord is clear,
inlightning the eyes, yet the same Prophet said to God: Enlighten mine eyes,
that I may see the marveils of thy Law: And Saint John tells us, that the book
of God had seven Seals, and it was not every one that was thought worthy to
open it, only the lamb. The Disciples had been ignorant, if Jesus had not
opened the Scriptures unto them. The Eunuch could not understood them without
an Interpreter; and Saint Peter tells us, that the Scripture is not of private
Interpretation: and that in his brother Paul's epistles there are many things
hard to be understood, which ignorant and light-headed-men wrest, to their own
perdition. Wherefore though as Saint Chrysostom says: Omnia clara sunt and
plana exscripturis divinis: quaecunque necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt: yet no
man ever has yet defined what are necessary, and what not. What points are
fundamental, and what are not fundamental. Necessary to Salvation is one
thing, and necessary for knowledge as an improvement of our faith is an other
thing, for the first, if a man keeps the Commandments, and believes all the
Articles of the Creed, he may be saved, though he never read a word of
Scripture; but much more assuredly if he meditates upon Gods word with the
Psalmist day and night. But if he means to walk by the rule of Gods word, and
to search the Scriptures, he must lay hold upon the means that God has
ordained, whereby he may attain unto the true understanding of them; for as
Saint Paul says: God has placed in the Church Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, to the end we should be no more little
children, blown about with every wind of Doctrine, therefore it is not for
babes in understanding to take upon them to understand those things, wherein so
great a Prophet as the Prophet David confessed the darkness of his own
ignorance. And though it be true, the Scripture is a river through which a
lamb may wade, and an Elephant may swim, yet it is to be supposed and
understood, that the lamb must wade but only through, where the river is
foordable; It does not suppose the river to be all alike in depth, for such a
river was never heard of; but there may be places in the river, where the lamb
may swim as well as the Elephant, otherwise it is impossible that an Elephant
should swim in the same depth, where a lamb may wade, though in the same river
he may; neither is it the meaning of that place, that the child of God may wade
through the Scripture without directions, help, or Judges, but that the meanest
capacity, qualified with a harmeless innocence, and desirous to wade through
that river of living waters to eternal life, may find so much of Comfort, and
heavenly knowledge there easily to be obtained, that he may easily wade through
to his eternal Salvation; and that there are also places in the same river,
wherein the highest speculations may plunge themselves, in the deep mysteries
of God. Wherefore with pardon craved for my presumption, in holding Your
Majesty in so tedious a discourse, as also, for my boldness in obtruding my
opinion, which is except (as incomparable Hooker in his Ecclesiastical policy
has well observed) the Churches Authority be required herein, as necessary
hereunto we shall be so far from agreeing upon the true meaning of the
Scripture, that the outward letter sealed with the inward witness of the Spirit
(being all heretics have quoted Scripture and pretended Spirit) will not be a
warrant sufficient enough, for any private man, to judge so much as the
Scripture to be Scripture: or the Gospel it self, to be the Gospel of Christ:
This Church being found out, and her Authority allowed of* all controversies
would be soon decided, and although we allow the Scripture to be the lock, upon
the door, which is Christ, yet we must allow the Church, to be the Key, that
must open it; as Saint Ambrose in his 38. Sermon calls the agreement of the
Apostles in the Articles of our belief, Clavis Scripturae, one of whose
Articles is, I believe the holy Catholic Church. As the Lion, wants neither
strength, nor courage, nor power, nor weapons, to seize upon his prey, yet he
wants a nose to find it out: wherefore by natural instinct, he takes to his
assistants, the little Jack-call: a quick sented beast: who runs before the
Lion, and having found out the prey in his language, gives the Lion notice of
it, who soberly until such time as he fixes his eyes upon the booty, makes
his advance, but once coming within view of it, with a more speed then the
swiftest running can make have, he jumps upon it, and seizes it. Now to apply
this to our purpose.

Christ crucified is the main substance of the Gospel, according to the
Apostles saying: I desire to know nothing, but Jesus, and him crucified; This
crucified Christ is the nourishment of our souls, according to our Saviors
own words: Vbi Cadaver, ibi aquilae. Thereby drawing his Disciples from the
curious speculation of his body glorified, to the profitable meditation of his
body crucified: It is the prey of the Elect: the dead Carkes feeds the
Eagles, Christ crucified, nourishes his Saints: according to Saint John's
saying, except we eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, we have
no life in us; him we must mastigate, and chew by faith: traject, and convey
him into our hearts as nutriment, by meditation: and digest him by Coalition,
whereby we grow one with Christ, and Christ becomes one with us, according to
that saying of Tertullian, auditu devorandus est, intellectu ruminandus, fide
digerendus.

Now for the true understanding of the Scriptures, which is no other thing,
then the finding out of Jesus, and him crucified, who is the very life of the
Scriptures: which body of Divinity, is nourished with no other food, and all
its veins filled with no other blood: though this heavenly food the Scripture
have neither force nor power to seize upon its prey, but is endued with a
lively spirit, able to overcome the greatest ignorance, yet there is a quick
sented assistant called Ecclesia, or Church, which is derived from a verb,
which signifies to call, which must be the Jack-call to which this powerful
seeker after this prey must join it self, or else it will never be able to find
it out; and when we are called, we must go soberly to work, until by this
means we have attained unto the true understanding and sight thereof, and
then, let the Lion, like the Eagle, Maher-shalal-hashbaz (as the Prophet Esaias
cap. 8. v. 3. tells us,) make have to the prey, make speed to the spoil. Saint
Paul confirms the use of this Etimologie writing to the Corinthians viz. To
the Saints called, and the Ephesians cap. 4. he tells us, if ye would be in one
body, and in one spirit, and of one mind, you must be as you are called in our
hope of your vocation: and in his Epistle to the Colossians cap. 3. he tells
us, that if we will have the peace of Christ to rule in our hearts, that is it
by which we are called in one self body, where we must allow a constitution or
Society of men called to that purpose, and whose calling it is to procure unto
us this peace and unity in the Church, or we shall never find it. Thus when
dissension arose between Paul and Barnabas concerning Circumcision, their
disputations could effect nothing but heat, until the Apostles and Elders met
together, and determined the matter: there must be a society of men, that can
say, been visum fuit nobis and spiritui sancto, or else matters of that nature
will never be determined, which society is there called the Church, which
Church we are to find.


King. I pray my Lord, what do you mean by the holy Catholic Church, do you
mean the Church of Rome?


Marq. I do so.


King. My thinks it should be inconsistent with it, to be both universal, and
particular.


Marq. No more then it is inconsistent, for the General of Your Army to be
General of all Your Officers, and Soldiers, and yet a particular man. By the
word Roman we intend not the particular Church of Rome, but all the Churches
which adhere and are joined in Communion with the Roman Church, as by the
Jewish Church, was not only meant the Church of Judah, only, but of all the
other Tribes which had Communion with her; the word Catholic is taken in three
several senses, formally, causually, and participatively: In the first sense,
the Society of all the true particular Churches, united in one self-same
Communion, is called Catholic; Causually, the Roman Church is called
Catholic, for as much as she infuseth universalitie into all the whole body of
the Catholic Church, wherefore being a Center and beginning of Ecclesiastical
Communion, infusing unity, which is the form of of universalitie, into the
Catholic Church. She may be called Catholic, Participatively, because
particular Churches agree, and participate in Doctrine and Communion with the
Catholic.


King. You have satisfied me why the Church of Rome (in your sense) may be
called Catholic, but you have not yet satisfied me, why other Churches may not
be called (causually) as much Catholic as she: being the Greek Church has
infused as much universalitie into the wholly body of the Catholic Church as
she did, and was both center and circumference, as much as ever she was.


Marq. Sir, as to this point, I shall refer Your Majesty to the learned reply,
that the profound Card. Peroon, so respectfully and learnedly made to Your
royal Father his Apology, wherein this point is largely and (to my
apprehension) fully answered. But will Your Majesty either give or take,
either let me show you this Church, or else do Your Majesty show it me.


King. My Lord, if you can show it me, I shall not shut mine eyes against it;
But at this time, truly my Lord, I can hardly hold them open. My Lord, I pray,
will you set down your mind in writing, and I will promise you it shall want no
animadvertion, and that I will give, you my clear opinion concerning it.


Marq. O Sir! Literae scriptae manent; I do not like, that what I speak here to
Your Majesty, I can promise my self, so much from Your goodness, that no bad
Construction shall be made of what I speak. But if my writing should come into
other folks hands, I may justly fear their comments: wherefore I desire to be
excused.


King. My Lord, I hold it more convenient so to do: I will promise you, that
I will let no eyes but mine own view, your Paper: and I will return it to you
again by the Doctor.


Marq. Upon that Condition I am contented: I have one request more unto Your
Majesty: that You would make one Prayer to God, to direct You in the right
way: and that You would lay aside all prejudice, and self-interest, and that
You will not so much fear the Subject, as the Superior, who is over all, and
then You cannot do a miss.


King. My Lord, all this shall be done, by the Grace of God.


Whereupon the Marquess called upon me to help him, so that he might kneel: and
being upon his knees, he desired to kiss His Majesty's hand, which he did,
saying:

Sir, I have not a thought in my heart, that tends not to the service of my
God, and you: and if I could have resisted this motion of his Spirit, I had
desisted long ago, but I could not: wherefore on both my knees, I pray to his
Divine Majesty, that he will not be wanting to his own Ordinance, but will
direct Your understanding, to those things, which shall make You a happy King
upon Earth, and a Saint in Heaven; And thereupon he fell a weeping, bidding me
to light His Majesty to His Chamber. As the King was going, he said unto the
Marquess: My Lord, it is great pity, that you should be in the wrong: Whereat
the Marquess soon replied: It is greater pity, that You should not be in the
right. The King said: God direct us both: The Marquess said: Amen, Amen, I pray
God. Thus they both parted: and (as I was lighting His Majesty to His
Chamber,) His Majesty told me, that he did not think to have found the old
Man, so ready at it, and that he believed, he was a long time putting on his
armor: yet it was hardly proof. To which I made answer, that I believe, his
Lordship had more reason to wonder, how His Majesty (so unprepared) could
withstand the on set. The King (being brought to His door,) commanded me, that
before I brought him his Lordship Paper, I should peruse it, and give him my
opinion of it. Which I promised to obey, and so returned to the Marquess, whom
I found in the dark upon his knees, whom I did not disturb; but when he rise,
he said unto me: Doctor, I will tell you what I was doing, I was giving God
thanks, that he had preserved the use of my memory for so good a work, and
imploring a blessing upon my endeavors. To which I made answer: My Lord, no
question, but you think it a good work, or else you would not implore Gods
blessing upon it. Whereupon my Lord said: Ah! Doctor, I would to God, you
thought so too: And waiting upon him into his Chamber, he further said unto me:
Doctor Bailey, you know, I am obliged not to speak unto you in this nature, yet
I hope, I may say thus much unto you, without any breach of promise, you may be
an Instrument of the greatest good that ever befell this Nation. I say no more:
Good night to you.

The third day after, he gave me this Paper to deliver unto His Majesty, which
I did.

The Marquess his Paper to the King.
IT must be granted by all: that there must be (always) in the world, one,
holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church: one, that it may be uniforme: holy,
that it may be certain: Catholic, that it may be known: and Apostolic, that
it may succeed: this Church must be either the Roman, or the Protestant, or
else, some other, that is opposite to both. It cannot be any Church which is
opposite to both: because, the Church of England did not (when she separated
from the Roman) join her self to any: not to the Grecian: for that houlds as
many Doctrines contrary to the Church of England, as does the Roman; nor to
any else, because, she agrees with none, no reformed Church under the Sun, that
is, or ever was, has the same articles of belief, as has the Church of
England: and from any other Church, besides the Roman, she never had a being:
and with any other Church besides the Roman, she never had Communion; She
cannot be that one, because she is but one: nor Catholic, because she agrees
not with any: nor Apostolic, because she has acknowledged such a fine and
recovery, that has quite cut off the entaile which would have (otherwise)
descended unto her from the Apostles; neither can she be holy, because she is
none of all the other three. Now if these Attributes cannot belong unto the
Protestant Religion, and do (clearly) belong unto the Roman, then is the Church
of Rom, the Catholic Church. And that it does, I shall prove it by the marks,
which God Almighty has given us, whereby we should know her.

And the first is Universality: All Nations shall flow unto her, Esa. 2. 2. And
the Psalmist: The heathen shall be thine inheritance, and the uttermost part of
the Earth for thy possession, Psalm. 2. 2. And our Savior Matthew. 20. 14. This
Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, as a witness to all
Nations, etc. Now I confess, that this glory is belonging to all Professors of
the Christian Religion: yet amongst all those, who do profess the name of
Christ, I believe, Your Majesty will consent with me herein, that the Roman
Church, has this form of universality, not only above all different and
distinct Professors of Religion, but also beyond all Religions of the world,
Turks or heathens: and that there is no place in the world, where there are
not Roman Catholics; which is manifestly wanting to all other Religions,
whatsoever: Now I hope Your Majesty cannot say so of any Protestant Religion:
neither that Your Majesty will call all those who protest against the Church
of Rome, otherwise then Protestants: but not Protestant Catholics, or
Catholics of the Protestant Religion, being they are not religated within the
same Communion, and fellowships: for then Religion would consist in
protestation rather then unity; in Nations falling off from one another, rather
then all nations flowing to one another: neither is it a Consideration
altogether invalid, that the Church of Rome has kept possession of the name;
all along other reformed Churhes, leaving her in possession of the name, and
taking unto themselves new names according to their several founders: except
the Church of England, (who is now herself become like a Chapter that is full
of nothing else) whose founder was such a one, whose name it may be they were
unwilling to own.

For antiquity, if we should inquire after the old paths, which is the good
way, and walk therein; as the Prophet Jeremiah advises us: if we should take
our Saviors rule, Ab initio autem, non fuit sic: if we should observe his
saying, how the good seed was first formed: and then the tares: If we should
consider the pit from whence we were dug, and the rock from whence we were
hewn, we shall find antiquity more applicatory to the Church of Rome, then any
Protestant Church. But you will say, your Religion is as ancien^ as ours;
having its procedure from Christ, and his Apostles: so say the Lutheran
Protestants, with their Doctrine of Consubstantiation: and many other sorts of
Protestants, having other Tenants, altogether contrary to what you hold: how
shall we reconcile you? so say all heretics that ever were, how shall we
confute them? a part to set up themselves against the whole, and by the power
of the sword, to make themselves Judges, in their own causes, is dealing, that
were it your case, I am sure you would think it very hard, I wish you may never
find it so.

For Visibility: Our Savior compares his Church to a City placed on a hill,
according unto the Prophet David's Prophecy, a Tabernacle in the Sun: It is
likewise compared unto a candle in a candle-stick: not under a bushel: and
says our Savior, If they shall say unto you, behold, he is in the desert, go
ye not forth; Behold, he is in secret places, believe it not; forewarning us
against obscure and invisible Congregations: Now I beseech Your Majesty,
whether should I betake my self, to a Church that was always visible, and
gloriously eminent; Or to a Protestant Church that was never eminent, and for
the most part invisible? shrowding their defection, under an Apostolical
Expression, of a woman in the Revelation, who fled into the wilderness for a
thousand years? as if an allegory, could wipe out so many clear texts of
Scripture, as are set down by our Savior, and the Prophets concerning the
Churches invisibility? And I could not find any Church in the world, to whom
that Prophesy of Esaias might more fitly appertain, then to the Church of Rome: I
have set watchmen upon the walls, which shall never hold their peace day nor
night, which I am sure no Protestant Church can apply to her self.

It is not enough to say, I maintain the same Faith and Religion which the
Apostles taught, and therefore, I am of the true Church, ancient, and visible
enough: because (as I have said before) every heretic will say as much: but if
you cannot by these marks of the Church, (set down in Scripture) clear your
selves to be the true Church, you vainly appeal to the Scriptures siding with
you in any particular point: for what can be more obsurd, then to appeal from
Scripture (setting things down clearly) unto Scripture setting down things more
obscurely? There is no particular point of Doctrine in the holy Scripture so
manifestly set down, as that concerning the Church, and the Marks thereof:
nothing set down more copious and perspicuous then the visibility, perpetuity
and amplitude of the Church.

So that Saint Augustine did not stick to say, that the Scriptures were more
clear about the Church, then they were about Christ. Let him answer for it. He
said so in his book, de unitate Ecclesiae, and this (he said) was the reason:
because, God (in his wisdom) would have the Church to be described without
any ambiguity, that all Controversies about the Church may be clearly decided:
wherehy questions about particular Doctrines, may find determinations in her
judgment: and that Visibility might show the way unto the most rude and
ignorant: and I know not any Church, to whom it may more justly be attributed,
then to the Church of Rome: whose Faith (as in the beginning was spread through
the whole world) so (all along) and at this day, it is generally known among
all nations. Next to this, I prove the Catholic Church to be the Roman;
because, a lawful succession of Pastors is required in every true Church,
according to the Prophet Esaias his Prophecy concerning her, viz. My Spirit
which is upon thee, and the words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy seeds seed, from henceforth, for ever; This succession I can find only
in the Church of Rome: This Succession they only can prove; none else,
offering to go about it. This Succession Saint Augustine says, kept him in that
Church, viz. a Succession of Priests, from the very seat of Peter the Apostle,
to the present Bishop of his time. And Optatus Milevitanus recons all the
Roman Bishops, from Saint Peter to Syricius, who then was Pope: and by this,
he showed and made it his Argument, that the true Church was not with the
Donatists: bidding them, to show the Original of their Chair: this no
Protestant did, or ever can do: The Roman Church gave the English Bishops
Commission to preach the Doctrine of Christ, as they have delivered it unto
them: but they never gave them any Commission to preach against her Religion:
which Bishops being turned out, for observing the depositum (wherewith they
were instructed) and new Bishops chosen in their room (by her, who not
contenting her self with being a nursing mother thereof, must needs be head of
the child: and moderatrix in the same Church, wherein by the Apostles precept
she is forbidden to speak) the Succession was broke off: the branch cut off
from the body, becoming no part of the tree, sit for nothing but to be chopped
into smaller pieces, and so fitted for the fire; this proof of Succession the
Bishops of England, thought so necessary, for proving their Church to be the
true Church, that they affirmed themselves to be consecrated by Catholic
Bishops, their Predecessors, wbich (never proved) argues the interruption, and
affirming it, shows how that (in their own opinion) the Succession could not
hold in the inferior Ministers (as indeed it cannot) for as there is a
continued supply of Ambassadors in all places, yet the Succession is in the
royal race: so though all vacancies are replenished by Ministers of the
Gospel, yet the Succession of the Authority was in the Bishops, as descended
(to them) from the Apostles, according to our Saviors rule: I will be with you
always unto the end of the world; Which Affirmation of theirs, argues that
their calling is insufficient without it: and in that they would feign derive
it from the Church of Rome, it argues, that that is the true Church: and yet
they would forsake her, supposing her to have errors, when that Reformation it
self, was but a Supposition; for seeing they hold that their Church may err,
they can be certain of nothing: and whilst (for errors sake) they forsake the
Church of Rome, the Church of England (in forsaking her) may be in the greatest
error of all: where there is neither Succession, nor assurance, I must leave
her to her self, and Your Majesty to judge.

Next: I prove, the Roman Church, to be the true Church, by her unity in
Doctrine: for so the Apostle Paul requires all the Churches children to be of
one mind. viz. I beseech you, that all speak one thing; Be ye knit together in
one mind, and one Judgment, 1. Cor. 1. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. The multitude of them that believed,
were of one heart, and of one soul, Act. 4. 32. Continue in one spirit and one
mind, of one accord and one judgment, Phil. 1. 27. Phil. 2. 2. So our Savior
prays that they may be one; So Joseph forewarned his brethren, that they
should not fall out by the way, knowing that whilst they were with him, he
could order them: when they came to their father, he could order them: but
having no head, they should be apt to dissentious. This Unity I find no where
but in the Church of Rome: agreeing in all things, which the Church of Rome
has determined for Doctrine, whereas the Protestant Doctrine, like the heresy
of Simon Magus, divided it self into several Sects, and to that of the
Donatists which were cut into small threads, in so much, that among the many
Religions which are lately sprung up, and the sub, sub, subdivisions under
them: each one (pretending to be the true Protestant) excluding the other: and
all of them together, no more likely to be bound up in the bond of peace, then
a bundle of thorns, can expect binding with a rope of sand; In vain is their
excuse, if non-disagreement in fundamentalls: for they dis-agree amongst
themselves about the Sacrament: for the Lutherans hold Consubstantiation: but
the Church of England no such matter.

Some, that Christ descended into hell: others not. The Church of England
maintain their King to be the head of the Church: The Helvetians will
acknowledge no such matter: the Presbyterians will acknowledge no such matter;
the Independent will acknowledge no such matter: Concerning the Government of
the Church by Bishops, some Protestants maintain it to be Jure Divino: others,
to be Jure Ecclesiastico, others no such matter. Some thinks that the English
translations of the Bible in some places takes away, in other places adds, and
other-some places changes the meaning of the holy Ghost, and some think it no
such matter or else the Bishops would not have recommended Lincol. min. to K.
James, page 11. 13.
it unto the people. Lastly, they are so far from agreeing about the true
meaning of the word of God, that they cannot agree upon what is the word of
God: For Lutherans, deny the second Epistle of Saint Peter, the second and
third Chem. Ex. Contr. Trid. part. 1. page 55 Also: Eucher. p. 63.
Epistle of Saint John: the Epistle to the Hebr. the Epistle of Saint James,
and Saint Jude, and the Revelation; The Calvinists and the Church of England,
no such matter, they allow them. And I believe that these are fundamentalls; If
they cannot agree upon their Principalls, how shall they agree upon the
deductions thence? If these be not fundamental points: how comes Protestants,
to sight against Protestants, for the Protestants Religion?

The disagreement is not so amongst the Roman Catholics: for all points of
the Roman Religion, that have been defined by the Church, in a general
Council, are agreed upon exactly, by all nations, tongues, and people,
ubicunque terrarum: but in those points which are not determined by the Church,
the Church leaves every man to abound in his own sense; and therefore all the
heat that is either between the Thomists and the Scolists: the Dominicans, and
the Jesuits: either concerning the Conception of our blessed Lady, or the
concurrence of Grace, and free will, etc. being points, wherein the Church has
not interposed her decrees, is no more prejudicall or objectionall against the
Church of Romes Unity, then the disputations in the Schools of our
Universities are prejudicial to the 39. Articles of the Church of England. But
in each several protestant Dominion there are certain several Articles of
belief, belonging to several protestant Dominions, in which several
agreements, not any one, agrees with any of all the rest; neither is there any
possibility they should: being there is no means acknowledged, nor power
ordained, whereby they should be gathered together in one council, whereby
they might be of one heart, and of one soul: neither is there this Unity in
any one particular Dominion: as is in the Dominion of the Roman Church; for
they are all in pieces amongst themselves, even in their own several
Dominions, practicing disobedience to their Superiors, they teach it to their
Inferiors.

The greatest Unity the Protestants have, is not in believing, but in not
believing: in knowing, rather what they are against, then what they are for;
not so much in knowing what they would have, as in knowing what they would not
have. But let these negative Religions take heed, they meet not with a negative
Salvation.

Neither can the Conversion of Nations be attributed to any other Church then
to the Roman, which is another mark of the true Church, according to the
prophesies of Esaias cap. 49. 23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens
thy nursing mothers. And Esaias 60. 16. Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles,
and the breasts of Kings shall minister into thee: And Esaias 60. 10. And thy
Gates shall be continually open, that men may bring to thee the riches of the
Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought. And the Isles shall do thee
service. And the Prophet David, I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermosts parts of the earth for thy possession, etc. Now
no Protestant Church ever converted any one Nation, Kingdom or People. Many
protestant people have fallen away from the Church of Rome, but this cannot be
called conversion, but rather perversion: for the Roman Church may justly say
of such, these have not converted Nations from paganism to Christianity, which
is the mark of the true Church: These are they, which went forth from us, 1 John 2. 19. Certain that went forth from us, Act. 15. 14. These are certain
men who rise out of our selves, speaking perverse things, Act. 20. 30. These
were they who separated themselves, Jude 19. which are marks of false and
heretical Churches. But the Roman Church I find stretching forth her arms,
from East to West, receiving and embracing all within her Communion; For the
first three hundred years, the Church grew down-ward, like a strong building,
whose foundations are first laid in the earth, whose stones are knit together
in Unity by the mortar that was tempered with the blood of her ten
Persecutions. Afterward this building, hasting upwards, Constantine the great
Emperor, submitting his neck unto the yoke of Christ, subdued all Christian
Churches to Pope Sylvester, then Pope of Rome, from which time to these our
days the Pope and his Clergy has possessed the outward and visible Church,
as is confessed by Napier, a learned Protestant in his treatise upon the
Revelation page 145. and all along has added Kingdoms upon Kingdoms to her
Communion: until she had incorporated into her self, not only Europe, but
Asia, Africa and America: as Simon Lythus, a Protestant writer, affirms, viz.
The Jesuits have filled Asia, Africa and America with their idols (as he calls
them) for the late Conversions of the East and West Indies by the Romans, if
you read Joan. Petrus Maffeus Hist. Indicarum, Jos. Acosta de nature. novi
orbis: You shall find that no Church in the world has ever spread so far and
wide, as the Church of Rome. Wherefore I hope in this respect (also) I may
safely conclude that the Church of Rome most justly deserves to be called the
Catholic Church.

Neither is it a vainer thing, to say, that the Pope of Rome cannot be head of
the Church, because Christ himself is head thereof; then it is for a man to
say, that the King of England cannot be King of England, because, God is King
of all the earth, Psalm. 46. 8. As if the King could not be Gods Vicegerent,
and the peoples visible God? so the Pope Christ's Vicar or Deputy, and the
Churches visible head. And let Kings beware, how they give way to such
Arguments as these, least at the last, such inferences be made upon themselves.

As strange an inference is that, how that the Church was not built upon Peter,
because it was built upon his Confession, as if it might not be built
caussually upon the one, and formally upon the other: as if both these could
not stand together: as if the Confession of Peter's Faith might not be the
cause, why Christ built his Church upon his Person; as if Christ did not as
well (personally) tell him, Tu es Petrus: as (significantly) super hanc Petram
(id est super istam Confessionem) aedificabo Ecclesiam.

No less invallied is that Objection of Protestants against the oecunomacie of
the Bishop of Rome, viz. that saying of Greg. sometimes Bishop of that sea,
viz. He that entitled himself universal Bishop, exalted himself like Lucifer,
above his brethren, and was a forerunner of Antichrist: as if there were no
more meanings in the word Universality then one: as if there were not a
Metaphorical as well as a Literal and Grammatical Sense: as if Saint Gregory
might not censure this title of Universality, in the Grammatical, and
exclusive meaning (which being so taken, would have excluded all other Bishops
from their Offices, Essences and Proprieties, which they held under Christ)
thereby depriving them of the Key of orders; and yet, still keep the
Superiority, (viz. of one Bishop over another, and himself over all in a
Metaphorical and transferent sense,) thereby still keeping the Key of
Jurisdiction in his own hands; and this not only is, but must be the meaning
of Saint Gregory; for he thus explicates the matter himself, lib. 4. ind. 13.
ep. 32. viz. The Care of the Church has been committed to the Prince of all
the Apostles, Saint Peter, and yet had Saint Peter called himself the
Universal Apostle: in the first sense, (seeing that Christ Jesus made other
Apostles as well as him,) he had been no Apostle himself but Antichrist; and
yet this hindered not, but that the care and principality was committed unto
Peter. Whereby you may plainly see, how he ascribes a head-ships over the
Church, whilst he denies the Universality of Episcopacie. Wherefore having
showed Your Majesty my Church; I humbly beg: that You will be pleased, either
to give me a few lines in answer hereunto; or else to show me Yours.

The Kings Paper in answer to the Marquess.
MY Lord: I have perused your Paper: whereby I find, that it is no strange
thing to see error, triumph in antiquity, and flourish all those ensigns of
Universality, Succession, Unity, Conversion of Nations, etc. in the face of
truth, and nothing was so familiar, either with the Jews or Gentiles, as to
besmeare the face of truth with spots of noveltie: for this was Jeremiahs case,
Jerem. 44. 16. viz. As for the word which thou have spoken unto us in the Name
of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee, but we will certainly do whatsoever
thing goes forth out of our own mouths: to burn incense unto the Queen of
heaven, and to power out drink offering unto her as we have done, we, and our
fathers, our Kings and our Princes in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets
of Jerusalem as we have done: there is Antiquity, we and our fathers: there is
Succescession, In the Cities of Judah and Jerusalem: there is Universalitie: so
Demetrius, urged Antiquity and Universality for his gods Diana: viz. That
her temple should not be despised, nor her Magnificence destroyed, whom all
Asia and the world worshipped, So Symacchus that wise Senator, though a bitter
enemy to the Christians: Servanda est inquit tot seculis fides and sequendi
sunt nobis parents qui feliciter sequuti sunt suos: we must defend that
Religion which has worn out so many ages and follow our Fathers steps, who
have so happily followed theirs. So Prudentius would have put back
Christianity it self, viz. Nunc dogma nobis Christianum nascitur post evolutos
mill demum Consules: Now the Christian Doctrine begins to spring up after the
revolution of a thousand Consul-ships: But Ezekiel reads us another lecture. Ne
obdurate cervices vestras ut patres vestri cedite manum Jehovae ingredimini
sanctuarium ejus, quod sanctificavit in saeculum and colite Jehovam Deum
vestrum: Be not stiff necked as your forefathers were, resist not the mighty
God enter into his sanctuary which he has consecrated for ever, and worship
ye the Lord your God.

Radbodus, King of Phrygia, (being about to be baptized) asked the Bishop, what
was become of all his ancestors, who were dead without being baptized? The
Bishop answered: that they were all in hell; whereupon the King suddenly
withdrew himself from the font (saying) Ibi profecto me illis Comitem adjungam:
Thither will I go unto them: no less wise are they, who had rather err with
fathers and Councels, then rectify their understanding by the word of God, and
square their faith according to its rules.

Our Savior Christ says, we must not so much hearken to what has been said by
them of old time, Matthew. 21. 12. as to that which he shall tell you, where
Auditis dictum esse antiquitis is exploded: and Ego dico vobis is come in its
place, which of them all can attribute that credit to be given unto him, as is
to be given to Saint Paul. Yet he would not have us to be followers of him
more, then he is a follower of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Wherefore if you cry
never so loud, Sancta matter Ecclesia, sancta matter Ecclesia, the holy mother
Church, holy mother Church as of old, they had nothing to say for themselves,
but Templum Domini, Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, we will cry as loud again with the Prophet: Quomodo facta est meretrix
Vrbs fidelis? how is the faithful City become a harlot? if you vaunt never so
much of your Roman Catholic Church, we can tell you out of Saint John, that
she is become the Synagogue of Satan: neither is it impossible, but that the
house of prayers may be made a Den of thieves: you call us heretics; we answer
you with Saint Paul, Act. 24. 14. After the way which you call heresy, so
worship we the God of our fathers, believing all things which were written in
the Law and the Prophets.

I will grant you, that all those marks which you have set done, are marks of
the true Church; and I will grant you more, that they were belonging to the
Church of Rome: but then, you must grant me thus much, that they are as well
belonging to any other Church, who hold and maintain that doctrine which the
Church of Rome then maintained, when she wrought those conversions: and not at
all to her, if she have changed her first love, and fallen from her old
principles; for it will do her no good to keep possession of the keys, when
the lock is changed: now to try whether she has done so or no, there can be no
better way, then by searching the Scriptures; for though I grant you that the
Catholic Church is the white in that butt of earth at which we all must aim;
yet the Scripture is the heart center, or peg in the midst of that white that
holds it up, from whence we must measure, especially when we are all in the
white. We are all of us in gremio Ecclesiae; so that controversies cannot be
decided by the Catholic Chruch, but by the Scriptures, which is the thing by
which the nearnes unto truth must be decided; for that which must determine
truth must not be fallible: but whether you mean the consent of Fathers, or the
decrees of general Counsels, they both have erred; I discover no Fathers
nakedness; but deplore their infirmities, that we should not trust in arms of
flesh: Tertullian was a montanist; Cyprian a rebaptist; Origin, an
Anthropomorphist, Heirom, a Monoganist Nazianzen, an Angelist; Eusebius, an
Arrian; Saint Augustine, had written so many errors, as occasioned the writing
of a whole book of retractaions: they have often times contradicted one
another, and some times themselves.

Now, for general Counsels: Did not that Concilium Ariminense, conclude for
the Arrian heresy? Did not that Concilium Ephesinum, conclude for the
Eutichian heresy? Did not that Concilium Carthaginense, conclude (...) not
lawful for Priests to marry? Was not Athanasius, condemned, In ^cilio Tyrio?
Was not Eiconolatria, established, In concilio Nicaeno secundo?

What should I say more? when the Apostles themselves, less obnoxious to
error, either in life or doctrine more to be preferred then any, or all the
world besides; one of them betraies his Savior, another denies him; all
forsake him. They thought Christ's Kingdom to have been of this world; and a
promise only unto the Jews, and not unto the Gentiles; and this after the
resurrection.

They wondered that the holy Ghost should fall upon the Gentiles. Saint John
twice worshipped the Angel, and was rebuked for it: Apoc. 22. 8. Saint Paul saw
how Peter walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel. Gal. 2.
14. Not only Peter, but other of the Apostles, were ignorant, how the word of
God was to be preached unto the Gentiles.

But who then shall roll away the stone from the mouth of the monument? Who
shall expound the Scriptures to us? one pulls one way, and another another: by
whom shall we be directed?

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. You that cry up the Fathers,
the Fathers so much; shall hear how the Fathers do tell us that the Scriptures
are their own interpreters.

Irenaeus, who was scholar to Policarpus, that was scholar to Saint John,
lib. 3. ca. 12. thus says, Ostentiones quae sunt in Scripturis non possunt
ostendi nisi ex ipsis Scripturis: the evidences which are in Scripture cannot
be manifested but out of the same Scripture.

Clemeus Alexandinus, Nos ex ipsis deipsis Scripturis, perfect demonstrantes
ex fide persuademus demonstrative: Strom. li. 7. Out of the Scriptures
themselves, from the same Scriptures perfectly demonstrating, do we draw
demonstrative persuasions from faith.

Crysost, Sacra Scriptura seipsam exponit and auditorem errare non sinit.
Basilius Magnus, Quae ambigue and quae obscure, videntur dici in quibusdam
locis sacrae Scripturae, ab ijs quae in alijs locis aperta and perspicua sunt
explicantur Hom: 13. in Genesis Those things which may seem to be ambiguous and
obsure in certain places of the holy Scripture, must be explicated from those
places which elsewhere are plain and manifest.

Augustinus, Ille qui cor habet Questionu^ asceticaru^ secundum eptt regula tree
cen^ssi ema sexagessima
quod precisum est jungat Scripturae, and legate superiora vel inferiora et in
veniet sensum. Let him who has a precise heart join it unto the Scriptures:
and let him observe what goes before, and that which follows after, and he
shall find out the sense.

Gregorius says (Ser. 49. De verbis Domini.) Per Scripturam loquitur deus omne
quod vult: et voluntas dei sicut in testamento, sic in evangelio inquiratur. By
Scripture God speaks his whole mind; and the will of God, as in the old
Testament so in the new, is to be found out.

Optatus contra parmenonem, lib. 5.

Number quis aequior arbiter veritatis divinae quam deus out ubi deus manifestius
loquitur quam in verbo suo: Is there a better judge of the divine verity then
God himself? or where dorh God more manifestly declare himself then in his own
word?

What breath shall we believe then but that which is the breath of God; the
holy Scriptures? for it seems all one to Saint Paul to say, dicit Sriptura, the
Scripture says: Romans 4. 3. and dicit Deus the Lord says: Romans 9. 17. The
Scripture has concluded all under sin, Gallathians 3. 22. for that which
Romans 11. 32. he says, God has concluded all etc. how shall we otherwise
conclude then but with the Apostle 1 Cor. 2. 12. we have received not the
spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are freely given unto us of God.

They who know not this spirit, do deride it: but this spirit is the hidden
Manna, Apo. 2. 17. which God gives them to eat who shall overcome; it is the
white stone wherein the new name is written, which no man knows but he that
received it. Wherefore we see the Scripture is the rule by which all difference
may be composed: it is the light wherein we must walk: the food of our souls:
an antidote that expels any infection: the only sword that kills the enemy: the
only plaster that can cure our wounds: and the only documents that can be given
toward the attainment of ever lasting salvation.

The Marquesses reply to the Kings Paper.
May it please your most excellent Majesty.

YOur Majesty is pleased to wave all the marks of the true Church; and to make
recourse unto the Scriptures.

I humbly take leave to ask Your Majesty what heretic that ever was did not
do so? How shall the greatest heretic in the world, be confuted or censured;
if any man may be permitted to appeal to Scriptures: margind with his own
notes, senc'd with his own meaning, and enlivened with his own private spirit:
to what end were those marks so fully, both by the Prophets, the Apostles, and
our Savior himself set down, if we make no use of them? To what use are land
marks set up, if Mariners will not believe them to be such?

Yet notwithstanding after that I have said, what I have to say in removal of
certain obstacles that lie in the way, I shall lead your Majesty to my Church,
through the full body of the Scriptures, or not at all, and then I shall leave
it to your royal heart to judge (when you shall see that we have Scripture on
our side) whether or no the interpretation thereof be likelier to be true, that
has been adjudged so by Councels, renowned Fathers, famous for sanstity and
holiness of life; continued for the space of a thousand or twelve hundred
years, by your own confession, universally acknowledged; or that such a one as
Luther (his word shall be taken, either without Scripture, or against it, with
sic volo, and sic Jubeo; a man who confessed himself, that he received his
doctrine from the Devil; or such a one as Calvin and their associates,
notoriously infamous in their lives and conversations, plain rebels to their
Moses and Aaron, united to the same person should counter-ballance all the
worthies, deterninations of Councels, and the continued practices which so many
ages produced.

If your Majesty means by the Church all the professors of the Gospel; all that
are Christians are so the true Church; then we are so in your own sense, and
you in ours: then none who believe in the blessed Trinity, the articles of the
Creed; none, who deny the Scriptures to be the word of God, let them consture
them as they please, can be heretical, or of a wrong Religion; therefore we
must contradistinguish them thus: and by the Protestant Church and Religion, we
must understand those opinions which the Protestants hold contrary to the
Church of Rome; and by the Roman, the opinions which they hold dissenting from
the Protestant; and then we will see whether we have Scripture for our religion
or not: and whether you have Scripture for what you maintain: and whose
opinions are most approved of by the Primitive times, and Fathers; and what
ground your late Divines have built their new opinions upon; and then I shall
give your Majesty an answer to the objection which you make against our Church:
viz. That she has forsaken her first love, and fallen from the principles
which she held, when she converted us to Christianity.

But first to the removal of those rubs in our way; and then I shall show as
much reverence to the Scripture as any Protestant in the world; and shall
endeavor to show your Majesty that the Sctiptures are the Basis or foundation
upon which our Church is built.

Your Majesty was pleased to urge the errors of certain Fathers, to the
prejudice of their authority; which I conceive would have been so, had they
been all Montanists, Rebaptists, all Anthropomorphists, and all of them
generally guilty of the faults, wherewith they were severally charged, in the
particulars: seeing that when we produce a Father, we do not intend to produce
a man in whose mouth was never found guile: the infallibility being never
artributed, by us, otherwise then unto the Church, not unto particular
Churchmen: as Your Majesty has most excellenly observed, in the failings of
the holy Apostles, who erred after they had received the holy Ghost, in so
ample manner: but when they were all gathered together in Council, and could
send about their edicts, with these capital letters in the front, Visum est
spiritui sancto and nobis: Acts 15. 28. then I hope your Majesty cannot say,
that it was possible for them to err.

So, though the Fathers might, err in particulars; yet those particular errors
would be swallowed up in a general Council, and be no more considerable in
respect of the whole, then so many heat-drops of error, can stand in
competition with a cloud of witnesses, to the divine truth; and be no more
prejudicial to their general determinations, then so many exceptions, are
prejudicial to a general rule. Neither is a particular defection in any man any
exception against his testimony, cept it be in the thing wherhin he is
deficient; for otherwise we should be of the nature of the flies, who only prey
upon corruption, leaving all the rest of the body that is whole unregarded.

Secondly, Your Majesty taxes general Councels for committing errors. If Your
Majesty would be pleased to search into the times wherein those Councels were
called, Your Majesty shall find, that the Church was then under persecution,
and how that Arrian Emperors, rather made Assemblies of Divines, then called
any general Councels; and if we should suppose them to be general and free
Councels, yet they could not be erroneous in any particular man's judgment,
until a like general Council should have concluded the former to be
erroneous; (except you will allow particulars to condemn generals, and private
men the whole Church) all general Councels, from the first unto the last that
ever were, or shall be, maks but one Church: and though in their intervails,
there be no session of persons, yet there is perpetual virtue in their
decretals, to which every man ought to appeal for judgment, in point of
controversy. Now as it is a maxim in our law, Nullum tempus occurrit regi: so
it is a maxim in divinity, Nullum tempus occurrit deo: Vbi deus est, as he
promised, I will be with you always unto the end of the world; that is with
his Church, in directing her chief Officers, in all their consultations,
relating either to the truth of her doctrine, or the manner of her discipline:
wherefore if it should be granted, that the Church had at any time determined
amiss; the Church cannot be said to have erred, because you must not take the
particular time for the Catholic Church; because the Church is as well
Catholic for time as territory; except that you will make rectification an
error.

For as in civil affairs, if that we should take advantage of the Parliaments
nulling former Acts; and thereupon conclude, that we will be no more regulated
by its laws, we should breed confusion in the Commonwealth; for as they alter
their laws, upon experience of present inconveniences; so the Councels cange
their decrees according to that further knowledge which the holy writ assures
us, shall increase in the latter days; provided that this knowledge he
improved by means approved of, and not by every enthusiastic, that shall
oppose himself against the whole Church.

If I recall my own words, it is no error, but an avoidance of error: so where
the same power rectifies it self, though some things formerly have been
decreed amiss, yet that cannot render the decrees of general Councels not
binding, or incident to error, quoad ad no^; though in themselves, and
protempore, they may be so.

As to Your Majesty's objecting the errors of the holy Apostles, and penmen of
the holy Ghost; and Your inference thereupon, viz. That truth is no where to be
found but in holy Scripture; under Your Majesty's correction, I take this to be
the greatest argument against the private spirit (urged by your Majesty) its
leading us into all truth, that could possibly be found out. For if such men
(as they) endued with the holy Ghost, enabled with the power of working
miracles; so sanctyfied in their callings, and enlightened in their
understandings could err: how can any man (less quallified) assume to himself
a freedom from not erring, by the assistance of a private spirit?

Lastly, as to Your Majesty's quotations of so many Fathers, for the Scriptures
easines and plainness to be understood. If the Scriptures themselves do tell
us, that they are hard to be understood, so that the unleaned and unstable
wrest them to their own destruction: 2 Peter 3. 16. and if the Scripture tells
us, that the Eunuch could not understand them except some man should guide him:
as Acts 8. 13. and if the Scripture tells us, that Christ's own Disciples could
not understand them, until Christ himself, expounds them unto them, as Luke
24. 25. and if the Scriptures tell us, how the Angel wept much, because no man
was able either in heaven or earth to open the Book sealed with seven seals,
nor to look upon it: as Apoc. 5. 1. then certainly all these sayings of theirs
are either to be set to the errata's that are be hind their books, or else we
must look out some other meaning of their words, then what Your Majesty has
inferred from thence; as thus they were easy id est in aliquibus, but not in
omnibus locis; or thus, they were easy as to the attainment of particular
salvation, but not as to the general cognizance of all the divine mystery
therein contained, requisite for the Churches understanding, and by her alone,
and her consultations and discusments (guided by an extraordinary and promised
assistance) only to be found out; of which as to every ordinary man, this
knowledge is not necessary, so hereof he is not capable.

First, we hold the real presence; you deny it: we say his body is there: you
say there is nothing but bare bread: we have Scripture for it, Mat. 20. 26.
Take eat this is my body, so Luke 22. 19. This is my body which is given for
you.

You say that the bread which we must eat in the Sacrament, is but dead bread;
Christ says that that bread is living bread: you say, how can this man give us
his flesh to eat? we say that that was the objection of Jews and Infidels (1
John 6. 25.) not of Christians and believers: you say it was spoken
figuratively; we say it was spoken really, revera, or as we translate it
indeed, John 6. 55. But as the Jews did, so do ye, first murmur that Christ
should be bread, John 6. 41. Secondly, that that bread should be flesh, John 6.
52. And thirdly, that that flesh should be meat indeed, John 6. 55. until at
last you cry out with the unbelievers, this is a hard saying who can hear it?
John 6. 60. had this been but a figure certainly Christ would have removed the
doubt, when he saw them so offended at the reallity: Joh. 6. 61. He would not
have confirmed his saying, in terminis, with promise of a greater wonder, John
6. 62. you may as well deny his incarnation, his ascension, and ask, ^ow could
the man come down from heaven and go up again? (if incomprehensibility should
be sufficient to occasion such scruples in your breasts) and that which is
worse then naught, you have made our Saviors conclusion an argument against
the premises; for where our Savior tells them, thus to argue according unto
flesh and blood, in these words, the flesh profits nothing; and that if they
will be enlivened in their understanding, they must have faith to believe it in
these words, it is the Spirit that quickneth, John 6. 63. They pervert our
Saviors meaning into a contrary sense, of their own imagination: viz. the
flesh profits nothing, that is to say, Christ's body is not in the Sacrament:
but it the Spirit that quickneth, that is to say, we must only believe that
Christ dyed for us, but not that his body is there: as if there were any need
of so many inculcations, pressures, offenses, misbelievings, of and in a thing
that were no more but a bare memorial of a thing; being a thing nothing more
usual with the Israelites; as the twelve stones which were errected as a sign
of the children of Isreal's passing over Jordan: That when your children shall
ask their Fathers what is meant thereby, then ye shall answer them etc. Josh.
4. there would not have been so much difficulty in the belief, if there had not
been more in the mystery; there would not have been so much offense taken at a
memorandum, nor so much stumbling at a figure.

The Fathers are of this opinion, Saint Ignat. in Ep, ad Smir. Saint Justin.
Apol: 2. ad Antonium: Saint Cyprian Ser. 4. de lapsis. Saint Ambr. lib. 4. de
Sacram. Saint Remigius, etc. affirm the flesh of Christ to be in the Sacrament,
and the same flesh which the word of God took in the Virgins womb.

Secondly, We hold tbat there is in the Church an infallible rule for
understanding of Scripture, besides the Scripture it self: this you deny: this
we have Scripture for, as Romans 12, 16. we must prophecy according to the rule
of faith: we are bid to walk according to this rule: Gal. 6. 16. we must
increase our faith, and preach the Gospel, according to this rule: 1 Cor. 10.
15, this rule of faith, the holy Scriptures call a form of doctrine: Romans 6.
17. a thing made ready to our hands: 2. Cor. 10. 16. that we may not measure
our selves by our selves: 2 Cor. 10. 12. the depositions committed to the
Churches trust, 1 Timothy 6. 20. for avoiding of profane and vain bablings and
oppositions of sciences, and by this rule of faith, is not meant the holy
Scriptures; for that cannot do it, as the Apostle tells us, whilst there are
unstable men who wrest this way and that way, to their own destruction; but it
is the tradition of the Church and her exposition, as it is delivered from hand
to hand as most plainly appears, 2 Timothy 2. 2. viz. The things which thou have
heard of us (not received in writing from me or others) among many witnesses,
the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach it to others
also.

Of this opinion are the Fathers; Saint Irenaeus 4. chap. 45. Tertull: de
praescr. and Vnicent. lir. in suo commentario says, It is very needful in
regard of so many errors proceeding from misinterpretations of Scripture, that
the line of prophetical and Apostolical exposition, should be directed
according to the rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense; and says.
Tertullian praescript. advers. haeres. chap. 11. We do not admit our
adversaries to dispute out of Scripture, till they can show who their Ancestors
were, and from whom they received the Scriptures: for the ordinary course of
doctrine, requires that the first question should be, from whom, and by whom,
and to whom, the form of Christian Religion was delivered; otherwise
prescribing against him as a stranger: for otherwise if a heathen should come
by the Bible, as the Eunuch came by the Prophecy of Esaias. and have no Philip
to enterpret it unto him, he would find out a Religion rather according to his
own fancy, then divine verritie.

In matters of faith, Christ bids us to observe and do whatsoever they bid us
who fit in Moses seat Mat. 22. 2. therefore surely there is something more to
be observed then only Scripture; will you not as well believe what you hear
Christ say, as what ye hear his Ministers write; you hear Christ when you hear
them, as well as you read Christ when you read his word: He that hears you
hears me: Luke 10. 16.

We say the Scriptures are not easy to be understood; you say they are: we
have Scripture for it, as is before manifested at large: the Fathers say as
much: Saint Irenaeus lib. 2. chap. 47. Origin: contr. Cells: and Saint Ambr.
Epist. 44. ad Constant. calls the Scripture a Sea and depth of prophetical
riddles: and Saint Hier. in praefat: comment. in Ephesians: and Saint Aug: Epist:
119. chap: 21: says, The things of holy Scripture which I know not, are more
then those that I know: and Saint Denis, Bishop of Corinth, cited by Eusebius,
lib. 7. hist. Eccles: 20. says of the Scriptures, that the matter thereof was
far more profound then his wit could reach.

We say that this Church cannot err: you say it can: we have Scripture for
what we say; such Scripture that will tell you that fools cannot err therein:
Esaiah 35. 8. such Scripture as will tell you, if you neglect to hear it, you
shall be a heathen and a publican: Mat. 18. 17. such Scripture as will tell
you, that this Church shall be unto Christ a glorious Church, a Church that
shall be without spot or wrincle: Ephesians 5. 27: such a Church as shall be
enlivened for ever with his Spirit: Isaiah 59: 21: The Fathers affirm the same,
Saint Aug: Contra Crescon: lib: 1. ca. 3. Saint Cypr: Epist: 55. ad Cornel.
number: 3. Saint Irenaeus lib: 3. chap: 4. Cum multis aljis.

We say the Church has been always visible; you deny it: we have Scripture
for it, Mat: 5. 14, 15: The light of the world; a City upon a hill cannot be
hid: 2 Cor: 4: 3: Isaiah 22:

The Fathers unanimously affirm the same; Origin: Hom: 30: in Math: That the
Church is full of light even from the East to the West: Saint Chrisost: Hom: 4:
in 6: of Isaiah, That it is easier for the Sun to be extinguished, then the
Church to be darkened: Saint Aug: tract: in Joan: calls them blind, who do not
see so great a mountain: and St: Cypr: de Vnitate Ecclaesioe:

We hold the perpetual universality of the Church, and that the Church of Rome
is such a Church: you deny it: we have Scripture for it, Psalm 2. 8. Romans 1. 8.
the Fathers affirm as much, Saint Cypr: ep. 57. writing to Cornelius Pope of
Rome, says, whilst with you there is one mind and one voice, the whole Church
is confessed to be the Roman Church. Saint Aug. de unitate eccles. chap. 4.
says who so communicates not with the whole corpse of Christendom, certain it
is that they are not in the holy Catholic Church. Saint Hier in apol. ad
Ruffin. says, that it is all one to say the Roman faith, and the Catholic.

We hold the unity of the Church to be necessary in all points of faith: you
deny it: the several articles of your Protestant Churches deny it: we have
Scripture for it, Ephesians. 4. 5. One Lord, one faith, one Baptism. Acts 4. 35. 1
Cor. 1. 10. The Fathers are of that opinion, Saint Aug. cont. ep. Par: li. 3.
chap. 5. Saint Cyp. li. de unitate ecclesiae nu. 3. Saint Hyl. lib. ad
constantium Augustum.

We hold that every Minister of the Church, especially the supreme Minister or
head thereof, should be in a capacity of fungifying his office in preaching the
Gospel, administering the Sacraments, baptizing, marrying, and not otherwise,
this we have Scripture for, Heb. No man takes this honor unto himself but he
that is called of God, as Aaron was: this you deny: and not only so, but you so
deny it, as that your Church has maintained and practiced it along time, for a
woman to be head or supreme moderatrix in the Church; when you know that
according to the word of God (in this respect) a woman is not only forbid to be
the head of the man, but to have a tongue in her head. 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12. 1 Cor.
14. 34. yet so has this been denied by you, that many have been hanged, drawn,
and quartered, for not acknowledging it: the Fathers are of our opinion herein
Saint Damascen: ser: 1 Theod: hist: Ecclesi: li: 4: chap: 28: Saint Ignat:
Epist: ad Philodolph: Saint Chyrsost: hom: 5. de verbis: Isaiae.

We say, that Christ gave commission to his Disciples to forgive sins; you deny
it: and say, that God only can forgive sins: we have Scripture for it, John
20. 23. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whosesoever sins ye
tetain, they are retained: and John 20. 21: As my Father has sent me, even so
send I you: and how was that? viz. with so great power, as to forgive sins:
Mat: 9. 3. 8. where note, that Saint Matthew does not set down, how that the
people glorified God the Father, who had given so great power unto God the Son;
but that he had given so great power unto men: loco citato. The Fathers are of
our opinion: S. Aug: tract: 49: in Joan: Saint Chris: de Sacerdotio: li. 3.
Saint Ambros: li: 3. de penitentia: Saint Cyrill: li: 12: ca: 50: says, It is
not absurd to say, that they should remit sins, who have in them the Holy
Ghost: and Saint Basil: li: 5: cont: Eunom: proved the holy Ghost to be God
(and so confuted his heresy) because the holy Ghost forgave sins by the
Apostles: and Saint Irenaeus li: 5. cap: 13: so Saint Greg: Hom: 6: Evang:

We hold, that we ought to confess our sins unto our ghostly Father; this ye
deny; saying that ye ought not to confess your sins but unto God alone; this
we prove out of Scripture, Mat: 3: 5, 6. Then went out Jerusalem and all Judea,
and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins; this confession,
was no general confession, but in particular: as appears Acts 19: 18, 19. And
many that believed, came and confessed, and showed their deeds.

The Fathers affirm the same; Saint Irenaeus li: 1. ca: ^: Tertull: li: de
Paenitentia: where he reprehendeth some who for humane shame fastness,
neglected to go to confession. S: Ambr: sat to hear confession: Amb:
Expaulsino: S: Clem: Ep: de fratr. Dom: Origin li. 3. Chrysostom. li: 3. de sacerd:
Saint Ambr: urat: in muliere peccatrice says, confess freely to the Priest
the hidden sins of thy soul.

We hold that men may do works of supererogation: this you deny: This we
prove by Scripture, Mat. 19. 12. viz. There be Eunuchs which have made
themselves Funuches for the Kingdom of heaven: he that is able to receive it
let him receive it: this is more then a Commandment, as Saint Aug. observes
upon the place, ser li. de temp: for of precepts it is not said, keep them, who
is able, but keep them absolutely.

The Fathers are of this opinion; Saint Amb. li. de viduis. Orig: in c. 15. ad
Romans Eusebius: 1. demonstrat. chap. 8. Saint Chrysostom. hom: 8. de act. paenit. Saint
Greg: nicen: 15. Moral: chap. 5.

We say, we have free will: you deny it: we prove we have out of Scripture,
viz. 1 Cor. 17. He that stands steadfast in his heart, having no necessity,
but has power over his own will, and has so decreed in his heart that he will
keep his virgin, does well.

Deuteronomy. 30. 11. I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing,
choose life, that thou and thy seed may live: and Christ himself said: O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as
a Hen gathers her Chicken, and ye would not* where Christ would and they would
not: there might have been a willingness as well as a willing; or else Christ
had wept in vain: and to think that he did so; were to make him an imposture.

The ancient Fathers are of our opinion: Eusebius: Caesar: de praep: li. 1. c. 7.
Saint Hilde: Trin: Saint Aug: li. 1. ad Simp: q. 4. Saint Ambr: in Luc: chap:
12. Saint Chrysostom: hom: 19. in Gen: Irenaeus li: 4. ca. 72, Saint Cyril. li. 4.
in Joan: in cap: 7. etc.

We hold it possible to keep the Commandments; you say it is impossible: we
have Scripture for it, Luk: 1, 6: And they were both righteous before God:
walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless: and 1
John 5: 3: His Commandments are not grievious.

The Fathers are for us: Orig: Hom: 9: in Josue: Saint Cyril: li: 4: Cont:
Julian: Saint Hyl: in Psalm: 118: Saint Hier: l. 3: cont: pelag: Saint Basil:

We say, faith cannot justify without works: ye say good works are not
absolutely necessary to salvation: we have Scripture for what we say, 1 Cor:
13: 2: Though I have all faith, and have no charity, I am nothing: and James 2:
24: By works a man is justified and not by faith only.

This opinion of yours Saint Aug: li: de fide and oper: ca: 14: says, was an
old heresy, in the Apostles time; and in the preface of his Comment: upon the
32: Psalm: he calls it the right way to hell and damnation: See Orig: in 5. to
the Rom: Saint S. Hillar. chap. 7. in Mat: S. Amb: 4. ad Heb: etc.

We hold, good works to be meritorious; you deny it: we have Scripture for it,
Mat. 6. 27. He shall reward every man according to his works. Mat. 5. 12.
Great is your reward in heaven. Reward at the end, presupposes merit in the
work: the distinction of secundum, and propter opera: is too nice, to make
such a division in the Church.

The Fathers were of our opinion. S. Amb: de Apolog: David. ca. 6. S. Hier:
lib. 3. Cont: Pelag: S. Aug: de Spiritu and lit. cap. ult, and diverse others.

We hold, that faith once had may be lost, if we have not care to preserve it:
You say it cannot; we have Scripture for it, viz. Luke 8. 13. They on the rock,
are they, which when they hear, receive the word with joy: which for a while
believe, and in time of temptation fall away. So 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. Which some
having put away, have made shipwreck of their faith.

This is frequently affirmed amongst the Fathers, See S. Aug: de gratia, and
lib: arbit: de correp: and gratia, and ad articulos.

We hold, that God did never inevitably damn any man, before he was born: or as
you say, from all eternity; you say, he did, we have Scripture for what we say,
Wis: 1. 13. God made not death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of
the living. 1 Timothy: 2. 34. God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved. 2
Pet: 3. 9. The Lord is not willing that any should die, but that all should
come to repentance: and if you will not believe, wben he says so; believe him
when he swears it: As I live, says the Lord, I do not delight in the death of
a sinner.

The Fathers are of our opinion, Saint Aug: li: 1. Civit: Dei Tertul: Orat: ca:
8. Saint Cypr: lib: 4. Epist: 2. and Saint Amb: lib: 2. de Cani and Abel.

We hold, that no man ought, infallibly, to assure himself of his salvation:
you say he ought: the Scripture says, we ought not, 1 Cor: 9. 27. S. Paul was
not assured, but that whilst he preached unto others, he himself, might become
a castaway.

Rom: 11. 20. Thou stand in the faith: be not high minded, but fear, etc.
least thou also may be cut off. Phil: 2. 12. Work out your salvation with
fear and trembling.

The Fathers are of our opinion: Amb: Ser: 5. in Psalm: 118. S. Basil: in
Constil: Monast: chap: 2. S. Hier: li: 2. Advers. Pelagian: S. Chrysostom: Hom:
87. in Joan: S. Aug: in Psa: 40. S. Bernard Ser: 3. de Advent: and Ser: 1. de
Sept: says, Who can say I am of the Elect?

We say, that every man has an Angel guardian; you say he has not: we have
Scripture for it, viz. Mat: 18. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven, there Angels do always
behold the face of my Father. Acts 12. 13. S. Peter knocking at the door, they
say, it is his Angel: they believed this in the Apostles time: the Fathers
believed it along, S. Greg: Dial: li: 4. cap: 58. S. Athanas: de Communi
Essentia. S. Chrysostom: Hom: 2. in Ep: ad Collos: lib: 6. de Sacer: Greg: Turonens:
lib: de gloria Martyr. S. Aug: Ep: ad Prabam cap. 19. and S. Jer: upon these
words, Their Angels, Mat. 17. 10. calls it a great dignity, which every one has
from his Nativity.

We say, the Angels pray for us, knowing our thoughts, and deeds; you deny it:
we have Scripture for it, Zach: 1, 9, 10, 11, 12. Then the Angel of the Lord,
answered, and said, O Lord of Hosts, how long, will thou not have mercy on
Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against whom thou have had indignation,
these theescore and ten years. Apoc: 8. 4. And the smoke of the incense of the
prayers of the Saints, ascended from the hand of the Angel before the Lord.

This place was so understood by Irenaeus, li: 4. cap: 34. and S. Hilary in
Psalm: 129. tells us, This intercession of Angels, Gods nature needs not, but
our infirmities do: So S. Amb: lib: de viduis, Victor: utic: lib: 3. de
persecutione vandalorum.

We hold it lawful to pray unto them; you not: we have Scripture for it, Gen:
48. 16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless these lads, etc.
Hosea 12. 4. He had power over the Angel, and prevailed: he wept and made
supplications unto them.

Saint Augustine expounding these words of Job 19. 21. Have pity upon me, O ye
my friends, for the hand of the Lord is upon me, says, that holy Job addressed
himself to the Angels.

We hold, that the Saints deceased, know what passes here on earth; you say
they know not: we have Scripture for it, Luke 16. 29. where Abraham knew that
there were Moses and the Prophets Books here on earth, which he himself had
never seen when he was alive.

The Fathers say as much, Eusebius: Ser: de Ann: S. Hier: in Epit: Paulae: S.
Maxim: Ser: de S. Agnete.

We say, they pray for us; you not: we have Scripture for it, Apoc: 5. 8. The
twenty four Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them
Harpes, and golden Viols, full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints.
Baruch 3. 4. O Lord Almighty, thou God of Israel, hear now the prayers of the
dead Israelites.

The Fathers were of this opinion, S. Aug: Ser: 15. de verbis Apist: S. Hilar:
in Psa: 129. S. Damas: lib: 4. de fide cap: 16.

We hold, that we may pray to them; you not: we have Scripture for it, Luke 16.
24. Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, etc. You bid us show one
proof, for the lawfulness hereof, when here are two Saints prayed unto in one
verse: and though Dives were in Hell, yet Abraham in Heaven would not have
expostulated with him so much, without a non nobis domine if it had been in it
self, a thing not lawful: You will say it is a parable; yet a jury of ten
Fathers, of the grand inquest as Theophil: Tertul: Clem: Alex: S. Chrysostom: S.
Jer: S. Amb: S. Aug: S. Greg: Euthem: and Ven: Beda, give their verdict, that
it was a true History: but suppose it were a parable; yet every parable is
either true in the persons named, or else may be true in some others: The Holy
Ghost tells no lies, nor fables, nor speaks not to us in parables, consisting
either of impossibilities, or things improbable, Job 5. 1. Call now, if there
be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn? It
had been a frivolous thing, in Eliphaz. to have asked Job the question; if
invocation of Saints had not been the practice of that time.

The Fathers offirme the same, S. Dony: cap: 7. S. Athan: Ser: de Annunt: S.
Basil: Orat: in 44. Mart. S. Chrysostom: Hom: 66. ad Popul: S. Hier: prayed to S.
Paula in Epitaph. S. Paulae. S. Maximus to S. Agnes, Ser: de S. Agnete: S.
Bern: to our blessed Lady.

We hold, Confirmation necessary; you not: we have Scripture for it, Acts 8.
14. Peter and John prayed for them, that they might receive the holy Ghost (for
as yet he was fallen upon none of them; only they were baptized in the name of
the Lord Jesus) Then laid they their hands on them; and they received the holy
Ghost: Where we see, the holy Ghost was given in Confirmation, which was not
given in Baptism: also Heb: 6. 1. Therefore leaving the principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, not laying again the
foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith, toward God, of
Baptism and of Laying on of hands.

The Fathers affirm the same. Tert: li: de Resurect: Carn: S. Pacian: lib: de
Bapt: S* Amb: lib: de Sac: S. Hier: Cont: Lucif: S. Cypr: li: 2. Ep: 1.
speaking both of Baptism, and Confirmation, says, Then they may be sanctified
and be the sons of God, if they be borne in both Sacraments.

We hold it sufficient, to communicate in one kind; you not: we have Scripture
for it, Joh. 6. 15. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. If
everlasting life be sufficient, then is it also sufficient, to communicate
under one kind: So Acts 2. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
doctrine, and fellowship (or communion) and in breaking of bread and prayer:
where is no mention of the cup, and yet they remained steadfast in the Apostles
doctrine, Luke 24. 30. 8. 35. where Christ communicated his two Disciples under
one kind.

Saint Augustine and Theophilact, lib: de Consens: Evang: cap: 25. expound this
place of the blessed Sacrament, S. Chrysostom: Hom: 17. oper: imperfecti.

We hold, that Christ offered up unto his Father, in the Sacrifice of the Mass
(as an expiation for the sins of the people) is a true and proper Sacifice;
this you deny: this we prove by Scripture, viz. Malach: 1. 11. from the rising
of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the
Gentiles: and in every place incense shall be offered, to my name, and a pure
offering: This could not be meant, of the figurative offerings of the Jews:
because it was spoken of the Gentiles; neither can it be understood, of the
real Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross; because that was done but in one
place, and at one time, and then, and there, not among the Gentiles neither:
which could be no other, but the daily Sacrfice of the Mass; which is, and
ever was, from East to West, a pure and daily Sacrifice, Luke 22. 19. This is
my body, which is given for you: not to you; therefore a Sacrifice.

The Fathers are of this opinion: S. Clem: Apost: Constable: li: 6. cap. 23. who
calls it a reasonable unbloudy and mystical Sacrament, S. Aug: li: 1. Cont:
adverse: leg: and proph: cap: 18. 19. calls it, a singular and most excellent
Sacrifice. S. Chrysostom: hom: in Psa: 95. calls it, a pure and unbloudy host, a
heavenly, and most reverend Sacrifice. S. Greg: Nicen: Orat: 4. de Resurrect.

We say, that the Sacrament of orders, confers grace upon those, on whom the
hands of the Presbytery are imposed; you both deny it to be a Sacrament,
notwithstanding the holy Ghost, is given unto them thereby; and also you deny,
that it confers any inferior grace at all upon them: we have Scripture for
what we hold, viz. 1 Timothy: 4. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which
was given thee by Prophecy, and with the laying on the hands of the
Presbytery, So 1 Timothy: 1. 6. Stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the
putting on my hands.

S. Aug: li: 4. Quaest: super number: S. Cyp: Ep: ad Magnum: optatus Milevit: the
place begins, ne quis miretur. Tertul: in prescript: The place begins
Edant Origines.

We hold, that the Priest and other Religious persons who have vowed chastity,
to God, may not marry afterward; you deny first, that it is lawful to make
any such vows: and secondly, That those who have made any such vows, are not
bound to keep them; we have Scripture for what we hold, Deuteronomie 23. 22.
When thou shall vow, a vow unto the Lord, thy God, thou shall not slack to pay
it: for the Lord thy God will require it of thee. So 1 Timothy: 5. 11, 12. But the
younger widows refuse, for when they have begun to wax wanton, against the
Lord, they will marry, having damnation, because they have cast off their first
faith. What can be meant hereby, but the vow of Chastity? or by their first
faith, but some promise made to Christ, in that behalf? otherwise, Marriage
could not be damnable: so all the ancient Fathers have expounded it. Saint Aug:
li: de bono viduit. cap: 9. Saint Athanas: lib: de Virginitat: Saint Epiph:
Here Is: 48. Saint Hier: Cont: Jovin: li: 1. ca: 7.

We say, Christ descended into Hell, and delivered thence the Souls of the
Fathers; ye deny it: we have Scripture for it, viz. 1 Ephesians: 4. 8. When he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, etc. Descending first, into the
lower part of the Earth. This lower part of the Earth, could not be a Grave;
for that was the upper part: nor could it have been the place of the damned;
for the Devils would have been brought again into heaven: more clearly, Acts 2.
27. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy one
to see corruption: there is hell for his soul for a time; and the grave for his
body, for a while: plainer yet, 1 Pet. 3. 18. 19. Being put to death in the
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, by which also he went and preached unto the
spirits in prison: this prison cannot be heaven, nor hell, as it is the place
of the damned; nor the grave, as it is the place of rest; therefore it must be
(as Saint Aug Epist. 99. ad Evod. says) some third place; which third place,
the Fathers have called Limbus patrum: also Zachary: 9. 11. As for thee also,
by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit
wherein is water: by this pit, could not be meant the place of the damned; for
they have no share in the Covenant; neither are they Christ's prisoners, but the
devils; neither could this pit be the grave; because Christ's grave was a new
pit, where never any was laid before.

The Fathers affirm as much; Saint Hier: in 4. ad Ephesians. Saint Greg. li. 13.
Moral. ca. 20. Saint Aug. in Psalm. 3. 7. v. 1.

We hold purgatory fire, where satisfaction shall be made for sins after
death; you deny it: we have Scripture for it, 1 Gor: 3. 13. 15. The fire shall
try every man's work, of what sort it is, if any man's work shall de burnt he
shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

Saint Aug: so interprets this place upon the 37. Psalm: also Saint Amb: upon
1 Cor 3. and Ser: 20. in Ps: 118. Saint Hier: lib. 2. chap: 13. ad verse: Joan:
Saint Greg: li: 4. dialog ca: 39. Orig. hom. 6. in ca 15. Exodus

Lastly, We hold extreme Unction to be a Sacrament; you neither hold it be a
Sacrament, neither do you practice it, as a duty: we have Scripture for it,
James 5. 13. Is any sick among you? let him call the Elders of the Church, and
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil, in the name of the Lord; and
the prayer of faith shall save the sick: and the Lord shall raise him up; and
if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him: Neither any, nor all the
Sacraments, were or could be more effectual, men's good, nor more substantial
in matter, nor more exquisite, in form; nor more punctual in designation of
its ministry: other Sacraments, being bounded, within the limits of the souls
only good; this extends it self to the good both of soul and body: he shall
recover from his sickness, and his sins shall be forgiven him: and yet it is
both left out in your practice, and acknowledgment.

The Fathers are on our side, Orig: Hom: 2. in Levit: S. Chrysostom: lib: 3. de
Sacerd: S. Aug: in speculo and Ser: 215. de temp: Vener: Bed: in 6. Mark and
S. James and many others.

Thus, most Sacred SIR, we have no reason to wave the Scriptures umpirage; so
that you will hear it speak in the mother language, and not produce it, as a
witness on your side, when the producers tell us nothing, but their own
meaning, in a language unknown to all the former ages, and then tell us, that
she says so, and they will have it so; because, he that has a Bible and a
sword, shall carry away the meaning, from him that has a Bible, and never a
sword: nor is it more blasphemy, to say, that the Scripture is the Churches
offspring, because it is the word of God, then it is for me to say, I am the
son of such a man, because God made me instrumentally; I am so, and so was
she; for as says S. Aug: Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae authoritas
commoveret. I should not believe the Gospel it self, unless I were moved by
the authority of the Church. There was a Church, before there was a Scripture,
take which Testament you please.

We grant you, that the Scripture is the Original of all light: yet, we see
light, before we see the Sun; and we know there was a light, when there was no
Sun: the one is but the body of the other. We grant you, the Scriptures to be
the Celestial globe, but we must not grant you that every one knows how to
use it, or that it is necessary or possible they should. We grant that the
Scripture is a light, to our feet, and a lantern to our paths: then you must
grant me that it is requisite that we have a guide, or else we may lose our way
in the light, as well as in the dark. We grant you that it is the food of our
souls, yet there must be some body that must divide, or break the bread. We
grant you, that it is the only antidote against the infection of the Devil, yet
it is not every ones profession to be a compounder of the ingredients. We grant
Your Majesty, the Scripture to be the only sword and buckler, to defend a
Church from her Ghostly enemies: yet, I hope you will not have the glorious
company of the Apostles, and the goodly fellow ship of the Prophets, to
exclude, the noble Army of Martyrs, and the holy Church, which through all the
world does acknowledge Christ; wherefore having shown Your Majesty how much
the Scriptures, are ours: I shall now consider, Your opinions apart from us,
and see how they are Yours; and who sides with You in Your opinion, besides
Your self: and first I shall crave the boldness to begin with the Protestants
of the Church of England.

The Church of England,
WHose Religion, as it is in opposition to ours, consists altogether in denying
(for what she affirms, we affirm the same) as the Real presence; the
infallibility, visibility, universality, and unity; of the Courch; confession,
and remission of sins; free will, and possibility of keeping the Commandments,
etc. all these things you deny, and you may as well deny the blessed Trinity
(for we have no such word in Scripture only inference) then that which ye have
already denied; and for which we have plain Scripture, Fathers, Councels,
practice of the Church: Whereas matters of so weighty concernment, as
delivering of men's souls, into the Devils hands should not be executed, but
upon mature deliberation, and immergent occasions, and not by any, but those
who have the undoubted authority; lest otherwise, you make the authority it
self to be doubted of that which ye hold positive in your discipline, is more
erroneous, then that which is negative in our Doctrine: as your maintaining a
woman to be Head, Supreme, or Moderatrix in the Church; who by the Apostles
rule is not to speak in the Church (or that a Layman may be so) what Scripture,
or Fathers, or custom, have ye for this? or that a Layman (as your
Lay-Chancellours) should Excommunicate and deliver up souls to Satan? a
strange Religion! whose Ministers are denied the power of remitting sins;
whilst Laymen are admitted to the power of retaining them: and that upon every
ordinary occasion, as non-payment of fees, and the like: Whereas such practices
as these have rendered the rod of Aaron, no more formidable then a reed, shaken
with the wind; so that you have brought it to this, that whilst such men as
these were permitted to excommunicate for a three-peny matter, the people made
not a three-peny matter of their Evcommunication.

The Church of Saxony.
NOw for the Church of Saxony, you shall find Luther, a man not only obtruding
new Doctrine upon his Disciples, without Scripture, or contrary to Scripture;
but also Doctrine denying Scripture, to be Scripture, and vilipending those
books of Scripture, which were received into the Canon, and acknowledged to be
the word of God, in all ages. As,

Ad Argent: An. 1525. The book of Eccles: saying, That it has never a perfect
sentence in it, and that the Author thereof had neither boots nor spurs, but
rid upon a long stick, or in begging shoes, as he did when he was a Friar.
Luther anvival, tit. de lib. novi. and vet. testam. Rebenstock, lib. 2. Colloq.
laet. Luth: c. de vet. test.


And the book of Job, that the argument thereof, is a mere fiction; invented
only, for the setting down of a true and lively example of patience. Luth:
Ser. convinal. tit. ut supra. and tit. de patrick. and Prophet.


That it is a false opinion, and to be abolished, that there are four Gospels;
and that the Gospel of S. John is only true. Luth: praefat. in nov. test. and
lib. de descript and Eccles: auth. c. 3.


That the Epistle of S. James is contentious, swelling, dry, strawy, and
unworthy an Apostolical spirit. Luth: praef: in Epist. Tac. edit. Jenensi.


And tbat Moses in his writings, shows unpleasant, stopped and angry lips; in
which the word of grace is not, but of wrath, death and sin. Luth: Tom: 3. wit.
fol. 423.


He calls him a Jailer, Executioner, and a cruel Sergeant. Fol. 421. 422.


For his doctrine: He holds, a threefold Divinity: or three kinds; as there
are three persons: whereupon Zwinglius taxes him for making three Gods, or
three Natures in the Divinity. Zwingl: part 2. fol. 474.


He himself is angry with the word Trinity, calling it a humane invention, and
a thing that sounds very coldly. Luth: postill: maiore Basil: apud Harvag.
enarr. Evang. dom. Trinit.


He justifies the Arians, and says, they did very well in expelling the word
(Homousion) being a word that his soul hated. Luth. l. cont. latom. tom wit.
imp. an. 1551.


He affirmed that Christ was from all eternity, even according to his humane
nature: texed for it by Zwing. in these words, how can Christ then be said to
be born of a woman? Zwingl. Part. 2. fol. 402.


He affirms that, as Christ dyed with great pain, so he seems to have sustained
pains in Hell after death. Luth. tom. 3. fol. 219.


That the divinity of Christ suffered, or else he were none of his Christ.
Luth. lib. de Council. part. 2. and Hosp. Hist. Sac. part 2. fol. 76.


That if the humane nature should only suffer for him, that Christ were but a
Savior of a vile account, and had need himself of another Savior. Luth.
Confess. ma. de caena. tom. 3. ten. fol. 454.


Luther held not only consubstantiation, but also (says Hospinian) that the
body and blood of Christ both is and may be found, according to the substance,
not only in the bread and wine of the Eucharist: or in the hearts of the
faithful, but also in all Creatures, in fire, water, or in the rope, and
halter wherewith desperate persons hang themselves. Hospin. v. 61. supra. fol.
44. Luth. ser. de Mose. See pist. ad Galat. c. 4. and ca. 20. Exodus


He averreth, that the ten commandments belong not unto us, for God did not
lead us, but the Jews forth of Egypt. r

That faith, except it be without (even the least) good works, does not
justify; and is no faith: Whereof you may see him condemned and cited by
Covel. def. of M. Hooker page 42.


That we are equal in dignity and honor with Saint Paul, Saint Peter, or the
blessed Virgin Mary, or all the Saints. Luth. tom. 5. fol. 442.


That all the holiness which they have used in fasting, and prayer, enduring
labors, chastising their bodies, austerity and hardness of life, may be daily
performed by a hog or a dog. Luth. praef. in Alex. lib. de Eccles.


That in absence of a Priest, a woman or a boy, or any Christian may absolve.
Luth. tom. 2. fol. 103.


That they only communicate worthily, who have confused and erroneous
consciences. Ibid. fol. 73.


That a Priest, especially in the new Testament, is not made, but born; not
consecrated, but created. Ibid. fol. 367.


That the Sacrament were true, though it were administered by the devil: Se him
baited* for it by two of his fellow Protestants. Hosp. Hist. Sac. part 2. fol.
14. Covel: def. of Hooker pa. 101.


That among Christians, no man can or ought to be a Magistrate; but each one is
to other equally subject: and that among Christian men, none is superior save
one, and only Christ: ( Luth. tom. 6. Ger. de saecul. potest.
) That the husband, in case the wife refuse his bed; may say unto her if thou will not, another will; if the mistres will not, let the maid come. Luth. tom.
5. fol. 123.
That the Magistrates duty is to put such a wife to death: and that if that the
Magistrate omit to do so, the husband may imagine that his wife is stolen away
by thieves, and slain, and consider how to marry another. Ibid. fol. 123. See
also 111.


That the Adulterer may fly into another Country; and if he cannot contain
marry again. Luth. Ibid. fol. 123.


That Polygamy is no more abrogated then the rest of Moses Law; and that it is
free, as being neither commanded, nor forbidden. Luth. propos. de Bigam. Epist.
An 1528. propos. 62. 65, 66. See in ca. 16. Genesis edit. An. 525.


That it is no more in his power to be without a woman, then it is in his power
to be no man: and that it is more necessary then to eat, drink, purge, or blow
his nose. Luth. tom. 5. fol. 119.


I will give you the latin of another opinion of his, because they are his
own words; but not any of my english shall be ^essary to the transportation of
such a blast into my native language: Perinde faciunt qui continenter vivere
instituunt acsi qui excrementa vel lotium contra naturae impetum retinere
velit: ( Luth. in suo glossem. in decret Noreberg.
) Luther says, How can man prepare himself to good? seeing it is not in his
power to make his ways evil; for God works the wicked work in the wicked.
Luth. tom. 2. wit. An. 1551. assert. art. 36. also de servo. arbit, edit. 1603.
fol, 195.


But I pray you where have you this or any of all this in Scripture, nay what
Scripture have you for it? that Scripture should be no Scripture, as hitherto
he has made a great part of it; and Zwingl. almost all the rest, denying all
Paul's Epist: to be sacred: Zwing. tom. 2. fol. 10. What Council, what Fathers,
what primitive, or sequent Church (Usque ad) ever taught or approved such
doctrine as this? and how are we cried out upon for errors, notwithstanding we
have all for our Justification? and yet this is the man that boasted, that
Christ was first published by him; ( Luth. Ep. ad Argent. An. 1525.
) and by all of you that he was the first reformer: this is he who calls himself
a more excellent Doctor then all those who are in the papacy. Epist. ad
Anonymum. tom. 5.


This is he who thus brags of himself, viz. Dr. Martin Luther will have it so,
a Papist and an Ass are directly the same; so is my will, such is my command;
my will is my reason. Luth. tom. 5. Germ. fol. from 141. to 144.


This is he that tells you, I will have you to know, that I will not (hereafter)
vouchsafe you the honor, as that I will suffer either you, or the very Angels
of heaven, to judge of my doctrine, etc. Nor will I have my doctrine judged by
any, no not by the Angels themselves: for I being certain thereof, will (by it)
be judge both of you and the Angels. Luth. ad ves. falso nomin. Eccles. stat.
prope init.


And lastly, this is he that gave the alarm to all Christendom, of the
errors, idolatries, superstitions and prophannes of the Church of Rome: but
what Scriptures have you for it, that you should not believe the Scriptures?
what Fathers have you, that you should not believe the Church? what custom
have you that you should not believe the Fathers, rather then any private
interpretation? the promised holy Ghost, always ruling in the Church, rather
then the presumed private Spirit in any particular man.

The Church of Geneva.
NOw for the Church of Geneva: Calvin coming after him, is not contented to
stop himself at Luthers bounds; but he goes further, and detracts not only
from the Scripture, but from Christ and God himself. For first;

He maintains, that three essences do arise out of the holy Trinity. Tract.
theol. p. 793.


That the Son has his substance distinct from the Father; and that he is a
distinct God, from the Father. Act. Serve. p. 249, 250. 871, 872.


He teaches that the Father can neither wholly, nor by parts, communicate his
nature to Christ; but must withal be deprived thereof himself. Tract. theol.
p. 771, 772.


He denies that the Son is begotten of the Father substance 1 Instit. ca 13.
sect. 23. 29.
and essence; affirming that he is God of himself, not God of God: (d) He
says, that that dream of the absalute power of God, which the Schoolmen have
brought in, is execrable blasphemy. Calv. ad cap. 23. Ezech. gal. script. also
Instit. li. 3. c. 23. sect, 2.


He says, that where it is said, that the Father is greater then I, it has
been restrained to the humane nature of Christ; but I do not doubt to extend it
to him as God and man. Tract. theol: p. 794. see p. 792. and 2. Instit. ca. 14.
sect. 3. and ca. 17. Jo. v. 12. and ca. 22. Math.


He severeth the person of the Mediator from Christ's divine person; maintaining
with Nestorius 2 persons in Christ, the one humane, and the other divine. L. 1.
Instit. ca. 13. sect. 9. 23' 24.


That Christ's soul was subject to ignorance; and that this was the only
difference betwixt us, and him: that our infirmities are of necessity, and this
was voluntary. In Ca. 2. Luke v. 40.


That it is evident that ignorance was common to Christ, with the Angels. In
ca. 24 Mat. v. 36.


And particulariseth wherein, viz. that he knew not the day of Judgment; In
ca. 24. Mat. v. 36.
Nor that the Fig Tree was barren which he cursed, till he came near it. In c.
21 Mat. v. 19. also ib. c. 9. v. 2.


He is not afraid to censure, certain words of Christ to be but a weak
confutation, of what he sought to refute. In c. 12. Mat. v. 25.
And says, Christ seems here not to reason solidly. Id: in c. 9. Mat. v. 5.


He tells us that this similitude of Christ seems to be harsh, and far
fetched, and (a little after) the similitude of sifting does not hang together.
Calv: in c. 16. and 22. Luk:


Where Christ inferred, All things, therefore whatsoever you will, etc. Calvin
gives it this gloss: It is a supurfluous or vain illation. In c. 7. Mat. v.
12.


This metaphor of Christ is somewhat harsh: In c. 9. Mat. v. 49.
He says, insomuch as Christ should promise from God a reward to fasting, it
was an improper speech, In Mat. c. 9. v. 16, 17, 18.


He writes of a saying of Christ, that it seems to be spoken improperly, and
absurdly, in French sans raison. In c. 3. ^oan: v. 21.


He says, that Christ refused, and denied, as much as lay in him, to perform
the office of a Mediator. In c. 26. Mat: v. 39.


That he manifested his own effeminateness, by his shunning of death. Ca: 12.
Jo. v. 27.


He says, that Thieves, and malefactors, hasten to death with obstinate
resolution; dispising it with haughty courage, others mildly suffer it: but
what constancy, stoutness, or courage was there in the son of God, who was
astonished, and in a manner, stricken dead with fear of death? how shameful a
tenderness was it, to be so far tormented with fear of common death, as to
melt in bloody sweat, and not to be able to be comforted but by the fight of
Angels. Li: 2. Instit: ca. 16. Ser: 22.


And that the same vehemence took him, from the present memory of the heavenly
decree; so that he forgot at that instant, that he was sent hither to be our
redeemer. In c. 26. Mat: v. 39.


This prayer of Christ was not premeditate: but the force, and extremity of
grief, wringed from him this hasty speech; to which a correction was presently
added, and a little before, he chastises, and recalleth that vow of his, which
he had let suddenly slip. Id: 16.


Thus do we see Christ to be on all sides so vexed, as being overwhelmed with
desperation, he ceased to call upon God: which was as much as to renounce his
salvation, and this (says he) a little before, was not fained, or as a thing
only acted upon a stage. In c. 27. Mat: v. 46, 47.


That Christ in his soul suffered the terrible torments of a damned and for
saken man. L. 2. Instit: c. 16. Sect: 10.


In the death of Christ occurs a spectacle full of desperation. In c. 27. Mat:
v. 57.


In this spectacle there was nothing but matter of extreme despair. In c. 14.
Joan: v. 6.


It is no marvel if it be said that Christ went down into Hell, since he
suffered that death wherewith God in wrath strikes wicked doers. L. 2. Instit:
ca: 6. Sect: 10.


That Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father, holds but a second degree
with him in honor, and rule, and is but his Vicar. In c. 26. Mat: v. 64.


Lastly, Calvin holds it to be absurdc that Christ should challenge to
himself, the glory of his own resurrection; when the Scripture, says he,
every where teaches it to be the work of God the Father.

That God is the author of all those things, which these Popish Judges would
have to happen only by his idle sufference, Instit: li: ca: 18. Sect: 3.

That our sins are not only by his commission, but decree, and will: 16. Sect:
1, 2. and li: 2. ca. 4. Sect: 3, 4. Which blasphemy is condemned by his famous
brethren: Fleming: l. de univers: great: p. 109. Osiander Euchir: Controvers: p.
104. Schaffm: de peccat: causis. p. 155. 27. Sitzlinus disput. Theol: de
providentia Dei, Sect: 141. i In c. 2. Joan: also in c. 8. ad Rom:
Insomuch that the Magistrates of Berne, made it penal by their Laws, for any
man to preach, or read any of his books or doctrine: Vide literas Senate: Bern:
ad ministros, Anno 1555.

This man strikes neither at the right hand, nor on the left, but at the King
of Israel himself; who can think this man's mouth any slander, or his
invections, a depravement, when he belches forth such blasphemies against the
Son of God* in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily? or who could
think this man fit to reform a Church, when nothing more required reformation
then his own errors? But what Scriptures or Fathers is there for all this?

The Doctrine of the Zwinglians.
ZWinglius (confesses himself to have been instructed against the Mass, by a
certain admonisher, which he knew not, whither it was black or wite. Zwingl:
tom: 2. fol. 249.


The same derided, as illusion by the learned Protestants. Andr: confut:
Grinae. p. 128. 254. 304. Schlus: Theol: Calv: 6. 1. in Proaem:


The same as Luther's Devil, largely set down by himself. In tom: 7. wit: f.
228. and tom: 6. Germ: tenen: fol: 28. Calv. theol: l. 2. Act: 1. Zwingl: tom
2. fol: 210.


He is taxed by Calvin for depraving the Scripture, for changing the word est,
and putting in significat in his Translation of the New Testament: He says,
that these sayings, and the like, viz. If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments, etc. are but superfluous and hyperbolical. Zwingl: tom: 1. 137.


He denies, that Original sin can damn us; calling it but a disease or
contagion. Zwingl: tom: 2. fo. 90. See fo. 89. 115, 116. and in Epist: Oecol:
and Zwingl, l. 1. p. 252. 258.


He makes Baptizing of Infants, a thing indifferent; which may be used or left
off. Tom: 2. fol: 96.


That Princes may be deposed, by the Godly, if they be wicked, or go contrary
to the rule of Christ. Tom: 1. fol: 84, 85. and li: 4. Epist: Zwingl: and
Oecol: p. 868, 869.


He says, that when we commit adultery, or murder, it is the work of God:
being the mover, the auththor, or inciter, etc. God moves the thief to kill,
etc. he is forced to sin, etc. God hardened Pharaoh, not speaking
hyperbolically, but he truly hardened him, though he had resisted. Zwingl: tom:
10. de providentia dei, fol: 365, 366, 367.


For which he is particularly reprehended by the learned Protestant, Grawerus.
Absurda: Absurd: c. 5. de praedest: fol: 3. 4.
But where is there any Scripture, or Fathers, or Doctors of the Church, that
ever taught this Doctrine before?

Melancthons Doctrine.
FOr Melancthon he taught that there are three Divinities, as there are three
Persons. Melanct. loc. com. An. 1545. c. de Christo.


For which he is reprehended by Stancarus. l. 4. de Trinit.


He affirms polygamy, not to be against Jus Divinum: and advises Hen. 8. unto
it.

He teaches peremptory resistance against Magistrates. Epist. ad Romans capit.
13.


He inableth the inferior Magistrate, to alter Religion against the contrary
Edicts of the Superior. Council. Theol. part. 1. p. 314.


So Calvin, so Beza, so Goodman, so Danaeus, so Knox, so Buch: so Bancroft, so
Fenners, so Sutcliff, so Hottomanus, so Ficlerus, so Renekerus, all hold it
lawful, to depose murder, or x Melanct. Council. Theol. page 134.
to arraign their prince. Call in foreign aid to assist them. Bestow the Crown
at their pleasure. Destroy them, either by peaceable practices, or open War.
Propose rewards to such: but where have they Scriptures, or Fathers, or times,
that showed the practice of such doings, before these latter times, and latter
practices?

The Doctrine of Andreas Musculus.
AS for Andreas Musculus, he was not afraid openly to teach, that the Divine
Nature of Christ, (which is God) died upon the cross with his humane Nature.
Neither did he desist (publicly) to profess and spread abroad this Doctrine of
the death of Christ's Divinity. And that by the help of Johannes Islebius. Thus
for Sylvest. Ezecanorius. Dial. de corrupt. mor. art. 3. fol. 5. See Andr.
Muscul. and Isleb. in refut. Simleri.


It is manifest (says Simlerus) forth of the writings of Brentius, Myricus and
Andr. Musculus, that they make nothing of the ascension of Christ but a
vanishing, or disappearing. What is this but making way for Mahomet? but what
Scriptures, or Fathers, or times has he wherein this Doctrine was ever taught
before. In vita Bulling. fol. 55.


The Divisions of Protestants.
IF Ye would but consider, how the Lutherans are divided into Antinomians,
Osiandrians, Majorists, Synergists, Staucarians, Amsdorfians, Flaccians,
Substantiarians, Accidentarians, Adjaphorists, Musculans of Effingerians,
Vibiquilists, etc. etc. So dissenting from, and persecuting one another, that
they will not permit one another to live in the same Town, in so much, that
Oecolampadius reckons up seventy seven changes, not only in their explanations
of Scripture, but also in certain imaginary fantasies. Lin. germ. aequa.
resp. ad Luth. Prefat.
Or, if we should consider the Divisions that are between the old and new
Sacramentaries, the old, called Zwinglians: the new, Calvinists; with us,
Puritans: infrance, Hugonots: in other places Formalists; elsewhere Familists:
somewhere Brownists: every where Arminians, Seekers, Dippers, Shakers, Adamists.

Luther complaining of seven Sects risen in two years. Tom. 16. fol. 335.
And we of new Sects rising every day; If we should consider the several
species of Independencie, how it has brought Religion to nothing, but
Confusion, we would conclude with Saint Augustine, That it is necessary, that
(rent and divided into small pieces) we perish who have preferred the swelling
pride of our haughly Stomachs, before the most holy band of Catholic peace and
Unity. Aug. Cont. Parm. li. 1. cap. 4.


Whilst the Catholics have no jars, undecided, no differences, uncomposed;
having one common Father, one Conductour and Adviser; as Sr. Edw. Sands
confesses. In his Relat. of Religion Sect. 47. fol. 5. 2, 8.
None contend about the Scripture, all Consent and Credit the Fathers, adhere
to the Councels, submit to the holy Sea of Rome. And the Divisions that are:
are but humane dissentions, as is confessed by Luther, Tom. 7. fol. 380.
Beza, Beza Epist. 1.
Whitaker, Whit. de Eccles. Cont. Bell. Cont. 2. q. 5. p. 327.
Fulk, Fulk ag. Hesk. Sand. etc. c. page 293.
etc

Thus Religion, being at Unity with it self, is the true Speculum Creatoris, or
looking glass of the Creator: wherein the full proportion of a Deity may be
seen: but once broken into pieces, it may represent diverse faces, but no true
proportion: and loses at once both its value, and its virtue.

I have thus presented Your Majesty, with a view of the Catholic Religion,
asserted by the Fathers; and the Protestant Religion asserted by their
founders. I shall humbly desire Your Majesty's further patience, that Your
Majesty will be pleased to consider the lives and Conversations of the one,
and of the other: First the rare Sanctity, and admired holiness, which all
ages and writers have ascribed unto these holy Fathers. And the strange and
unheard of blasphemies, vileness and wickedness that are cast upon the other,
not by any of their Adversaries, but by themselves upon one another: If these
testimonies had been by any of our side, I could not have expected credit, but
being by Protestants themselves, I cannot see how it should be denied.

Luther confesses, says the learned Protestant Hospinian, that he was taught
by the devil, that the Mass was naught, and overcome with the devils reasons,
he abolisht it: Hist. Sacr. part. ult. fol. 131.


The same confessed by himself: ( Tom. 7. Wit. fol. 228.
) Lingeniously confess (says Luther) that I cannot (henceforth) place
Zwinglius in the number of Christians, ( Tom. 2. Germ. fol. 190.
) and further he affirms that he had lost whole Christ ( In fol. 182.
) after the manner of all Zwinglius (says Schlusselburg) Heretics was
stricken with the spirit of giddiness, and blindness; deriving it from the
etemologie of his name, in dutch, von them Schwindel. lin. 2. act. 1.


Gualterus calls Zwinglius, the author of war, the disturber of peace, proud and
cruel; and instances in his strange attempt against the Tygurnis, his fellows,
whom he forced by want, and famine, to follow his doctrine; and that he dyed in
armor, and in the war. In apolog: pro Zwing. 1. tom: fol: 30, 31. and
Osiander Epist: Cent: 16. p: 203.


And Luther says, he dyed like a thief, because he would compel others to
his error. Luther collog: lat: tom: 2. ca: de Advers.


And he says further, that he denied Christ and is damned. Luth: col. lat:
tom: 1. c. de dam: and inferno.


He tells us also, that the devil or the devils dam, used to appear to Carolos*,
and taught him the exposition of, this is my body. ( Tom: 3. Jen: Germ: fol.
68. so Chemnitius de caena p. 214.
) As also that he possessed him corporally; and that he was possessed with more
devils then one. Luth: loc: com: class: 5. c. 15. p: 47.
Neither would he have any man wonder that he calls him devil: for he says he
has nothing to do with him: but has only relation to him, by whom he is
obsest, who speaks by him. ( Luth: tom: 3. Jen: fol: 61.
) The last apparition of the devil to him, which was three days before his
death, is recorded by Albert. Cont. Carlost: fol: 6. See Jo: Schutz: li: 50.
cause: c. 50.


If you look into Bezas Epigrams, printed at Paris, An. 1548. you will find
pretty passages concerning his boy Andebers, and his wench Candida; and the
business debated at large, concerning which sin is to be preferred; and his
choosing the boy at last.

Sclusselberg said, that Peter Martyr was a heretic, and dyed so. Theol: Calv:
li: 2. act: 1.


Nicolaius Selneverus said, that Oecolampadius, in his doctrine, built upon the
sand. Seln: part: c. Ennarrat: ger: in Psa: fol: 215.
And

(Says Luther) Emser. and Oecolampadius, and such like, were hiddenly slain,
by those horrible blows and shakings of the devil. Luth: tom: 7. fol: 30.


Simlerus says, that Brentius, Miricus, and Andrew Musculus, in their
writings, did nothing else but make way for the devil. Siml: in vita Bulling:
fol: 55.


Luther (says Calvin) was infected with many vices; I would he had bin more
careful in correcting his vices. Calv: alleged by Schlusselb: theol: call:
lib: 2. fol: 126.


God for the sin of pride (wherewith Luther exalted himself) took away his
true spirit. Cont: Rheg: l: Germ: cont: Jo: Hess: de coena domini:


We have found (says Oecalompadius) in the faith and confession of Luthers 12.
Articles, whereof some are more vain then is fitting; some less faithful, and
over-guilefully expounded; others again are false, and reprobate; but some
there are which plainly dissent from the word of God, and the Articles of
Christian faith. Oecol: resp: ad Luth: confess: See Zuenckfeld: praef: super
prae cept: fidei artic and Ho: spin: hist: Sacra part 2. fol: 5.


Thou O Luther, says Zwinglius, corruptest and adulterest the Scripture,
imitating therein the Marcionists, and the Arians. Zwing: tom: 2. fol: 412.


In translating and expounding of Scripture: Luthers erros are many, and
manifest. Bucer: dial: Cont: Melanct:


Zwinglius, tells us, that Luther affirms some times this, and some times that
of one and the same thing, and that he is never at one with himself; taxing him
with inconstancy, and lightness in the word of God. Zwing: tom: 2. fol. 458.


That he cares not what he says, though he be found contradicting the Oracles
of God. Zwing: tom: 2. resp: ad confess: Luth:


As sure as God is God; so sure, and devilish a liar is Luther. Jo: Camp:
colloq: lat: Luth: tom. 2. c. de adv: f. 354*


Luthers writings contain nothing, but railing and reproaches: insomuch that it
makes the Protestant Religion suspected, and hated. Tigur: confesses Orthod:
fol 122, 123.


He calls an anointed King, Hen. 8. of England, a furious dolt, endued with an
impudent and whorish face, without a vein of princely blood in his whole body;
a lying Sophist; a damnable rotten worm, a basilisk, the progeny of an Adder;
scurrilouslyer, covered with title of a King; a clown, a block-head, foolish,
wicked, and impudent Henry: and says, that he lies like a scurrilous knave:
and thou lie in thy throat, foolish and sacrilegious King. Luth: tom: 2. fol:
333, 334, 335. 338. 340.


Nor did he less rail at other Princes; as at the Duke of Brunswick, in his
Book called Wider hans worst, written purposely against him, as also against
the Bishop of Mentz. one of the Princes Electors. Tom: 3. Germ: fol: 533. 339.
360.
And against the Princes of Germany. Tom: 2. Germ: fol: 190. 200.


No marvail that he says, that he had eaten a peck or two of Salt with the
Devil; and that he knew the Devil very well, and that the Devil knew him again.
Luth: conc: de turb: sedant:


No marvail that he confessed of himself, that the Devil sometimes passed
through his brains. Tom: 3. Ien: Germ: fol: 485.


No marvail that he said, the Devil did more frequently sleep with him, and
cling to him closer, then his catharine. Luth: Colloq: men's Germ: fol: 281.


No marvail that he said that the Devil walked with him in his bedchamber; and
that he had one or two wonderful Devils, by whom he was diligently and
carefully served: and they no small Devils but great ones; yea, Doctors of
divinity, amongst the Devils. Luth. 16. fol: 275.


No marvel that his fellow Prot. could wonder how marvelously he bewrayed
himself with his Devils; and that he could use such filthy words, so
replenished with all the Devils in Hell. Tigur: tract: 3: cont: supra: Luth:
confessio:


No marvel that they said that, never any man writ more filthily, more
uncivilly, more lewdly, and beyond all bounds of Christian modesty, then did
Luther. Tigur: theol: Orthod: confess: fol: 10.


No marvel that he is so taxed for his obsceanity in his Henzius Anglicus,
against King Hen. the eight, for his beastliness in his Hans worst against the
Jews: for his filthy mentioning of Hogs; for his stinking repetition of turds
and dunghils, in his Schemhamphorise: But if you will hear of his master piece,
you must read the Book which he writ against the Pope; where he asks him, out
of what mouth (O Pope) do thou speak, is it out of that from whence thy farts
do burst? If it come thence, keep it to thy self: if it comes from that,
wherein thou powrest thy Corifca wine, let the Dog fill that with his
excrements; good Ass do not kick; kick not my little Pope: O my dear Ass,
do not so: fie how this little Pope has bewrayed himself. Luth: cont: pontif:
Rom: adiab: fund: in tom. 8. Jen: p: 207, 208.


Is this the way to win to his side, or to gain souls to Christ? or to reform
Churches, or to confute heresies? It is observed, that Saint Paul in his
Epistles repeated the sacred name of Jesus 500 times, and it is the observation
of the learned Tygurin Divines, that so many times Luther has used the name of
Devil in his Books: and it is no marvail that they burst out into this
admiration; How wonderful is Luther here, with his Devils! what impure words
he uses, with how many Devils does he burst? Theol: Tigur: confess: Germ: fol:
3. and part 3: fol: 114:


Nor marvail that Zwinglius says to him, we fill not our Books with somany
Devils, nor do we bring so many armies of Devils against thee. Zwing: tom, 2:
fol: 381:


If you can expect to gather figs from thorns, or grapes from thistles, then
ye may expect words from a sanctified spirit, to proceed from such a mouth,
else not.

What should I say more: Melancthon tells us, that Carolostadius was a barbarous
fellow; without wit, without learning, without common sense; in whom was no
sign of the holy Ghost; but manifest tokens of impiety. Melanct: Epist ad
freder: micon: Hosp: hist: Sac.


Lastly, Hutterus, Beza's own fellow Protestant, thus says of him, and casts
this dirt in his face, which is so shameless a testimony, that you must give
me leave to throw a latin vail over it, viz. Beza in fine libri, de absentia
corporis Christi in coena scribit; Candidae, sive Amascae suae, culum, imo
partem diversam, magis adhuc pudendam, mundiora esse, quam illorum ora, qui
simpliciter verbis Christi inherentes, credant. se praesens Christi Corpus in
coena sacra, ore suo accipere. Hut: exblic: lib: concord: art: 7. p. 703.


And another: Beza, by his most filthy manners, was a disgrace to honest
Discipline; who in sacrilegious verse published to the world, his detestable
loves, his unlawful carnal acts, whoredoms, and fowl adulteries: not content
that himself only should like a hog wallow in the dirt of wicked lusts, but he
must also polute the ears of studious youth with his filth. Tilm. Heshus. Ver.
and Sanc. Conf.


I could enlarge my Paper to a volume of like instances in others, but these
are the prime reformers of the Protestant Churches: and how the people edified
under their Doctrine; these Narratives from their own mouths shall tell you.

When we were seduced by the Pope (says Luther) every man did willingly,
follow good works: and now every man neither says, nor knows any thing, but
how to get all to himself, by exactions, pillage, theft, lying, usury. Luth.
Dom. 26. post Trin. See Mr. Stubs motive to good works, p. 44. 45.


Certainly, to speak the truth, there is many times found Conscionabler, and
plainer dealing amongst most Papists, then among many Protestants. And if we
look narrowly to the ages past, we shall find more godliness, devotion and zeal,
(though blind) more love, one toward another, more fidelity and faithfulness,
every way in them, then is now to be found in us. Mr. Stubs motive page 43.


If any man be desirous to see a great rabble of knaves, of persons turbulent,
deceitful, Coseners, Usurers, let him go to any City, where the Gospel is
purely preached, and he shall find them there by multitudes. For it is more
manifest then the day light, that there were never among the Ethnicks, Turks,
or infidels more unbridled, and unruly persons, with whom all virtue and
honesty is quite extinct, then are amongst the Professors of the Gospel. Andr.
Muscul. Domin. 1. Adv. See him also li. de Prophet. and Sim. Paulus in Sermon.
Dom. 13. post Trinit.


The children of them of the reformed Gospel grow every day worse, more
untractable, and dare commit such crimes; as men of former times were never
subject to. Jo: Wygand: l: de bon: and mal: Germ:


If you cast your eyes upon Protestant Doctors, you shall find that some of
them moved through vain glory, envious zeal, and a prejudicate opinion,
disorder the true Doctrine, disperse, and earnestly defend the false; some of
them without cause, stir up contentions, and with inconsiderate spite defend
them: many wrest their doctaines every way, of purpose to please their Princes,
and the people: by whose grace and favor they are maintained: they overthrow
with their wicked life, all that they had formerly built, with their true
doctrine. Paul Eber: praefat: comm: Philippi: in Epist: ad Cor:


How could the people be better, when their Ministers were so bad? like lips,
like lettice. I will conclude all with the learned Protestant, Zanchius, and
then you will neither wonder at one or other; I have read (says he) the Latin
copy of the Apology, and diligently read it over, not without choler, when I
perceived what manner of writing, very many (let me not say for the most part,
but all) do use, in the Churches of the reformed Gospel: who would seem
(notwithstanding) to be Pastors, Doctors, and Pillars of the Church.

The state of the question, that it may not be understood, we often, of set
purpose over-cloud with darkness: things which are manifest, we impudently
deny: things false, we (without shame) avouch: things plainly impious, we
propose as the first principles of faith: things orthodoxall, we condemn of
heresy: Scripture at our pleasure, we detort to our own dreams: we boast of
Fathers, when we will follow nothing less, then their doctrine: to deceive, to
calumniate, to rail, is familiar with us: so as we may befend our cause, good
or bad, by right or by wrong; all other things we turn upside down: Oh times,
Oh manners. Zanch: epist: ap Jo: Sturm: this in fine Ii: 7. and 8. Missellan:


It is no marvel that Mr. Sutcliff, says, that the Protestant writers offered
great violence to the Scriptures, expounding them contrary both to ancient
Fathers, History, and common reason. Sutclif: answ. Call: pet: p. 141.


It is no marvel that Cambden tells us, that Holland is a fruitful province of
heretics: Elizah: p: 300:


It is no marvel that Your royal Father tells us, that both Hungary, and
Bohemea, abound with infinite varieties of sects. King James his Works p: 371.


It is no marvel, that he said he could never see a Bible well translaed into
English; and that the worst of all was the Geneva, whereunto were added notes,
untrue, seditious, and savoring too much of dangerous, and traitorous conceits.
Page 45, 46.


It is no marvel that He protested before the great God, that you should never
find among the Highland, or Border thieves; greater ingratitude, more lies, and
vile perjuries, then with those phanatick spirits. King James his Works p. 161.


It is no marvel that M. Bancroft said that the puritans of Scotland, were
published in a Declaration, by His Majesty, to be un-naturall Subjects,
seditious, troublesome, and unquiet spirits, members of Satan, enemies to the
King, and the Commonwealth of their own native Country. Dang: posit. 2^.


And lastly, because your Church of England most followed Calvin's doctrine of
any of the rest: I shall show you what end he made: answerable to his
beginning, and course of life: written by two known and appoved Protestant
Authors, viz. God in the rod of his fury, visiting Calvin, did horribly punish
him, before the fearful hour of his unhappy death; for he so struck this
heretic with his mighty hand, that being in despair, and calling upon the
Devil, he gave up his wicked soul, swearing, cursing, and blaspheming, dying
upon the disease of lyce and worms, increasing in a most loathsome ulcer about
his privy parts, so as none present could endure the stentch; these things are
objected unto Calvin in public writing, in which also horrible things are
declared concerning his lasciviousness, his sundry abominable vices, and
Sodomiticall lusts, for which last he was by the Magistrate (at Nayon) under
whom he lived branded on the shoulder with a hot burning iron; And this is said
of him by Schlusberg. Theolog. Calvinist. li. 2. fol. 72.
She which is likewise confirmed by Joh. Herennius. lide vita Calvini.


It may be your Majesty may tax me of bitterness, or for the discovery of
nakedness. But I hope you will give me leave to look what staff I lean upon
when I am to look down upon so great and terrible a precipice as hell, and to
consider the rottenness of the several rounds of that ladder, which is
proposed to me for my ascent unto heaven, and to forewarne others of the
dangers I epsy; their own words can be none of my railing: nor their own
accusations, my error: except it be a fault, to take notice, of what is
published, and make use of what I see: Ex ore tuo was our Saviors rule, and
shall be mine. There has not been used one Catholic Author throughout the
accusation, and I take it to be the providence of God, that they should be thus
infatuated, as to accuse one another, that good men may take heed, how they
rely upon such men's Judgments, in order to their eternal Salvation.

As to Your Majesty's Objection, that we of the Church of Rome fell away, from
our selves, and that you did not fall away from us, as also to the common
saying of all Protestants, bidding us to return to our selves, and they will
return to us, we accept of their offer, we will do so; that is to say, we will
hold our selves to the same Doctrine, which the Church of Rome held, before she
converted this Nation to Christianity, and then they cannot say, we fell away
from them, or from our selves, whilst we maintain the same Doctrine, we held,
before you were of us: that is to say, whilst we maintained the same Doctrine,
that we maintained during the four first Councels, acknowledged by most
Protestants, and during Saint August. time concerning whom Luther himself
acknowledged, that after the sacred Scriptures, there is no Doctor of the
Church to be compared, ( Luth. loc. com. Class. 4. p. 45.
) thereby excluding himself and all his associats from being preferred before
him, concerning whom Mr. Field of the Church writes, that Saint Aug. was the
greatest Father since the Apostles. ( li. 3. fol. 170.
) Concerning whom Covel writs, that he did shine in learning above all that
ever did, or will appear. ( Covel in his answ. to Jo. Burges.
) Concerning whom Jewel appeals, as to a true and orthodox Doctor. In his
challenge at Paul's Cross.
Concerning whom Mr. Forrester. Non. Tessagraph. calls him the Fathers Monarch.
In proem. p. 3.
and

Concerning whom Gomer acknowledges his opinion to be most pure. Gom. spec.
verae Eccles.


Concerning whom Mr. Whitaker doubts not, but that he was a Protestant. Whit.
answ. to f. Camp. in the cont. fol. a. 2. parag. 28.
And lastly concerning whom Your royal Father seemed to appeal, when he
objected unto Card. Peron, that the face and exterior form of the Church was
changed since his time, and far different to what it was in his days,
wherefore we will take a view of what it was then and see whether, we lose or
keep our ground: and whether it be the same which you acknowledged then to be
so firm.

Our Church believed then a true and real presence, and the orall manducation
of the body of Christ, in the Sacrament, as the prince of the Sacramentarians
acknowledged ( Zwingl. li. de vera and falsa relig. cap. de Eucharist.
) in these words from the time of Saint Augustine, which was for the space of
twelve hundred years, the opinion of corporal flesh, had already got the
masterie. And in this quality she adored the Eucharist, ( Chrysostom. in 1. Cor.
Hom. 24.
) withoutward gestures and adoration, as the true and proper body of Christ.
Then the Church believed the body of Christ to be in the Sacrament; Cyrill.
Alex. Ep. ad Caesar pat.
Even besides the time that it was in use: and for this cause, kept it after
Consecration, for Domestical Communions, ( Cypr. de lapsu.
) to give to the sick, ( Eu^eb. hist. li. 7.
) to carry upon the Sea, ( Ambr. de obiit Sayer.
) to send into far provinces. Eusebius. hist. li. 1.


Then she believed that Communion under both kinds was not necessary, for the
sufficiency of participation, but that all the body, and all the blood was
taken in either kind: and for this cause, in Domestical Communions, in
Communions for children, for sick persons by Sea, and at the hour of death it
was distributed under one kind, only

Then the Church believed, ( Cypr. ad caecil. ep. 63.
) that h Paulin in vita Ambr. Tertul. ad ux. c. 55. Basil. epist. ad Caesar pat.
the Eucharist was a true, full and entire sacrifice: not only Eucharistical,
but ( Eusebius. de vita Constable. l. 4.
) propitiatory: and offered it as well for the living ( Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom.
41.
) as the dead. The faithful and devout people of the Cburch then made
pilgrimages to ( Basil. in 40. Martyrs.
) the bodies of the Martyrs, ( Ambr. de vid.
) prayed to the Martyrs, to pray to God for them: ( Aug: in Psalm. 63. and 88.
) celebrated their feasts, ( Hier. and Marcell. ep. 17.
) reverenced their relics, in all honorable forms; and when they had
received help from God, by the intercession of the said Martyrs, ( Theod. de
Gr. aff. l. 8.
) they hung up in the temples, and upon the Altars, erected to their memory,
images of those parts of their bodies, that had been healed.

The Church then held ( Basil. de Sanct. Spirit.
) the Apostolical traditions, to be equal to the Apostolical writings; and
held for Apostolical traditions, all that the Church of Rome now imbraceth
under that title: She then offered prayers for the dead, ( Tertul. de mon. Aug:
de verb. Ap.
) both public and private, to the end to procure for them, ease and rest: and
held this custom as a thing ( August. de cura pro mort.
) necessary, for the refreshment of their souls: The Church then held the fast
( Hier. ad Marcell. ep. 54.
) of the forty days of lent, for a custom, not free, but necessary, and of
Apostolical tradition: And out of the time of Penticost fasted all the
frydayes in the years in memory of the death of Christ: except Christmas Day
fell on a friday, ( Epiph. in Compen.
) which she then excepted as an Apostolical tradition: The Church then held (
Epiph. Cont. Apost. Haeres. 51.
) marriage after the vow of Virginity, to be a sin: and reputed ( Chrysostom. ad
Theod. Hier. Cont. Jov. li. 1.
) those, who married together after their vows, not only for adulterers; but
also for incestuous persons.

The Church held then ( Cypr. Caecil. epist. 63.
) mingling of water with wine in the sacrifice of the Eucharist, for a thing
necessary, and of Divine, and Apostolical tradition. She held then ( Aug. de
pec. orig. ca. 40.
) exorcismes, exsufflations, and renunciations, which are made in baptism, for
sacred ceremonies, and of Apostolical tradition: She held then ( Aug. Cont.
pet. li. 3. ca. 4.
) besides baptism and the Eucharist, Confirmation ( Aug: de nupt. and Conc. c.
17.
) marriage, ( Ambr. de paenit. c. 7.
) Orders and extreme Unction, for true and proper Sacraments, which the Church
of Rome now acknowledges; The Church in the ceremonies of baptism used then (
Cyp. epist. 70.
) oil, ( Conc. Carth. 3. c. 5.
) salt, ( Greg: Naz: de bapt.
) wax-lights, ( Aug: ep. 10.
) exorcismes, ( Aug. Cont. Jul. lib. 6. c. 8.
) the Leo 1. epist. n Aug: Cont. parm. li. 2. c. 13.
sign of the cross, ( Ambr. de sacr. l. 1.
) the word Ephata and other things that accompany it, none of them without
reason and excellent signification. The Church held then ( Aug: de an. and evis
orig. l. 3. c. 15.
) Baptism for infants of absolute necessity: and for this cause then
permitted, ( Tertul: de bapt.
) lay men to baptize in danger of death, the Church used then holy water,
consecrated by certain words and ceremonies: and made use of it, both for
baptism, ( Basil. de S. Spirit. c* 17.
) and ( Epiph. haer. 30.
) against enchantments, and to make ( Tbeod. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 3.
) exorcismes and conjurations against evil spirits.

The Church held then diverse degrees in the Ecclesiastical Regiment, to wit. (
Council. Laod. c. 24. Council. Carth. 4. 6. 2.
* Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, the Acolite, Exorcist, Reader and
Porter consecrated and blessed them with diverse Forms and Ceremonies: And in
the Episcopal Order acknowledged, diverse seats of Jurisdiction of positive
right; to wit, Archbishops, Primates, Patriarchs, and Hier. ad Damasc. Epist.
57. Council: Chal. ep. ad leon.
one Supereminent (by Divine law) which was the Pope, without whom nothing
could be decided, appertaining to the universal Church; and the want of whose
presence, either by himself, or his Legates, or his Confirmation, made all
Councels (pretended to be universal) unlawful.

In the Church then the service was said throughout the east, in greek, and
throughout the west, Aug: Epist: 57. de Doct. Christ. lib. 2. c. 13.
as well in Africa, as in Europe, in Latin: although that in none of the
provinces (except in Italy, and the Cities where the Roman Colonies resided)
the latin tongue, was understood by the common people. She observed then the i
Hier. praef. in paralip.
distinction of feasts Aug: Epist: 118. and Psalm. 63. and 38.
and ordinary days, the Distinction of Hier. ad He. Ep: 3. Theod. Hist.
Eccles: l. 2. c. 27.
Ecclesiastical and lay habits: the Op^a^: l. 1. p. 19.
reverence of sacred vessels, the custom of Theod. Hist. l. 5. c. 8. Isid: de
Diu off: l. 1. c. 4.
shaming and Greg. Naz. de pac. or 1.
unction for the collation of orders; the Ceremony of the Cyrill: Hier: Cat:
Mat. 5.
Priest washing his hands at the Altar, before the consecration of the
mysteries. She then Council: Laod: c. 9.
pronounced a part of the service, at the Altar with a low voice made Aug: de
Civit: Dei, l 2: 2. c. 8.
processions with the relics of Martyrs, Hier. Cont: Vigil:
kissed them, Hier: Con. Vigil:
carried them in clothes of silk, and vessels of gold, Hier: c. Vigil:
took and esteemed the dust from under their reliquaries: accompained the dead
to their sepulchers, with Greg: Naz: in Jul. orat. 2.
wax tapers in sign of joy, for the certainty of their future resurrection. The
Church then had the picture of Christ, and of his Saints, both ( Eusebius: de Vita
Constable:
) out of Churches, ( Paulin Epist: 12. Basil: in Martyr: Bar:
) and in them: and upon the very ( Prudent: in S. Cassian:
) Altars, (not to adore them with God like worship) but by them, to reverence
the Soldiers and Champions of Christ.

The faithful then used the ( Tert: de coron. milit.
) sign of the cross, in all their Conversations ( Cyril: Cont. J^l: l: 6.
) painted it on the portal of all the houses of the faithful; ( Hier: in Vit.
Hill.
) gave their blessing to the people with their hand, by the sign of the cross,
( Athan: cont. Idol.
) employed it to drive away evil spirits, ( Paul: Ep: 11.
) proposed in Jerusalem the very cross to be adored on good friday: Finally,
the Church held then ( Tert: de praescrip: Iren. l. 3. c. 3. and l. 4. c. 32.
) that to the Catholic Church only belongs the keeping of the Apostolical
tradition, the Authority of interpretation of Scripture; and the decision of
Controversies of faith; and that out of the succession ( Cypr: de unit. Eceles:
Conc: Car: 4. c. 1.
) of her communion of ( Hier: Cont: Lucif: Aug: de util: cred: c. 8.
) her Doctrine ( Cypr: ad pub: Ep: 63. ad mag: Ep: 67. Hier. ad Tit: c. 3.
) and her ministry, there was neither Church, nor Salvation.

Neither will I insist with you only upon the word, then, but before, and
before, and before that, even to the first age of all, will I show you our
doctrine of the real presence, and holy Sacrifice of the Mass; Invocation of
Saints; Veneration of Relics and Images, Confession, and Priestly absolution;
Purgatory and prayer for the dead; Traditions, etc.

In the fifth Age, or hundred of years, Saint Augustine, was for the real and
corporal presence. Aug: Conc: 1. in Psall: 33.


In the fourth Age, Saint Ambrose. Lib: 4. de Sacra


In the third Age S. Cyprian. 5. and l. de iis, qui misteriis initiantur, c. 9.
c Sermon: de Coena Dom. prope init.


In the second Age, or hundred of years, S. Irenaeus. l. 4. c. 32. infin.


And in the first Age ( Ep: ad smirnum u^ cit: a Theod: Dial: 3.
) S. Ignatius, Martyr, and disciple of St. John the Evangilist.

Concerning the honor and invocation of Saints, In the fifth age we find S.
Augustine, Sermon. de Verb: Apost: prope init and medit: c. 40. and li. de
loquutionibus in gen: prope finem.
praying to the Virgin Mary, and other Saints.

In the fourth age, we find Greg. Naz. praying to S. Basil the great. In Orat:
20. quae est in laudem Basil: mag: And St. Hier: Cont: Vigil: 13. initio


In the third age, we find S. Origin, praying to Father Abraham. Initio sui
lamenti.


In the second age, Justin Martyr. Apol: 2. ad Anton: pium Imper: non long ab
initio.


And in the first age, in the Liturgy of S. James the less. Ange Med.


For the use and veneration of holy Relics and Images, and chiefly of the
Holy Cross; In the fifth age, Saint Augustine. Tract: 118. in Joan fine.


In the fourth age, Athanasius. Ad Antiochum principem.


In the third age, Brigin. Hom: 8. in diversos Evangelij locos.


In the second age, S. Justin Martyr. Ad quaest: 28. Gentilium.


And in the first age, St. Ignatius. Epist: ad Phil: ante Med.


Concerning Confession and Absolutions: In the fifth age, St. August. Hom: 49.
ante Med.


In the fourth age, S. Basil. the great. Sui regulis brevior: interr. 288.


In the third age, St. Cypr. Sermon: de lapsis


In the second age, Tertull. l. de poenit. c. 10.


And in the first age, St. Clement. Clement: To: Epist. 1.


Now concerning Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead in the fifth age, St.
Augustine. De Civit. Dei, li: 26. c. 24. and also Ser. 41. de sanct. prope init.
also Sermon. 22. de Verb: Apost.


In the foutrh age, St. Ambrose. Ambr. in 1. Cor: 3. S. Hier. in Com. in cap.
11. proverb.


In the third age, St. Cypr. Epist: 5. ad Anton: post: med.


In the second age, Tertull. li: de animae c. 58. de Corona milit. c. 3. 4.


And in the first age, St. Clement. Clem: To: Ep: 1. de S: Petr: prope fin.
Concerning Traditions in the fifth age, St. Augustine. l. 4. de bapt: Con.
Dona^ c. 24.


In the fourth age, St. Basil. li: de Sp: Sancto c. 27.


In the third age, St. Epiphanius. Heref. 61.


In the second age St. Irenaeus. li: 3. c. 4.


And in the first age, St. Dennis. Areopag: c. 1. Eccles. Hierar.


Now suppose, that all these quotations be right. The saving of a soul: of your
own soul: of the soul of a King: of the souls of so many Kingdoms: and the
gaining of that Kingdom, for a reward (which in Comparison of these earthly
ones (for which you so often fight, so much strive, and labor so much for to
obtain) your tetrarchate would be a gain for you to lose it, so that you might
but obtain that) would be worth the search; and when you have found them to be
truly cited. I dare trust your judgment, that it will tell you, that we have
not changed our Countenance, nor fled our Colors, nor fallen away, nor altered
our Religion, nor forsaken our first love, nor denied our principles, nor
brought novelties into the Church, (but that we do antiquum obtinere,) whereby
we should be forsaken of you, for forsaking our selves: but rather that we
should win you unto us, by being still the same, we were when we won you
first unto us, and were at the beginning. And is it for the honor of the
English Nation, famous for the first Christian King, and the first Christian
Emperor to forsake her mother Church, so renowned for antiquity, and to annex
their Religion, as a codicell to an appeal of a company of Protesters, against
a decree at Spira? and to forsake so glorious a name as Catholic, and to take
a name upon them, wherein they had neither right nor interest; and then to take
measure of the Scottish Discipline, for the new fashion of their souls, and to
make to themselves posies of the weedings of that Garden, into which Christ
himself came down, ( Cant. 6. 1.
) upon which both the north and south-winds do blow, Cant. 4. 16.
in which is a well of living waters and streams from Lebanon: Cant. 4* 15.
about which is an enclosure of brotherly affection. Cant. 4. 12. Cant. 2. 1.
Will you forsake the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys for such a
nose-gay? for I shall make it apparent unto Your Majesty, that the Doctrines
which Protestants now hold, as in opposition unto us, were but so many
condemned heresies, by the ancient and orthodoxall Fathers of the Church, and
never opposed by any of them; as for example: Protestants hold that the Church
may err: this they had from the Donatists, for which they were frequently
reproved by St. Augustine. Passim. cont. Donat.


Protestants deny unwritten traditions, and urge Scripture only. This they
had from the Arrians, who were condemned for it by St. Epiphanius, and St.
Augustine, both. Epiph. Her. 75. Aug: cont. maxim. li: 1. c. 2. and ult.


Protestants teach, that Priests may marry; this they had from Vigilantius who
is condemned for it by St. Hieronimus. Con. Vigilan. c. 1.


Protestants deny Prayer for the dead: this they had from Arrius, for which he
is condemned by St. August: and Epiphanius both. Aug: haer: 53. Epiphan: haer:
75.


Protestants deny Invocation of Saints: this they had from Vigilantius, for
which he was condemned by St. Hieron. Hic: Cont: Vigil: c. 3.


Protestants deny Reverence to Images: this they had from Xenias, for which he
is reproved by Nicephorus. Hist: li: 16. c. 27.


Protestants deny the real Presence: this they had from the Carpenaites, who
were says St. Augustine, the first Heretics, that denied the real Presence:
and that Judas was the first Suborner and Maintainer of this heresy. Aug: in
Psalm. 54. and 55.


Protestants deny Confession of sins to a Priest: so did the Novatian
Heretics, and the Montanists, for which they are reproved by St. Ambrose and
St. Hieron. Ambr: i: de poenit: c. 7. Hier: Epist: ad Marcle: 54.


Protestants say that they are justified by Faith only: this they had from the
pseudo-Apostles, for which they are condemned by St. Augustine. Aug: de fide and
oper. c. 14.


Lastly, as I have showed Your Majesty, that Your Church as it stands in
opposition to ours, is but a congeries of so many heresies, to which I could
easily make an enlargement: but that I fear, I have been too tedious already;
So I shall make it appear, that our Church as she stands in opposition unto
yours, is true and right, even your selves being witnesses, and you shall find
our Doctrine among your own Doctors. First the Greek Church, whom you court to
your side, as indeed they are Protestants according to your vulgar reception,
being you call all those Protestants, who are or were in any Opposition to the
Church of Rome, though in their Tenants otherwise, they never so much do
disagree. For the Greek Church with which you so often hit us in the teeth and
take to be of your faction, she holds Invocation of Saints, Adoration of
Images, Transubstantiation, Communion in one kind for the sick, and many others.

Master Parker confesses, that Luther crossed himself morning and evening, and
is never seen to be painted praying, but before a Crucifix. Against Simb. part:
1. C. 2. sect: 30. p. 105. See Jo: Crevel: refut: Cerem: miss: p. 188 Jo: Manl:
Loc: Com. p. 636.


As touching the Invocation of Saints (says Luther) I think with the whole
Christian Church and hold, that Saints are to be honored by us, and
invocated. Purgat. quorund: art and in Ep: ad Georg. Spal:
Inever denied Purgatory (says Luther,) and yet I believe it, as I have often
written and confessed. Tom: 7. fol: 132. adversus bullam. See him also in disp:
Lips: c. de purgat: and resolut: de indulg: Conclus: 16. See likewise Zwingl:
Tom: 2. fol. 378.
If it is lawful, (says Luther,) for the Jews to have the picture of Caesar
upon their Coins; much more is it lawful for Christians, to have in their
Churches Crosses and Images of Mary; Luth: in Consolat: prolab: Ii: 6. See this
cited forth of Luth: by Hasp: Hist: Sac: p. 2. f. 33.
and lastly he maintained the real Presence. See Zwingl: Tom. 2. fol: 375. f
p. 2. 16. g Page: 209.


But let us go a little further, and consider what they held, whom ye call your
Predecessors, under whom ye shroud your Visibility, and on whom you look
beyond Luther, for your Doctrines Patronage, viz. First upon the Hussites, who
brake forth about the year 1400. they held seven Sacraments. f
Transsubstantiation. g the Popes primacy, Page: 217. art: 7, 8.
and the Mass, Luth: in Colloq: Germ: c. de missa.
as Fox in his acts and monuments acknowledges.

Let us go further, and consider Wickliffe, (our own Countryman,) who
appeared about the year 1370. he maintained holy water, Wick: de blasphem. cap:
17.
worship of Relics and Images, Idem de Eucharist. c. 9.
Intercession of the blessed Virgin Mary, Idem. in Ser. de Assump: Mariae.
the rites and Ceremonies of the Mass, Idem de apostasia c. 18.
all the seven Sacraments. Idem. in postill. sup. c. 15. Marci.
Moreover, he held Opinions contrary, and condemned both by Catholic and
Protestants, as that if a Bishop or Priest be in any mortal sin, his
Ordaining, Consecrating, or Baptising is of no effect. Acts and mon: p. 96. a
art. 4.
He condemned lawful Oaths with the Anabaptists. Osiand: Epist: Hist: Eccles:
p. 459. art: 43.
Lastly he maintained that any Ecclesiastical Ministers were not to have any
temporal possessions. Act and mon: p. 96.
This last Opinion was such savoury Doctrine, that rather then some of those
times would not hearken to that, they would listen to all; as the greedy
appetites to Bishops Lands, make some now a days to hearken unto any thing,
that Cryers down of Bishops shall foment.

To go further, yet to the Waldenses descended from the race of one Waldo, a
Merchant of Lions, who brake out about the year 1220. These men held the real
Presence, In Epist: 244. p. 450.
for which they were reproved by Calvin. These men extolled the merit of
voluntary poverty; they held Transubstantiation, Illiricus Catalog: Test: p.
1498.
and many other opinions which most Protestants no way allow.

And lastly, I shall run your pedigree to the radix, and utmost Derivation,
that the best read Herald in the Protestant Genealogy, can run its line, and
that is to the Waldenses, and to Berengarius, who broacht his heresy in the
year 1048. and he held all the points of Doctrine that we held, only he
differed from us in the point of Transubstantiation. And for this cause they
took u Idem Catalog. Test. page 1502.
him into the name and number of Protestants and Reformers, nothwithstanding he
presently afterward recanted and died a Catholic. So it ends, where it never
had beginning.

Finally: if neither prescription of 1600 years possession, and continuance of
our Churches Doctrine, nor our evidence out of the word of God, nor the Fathers
witnessings to that evidence: nor the Decrees of Councels: nor your own
acknowledgements; Be sufficient to mollify and turn your royal heart, there
is no more means left for truth, or me, but I must leave it to God, in whose
hand are the hearts of Kings.

THis Paper was finished, and delivered into His Majesty's hands, at a very
unfit time, either for perusal, or answer, being at the time when Bristoll was
delivered up unto the Parliament, and the Court in great distraction: the King
being in a study rather to know which way to go, then how to answer papers:
Yet His Majesty vouchsafed to run over the leaves, rather then the lines, with
His eye, and finding the Paper of some length, and full of Quotations, His
Majesty said, To answer this Paper requires a great deal of that which I want,
and that is time: besides, I perceive, that to make due enquiry into these
particulars, it will require a great deal of search, which if leisure would
give leave, I believe industry might find a great deal of foul play, and
mis-quotations: Oxford would have been a fitter place for me then Ragland
Castle, to have entertained such an Encounter; where the same place that is my
Soldiers quarters, is his Jesuits College? yet I pray tell him, I return
his Paper to him again, and shall take another time to answer it, when
opportunity shall give me leave: To morrow I shall ease his Lordship of a heavy
burden, and this day will be time little enough for us to consider what course
we are to take. I prayed God to bless His Majesty in all His ways, and to
direct Him in all His consultations. The King (having (as it seemed) fixed His
eye upon that place in my Lords Paper, where he charged Luther for saying that
he received his Doctrine from the Devil) asked me what was Luthers meaning
thereby? or whither or no Luther said any such thing? Whereunto I made answer,
that to my knowledge Luther had written so, but I believed his meaning was (as
elsewhere he said, Diabolus me Christianum fecit) that having received many
combats by the suggestions of the Devil: deterring him from undertaking so
great a weight as Reformation, and having resisted those temptations, and at
last overcome them, he became a better Scholar in the School of Christ, and
Soldier in that spiritual warfare. The King said, Luther was a bold man, and
such high spirits sometimes take a pride to fight against common sense, as if
it were the common enemy: Whereupon some of the Lords came in, and I took my
leave of His Majesty.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 2. lin. 19. for Crown, read Crosier. Page 29. l. 8. for Aroties, r.
Azotus. Page 54. l. 13. for it necessary, r. it not necessary. Page 58. l. 23.
for constitution, r. contrition. Page 64. l. 12. del. two. Page 91. l. 15. for
Apostolical, r. Analogicall. and l. 22. for invisibility, r. visibility. P.
111. l. 12. r. Audistis dictum esse antiquis. Page 151. l. 21. for inferior,
r. interior. Page 199. l. 18. for hiddenly, r. suddenly.


