The COPY OF A LETTER FROM PARIS; Dated the last of December.

BEING A true Relation of the manner of the blocking up of that City by the
Forces of the KING.

As likewise, An EDICT of Parliament, giving Power to the People to raise Arms
for the defense of that CITY.

With many other Passages of Note, as by this Edict and Letter, does more at
large appear.

Jan: 9th LONDON, Printed for Edward Griffin. 1648.

Paris, January the 9. 1648.
Sir,
I Received yours of the 15 of December. for which I thank you; and to make you
some part of requital, I send you these to let you know how affairs stand
here.

Upon Wednesday last about three of the clock in the Morning, the King, Queen
Regent, and some of the chiefest Grandees got privately out of Town to St
Germains, and their Guards without making any noise marched after. This sudden
action caused the Parliament to be immediately to be assembled, whereupon strong
Guards of Citizens were ordered to the several Ports, since which time no
Person of what quality soever is suffered to go out (nor any Coach, Wagon, or
Horse) yet many have endeavored it, for which they have not only been notably
plundered, but some of them have been torn in pieces by the Rabble. The Queen
of England remains at the Louuere in this Town, and for ought I understand
intends not to remove; She is extremely beloved here, and the people are not
willing to let her depart hence. The Bastiell being the chief Fort in this
City, is summoned by the Town, and if the Governor surrender it not within
two days it will certainly be forced. I am just now informed that the
Parliament and City have chosen the Marquess de la Bullaies for their General;
who coming out of the Parliament Chamber into the Palace with his Sword drawn,
cried, Vive le Roy and le Parliament, and so with acclamations went to the
Towne-House to consult and take order for the speedy raising of an Army, which
they say shall be ready to march within few days, and in the mean time
Parties of Horse and Foot are sent forth to secure the bringing in of
Provisions. This night the Duke of Orleans quarters at St Clowes, Marshall
Grament at St Denis, Prince of Condy at Charington, and Marshall de Millorie in
the fourth place.

This is all at present that I can say; By the next (if the ways be not blockt
up) you shall hear further from

Your assured friend, and Servant. R. B.

An Order of the Parliament of Paris, taken out of the Register-book, as it was
agreed on, Jan. 8. 1648.
THis day the Court of all the Chambers of Parliament assembled, debating on the
Declaration put forth by the Kings servants, reciting why they went to Saint
Germains in Lay, to their Lord the King, and the Queen Regent of France, in
execution of the other days Decree; and upon refusal of the hearing them, and
that they said that the Town was blocked up, Have commanded and ordained, that
most humble Remonstrances be made in writing to the Lord the King, and the
aforesaid Queen Regent.

And seeing that the Cardinal Mazarin is notoriously the Author of all the
troubles and disorders of the State, and of the present evil, have and do
declare him the troubler of the public Peace, enemy to the King and his
State: Do enjoyne him forthwith to withdraw from the Court; and within eight
days to depart the Kingdom. The said time being past, enjoyne all the Kings
Subjects to apprehend him: forbid any to entertain him. And do further
ordain, That a sufficient number of Armed men be raised in this Town; and to
that purpose, Commission shall be given them for the safety of those without,
as well as those within the Town. And to convoy them that bring Provision to
the City; and so to order it, that they may come with all freedom and safety.
And this Decree shall be published and fixed at every place where it ought, to
the end that none may plead ignorance; commanding the Provost of Merchants and
Sheriffs to see it executed. Concluded in Parliament, Jan. 8.

Signed Du Tillet.
This Decree was accordingly on Friday, Jan. 8. read and published at the
Gates, and other passages of the City.

Signed by Joss^^r.



FINIS.

