A COPY OF THE OATH Taken by the Papists, as it was given to the Governor and
Captains by Friar Darcy, lately Guardian of the Franciscans in Ireland, and
employed by the Rebels upon a Treaty.

With a short Gloss upon the confused OATH of the pretended Catholics for
this Religious Rebellion.

By N. B.

LONDON, Printed for William Bladen, MDC.XLII.

A short Gloss upon the confused Oath of the pretended Catholics for this
religious Rebellion.
I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty GOD, and all the Angels and Saints in A
contradiction at first, sworn on Earth, and yet at the same instant in the
presence of the Saints then in Heaven, will you attribute unto them an
Omni-presence to fill heaven and earth at once, proper only to him, who is
Infinite.
Heaven, Promise, Vow, Swear and This is over-sworn, we observe your Oath for
Religion is well bound, runs strongly upon 4 wheels, the next for the King is
but weakly mounted on one, but there is good reason, this is the prime, the
other but an attendant.
Protest to mainetaine and defend, as far as I That is, as far as J am
able, but we hope you are now at your furthest, and as S. Paul of Jannes and
Jambres, your folly will be made manifest before all men.
may with my life, Power and Estate, the What wanted you but the public
exercise of it in our Churches, which you have indeed of late practiced in many
places by violence.
Public and Were any of you fined or restrained in bonds for it.
free exercise of the true and Catholic As if we could not be of the
Catholic Church, unles of the Roman, as much to say, a man could not be in
Ireland, unles he were in Dublin. And yet by that very addition of Roman to
Catholic by way of distinction is necessarily confessed, there is also a true
Catholic Religion, not Roman.
Roman Religion against No exceptions of the King here, who has often declared
himself against it.
All Persons that shall oppose the same.

I further swear, that I will bear But is it not your Doctrine? no Faith need
be kept with Heretics, and has not the Pope often declared our Kings to be
such?
Faith and Take heed what you do, there are two Bulls of the Popes against
your taking the Oath of Allegiance, and a long Tractate of Cardinal
Bellarmines to show the unlawfullnesse of it, this is more then we pressed you
too, or looked for from you.
Allegiance to our Sovereign If you be a Priest, you profess to have no Lord
even in Temporalibus, but the Pope.
Lord King And yet the Earl of Ormond has a Commission under the Hand and
Seal of our King Charles for the suppressing of you, as evidently run into
Rebellion against him.
Charles, his heirs and Successors, and that I will defend him and them, as
Well put in, as a good reservation, that is, as far as it may stand with the
former Article, or till I am restrained by the Pope.
far as I may with my life, power and estate, against all such persons as
shall attempt any thing against their Royal Persons, Honors and Estates or
Dignities, and against all such as shall directly or indirectly endeavor to
suppress their Royal How the season has altered your dispositions, were you
not this last Summer in Parliament, directly and indirectly, the greatest
opposers of it, would not you have had an Act and Acts for suppressing it,
Tempora mutantur and vos, etc.
Prerogatives, or do any Act or Acts contrary to It should be Papal
Government.
Regal Government.

As also the Power and Why do you then detain so many Parliament men here
besieged from attending it, who are privileged from so much as an arrest, are
you not perjured in it.
Privileges of Parliament, the lawful rights and Privileges of the Be good
Subjects your selves first, and take not in the mean time a Privilege to
destroy those who are such.
Subject and every We guess whose apes you are in this, but the cause and end
is much differing and the success will be according.
person that makes this vow, Oath and Protestation in whatsoever he shall do
in the lawful pursuance of the same.

And to my power, as far as I may, I will oppose, and by It Is no matter,
whither lawful or no.
All ways and means endeavor to bring to Condign, this word needs a Gloss
indeed for the Vulgar, but they are used enough to an unknown language, and an
implicit Oath, may be as safe as an implicit faith, what the boast of the
merit of your good works, is ex condigno, we know, but what will prove a
condign punishment for a pretended bad work, I believe, the poor people will
sooner feel then understand.
condign punishment, even to the Bloody it must be, or you cannot own it,
enough we had of this, for murder, robbery and imprisonment, before we heard of
this Oaths framing, only then inflamed by him, who was a murderer from the
beginning.
loss of life, liberty and estate, all such as shall either by What need this,
alas, have ye not cruelly starved and undone thousands that never were guilty
of any of these, that meddled not with your Religion, lived harmless and
innocently by you, and were your best friends, who were not of that strength as
to force, of that disposition as to be practicing, of that reach as to be
plotting, or so false as to be conspiring, all which we freely (as having
nothing to do with them) resign up to your selves again.
force, practice, councels, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise do or attempt
any thing to the contrary of any Article, clause or any thing in this present
Vow, Oath and Protestation contained, So help me And why is there not added,
And all his Saints, as your custom was and is, whereby your farewell had bin
somewhat answerable to your entrance, but it is possible, if the Angels and
Saints were present at the beginning of the first Article, they so abhorred the
Progress, that they would not stay to be witnesses of the conclusion.
God.

Well, God help you indeed, and open your eyes to see into this mystery of
Iniquity, the perjury and contradiction, with which your souls are in hazard;
make your consciences sensible of the guilt of blood, your hearts to smite you
for making this rent in the Kingdom, and give you repentance to turn from
those evil ways, least in the end the mischief return upon your own heads.
Would ye know whose steps ye have followed formerly, you shall find Psalm. 83.
to be the cursed Edomites and Ishmaelites, Moab, Ammon, and Amalek with the
Philistines, of whom the Psalmist (by way of complaint to God) says thus, They
have taken crafty counsels against thy people, and consulted against thy
hidden ones; They have said, come let us cut them off from being a Nation, that
the name of Israel be no more in remembrance; they have conspired together with
one consent, saying, let us take to our selves the Houses of God in possession;
Would ye see your face by way of Prophecy, look into Saint Paul's 2. Tim. 3.2.
In the latter days men shall be unthankefull, without natural affection,
truce breakers, false Accusers, fierce, Traitors, heady, high min^ed, yet
having a form of Godliness, or a pretense of Religion, but denying the power
of it.

For such of you as have bin drawn to take this unlawful Oath, let them
think they are no more bound to observe it, then David was by his to have
killed Abigail, Herod to have beheaded S. John the Baptist, or the 40
Conspiratours to have slain S. Paul.

To such as have not yet taken it, let them hearken to the Council of Solomon,
1. Pro. 10. My Son, if sinners entice thee consent thou not, if they say, Come
with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent
without cause; let us swallow them up alive as the Grave, and whole as those
that go down into the Pit. We shall find all precious substance, we shall
fill our houses with spoil. Cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one
purse. My Son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from
their path. And for us in this Town, Blessed be God, who has not given us
over as a prey unto your teeth, our soul is this day escaped as a bird out of
the snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken and we are escaped; Blessed be the
name of the Lord, who has made Heaven and Earth, Ps. 124.6, 7, 8.

Upon the treaty of this Friar and others, who in the name of the Commanders
of the Catholic Army (for so they term it) demanded the surrender of this
Town of Drogheda, for his Majesty's use and service, the Governor and
Captains of the said Town, caused this Protestation and Oath to be drawn up
as follows.

The Protestation of the Governor and Captains of the Town of Drogheda for
their unanimous defense of it for his Majesty's use and service.
Whereas, we are beset with such, who pretend their attempt in taking of this
Town to be for the advancement of his Majesty's service, (which
notwithstanding we believe, is but a pretext for the deluding of the Vulgar) We
the Governor and Captains of the said Town, for the further manifestation
and approbation of our loyalty and faithfulness to his Majesty, by whose
immediate Command we are here charged for the defense of his Majesty's Royal
Title in it, do likewise hereby unanimously make this following Protestation
and Oath, and do enjoyne it to be taken by every Soldier and Inhabitant of
this Town, as the Evidence of their faith and truth to the Kings Crown and
Dignity, which we shall maintain with our lives and estates, and that such as
shall refuse it, be put out of the Gates.

The Oath.
1. I Shall to my uttermost, endeavor the defense of this Town against all
outward or inward attempts whatsoever for his Majesty's Service.

2. I shall forthwith discover any Plot, Conspiracy or Combination, which may
or shall come to my knowledge, from without or within, which may be any ways
intended to the prejudice of the whole Town, or to the persons of the Mayor,
Aldermen, Governor, or any of the Captains or Officers garrisoned in it.

3. I shall not attempt, nor consent, that the Town shall be given up, upon
any pretense or cause whatsoever without the consent of the Governor, Major
and greater part of the Captains and Aldermen in it, or without some special
command from his Majesty, or chief Governor or Governors of the Kingdom.

All which I do hereby swear truly and faithfully to observe and keep,
without any fraud, deceit, or mental reservation whatsoever.

THis Oath, howsoever intending the safety of the Town Officers as the
Garrison, and either readily taken or offered to be taken by the Captains,
Officers and all the Soldiers, yet being presented to the Major and Aldermen,
they first delayed it, by desiring a Copy of it with some time of
consideration, and so after advice with their Learned (I will not say,
Religious) Counsel, returned a flat refusal, only colored, with a pretense
of indangering the favor of a fair Quarter, which they expected from the
enemy if the Town were taken.

FINIS.

