A BRIEF ANSWER To R. H. His Book, ENTITLED, The True Guide, etc.

Wherein are occasionally declared and proved by Scripture these particular
things following:

First, That the Baptism of water is a distinct Baptism from the Baptism of
the spirit.

Secondly, That the Baptism of Water does not by Scripture expression signify
the Baptism of the Spirit.

Thirdly, What is signified by the Baptism of Water.

Fourthly, In whom the true Right of Church Power resides, and how typified in
the Law.

Fifthly, The State of the Church and Ministry in Babylon, typical and
mystical.

Sixthly, In what sense some things related in Scripture are not Scripture,
with diverse other particulars occasionally spoken of.

By R. B. A well-wisher to the truth, and R. H.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his
neighbor comes and searches him.

Prove. 30.12, 13, 14. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes,
and yet are not washed from their filthiness.

Read Ezekiel. 43.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop at the West
end of PAUL^. 1646.

The Epistle to the Reader.
ALL men are naturally addicted to take up that Religion for the true Religion,
which they find to be received and allowed in that Nation wherein they are
borne; those that are borne in Turkey take up the Mahumetan Religion, those
that are borne in Rome the Popish Religion, and yet neither of these the true
Religion and Worship of God; so that it plainly appears, that whole States
have been deceived in matter of Religion and Worship, and what State can be
instanced, that the Successors have not in many particulars contradicted their
Predecessors, and both of them cannot be in the right, for the Truth is but
one, us God is one; the cause of this chiefly is, because men rather take up
Religion, then are taken up of it; men commonly take things upon trust,
untried, doing as other of their Neighbors do, even live in men in matters of
Religion and Worship, more than in God; contrary to that, Matthew. 15.9. Col.
2.20, 22. most men dream of a worldly Sanctuary still in being, whereas Gods
house in the time of the Gospel is Spiritual. The Apostasy from the Faith
under Antichrist is a mere Riddle to thousands, yea, and thousands that are
convinced of that Apostasy, confine it to the Popish Church, and plead a
restitution from Luthers time, but point blanke from Queen Elizabeth's. And yet
we see much of that corrected of late; and must it needs be, there are no
Truths left behind still undiscovered, Prophesying in Sackcloth? God is not
bound to restore all Truth at once, nor to a multitude, but even a few, and
they perhaps despised ones, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. even like those Fishermen which
Christ chose. It is well known the decay of Truth was graduall from the
Apostles times, as may be seen, 2 These. 2.3, 7. and Rev. 8, and 9. Chapters.
And the restitution is likewise graduall, as may appear, Revel. 14. and 16.
Chapters. Where we may observe the Truths increase, and Antichrists decrease by
degrees contemporising so, that the rise of the one, is the decay of the other;
which being well considered, may serve to convince many of a too common error
amongst us; for most men, yea, even many Professors are resolved, as by their
practice may appear, to receive nothing for Truth, but that which has the
stamp of a State Approbation. Had such Professors lived in the Apostles
times, the Truth and such would have had little acquaintance, for Christ says
plainly, Luke 17.20. The Kingdom of God comes not with observation: And I
suppose Christ will come with as little worldly state and pomp at the
restoring of the Truth from under Antichrist, as at the first publishing of it
to the Gentile world: Matthew. 12.19. But because Christ has none of this form
or beauty among men, Esaias 55.1, 2, 3. He is despised, rejected and not
esteemed; the lesson of bearing the cross, Luke 14.26.27. is a hard lesson,
and yet true Disciples learn it; I will only premise two cavets to the
Christian Reader, and so conclude. The first is this, take heed of rejecting
true light, under a pretense of reproached new light, least in so doing, thou
reject Christ. Secondly, take heed of receiving older new light from any men
whatsoever upon trust, untryed by the Word and Spirit, least that curse light
upon thee, Jer. 17.5. Thus says the Lord, cursed be the man that trusts in
man, and makes flesh his arm, such are said, to depart from the Lord in their
hearts: If any thing I have written in this ensuing Tract, come in evidence of
Truth, receive it, as those Samaritans, John 4.42. because of Christ's own
Word, If any thing I have written, appear otherwise to thee upon trial,
reject it, and so will I through Gods grace, any man's Sayings or Writings
dissenting from the Word of Truth: but let thee and I receive and reject in
Love, and the God of Peace and Love shall be with us, and make us one in Truth
also in his own time, Phil. 3.15. Joh. 17.17, 19, 21.

R. B.

TO speak a word or two, and so to let pass this Epistlers invectives and
reproaches, we being frequently used to bear them from the Pulpit, can the
easier bear them from the Press; and we having experience of his fallibility
in judgment, ever since the Bishops impositions, conceive them to be more
prejudicial to themselves then to us, they being evident discoveries of the
bitterness of his spirit against us that differ in judgment from him; but
being so void of Truth from Scripture to back them, we shall esteem of them
but as the Ignis fatuus of his own brain, for he has only three quoted
Proofs from Scripture, not to make good his reproaches, but to prove two
things; namely, that there must be Heresies and false Prophets, both which we
easily grant, having had so long experience thereof; for we find that
Antichristian Spirit to have begun and continued ever since the Apostles times
till this day, and that with no small esteem in the world: for honor and
greatness amongst men they chiefly hunt after, the Disciples of Christ were
infected with it, but durst not own it before Christ, Mark. 9.33, 34. for he
expressly forbids it, Matthew. 20.25, 26, 27. Luke 22.25, 26, 27. This lofty
Spirit began in Diotrephes, 3 John 9. and ever since this Episcopal generation
have loved and endeavored to have the pre-eminence, these false Prophets are
very covetous, 2 Pet. 2.3. 2 Cor. 11.20. The true servants of Christ were not
so, 2 Cor. 12.17. The false Prophet, and the Antichristian Beast aspire and
expire, live and dye together, 1 John 4.1, 3. Rev. 20.10. They came to some
height even in the Apostles times, for they reigned like Kings, whereas the
Apostles, the true servants of God, were in disgrace and reproach, they were at
peace, while the true servants of God were persecuted, 1 Cor. 4.8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13. They could swallow down impositions from men, Gal. 6.12. which the true
Servants of Christ could not do, and this was because they desired to make a
fair show in the flesh, and to avoid persecution, as in the place before
quoted appears, the true servants of Christ were accused of Heresy, Acts 24,
14. yea, accounted Sectaries and seditious, Acts 24.5. and under that notion of
Sectaries, they were every where spoken against, Acts 28.22. and were accused
of, and charged with many things which could not be proved against them, Acts
24.23. This I say that even as then, so now is it the portion of Gods people.
But one thing I note in particular, which is his calumniating the maintainers
of Free Grace, as if they were the Abetters of carnal liberty. Truly I cannot
see how any that understand the Doctrine of Gods Free Grace aright, can make
such conclusions, except Legalists or carnal Christians; my reason is, because
the truest and most active principle of all holiness in conversation, is the
right knowledge and experience of Gods Free Grace and Love, the which knowledge
is no acquired thing, as he conceives, but is the free gift of God, Ephesians.
1.17, 18. and Luke 1.77. saving knowledge is there said to spring from the
remission of sins, and so it follows, that saving knowledge is no more
acquirable then Salvation it self, or remission of sins: And where as he
complains of thorny objections that indangers the pricking of their fingers, I
answer him as Jesus Christ did Saul, afterward called Paul, It is hard for
thee to kick against the pricks, Acts 9 5. so it is hard indeed to resist the
Spirit of God, whose coming is said to be in brightness and clearness of the
Truth, to destroy all Antichristian Tenants, though they were esteemed never so
Orthodoxe before, 2 These. 2.8. The Lord guide both him and me to see the Truth
as it is in Jesus, and there to rest, and not as it is in any man or men
whatsoever, even as Saint Paul counsels, Be ye followers of me as I am of
Christ, Ephesians. 5.1.

A Brief Amswer to R. H. his Book, called, The TRUE GUIDE.
FIrst he styles his Book the True Guide, A speech very Emphaticall, and
seems to me a Title too high for any sinful Creature either to assume to
himself, or affixe to his writings: for never did any one of the Apostles
assume it, but it was given only to Jesus Christ, and to the Spirit of Truth.
First to Jesus Christ, Revel. 1.5. The faithful witness: And take notice of
the word The, three times in that verse. Also it is given to the Spirit
expressly, Joh. 16.13. when he, The Spirit of Truth is come, he shall guide you
into all Truth. John Baptist indeed was A burning and a shining light, Joh.
5.35. but Jesus Christ was the true light, Ioh. 1.9. and The way, The truth,
and The life. Ioh. 14.6. But if his Spirit had been infallible, and he had
titled his Book A True Guide, in stead of The True Guide, then might his Title
have proved Orthodoxe (I hope he will suffer his Epistlers terms) which now
must remain Hererodoxe, and must of necessity be degraded.

Further, he says, the weakest Christ an may be able to discern the true way
of the Spirit of God, etc.

By way of the Spirit, I suppose R. H. chiefly intends the outward way of it,
and that especially in the public Ministry, as may appear in his third
distinction, Page 1. and his so often mentioning of it almost in every Page to
the end of the Book, at least it is the chief thing in difference betwixt us,
and whereupon I shall chiefly insist.

Truly, it is strange to me that R. H. his Guide should habilitate the weakest
Christian to discern the true way of the Spirit of God, about the public
Ministry, for that he chiefly drives at, whereas the strongest Christians
endued with far greater light about this point in controversy, then ever yet
R. H. saw, are at a stand about it, witness the strong Controversy yet on
foot, about that point of Ministry and Church Government, even amongst them of
clearest light. Which Controversy was not in the Primitive times after the
giving of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. For during the continuance of those necessary
members of the Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27. the Apostolical Office and Gifts
which were infallible, there was no place left for any difference among the
Churches in that point, it being a part of the truth of the Gospel revealed;
for if it were not so, then by as good reason they might question the certainty
of the whole Gospel, as that part of it. Witness likewise the flow coming in
of the Synods Answer to the Parliaments Quaeries.

It follows, from all false and erroneous ways.

Certainly, R. H. must needs be endued with the gift of discerning of Spirits
at least, a gift not given to all in the Primitive Churches, 1 Cor. 12.10. To
another the working of miracles, to another Prophecy, to another discerning of
Spirits, etc. I wonder that we in this Town living so near him, have reaped
no better fruits of it, having diverse times both by word and writing, desired
conference with him in a loving way, and could not obtain it, but were put off
with this excuse, he had a pain in his head, by reason of which his memory was
weak. Truly, had not his love to us been weaker then that he made show of, and
seemed earnestly often times to desire, he would have dealt with us as brethren,
and not have given us the first fruits of it in a scandalous and lying Pamphlet
published to the world, but would either by word or writing, first have taken
counsel of the Word and Spirit, in Matthew. 18.15. If thy brother trespass
against thee, go tell him his fault betwixt him and thee alone, etc. which all
Christians that understand that place (both in Old and New- England) confess
to be a rule observable, not only betwixt particular Brethren, but by Analogy
between Churches themselves in case of difference. But he leaves not only that
way, but also the more excellent way of Love, as the Apostle calls it, 1 Cor.
12.31. But covet earnestly the best gifts, and yet show I unto you a more
excellent way, compared with 1 Cor. 14.1. follow after charity, (which way of
love is not only to be sought before, but is indeed more excellent then all
Ordinances) and likewise the Prophets and Apostles examples, who never
published to the world, the grievances or imperfections of the people of God, 2 Samuel 1.20. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, etc
Mica. 1.10. Declare it not at Gath, etc. Yet the Apostles in diverse of their
Epistles, had to do with false Apostles, and with scandalous and false Brethren.

But he knowing no world, no Gath, nor Askelon now in being, takes this
unbrotherly course to render us, that differ in judgment from him, as odious
to the world as he can: therefore we may justly take up David's complaint, Psalm.
120. throughout the whole Psalm, but had he not wronged the Truth as well as
us, it had been much the better, and we had been prevented of making this just
vindication.

It follows, By a lover of the Truth.

This may be so, if it be understood of that which he judges Truth, but to love
Truth is to love God, for God is Truth; and then if he love him that begat, he
also loves him that is begotten of him. Also if he be a lover of the Truth
indeed, then he loves all Truth as well as any, and that for its own sake,
yea, even those Truths that are against him, as well as those that are for him,
and is as willing to know it as was Old Ely, 1 Samuel 3.17. which made him say to
Samuel, what is the thing that the Lord said unto thee, I pray thee hide it not
from me, etc. and to submit to it being known, as he, v. 18. and he said it is
the Lord, let him do what seems him good, yea, though it put him upon
suffering, Revel. 10.10. Thus far the frontispiece.

His Text follows, Romans 8.14.

The principal drift of his discourse is about discerning the true way of the
Spirit of God, especially as it concerns the public Ministry, as is said
before. His third distinction in Page 1. he divides into two, (viz) first
inward. Secondly, outward and Ministerial, which latter is indeed the sense
employed in his third observation. Page 2. Now had he purposed to have been a
True Guide, he should have showed himself a workman, as Paul counseled
Timothy, ^ Tim. 2.15. by rightly distinguishing between Ministers and
Ministries according to the Word, and not to have begged the question, as it is
plain he does, he being either unwilling or unable to play upon that string,
but would have us take his word for it, as he does others. Certain it is he
allows of more Ministries then one, for he himself preaches, and we do not
question him for it, but we know not of any Office he has yet, so that his
present practice warrants a Ministry without an Office, according to that Acts
8.4. they that were scattered abroad, went every where preaching the Word, and
1 Pet. 4.10. as every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one
to another, as good Stewards of of the manifold Grace of God. And so far I
hope others may go as well as he. But this he will say is not the public
Ministry he speaks of: but what does R. H. think makes a Ministry public?
Is it something in and about it called Jure divino, or Jure humano? If he say
the latter, then Christ's Ministry and John Baptists were not public, for they
had it not. If he say the former, then there be many now in London and other
places, who have it not in his way, which yet have as good, and better
testimony from the Word for theirs, then he has for his.

In his second observation, he takes a great deal of pains in quoting a
multitude of Scriptures, to prove a thing we easily grant, for we have had long
experience of being seduced, though not so long experience as he; if the Lord
would be pleased to discover it to him.

In his third observation, Page 3. he says, the most are led by an erroneous
spirit; now if this be true, as certainly it is, and his Church consisting of
all men, who are the most, see how he foyles himself, and disgraceth his
Church. The true Church Members are all living stones, as Peter speaks (in
appearance at least) now if the Church knew of any one defiled person in it,
and did not cast him out, it was her great sin, and a means of infecting the
whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.6. Your glorying is not good, know you not that a little
heaven leaveneth the whole lump? But he confesses (and we should believe the
True Guide) that most are led by an erroneous spirit, therefore a body
desperately corrupt by his own position.

Further in the same Page, he takes the Apostles weaknesses to serve his
turn, never distinguishing betwixt their sailings in Doctrine and Practice,
and so in stead of being a True Guide, may prove a false one; especially to
weak Christians, for whom is seems he chiefly intended his Book; for they
may think if the Apostles erred, whom should we believe? and so he may bring a
blot upon his True Guide, and men may say if the Apostles erred, why may not R.
H. err also?

But I wish him how ever it fares with his True Guide, to take heed least by
opening the Prophets and Apostles failings in matters of Practice, to serve his
own turn, he make not their Doctrine questionable with his, in which they
could not err as they were Apostles, and moved by the Holy Ghost in execution
of their Office. But it follows not, but that another, even a public
Ministry may err, therefore his whatsoever it be, is as questionable as any
other, though he leaves it unquestionable and questions all others, making hue
and cry after them under the name of seducers, if they have not his allowance
and run not in his stream. But I desire him to show us by what right others
are bound to have his approbation more, then he theirs; unless he stand for
some mother Church, and would bring other Churches and Assemblies under it
whether they will or no; truly, I know of no mother Church but that spoken of
by S. Paul, Gal. 4.26. Jerusalem which is above, the mother of us all. Indeed I
read of union, Cant. 6.9. My Dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one
of her mother; but of no subordination of Churches, this opinion he knows is
somewhat Romish. But let him show us where Christ or his Apostles constituted
any one Church over another Church or Churches, from whence a pattern may be
taken for any such pre-eminence, and he has done the work: when he has also
proved his true succession (for certainly he must go that way to work) and
also his infallibility of judgment, as he knows the mother Church of Rome is
forced to do, like an Ape, imitating the Primitive Church, who alone enjoyed
(in the time of the Apostles, those useful and necessary members of the
Christian Churches) the true way of Gospel Churches.

Further, in Page 3. he propounds a question, how the Spirit of Truth may be
known from the Spirit of Error: his answer is, Gal, 5.22. But the fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness goodness, faith, etc.
Here R. H. was at a stand, for his old papers did not afford him a particular
answer to this quaere, therefore he contents himself with a general one, for
we know that he has been long since compiling this model by the help of his
old notes, which he made use of to this purpose. And truly, had he well viewed
that Text, it is not a very pertinent place to his purpose, save only in the
general to discover seducers from a True Guide, but rather a false Christian
from a true one, and also is meant properly of a persecuting biting, devouring
Spirit, Gal. 5.15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not
consumed one of another. Or in plain terms, a Legalist from a Spiritual man
ver. 18. but if ye are led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law, a loving,
peaceable man, from a van-glourious, envious man, ver. 22.26. But had he been
as well versed in the Scripture as in his old notes, Saint John would have
sufficiently furnished him with particulars for that purpose, but that he
thought it would make against him: 1 John 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Every Spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God, and every Spirit
that confesses not that Christ is come in the flesh is not of God, and this is
that Spirit of Antichrist whereof you have heard that it should come, and even
now already is it in the world, and so ver 5. They are of the world, therefore
speak they of the world, and the world hears them, we are of God, he that
knows God, hears us, he that is not of God hears not us, hereby know we
the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error: but it may be he has not heard
that place so expounded, and had he took notice also of Esaias 57.19. I create
the fuit of the lips, etc. he should have there read of a fruit of the lips as
well as of the fruits of conversation else where, which sense John proceeds in,
to discover seducers in the place before quoted. But R. H. not being acquainted
with it, thought a general discovery might pass, but he finds in Scripture
that Seducers come in Sheeps clothing, they seem to be holy in their
conversation, therefore the fruit of the lips seem to be the most proper
distinguishing character to know them by, for neither he nor I, can tell when
we see things done agreeable to the Word that it is a fruit of the Spirit, for
all that we can see is but a Moral thing: therefore Paul when he speaks of
the fruits of the flesh, says, they are manifest, Gal. 5.19. but he does not
say, the fruits of the Spirit are manifest, verse 22. for they are not so
easily known to us, only the judgment of charity which is so much wanting in
him toward us, should be in us all toward them whose actions are according to
the Word.

In Page 4. in his four last lines, in applying his Answer to a general
Question there propounded, he mentions Christ's Answer to the Disciples about
their commanding fire to come down from Heaven, etc. Christ does indeed as he
says, reject their answer, and good reason for it, though it was not as he
says, altogether contrary to the Word written, for they had Elias for their
example, to justify their demand, 2 King. 1.10. and so they had some Scripture
to ground their demand upon, but the Disciples being yet somewhat like R. H. of
a Legal Spirit, thinking the old Legal administration should continue, and it
may be stood somewhat prejudiced to the New-light, like him. But Jesus Christ
whose will was to have the glorious Gospel and new Covenant, go forth with
new, even Gospel administrations like it self, forbad them their demand with
utter dislike of it, (although it will not satisfy many men's spirits to this
day) and told them that the Son of man cause not to destroy, but to save men's
lives.

It follows, Page 5. Therefore (says he) if any shall persuade you to
separate from the people of God or Ordinances, etc. Mark how he still goes on
in begging of questions, if he had proved who were the people of God, and which
were the Ordinances of God, then we should have been better able to justify a
separation from him, as he from Rome, or to have renounced such separation if
unlawful, yet let him know there is a lawful separation, as well as
unlawful, as may appear, Acts 19.9. When diverse were hardened and believed
not* but spoke evil of that way before the multitude, he departed from them,
and separated the Disciples, so 2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them and be ye
separate, etc. Else why does he refuse to worship God as the Papists do, but
because of their corrupt Doctrine, and humane inventions.

It follows; Likewise if any shall persuade you from the public Ministry, and
from the Sacrament.

Mark still how he beggs questions, but let him be plain, what Ministry and
Sacraments he means, and prove them to be Gods, and done in Gods way, and he
shall receive an answer: for from such as are Gods, and administered in Gods
way, we say the same as he does.

Again, he mentions praying and giving of thanks.

I am persuaded there no true Christian so Atheistical, but does as
faithfully, and constantly acknowledge in these duties, as R.H.

Next follows his question, Page 5. May I be led with every one that brings
Scripture?

His answer is No, for none are readier to bring Scripture then seducers, true,
which may be the cause that R. H. brings Scriptures so often, and gives the true
sense so seldom.

Next follows his notes or difference, first, those that are deceivers (says
he) will practice many things that they have no rule in Scripture for.

I answer, it is very true, and this we can make appear to R. H. that he
himself does so, for, what warrant out of Scripture has he for a Church of
Christ made up of all the world, as if a worldly Sanctuary were still Gods
Ordinance, as if a typical State were still in being? what Scripture has he
for a worldly worship, and worldly Ministry? for, such as the Church is, such
is the Ministry, and worship of it. 1 John 4.5. They are of the world,
therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them. Such practices
deny Christ to be come in the flesh. 1 John 4.3. for he would have all that are
borne into the world Sons of God, whether they be newborn or no, whereas the
Apostle says plainly, not by our natural birth, but by our new birth we
become the Sons of God, Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the Sons of God by faith in
Christ Jesus.

But mark his first proof; for his instance, is, 1 King. 13. where the young
Prophet following the advice of the old Prophet contrary to the command of God,
was slain. I suppose he here discovers notable ignorance; for the Prophet
there does not go on his message by a Word ordinary and written, but by an
immediate Word from God, and should have been taken off not by a mediate word,
and pretended, as was that of the old Prophet, nor by Scripture, but by the
same immediate Word that set him on work. Even as Abraham had the same
immediate Word to stay his hand from killing Isaac, that commanded him to do
it. Now the Word written, rather warranted the Prophet to eat for his health,
and forbad Abraham to kill, but they had a word immediately from the same
fountain from whence the Word written first came, which being written, is a
record and rule to all the Saints; but it seems R. H. would not have God
himself, nor the Prophets and Apostles in no case to go a jot higher then the
Word written.

In Page 6. He mentions three or four things negatively; the first is about
Childrens Baptism, and some other things, questioning what we have against
them; and because he thinks nothing can be said against that point, concerning
the Baptism of water, let him take these few things into consideration. First,
how he can warrant the baptizing of any with water by virtue of that
commission, Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; because the Apostles themselves
that baptized with water before that commission was given, could not baptize
with this Baptism, till they were endued with power from one high, Luke 24.49.
Tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, till you be endued with power from on high,
Acts 1.4. And being assembled together with them, commanded them that they
should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father,
which, says he, ye have heard of me.

Secondly, The baptism of water was ever, both before and after the giving of
the Holy Ghost, called, John's Baptism, Act. 1.22. Beginning from the baptism
of John, unto the same day that he was taken up from us, Acts 18.25, This man
was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in the Spirit, he
taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism of John.
And Acts 19.3, 4, He said unto them, unto what were ye then baptized! they
said, unto John's Baptism: then said Paul John verily baptized with the
baptism of repentance, etc.

Thirdly, And no other form of words were used in that Baptism, but in the
name of the Lord Jesus only, Acts 8.16. For as ye the Holy Ghost was fallen
upon none of them only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts
19 5. When they heard this they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
For the baptism of the Spirit was by laying one of the Apostles hands, Acts.
8.^^. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.

Fourthly, The baptism of the Spirit was not so much as signified by the
baptism with water as may appear, Acts 19.2. And he said unto them have ye
received the Holy Ghost, since ye believed? and they said unto him, we have not
so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost; But if the Baptism of the
spirit had been the thing signified by the baptism with water, the Baptizers
would no doubt have so instructed the parties baptized, or else they must be
concluded to be either negligent or ignorant of their office: But Paul did not
so much as reprove those Baptizers for any such neglect, but by laying on of
Paul's hands they received the Holy Ghost.

Nay further, This Baptism of the Holy Ghost was a distinct gift of the
Spirit, from that which the Apostles and all other Believers receive by their
union with Christ, for the Apostles had those gifts and graces which were, and
still are common to other Believers, by virtue of their union before this was
given; but this which is the promise of the Father, they had not till Christ
was ascended, John 7.39. This he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe
on him should receive, for the Holy Ghost was not yet given because that Jesus
was not yet glorified. Acts 1.5. Ye shall be baptied with the Holy Ghost not
many days hence.

Lastly, S. Paul says expressly it was no part of his commission, 1 Cor. 1.15,
17. but the Baptism of the Spirit, by laying on of hands, was part of the
Apostles commission, Mat. 28.19. compared with Acts 8.18. Mark. 16.15, 16, 17.

If any object and say, what does the Baptism with water signify then?

I answer, it signifies our remission of sins by the death of Christ, Acts
2.38. Then said Peter repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, etc. Romans 6.4. And as for the subjects
of this Baptism of water, I commend to R.H. his consideration, Mr. Tombs his
Book who is a Presbyterian (as they are called) and has written largely upon
that point, whose Book yet remains unanswered for any thing I understand to
the contrary; and when R.H. has answered him rightly, he will satisfy many
Christians who are at a stand, and very much troubled about that point, and
when he has positively proved his other things he speaks of, and turned his
interrogations into positive conclusions fully proved, we shall then more
particularly know what to answer to them: In the mean time, we will suffer him
to make Quaerees, and because he loves quaerees, let him take this one, not
what he has against, but what he has for any of his way, to desire of the
Parliament that which is inconsistent to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom,
did ever any of those whom he calls perverse and obstinate people desire such a
thing. Let him also know, that until he has positively proved his own
practice, he must be suspected for a seducer, according to his own first rule:
And mark further, how he swerves from his own first rule, for whereas he
titles those, deceivers, that will practice that, they have no rule from
Scripture for; he finding himself destitute of Scripture, runs to the old
Popish shift, and makes Quaeries, and says, what have you against such and
such things, but let him know that God has Interrogations to set against his
Interrogations, which will overthrow them: Esaias 1.12. saying, Who has required
this at your hands: So that we have enough against a thing, when we have
nothing for it; for positive positions and practices must have positive
proofs, for negative positions, negative proofs suffice: I do not a thing,
because I find it not written, suffices. Therefore the Jews circumcised Males
because there was express command for it, and not Females because they found
it not written, and yet they had no express command against it: So in the Law
we read, that the Priests were to bear the Arc on their shoulders, Number. 4.15.
1 Chronicles. 15.2. as was there expressly commanded, but there was no express
command against carrying it on a Cart, only they had learned that of the
Philistims: 1 Samuel 6. but God made a breach upon them for it, 2 Samuel 6.8, 9. 1 Chronicles. 15.13. And so they learned to do it afterward according to the Law of
God: 1 Chronicles. 15.14, 15. And the children of the Levites bare the Ark of God
upon their shoulders, as Moses commanded according to the Word of the Lord.

He interrogates yet further, In Page 6. saying, what Scripture have any to
rail against the Parliament?

Answ. Truly, none that I know of, nor any warrant at all to be unfaithful
toward them in the least, who have been so careful of our peace and safety,
and so faithful toward us, though some would have had it otherwise. But R. H.
would make the world believe, that those that differ from his opinions and
practices are such, and therefore mentions diverse opinions, and among the rest
this Interrogatory, to render them as hateful to the world as possibly he can,
as this Interrogatory especially must needs do if it were true; but it may be
he has heard some that stand opposite to his opinions, speak foolishly that
way, though for my part all those that I am intimate with, stand to this day as
cordial and real for the Parliament as ever, as our neighbors can testify:
But contrariwise, I have heard of some of his opinion that have proved
unfaithful to the Parliament; should I therefore take occasion to make mention
of the actions of some few of his opinion to the world, to render all of the
same opinion odious? yet this is the very drift of his mentioning this thing,
as may appear to them that read his Book. But it may be he will say he does
but interrogate; but he may know well that interrogations are either strong
affirmations, or strong negations; and I think he will not say it is a
negation, but should I have begun and done such a thing so publicly against
them of his opinion, I should have been thought at least a seducer, unjustly
endeavoring to draw the Parliament and well affected peoples affections from
such.

His next things he mentions in the same page, are Magistrates, Masters and
Fathers.

Verily I know none that are accused by R. H. that take away in the least from
Parliament, Masters or Fathers, what God, nature, and this whole Kingdom has
invested them with severally from God; but I never yet read in the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, that ever he gave any in the world power over the consciences of
his people in matter of worship, 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be
not the servants of men. Col. 2.20. Why as though living in the world, are ye
subject to Ordinances; touch not, taste not, handle not, which all perish with
the using after the Commandments and Doctrines of men: But mark the enmity of
this man against them he opposes he would have them thought to be such as
cry down superiority and inferiority, and yet he knows well they stand for
all due subjection to Caesar's, Masters, and Fathers, as much as he, if not
more: For we conceive all civil subjection to be due to such, whether Heathens
or Christians; but if he will give to them that which belongs to God, we are
not bound to do so too by his example: we acknowledge no power in matter of
worship above Christ Jesus, who is the only Lawgiver to his people, whose
government differs from Moses government, even as his house differs from his,
Heb. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also
Moses was faithful in all his house: And Moses verily was faithful in all his
house as a servant, but Christ as a son over his own house, etc. So that the
Government of Moses house is as unfit for Christ's house, as a poor cottagers
for a Kings house.

Besides Moses house, yea, even that whose State being shaddowish, when Christ
the body came, the shadows must needs fly away, (as Solomon says) then to
what purpose serve his proofs from the examples of the Kings of Judah, more
then of the Priests of Judah, for the Government of Christ's house; unless they
are understood spiritually and not according to the Letter: For were not the
Kings and Priests of Judah, both types of Christ Jesus? Now if he will more
argue from the one than from the other, let him show his grounds from
Scripture; if he will argue from both, as he must of necessity if he do from
either, then how will he escape the Episcopal order, even the Papal power of
Rome it self, which they raise up to the foundation of the Aaronical Priesthood.

But it may be R. H. is not thoroughly convinced of the truth, and extent of the
typicality of that estate, nor the spirituality of the present Gospel state as
the antitype of that: Let him therefore a little consider, first the Land is
called holy, Zach. 2.12. The glory of all Lands, Ezekiel. 20.6. Emmanuels Land,
Esaias 8.8. the typical rest, Deuteronomy. 12.9, 10. Which when men believe, they are
said to enter into, not that natural Canaan, but the spiritual rest, Heb.
4.3. For we which have believed enter into rest, etc, Besides, Jerusalem when
the Jewish state stood, was the chiefest place of Gods worship, unto which all
men of that Nation, were bound to resort three times a year, according to the
Law, Exodus 34, 23, 24. Thrice in the year shall all your men children appear
before the Lord. So Psalm. 122. But now every where, and in every Nation men may
worship God, if they worship him in Spirit and truth: John 4.20, 21, 23. The
hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor in Jerusalem worship
the Father, But the hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and truth. Acts 10 35. In every Nation he that
fears him and works righteousness, is accepted of him.

Secondly, The people were separated from other people to God, Levit. 20.26. I
the Lord am holy, and have severed you from other people that you should be
mine: But where has God in the Gospel separated any whole Nation or Kingdom
as a peculiar people, but rather chooses out to himself a people by the voice
of the Gospel, not of all Nations, but out of all Nations and tongues: Rev.
5.9. Thou have redeemed us by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and Nation. And is it not plain, that the spiritual Israel, holy
Nation, and peculiar people, as Peter calls them, 1 Pet. 2.9. ^re the true
Antitype of that?

Thirdly, The Priesthood was typical, as may be seen at large, Heb. 7, 8, 9
Chapters, what was signified by it, and how, and in whom fulfilled.

Lastly, To go no further, though much more might be said, the Kingdom of
Judah was typical to Christ according to that, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall
not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till Shilo come.
So Hos. 3, 5. Afterward the children of Israel shall return and seek the Lord
their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in
the latter days. Ezekiel. 37.22, 24, 25: And I will make them one Nation, and one
King shall be King to them all: ver. 24. And David my servant shall be their
King. Amos 9.11. In that day I will raise up the Tabernacle of David that is
fallen. So Esaias 9.6. Dan, 7. Joh, 1.49. Thou art the King of Israel: So Luke
1.32. Acts 2.30. and many more places. And which is more, the Law-giving power
was so appropriated to Judahs Tribe, that it was common to none other in the
world with him, and observe that this Law-giving power (I do not say Law-making
power for that was wholly delivered to them from God: 1 Chronicles. 28.11. to the
end, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. 2 Chronicles. 31.2, 3.) was so peculiar to Judahs Tribe, that
it was not common, no not to the Kings of Israel, who were Christian Kings by
profession, and lawful by Gods approbation, 1 King. 11. else now were any
Kings lawful either in Israel or Judah? for God told them expressly when they
desired a King first, that they had cast him off, that he should not reign
over them: 1 Samuel 8.5, 6 7. But as Gods approbation of it afterward made that
lawful, so also this, having also Gods approbation before the division; 1
Kings 11.31, 37, 38. And he said to Jeroboam, take thee ten pieces, for thus
says the Lord, I will rend the Kingdom out of the hands of Solomon, and give
ten Tribes unto thee, and if thou harken to what I command thee, and keep my
Statutes as David my servant did, I will be with thee, and build thee a sure
house, as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee. Yet he never
approved of their actions about his worship, for that as I said, was peculiar
to Judahs Tribe, yet, even this privilege that was in Judahs Tribe, was no
moral right, but typical and shadowish only, and so was wholly to vanish away,
and cease for ever when Christ came. Genesis 49.10. Ezekiel. 21.26, 27. Thus says
the Lord, remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown, this shall not be the
same, exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high, I will overturne,
overturne, overturne it, and it shall be no more until he come whose right it
is, and I will give it him. Now no Civil Kings of the Nations of this world,
were typed out, but Christ Jesus only, from whom it is that all Believers in a
spiritual respect are equally Kings and Priests. 1 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 1.6. for
even as the Land, People and Priesthood were types of a Spiritual, not Civil,
Land, People and Priesthood; even so their Kings must also have their
Spiritual Antitypes, and so it follows clearly, not Civil but spiritual,
even Christ Jesus is the true Antitype shadowed forth, for if it were not so,
the very essentiallity of types and figures would be taken away and destroyed;
but the Civil power which is from nature, and so Moral and perpetual
continues still, and subjection to it is expressly commanded in Civil things,
Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. whereas subjection to it in matters Spiritual, is as
expressly forbidden, Matthew. 20 25, 26, 27, Luke 22.25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 7.23. Col.
2.20, 22. Mat. 15.9. And this is the true sense of the Gospel in this point,
thus clearly distinguishing betwixt the Civil and Spiritual power.

A little further he sets the Scriptures at variance amongst themselves, and so
leaves them, never showing what the spirit of God means in those places of
Jude 3. Contend earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints; and Mat. 11.
The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. But
he does in this case, as some Fishes, who will make the water thick and muddie,
that they may the easier get away undiscerned; it may be he counts all
calling into question his ways to be contention, though it be done lovingly,
and his open calumniating others that differ from him, to be no striving nor
contention, giving them his charitable brand, a perverse and obstinate people:
But if this be his charity, we desire he should keep it to himself, and
pretend less love, and intend more.

In Page 7. his second rule to try the spirits, is this: Those motions or
persuasions that are pleasing to the flesh, and take most with natural men,
are not from the spirit of God: His proofs are, Gal. 5.17. 1 Cor. 2.14. For
the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, etc.
Whereto I answer; Our ways cannot please natural men; for we declare to them,
that until they be borne again, and believe in Christ, they are carnal
still, Romans 8.9. If any man have not the spirit of God, he is none of his. And
so being not believers, they cannot be true Church Members. But they admit all
without exception, and is not that pleasing to flesh and blood to have their
carnal ways, and yet be counted Gods children too, as is plain by their
communicating with them in their Church Priviledges? But let R. H. go about to
unchurch them, and take away that Religion that they seem to have from them,
and then he shall see plainly whether it will displease flesh and blood, or no.

It follows, page 7. What profit is it that we keep his Ordinances?

Verily if R. H. have repented of any service performed by him to God, that was
not Gods, he has done well, and I hope he will say the same by us doing the
like; but if he means it of that service that indeed is Gods, I know none that
repents of any service performed to God, unless it be of their wants and
weaknesses in their performances etc.

It follows page 8. where he quotes a place out of Matthew. 24.26. and once
before Page 2. but his Reader may go seek the true sense, the words are these,
Wherefore if they shall say to you he is in the desert* go not forth; behold he
is in the secret chamber, believe it not, etc. But what, does he think, is
meant by the desert? where is it thinks he? Is it some wilderness natural
where wild Beasts inhabit? this is indeed a natural construction; or is it
Spiritual? which verily is more likely, according to that, Rev. 12. whither
the woman fled for shelter, and was preserved there rather by Gods providence,
than by virtue of any true outward Church-Office and Ordinance. For the outward
Court was given to the Gentiles, Rev. 11.2. and the true visible Ministry by
Office was departed, and an earthly one succeeded all that time of the forty
two months, Revel. 9.1. I saw a Star fall from heaven to the earth, and to him
was given the key of the bottomless pit. And in Rev. 11.2. it is said, the
outward Court was given to the Gentiles, and this is that departing foretold by
the Apostle Paul, 2 These. 2.3. That day shall not come except there come a
falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, see Acts 20.29. After my
departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you not sparing the flock. And
by our Savior, Mat. 24.24, 25, 26. For there shall arise false Christ's and
false Prophets etc. Luke 17.21, 22, 23. So that the Saints being in their
spiritual Babylonish captivity, no marvel that their state was so confused;
For as in Babylon of old there was confusion of tongues, Genesis 11.4, 7, 9. and
from that confusion Babell took its name, verse 9. so in this spiritual
Babylon the Church of God came into confusion loosing that Apostolical and
first order of the Gospel: yea, and take notice that that gift of tongues was
one of those gifts, Acts 2. that in spiritual Babylon was again confounded;
yet some enjoyment of God was even there to the Saints, though not according to
the former way: But even as Israel of old was extraordinarily nourished in
their captivity in heathen Babylon, Zach. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. (so in mystical
Babylon, as hereafter shall appear) Then I said unto him, what are these two
Olive Trees upon the right side of the Candlestick, and upon the left side
thereof; and what are those two Olive branches, which through the two golden
pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves, and he said these are the two
anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth. (There is mention
made but of one Candlestick, because their Church was National) they were
extraordinarily preserved, for the pipes emptied the golden oil out of
themselves, they could not be provided for in the ordinary way, as that place
before quoted proves, and may further appear by the reinvesting again of the
Priests after their Captivity, Ezra. 6.20. For the Priests and Levites were
purified together, all of them were pure: compared with Zach. 3. all along that
Chapter; for what needed a restoring where was no loss.

Moreover, after some degree of restoring, some difference about the Priests
Office could not be decided, till a Priest arose with Urim and Thummim,
infallibly to determine it, Ezra. 2.62, 63. Nehem. 7.64, 65. The Tirshatha said
unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood
up a Priest with Urim and Thummim. Even so I say, in this mystical Babylon,
the two Candlesticks (called two, because the estate under the Gospel is
Congregationall) were likewise extraordinarily nourished: Rev. 11.3, 4. I will
give power to my two witnesses, and they shall Prophesy a thousand two hundred
and threescore days in sacke-cloath: These are the two Olive Trees, and the
two Candlesticks standing before the God of the earth. Yet also some communion
among themselves there was, it may be somewhat like that, Mal. 3.16. For else
how could the enemies find them out to persecute them? yet a perpetual
visibility of a Church in that estate, all the Reformed Divines are contrary
to; as Mr Saltmarsh declares in his Divine Right of Presbytery, Page 2. And it
is less probable that they should have a visible Ministry, than a visible
Church, the Scriptures being so plain against that of the Ministry, but rather
for that of the Church (and it is well known, a Church may subsist, at least
for some time without Officers, though not so well) which induces me to think
that those Divines before spoken of, do understand that visibility of Church
they speak of, chiefly of a visibility by true Officers and Ordinances, and my
reason is, because I find two Candlesticks, Rev. 11.3, 4. (and no stars but
earthly ones) all the time of Antichrists reign, Prophesying, although it was
in Sacke-cloath. Some light they had, as I said before, whereby they lived by
faith, according to that Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by faith, etc. And
witnessed to the truth against Antichrist: Now the visibility of the Church
taken in this latter sense, I conceive to be neither in the desert, nor in the
secret chamber (that is, the most retired assemblings of the Saints) for in
neither of these is Christ enjoyed, but when the Lord Jesus shall repair these
losses, it shall be like that lightening from East to West, which shall be
obvious to all his people, and put an end to these Ordinance Controversies.

It follows, In the same Page he quotes Romans 16.17. Mark them which cause
divisions, and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and
avoid them: This is very good counsel indeed, when it is rightly understood,
but the Papists bring this place against the Protestants, and the Protestants
against the Papists; the Bishops bring it against the Non-conformists, and they
against them; and R. H. he brings it against his opposites, and they against
him. But the question is, how shall we know when it is rightly brought? I
answer; when the Church of God is restored again from under Antichrist to that
Primitive purity, and first pattern of Truth, and he that makes use of this
Scripture, is in a Church way, answering that pattern, and is infallibly
assured of it; then he may infallibly make use of this place, and declare who
they are that make divisions: and this sense the latter part of the words
include; for he adds, Mark them that cause divisions, contrary to the Doctrine
that ye have learned, that is, of the Apostles, and not any other Doctrine
whatsoever, 2 Timothy 2.2. The things which thou have heard of me, commit to
faithful men, that they may be able to teach others. Now if R. H. means them
that cause divisions from the first pattern of Truth, we agree with him that
such are diligently to be marked: But he does not declare and prove from what
Church it is meant, that this division is to be understood of, whether
National, or Congregationall, Primitive, or since the Apostasy under
Antichrist, and so he contends to no purpose.

It follows, Acts 7.37. and Mark 3.28. All sins and blasphemies shall be
forgiven to the Sons of men, but he that sins against the Holy Ghost shall
never be forgiven.

This is good counsel because it comes from Christ; but who are the subjects
this principally looks upon we shall see anon: For most plain it is, that it
was directed to the Scribes and Pharisees that adulterous generation, Mat.
12.39. that could dance after no Music but their own pipes, Mat. 11.16, 17.
that could learn no truths, but such as were brought to them in their own
way, who being afraid that Jesus Christ was come to overthrow their Church
Constitutions and Traditions, and all their false ways, made Christ as odious
as they could to all the Jews by their invectives (as R. H. endeavors to do
us to the world) declaring that he was a glutton, a drunkard, a friend of
wicked men, Mat. 11.19. yea, a conjurer, which occasioned this speech of our
Savior, which he quotes. Now these men being so bewitched to their humane
inventions and Constitutions, would say any thing against Christ to make their
own cause seem good: Now whether we or our opposites, oppose Christ most in
matter of humane Constitutions and Inventions in Gods Worship, we leave to all
Christians to judge, and so consequently, whom that speech of our Savior most
concerns.

Next follow two Objections, Page 8.

The first is this. 1 These. 5.21. Try all things and keep that which is good.
But if the Reader mark his answer, he shall find that he scarce gives leave to
try any thing, for fear there should be evil in it; would he not have us try
appearances of evil, whether they are so or no? Would he have us take all upon
trust that comes from them? Truly, I do not read that Paul made, 1 These. 1.21.
Try all things and keep that which is good, the Objection, and ver. 22.
Abstain from all appearance of evil, the answer to the Objection, that is R.
H. his addition to the Scripture, to darken the sense of it. But the Apostles
mind is, as I conceive, to teach us, ver. 21. to take nothing upon trust
untried, and being tried and found good, to keep it; and being found to be
evil, to avoid it wholly in all its degrees, even to the very appearance of
evil.

The second Objection is this: But they teach many sweet Truths. He answers,
therein lies the more danger. Truly, I conceive the danger lies not in teaching
sweet Truths, much less in teaching many sweet Truths; but the danger lies in
this, when men make not use of that duty and Christian Liberty they have from
the Word of Truth, to try all things, they hear, wheresoever, or by
whomsoever, whether they are Truths or not: Which duty and Liberty is so much
infringed by him in this his answer, as may appear in the amplification of his
answer, Page 9. by a fabulous similitude, as if he meant to drive men wholly
from trial.

The next Objection, Page 9. which being large, I refer to his Book, where
he says, That we say the way to have their eyes opened is to forsake their
Antichristian Ministers.

Answ. This we deny, and say quite contrary, the way to forsake Antichristian
Ministers, is to have men's eyes first opened by Jesus Christ; and whereas he
says in the words following, that his opposites would have them come and join
with them in their meetings: This is his slander, who is so jealous of all men's
ways but his own, that he is unwilling to make a found trial, either of
other men's ways or his own, but takes things at the first hand, to disgrace
others, and boulster his own, and so his positions being still begged and not
proved, he builds without a foundation. The similitude he alludes to, of Eves
eating the forbidden fruit, will not serve his turn, for that was proved
infallibly to be forbidden fruit, but he takes for granted, and has not yet
proved the ways he so reproaches to be forbidden fruit: therefore his answer
is of no force, but must needs remain the conceit of his own brain and
mis-applied.

It follows, Page 10. where he brings in the Pharisees accusing Christ's
Disciples of ignorance, John 7.49. yet boasting themselves of their own light.

Answ. I have declared a little before, who are most sick of the Pharisees
disease, and truly, this mentioned here by him, is another Symptom of their
infection; for they were better versed in the Laws and Traditions of their
Fathers, than in the Laws of Christ, and so accused Christ's Disciples of
ignorance, so that I grant it to be as he says, of the Pharisees, and it is a
very Epidemicall disease amongst all of that kindred: but now to the trial of
his application, to see if it does not touch himself most* Did he when he writ
and composed his calumniating Book, think with himself that he knew nothing?
If so, I wonder how he durst venture to put it forth, so to publish his
ignorance to the world? Also, if he were free from all boasting of his
knowledge, what was it that made him to dignifie his Book with such a high
title as The True Guide? this I commit to any reasonable man's consideration,
whether he thought he know nothing, and was freed from boasting, according to
his quoted place, 1 Cor. 8.2. When he wrote and published his Book with so high
a Title, and according to his other quoted place, 2 Cor. 10.18. He that
commends himself is not approved, but he whom the Lord commends.

But Saint Paul answers him fully, 1 Cor. 2.8. with Acts 9.5. They that know
Christ will not persecute and crucify Christ in himself, nor in his members.

The next Objection he seems to answer is, Page 10. Object. but I cannot answer
their arguments, they are so deep, must not I then be feign to yield unto them.

He answers, by no means, etc. See how resolute this man is, the deepest
arguments cannot move him; but mark his proof, Mat. 24.26. A third time
abused; for this absence of Christ here spoken of, is a like absence from all
men upon earth, and so from R. H. as well as from others, whether it be
understood of his personal absence, or of the absence of him in the external
and powerful administrations of his Kingdom, in both these senses the
Scripture speaks of his absence. For that of his person, see Acts. 1.11. This
fame Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner
as ye have seen him go into heaven. For that of the administrations of his
Kingdom, in the gifts of the Spirit, see Mat. 16.28. Mark 9.1. There be some
standing here which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the Son of
man coming in his Kingdom: which absence was supplied and enjoyed in the
gifts of the Spirit, as I have declared before at large; as also, how this
enjoyment was again lost under Antichrist. Now he must of necessity understand
that absence of Christ in one of these two senses, for it cannot be understood
of an inward and spiritual absence, for that enjoyment that slowes from union
is perpetual; Romans 8.11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall quicken
your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you. So 1 John 3.9. Whosoever
is borne of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, etc. These
things being premised, it follows clearly, that we are forbidden to go after
R. H. into the desert to seek Christ, or after others into the secret
Chambers, he being alike absent from all, until that in Mat. 24.27, 28. be
fulfilled, For as the lightning comes out of the East, and shines into the
West, so shall the coming of the Son of man be, etc. These things I thought
good to add to that spoken of before, to make the matter more plain.

It follows, he says, The Spirit of God bids remember how thou have received,
and heard, and hold fast and repent: Rev. 3.3. Very good counsel to him and
us, and it is very well backed with two other proofs, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast
the form of sound words. Gal. 1.8, 9. Though we or an Angel from heaven preach
any other Gospel to you then this, let him be accursed. Where we find, that
no Assemblies or Churches in the world must be our rule, but only the true
pattern of wholesome words; here R. H. seems as if he would keep to the
pattern, and if it were so, why is he so angry with us for so doing? We dare
not do any thing without Scripture as he does, as we have already declared, and
shall further appear in the matter following: And whereas he mentions
Thiatirahs Prophetess that came with her deep learning, I understand that to
be so, because she spoke not as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. But with the
enticing words of man's wisdom: 1 Cor. 2.4. And where has R H. had either by
word or writing, such from his opposites, except a passage or two in this our
answer, to pay him in his own Coin, for we have had such from his Epistle, as
Orthodox, Heterodoxe, Enthusiasmes, Ignis fatnus, Anodines, Enchiridion. If he
call this deep learning, we agree with him; but if he mean by deep learning,
that which is allowed of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. and such as our arguments to him
have hitherto been, and still do consist of, then it is no marveile he cannot
answer them; for God says expressly, that such as are resolved and settled in
their formal ways, setting up that Idol in their hearts, they shall not have
the Truth discovered to them, but he will in judgment being enquired of,
suffer the Word to sound after the sense of their old forms, and false ways,
Ezekiel. 14.4. Thus says the Lord God, every man of the house of Israel, that
sets up his Idols in his heart, and puts the stumbling block of his
iniquity before his face, and comes to the Prophet to enquire of him
concerning me, I the Lord will answer him according to the multitude of his
Idols. But truly, his learning in his Book is shallow enough, for it has no
ground or foundation whereon to build that he chiefly aims at, and what that
is, I have declared already.

In Page 11. I find a pretended answer, to a pretended allegation, which he
there says he met with, how true I know not, it is this; They persuade people,
that the Word delivered in private, and by private men of their way, is more
sweet, and they can profit more by it, than by that which is taught in the
public Ministry.

To which he gives a twofold answer: first, he makes that had in a private way,
to be stolen waters, Pro. 9.17. and forbidden fruit, Genesis 2.9, 16, 17. Chap.
3.6. Whereto I answer; first, if ours be stolen waters, so is his, for he
preaches in private (take private in his own sense) as I have declared before,
and I wonder how he dares to trade in stolen waters, and to eat forbidden
fruit, unless it be lawful for him only so to preach, and not for others.

But secondly, though he has overthrown his own practice, he has not yet
proved our practice to be either stolen waters, or forbidden fruit, as I have
declared already upon another the like occasion, whereto I refer.

And whereas in Page 11. he is large in his amplification of this to upbraid
others, the matter there being convertible, it fits R. H. himself, as much as
it can do us, unless he thinks that we are only bound to have and show love
toward him, and he quite contrary toward us; verily in this, he deals just
like the Pharisees, Mat. 23. require much from others, but perform little
themselves. So he would have all our words and ways toward him, paved with
butter and honey, though his words and ways, be with gall and wormwood toward
us, as by and by shall appear.

His next allegation he seems to answer, is in the same Page 11. and it is
this, They would persuade people, that we are not able to maintain what we
teach or hold, for they have offered to reason with our Ministers, or private
men, but they cannot get us to it, (this he knows for the most part to be true)
but he answers, some of you have been reasoned with, and confuted too, though
you will not acknowledge it; but if any have refused, it is not because we
cannot maintain the Truth we hold, but because you are a perverse people, that
will not yield to the true meaning of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, but
will make all Scriptures to speak what they would have them speak, to
maintain what they hold and practice.

I answer; first, he acknowledges in part, our readiness to reason with them,
and their unwillingnesse to reason with us: But whereas he says further, that
we have been reasoned with, and confuted too, he should have done well to have
declared in what particulars, the time when, and the place where, and in the
mean time we must tax him for an untruth.

It follows, Page 12. where he says, Because you are a perverse people, and
perverse and obstinate in an erroneous way, such as will hear no reason.

Answ. In Page 11. in the last amplification, he censures the censorious, that
they do not indeed profit by the Word, because they grow not in charity; and so
by his own Doctrine he profits, not by the Word in their Assemblies, because
he is not charitable, but very censorious, doing that which the Word plainly
forbids, Mat. 7.1, 2, 3. Judge not that ye be not judged, for with what
judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what measure you mete, it
shall be measured to you again; And why beholdest thou the moate that is in
thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye, etc.
Romans 14.4. Who are thou that judge another man's servant, to his own master he
stands or falls. Christ Jesus is our master to whom we stand or fall,
therefore let not R. H. be so proud, as to get into our Masters Chair, for he
will question him for so doing, Romans 14.10. Why do thou judge thy brother, or
why do thou set at naught thy brother, we shall all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ: If R. H. had censured us to be false worshippers, in
relation to some outward false worship, it might have argued rather weakness
than wickedness in us, and so some place left for charity, that we might have
been Christians still: But he has point blanke made us Heretics (according to
the common and known distinction of Heresy that obstinacy joined with error is
Heresy) yea, a little more vile too, even brutish, such as will hear no
reason, and yet for all this, he would be thought to be humble, and charitable.

Further says he, You are a perverse people, that will not yield to the true
meaning of the Spirit of God in, the Scriptures, but will make all Scriptures
speak what they would have them speak, etc.

Answ. Truly, we do no more fear his false censures here, than his false
English; but the truth is, that he takes for granted, that only to be the true
meaning of the Spirit of God in the Scripture, which he yields to: And all that
differ from him, to be a perverse people, so that many thousands who are as
really godly as ever was R. H. come under this censure and are by him made
Heretics: But if it be so, that he himself uses to make all Scriptures
speak what he would have them speak: let him not conclude others do so
because he does so, but let him remember his own lesson, and learn it, Page
11. he says there. They that profit by the Word, are more humble and low in
their own eyes, and think every Christ's(...)then themselves: Phil. 2.3. and
that at here know more of God then they do, as Elihu, Job 32.6. Who says I am
young and ye are old, wherefore I was afraid, and durst not show you mine
(...). But seeing R. H. has first spoken and published his opinion, and that
in a rigid and censorious way. I am induced to take Elihu's further counsel,
verse 9.10. where he says, Great men are not (...) wise, neither do the aged
understand judgment, therefore I said hearken to me, I will also show you my
opinion: And so may I to R.H. though he be somewhat more aged then I, declare
my opinion, for possibly R.H. may err, he is not a man infallible, he may
pervert the Scriptures as well as another man, and so be liable to trial,
unless it be lawful for him to Stigmatize others without control.

A little further, in Page 12. he says, Some of them have denied the truth of
some Scriptures.

Answ. This one expression, the truth of some Scriptures plainly declares who
he means, as shall by and by appear; and verily, had he been charitable and
not malicious, he would not have mentioned this about the Scriptures, it being
openly among all our opposites, (at that meeting where the difference about
some Scriptures arose) agreed upon, as all can witness that were then present,
and this it was, it was about Jobs three friends that came to visit him, and I
then spoke to this effect, that though the speech of Jobs three friends was in
the Scripture, and was a true relation of it, and so in that sense is
Scripture, ye it is not positively the truth and mind of God, as it came from
them in relation to God and Job, and so in this latter sense, it is not the
Scripture, Word or Truth of God: my reasons are not only because Job disclaimes
their speeches, but even God himself, Job. 42.7, 8. Saying, ye have not spoken
of me the thing that is right. Now if it be not right, it is falsehood, and so
none of Gods Truth, but only in the sense before said, that is to say, a true
relation.

Object. But you are not the p^^^^^ meant in the True Guide.

Answ. Truly, I wonder how he dares in the least to deny it, the things being
so plainly spoken, which for the greatest part have passed betwixt us in this
place, from Page 11. the four last lines, and almost half way in Page 12. but
especially this, about denying the truth of some Scriptures: I hear indeed, a
rumor of some men in the world that deny the Scriptures, but they deny all
alike, and not some only, and so cannot be the parties here intended, for those
intended here deny but some only. Besides, I sent him word by a friend of his,
that if we were none of them he aimed at in his Book, if he would but clear
us by declaring who they were, it might give satisfaction to us, but we have no
answer to this day, therefore it is plain to me and others, that all his fair
glosses, and gilded shows to the contrary, were but figg leaves to delude us,
that he might render us odious unobserved, and this his cunning evasion, is but
a new trick of the old Serpent, to deceive us by fair words and foul deeds:
but let him read that place, Rev 9.7, 8 and consider it well, those Locusts
there spoken of, are said to have faces as the faces of men, reasonable and
modest in their words and outward appearance, but they had teeth like Lions to
bite withal: And I am persuaded that the new persecution of the Saints that is
to come by the old formal Professors, shall be most bitter; for who were
greater enemies and persecutors of Christ and his Disciples, then those formal
Professors the Pharisees, who were the strictest in the Jewish Religion, Acts
26.4, 5. even as those who were formerly called Puritans in the Protestant
Religion: Yet I speak not this of all that are our opposites in judgment, for
I put a wide difference betwixt those whom God has endewed with the Spirit of
brotherly love and concord, and those who remain still bewitched with the
Antichristian spirit of persecution.

But it may be R. H. will say, you plead for Christian Liberty, and will not
suffer us to enjoy ours.

Answ. If R. H. say, his Christian liberty consists in persecuting his
brethren, who are as dear to Christ as himself, I utterly deny such Christian
liberty both in judgment and practice, and desire him to clear and prove that
to be lawful which he has done already; namely, to publish the grievances and
differences among the Saints to the world, contrary to that of David, 2 Samuel
1.20. except he think that God as little regards the credit of his people as
he; or less now then in the time of the Law: Certain it is, that God will
have a time to vindicate his peoples reproach, Zeph. 3.19. Behold says the
Lord, at that time I will undee all that afflict thee, etc. And I will get them
praise and fame in every Land where they have been put to shame: and ver. 10. I
will make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn
back your captivity, etc. Truly, Gods people are yet in their Spiritual
captivity, reproached not only from the world, but even of them who think
themselves no small Christians. And because R.H. cites Doctor Sibbs on the
Canticles, I also desire him and others to read his notes upon those words
Cant. 5.7, Page 298. who in those times he lived in, was not altogether
unsensible of the reproaches Gods people found then, even as we find now
abundantly, as if that Prophecy in Cant. 5.7. were now fulfilling. I will
deliver it in his own words at large: It should teach us, says he, not to
think the worse of any for the differences of the times; the watchmen (that
is, the Ministers, as he interprets it) here take away the veil of the Church,
and her forwardness is disgraced by them. And is it not so now? are not our
ways accounted mad zeal and whimseys, and does not R.H. call it new light?
dealing with us as those did with Saint Paul, Acts 17.19, 20. May we know what
this new Doctrine whereof thou speak is? for thou bring certain strange
things to our ears.

Doctor Sibbs says further, Take heed therefore we entertain not rash
conceits of others upon the entertainment they find abroad in the world, or
even among those that have a standing in the Church, for so we shall condemn
Christ himself, says he, how was he judged of the Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees in his time? and this has been the lot of the Church in all ages,
the true members thereof were called Heretic and Schismatics; and is it not
a matter of great zeal at this day, for many Ministers to raise at Gods
people, and call them Antinomians, Anabaptists, Separatists, etc. and such
reproachful terms to render them odious? Therefore says Doctor Sibbs
further, It is the poysinfull pride of man's heart, when it cannot raise it
self by its man worth, it will endeavor to raise it self by the ruin of
others credit, through lying slanders. The Devil was first a slanderer, and
liar, and then a murderer; he cannot murder, except he slander first, even as
those that kill a Dog, make the world believe that he was mad first, so they
always take away the credit of the faithful in the world, and then persecute
them, and so those watchmen that should encourage the godly, they smite and
wound them. To conclude, were it not for the just vindication of the Truth of
our selves and others, I would never have put Pen to Paper, but he has
compelled me, as Paul was in a like case by the Corinthians, to his just
vindication, 2 Cor. 12.11. says he, I am become a fool in glorying, ye have
compelled me for I ought to have been commended of you: And so St. Paul was
feign to go contrary to Solomon counsel, Pro. 27.2. and praise himself, to
vindicate both the Truth and himself.

A little further in Page 22. he says, They much desire and pray for (...).

Answ. I believe his desires and prayers are rather that we should return to
them and their ways, then to Christ; but certain it is, if he do pray for us,
either his praying for us will make him cease persecuting of us, or his
persecuting will make him cease praying for us.

He says, We further object, and bring many Scriptures to persuade people to
stand fast in the Truth they have been taught, but they have not been taught
the Truth, but have been taught a false and blind way by your Ministers.

He answers, It is a very false and scandalous imputation cast upon the
faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, for have they not taught us Jesus Christ,
that we are freely justified and saved by him alone.

I answer here, first R. H. labors to vindicate his faithful Ministers about
their Doctrine; It is very well I say, if they do teach free Justification and
Salvation by Christ alone: I can remember the time, since it was a rare thing
to hear free grace preached, especially in the practical part of Divinity. I
my self have heard delivered in London not long since at a Fast, that true
repentance and humiliation, was able to remove Gods judgments, which if it be
so, I marvel to what purpose Christ serves for? and one even of R. H. his
intimate companions, is not very well instructed in that point, for I have
heard him say diverse times not long since, that the more good works he did,
the greater glory he should have at last in Heaven, so laying the height of his
glory on the foundation of his good works, building this Babell on Nehe.
13.14. so that he may thank his good works at least, for the height of his
glory. But I would desire them to show me what measure of glory is given
freely, without any respect to works, and what glory is intailed to works?
But suppose it be granted they teach Jesus Christ more purely than formerly,
yet I have observed, that the men that were as he Goats, in the Doctrine of
Gods free grace and love, were as odious at the first, as ever Martin Luther
was in his time, yea, and still are too, many that remain of R. H. his mind,
for he does what he can to disgrace the teachers of it, still by his
Calumniations, as may plainly appear in his Book Page 9. and they can hardly
forbear bringing in Moses Law of works, in Moses way of administration,
whereas we are only under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. If it were not so,
why do they so rail against Gods people, under the name of Antinomians.

He says, We object and say your Ministers are Antichristian, for they were
called by an Antichristian power, there fore it is not lawful to hear them.
He answers, that must be proved first which you say, etc.

I answer, had R. H. been indeed but a True Guide, he would have been punctual
in proving this point especially, it being the chief point in difference
betwixt us, and the maine thing he aims at in his Book, as I said in the
beginning; but certain it is, the man was at a stand here, and was feign to be
of a good belief, and take things upon trust, and would have others do so too;
but observe the way he takes to prove the point, and to answer the objection;
he goes four ways, and all wrong, for he brings not one proof of Scripture
positively to prove his Ministers lawful. But

First, He puts us upon negative proofs.

Secondly, He compares them with other teachers.

Thirdly, By two fabulous similitudes of a Cook and a Clarke.

Fourthly, By answering three questions.

So that here is not one rule from Scripture to prove it, and so he makes
himself a seducer, in his first answer to the last question, Page 5. of his
Book Wherefore I answer: To the first of his four things I have in a sense
answered already, by declaring the necessity of a man's proving his practice
positively by Scripture, which holds forth a rule for all lawful practice, and
not to require negative proofs from others, for that is not Gods way.

To the second thing, where he compares them with other Teachers, I suppose he
means Teachers by virtue of Office, and so we have none of any higher calling
then R. H. when he himself teaches; but if he will rightly compare his
Ministers, to find whether they are Ministers of Christ, or of Antichrist, let
him go to Scripture-patterne for all inward and outward qualifications for
Christ's Ministers or Pastors, according to that, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to
the Testimony, if they walk not according to this rule, it is because there is
no light in them: For what the Prophet says of speaking, I may say of
practice: and 1 John 2.24. Let that therefore abide in you (to be practiced
certainly) which ye have heard from the beginning, if that abide in you which
ye have heard from the beginning, ye shall continue in the Son, and in the
Father; now this is a way without exception.

To his third thing, verily one similitude has as much authority as another;
therefore consider, that as it is not lawful for any person without commission
and authority from the King, to use and apply the Kings Seal to convey any
assurance in worldly matters, even so it is not lawful for any man having no
calling or commission from Christ, to take upon him the administration of such
Ordinances of Christ, that never were administered by any without such calling
and commission from Christ.

To his fourth, which is by asking three questions, to which I answer by asking
them other questions.

First, whether the inward call without the outward be sufficient? or whether
God joined not the inward and outward together to make it a sufficient call?

Secondly, Whether God allow of any calling besides his own, whether inward or
outward? and whether either of these allowed of by God, being corrupted,
whether then it be Gods or no?

Thirdly, Whether there be any difference betwixt a man that has a corrupt
calling to an Office not warranted by God, and a man that has no calling to an
Office? but suppose he that has a corrupt calling, and he that has no
calling, should preach by virtue of a true calling before they have it, should
I be guiltless, and yet constantly by my presence and practice allow of that
which God allows not of? should not I be guilty of all corrupt Officers
standing ever since the time of Antichrist? and so come under that Sentence of
Christ, Luke 11.48. Truly says he, ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds
of your Fathers: and does not a little leaven leaven the whole lump, being
unpurged, 1 Cor. 5 6, 7. or may some corruption be let alone unpurged, or may
we in some things be guilty of allowing the deeds of our Fathers, and not in
others?

To conclude, If men may remain lawful Ministers, notwithstanding their
corrupt calling from men, and cannot as R. H. says, corrupt the Word of God?
Whether are not they lawful Ministers that have their calling in the Church of
Rome, and so may lawfully be heard?

But mark how he reasons; Why, says he, were not Martin Luthers works
rejected but embraced.

Answ. Why? must R. H. needs be allowed a true Minister of those that embrace
his Book? Do but take notice here how he also labors to justify the Popish
calling which I made mention of, for Luther had his outward calling there.

Next he brings in Balaam a false Prophet, to prove a true Minister, Number.
23.21. but as Balaams speaking some truths from the mouth of the Lord made him
not a true Prophet, even so many truths delivered by others, does not make them
true Ministers; for Balaam had as good and better will to curse than to bless
Gods people, he was very desirous to make them miserable for filthy lucres
sake, even as there be many in these days too like Balaam in this, witness
their railing Books and Sermons against Gods people, as if they were unwilling
they should live in the world by them, but it is but the old Antichristian
practice. Rev. 15.17.

In his last Page he pleads earnestly for, and encourages people to the
Ministry of the Word, and so do I also, but that is not the difference betwixt
us; but our difference lies here; he would have people believe the true
Ministry to be no where else, but with them in their way, as if they only had
this open doors he speaks of, Rev. 3.8, 10.11.12. (he leaves out the 9. verse,
for fear it would have beat hard upon his quarters) but certainly the Word of
God in the public Ministry, as he calls it, neither came to them only, nor
from them only, 1 Cor. 14.36. Besides, he must first prove his Church and
Ministry to be the Philadelphian State, before he lay claim to the open door,
for that is the Philadelphian Churches promise, for each Church had its
peculiar promise, as may be seen, Rev. 2, 3. Chapters. And truly, I conceive
R. H. to be yet a stranger to the glory of this Philadelphian State, but I
desire that both he and I may see the right sense of that place, who they are
that God has or shall betrust with that open door, but sure I am, it is a
door to the new Jerusalem, and not the old, national, earthly one.

These things I thought good to return in answer to R. H. his True Guide, in
the behalf of our selves and others, for our just vindication, and desire the
Lord to indue him, and the rest of our opposites, with the spirit of Christian
wisdom, moderation, and peace, and for this purpose let them mind that
experimented Counsel of Gamaliel, Acts 5.35. Take heed to your selves what ye
intend to do as touching these men, and so ver. 38, 39. Refrain from these men
and let them alone, for if this Counsel or work be of men, it will come to
naught, but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, least happily ye be found
even to fight against God: Let them I say, consider these things, that so we
may live at peace by them, and they by us, until the God of peace, truth and
love draw up all the Saints to himself, in him who is truth it self, the Lord
Jesus, by a fuller making out of Truth so long obscured, that so we may become
one in Truth, and in the mean time one in peace and love; and this shall be
the constant desire of him, who earnestly follows after the enjoyment of Peace,
Truth and Love, in one Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

