THE CAMBRIDGE ROYALLIST Imprisoned.
It Was then, when as the Fame of Ruperts Force
Called the confiding Counties all to Horse,
And drew the Bacon-eating Cavaliers
(By the convenient Handle of their ears)
To leave their tough dunne Wives behind, and come
(Their Calve-skin Breeches turned into a Drum)
Tout-stinke our streets at Cambridge, when as I
(Being guilty found of too much honesty)
By two Malignants was, Conscience and Reason,
Betrayed t'an act of Virtue, now called Treason:
The Committee was straight informed; A youth,
With goodly goggle eyes, and large ^vry mouth,
Is sent for me. -- He knocks at Door: Who Is there?
A Friend; Duns, I deke you all, Come near!
The word scarce spoke, there comes one rushing in,
All armed with Ear, his B^^f^ was of the same skin*
What could One think this was? Some monstrous Creature,
Tanned, whilst it was alive, whose Visage Nature
Broached in the wrong place; Faith, I took't for a Man.
(Boldly I must confess) and thus began:
What would thou Friend, what brought thee to this place?
He answers me from the other side his face;
You Are a Malignant Sir, and Rebel, we
Are sent to fetch you to the Committee.
Good words my Friend; if you or I must be
A Rebel, I some hope of Comfort see,
Your Mouth does just in the hanging posture stand:
With that his Brows fierce bristles startled, and
I yield up, Sir, I Will go along with you:
Walk on; Nay leave me in the Chamber though,
Good Lord, you are all so complementall. Down
We go, and both marched up into the Town:
And which way now? Nay, good Sir keep the wall:
Excuse me, Sir; Nay as you live you shall:
Why it is the windy side, and credit me
Your strange perfumes make my head ache. Thus we
Marched to the Towne-Hall; where being straight ^et in,
Such company such smoke, such stink, such dinne,
Such swearing did salute me, that I fell
On wondering how we came up stayres to Hell,
For this could be no less; on every side
Such sawcer-eyes appeared such horrid, wide,
And gaping mouths, such teeth, such thorny hair,
Which you might see through the lantern of their ear,
So short, so strangely notcht, that you might know
It never had bin cut, but sindged so;
Beside each horne-pipe voice seemed to betray
Where good Saint Dunstans Tongs had spoyld the way:
Happy the men must fight with these, thought I,
For they shall nothing but their backs epsy.
Six Volley of Curses against the Scholars, here,
Went off for entertainment, and a Jeere.
Or two were past for Complement; but I,
Like a brave-suffering Man, passed silent by.
They spent themselves about me: One steps out,
And cries, Rupert's a Coward; all the Rout
Clap hands to the Basket-hilt, and Draw, then cry,
Oh that we had that Devil Rupert by.
Out ye damned Garlick-eating Rogues, Do You think
You don't already vent sufficient stink,
But you must call for one, whose very Name
Will dye your Scarffes and Breeches of the same?
Three redion; hours amongst these hell hounds we
Bravely en lured; when coming in we see
A spruce young Rebel, who scarce yet did know
Whether he fought against the King, or no;
Who had bin Scholar once (to our shame be it spoken)
Since a young Merchant, and since that time broken,
Now damned to the service of the Rebels: he
Proffered his utmost pains to set us free.
I, though it vexed me, any of them should
Do ought which even Complement might call good,
Yet had not so much valor to deny
Quarter, though from a Rebel, willingly
Accept his courteous offer; thinking then,
The greatest Good could befall innocent men,
Was to be soon accused: With that away
We went to the Bear, where then our Judges lay;
Where by the Captain we were brought before
A veryer Beast then that which hung at door,
A strange fat unlickt, bald-fac'd fellow, who
Was round all ore, head, face, back, belly too:
This thing was Knighted once, but into's skin,
Beside the tallow and guts, were crowded in
A Fool, a Knave, a Madman, in whose Rights
He since has styled himself not Knight, but Knights.
He having tuned his Pipes with six or seven
Good rattling Oaths, began to speak; Before Heaven
Gentlemen this is strange, By -- it is;
And if it were but my case as it is his,
(Meaning the Colonels) I Would hang you all:
For look you, Sir, if any Body shall
Abuse the Parliament, as some of you
May chance, and I have witness of it too,
Judge me, confound me, if you had but don't,
The best amongst you should hear further on it,
This Mooneling I did now perceive to be
A kind of Haselrigge to the Committee,
Only brought unto do he knew not what,
And gladly would have kept him out of that
Mad Wilderness of Nonsense, and began
To ask him, What the matter was? The man
Mad at this Interruption, tells us plain,
We all must back to the Court of Guard again;
The Devil sure (thought I) entered this Rogue
In the same humor that he did the Hog.
But obstinate he was, we all are sent
To the Hell from whence we came, and down we went.
But our spruce Youngster who before relieved us,
Now in the height of our Despair reprieved us,
And by stealth kept us in the House: the Mind
Of him who finding Gold, did leave behind
His Rope, was not so glad as ours; for here
We found a handsome Room, good wholesome Beero,
Some hopes of Supper too, nor did we lack
The promise of incomparable Sack.
And say thou so, my Lad? Let Us have it then;
Fill my Bowl full, you Rogue. Come Gentlemen,
A Health to our friends, and him above the rest,
Who Is meant by the Phillip and Clap upon the breast.
How now, who is drooping there? who dares be so
In the Kings Cause, and on the Kings day too?
Pox on it, it is scurvie; I Will tell thee, we shall bring
(When we are merry or lousy) for the King
As much of spirit as when we fight for him.
Come, here is to thee Jack,
It Is a Cup of good Sack,
Let the Plunderers come,
With their Fife and Drum,
Let in Bullet in the House,
We care not a Lowse,
I Will fill up my Cup,
And take it all up.
Then through their Chambers we will send such a Rattle,
Shall summon the Rogues in their Dreams to Battle;
And when we begin but our Voices to rear,
It shall strike such a terror in every Prick-eare,
That shall make the Roundheads
Leap out of their Beds,
And swear Prince Rupert's there.
What was it I began,
King Charles was the Man?
It Is he that must now
Claim just title too.
That gallant brave food
Of rich sparkling blood,
That Liquor must make,
Which now thou do take,
I tell thee 'twill bring such spirits to thee,
That shall in the face of a Rebel flee;
And entering in, without any control,
Shall find out that durtie thing called thy Soul,
And hunt it about,
Till they drive it out,
By the way most stinking and foul.
Come fill my Cup full,
Here Is to the taking of Hull,
To the Man that shall bring
The great Cuckold to the King,
To him that shall make
Northampton to quake,
To all that dare fight,
And dye with delight.
Then let them all come; what fear, thou Man?
Do but spend what thou have, let them take what they can:
And since that the Rogues with their Arms do endeavor
Our selves from our King and our Money to sever,
We Will send it by stealth,
In drinking his Health,
And give't him that way soever.
This Rapture ended, we see coming in
A good Man of the Tribe of Anakim;
A pretty beard-lesse Squire followed him nigh,
Being a Gigge of his, some seven foot high:
They tell us, Supper's coming up; we say,
Let it come up, ^'th' mean time drink away.
Supper being done, the mirth w'enjoy'd before
Returns continues some five hours, or more;
Mysterious Malignant Healths abound,
Which we by Signs and Characters put round;
The last of which Sm^^miniously went up,
Each Letter in the Name Christened a Cup.
And now a^ things conven^ent being done,
Our Brace of (...) Ho^ and Son,
Made very sleepie, out hea^ Captain sun^^,
Our Hostess kissed our gentle Keepers drunk,
A bri^^ing Cast gone round, to Bed we go,
And sleep like valiant Prisoners round^y too;
Our Martial Jaylors by us are laid all.
Drunk of the ground, dirt to dirt: in the Morn they call.
We lowse our selves, and rise, then go to be
Questioned by the Sanedrim in the Committee.
But here things prove quite contrary; No man
Can tell why we are brought there: We began
T'examine them, What was our fauit? Our foe.
The gentle Knight said, he did nothing know,
But that we might be honest: only apace
He swore that we were Rogues, and hanging was
Too good for us: Another starts, and says
We wore Kings Colors ( God so, Hide thy face,
Good fellow Prisoner, that pale reddish Blew
Will else betray us) Another swore, he knew
Each of us had a Pope in's belly; some
Said we drank Healths unto they knew not whom:
Our Keepers knew no hurt, unless 'thad bin
Drinking of Sack, honest Jack Falstaffes sin,
That could not any accusation bring,
(Though Royal Drink and Laquor for the King)
One said he thought that we Malignants were;
That very word made us to tarry there:
For now their Cabinet Counsel thought it fit
To keep us, till we should some Crime commit.
This vexed me (I confess) and to my thought
Some of my daily Meditations brought.
Curse on your Parliament Justice; I did know
This was your way, and I have felt it now:
Alas, we know your arbitrarie hate
Is grown to be both our Ste^ne Law and Fate;
We know how often you are forced the Name to change,
And what you cannot call Punishment, is Revenges
If you do hap to light on a confessed
Offender, it is but Fortune at the best.
To be thought honest Men, is to betray
Our selves and fortunes (an unluckie pray)
To your vast cruel Avarice: We know
What horrid ills you must hereafter do,
By Sequestration and Proscriptions; Crimes
Which shall absolve the Irish in aftertimes.
Oh may these Wrongs sit heavy on you, when
You meet the King in the Field; May your Ills then
Stick fast and strongly to you on all parts.
And send a ghastly trembling through your hearts;
May you then think of GOD, and p^^us grow,
And then Despair prove Cowardice in you;
Be your own Sp'rites amongst you, to possess
Your Coward hearts with thoughts of gu^ltinesse,
And fear of Vengeance: May each good man's prayer,
Whom you have wronged, fly strong against you there;
And your miraculous Misfortunes bring
You to confess, you fight against the King.
And sure we shall at last our wishes gain,
So vigorous hatred cannot be in vain:
If Murder, Rapine, and Injustice be
Enough t'orewhelme you, sure these eyes shall see
Your Villainies unmaskt, and you so low
And poor, that even my self shall pity you.
And thou my Knight, whom a more sordid Fate
Has made below so strong, and fierce a hate,
My venerable Judge, to whom I owe
Six L^ce and my Imprisonment, shall grow
More famous now (if ought my Verses can,
Or those my Friends can make) thou shall b'a Man
Greater then Fate has made thee (if Ballets be
But capable of Immortality)
Children and Market-maids in aftertimes
Shall see thee dressed in most vile Tunes, and Rimes,
And Alehouses as yet not built, shall see
Thy Picture pasted on their Mantle-tree:
Nere look to dye, thou shall be laughed at still,
Longer then Nashos Harvy, or Triplets Gill.
FINIS.
Sent from the same Scholar from Cambridge, whose name is R. B. to his Royal
friend at Oxford, T. S.


