POEMS: BY FRANCIS BEAVMONT, Gent.

Viz. The Hermaphrodite. The Remedy of Love. Elegies. Sonnets, with other
Poems.


LONDON, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at his Shop near
the middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street. 1653.

TO THE Right Worshipful, the worthily honored, ROBERT PARKHURST Esquire
Were these but worthless Poems, or light Rimes,
Writ by some common scribler of the Times,
Without your leave I durst not then engage
You, to ennoble 'em by your patronage;
But these though Orphans, and left Fatherless,
Their rich endowments show they do possess
A Fathers blessing; whom the Fates thought fit
To make a Master of a Mine of wit:
Whose ravishing conceits do tower so high,
As if his Quill had dropped from Mercury:
But when his fancy chanced of love to sing,
You Would swear his Pen were plumed from Cupids wing;
He does an amorous passion so discover,
As if (save Beaumont) none had ere been Lover;
Some praise a manly bounty, some incline
More to applaud the virtues feminine;
Some several graces in both Sexes hid,
But only Beaumont's, he alone that did
By a rare stratagem of wit connex
What Is choice and excellent in either Sex.
Then cherish (Sir) these Saplings, whose each strain,
Speaks them the issue of brave Beaumonts brain;
Which made me thus dare to prefix your name,
Which will, if ought can, add unto their fame.
I am, Sir, Your most humble and devoted Servant, L. B.

To the true Patroness of all Poetry, CALIOPE.
IT is a statute in deep wisdoms lore,
That for his lines none should a Patron choose,
By wealth or poverty, by less or more,
But who the same is able to peruse:
Nor ought a man his labor dedicate,
Without a true and sensible desert,
To any power of such a mighty state:
But such a wise defendresse as thou art;
Thou great and powerful Muse, then pardon me,
That I presume thy maiden cheek to stain,
In dedicating such a work to thee,
Sprung from the issue of an idle brain:
I use thee as a woman ought to be,
I consecrate my idle hours to thee.
F. B.

In laudem Authoris.
LIke to the weak estate of a poor friend,
To whom sweet fortune has been ever slow,
Which daily does that happy hour attend,
When his poor state may his affection show:
So fares my love, not able as the rest,
To chant thy praises in a lofty vain;
Yet my poor Muse, does vow to do her best,
And wanting wings, she will tread an humble strain;
I thought at first her homely steps to raise,
And for some blazing Epethites to look:
But then I feared that by such wondrous praise,
Some men would grow suspicious of thy book:
For he that does thy due deserts rehearse,
Derives that glory from thy worthy verse.
W. B.

To the Author.
EIther the goddess draws her troops of loves
From Paphos, where she erst was held divine,
And does unyoke her tender necked doves,
Placing her seat in this small pap'ry shrine;
Or the sweet graces through the Idalian grove,
Led the best Author in their danced rings;
Or wanton Nymphs inwatry bowers have wove,
With fair Mylesian threads, the verse he sings;
Or curious Pallas once again does strive
With proud Arachue, for illustrious glory,
And once again does loves of Gods revive,
Spinning in silver twists a lasting story:
If none of these then Venus chose his sight,
To lead the steps of her blind son aright.
J. B.

To the Author.
THe matchless lust of a fair Poefie,
Which was erst buried in old Romes decaies;
Now 'gins with heat of rising Majesty,
Her dust wrapped head from rotten Tomb to raise,
And with fresh splendour gilds her fearelesse crest,
Rearing her Palace in our Poets breast.
The wanton Ovid, whose intising rimes
Have with attractive wonder forced attention
No more shall be admired at: for these times
Produce a Poet, whose more rare invention,
Will tear the lovesick Myrtle from his brows,
TO adorn his Temple with deserved boughs.
The strongest Marble fears the smallest rain,
The rusting canker eats the purest gold;
Honors best dye dreads envies blackest stain,
The crimson badge of beauty must wax old:
But this fair issue of thy fruitful brain,
Nor dreads age, envy, cankring, rust or rain,
J. B.

The Author to the Reader.
I Sing the fortune of a lucklesse Pair,
Whose spotless souls now in one body be;
For Beauty still is Prodromus to care,
Crossed by the sad stars of nativity:
And of the strange enchantment of a well.
Given by the Gods; my sportive Muse does write,
Which sweet lip'd Ovid long ago did tell,
Wherein who baths straight turns Hermaphrodite:
I hope my Poem is so lively writ,
That thou will turn half mad with reading it.
To Mr FRANCIS BEAUMONT (then living.)
HOw I do love thee BEAUMONT, and thy Muse,
That unto me do such Religion use!
How I do fear my self, that am not worth
The least indulgent thought thy Pen drops forth!
At once thou make me happy, and unmak'st;
And giving largely to me, more thou take.
What fate is mine, that so it self bereaves?
What art is thine, that so thy friend deceives?
When even there where most thou praisest me,
For writing better, I must envy thee.
BEN. JOHNSON.

Upon M. FLETCHERS Incomparable Plays.
APollo sings, his harp resounds; give room,
For now behold the golden Pomp is come,
Thy Pomp of Plays which thousands come to see,
With admiration both of them and thee.
O Volume worthy leaf, by leaf and cover
To be with juice of Cedar washed all over;
Here Is words with lines, and lines with Scenes consent,
To raise an Act to full astonishment;
Here melting numbers, words of power to move
Young men to swoone, and Maids to dye for love.
Love lies a bleeding here, Evadne there
Swells with brave rage, yet comely every where:
Here Is a mad lover, there that high design
Of King and no King, (and the rare Plot thine)
So that when e're we circumvolve our Eyes;
Such rich, such fresh, such sweet varieties,
Ravish our spirits, that entranc't we see
None writes lov's passion in the world like Thee.
ROB. HERRICK.

To the Memory of the incomparable Pair of Authors, Beaumont and Fletcher.
GReat pair of Authors, whom one equal star
Begot so like in Genius, that you are
In fame, as well as writings, both so knit,
That no man knows where to divide your Wit,
Much less your praise; you, who had equal fire,
And did each other mutually inspire;
Whether one did contrive, the other write,
Or one framed the Plot, the other did indite;
Whether one found the matter, the other Dress,
Or the one disposed what the other did express;
Where e're your parts between your selves lay, we,
In all things which you did, but one thread see,
So evenly drawn out, so gently spun,
That Art with Nature never did smoother run.
Where shall I fix my praise then? or what part
Of all your numerous Labors has desert
More to be framed than other? shall I say,
I Have met a Lover so drawn in your Play,
So passionately written, so inflamed,
So jealously enraged, then gently tamed,
That I in reading have the Person seen,
And your Pen has part Stage, and Actor been?
Or shall I say, that I can scarce forbear
To clap, when I a Captain do meet there;
So lively in his own vain humor dressed,
So braggingly, and like himself expressed,
That Modern Cowards, when they saw him played,
Saw, blushed, departed guilty, and betrayed?
You wrote all parts right; what soever the Stage
Had from you, was seen there as in the Age,
And had their equal life: Vices which were
Manners abroad, did grow corrected there:
They who poss^ss'd a box, and half Crown spent
To learn obscenenes, returned innocent;
And thanked you for this coz'nage, whose chaste Scene
Taught loves so Noble, so reformed, so clean;
That they who brought foul fires, and thither came
To bargain, went thence with a holy flame.
Be It to your praise too, that your Stock and vein
Held both to Tragic and to Comic strain;
Where e're you listed to be high and grave,
No Busk in showed more solid, no quill gave
Such feeling objects to draw tears from eyes,
Spectators sat part in your Tragedies.
And where you lifted to be low, and free,
Mirth turned the whole house into Comedy;
So piercing (where you pleased) hitting a fault,
That humors from your Pen issued all salt.
Nor were you thus in works and Poems knit,
As to be but two halfes, and make one wit;
But as some things we see have double cause,
And yet the effect it self, from both whole draws:
So though you were thus twisted and combined
As two bodies, to have but one fair mind;
Yet if we praise you rightly, we must say
Both joy'nd, and both did wholly make the Play:
For that you could write singly, we may guess
By the divided pieces, which the Press
Has severally set forth; nor were gone so
(Like some our Modern Authors) made to go
On merely by the help of the other, who
To purchase fame do come forth one of Two;
Nor wrote you so, that ones part was to lick
The other into shape, nor did one stick
The others cold Inventions with such wit,
As served like spice, to make them quick and fit;
Nor out of mutual want, or emptiness,
Did you conspire to go still Twins to the Press:
But what thus joined you wrote, might have come forth
As good from each, and stored with the same worth
That thus united them, you did join sense;
In you 'twas League, in others Impotence;
And the Press which both thus amongst us sends,
Sends us one Poet in a Pair of Friends.
On the happy Collection of Beaumont's and Fletcher's Works.
FLETCHER arise, Usurpers share thy Bays,
They Canton thy vast Wit to build small Plays:
He comes! his Volume breaks through clouds and dust,
Down, little Wits, Ye must refund, Ye must.
Nor comes he private, here is great BEAUMONT too,
How could one single World encompasse Two?
For these Co-heires had equal power to teach
All that all Wits both can and cannot reach.
Shakespeare was early up, and went so dressed.
As for those dawning hours he knew was best;
But when the Sun shone forth, You two thought fit
To wear just Robes, and leave off Trunk-hose-Wit.
Now, now 'twas Perfect; None must look for Now,
Manners and Scenes may alter, but not You;
For Yours are not mere Humors, gilded strains;
The Fashion lost, Your massy Sense remains.
Some think Your Wit's of two Complexions framed,
That One the Sock, the Other the Buskin claimed;
That should the Stage embattaile all its Force,
FLETCHER would lead the foot, BEAUMONT the horse.
But, you were Both for Both; not Semi-wits,
Each Piece is wholly Two, yet never splits:
Y' are not Two Faculties (and one Soul still)
He the Understanding, Thou the quick free Will;
But, as two Voices in one Song embrace,
( FLETCHER'S keen Trebble, and deep BEAUMONTS Base)
Two, full, Congeniall Souls; still both poevail'd;
His Muse and Thine were Quartered, not Impaled:
Both brought Your Ingots, Both toiled at the Mint,
Beat, melted, sifted, till no dross stuck in it;
Then in each Others scales weighed every grain;
Then smoothed and burnished, then weighed all again;
Stamped Both your Names upon it at one bold Hit,
Then, then 'twas Coin, as well as Bullion- Wit.
Thus Twinns: But as when Fate one Eye deprives,
That other strives to double which survives:
So BEAUMONT died: yet left in Legacy
His Rules, and Standard-wit (FLETCHER) to Thee.
Still the same Planet, though not filled so soon,
A Two-horn'd Crescent then, now one Full-Moon.
Joint Love before, now Honor does provoke;
So the old Twin- Giants forcing a huge Oak,
One slipped his footing, the other sees him fall,
Grasped the whole Tree, and single held up all.
Imperial FLETCHER! here begins thy Reign,
Scenes flow like Sunbeams from thy glorious Brain;
Thy swift dispatching Soul no more does stay,
Than he that built two Cities in one day;
Ever brim-full, and sometimes running over,
To feed poor languid Wits that wait at door;
Who creep, and creep, yet never above-ground stood,
(For Creatures have most Feet which have least Blood)
But thou art still that Bird of Paradise
Which has no feet, and ever nobly flies:
Rich, lusty Sense, such as the Poet ought;
For Poems, if not Excellent, are Naught;
Low wit in Scenes, in state a Peasant goes;
If mean and flat, let it foot Yeoman Prose,
That such may spell as are not Readers grown,
To whom He that writes Wit, shows he has none.
Brave Shakespeare flowed, yet had his Ebbings too,
Often above Himself, sometimes below;
Thou always Best; if ought seemed to decline,
'Twas the unjudging Rout's mistake, not thine:
Thus thy fair SHEPHERDESS, which the bold Heap
(False to Themselves and Thee) did prize so cheap,
Was found (when understood) fit to be Crowned,
At worst 'twas worth Two hundred thousand pound.
Some blast thy Works, lest we should track their Walk
Where they steal all those few good things they talk;
Wit-Burglary must chide those it feeds on,
For Plundered folks ought to be railed upon;
But (as stolen goods go off at half their worth)
Thy strong Sense pall's when they purloine it forth.
When did Thou borrow? where is the man e're read,
Ought begged by Thee from those Alive or Dead?
Or from dry Goddesses, as some who when
They stuff their page with Gods, write worse than Men.
Thou was it thine own Muse, and had such vast odds,
Thou out-writt'st him whose verse made all those Gods:
Surpassing those our Dwarfish Age upreares,
As much as Greeks or Latins thee in years:
The Ocean Fancy knew nor Banks nor Damms,
We ebb down dry to pebble- Anagrams;
Dead and insipid, all despairing sit,
Lost to behold this great Relapse of Wit:
What strength remains, is like that (wild and fierce)
Till Johnson made good Poets and right Verse.
Such boyst'rous Trifles Thy Muse would not brook
Save when she would show how scurvily they look;
No savage Metaphors (things rudely Great)
Thou do display, not butcher a Conceit;
Thy Nerves have Beauty, which Invades and Charms;
Looks like a Princess harnessed in bright Arms.
Nor art Thou Loud and Cloudy; those that do
Thunder so much, do it without Lightning too;
Tearing themselves, and almost split their brain
To render harsh what thou speak free and clean;
Such gloomy Sense may pass for High and Proud,
But true-born Wit still flies above the Cloud;
Thou knewst 'twas Impotence what they call Height;
Who blusters strong in the Dark, but creeps in the Light.
And as thy thoughts were clear, so, Innocent;
Thy Fancy gave no unswept Language vent;
Slaunder'st not Laws, prophan'st no holy Page,
(As if thy Fathers Crosier awed the Stage;)
High Crimes were still arraigned, though they made shift
To prosper out four Acts, were plagued in the fifth:
All Is safe and wise; no stiffe-affected Scene,
Nor swollen, nor flat, a True Full Natural vein;
Thy Sense (like well-drest Ladies) clothed as skinn'd,
Not all unlac'd, nor City-startcht and pinned;
Thou had no Sloth, no rage, no sullen Fit,
But Strength and Mirth, FLETCHER'S a Sanguin Wit.
Thus, two great Consul-Poets all things swayed,
Till all was English Borne, or English Made:
Miter and Coyfe here into One Piece spun,
BEAUMONT a Judge's, This a Prelat's Son.
What strange Production is at last displaid,
(Got by Two Fathers, without Female aid)
Behold, two Masculines espoused each other,
Wit and the World were born without a Mother.
I. BERKENHEAD.

Salmacis and Hermaphroditus: OR The Hermaphrodite.
MY wanton lines do treat of Amorous love,
Such as would bow the hearts of Gods above.
Thou Venus our great Citheraean Queen,
That hourly trip'st on the Idalian green;
Thou laughing Ericina daigne to see
These verses wholly consecrate to thee:
Temper them so within thy Paphian shrine,
That every lovers eye may melt a line;
Command the god of love, that little king,
To give each verse a slight touch with his wing;
That as I write, one line may draw the other,
And every word skip nimbly over another.
There was a lovely Boy the Nymphs had kept,
That on the Idalian Mountains often had slept,
Begot and born by powers that dwelt above,
By learned Mercury on the Queen of love.
A face he had that showed his Parents fame,
And from them both conjoined he drew his name;
So wondrous fair he was, that (as they say)
Diana being bunting on a day,
She saw the Boy upon a green bank lay him,
And there the virgin huntresse meant to slay him;
Because no Nimphs would now pursue the chase,
For all were struck blind with the wantons face.
But when that beauteous face Diana saw,
Her arms were nummed, and she could not draw,
Yet did she strive to shoot, but all in vain,
She bent her bow, but loosed it straight again:
Then she began to chide her wanton eye,
And feign would shoot, but durst not see him dye:
She turned and shot, but did of purpose miss him,
She turned again and could not choose but kiss him;
Then the Boy ran: for some say had he staid,
Diana had no longer been a maid:
Phoebus so doted on this rosiat face,
That he has often stolen closly from his place,
When he did lie by fair Leucothoes side,
To dally with him in the vales of I Would.
And ever since this lovely boy did dye,
Phoebus each day about the world does fly,
And on the earth he seeks him all the day,
And every night he seeks him in the sea:
His cheeks were sanguine, and his lips were red,
As are the blushing leaves of the Rose spread;
And I have heard that till this Boy was born,
Roses grew white upon the virgin thorn;
'Till one day walking to a pleasant spring,
To hear how cunningly the birds could sing,
Laying him down upon a flowery bed,
The Roses blush't and turned themselves to red:
The rose that blush't, not for his great offense,
The gods did punish, and for's impudence
They gave this doom, and 'twas agreed by all,
The smell of the white rose should be but small.
His hair was bushie, bur it was not long,
The Nimphs had alone his tresses mighty wrong;
For as it grew they pulled away his hair,
And made habiliments of gold to wear:
His eyes were Cupids, for until his birth
Cupid had eyes, and lived upon the earth;
Till on a day when the great Queen of love
Was by her white doves drawn from heaven above,
Unto the top of the Idalian hill,
To see how well the Nymphs her charge fulfill,
And whether they had done the goddess right
In nursing of her sweet Hermaphrodite;
Whom when she saw, (although complete and full)
Yet she complained his eyes were somewhat dull:
And therefore more the wanton boy to grace,
She pulled the sparkling eyes from Cupid's face,
Faining a cause to take away his sight,
Because the Ape would sometimes shoot for spite:
But Venus set those eyes in such a place,
As graced those clear eyes with a clearer face;
For his white hand each goddess did him woo,
For it was whiter than the driven snow;
His leg was straighter than the thigh of Jove,
And he far fairer than the god of love.
When first this well shaped boy, beauties chief king,
Had seen the labor of the fifteenth spring,
How curiously it painted all the earth,
He 'gan to travel from his place of birth,
Leaving the stately hills where he was nursed,
And where the Nymphs had brought him up at first;
He loved to travel unto coasts unknown,
To see the Regions far beyond his own,
Seeking clear watery springs to bath him in,
For he did love to wash his Ivory skin.
The lovely Nymphs have often times seen him swim,
And closely stolen his clothes from off the brim,
Because the wanton wenches would so feign
See him come naked to ask his clothes again;
He loved besides to see the Lician grounds,
And know the wealthy Carians utmost bounds.
Using to travel thus, one day he found
A Crystal brook that tril'd along the ground;
A brook that in reflection did surpass
The clear reflection of the clearest glass;
About the side there grew no foggy reeds,
Nor was the front compast with barren weeds,
But living turfe grew all along the side,
And grass that ever flourished in his pride;
Within this brook a beauteous Nymph did dwell,
Who for her comely feature did excel;
So fair she was, of such a pleasing grace,
So straight a body, and so sweet a face,
So soft a belly, such a lusty thigh,
So large a forehead, such a cristall eye,
So soft and moist a hand, so smooth a breast,
So fair a cheek, so well in all the rest:
That Jupiter would revell in her bower
Were he to spend again his golden shower.
Her teeth were whiter than the Morning-milk,
Her lips were softer than the softest silk,
Her hair as far surpast the burnished gold,
As silver does excel the basest mold;
Jove courted her for her transluent eye,
And told her he would place her in the sky;
Promising her if she would be his love,
He would ingrave her in the heavens above:
Telling this lovely Nymph, that if he would,
He could deceive her in a shower of gold;
Or like a swan come to her naked bed,
And so deceive her of her Maidenhead.
But yet because he thought that pleasure best
Where each consenting joines each loving breast,
He would put off that all commanding crown,
Whose terror stroke the aspiring Giants down;
That glittering crown whose radiant fight did toss
Great Pelion from the top of mighty Osse:
He would depose from his world-swaying head
To taste the amarous pleasure of her bed;
This added, he besides the more to grace her,
Like a bright star he would in heaven's vault place her.
By this the proud lascivious Nymph was moved,
Perceiving that by great Jove she was loved:
And hoping as a star she should e're long
Be stern or gracious to the sea-man's song,
(For mortals still are subject to the eye,
And what it sees they strive to get as high)
She was contented that almighty Jove
Should have the first and best fruits of her love;
For women may be likned to the year,
Whose first fruits still do make the daintiest cheer.
But yet Astraea first should plight her troath,
For the performance of Jove's sacred oath;
Just times decline, and all good days are dead,
When heavenly oaths had need be warranted.
This heard great Jupiter and liked it well,
And hastily he seeks Astraeas cell,
About the massy earth searching her tower;
But she had long since left this earthly bower,
And flew to heaven above, loathing to see
The sinful actions of humanity:
Which when Jove did perceive, he left the earth,
And flew up to the place of his own birth;
The burning heavenly throne, where he did spy
Astraeas palace in the glittering sky.
This stately tower was builded up on high,
Far from the reach of any mortal eye;
And from the Palace side there did distill
A little water through a little quill,
The dew of justice which did seldom fall,
And when it dropped, the drops were very small:
Glad was great Jove, when he beheld her tower,
Meaning a while to rest him in her bower;
And therefore sought to enter at her door,
But there was such a busy rout before;
(Some serving-men, and some promooters be,)
That he could pass no foot without a fee:
But as he goes he reaches out his hands,
And paies each one in order as he stands,
And still as he was paying those before.
Some slipped again betwixt him and the door;
At length (with much ado) he past them all,
And entering straight into a spacious hall,
Full of dark angles and of hidden ways,
Crooked Meanders, infinite delays,
All which delays and entries he must pass
E're he could come where just Astraea was:
All these being past by his immortal wit,
Without her door he saw a Porter fit,
An aged man that long time there had been,
Who used to search all those that entered in,
And still to every one he gave this curse,
None must see justice but with empty purse.
This man searched Jove for his own private gain,
To have the money which did yet remain,
Which was but small, for much was spent before
On the tumultuous rout that kept the door;
When he had done he brought him to the place
Where he might see divine Astraea's face,
There the great king of gods and men in went,
And saw his daughter Venus there lament,
And crying loud for justice, whom Jove found
Kneeling before Astraea on the ground,
And still she cried and begged for a just doom
Against black Vulcan, that unseemely groom,
Whom she had chosen for her only love,
Though she was daughter to great thundering Jove;
And though the fairest goddess, yet content
To marry him though weak and impotent:
But for all this they always were at strife,
For evermore he railed at her his wife,
Telling her still thou art no wife of mine,
Another Strumpet, Mars his concubine.
By this Astraeae spied almighty Jove,
And bowed her finger to the Queen of love,
To cease her suit which she would hear anon,
When the great King of all the world was gone;
Then she descended from her stately throne,
Which seat was builded all of Jasper stone,
And over the seat was painted all above
The wanton unseene stealths of amorous Jove.
There might a man behold the naked pride
Of lovely Venus in the Vale of I Would,
When Pallas and Joves beauteous wife and she
Strove for the prise of beauties rarity,
And there lame Vulcan and his Cyclops strove
To make the thunderbolt for mighty Jove;
From this same stately throne she down descended,
And said the griefs of Jove should be amended,
Asking the King of gods what lucklesse cause,
What great contempt of state, what breach of laws,
(For sure she thought some uncouth cause befell
That made him visit poor Astraea's cell)
Troubled his thoughts, and if she might decide it
Who vexed great Jove full dearly should abide it:
Jove only thanked her, and began to show
His cause of coming, (for each one does know
The longing words of lovers are not many
If they desire to be enjoyed of any,)
Telling Astraea, it would now befall
That she might make him blessed that blesses all:
For as he walked upon the flowery earth,
To which his own hands whilome gave a birth,
To see how straight he held it, and how just
He ruled this massy pondrous heap of dust:
He laid him down by a cool rivers side,
Whose pleasant water did so gently slide,
With such soft whispering, for the brook was deep,
That it had lulled him in a heavenly sleep.
When first he laid him down there was none near him,
(For he did call before, but none could hear him,)
But a fair Nymph was bathing when he waked,
(Here sight great Jove, and after brought forth) naked
He seeing loved the Nymph, yet here did rest
Where just Astraea might make Jove be blessed,
If she would pass her faithful word so far
As that great Jove should make the maid a star;
Astraea yielded, at which Jove was pleased,
And all his longing hopes and fears were eased,
Jove took his leave and parted from her fight,
Whose thoughts were full of lovers sweet delight;
And she ascended to the throne above,
To hear the griefs of the great Queen of love:
But she was satisfied, and would no more
Rail at her husband as she did before;
But forth she tript apace, because she strove
With her swift feet to overtake great Jove;
She skipt so nimbly as she went to look him,
That at the Palace door she overtook him;
The way was plain and broad as they went out,
And now they could see no tumultuous rout.
Here Venus fearing lest the love of Jove
Should make this maid be placed in heaven above;
Because she thought this Nymph so wondrous bright
That she would dazell her accustomed light,
And fearing now she should not first be seen
Of all the glittering stars as she had been;
But that the wanton Nymph would every night
Be first that should salute each mortal sight,
Began to tell great Jove she grieved to see
The heaven so full of his iniquity:
Complaining that each strumpet now was graced,
And with immortal goddesses was placed,
Entreating him to place in heaven no more
Each wanton strumpet, and lascivious whore.
Jove, mad with love, minded not what she said,
His thoughts were so entangled with the maid:
But furiously he to his Palace lept,
Being minded there till morning to have slept.
For the next morn so soon as Phoebus rays
Should yet shine cool by reason of the seas,
And e're the parting tears of Thetis bed
Should be quite shak'd from off his glittering head,
Astraea promised to attend great Jove
At his own Palace in the heavens above,
And at that Palace she would set her hand
To what the lovesick god should her command:
But to descend to earth she did deny,
She loathed the sight of any mortal eye,
And for the compass of the earthly round
She would not set one foot upon the ground:
Therefore Jove meant to rise but with the sun,
Yet thought it long until the night was done.
In the mean space Venus was drawn along
By her white doves unto the sweating throng
Of hammering blacksmiths at the lofty hill
Of stately Aetna, whose top burns still;
For at that mountains glittering top
Her cripple husband Vulcan kept his shop;
To him she went, and so collogues that night
With the best strains of pleasures sweet delight,
That ere they parted she made Vulcan swear
By dreadful Styx, (an oath that gods do fear)
If Jove would make the mortal maid a star,
Himself should frame his instruments of war:
He took his oath by black Cocytus lake
He never more a thunderbolt would make;
For Venus so this night his senses pleased,
That now he thought his former griefs were eased,
She with her hands the blacksmiths body bound,
And with her Ivory arms she twined him round,
And still the fair Queen with a pretty grace
Dispersed her sweet breath over his swarthy face;
Her snowy arms so well she did display,
That Vulcan thought they melted as they lay,
Until the morn in this delight they lay.
Then up they got and hasted fast away
In the white Chariot of the Queen of love,
Toward the Palace of great thundering Jove:
Where they did see divine Astraea stand
To pass her word for what Jove should command;
In limp'd the blacksmith, after stepped his Queen,
Whose light arraiment was of lovely green:
When they were in, Vulcan began to swear
By oaths that Jupiter himself does fear,
If any whore in heavens bright vault were seen,
To dim the shining of his beauteous Queen,
Each mortal man should the great god disgrace,
And mock almighty Jove unto his face:
And Giants should enforce bright heaven to fall
Ere he would frame one thunderbolt at all;
Jove did entreat him that he would forbear,
The more he spoke the more did Vulcan swear.
Jove heard the words and 'gan to make his moan,
That mortal men would pluck him from his throne,
Or else he must incur this plague he said,
Quite to forgo the pleasure of the maid;
And once he thought rather than lose those blisses,
Her heavenly sweets her most delicious kisses,
Her soft embraces, and the amorous nights,
That he should often spend in her delights,
He would be quite thrown down by mortal hands
From the blessed place where his bright palace stands:
But afterward he saw with better sight,
He should be scorned by every mortal wight,
If he should want his thunderbolts to beat
Aspiring mortals from his glittering seat;
Therefore the god no more did woe or move her,
But left to seek her love, though not to love her:
Yet he forgot not that he wooed the Less,
But made her twice as beauteous as she was,
Because his wonted love he needs would show.
This have I heard, but yet not thought it true;
And whether her clear beauty was so bright,
That it could dazzle the immortal sight
Of Gods, and make them for her love despair,
I do not know, but sure the maid was fair:
Yet the fair Nymph was never seen resort
Unto the savage and the bloody sport
Of chaste Diana, nor was ever wont
To bend a bow, nor never used to hunt;
Nor did she ever strive with pretty cunning
To overgo her fellow Nymphs in running:
For she was the fair water-Nymph alone,
That unto chaste Diana was unknown.
It is reported that her fellows used
To bid her (though the beauteous Nymph refused)
To take a painted quiver, or a dart,
And put her lazy idleness apart.
But she would none but in the fountains swims,
Where often she washes over her snowy limbs;
Sometimes she combed her soft dishevelled hair,
Which with a fillet tied she often did wear;
But sometimes loose she let it hang behind,
When she was pleased to grace the Eastern wind,
For up and down it would her tresses hurl,
And as she went it made her loose hair curle:
Often in the water did she see her face,
And often she used to practice what quaint grace
Might well become her, and what comely feature
Might be best fitting so divine a creature.
Her skin was with a thin veil over-thrown,
Through which her naked beauty clearly shone;
She used in this light raiment as she was
To spread her body on the dewy grass:
Sometimes by her own fountains as she walks
She nipt the flowers from off the fertile stalks,
And with a garland of the sweating vine
Sometimes she does her beauteous front entwine;
But she was gathering flowers with her white hand,
When she beheld Hermaphroditus stand
By her clear fountain wondering at the sight,
That there was any brook could be so bright,
For this was the bright river where the boy
Did dye himself, that he could not enjoy
Himself in pleasure, nor could taste the blisses
Of his own-melting and delicious kisses.
Here did she see him, and by Venus law
She did desire to have him as she saw:
But the fair Nymph had never seen the place
Where the boy was, nor his enchanting face;
But but by an uncouth accident of love
Betwixt great Phoebus and the son of Jove,
(Lightheaded Bacchus) for upon a day
As the boy-god was keeping on his way,
Bearing his vine-leaves and his Ivy bands
To Naxos, where his house and Temple stands,
He saw the Nymph, and seeing he did stay,
And threw his leaves and his Ivy bands away,
Thinking at first she was of heavenly birth,
Some goddess that did live upon the earth;
Virgin Diana that so lovely shone
When she did court her sweet Endimion;
But he a god, at last did plainly see
She had no mark of Immortality:
Unto the Nymph went the young god of wine,
Whose head was chafed so with the bleeding vine,
That now, or fear, or terror had he none,
But 'gan to court her as she sat alone;
Fairer than fairest (thus began his speech)
Would but your radiant eye please to enrich
My eye with looking, or one glance to give
Whereby my other parts may feed and live,
Or with one sight my senses to enspire,
Far livelier than the stolen Promethean fire;
Then might I live, then by the sunny light
That should proceed from thy chief radiant sight
I might survive to ages, but that missing,
(At that same word he would have fain been kissing)
I pine (fair Nymph.) O never let me dye
For one poor glance from thy translucent eye,
Far more transparent than the clearest brook;
The Nymph was taken with his golden hook,
Yet she turned back and would have tript away,
But Bacchus forced the lovely maid to stay,
Asking her why she strugled to be gone,
Why such a Nymph should wish to live alone;
Heaven never made her fair that she should vaunt
She kept all beauty, yet would never grant
She should be borne so beatious from her mother,
But to reflect her beauty on another:
Then with a sweet kiss cast thy beams on me,
And I Will reflect them back again on thee.
At Naxos stands my Temple and my shrine,
Where I do press the lusty swelling Vine;
There with green Ivy shall thy head be bound,
And with the red grape be incircled round;
There shall Silenus sing unto thy praise
His drunken reeling songs and tippling lays.
Come hither gentle Nymph: here blushed the maid,
And feign she would have gone, but yet she staid.
Bacchus perceived he had overcome the Less,
And down he throws her in the dewy grass,
And kissed the helpless Nymph upon the ground,
And would have strai'd beyond that lawful bound.
This saw bright Phoebus, for his glittering eye
Sees all that lies below the starry sky:
And for an old affection that he bore
Unto this lovely Nymph long time before,
(For he would often times in his circle stand,
And sport himself upon her snowy hand:)
He kept her from the sweets of Bacchus bed,
And against her will he saved her maidenhead.
Bacchus perceiving this apace, did hie
Unto the Palace of swift Mercury;
But he did find him far below his birth,
Drinking with thieves and Catchpoles on the earth,
And they were parting what they stole to day,
In consultation for to morrows prey;
To him went youthful Bacchus, and begun
To show his cause of grief against the Sun,
How he bereft him of his heavenly blisses,
His sweet delight, his Nectar-flowing kisses,
And other sweeter sweets, that he had won
But for the malice of the bright faced Sun;
Entreating Mercury by all the love
That had him born amongst the sons of Jove,
(Of which they two were part) to stand his friend
Against the God that did him so offend;
The quaint tongued issue of great Atlas race,
Swift Mercury, that with delightful grace,
And pleasing accents of his feigned tongue,
Has often reformed a rude uncivil throng
Of Mortals, that great messenger of Jove,
And all the meaner gods that dwell above,
He whose acute wit was so quick and sharp,
In the invention of the crooked Harp:
He that is so cunning with his jesting slights
To steal from heavenly gods, or earthly wights,
Bearing a great hate in his grieved breast
Against that great Commander of the West,
Bright faced Apollo; for upon a day
Young Mercury did steal his beasts away;
Which the great God perceiving, straight did show
The piercing arrows, and the fearful bow
That killed great Pithon, and with that did threat him,
To bring his beasts again, or he would beat him;
Which Mercury perceiving, unespi'd,
Did closely steal his arrows from his side;
For this old grudge he was the easier won
To help young Bacchus against the fiery Sun:
And now the Sun was in the middle way,
And had overcome the one half of the day;
Scorching so hot upon the reeking sand
That lies upon the mere Egyptian land,
That the hot people burnt even from their birth,
Do creep again into their Mother earth:
When Mercury did take his powerful wand,
His charming Caduceus in his hand,
And the thick beaver which he used to wear
When ought from Jove he to the Sun did bear,
That did protect him from the piercing light
Which did proceed from Phoebus glittering sight;
Clad in these powerful ornaments he flies
With out-stretcht wings up to the Azur skies,
Where seeing Phoebus in his orient shrine,
He did so well revenge the god of wine,
That whilst the Sun wanders his Chariot reeles,
The crafty god had stolen away his wheels;
Which when he did perceive he down did slide
(Laying his glittering Coronet aside)
From the bright spangled firmament above
To seek the Nymph that Bacchus so did love,
And found her looking in her watery glass,
To see how clear her radiant beauty was:
And (for he had but little time to stay,
Because he meant to finish out his day)
At the first sight he 'gan to make his moan,
Telling her how his fiery wheels were gone;
Promising her if she would but obtain
The wheels that Mercury had stolen again,
That he might end his day, she should enjoy
The heavenly sight of the most beauteous boy
That ever was: The Nymph was pleased with this,
Hoping to reap some unaccustomed bliss,
By the sweet pleasure that she should enjoy
In the blessed sight of such a melting boy.
Therefore at his request she did obtain,
The burning wheels that he had lost again;
Which when he had received, he left the land,
And brought them thither where his coach did stand,
And there he set them on, for all this space
The horses had not stirred from out their place;
Which when he saw he wept, and 'gan to say,
Would Mercury had stolen my wheels away,
When Phaeton, my haire-brain'd issue, tried
What a laborious thing it was to guide
My burning Chariot, then he might have pleased me,
And of a Fathers grief he might have eased me:
For then the steeds would have obeyed his will,
Or else at least they would have rested still.
When he had done, he took his whip of steel,
Whose bitter smart he made his horses feel,
For he did lash so hard to end the day,
That he was quickly at the western sea.
And there with Thetis did he rest a space,
For he did never rest in any place
Before that time; but ever since his wheels
Were stolen away, his burning Chariot reeles
Toward the declining of the parting day,
Therefore he lights and mends them in the sea.
And though the Poets feign that Jove did make
A treble night for fair Alcmena's sake,
That he might sleep securely with his love,
Yet sure the long night was unknown to Jove:
But the Suns wheels one day disordered more,
Were thrice as long a mending as before.
Now was the Sun environed with the sea,
Cooling his watery tresses as he lay,
And in dread Neptunes kingdom while he sleeps
Fair Thetis clips him in the watery deeps;
There Mair-maids and the Tritons of the west,
Straining their voices to make Titan rest:
The while the black night with her pithy hand
Took just possession of the swarthy land,
He spent the darksome hours in this delight,
Giving his power up to the gladsome night;
For never before he was so truly blessed
To take an hour, or one poor minutes rest.
But now the burning God this pleasure feels
By reason of his newly crazed wheels;
There must she stay until lame Vulcan send
The fiery wheels which he had took to mend;
Now all the night the smith so hard had wrought,
That ere the Sun could wake his wheels were brought;
Titan being pleased with rest and not to rise,
And loath to open yet his slumbring eyes;
And yet perceiving how the longing sight
Of mortals waited for his glittering light,
He sent Aurora from him to the sky
To give a glimpsing to each mortal eye.
Aurora much ashamed of that same place
That great Apollos light was wont to grace,
Finding no place to hide her shameful head
Painted her chaste cheeks with a blushing red;
Which ever since remained upon her face
In token of her new received disgrace:
Therefore she not so white as she had been
Loathing of every Mortal to be seen;
No sooner can the rosy fingred morn
Kiss every flower that by her dew is borne;
But from the golden window she does peep
When the most part of earthly creatures sleep.
By this bright Titan opened had his eyes.
And 'gan to jerk his horses through the skies,
And taking in his hand his fiery whip
He made Aeous and swift Aethon skip
So fast, that straight he dazzled had the sight
Of fair Aurora glad to see his light;
And now the Sun in all his fiery haste
Did call to mind his promise lately past,
And all the vows and oaths that he did pass
Unto fair Salmacis the beauteous less:
For he had promised her she should enjoy
So lovely, fair, and such a well-shapt boy,
As never before his own all-seeing eye
Saw from his bright seat in the starry sky;
Remembering this he sent the boy that way
Where the clear fountain of the fair Nymph lay;
There was he come to seek some pleasing brook,
No sooner came he but the Nymph was struck,
And though she longed to embrace the boy,
Yet did the Nymph a while defer her joy,
Till she had bound up her loose flagging hair,
And well ordered the garments she did wear,
Faigning her countenance with a lovers care,
And did deserve to be accounted fair;
When thus much spoke she while the boy abode,
O boy! more worthy to be thought a god;
Thou may inhabit in the glorious place
Of Gods, or may proceed from humane race;
Thou may be Cupid, or the god of wine,
That lately wooed me with the swelling Vine:
But whosoever thou art, O happy he
That was so blessed to be a sire to thee!
Thy happy mother is most blessed of many,
Blessed thy sisters if her womb bare any;
Both fortunate, O and thrice happy she,
Whose too much blessed breasts gave suck to thee:
If anies wish with thy sweet bed be blessed,
O she is far more happy than the rest!
If thou have any, let her name be known,
Or else let me be she, if thou have none.
Here did she pause a while, and then she said,
Be not obdurate to a silly maid;
A flinty heart within a snowy breast
Is like base mold locked in a golden chest.
They say the eye's the Index of the heart,
And shows the affection of each inward part:
Then love plays lively there, the little god
Has a clear crystal palace of abode;
O bar him not from playing in thy heart,
That sports himself upon each outward part.
Thus much she spoke, and then her tongue was hushed;
At her loofe speeches Hermaphroditus blushed;
He knew not what love was yet love did shame him,
Making him blush, and yet his blush became him.
Then might a man his lively color see,
Like the ripe apple on a sunny tree,
Or Ivory died over with a pleasing red,
Or like the pale morn being shadowed.
By this the Nymph recovered had her tongue,
That to her thinking lay in silence long,
And said, thy cheek is mild, O be thou so,
Thy cheek says I, then do not answer no;
Thy cheek does shame, then do thou shame she said,
It is a man's shame to deny a maid:
Thou look to sport with Venus in her tower,
And be beloved of every heavenly power;
Men are but mortals, so are women too,
Why should your thoughts aspire more than ours do;
For sure they do aspire; else could a youth,
Whose countenance is full or spotless truth,
Be so relentlesse to a virgins tongue?
Let me be wooed by thee but half so long;
With half those terms, do but my love require,
And I will easily grant thee thy desire;
Ages are bad when men become so slow,
That poor unskilful maids are forced to woo.
Her radiant beauty, and her subtle art,
So deeply struck Hermaphroditus heart,
That she had won his love, but that the light
Of her translucent eye did shine too bright,
For long he looked upon the lovely maid,
And at the last Hermaphroditus said,
How should I love thee, when I do epsy
A far more beauteous Nymph hid in thy eye;
When thou do love let not that Nymph be nigh thee,
Nor when thou woo'st let that same Nymph be by thee:
Or quite obscure her from thy lovers face,
Or hide her beauty in a darker place;
By this the Nymph perceived he did espy
None but himself reflected in her eye.
And for himself no more she meant to show him,
She shut her eyes, and blindfold thus did woo him:
Fair boy, think not thy beauty can dispense
With any pain due to a bad offense;
Remember how the gods punished that boy,
That scorned to let a beauteous Nymph enjoy
Her long wished pleasure, for the peevish else
Loved of all others, needs would love himself:
So may thou love perhaps; thou may be blessed
By granting to a lucklesse Nymphs request,
Then rest a while with me amidst these weeds,
The Sun that sees all winks at lovers deeds.
Phoebus is blind when love sports are begun,
And never sees until their sports be done;
Believe me boy, thy blood is very staid,
That art so loath to kiss a youthful maid:
Were thou a maid and I a man, I Will show thee
With what a manly boldness I could woo thee:
Fairer than loves Queen (thus I would begin)
Might not my over-boldnesse be a sin,
I would entreat this favor if I could
Thy roseat cheeks a little to behold;
Then would I beg a touch, and then a kiss,
And then a lower, yet a higher bliss;
Then would I ask what Jove and Leda did,
When like a Swan the crafty god was hid;
What came he for? why did he there abide?
Surely I think he did not come to chide;
He came to see her face, to talk, and chat,
To touch, to kiss, came he for naught but that?
Yes something else, what was it he would have?
That which all men of maidens ought to crave.
This said, her eyelids wide she did display,
But in this space the boy was run away:
The wanton speeches of the lovely less
Forced him for shame to hide him in the grass;
When she perceived she could not see him near her,
When she had called, and yet he would not hear her,
Look how when Autumn comes, a little space
Paleth the red blush of the summers face,
Tearing the leaves, the summers coveting,
Three months in weaving by the curious spring,
Making the grass his green locks go to wrack,
Tearing each ornament from off his back;
So did she spoil the garments she did wear,
Tearing whole ounces of her golden hair;
She thus deluded of her longed bliss,
With much ado at last she uttred this:
Why were so bashful boy? Thou have no part
Shows thee to be of such a female heart:
His eye is gray, so is the mornings eye,
That blusheth always when the day is nigh.
Then is gray eyes the cause? that cannot be,
The gray eyed morn is far more bold than he,
For with a gentle dew from heavens bright tower,
It gets the maidenhead of every flower,
I would to god he were the rosiat morn,
And I a flower from out the earth new born.
His face was smooth, Narcissus face was so,
And he was careless of a sad Nymphs woe.
Then that is the cause, and yet that cannot be,
Youthful Narcissus was more bold than he;
Because he died for love, though of his shade,
This boy nor loves himself, nor yet a maid;
Besides, his glorious eye is wondrous bright,
So is the fiery and all-seeing light
Of Phoebus, who at every mornings birth
Blusheth for shame upon the sullen earth;
Then that is the cause, and yet that cannot be,
The fiery Sun is far more bold than he;
He nightly kisseth Thetis in the sea,
All know the story of Leucothoe.
His cheek is red, so is the fragrant rose,
Whose ruddy cheek with over-blushing glowes;
Then that is the cause, and yet that cannot be,
Each blushing rose is far more bold than he:
Whose boldness may be plainly seen in this,
The ruddy rose is not ashamed to kiss;
For always when the day is new begun,
The spreading rose will kiss the morning sun.
This said, hid in the grass she did espy him,
And stumbling with her will she fell down by him,
And with her wanton talk, because he wooed not,
Begged that which he, poor novice, understood not.
And (for she could not get a greater bliss)
She did entreat at least a sisters kiss;
But still the more she did the boy beseech,
The more he powted at her wanton speech.
At last the Nymph began to touch his skin,
Whiter than Mountain snow has ever been,
And did in pureness that clear spring surpass,
Wherein Acteon saw the Arcadian less.
Thus did she dally long, till at the last
In her white Palm she locked his white hand fast;
Then in her hands his wrist she 'gan to close,
When through his pulses straight his warm blood glows,
Whose youthful Music faining Cupids fire,
In her warm breast kindled a fresh desire;
Then did she lift her hand unto his breast,
A part as white and youthful as the rest,
Where as his flowery breath still comes and goes,
She felt his gentle heart pant through his clothes;
At last she took her hand from off that part,
And said it panted like another heart,
Why should it be more feeble, and less bold?
Why should the blood about it be more cold?
Nay sure that yields, only thy tongue denies,
And the true fancy of thy heart belies.
Then did she lift her hand unto his chin,
And praised the pretty dimpling of his skin.
But straight his chin she 'gan to overslip
When she beheld the redness of his lip;
And said, thy lips are soft, press them to mine,
And thou shall see they are as soft as thine
Then would she feign have gone unto his eye,
But still his ruddy lip standing so nigh
Drew her hand back, therefore his eye she mist,
'Ginning to claspe his neck, and would have kissed:
But then the boy did struggle to be gone,
Vowing to leave her in that place alone;
But the bright Salmacis began to fear,
And said fair stranger I will leave thee here,
And these pleasant places all alone,
So turning back she fained to be gone:
But from his sight she had no power to pass,
Therefore she turned and hid her in the grass,
When to the ground bending her snow-white knee,
The glad earth gave new coats to every tree.
He then supposing he was all alone,
Like a young boy that is espied of none,
Runs here and there, then on the banks does look,
Then on the Crystal current of the brook,
Then with his feet he touched the silver streams,
Whose drowzie waves made music in their dreams;
And, for he was not wholly in, did weep,
Talking aloud, and babbling in their sleep,
Whose pleasant coolness when the boy did feel,
He thrust his foot down lower to the heel,
Overcome with whose sweet noise he did begin
To strip his soft clothes from his tender skin,
When straight the scorching Sun wept tears of brine,
(Because he durst not touch him with his shine)
For fear of spoiling that same Ivory skin
Whose whiteness he so much delighted in;
And then the Moon mother of mortal ease
Would feign have come from the Antipodes
To have beheld him naked as he stood
Ready to leap into the silver flood,
But might not, for the laws of heaven deny
To show men's secrets to a woman's eye,
And therefore was her sad and gloomy light
Confined unto the secret keeping night.
When beauteous Salmacis a while had gazed
Upon his naked corpse, she stood amazed,
And both her sparkling eyes burnt in her face
Like the bright Sun reflected in a glass;
Scarce can she stay from running to the Boy,
Scarce can she now defer her hoped joy:
So fast her youthful blood plays in her veins,
That almost mad, she scarce her self contains;
When young Hermaphroditus as he stands
Clapping his white side with his hollow hands,
Leapt lively from the land whereon he stood
Into the maine part of the Crystal flood;
Like Ivory then his snowy body was,
Or a white Lilly in a Crystal glass;
Then rose the Water-Nymph from where she lay,
As having won the glory of the day,
And her light garments cast from off her skin,
He Is mine she cried, and so leapt sprightly in;
The flattering Ivy who did ever see
Inclasp'd the huge trunk of an aged tree,
Let him behold the young boy as he stands
Inclaspt in wanton Salmacis pure hands;
Betwixt those Ivory arms she locked him fast,
Striving to get away, till at the last,
Fondling she said, why striv'st thou to be gone?
Why should thou so desire to be alone?
Thy cheek is never fair when none is by,
For what is red and white but to the eye;
And for that cause the heavens are dark at night,
Because all creatures close their weary sight:
For there is no mortal can so early rise
But still the morning waits upon his eyes;
The early rising and soon singing Lark
Can never chant her sweet notes in the dark,
For sleep she never so little or so long
Yet still the morning will attend her song.
All creatures that beneath bright Cinthia be
Have appetite unto society;
The overflowing waves would have a bound
Within the confines of the spacious ground,
And all their shady currents would be placed
In hollow of the sollitary vaste:
But that they loath to let their soft streams sing
Where none can hear their gentle murmuring;
Yet still the boy regardlesse what she said,
Strugled apace to overswim the maid,
Which when the Nymph perceived she 'gan to say,
Struggle thou may, but never get away;
So grant, just gods, that never day may see
The separation 'twixt this boy and me.
The gods did hear her prayer, and feel her woe,
And in one body they began to grow:
She felt his youthful blood in every vein,
And he felt hers warm his cold breast again;
And ever since was woman's love so blessed,
That it will draw blood from the strongest breast.
Nor man, nor maid, now could they be esteemed,
Neither and either might they well be deemed;
When the young boy Hermaphroditus said
With the set voice of neither man nor maid,
Swift Mercury, thou Author of my life,
And thou my mother, Vulcans lovely wife,
Let your poor offsprings latest breath be blessed
In but obtaining this his last request:
Grant that whoever, heated by Phoebus beams,
Shall come to cool him in these silver streams,
May never more a manly shape retain,
But half a virgin may return again.
His parents harkned to his last request,
And with that great power they the fountain blessed;
And since that time who in that fountain swims
A maiden smoothnes seizes half his limbs.
THE REMEDY OF LOVE.
WHen Cupid read this Title, straight he said,
Wars, I perceive, against me will be made:
But spare (oh Love) to tax thy Poet so,
Who often has born thy Ensign against thy so;
I am not he by whom thy Mother bled,
When she to heaven on Mars his horses fled.
I often, like other Youths, thy flame did prove,
And if thou ask, what I do still; I Love.
Nay I have taught by Art to keep loves course,
And made that reason which before was force.
I seek not to betray thee pretty boy,
Nor what I once have written to destroy.
If any love, and find his Mistress kind,
Let him go on and sail with his own wind;
But he that by his Love is discontented,
To save his life my Verses were invented;
Why should a Lover kill himself? or why
Should any, with his own grief wounded, die?
Thou art a boy, to play becomes thee still,
Thy reign is soft, play then, and do not kill;
Or if thou wilt needs be vexing, then do this,
Make Lovers meet by stealth, and steal a kiss:
Make them to fear, least any over-watch them,
And tremble when they think some come to catch them:
And with those tears that Lovers shed all night
Be thou content, but do not kill outright.
Love heard, and up his silver wings did heave,
And said. Write on, I freely give thee leave.
Come then all ye despised that Love endure,
I that have felt the wounds your Love will cure;
But come at first, for if you make delay
Your sickness will grow mortal by your stay;
The Tree, which by delay is grown so big,
In the beginning was a tender twig.
That which at first was but a span in length,
Will, by delay, be rooted past man's strength.
Resist beginnings, medicines bring no curing
Where sickness is grown strong by long enduring.
When first thou see a Less that likes thine eye,
Bend all thy present powers to descry
Whether her eye or carriage first would show
If she be fit for Loves delights, or no;
Some will be easy, such an one elect;
But she that bears too grave and stern aspect
Take heed of her, and make her not thy Jewel,
Either she cannot Love, or will be cruel.
If love assail thee there, betime take heed,
Those wounds are dangerous that inward bleed;
He that to day cannot shake off Loves sorrow,
Will certainly be more unapt to morrow.
Love has so eloquent and quick a tongue
That he will lead thee all thy life along;
And on a sudden claspe thee in a yoke
Where thou must either draw, or striving choke.
Strive then betimes, for at the first one hand
May stop a water drill that wears the sand,
But, if delayed, it breaks into a flood,
Mountains will hardly make the passage good;
But I am out: for now I do begin
To keep them off, not heal those that are in.
First therefore (Lovers) I intend to show
How love came to you, then how he may go.
You that would not know what Loves passions be,
Never be idle, learn that rule of me.
Ease makes you love, as that o'recomes your wills,
Ease is the food and cause of all your ills.
Turn ease and idleness but out of door,
Loves darts are broke, his flame can burn no more.
As reeds and Willows loves the Waters side,
So Love loves with the idle to abide.
If then at liberty you feign would be,
Love yields to labor, Labor and be free.
Long sleeps, soft beds, rich vintage, and high feeding,
Nothing to do, and pleasure of exceeding
Dulls all our senses, makes our virtue stupid,
And then creeps in that crafty villain Cupid.
That boy loves ease alife, hates such as stir,
Therefore thy mind to better things prefer.
Behold thy Countries enemies in Arms,
At home love gripes thy heart in his sly charms,
Then rise and put on armor, cast off sloth,
Thy labor may at once overcome them both.
If this seem hard, and too unpleasant, then
Behold the Law set forth by God and men,
Sit down and study that, that thou may know
The way to guide thy self, and others show.
Or if thou love not to be shut up so,
Learn to assail the Dear with trusty bow,
That through the Woods thy well-mouth'd hounds may ring,
Whose Echo better joys, than Love, will sing.
There may thou chance to bring thy love to end,
Diana unto Venus is no friend.
The Country will afford thee means enough;
Sometimes disdain not to direct the Plough;
To follow through the fields the bleating Lamb,
That mournes to miss the comfort of his Dam.
Assist the harvest, help to prune the Trees;
Graft, plant, and sow, no kind of labor leese.
Set nets for birds, with hooked lines bait for fish,
Which will employ thy mind and fill thy dish;
That being weary with these pains, at night
Sound sleeps may put the thoughts of Love to flight.
With such delights, or labors; as are these,
Forget to love, and learn thy self to please.
But chiefly learn this lesson for my sake,
Fly from her far, some journey undertake,
I know thou wilt grieve, and that her name once told
Will be enough thy journey to withold:
But when thou find'st thy self most bent to stay,
Compel thy feet to run with thee away.
Nor do thou wish that rain or stormy weather
May stay your steps, and bring you back together;
Count not the miles you pass, nor doubt the way,
Lest those respects should turn you back to stay.
Tell not the clock, nor look not once behind,
But fly like Lightning, or the Northern wind;
For where we are too much o'rematcht in might,
There is no way for safeguard, but by flight.
But some will count my Lines too hard and bitter,
I must confess them hard; but yet it is better
To fast a while that health may be provoked,
Than feed at plenteous tables and be choked.
To cure the wretched body, I am sure,
Both Fire and Steel thou gladly wilt endure:
Will thou not then take pains by any Art
To cure thy Mind, which is thy better part?
The hardness is at first, and that once past,
Pleasant and easy ways will come at last.
I do not bid thee strive with Witches Charms,
Or such unholy acts, to cease thy harms:
Ceres her self, who all these things did know,
Had never power to cure her own Love so:
No, take this Medicine (which of all is sure,)
Labor and Absence is the only Cure.
But if the Fates compel thee, in such fashion,
That thou must needs live near her habitation,
And can not fly her fight, learn here of me,
That thou would feign, and can not yet be free.
Set all thy Mistress faults before thine eyes,
And all thy own disgraces well advise;
Say to thy self, that she is covetous,
Has taken my gifts, and used me thus, and thus;
Thus has she sworn to me, and thus deceived;
Thus have I hope, and thus have been bereaved.
With love she feeds my Rival, while I starve,
And poures on him kisses, which I deserve:
She follows him with smiles, and gives to me
Sad looks, no Lovers, but a strangers fee.
All those embraces I so often desired,
To him she offers daily unrequired;
Whose whole desert, and half mine weighed together,
Would make mine Lead, and his seem Cork and Feather,
Then let her go, and since she proves so hard,
Regard thy self, and give her no regard.
Thus must thou school thy self, and I could wish
Thee to thy self most eloquent in this.
But put on grief enough and do not fear,
Grief will enforce thy eloquence to appear.
Thus I my self the love did once expel
Of one whose Coyness vexed my soul like hell.
I must confess she touched me to the quick,
And I, that am Physician, then was sick.
But this I found to profit, I did still
Ruinate what I thought in her was ill;
And, for to cure my self, I found a way,
Some honest slanders on her for to lay:
Quoth I, how lamely does my Mistress go!
(Although, I must confess, it was not so;)
I said, her arms were crooked, fingers bent,
Her shoulders bowed, her legs consumed and spent:
Her color sad, her neck as dark as night,
(When Venus might in all have taken delight,)
But yet because I would no more come nigh her,
My self unto my self did thus belie her.
Do thou the like, and though she fair appear,
Think, vice to virtue often comes too near;
And in that error (though it be an error)
Preserve thy self from further terror.
If she be round and plumpe, say she is too fat;
If brown, say black, and think who cares for that;
If she be slender, swear she is too lean,
That such a Wench will wear a man out clean;
If she be red, say, she is too full of blood;
If pale, her body nor her mind is good;
If wanton, say, she seeks thee to devour;
If grave, neglect her, say, she looks too sour.
Nay, if she have a fault, and thou do know it,
Praise it, that in thy presence she may show it:
As if her voice be bad, cracked in the ring,
Never give over till thou make her sing.
If she have any blemish in her foot,
Commend her dancing still and put her to it.
If she be rude in speech incite her talk;
If haulting lame, provoke her much to walk.
Or if on Instruments she have small skill,
Reach down a Vial, urge her to that still.
Take any way to ease thy own distress,
And think those faults be, which are nothing less;
Then meditate besides, what thing it is
That makes thee still in Love to go amiss.
Advise thee well, for as the World now goes
Men are not caught with substance, but with shows;
Women are in their bodies turned to French
That face and body's least part of a Wench.
I know a Woman has in Love been troubled
For that which Tailors make, a fine neat Doublet.
And men are even as mad in their desiring,
That oftentimes love Women for their tyring;
He that does so, let him take this advise,
Let him rise early, and not being nice,
Up to his Mistress chamber let him hie,
E're she arise, and there he shall epsy
Such a confusion of disordered things,
In Bodies, Jewels, Tyres, Wyres, Lawnes, and Rings,
That sure it cannot choose but much abhor him,
To see her lie in pieces thus before him;
And find those things shut in a painted box
For which he loves her, and endures her mocks.
Once I my self had a great mind to see
What kind of things Women undressed be,
And found my Sweetheart, just when I came at her,
Screwing in teeth, and dipping rags in water.
She missed her Perriwig, and durst not stay,
But put it on in haste the backward way;
That had I not on the sudden changed my mind,
I had mistook and kissed my Love behind.
So, if thou wish her faults should rid thy cares,
Watch out thy time, and take her unawares:
Or rather put the better way in proof,
Come thou not near, but keep thy self aloof.
If all this serve not, use one medicine more,
Seek out another Love, and her adore;
But choose out one, in whom thou well may see
A heart inclined to love and cherish thee.
For as a River parted slower goes,
So, Love thus parted still more evenly flows.
One Anchor will not serve a Vessel tall,
Nor is one hook enough to fish withal,
He that can solace him, and sport with two,
May in the end triumph as others do.
Thou that to one have showed thy self too kind,
May in a second much more comfort find:
If one Love entertain thee with despite,
The other will embrace thee with delight:
When by the former thou art made accursed,
The second will contend to excel the first,
And strive, with love, to drive her from thy breast:
("That first to second yields, women know best.)
Or if to yield to either thou art loath,
This may perhaps acquit them of them both.
For what one Love makes odd, two shall make even,
Thus blows with blows, and fire by fire's out driven.
Perchance this course will turn thy first Loves heart,
And when thine is at ease cause hers to smart.
If thy Loves Rival stick so near thy side,
Think, women can Copartners worse abide.
For though thy Mistress never mean to love thee,
Yet from the others love she will strive to move thee:
But let her strive, she often has vexed thy heart,
Suffer her now to bear her self a part.
And though thy bowels burn like Aetna's fire,
Seem colder far than Ice, or her desire;
Faigne thy self free, and sigh not overmuch,
But laugh when grief thy heart does touch.
I do not bid thee break through fire and flame,
Such violence in love is much too blame;
But I advise, that thou dissemble deep,
And all thy passions in thine own breast keep.
Faigne thy self well, and thou at last shall see
Thy self as well as thou did faigne to be.
So have I often, when I would not drink,
Sat down as one asleep and faign'd to wink,
Till, as I nodding sat, and took no heed,
I have at last fallen fast asleep indeed.
So have I often been angry, faigning spite,
And counterfeiting smiles have laughed outright.
So Love, by use, does come, by use does go,
And he that feignes well shall at length be so.
If e're thy Mistress promised to receive thee
Into her bosom and did then deceive thee,
Locking thy Rival in, thee out of door,
Be not dejected, seem not to deplore,
Nor when thou see her next take notice of it,
But pass it over, it shall turn to profit:
For if she sees such tricks as these perplex thee,
She will be proud, and take delight to vex thee.
But if she prove thee constant in this kind,
She will begin at length some sleights to find,
How she may draw thee back, and keep thee still
A servile Captive to her fickle will.
But now take heed here comes the proof of men,
Be thou as constant as thou seem then:
Receive no Messages, regard no Lines,
They are but snares to catch thee in her twines.
Receive no gifts, think all that praise her flatter;
Whatever she writes believe not half the matter,
Converse not with her servant, nor her maid,
Scarce bid good morrow lest thou be betrayed.
When thou go by her door never look back,
And though she call do not thy journey s^ack;
If she should send her friends to talk with thee,
Suffer them not too long to walk with thee.
Do not believe one word they say is sooth,
Nor do not ask so much as how she does;
Yea, though thy very heart should burn to know,
Bridle thy tongue, and make thereof no show;
Thy careless silence shall perplex her more
Then can a thousand sighs sighed over and over;
By saying, thou love not thy loving prove not,
For he is far gone in Love that says I love not:
Then hold thy peace and shortly Love will die,
That wound heals best that cures not by and by.
But some will say, alas, this rule is hard,
Must we not love where we find reward?
How should a tender Woman bear this scorn
That cannot, without art, by men be borne?
Mistake me not; I do not wish you show
Such a contempt to them whose love you know:
But where a scornful Less makes you endure
Her slight regarding, there I lay my cure.
Nor think in leaving Love you wrong your Less,
Who one to her content already has;
While she does joy in him, joy thou in any,
Thou have, as well as she, the choice of many.
Then, for thy own contempt, defer not long,
But cure thy self and she shall have no wrong.
Among all cures I chiefly did commend
Absence in this to be the only friend.
And so it is, but I would have ye learn
The perfect use of Absence to discern.
First then, When thou art absent to her sight
In solitariness do not delight:
Be seldom left alone, for then I know
A thousand vexing thoughts will come and go.
Fly lovely walks, and uncouth places sad,
They are the Nurse of thoughts that make men mad.
Walk not too much where thy fond-eye may see
The place where she did give loves rights to thee:
For even the place will tell thee of those joys,
And turn thy kisses into sad annoies.
Frequent not Woods and Groves, nor sit and muse
With arms acrosse, as foolish lovers use:
For as thou sitt'st alone thou soon shall find
Thy Mistress face presented to thy mind,
As plainly to thy troubled fantasy
As if she were in presence, and stood by.
This to eschew open thy doors all day,
Shun no man's speech that comes into thy way.
Admit all companies, and when there is none
Then walk thou forth thy self, and seek out one,
When he is found seek more, laugh, drink, and sing;
Rather than be alone do any thing.
Or if thou be constrained to be alone,
Have not her Picture for to gaze upon:
For that is the way when thou art eased of pain,
To wound anew, and make thee sick again.
Or if thou have it, think the painters skill
Flattered her face, and that she looks more ill;
And think, as thou do musing on it sit,
That she her self is counterfeit like it.
Or rather fly all things that are inclined
To bring one thought of her into thy mind.
View not her tokens, nor think on her words.
But take some book, whose learned womb affords
Physic for souls, there search for some relief
To guile the time and rid away thy grief.
But if thy thoughts on her must needs be bent,
Think what a deal of precious time was spent
In quest of her; and that thy best of youth
Languish'd and died while she was void of truth.
Think but how ill she did deserve affection,
And yet how long she held thee in subjection.
Think how she changed, how ill it did become her,
And thinking so, leave love, and fly far from her.
He that from all infection would be free,
Must fly the place where the infected be.
And he that would from loves affection fly,
Must leave his Mistress walks and not come nigh.
"Sore eyes are got by looking on sore eyes,
"And wounds do soon from new-heal'd scars arise.
As embers touched with sulphurs do renew,
So will her sight kindle fresh flames in you.
If then thou meet'st her suffer her go by thee,
And be afraid to let her come too nigh thee:
For her aspect will raise desire in thee,
And hungry men scarce hold from meat they see.
If e're she sent thee Letters, that lie by,
Peruse them not, they will captivate thy eye:
But lap them up and cast them in the fire,
And wish, as they waste so may thy desire.
If e're thou sent'st her token, gift, or letter,
Go not to fetch them back, for it is better
That she detain a little paltry pelf,
Than thou should seek for them and lose thy self.
For why? her sight will so enchant thy heart
That thou will lose thy labor, I my Art.
But if by chance there fortune such a case
Thou needs must come where she shall be in place,
Then call to mind all parts of this discourse,
For sure thou shall have need of all thy force:
Against thou go curle not thy head and hair,
Nor care whether thy band be foul or fair;
Nor be not in so neat and spruce array
As if thou mean to make it holiday;
Neglect thy self for once, that she may see
Her love has now no power to work on thee.
And if thy Rival be in presence too,
Seem not to mark, but do as others do;
Salute him friendly, give him gentle words,
Return all courtesies that he affords:
Drink to him, carve him, give him complement,
This shall thy Mistress, more than thee, torment:
For she will think by this thy careless show
Thou car'st not now whether she love or no.
But if thou can persuade thy self indeed
She has no Lover, but of thee has need;
That no man loves her but thy self alone,
And that she shall be lost when thou art gone;
Thus sooth thy self, and thou shall seem to be
In far more happy taking than is she.
For if thou think she is loved, and loves again,
Hell fire will seem more easy than thy pain:
But chiefly when in presence thou shall spy
The man she most affects standing by,
And see him graspe her by the tender hand,
And whispering close, or almost kissing stand;
When thou shall doubt whether they laugh at thee,
Or whether on some meeting they agree;
If now thou can hold out thou art a man,
And can perform more than thy teacher can:
If then thy heart can be at ease and free,
I will give over to teach and learn of thee.
But this way I would take among them all,
I would pick out some Less to talk withal,
Whose quick inventions, and whose nimble wit
Should busy mine, and keep me from my fit:
My eye with all my art should be a wooing,
No matter what I said so I were doing;
For all that while my Love should think at least
That I, as well as she, on Love did feast.
And though my heart were thinking of her face,
Or her unkindnesse, and my own disgrace,
Of all my present pains by her neglect,
Yet would I laugh, and seem without respect.
Perchance, in envy thou should sport with any,
Her beck will single thee from forth of many:
But, if thou can, of all that present are,
Her conference alone thou should forbear;
For if her looks so much thy mind do trouble,
Her honied speeches will distract thee double.
If she begin once to confer with thee,
Then do as I would do, be ruled by me:
When she begins to talk imagine straight,
That now to catch thee up she lies in wait;
Then call to mind some business or affair,
Whose doubtful issue takes up all thy care;
That while such talk thy troubled fancies stirs,
Thy mind may work, and give no heed to hers.
Alas, I know men's hearts, and that full soon,
By women's gentle words we are undone.
If women sigh or weep our souls are grieved,
Or if they swear they love they are believed;
But trust not thou to oaths if she should swear,
Nor hearty sighs, believe they dwell not there.
If she should grieve in earnest, or in jest,
Or force her arguments with sad protest,
As if true sorrow in her eyelid sat;
Nay, if she come to weeping, trust not that,
For know that women can both weep and smile
With much more danger than the Crocodile.
Think all she does is but to breed thy pain,
And get the power to tyrannize again.
And she will beat thy heart with trouble more
Than rocks are beat with waves upon the shore.
Do not complain to her then of thy wrong,
But lock thy thoughts within thy silent tongue.
Tell her not why thou leave her, nor declare
(Although she ask thee) what thy torments are.
Wring not her fingers, gaze not on her eye,
From thence a thousand snares and arrows fly.
No, let her not perceive by sighs or signs
How at her deeds thy inward soul repines.
Seem careless of her speech, and do not hark,
Answer by chance as though thou did not mark.
And if she bid thee home straight promise not.
Or break thy word as if thou had forgot.
Seem not to care whether thou come or no,
And if she be not earnest do not go.
Feign thou have business, and defer the meeting,
As one that greatly cared not for her greeting.
And as she talks cast thou thine eyes elsewhere,
And look among the Lasses that are there.
Compare their several beauties to her face,
Some one or other will her form disgrace;
On both their faces carry still thy view,
Balance them equally in judgment true:
And when thou find'st the other does excel
(Yet that thou can not love it half so well)
Blush that thy passions make thee dote on her
More than on those thy judgment does prefer;
When thou have let her speak all that she would
Seem as thou have not one word understood:
And when to part with thee thou see her bent,
Give her some ordinary complement,
Such as may seem of courtesy, not love,
And so to other company remove.
This carelessness in which thou seem to be,
(However in her) will work this change in thee,
That thou shall think for using her so slight
She cannot choose but turn her love to spite:
And if thou art persuaded once she hates,
Thou will beware and not come near her baits;
But though I wish thee constantly believe
She hates thy sight thy passions to deceive;
Yet be not thou so base to hate her too,
That which seems ill in her do not thou do;
'Twill indiscretion seem, and want of wit,
Where thou did love, to hate instead of it;
And thou may shame ever to be so mated,
And joined in love with one that should be hated:
Such kind of love is fit for Clownes and Hinds,
And not for debonaire and gentle minds;
For can there be in man a madness more
Than hate those lips he wished to kiss before?
Or loath to see those eyes, or hear that voice
Whose very sound has made his heart rejoice?
Such acts as these much indiscretion shows,
When men from kissing turn to wish for blows:
And this their own example, shows so naught,
That when they should direct they must be taught:
But thou will say, for all the love I bear her,
And all the service, I am never the nearer;
And which thee most of all does vex like hell,
She loves a man never loved her half so well:
Him she adores, but I must not come at her,
Have I not then good reason for to hate her?
I answer no, for make the case thine own,
And in thy glass her actions shall be shown:
When thou thy self in love were so far gone,
Say, could thou love any but her alone?
I know thou could not, though with tears and cries
These had made deaf thine ears, and dim thine eyes:
Would thou for this that they hate thee again,
If so thou would then hate thy love again:
Your faults are both alike; thou love her,
And she, in love, thy Rival does prefer:
If then her love to him thy hate procure,
Thou should for loving her like hate endure:
Then do not hate, for all the lines I write
Are not addressed to turn thy love to spite,
But writ to draw thy doting mind from love,
That in the golden mean thy thoughts may move;
In which, when once thou findst thy self at quiet,
Learn to preserve thy self with this good diet.
The Conclusion.
SLeep not too much, nor longer than asleep
Within thy bed thy lazy body keep;
For when thou warm awake shall feel it soft
Fond cogitations will assail thee often:
Then start up early, study, work, or write,
Let labor (others toil) be thy delight.
Eat not too much, for if thou much do eat
Let it not be dainty or stirring meat:
Abstain from Wine although thou think it good,
It sets thy meat on fire, and stirs thy blood;
Use thy self much to bath thy wanton limbs,
In coolest streams, which over the gravel swims:
Be still in gravest company, and fly
The wanton rabble of the younger fry,
Whose lustful tricks will lead thee to delight,
To think on love, where thou shall perish quit;
Come not at all where many women are,
But like a Bird that lately escaped the snare,
Avoid their garish beauty fly with speed,
And learn by her that lately made thee bleed;
Be not too much alone, but if alone
Get thee some modest book to look upon;
But do not read the lines of wanton men,
Poetry sets thy mind on fire again:
Abstain from Songs and Verses, and take heed
That not a line of love thou ever read.
An Elegy on the Lady MARKHAM.
AS unthrifts groan in straw for their pawned beds:
As women weep for their lost Maiden-heads;
When both are without hope or remedy,
Such an untimely grief I have for thee.
I never saw thy face, nor did my heart
Urge forth mine eyes unto it whilst thou were,
But being lifted hence, that which to thee
Was deaths sad dart, proved Cupids shaft to me.
Whoever thinks me foolish that the force
Of a report can make me love a Coarse,
Know he, that when with this I do compare
The love I do a living woman bear,
I find my self most happy: now I know
Where I can find my Mistress, and can go
Unto her trimmed bed, and can lift away
Her grasse-greene Mantle, and her sheet display,
And touch her naked; and though the envious mould
In which she lies uncovered, moist and cold,
Strive to corrupt her, she will not abide
With any Art her blemishes to hide,
As many living do, and know their need,
Yet cannot they in sweetness her exceed;
But make a stink with all their art and skill,
Which their Physicians warrant with a bill;
Nor at her door does heaps of Coaches stay,
Footmen and Midwives to bar up my way:
Nor needs she any Maid or Page to keep,
To knock me early from my golden sleep,
With letters that her honor all is gone,
If I not right her cause on such a one.
Her heart is not so hard to make me pay
For every kiss a supper and a play:
Nor will she ever open her pure lips
To utter oaths enough to drown our Ships,
To bring a plague, a famine, or the sword,
Upon the land, though she should keep her word;
Yet e're an hour be past in some new vain
Break them, and swear them double over again.
Pardon me that with thy blessed memory
I mingle mine own former misery:
Yet dare I not excuse the fate that brought
These crosses on me, for then every thought
That tended to thy love was black and foul,
Now all as pure as a new-baptiz'd soul:
For I protest, for all that I can see,
I would not lie one night in bed with thee;
Nor am I jealous, but could well abide
My foe to lie in quiet by thy side.
You Worms (my Rivals) whilst she was alive,
How many thousands were there that did strive
To have your freedom? for their sake forbear
Unseemly holes in her soft skin to wear:
But if you must (as what Worms can abstain
To taste her tender body?) yet refrain
With your disordered eatings to deface her,
But feed your selves so as you most may grace her.
First, through her ear-tips see you make a pair
Of holes, which, as the moist enclosed air
Turns into water, may the clean drops take,
And in her ears a pair of jewels make.
Have ye not yet enough of that white skin,
The touch whereof, in times past, would have been
Enought' have ransomed many a thousand soul
Captive to Love? If not, then upward roll
Your little bodies, where I would you have
This Epitaph upon her forehead grave.
Living, she was young, fair, and full of wit;
Dead, all her faults are in her forehead writ.
AN ELEGY.
CAn my poor lines no better office have,
But like Scriech-owls still dwell about the grave?
When shall I take some pleasure for my pain,
By praising them that can yield praise again?
When shall my Muse in Love sick lines recite
Some Ladies worth? which she of whom I write,
With thankful smiles, may read in her own days;
Or, when shall I a breathing woman praise?
Never; I am ambitious in my strings,
They never sound but of eternal things,
Such as freed souls: but had I thought it fit
To praise a soul unto a body knit,
I would confess, I spent my time amiss
When I was slow to give due praise to this.
Thus when all sleep my time is come to sing,
And from her ashes must my Poems spring;
Though in the race I see some swiftly run,
I will not crown them till the Goal be won.
They that have fought, not they that are to fight,
May claim the glorious Garland as their right.
A Charm.
SLeep old man, let silence charm thee,
Dreaming slumbers overtake thee,
Quiet thoughts and darkness arm thee,
That no creaking do awake thee.
Phoebe has put out her light,
All her shadows closing;
Phoebe lend her horns to night
To thy heads disposing.
Let no fatal Bell nor Clock
Pierce the hollow of thy ear:
Tongulesse be the early Cock,
Or what else may add a fear.
Let no Rat, nor silly Mouse,
Move the senseless Rushes,
Nor a cough disturb this house
Till Aurora blushes.
Come my sweet Corrinna, come;
Laugh, and leave thy late deploring:
Sable Midnight makes all dumb,
But thy jealous Husband's snoring.
And with thy sweet perfumed kisses
Entertain a stranger:
Loves delight, and sweetest bliss, is
Got with greatest danger.
On the Marriage of a Beauteous young Gentlewoman with an Ancient Man.
FOndly, too curious Nature, to adorn
Aurora with the blushes of the Morn:
Why do her rosy lips, breath, Gums, and Spice,
Unto the East, and sweet to Paradise?
Why do her eyes open the day? her hand,
And voice entrance the Panther, and command
Incensed winds: her Breasts, the tents of Love,
Smooth as the godded Swan, or Venus Dove;
Soft as the balmy dew, whose every touch
Is pregnant; but why those rich spoils, when such
Wonder and perfection must be led
A Bridal Captive unto Tithon's bed?
Aged, and deformed Tithon! must thy twine
Circle and blast at once what care and time
Had made for wonder? must pure beauty have
No other soil but ruin and a grave?
So have I seen the pride of Natures store,
The Orient Pearl, chained to the sooty Moore.
So has the Diamonds bright ray been set
In night, and wed ded to the Negro-Jet.
See, see, how thick those flowers of Pearl do fall
To weep her ransom, or her funeral,
Whose every treasured drop, congealed, might bring
Freedom and Ransom to a fett'red King,
While tyrant wealth stands by, and laughs to see
How he can wed, love, and Antipathy:
Hymen, thy pine burns with adulterate fire;
Thou and thy quiver'd boy did once conspire
To mingle equal flames, and then no shine
Of Gold, but beauty, dressed the Paphian Shrine,
Roses and Lillies kissed; the Amorous Vine,
Did with the fair and straight limbed Elm entwine.
The Glance.
COld virtue guard me, or I shall endure
From the next Glance a double Calenture
Of fire and lust; two flames, two Semeleis
Dwell in those eyes, whose looser glowing rays
Would thaw the frozen Russian into lust,
And parch the Negroes hotter blood to dust.
Dart not your Balls of Wildfire here, go throw
Those flakes upon the Eunuchs colder Snow,
Till he in active blood do boil as high
As he that made him so in Jealousy.
When the loose Queen of Love did dress her eyes
In the most taking flame to win the prize
At Ida; that faint glare to this desire
Burnt like a Taper to the Zone of fire:
And could she then the lustful youth have crowned
With thee, his Hellen, Troy had never found
Her fate in Sinon's fire, thy hotter eyes
Had made it burn a quicker Sacrifice
To lust, whilst every glance in subtle wiles
Had shot it self like lightning through the piles.
Go blow upon some equal blood, and let
Earths hotter ray engender and beget
New flames to dress the aged Paphians Quire,
And lend the world new Cupids borne on fire.
Dart no more here those flames, nor strive to throw
Your fire on him who is immured in Snow:
Those Glances work on me like the weak shine
The frosty Sun throws on the Appenine,
When the hills active coldness does go near
To freeze the glimmering Taper to his Sphere:
Each ray is lost on me like the faint light
The Glow-worme shoots at the cold breast of night.
Thus Virtue can secure, but for that Name
I had been now sins Martyr, and your flame.
A Sonnet.
FLattering hope away and leave me,
She Will not come, thou do deceive me;
Hark the Cock crows, the envious light
Chides away the silent night;
Yet she comes not, oh how I tire
Betwixt cold fear and hot desire.
Here alone enforced to tarry
While the tedious Minutes marry,
And get hours; those days and years
Which I count with sighs and fears:
Yet she comes not, oh how I tire
Betwixt cold fear and hot desire.
Restless thoughts a while remove
Unto the bosom of my Love,
Let her languish in my pain,
Fear, and hope, and fear again;
Then let her tell me in loves fire,
What torment's like unto desire.
Endless wishing, tedious longing,
Hopes and fears together thronging;
Rich in dreams, yet poor in waking,
Let her be in such a taking;
Then let her tell me in loves fire,
What torment's like unto desire.
Come then Love prevent days ey^ing,
My desire would feign be dying:
Smother me with breathless kisses,
Let me dream no more of blisses;
But tell me which is in Loves fire,
Best to enjoy, or to desire.
True Beauty.
MAy I find a woman fair,
And her mind as clear as Air,
If her beauty go alone,
It Is to me as if it were none.
May I find a woman rich,
And not of too high a pitch:
If that pride should cause disdain,
Tell me; Lover, where is thy gain?
May I find a woman wise,
And her falsehood not disguise;
Has she wit as she has will,
Double armed she is to ill.
May I find a woman kind,
And not wavering like the wind:
How should I call that love mine,
When it is his, and his, and thine?
May I find a woman true,
There is Beauties faired hue;
There is Beauty, Love, and Wit,
Happy he can compass it.
The Indifferent.
NEver more will I protest
To love a woman but in jest:
For as they cannot be true,
So to give each man his due,
When the woing fit is past,
Their affection cannot last.
Therefore if I chance to meet
With a Mistress fair and sweet,
She my service shall obtain,
Loving her for Love again:
Thus much liberty I crave,
Not to be a constant slave.
But when we have tried each other,
If she better like another,
Let her quickly change for me,
Then to change am I as free.
He or she that loves too long
Sell their freedom for a song.
LOVES Freedom.
Why should man be only tied
To a foolish Female thing,
When all Creatures else beside,
Birds and Beasts, change every Spring?
Who would then to one be bound,
When so many may be found?
Why should I my self confine
To the limits of one place,
When I have all Europe mine,
Where I list to run my race.
Who would then to one be bound,
When so many may be found?
Would you think him wise that now
Still one sort of meat does eat,
When both Sea and Land allow
Sundry sorts of other meat?
Who would then to one be bound,
When so many may be found?
E're old Saturn changed his Throne,
Freedom reigned and banished strife,
Where was he that knew his own,
Or who called a woman wife?
Who would then to one be bound,
When so many may be found?
Ten times happier are those men
That enjoyed those Golden days:
Until time redresse't again
I will never Hymen praise.
Who would then to one be bound,
When so many may be found?
On the Life Man.
LIke to the falling of a Star,
Or as the flights of Eagles are,
Or like the fresh Springs gaudy hue,
Or Silver drops of Morning dew,
Or like a wind that chafes the flood,
Or Bubbles which on water stood:
Even such is Man, whose borrowed light
Is straight called in and paid to night:
The wind blows out, the Bubble dies,
The Spring entombed in Autumn lies:
The dew's dried up, the Star is shot,
The flight is past, and man forgot.
An Epitaph.
HEre she lies, whose spotless fame,
Invites a Stone to learn her Name:
The rigid Spartan that denied
An Epitaph to all that died,
Unless for war, on charity
Would here vouchsafe an Elegy:
She died a Wife, but yet her mind
Beyond Virginity refined.
From lawless fire remained as free,
As now from heat her ashes be:
Her husband, yet without a sin,
Was not a stranger, but her kin,
That her chaste Love might seem no other
To her husband than a Brother.
Keep well this pawn, thou Marble Chest,
Till it be called for let it rest;
For while this Jewel here is set,
The grave is like a Cabinet.
A Sonnet.
LIke a Ring without a Finger,
Or a Bell without a Ringer;
Like a horse was never ridden,
Or a Feast and no Guest bidden;
Like a well without a Bucket,
Or a Rose if no man pluck it:
Just such as these may she be said
That lives, never loves, but dies a Maid.
The Ring, if worn, the Finger decks,
The Bell pulled by the Ringer speaks:
The horse does ease if he be ridden,
The feast does please if Guest be bidden;
The Bucket draws the water forth,
The Rose when plucked is still most worth.
Such is the Virgin, in my eyes.
That lives, loves, marries, e're she dies.
Like to a Stock not grafted on,
Or like a Lute not played upon;
Like a Jack without a weight,
Or a Barque without a freight;
Like a Lock without a Key,
Or a Candle in the day:
Just such as these may she be said
That lives, never loves, but dies a Maid.
The graffed Stock does bear best fruit,
There Is music in the fingered Lute:
The weight does make the Jack go ready,
The fraught does make the Barque go steady;
The Key the Lock does open right,
The Candle's useful in the night.
Such is the Virgin, in my eyes,
That lives, loves, marries, e're she dies.
Like a Call without Anon sir,
Or a Question and no answer:
Like a Ship was never rigged,
Or a Mine was never dug;
Like a wound without a Tent.
Or Sivet box without a scent:
Just; such as these may she be said
That lives, never loves, but dies a maid,
The Anon sir does obey the Call,
The Question answered pleases all;
Who riggs a Ship sails with the Wind,
Who digs a Mine does treasure find;
The wound by wholesome Tent has ease,
The box perfumed the Senses please:
Such is the Virgin in my eyes
That lives, loves, marries, e're she dies.
Like Marrow bone was never broken,
Or Commendations and no Token;
Like a Fort and none to win it,
Or like the Moon and no man in it;
Like a School without a Teacher,
Or like a Pulpit and no Preacher:
Just such as these may she be said
That lives, never loves, but dies a Maid.
The broken Marrow bone is sweet,
The token does adorn the greet;
There Is triumph in the Fort, being won,
The man tides glorious in the Moon;
The School is by the Teacher stilled,
The Pulpit by the Preacher filled:
Such is the Virgin, in my eyes,
That lives, loves, marries, e're she dies.
Like a Cage without a Bird,
Or a thing too long deferred;
Like the Gold was never tried,
Or the ground unoccupied;
Like a House that is not possessed,
Or the Book was never pressed:
Just such as these may she be said
That lives, never loves, but dies a maid.
The Bird in Cage does sweetly sing,
Due Season prefers every thing;
The Gold that is tried from dross is pur'd,
There Is profit in the ground mannur'd;
The House is by possession graced,
The Book when pressed is then embraced:
Such is the Virgin in my eyes
That lives, loves, marries, e're she dies.
A Description of Love.
LOve is a Region full of fires,
And burning with extreme desires;
An Object seeks, of which possessed,
The wheels are fixed, the motions rest,
The flames in Ashes lie oppressed;
This Meteor striving high to rise,
The fuel spent, falls down and dies.
Much sweeter, and more pure delights
Are drawn from fair alluring sights,
When ravished minds attempt to praise
Commanding Eyes like heavenly rays,
Whose force the gentle heart obeys;
Then where the end of this pretense
Descends to base inferior sense.
Why then should Lovers (most will say)
Expect so much the enjoying day;
Love is like youth, he thirsts for age,
He scorns to be his mothers Page;
But when proceeding times assuage
The former heat, he will complain,
And wish those pleasant hours again.
We know that hope and love are twins,
Hope gone, fruition now begins;
But what is this unconstant frail,
In nothing sure, but sure to fail?
Which if we lose it we bewail,
And when we have it still we bear
The worst of passions, daily fear.
When Love thus in his Center ends,
Desire and Hope, his inward friends
Are shaken off, while doubt and grief,
The weakest givers of relief,
Stand in his Council as the Chief;
And now he to his period brought,
From Love becomes some other thought.
These Lines I write not to remove
United souls from serious love,
The best attemps by Mortals made
Reflect on things which quickly fade;
Yet never will I men persuade
To leave affections where may shine
Impressions of the love Divine.
The Shepherdess.
A Shepherdess who long had kept her Flocks
On stony Charnwoods, dry and barren Rocks,
In heat of Summer to the Vales declined
To seek fresh pasture for her Lambs half pined;
She (while her charge was feeding) spent the hours
To gaze on sliding Brooks, and smiling flowers.
A Funeral Elogie on the Death of the Lady Penelope Clifton.
SInce thou art dead (Clifton) the world may see
A certain end of flesh and blood in thee;
Till then a way was left for man to cry,
Flesh may be made so pure, it cannot dye:
But now, thy unexpected death does strike
With grief the better and the worse alike;
The good are sad they are not with thee there,
The bad have found they must not tarry here.
Death, I confess, it is just in thee to try
Thy power on us, for thou thy self must dye;
Thou pay'st but Wages, Death, yet I would know
What strange delight thou take to pay them so;
When thou come face to face thou strik'st us mute,
And all our liberty is to dispute
With thee behind thy back, which I will use;
If thou had brav'ry in thee thou would choose
(Since thou art absolute, and can control
All things beneath a reasonable soul,)
Some look for way of killing; if her day
Had ended in a fire, a sword, or sea,
Or had thou come hid in a hundred years
To make an end of all her hopes and fears,
Or any other way direct to thee
Which Nature might esteem an Enemy,
Who would have chid thee? now it shows thy hand
Desires to cousin where it might command:
Thou art not prone to kill, but where the intent
Of those that suffer is their nourishment;
If thou can steal into a dish, and creep,
When all is still as though into a sleep,
And cover thy dry body with a draught,
Whereby some innocent Lady may be caught,
And cheated of her life, then thou will come
And stretch thy self upon her early Tomb,
And laugh, as pleased, to show thou can devour
Mortality as well by wit as power.
I would thou had had eyes, or not a Dart,
That yet at least, the clothing of that heart
Thou strook'st so spightfully, might have appeared
To thee, and with a Reverence have been feared.
But since thou art so blind, receive from me
Who 'twas on whom thou wrought'st this Tragedy;
She was a Lady, who for public Fame,
Never (since she in thy protection came,
Who sett'st all living tongues at large) received
A blemish; with her beauty she deceived
No man, when taken with it* they agree
'Twas Natures fault, when from 'em 'twas in thee.
And such her virtue was, that although she
Receive as much joy, having passed through thee,
As ever any did; yet has thy hate
Made her as little better in her state,
As ever it did any being here,
She lived with us as if she had been there.
Such Ladies thou can kill no more, but so
I give thee warning here to kill no more;
For if thou do, my pen shall make the rest
Of those that live, especially the best,
Whom thou most thirstest for, to abandon all
Those fruitless things, which thou would have us call
Preservatives, keeping their diet so,
As the long-living poor their neighbors do:
Then shall we have them long, and they at last
Shall pass from thee to hear, but not so fast.
F. B.

The examination of his Mistress Perfections.
STand still my happiness, and swelling heart
No more, till I consider what thou art.
Desire of knowledge was man's fatal vice,
For when our Parents were in Paradise
(Though they themselves, and all they saw was good)
They thought it nothing if not understood.
And I (part of their seed struck with their sin)
Though by their bountious favor I be in
A Paradise, where I may freely taste
Of all the virtuous pleasures which thou have.
Wanting that knowledge, must in all my bliss
Err with my Parents, and ask what it is.
My Faith says it is not heaven, and I dare swear
If it be hell no pain of sense is there;
Sure it is some pleasant place, where I may stay
As I to heaven go in the middle way.
Were thou but fair and no whit virtuous,
Thou were no more to me but a fair house
Hanted with Spirits, from which men do them bless,
And no man will half furnish to possess:
Or had thou worth wrapped in a rivell'd skin,
'Twere inaccessable; who durst go in
To find it out? far sooner would I go
To find a Pearl covered with hills of snow;
'Twere buried virtue, and thou mighst me move
To reverence the Tomb, but not to love,
No more than dotingly to cast mine eye
Upon the Urne where Lucrece ashes lie.
But thou art fair, and sweet, and every good
That ever yet durst mix with flesh and blood:
The Devil never saw in his fallen state
An Object whereupon to ground his hate
So fit as thee; all living things but he
Love thee; how happy then must that man be
When from amongst all creatures thou do take?
Is there a hope beyond it? Can he make
A wish to change thee for? This is my bliss,
Let it run on now, I know what it is.
Fran. Beaumont.

The Hermaphrodite made after M. Beaumonts Death by Thomas Randolph M. A.
Sometime Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge.
SIr, or Madam, choose you whether,
Nature twists you both together;
And makes thy soul to each confess,
Both Petticoat and Breeches dress.
Thus we chastise the god of Wine
With water that is Feminine,
Till the cooler Nymph abate
This wrath, and so incorporate.
Adam till his Rib was lost
Had the Sexes thus ingrost;
When providence, our Sire, did cleave,
And out of Adam carved Eve,
Then did man 'bout Wedlock treat,
To make his Body up complete;
Thus Matrimony speaks but thee
In a grave solemnity;
For man and wife make but one right
Cannonicall Hermaphrodite.
Revell thy body, and I find
In every limb a double kind;
Who would not think that head a pair
That breeds such Factions in the hair?
One halfe's so churlish in the touch,
That rather than endure so much
I would my tender Limbs apparel
With Regulus his nailed Barrel:
And the other half so small,
And so Amorous withal,
That Cupid thinks each hair to grow
A string for his invisible bow.
When I look babies in thine eyes,
Here Venus, there Adonis lies.
And though thy Beauty be high noon,
Thy Orbs contain both Sun and Moon.
How many melting kisses skip
Betwixt thy Male and Female lip,
Betwixt thy upper brush of hair,
And thy nether boards despair?
When thou speak (I would not wrong
Thy sweetness with a double tongue)
But in every simple sound
A perfect Dialogue is found.
Thy Breasts distinguish one another,
This is the Sister, that the Brother,
When thou joyn'st hands, my ears struck fancies,
The Nuptial sound, I John take Francis.
Feel but the difference soft and rough,
This is a Gauntlet, that a Muffe.
Had sly Ulysses at the sack
Of Troy brought thee his Pedlers pack,
And weapon too to know Achilles
From King Nicomedes Phillis,
His plot had failed; this hand would feel
The Needle, that the warlike steel,
When Music does thy pace advance
Thy right leg takes thy left to dance;
Nor is it a Galliard danced by one,
But a mixed dance although alone.
Thus every Heteroclite part
Changes gender but the heart.
And those which modesty can mean
(And dare not speak, are Epicene;
That Gamester needs must overcome
That can play both Tib and Tom.
Thus did Natures Mintage vary,
Coining thee both Phillip and Mary.
Upon the Hermaphrodite, written since by Mr J. Cleaveland.
Problem of Sexes; must thou likewise be
As disputable in thy Pedigree?
Thou twins-in-one, in whom Dame Nature tries
To throw less than Aums-ace upon two Dice:
Were thou served up two in one dish, the rather
To split thy Sire into a double Father?
True, the Worlds scales are even: what the maine
In one place gets, another quits again.
Nature lost one by thee, and therefore must
Slice one in two to keep her number just:
Plurality of Livings is thy state,
And therefore mine must be impropriate.
For since the child is mine, and yet the claim
Is intercepted by another Name.
Never did steeple carry double truer,
His is the Donative, and mine the Cure.
Then say my Muse (and without more dispute)
Who is it that Fame does superinstitute?
The Theban Wittall, when he once descries
Jove is his Rival, falls to sacrifice:
That Name has tipped his horns: see on his knees
A health to Hansen, Kelder, Hercules:
Nay, sublunary Cuckolds are content
To entertain their Fate with complement:
And shall not he be proud whom Randolph daines
To quarter with his Muse, both Arms and Brains?
Gramercy Gossip, I rejoice to see,
She has got a leap of such a Barbary.
Talk not of horns, horns are the Poets Crest;
For since the Muses left their former nest,
To found a Nunnery in Randolph's quill,
Cuckold Pernassus is a forked hill.
But stay, I Have waked his dust, his Marble stirs,
And brings the worms for his Compurgators.
Can Ghost have natural sons? say Ogg it is meet?
Penance bear date after the winding sheet?
Were it a Phaenix (as the double kind
May seem to prove, being there is two combined)
It would disclaim my right, and that it were
The lawful issue of his ashes, swear.
But was she dead? did not his soul translate
Her self, into a shop of lesser rate?
Or break up house, like an expensive Lord,
That gives his purse a fob, and lives at board?
Let old Pythagoras but play the pimp,
And still ther'es hopes 't may prove his bastard Mip:
But I Am profane; for grant the world had one
With whom he might contract an Union,
They two were one, yet like an Eagle spread,
In The Body joined, but parted in the head.
For you my brat, that pose the Porph'ry Chair,
Pope John or Joane, or whatsoever you are,
You are a Nephew, grieve not at your state,
For all the world is illegitimate;
Man cannot get a man, unless the Sun
Club to the Act of Generation.
The Sun and Man get Man, thus Tom and I
Are the joint Fathers of thy Poetry.
For since (blessed shade) this Verse is Male, but mine
O'th weaker sex, a fancy femenine.
We Will part the Child, and yet commit no slaughter;
So shall it be thy son, and yet my daughter.
To the Mutable Fair.
HEre Coelia, for thy sake I part
With all that grew so near my heart;
The passion that I had for thee,
The Faith, the Love, the Constancy;
And that I may successful prove,
Transform my self to what you love.
Fool that I was, so much to prize
Those simple virtues you despise?
Fool, that which such dull arrows strove,
Or hoped to reach a flying Dove;
For you that are in motion still
Decline our force, and mock our skill;
Who, like Don Quixote, do advance
Against a Windmill our vain Lance.
Now will I wander through the air,
Mount, make a stoop at every fair,
And with a fancy unconfined
(As lawless as the Sea, or Wind)
Pursue you wheresoever you fly,
And with your various thoughts comply.
The formal stars do travel so
As we their Names and Courses know;
And he that on their Changes looks,
Would think them governed by our books;
But never were the Clouds reduced
To any Art the motion used.
By those free vapors are so light,
So frequent, that the conquered sight
Despaires to find the rules that guide
Those gilded shadows as they slide;
And therefore of the spacious air
Jove's Royal Consort had the care,
And by that power did once escape
Declining bold Ixions rape;
She with her own resemblance graced
A shining cloud, which he embraced.
Such was that Image, so it smiled
With seeming kindness, which beguiled
Your Thirsis lately, when he thought
He had his fleeting Coelia caught;
'Twas shaped like her, but for the fair
He filled his Arms with yielding air,
A Fate for which he grieves the less
Because the gods had like success:
For in their Story one (we see)
Pursues a Nymph, and takes a Tree;
A second with a Lovers haste
Soon overtakes what he had chaste;
But she that did a Virgin seem,
Possessed, appears a wandering stream.
For his supposed Love a third
Lays greedy hold upon a Bird;
And stands amazed to see his Dear
A wild Inhabitant of the Air.
To such old tales such Nymphs as you
Give credit, and still make them new;
The Amorous now like wonders find
In the swift changes of your mind.
But Coelia if you apprehend
The Muse of your incensed friend:
Nor would that he record your blame,
And make it live, repeat the same;
Again deceive him, and again,
And then he swears he will not complain;
For still to be deluded so
Is all the pleasures Lovers know,
Who like good Falkners take delight
Not in the Quarrey, but the flight.
Of Loving at first sight.
NOt caring to observe the wind,
Or the new sea explore,
Snatched from thy self, how far behind
Already I behold the shore.
May not a thousand dangers sleep
In the smooth bosom of this deep:
No, it is so rocklesse, and so clear,
That the rich Bottom does appear
Paved all with precious things, not torn
From shipwrackt vessels, but there borne;
Sweetness, truth, and every grace
Which time and use are wont to teach,
The eye may in a moment reach,
And read distinctly in her face.
Some other Nymph with color faint,
And Pencill slow may Cupid paint,
And a weak heart in time destroy,
She has a stamp and prints the Boy,
Can with a single look inflame
The coldest Breast, the Rudest tame.
Tho. Batt.

The Antiplatonick.
FOr shame thou everlasting wooer,
Still saying grace, and never falling to her.
Love that is in contemplation placed,
Is Venus drawn but to the waste?
Unless your flame confess its gender,
And your Parley cause surrender;
Y' are Salamanders of a cold desire,
That live untoucht amid the hottest fire.
What though she be a Dame of stone,
The Widow of Pigmalion;
As hard and unrelenting she
As the new crusted Niobe;
Or what does more of statue carry,
A Nun of the Platonic Quarry?
Love melts the Rigor which the Rocks have bred,
A Flint will break upon a feather bed.
For shame you pretty female Elves,
Cease for to candy up your selves:
No more, you Sectaries of the Game,
No more of your calcining flame.
Women commence by Cupids Dart,
As a King hunting dubs a Heart;
Loves Votaries inthrale each others soul,
Till both of them live but upon Parole.
Virtue's no more in Women kind,
But the green-sicknesse of the mind.
Philosophy their new delight,
A kind of Charcoale appetite.
There Is no Sophistry prevails
Where all-convincing Love assailes;
But the disputing petticoat will warp,
As skillful Gamesters are to seek at sharp.
The Soldier, that man of Iron,
Whom ribs of Horror all inviron;
That Is strung with wire instead of veins,
In whose embraces you're in Chains;
Let a Magnetic girl appear,
Straight he turns Cupids Cuiraseer.
Love storms his lips, and takes the Fortress in,
For all the bristled Turn-pikes of his Chin.
Since Loves Artillery then checks
The breast-works of the firmest Sex,
Come let us in affections riot,
They Are sickly pleasures keep a Diet.
Give me a Lover bold and free,
Not Eunucht with formality:
Like an Ambassador that beds a Queen,
With the nice Caution of a Sword between.
Song.
SAy lovely dream, where could thou find
Shales to counterfeit that face?
Colors of this glorious kind
Come not from any Mortal place.
In Heaven it self thou sure were dressed
With that Angel-like disguise:
Thus deluded am I blessed,
And see my joy with closed eyes.
But ah! this Image is too kind
To be other than a dream,
Cruel Sacharissa's mind
Never put on that sweet extreme.
Fair Dream, if thou intend'st me grace,
Change this heavenly form of thine;
Paint despised love in thy face,
And make it to appear like mine.
Pale, Wan, and Meager, let it look,
With a pitty-moving shape,
Such as wander by the brook
Of Lethe, or from Graves escape.
Then to that Matchless Nymph appear,
In whose shape thou shinest so,
Softly in her sleeping ear
With humble words express my woe.
Perhaps from greatness, state and pride,
Thus surprised she may fall;
Sleep does disproportion hide,
And death resembling equals all.
Song II.
BEhold the brand of Beauty tossed;
See how the motion does dilate the flame,
Delighted Love his spoils does boast,
And triumph in this game:
Fire to no place confined,
Is both our wonder, and our fear,
Moving the Mind
Like lightning hurled through the air.
High heaven, the glory does increase
Of all her shining Lamps this Artfull way;
The Sun in figures such as these
Joies with the Moon to play;
To these sweet strains they advance,
Which do result from their own spheres,
As this Nymphs dance
Moves with the Numbers which she hears.
An Elegy.
HEaven knows my love to thee* fed on desires
So hallowed* and unmixt with vulgar fires,
As are the purest Beams shot from the Sun
At his full height, and the devotion
Of dying Martyrs could not burn more clear,
Nor Innocence in her first Robes appear
Whiter than our affections; they did show
Like frost forced out of flames, and fire from snow.
So pure the Phoenix, when she did refine
Her Age to Youth, borrowed no flames but mine.
But now my day's so'recast, for I have now
Drawn Anger, like a Tempest, over the brow
Of my fair Mistress; those your glorious eyes
Whence I was wont to see my day star rise
Thereat, like revengefull Meteors; and I feel
My Torment, my gilt double, my hell;
'Twas a mistake, and might have venial been,
Done to another, but it was made sin,
And justly mortal too, by troubling thee,
Slight wrongs are Treasons done to Majesty.
O all ye blessed Ghosts of deceased Loves,
That now lie sainted in the Eclesian Groves,
Mediate for mercy for me; at her shrine
Meet with full Quire, and join your prayers with mine:
Conjure her by the merits of your kisses,
By your past sufferings, and your present blisses.
Conjure her by your mutual hopes and fears,
By all your intermixed sighs and Tears,
To plead my pardon: go to her and tell
That you will walk the Guardian Sentinel,
My souls safe Genii, that she need not fear
A mutinous thought, or one close Rebel there;
But what needs that, when she alone sits there
Sole Angel of that Orb? in her own sphere
Alone she sits, and can secure it free
From all irregular motions; only she
Can give the Balsome that must cure this sore,
And the sweet Antidote to sin no more.
Upon Mr Charles Beaumont, Who died of a Consumption.
While others drop their tears upon thy hearse,
Sweet Charles, and sigh to increase the wind my Verse,
Pious in naming thee, cannot complain
Of Death, or Fate, for they were lately slain
By thy own conflict; and since good men know
What Heaven to such a virgin Saint does owe;
Though some will say they saw thee dead, yet I
Congratulate thy life and victory:
Thy flesh an upper garment, that it might
Aid thy eternal progress, first grew light;
Nothing but Angel now, which thou were near,
Almost reduced to thy first spirit here:
But fly fair soul, while our Complaints are just,
That cannot follow for our Chains of dust.
Fie on Love.
NOw fie on foolish Love, it not befits
Or Man or Woman know it.
Love was not meant for people in their wits,
And they that fondly show it
Betray the straw, and Feathers in their brain,
And shall have Bedlam for their pain:
If single love be such a curse,
To marry is to make it ten times worse.
A Song.
GO and catch a falling star,
Get with child a Mandrake root,
Tell me where all past years are,
Or who cleft the devils foot;
Teach me to hear Mermaids singing,
Or to keep off envies stinging,
And find
What wind
Serves to advance an honest mind.
If thou be^st borne to strange sights,
Things invisible to see,
Ride ten thousand days and nights,
Till Age snow white hairs on thee;
Thou, when thou return'st, wilt tell me
All strange wonders that befell thee,
And swear,
No where
Lives a Woman true and fair.
Secrecy protested.
Fear not (dear Love) that I Will reveal
Those hours of pleasure we two steal;
No eye shall see, nor yet the Sun
Descry, what thou and I have done;
No ear shall hear our love, but we
Silent as the night will be;
The God of Love himself (whose dart
Did first wound mine, and then thy heart)
Shall never know that we can tell
What sweets in stolen embraces dwell:
This only means may find it out,
If when I die Physicians doubt
What caused my death, and there to view
Of all their judgments which was true,
Rip up my heart, O then I fear
The world will see thy picture there.
Eternity of Love protested.
HOw ill does He deserve a Lovers name,
Whose pale weak flame
Cannot retain
His heat in spite of absence or disdain;
But does at once like paper set on fire,
Burn and expire.
True love can never change his seat,
Nor did he ever love that could retreat;
That noble flame which my breast keeps alive
Shall still survive,
When my soul's fled;
Nor shall my love die when my body's dead,
That shall wait on me to the lower shade,
And never fade.
My very Ashes in their Urne
Shall, like a hallowed Lamp, for ever burn.
The willing Prisoner to his MISTRESS.
LEt Fools great Cupid's yoke disdain,
Loving their own wild freedom better,
Whilst proud of my triumphant Chain
I sit, and court my beauteous fetter.
Her murdering glances, snaring hairs,
And her bewitching smiles, so please me,
As he brings ruin that repaires
The sweet afflictions that displease me.
Hide not those panting bals of snow
With envious veiles from my beholding;
Unlock those lips their pearly row
In a sweet smile of love unfolding.
And let those eyes whose motion wheels
The restless fate of every Lover.
Survey the pains my sick heart feels,
And wounds themselves have made discover.
A Mask of the Gentlemen of Graies Inn, and the Inner Temple, by Mr Francis
Beaumont.
Enter Iris Running, Mercury following and Catching hold of her. Mercury. STay
light-foot Iris, for thou striv'st in vain,
My Wings are nimbler than thy feet;
Iris away,
Dissembling Mercury my Messages
Ask honest haste, not like those wanton ones
Your thundering Father sends.

Mer. Stay foolish Maid,
Or I will take my rise upon a hill
When I perceive thee seated in a Cloud
In all the Painted Glory that thou have,
And never cease to clap my willing wing,
Till I catch hold on thy discolored bow,
And shiver it beyond the Angry power
Of your mad Mistress to make up again.

Iris. Hermes forbear, Juno will chide and strike;
Is great Jove jealous that I am employed?
Or her love Errands she did never yet
Claspe weak Mortality in her white Arms
As he has often done; I only come
To celebrate the long-wish'd nuptials
Here in Olympia, which are now performed
Betwixt two goodly Rivers that have mixed
Their gentle winding waves, and are to grow
Into a thousand streams, great as themselves:
I need not name them, for the sound is loud
In Heaven and Earth, and I am sent from her,
The Queen of marriage, that was present here,
And smiled to see them join, and has not chid
Since it was done; God Hermes let me go.

Mer. Nay you must stay, Joves Message is the same,
Whose eyes are Lightning, and whose voice is Thunder,
Whose breath is Airy wind, he will, who knows
How to be first in Earth as well as Heaven.

Iris. But what has he to do with Nuptial rites?
Let him sit pleased upon his starry Throne,
And fright poor Mortals with his Thunderbolts,
Leaving to us the mutual darts of Eyes.

Mer. Alas, when ever offered he to abridge
Your Ladies power, but only now in these,
Whose match concerns the general Government:
Has not each God a part in these high joys?
And shall not he the King of gods presume
Without proud Juno's License? let her know,
That when enamored Jove first gave her power
To link soft hearts in undissolving bands,
He then foresaw, and to himself reserved
The honor of this Marriage; thou shall stand
Still as a Rock, while I to bless this Feast,
Will summon up with my all-charming Rod
The Nymphs of Fountains, from whose watery locks
(Hung with the dew of blessing and increase)
The greedy Rivers take their nourishment.
Yea Nymphs who bathing in your loved springs,
Behold these Rivers in their infancy,
And joy'd to see them when their circled heads
Refreshed the Air, and spread the ground with flowers;
Rise from the wels, and with your nimble feet
Perform that office to this happy pair
Which in these Plains you to Alpheus did,
When, passing hence through many seas unmixed,
He gained the favor of his Aretheuse.

The Nymphs rise and dance a little and then make a stand. Iris. Is Hermes
grown a Lover? by what power
Unknown to us calls he the maids?

Mer. Presuptuous Iris, I could make thee dance,
Till thou forget'st thy Ladies messages,
And runn'st back crying to her: thou shall know
My power is more, only my breath and this
Shall move fixed stars, and force the firmament
To yield the Hyades, who govern showers,
And dewy Clouds, in whose dispersed drops
Thou form'st the shape of thy deceitful bow;
Ye maids, who yearly at appointed times
Advance with kindly tears the gentle floods,
Descend and power your blessing on these streams,
Which rouling down from Heaven, aspiring hills,
And now united in the fruitful Vales,
Bear all before them, ravish with their joy,
And swell in glory till they know no bounds.

The Cloud descends with the Hyades, at which the maids seem to be rejoiced,
they all dance a while together, then make another stand as if they wanted
something. Iris. Great wit and power has Hermes to contrive
A lively Dance which of one Sex consists.

Mer. Alas poor Iris, Venus has in store
A secret Ambush of her winged boys,
Who lurking long within these pleasant Groves,
First stuck these flowers with their equal Darts;
Those Cupids shall come forth and join with these,
To honor that which they themselves began.

The Cupids come forth and dance, they are weary with their blind pursuing the
Nymphs, and the Nymphs weary with flying them. Iris. Behold the statues which
wise Vulcan placed
Under the Altar of Olympian Jove,
And gave to them an Artificial life;
See how they move, drawn by this heavenly joy,
Like the wild Trees which followed Orphaeus harp.

The Statues come down, and they all dance till the Nymphs outrun them and
lose them, then the Cupids go off, and last the Statues. Mer. And what will
Juno's Iris do for her?

Iris. Just match this show or mine inventions fail;
Had it been worthier, I would have invoked
The blazing Comets, Clouds, and falling stars,
And all my Kindred, Meteors of the air,
To have excelled it, but I now must strive
To imitate confusion; therefore thou
Delightful Flora, if thou ever felt'st
Increase of sweetness in those blooming plants
On which the horns of my fair Bow decline,
Send hither all that rural company
Which deck the maygames with their clownish sports,
Juno will have it so.

The second Antimasque rusheth in, they dance their measure, and as rudely
depart. Mer. Iris we strive
Like winds at liberty, who should do worst
E're we return if Juno be the Queen
Of marriages, let her give happy way
To what is done in honor of the State
She governs.

Iris. Hermes so it may be done
Merely in honor of the State, and those
That now have proved it; not to satisfy
The Lust of Jupiter in having thanks
More than his Juno, if thy snaky rod
Have power to search the heaven, or sound the sea,
Or call together all the buds of earth,
To bring thee any thing that may do grace
To us, and these, do it we shall be pleased;
They know that from the mouth of Jove himself,
Whose words have winks, and need not to be borne,
I took a Message, and I bore it through
A thousand yielding Clouds, and never staid
Till his high will was done. The Olympian games
Which long had slept at these wished Nuptials
He pleased to have renewed, and all his Knights
Are gathered hither, who within their Tents
Rest on this hill, upon whose rising head
The Alter is discovered, with the Priests about it, and the Statues under it,
and the Knights lying in their Tents on each side near the top of the hill.
Behold Joves Altar and his blessed Priests
Moving about it; come you holy men,
And with your voices draw these youths along,
That till Joves music call them to their games,
Their Active sports may give a blessed content
To those for whom they are again begun.

The first Song when the Priests descend, and the Knights follow them.
SHake off your heavy trance
And leap into a Dance,
Such as no Mortals use to tread,
Fit only for Apollo
To play to, for the Moon to lead,
And all the stars to follow.
The second Song at the end of the first Dance.
ON blessed Youths, for Jove does pause,
Laying aside his graver Laws
For this device:
And at the wedding such a pair
Each Dance is taken for a prayer,
Each Song a Sacrifice.
The third Song after their many Dances, when they are to take the Ladies
single.
MOre pleasing were these sweet delights,
If Ladies moved as well as Knights;
Run every one of you and catch
A Nymph in honor of this match,
And whisper boldly in her ear,
Jove will but laugh if you forswear.
All.
And this days sins he does resolve,
That we his Priests should all absolve.
The fourth Song when they have parted with the Ladies, a shrill Music
sounds, supposed to be that which calls them to the Olympian Games, at which
they all make a seeming preparation to depart.
YOu should stay longer, if we durst,
Away, alas, that he that first
Gave time wild Wings to fly away,
Has now no power to make him stay;
And though these games must needs be played,
I would these pair when they are laid,
And not a Creature nigh 'em,
Might catch his sigh as he does pass,
And clip his wings, and break his glass,
And keep 'em ever by 'em.
The fifth Song when all is done as they ascend.
PEace and silence be the guide
To the Man, and to the Bride:
If there be a joy yet new
In marriage, let it fall on you,
That all the world may wonder:
If we should stay we should do worse,
And turn our blessings to a Curse,
By keeping you asunder.
Prologues, Epilogues, and Songs to several Plays, written by Mr Francis
Beaumont and Fletcher.
The Prologue to the Mad Lover.
TO please all is impossible, and to despair
Ruine's our selves, and damps the Writers Care:
Would we knew what to do, or say, or when
To find the minds here equal with the men,
But we must venture; now to sea we go,
Fair Fortune with us, give us room and blow:
Remember you are all venturers; and in this play
How many twelve pences ye have 'stowed this day;
Remember for Return of your delight,
We lanch and plough through storms of fear and spite:
Give us your fore winds fairly, fill our wings,
And steer us right, and as the Sailers sing,
Laden with wealth on wanton Seas, so we
Shall make our home-bound voyage cheerfully;
And you our Noble Merchants, for your Treasure,
Share equally the fraught, we run for pleasure.
The Epilogue.
HEre lies the doubt now, let our Plays be good,
Our own care sailing equal in this Flood;
Our preparations new, new our Attire,
Yet here we are becalmed still, still in the mire;
Here we stick fast, is there no way to clear
This Passage of your judgment, and our fear?
No Mitigation of that Law? Brave Friends,
Consider we are yours, made for your ends,
And every thing preserves it self, each will,
If not perverse and crooked, utters still,
The best of that it ventures in: have care
Even for your pleasures sake, of what you are,
And do not ruin all; you may frown still,
But it is the Nobler way to check the Will.
First Song to the mad Lover.
Stre. ORpheus, I am come from the deeps below
To thee* fond man, the plagues of love to show.
To thee fair Fields, where Loves eternal dwell,
There Is none that come, but first they pass through hell.
Hark and beware, unless thou have loved ever,
Beloved again, thou shall see those Joys never.
Hark how they groan that dyed despairing,
O take heed then:
Hark how they houle for ever daring,
All these were men:
They that be fools and dye for fame,
They lose their name,
And they that bleed,
Hark how they speed.
Now in cold Frosts, now scorching fires,
They sit and curse their lost desires:
Nor shall their souls be free from pains and fears,
Till Women waft them over in their tears.
The second Song to the Mad-Lover.
Orph. CHaron, O Charon,
Thou waster of the souls to bliss or bane.

Cha. Who calls the Ferry-man of Hell?

Orph. Come near
And say who lives in Joy, and whom in fear.

Cha. Those that dye well, eternal joy shall follow;
Those that dye ill, their own soul fate shall swallow.

Orph. Shall thy black Bark those guilty spirits stow
That kill themselves for love.

Cha. O no, no,
My courage cracks when such great sins are near,
No wind blows fair, nor I my self can steare.

Orph. What Lovers pass and in Elisium reign?

Cha. Those gentle loves that are beloved again.

Orph. This Soldier loves, and feign would dye to win,
Shall be go on?

Cha. No, it is too foul a sin,
He must not come aboard: I dare not Row.
Storms of despair and guilty blood will blow.

Orph. Shall time release him say?

Cha. No, no, no, no,
Nor time, nor death can alter us, nor prayer;
My Boat is destiny, and who then dare,
But those appointed, come aboard? Live still
And l^ve by reason, mortal, not by will.

Orph. And when thy Mistress shall close up thine eyes.

Cha. Then come aboard and pass.

Orph. Till when be wise.

Cha. Till when be wise.

The third Song to the mad Lover.
O Fair, sweet Goddess, Queen of Loves,
Soft and gentle as thy Doves,
Humble eyed, and ever ruing
Those poor hearts their loves pursuing.
O thou mother of delights,
Crowner of all happy nights,
Star of Dear content and pleasure,
Of mutual love the endless treasure,
Accept this Sacrifice we bring;
Thou continual youth and spring,
Grant this Lady her desires,
And every hour we will crown thy fires.
The fourth Song to the mad Lover.
Arm, Arm, Arm, Arm, the Scouts are all come in,
Keep your Ranks close, and now your honor win.
Behold from yonder Hill the Foe appears,
Bows, Bills, Glaves, Arrows, Shields, and Spears,
Like a dark wood he comes, or tempest pouring;
O view the wings of Horse the Meadows scowring.
The Vant-Guard marches bravely, hark the Drums -- Dub, Dub.
They meet, they meet, now the battle comes;
See how the Arrows fly,
That darken all the sky;
Hark how the Trumpets sound,
Hark how the hills rebound -- tara, tara, tara.
Hark how the Horses charge in boys, in boys in, -- tara, tara.
The Battle totters, now the wounds begin,
O how thy cry,
O how they dye.
Room for the Valiant Memnon armed with Thunder,
See how he breaks the Ranks asunder:
They fly, they fly, Eumenes has the Chase,
And brave Politius makes good his place.
To the plains, to the woods,
To the rocks, to the floods,
They fly for succor: follow, follow follow, hey, hey. --
Hark how the Soldiers hollow;
Brave Diocles is dead,
And all his soldiers fled,
The Battle's won and lost,
That many a life has cost.
The Prologue to the Spanish Curate.
TO tell ye (Gentlemen) we have a play,
A new one too, and that it is launched to day,
The name ye know, that is nothing to my story;
To tell you it is familiar, void of glory,
Of State, of Bitterness of wit you will say,
For that is now held wit that tends that way,
Which we avoid to tell you too, till merry,
And mean to make you pleasant, and not weary:
The stream that guides ye easy to attend
To tell you that it is good is to no end,
If you believe not; nay to go thus far,
To swear it, if you swear against it, were
To assure you any thing, unless you see,
And so conceive, is vanity in me;
Therefore I leave it to it self, and pray
Like a good Barque it may work out to day,
And stem all doubts; 'twas built for such a proof,
And we hope highly, if she lie aloof
For her own vantage, to give wind at will;
Why, let her work, only be you but still,
And sweet opinion'd, and we are bound to say,
You are worthy Judges, and you crown the Play.
The Epilogue.
THe Play is done, yet our suite never ends,
Still when you part you would still part our Friends,
Our Noblest Friends; if ought have fallen amiss,
Oh let it be sufficient that it is,
And you have pardoned it: In buildings great
All the whole body cannot be so neat
But something may be mended; those are fair,
And worthy love, that may destroy, but spare.
The Prologue to the French-Lawyer.
TO promise much before a Play begin,
And when it is done ask pardon, were a sin
We Will not be guilty of: and to excuse
Before we know a fault, were to abuse
The Writers and our selves; for I dare say
We all are fooled if this be not a Play,
And such a Play as shall (so should Plays do)
Impe Times dull wings, and make you merry too;
'Twas to that purpose writ, so we intend it,
And we have our wished ends if you commend it.
The Epilogue.
Gentlemen,
I am sent forth to enquire what you decree
Of us and our Poets, they will be
This night exceeding merry, so will we;
If you approve their labors they profess,
You are their Patrons, and we say no less;
Resolve us then, for you can only tell
Whether we have done idly, or done well.
First Song to the Play called the little French Lawyer, called an Epithalamine
Song, at the wedding.
COme away, bring on the Bride,
And place her by her Lovers side;
You fair troop of Maids attend her,
Pure and holy thoughts befriend her;
Blush, and wish you Virgins all
Many such fair nights may fall.
Chorus.
Hymen fill the house with joy,
All thy sacred fires employ;
Bless the Bed with holy love,
Now fair Orb of beauty move.
Second Song to the Little French Lawyer, called, Song in the Wood.
THis way, this way, come and hear,
You that hold these pleasures dear;
Fill your ears with our sweet sound,
Whilst we melt the frozen ground:
This way, come make have, O Fair,
Let your clear eyes gild the Air;
Come and bless us with your sight,
This way, this way seek delight.
The Prologue to the Play, called, The Custom of the Country.
SO free this work is (Gentlemen) from offense,
That we are confident it needs no defense
From us, or from the Poets, we dare look
On any man that brings his Table book
To write down what again he may repeat
At some great Table, to deserve his meat;
Let such come swelled with malice to apply
What is mirth here, there for an injury.
Nor Lord, nor Lady we have taxed, nor State,
Nor any private person, their poor hate
Will be starved here, for Envy shall not find
One touch that may be wrested to her mind;
And yet despair not Gentlemen, the Play
Is Quick and Witty, so the Poets say.
And we believe them, the Plot Neat and New,
Fashioned by those that are approved by you;
Only 'twill crave attention in the most,
Because one point unmasked the whole is lost;
Hear first then, and judge after, and be free,
And as our cause is let our Censure be.
The Epilogue.
Why there should be an Epilogue to a Play,
I know no cause, the old and usual way
For which they were made, was to entreat the grace
Of such as were Spectators in this place;
And time, it is to no purpose, for I know
What you resolve already to bestow
Will not be altered, whatsoever I say
In the behalf of us, and of the Play,
Only to quit our doubts, if you think fit,
You may, or cry it up, or silence it.
Another Prologue for the same Play.
WE wish, if it were possible, you knew
What we would give for this nights look, if new,
It being our Ambition to delight
Our kind Spectators with what is good and right,
Yet so far known, and credit me 'twas made
By such as were held workmen in their Trade;
At a time too, when they, as I divine,
Were truly merry, and drank lusty Wine,
The Nectar of the Muses; some are here,
I dare presume, to whom it did appear
A well-drawn piece, which gave a lawful birth
To passionate Scenes mixed with no vulgar mirth,
But unto such to whom it is known by fame
From others, perhaps only by the name;
I am a Suitor, that they would prepare
Sound Pallats, and then judge their bill of fare.
It were injustice to discry this now,
For being liked before you may allow
Your Candor safe what is taught in the old Schools,
All such as lived before you were not fools.
The Epilogue.
I Spoke much in the Prologue for the Play,
To its desert I hope, yet you might say,
Should I change now from that which then was meant,
Or in a syllable grow less confident,
I were weak-hearted, I am still the same,
In my opinion, and forbear to frame
Quallification, or excuse, if you
Concur with me, and hold my judgment true;
Show it with any sign, and from this place,
And send me off exploded, or with grace.
The Prologue to the Play called The Noble Gentleman.
Wit is become an Antic, and puts on
As many shapes of variation
To court the Times applause, as the times dare
Change several fashions, nothing is thought rare
Which is not new and followed; yet we know
That what was worn some twenty year ago,
Comes into grace again, and we pursue
That Custom by presenting to your view
A Play in fashion then, not doubting now
But 'twill appear the same if you allow
Worth to their Noble memory, whose name,
Beyond all power of death live in their fame.
The Epilogue.
THe Monuments of virtue and desert
Appear more goodly when the gloss of Art
Is eaten off by Time, than when at first
They were set up, not censured at the worst;
We have done our best, for your contents to fit,
With new pains this old Monument of Wit.
The Prologue to the Play, called, The Captain.
TO please you with this Play we fear will be
(So does the Author too) a mystery
Somewhat above our Art, for all men's Eyes,
Ears, Faith, and Judgments are not of one size;
For to say truth and not to flatter ye,
This is nor Comedy, nor Tragedy,
Nor History, nor any thing that may
(Yet in a week) be made a perfect play;
Yet those that love to laugh, and those that think
Twelve pence goes further this way than in drink,
Or Damsels; If they mark the matter through,
May stumble on a foolish toy or two,
Will make them show their teeth: pray, for my sake,
That likely am your first man, do not take
A distaste before you feel it, for ye may
When this is hist to Ashes have a play.
And here to out-hisse this be patient then,
(My honor done) you are welcome Gentlemen.
The Epilogue.
IF you mislike (as you shall ever be
Your own free Judges) this Play utterly,
For your own Nobleness yet do not hiss,
But as you go by, say it was amiss,
And we will mend, chide us, but let it be;
Never let it be in cool blood. OF my honesty,
If I have any, this I Will say for all,
Our meaning was to please you still, and shall.
First Song to the Play, called, The Captain.
TEll me dearest what is Love?
It Is a lightning from above,
It Is an Arrow, it is a fire,
It Is a Boy they call desire.
Both. It Is a Grave
Gapes to have
Those poor fools that long to prove.
1 Tell me more are women true?
2 Yes some are, and some as you;
Some are willing, some are strange,
Since you men first taught to Change.
Both. And till troth
Be in both,
All shall love to love anew.
1 Tell me more, yet can they grieve?
2 Yes* and sicken sore, but live:
And by wise and delay
When you men are as wise as they;
Both. Then I see
Faith will be
Never till they both believe.
The second Song.
A Way Delights, go seek some other dwelling,
For I must dye;
Farewell false love thy tongue is ever telling
Lie after Lie.
For ever let me rest now from thy Smarts,
Alas for pity go
And fire their hearts
That have been hard to thee, mine was not so,
Never again deluding love shall know me,
For I will dye:
And all those griefs that think to over-grow me,
Shall be as I;
For ever will I sleep while poor maids cry,
Alas, for pity stay,
And let us dye,
With thee men cannot mock us in the day.
The third Song.
CCome hither you that love and hear me sing
Of Joys still growing,
Green, fresh, and lusty, as the Pride of Spring,
And ever blowing;
Come hither youths that blush and dare not know
What is desire,
And old men worse than you, that cannot blow
One spark of fire;
And with the power of my enchanting Song
Boys shall be able men, and old men young.
Come hither you that hope, and you that cry,
Leave off complaining,
Youth, Strength, and beauty that shall never dye,
Are here remaining.
Come hither fools and blush you stay so long
From being blessed,
And Mad men worse than you, that suffer wrong,
Yet seek no rest;
And in an hour with my enchanting Song
You shall be ever pleased, and young maids long.
Songs to the Play, called, The Beggars Bush. The first Song.
CAst our Caps and Care away: this is Beggars holiday,
At the Crowning of our King thus we ever dance and sing;
In the world look out and see, where so happy a Prince as he
Where the Nation live so free, and so merry as do we;
Be it peace, or be it war, here at liberty we are,
And enjoy our ease and rest, to the Field we are not pressed:
Nor are called into the Town to be troubled with the Gown,
Hang all Offices we cry, and the Magistrate too by;
When the Subsidies encreast, we are not a penny ceast;
Now will any go to law with the Beggar for a straw,
All which happiness he brags he does owe unto his Rags.
The second Song.
TAke her and tug her,
And turn her and hug her,
And turn again boy, again;
Then if she mumble,
Or if her tail tumble,
Kiss her amain boy, amain.
Do thy endeavor
To take off her Fever,
Then her disease no longer will reign,
If nothing will serve her
Then thus to preserve her,
Swing her amain boy, amain.
Give her cold Jelly
To take up her belly.
And once a day swing her again:
If she stand all these pains,
Then knock out her brains,
Her disease no longer will reign.
The third Song.
BRing out your Cony-skins fair maids to me,
And hold 'em fair that I may see,
Gray, Black, and blew; for your smaller skins
I Will give ye looking-glasses pins;
And for your whole Coney, here is ready, ready money.
Come Gentle Joane do thou begin
With thy black, black, black Coney-skin,
And Mary then and Jane will follow
With their silver hair'd skins and their yellow;
The white Coney-skin I will not lay by,
For though it be faint it is fair to the eye;
The Gray it is warm, but yet for my money
Give me the bonny, bonny black Coney.
Come away fair maids, your skins will decay,
Come and take money maids, put your ware away.
Coney-skins, Coney-skins, have ye any Coney-skins,
I have fine Bracelets, and fine silver pins.
The Prologue to the Play, called, The Coxcombe.
THis Comedy long forgot, by some thought dead,
By us preserved once more does raise her head;
And to your Noble censures does present
Her outward form, and inward ornament.
Nor let this smell of Arrogance, since it is known
The makers that confessed it for their own,
Were this way skillful, and without the Crime
Of flatteries, I might say, did please the time;
The work it self too, when it first came forth,
In the opinion of men of worth,
Was well received and favored, though some rude
And harsh among the Ignorant multitude,
That relish gross food better than a dish
(That Is cooked with care, and served in to the wish
Of curious Pallats) wanting wit and strength
Truly to judge, condemned it for the length,
That faults reformed, and now it is to be tried
Before such Judges, 'twill not be denied
A free and Noble hearing, nor fear I
But 'twill deserve to have free liberty,
And give you cause (and with content) to say,
Their care was good that did revive this Play.
The Epilogue.
It Is ended, but my hopes and fear begin,
Nor can it be imputed as a sin
In me to wish it favor, if this night
To the judicious it has given light,
I have my ends, and may such, for their grace
Vouchsafe to this, find theirs in every place.
The Prologue to the Tragedy, called, The false One.
NEw Titles warrant not a Play for new,
The Subject being old and it is as true;
Fresh and neat matter may with ease be framed
Out of their Stories, that have often been named
With glory on the Stage: what borrows he
From him that wrought old Priams Tragedy
That writes his love to Hecuba? sure to tell
Of Caesar's amorous heats, and how he fell
In the Capital, can never be the same
To the Judicious: nor will such blame
Those that penned this forbarrennesse, when they find
Young Cleopatra here, and her great mind
Expressed to the height, with us a Maid and free,
And how he rated her Virginity:
We treat not of what boldness she did dye,
Nor of her fatal love to Anthony;
What we present and offer to your view
(Upon their Faiths) the Stage yet never knew;
Let reason then first to your wills give Laws,
And after judge of them, and of their cause.
The Epilogue.
I Now should wish another had my place,
But that I hope to come off, and with grace,
And but express some sign that you are pleased,
We of our doubts, they of their fears are eased;
I would beg further (Gentlemen) and much say
In the favor of our selves, them, and the Play,
Did I not rest assured? the most I see
Hate Impudence, and cherish Modesty.
First Song to the False One, a Tragedy.
LOok out bright Eyes, and bless the Air,
Even in shaddows you are fair:
Shut up, beauty is like fire
That breaks out clearer still and higher;
Though your body be confined,
And lost love a prisoner bound,
Yet the beauty of your mind,
Neither Cheek, nor Chain has found.
Look out Nobly then, and dare,
Even the Fetters that you wear.
The second Song.
ISis the Goddess of this Land
Bids thee (great Caesar) understand
And mark our Customs, and first know
With greedy eyes, these watch the flow
Of plenteous Nilus when he comes
With Songs, with Dances, Timbrels, Drums,
They entertain him, cut his way,
And give his proud heads leave to play;
Nilus himself shall rise and show
His matchless wealth in overflow.
The third Song.
COme let us help the Reverend Nyle,
He Is very old (alas the while)
Let us dig him easy ways,
And prepare a thousand plays
To delight his streams, let us sing
A loud welcome to our spring;
This way let his curling heads
Fall into our new-made beds;
This way let his wanton spawns
Friske and glide it over the Lawns;
This way profit comes and gain,
How he tumbles here amain.
How his waters haste to fall
In our Channel, labor all
And let him in: let Nylus flow,
And perpetual plenty show;
With Incense let us bless the brim,
And as the wanton Fishes swim,
Let us Gums, and Garlands fling,
And loud our Timbrels ring;
Come, (old Father) come away,
Our Labor is our Holiday.
Isis. Here comes the aged River now,
With Garlands of great Pearl his brow,
Begirt and rounded, in his flow
All things take life, and all things grow;
A Thousand wealthy treasures still
To do him service at his will,
Follow his rising Flood, and power
Perpetual blessings in our store.
Hear him, and next there will advance
His Sacred Heads to tread a Dance
In honor of my Royal Guest,
Mark them too, and you have a Feast.
The fourth Song.
MAke room, for my rich waters fall,
And bless my Flood,
Nylus come flowing to you all
Increase and good.
Now the Plants and Flowers shall spring,
And the merry Ploughman sing.
In my hidden waves I bring
Bread, and Wine, and every thing;
Let the Damsels sing me in,
Sing aloud that I may rise:
Your Holy Feasts and hours begin,
And each man brings a Sacrifice;
Now my wanton Pearls I show
That to Ladies fair necks grow;
Now my Gold
And Treasures that can never be told,
Shall bless this Land by my rich Flow;
And after this to crown your eyes,
My hidden holy bed arise.
The Prologue to the Play, called, The Chances.
Aptness for mirth to all this instant night
Thalia has prepared for your delight;
Her choice and curious Vyands in each part,
Seasoned with rarities of wit, as Art.
Nor fear I to be taxed for a vain boast,
My promise will find credit with the most,
When they know ingenious Fletcher made it, he
Being in himself a perfect Comedy;
And some sit here, I doubt not, dare aver,
Living, he made that house a Theater
Which he pleased to frequent; and thus much we
Could not but play to his loud memory.
For our selves we do entreat that you would not
Expect strange turns and windings in the Plot,
Objects of State, and now and then a Rhyme
To gaul particular persons with the time;
Or that his towering Muse has made her flight
Nearer your apprehension than your sight:
But if that sweet Expression, quick Conceit,
Familiar Language fashioned to the weight,
Of such as speak it have the power to raise
Your grace to us, with Trophies to his praise,
We may profess, presuming on his skill,
If his Chances please not you, our fortune's ill.
The Epilogue.
WE have not held you long,
One brow in this selected Company
Assuring a dislike our pains were eased,
Could we be confident that all rise pleased,
But such ambition soars too high: If we
Have satisfied the best, and they agree
In a fair Censure, we have our reward.
And in them Armed desire no surer guard.
The Prologue to the Play, called, The Loyal Subject.
WE need not Noble Gentlemen to invite
Attention, pre-instruct you who did write
This worthy Story, being confident
The Mirth joined with grave matter, and intent,
To yield the hearers profit with delight,
Will speak the maker, and to do him right
Would ask a Genius like to his; the Age
Mourning his loss, and our now widdowed stage
In vain lamenting, I could add so far,
Behind him the most Modern writers are;
That when they would commend him their best praise
Ruins the buildings which they strive to raise.
To his best memory so much a friend,
Presumes to write secure, 'twill not offend
The living that are modest with the rest,
That may repine he cares not to contest:
This Debt to Fletcher paid it is professed,
But us the Actors we will do our best
To send such savouring friends, as hither come
To grace the Scene, pleased and contented home.
The Epilogue.
THough something well assured, few here repent,
Three hours of precious time or money spent
On our endeavors, yet not to rely
Too much upon our care and industry:
It Is fit we should ask but a modest way
How you approve our Action in the Play;
If you vouchsafe to crown it with applause,
It is your bounty, and give us cause
Hereafter with a general consent
To study, as becomes us, your content.
First Song to the Play, Called, The Loyal Subject.
Broom, Broom, the bonny Broom,
Come buy my Birchen Broom,
In The Wars we have no more room,
Buy all my bonny Broom.
For a kiss take two,
If those will not do,
For a little, little pleasure,
Take all my whole treasure;
If all these will not do it,
Take the Broom man to boot;
Broom, Broom, the bonny Broom.
The second Song.
THe Wars are done and gone,
And Soldiers now neglected Pedlers are;
Come maidens, come along,
For I can show you handsome, handsome ware,
Powders for for the head,
And drinks for your bed
To make ye blithe and bonny:
As well in the night we Soldiers can fight,
And please a young wench as any.
The third Song.
Will ye buy any honesty? come away,
I sell it openly by day;
I bring no forced light, nor no Candle
To cozen ye; come buy and handle.
This will show the great man good,
The Tradesman where he swears and lies,
Each Lady of a Noble blood,
The City Dame to rule her Eyes:
Ye are Rich men now, come buy, and then
I Will make ye richer, honest men.
The fourth Song.
HAve ye any cracked maidenheads to new leach or mend?
Have ye any old maidenheads to sell, or to change?
Bring 'em to me with a little pretty gin,
I Will clout 'em, I Will mend 'em, I Will knock in a pin
Shall make 'em as good maids again
As ever they have been.
The Prologue to the Play, called, The Lovers Progress.
A Story, and a known one, long since writ,
Truth must take place, and by an able wit,
Foul-mouthed detraction daring not deny
To give so much to Fletchers memory;
If so, some may object, why then do you
Present an old Piece to us for a new?
Or wherefore will your professed Writer be
(Not taxed of Theft before) a Plagary?
To this he answers in his just defense,
And to maintain to all our innocence,
Thus much, though he has traveled the same way,
Demanding, and receiving too the pay
For a New Poem, you may find it due,
He having neither cheated us nor you;
He vows, and deeply, that he did not spare
The utmost of his strength, and his best care
In the reviving it; and though his powers
Could not, as he desired, in three short hours
Contract the Subject, and much less express
The Changes, and the various Passages
That will be looked for, you may hear this day
Some Scenes that will confirm it is a Play,
He being ambitious that it should be known
What Is good was Fletchers, and what ill his own.
The Epilogue.
STill doubtful and perplexed too, whether he
Has done Fletcher right in the History;
The Poet sits within, since he must know it,
He with respect desires that you would show it
By some accustomed sign; if from our Action
Or his Endeavors you meet satisfaction,
With ours he has his ends, we hope the best,
To make that certainty in you does rest.
First Song to the Lovers Progress.
ADieu fond Love, farewell you wanton powers,
I am free again;
Thou dull disease of blood and idle hours,
Bewitching pain.
Fly to the Fools that sigh away their time,
My Nobler love to heaven clime,
And there behold beauty still young,
That time can never corrupt, nor death destroy;
Immortal sweetness by fair Angels sung,
And honored by eternity and joy:
There lives my Love, thither my hopes aspire,
Fond love declines, this heavenly love grows higher.
The second Song.
It Is late and cold, stir up the fire,
Sit close and draw the Table nigher;
Be merry, and drink wine that is old,
A hearty Medicine against a cold.
Your beds of wanton down the best:
Where you shall tumble to your rest:
I could wish you wenches too,
But I am dead and cannot do;
Call for the best, the house may ring,
Sack White, and Claret let them bring,
And drink apace while breath you have,
You Will find but cold drink in the grave;
Plover, Partridge for your dinner,
And a Capen for the sinner,
You shall find ready when you are up,
And your horse shall have his sup:
Welcome shall fly round,
And I shall smile though under ground.
Songs to the Play, called, The Maid in the Mill. The first Song.
COme follow me, you Country Lasses,
And you shall see such sport as passes:
You shall dance, and I will sing,
Pedro he shall rub the string:
Each shall have a Loose-bodied Gown
Of Green; and laugh till you lie down.
Come follow me, come follow, etc.
The second Song.
HOw long shall I pine for love?
How long shall I sue in vain?
How long, like the Turtle Dove,
Shall I heartily thus complain?
Shall the sails of my love stand still?
Shall the grists of my hopes be unground?
Oh fie, oh fie, oh fie,
Let the Mill, let the Mill go round.
The third Song.
ON the bed I Will throw thee, throw thee down;
Down being laid, shall we be afraid
To try the rights that belong to love?
No, no, there I Will woo thee with a Crown.
Crown our desires, kindle the fires;
When love requires we should wanton prove,
We Will kiss, we will sport, we will laugh, we will play,
If thou come short for thee I Will stay;
If thou unskilful art the ground,
I Will kindly teach, we will have the Mill go round.
The fourth Song.
Think me still in my Fathers Mill,
Where I have often been found -- a
Thrown on my back on a well filled sack
While the Mill has still gone round -- a
Prithee Sirrah try thy skill,
And again let the Mill go round -- a.
The fifth Song.
THe young one, the old one, the fearful, the bold one,
The lame one, though never so unsound,
The Jew or the Turk have leave for to work
The whilst that the Mill goes round.
The Prologue to the Play, called, The Passionate Madman.
It Is grown in fash'on of late in these days
To come and beg a suff'rance to our Plays;
Faith Gentlemen our Poet ever writ
Language so good, mixed with such sprightly wit;
He made the Theater so sovereign
With his rare Scenes, he scorned this crouching vein.
We stabbed him with keen daggers when we prayed
Him write a Preface to a Play well made;
He could not write these toys, 'twas easier far
To bring a Fellon to appear at the Bar:
So much he hated baseness, which this day
His Scenes will best convince you of in's play.
The Epilogue.
OUr Poet bid us say, for his own part,
He cannot lay too much forth of his Art;
But fears our over-acting Passions may,
As not adorn, deface his labored Play:
Yet still he is res'lute for what is writ
Of nicer valor, and assumes the wit;
But for the love Scenes which he ever meant,
Cupid in's Petticoat should represent;
He Will stand no shock of Censure, the Play's good,
He says he knows it (if well understood)
But we (blind God) beg, if thou art divine,
Thou it shoot thy Arrows round, this Play was thine.
Songs to the Play, called, The Nice Valor: Or, The Passionate Madman. The
first Song.
THou Deity swift winged love,
Sometimes below, sometimes above,
Little in shape, but great in power,
Thou that make a heart thy Tower,
And thy loope-holes, Ladies eyes,
From whence thou strik'st the fond and wise.
Did all the shafts in thy fair Quiver
Stick fast in my ambitious Liver;
Yet thy power would I adore,
And Call upon thee to shoot more;
Shoot more, shoot more.
The second Song.
O Turn thy bow,
Thy power we feel and know,
Fair Cupid turn away thy bow:
They be those golden Arrows
Bring Ladies all their sorrows,
And till there be more truth in men,
Never shoot at maids again.
The third Song.
HEnce all you vain delights,
As short as are the nights
Wherein you spend your folly;
There Is naught in this life sweet,
If man were wise to see it,
But only Melancholy,
O sweetest Melancholy.
Welcome folded arms and fixed eyes,
A sight that piercing mortifies;
A look that is fastened to the ground,
A tongue chained up without a sound.
Fountain heads, and pathlesse Graves,
Places which pale Passion loves:
Moonlight walks, when all the Fowls
Are warmely housed save Bats and Owls.
A midnight Bell, a parting groan,
These are the sounds we feed upon:
Then stretch our Bones in a still gloomy valley,
Nothing so dainty, sweet, as lovely Melancholy.
The fourth Song.
A Curse upon thee for a slave;
Art thou here and heard'st me rave?
Fly not sparkles from mine eye
To show mine indignation nigh;
Am I not all foame and fire,
With voice as hoarse as a Town Crier?
How my back opes and shuts together
With fury as old men's with weather;
Could thou not hear my teeth gnash hither?
The fifth Song.
THou Nasty scurvy Mungrill Toad,
Mischief on thee,
Light upon thee
All the plagues
That can confound thee,
Or did ever reign abroad;
Better a thousand lives it cost
Then have brave anger spilt or lost.
The sixth Song.
Pas. OH how my Lungs do trickle? ha, ha, ha.

Bas. Oh how my Lungs do trickle? oh, oh, ho, ho.
Pas. sings.
Set a sharp Jest
Against my breast,
Then how my Lungs do trickle;
As Nightingales,
And things in Cambrick railes
Sing best against a prickle.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.

Bas. Ho, ho, ho, ho, ha.

Pas. Laugh.

Bas. Laugh.

Pas. laugh.

Bas. laugh.

Pas. Wide.

Bas. loud.

Pas. and vary.

Bas. A smile is for a simp'ring Novice.

Pas. One that never tasted Caveare.

Bas. Nor knows the smack of dear Anchovis.

Pas. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

Bas. Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.

Pas. A giling waiting wench for me,
That shows her teeth how white they be.

Bas. A thing not fit for gravity,
For theirs are foul and hardly three.

Pas. Ha, ha, ha.

Bas. Ho, ho, ho.

Pas. Democritus, thou ancient Fleerer,
Now I miss thy laugh, and ha since.

Bas. There you named the famous Jeerer
That ever jeered in Rome or Athens.

Pas. Ha, ha, ha.

Bas. Ho, ho, ho.

Pas. How brave lives he that keeps a fool,
Although the rate be deeper.

Pas. But he that is his own fool sir
Does live a great deal cheaper.

Pas. Sure I shall burst, burst, quite break, thou art so witty.

Bas. It Is rare to break at Court, for that belongs to the City.

Pas. Ha, ha, my spleen is almost worn to the last laughter.

Bas. O keep a corner for a friend, a jest may come hereafter.

The Prologue to the Tamer Tamed.
LAdies to you, in whose defense and right
Fletchers brave Muse prepared her self to fight,
A battle without blood, 'twas well fought too,
(The Victorie's yours, though got with much ado.)
We do present this Comedy, in which
A rivulet of pure wit flows, strong and rich
In Fancy, Language, and all parts that may
Add Grace and Ornament to a merry Play,
Which this may prove: Yet not to go too far
In promises from this our Female war,
We do entreat the angry men would not
Expect the Mazes of a subtle plot,
Set speeches, high expressions, and what is worse,
In a true Comedy Politic discourse.
The end we aim at, is to make you sport;
Yet neither gaul the City, nor the Court:
Hear and observe his Comique strain, and when
Y' are sick of Melancholy, see it again.
It Is no dear Physic, since 'twill quit the cost,
Or his Intentions with our pains are lost.
The Epilogue.
THe Tamers tamed, but so, as nor the men
Can find one just cause to complain of, when
They fitly do consider in their lives
They should not reign as Tyrants over their wives;
Nor can the woman from this president
Insult or triumph: it being aptly meant
To teach both Sexes due equality;
And as they stand bound to love mutually.
If this effect arising from a cause
Well laid, and grounded, may deserve applause,
We something more then hope, our honest ends
Will keep the men and women too, our friends.
The Prologue to the Martial Maid.
STatues and Pictures challenge praise and Fame,
If they can justly boast, and prove they came
From Phydeas or Apelles: None deny,
Poets and Picture Painters hold a Sympathy;
Yet their works may decay and lose their grace,
Receiving blemish in their Limbs or Face;
When the Minds Art has this Pre-eminence
She still retains her first Excellence.
Then why should not this dear piece be esteemed
Child to the richest Fancies that e're teemed?
When not their meanest Offspring that came forth
But bore the image of their Fathers worth,
Beaumonts and Fletchers, whose desert out-weighs
The best Applause, and their least sprig of Bays
Is worthy Phoebus; and who comes to gather
Their fruits of Wit, he shall not rob the Treasure;
Nor can you ever surfeit of the plenty,
Nor can you call them rare, though they be dainty:
The more you take, the more you do them right,
And we will thank you for your own delight.
The Epilogue.
OUr Author fears there are some Rebels hearts,
Whose dullness does oppose Loves piercing Darts:
Such will be apt to say there wanted wit,
The Language low, very few Scenes are writ
With spirit and life; such odd things as these
He cares not for, nor never means to please;
For if your selves a Mistress, or loves friends,
Are liked with this smooth Play, he has his ends.
A Song to the Play, called, Wit at several Weapons.
Feign would I wake you, Sweet, but fear
I should invite you to worse cheer;
In your dreams you cannot fare
Meaner than Music no compare;
None of your slumbers are compiled
Under the pleasure makes a Child:
Your day-delights, so well compact,
That what you think, turns all to Act;
I Would wish my life no better play,
Your dream by night, your thought by day.
Wake gently, wake,
Part softly from your dreams;
The morning flies,
To your fair eyes,
To take her special beams.
The Prologue to the Fair Maid of the Inn.
Plays have their fates, not as in their true sense
They Are understood, but as the influence
Of idle custom madly works upon
The dross of many tongued opinion.
A worthy story, howsoever writ
For language, modest mirth, conceit, o^ wit,
Mercies often times with the sweet Commendation
Of hanged it is scurvey, when for approbation,
A Jigge shall be clapped at, and every Rhyme
Praised and applauded by a clamorous chyme;
Let ignorance and laughter dwell together,
They are beneath the Muses petty. Hither
Came Nobler Judgments, and to those the strain
Of our invention is not bent in vain.
The fair maid of the Inn to you commends
Her hopes and welcomes, and withal intends
In the entertaines to which she does invite ye,
All things to please, and some things to delight ye.
The Epilogue.
WE would feign please ye, and as feign be pleased,
It Is but a little liking both are eased;
We have your money, and you have our ware,
And to our understanding good and fair;
For your own wisdoms sake be not so mad
To acknowledge ye have bought things dear and bad:
Let not a brack in the stuff, or here and there,
The fading gloss a general loss appear;
We know ye take up worse Commodities,
And dearer pay, yet think your bargains wise:
We know in meat and wine, ye fling away
More time and wealth, which is but dearer pay;
And with the Reckoning all the pleasure lost,
We bid you not unto repenting cost:
The price is easy, and so light the Play,
That ye may new digest it every day.
Then Noble friends, as ye would choose a Mistress,
Only to please the Eye a while and kiss,
Till a good wife be got: So let this Play
Hold ye a while, until a better may.
First Song to the Tragedy of Valentinian.
NOw the lusty spring is seen,
Golden, yellow, gaudy blew,
Daintily invite the view.
Every where, on every Green,
Roses blushing as they blow,
And enticing men to pull,
Lillies whiter than the snow,
Woodbines of sweet honey full.
All Loves Emblems, and all cry,
Ladies, if not plucked, we dye.
Yet the lusty Spring has stayed,
Blushing red and purest white,
Daintily to love invite,
Every woman, every maid,
Cherries kissing as they grow,
And inviting men to taste,
Apples even ripe below,
Winding gently to the waste.
All loves Emblems, and all cry,
Ladies, if not plucked, we dye.
The second Song.
Hear ye Ladies that despise
What the mighty love has done;
Fear Examples, and be wise,
Fear Calisto was a Nun.
Leda sailing on the stream,
To deceive the hopes of man,
Love accounting but a dream,
Doted on a silver Swan;
Danae in a brazen Tower,
Where no love was, loov'd a Flower.
Hear ye Ladies that are coy,
What the mighty love can do,
Fear the fierceness of the Boy,
The chaste Moon he makes to woo.
Vesta kindling holy fires
Circled round about with spies,
Never dreaming loose desires,
Doting at the Altar dies.
Ilion in a short Tower higher,
He can once more build, and once more fire.
The third Song.
Honor that is ever living,
Honor that is ever giving,
Honor that sees all, and knows
Both the ebbs of man and flows.
Honor that rewards the best,
Sends thee thy rich labors rest;
Thou have studied still to please her,
Therefore now she calls thee Caesar.
Chorus hail, hail, Caesar, hail and stand,
And thy name outlive the Land;
Noble Fathers to his brows
Bind this wreath with thousand vows.
The fourth Song.
GOd Lizus ever young,
Ever renowned, ever sung;
Stained with blood of lusty Grapes,
In a thousand lusty shapes;
Dance upon the Mazers brim,
In the Crimson Liquor swim;
From thy plentious hand divine,
Let a River run with Wine;
God of youth let this day here
Enter neither care nor fear.
The Prologue to the Play, called, Loves Pilgrimage.
TO this place, Gentlemen, full many a day
We have bid ye welcome; and to many a Play:
And those whose angry souls were not displeased
With law, or lending money, we have pleased,
And make no doubt to do again; this night
No mighty matter, nor no light,
We must entreat you look for: A good tale,
Told in two hours, we will not fail
If we be perfect to rehearse ye: New
I am sure it is, and hansome; but how true
Let them dispute that writ it. Ten to one
We please the women, and I would know that man
Follows not their example: If ye mean
To know the Play well, travel with the Scene,
For it lies upon the road; if we chance tire,
As ye are good men leave us not in the mire,
Another bait may mend us: If you grow
A little gald or weary, cry but hoa,
And we will stay for ye; when our journey ends
Every man's Pot I hope, and all part friends.
The Honest Man's Fortune.
YOu that can look through heaven, and tell the Stars,
Observe their kind Conjunctions, and their wars;
Find out new lights, and give them where you please,
To these men honors, pleasures, to those ease;
You that are Gods surveyers, and can show
How far, and when, and why the Wind does blow;
Know all the charges of the dreadful Thunder,
And when it will shoot over, or fall under:
Tell me by all your Art, I conjure ye,
Yes, and by truth, what shall become of me;
Find out my star, if each one, as you say,
Have his peculiar Angel, and his way;
Observe my Fate, next fall into your dreams,
Sweep clean your houses, and new line your sceames,
Then say your worst: or have I none at all?
Or is it burnt out lately, or did fall?
Or am I poor, not able, no full flame,
My Star, like me, unworthy of a name?
Is it your Art can only work on those
That deal with dangers, dignities and clothes?
With love, or new opinions? you all lie,
A Fish-wife has a Fate, and so have I,
But far above your finding; he that gives
Out of his providence to all that lives,
And no man knows his treasure, no not you:
He that made Egypt blind, from whence you grew
Scabby and Lousie, that the world might see
Your Calculations are as blind as ye;
He that made all the stars you daily read,
And from thence filtch a knowledge how to feed,
Has hid this from you, your conjectures all
Are drunken things, not how, but when they fall:
Man is his own star, and the soul that can
Render an honest and a perfect man,
Command all light, all influence, all fate,
Nothing to him falls early, or too late;
Our Acts our Angels are, or good, or ill,
Our fatal shadows that walk by us still;
And when the stars are laboring, we believe
It is not that they govern, but they grieve
For stubborn ignorance; all things that are
Made for our general uses are at war,
Even we among our selves, and from the strife
Your first unlike opinions got a life.
O man, thou Image of thy Makers good,
What can thou fear when breathed into thy blood
His Spirit is that built thee? what dull sense
Makes thee suspect, in need, that providence?
Who made the Morning, and who placed the light
Guide to thy labors? who called up the night,
And bid her fall upon thee like sweet showers
In hollow murmurs, to lock up thy powers?
Who gave thee knowledge, who so trusted thee
To let thee grow so near himself, the tree?
Must he then be distrusted? shall his frame
Discourse with him, why thus, and thus I am?
He made the Angels thine, thy fellows all,
Nay even thy servants when Devotions call:
O can thou be so stupid then, so dim.
To seek a saving influence, and lose him?
Can stars protect thee? or can poverty,
Which is the light to heaven, put out his eye?
He is my star, in him all truth I find,
All influence, all fate, and when my mind
Is furnished with his fullness, my poor story
Should outlive all their Age, and all their glory.
The hand or Danger cannot fall amiss,
When I know what, and in whose power it is:
Nor want, the cause of man, shall make me groan,
A holy Hermit is a mind alone.
Does not experience teach us all we can
To work our selves into a glorious man?
Love's but an Exhalation to best eyes,
The matter spent, and then the fools fire dies;
Were I in love, and could that bright star bring
Increase to wealth, honor, and every thing;
Were she as perfect good as we can aim,
The first was so, and yet she lost the game.
My Mistress then be knowledge, and fair truth;
So I enjoy all beauty, and all youth:
And though to Time her lights and Laws she lends,
She knows no Age that to corruption bends.
Friends promises may lead me to believe,
But he that is his own friend knows to live;
Affliction when I know it is but this,
A deep allay whereby man tougher is
To bear the hammer, and the deeper still,
We still arise more Image of his will;
Sickness an hum'rous cloud 'tvvixt us and light,
And death, at longest, but another night.
Man is his own star, and that soul that can
Be honest, is the only perfect man.
Mr Francis Beaumont's Letter to Ben Johnson, written before he and Mr Fletcher
came to London, with two of the precedent Comedies then not finished, which
deferred their merry meetings at the Mermaid.
THe Sun which does the greatest comfort bring
To absent friends, because the selfsame thing
They know they see, however absent is,
(Here our best hay-maker, forgive me this,
It is our Countries style) in this warm shine
I lie and dream of your full Mermaid wine;
O we have water mixed with Claret Lees,
Drink apt to bring in drier heresies
Than here, good only for the Sonnets strain,
With Fustian Metaphors to stuff the brain;
So mixed, that given to the thirstiest one
'Twill not prove Alms, unless he have the stone:
Think with one draught man's Invention fades,
Two Cups had quite spoiled Homers Illiades;
It Is Liquor that will find out Sutclifts Wit,
Like where he will, and make him write worse yet;
Filled with such moisture, in most grievous Qualmes
Did Robert Wisdom write his singing Psalms:
And so must I do this, and yet I think
It is a potion sent us down to drink
By special providence, keeps us from fights,
Make us not laugh when we make legs to Knights:
It Is this that keeps our minds fit for our states,
A Medicine to obey our Magistrates;
For we do live more free than you, no hate,
No envy at one another happy state
Moves us, we are all equal every whit;
Of Land that God gives men, here is their wit
If we consider fully for our best,
And gravest men will with his maine house jest,
Scarce please you, we want subtilty to do
The City Tricks, lie, hate, and flatter too;
Here are none that can bear a painted show,
Strike when you winch, and then lament the blow;
Who like Mils, set the right way for to grind,
Can make their gains alike with every wind:
Only some fellows with the subtil'st pate
Amongst us, may perchance equivocate
At selling of a Horse, and that the most;
Methinks the little wit I had is lost
Since I saw you, for a wit is like a rest,
Held up a tennis, which men do the best
With the best Gamesters: what things have we seen
Done at the Mermaid? Hard words that have been
So nimble, and so full of subtle flame,
As it that every one from whence they came
Had meant to put his whole wit in a Jest,
And had resolved to live a fool the rest
Of his dull life; then when there has been thrown
Wit able enough to justify the Town
For three days past, wit that might warrant be
For the whole City to take foolishly
Till that were cancelled, and when that was gone
We left an air behind us, which alone
Was able to make the two next Companies
Right witty, though but downright fools more wise:
When I remember this, and see that now
The Country Gentlemen begin to allow
My wit for dry bobs, then I needs must cry,
I see my days of Ballating grow nigh;
I can already riddle, and can sing
Catches, sell bargains, and I fear shall bring
My self to speak the hardest words I find
Over as often as any with one wind
That takes no medicines: but one thought of thee
Makes me remember all these things to be
The wit of our young men, fellows that show
No part of good, yet utter all they know;
Who, like trees of the guard, have growing souls,
Only strong Destiny, which all controules,
I hope has left a better fate in store
For me, thy friend, than to live ever poor.
Banished unto this home-fate once again,
Bring me to thee, who can make smooth and plain
The way of knowledge for me, and then I,
Who have no good but in thy company,
Protest it will my greatest comfort be
To acknowledge all I have to flow from thee.
Ben, when these Scenes are perfect we will taste Wine,
I Will drink thy Muses health, thou shall quaffe mine.
On Francis Beaumonts Death.
HE that had Youth, and Friends, and so much Wit
As would ask five good Wits to husband it:
He that has wrote so well, that no man dare
Refuse it for the best, let him beware,
Beaumont is dead, by which our Art appears,
Wit's a disease consumes one in few years.
An Elegy upon Mr Fran. Beaumont.
BEaumont lies here, and where now shall we have
A Muse, like his, to sigh upon his grave?
Ah none to weep this with a worthy tear,
But he that cannot, Beaumont, that lies here;
Who now shall pay this tomb with such a verse,
As thou that Ladies did, fair Rudlands hearse?
A monument that will then lasting be,
When all her marble is more dust than she:
In thee all is lost, a sudden dearth and want
Has seized on wit, good Epitaphs are scant:
We dare not write thy Elegy, for each fears
He never shall match a copy of thy tears;
Scarce yet in age a Poet, and yet he
Scarce lives the third part of his age to see;
But quickly taken off, and only known,
Is in a minute shut as soon as blown.
Why should weak nature tire her self in vain,
In such a piece, and cast it straight again?
Why shoud she take such work beyond her skill,
And when she cannot perfect she must kill;
Alas, what is it to temper slime and mire?
Then Is nature pussel'd when the work's entire:
Great brains, like bright glass, crackle straight, while those
Of stone and wood hold out, and fear no blows;
And we their ancient hoary heads can see,
Whose wit was never their mortality.
Beaumont dies young, so Sydney died before,
There was not Poetry, he could live no more:
He could not grow up higher, nay, I scarce know,
If thou art it self unto that pitch could grow,
Were not in thee, who had arrived to the height
Of all that Art could reach, or nature might.
Oh, when I read those excellent things of thine,
Such strength, such sweetness, couched in every line;
Such life of fancy, such high choice of brain,
Naught of the vulgar mint, or borrowed strain;
Such passions, such expressions, meet mine eye,
Such wit untainted with obscenity:
And these so unaffectedly expressed,
But all in a pure flowing language dressed;
So new, so fresh, so nothing trod upon,
And all so borne within thy self, thine own:
I grieve not now that old Meanders vein
Is ruined, to survive in thee again:
Such in his time was he, of the same piece,
The smooth, even natural wit, and love of Greece;
Whose few sententious fragments show more worth
Than all the Poets Athens e're brought forth:
And I am sorry I have lost those hours
On them, whose quickness comes far short of ours,
And dwelt not more on thee, whose every page
May be a pattern to their Scene and age;
I will not yield thy worth so mean a praise,
More pure, more chaste, more sainted than are plays:
Nor with that dull supinenesse to be read,
To pass a fire, or laugh an hour in bed:
How do the Muses suffer every where?
Taken in such mouths, sensur'd in such ears;
That 'twixt a whiffe, a line or two rehearse,
And with their Rheum together, spawle a verse:
It Is all a Punies leisure after play,
Drink and Tobacco, it may spend the day;
Whilst even their very idleness they think,
Is lost in these, that lose their times in drink:
Pity their dullness; we that better know,
Will a more serious hour on thee bestow;
Why should not Beaumont in the morning please,
As well as Plautus, Aristophanes?
Who if my pen may, as my faults, be free,
Were humble wits, and Buffoons both to thee:
Yet those our learned of severest brow,
Will deigne to look on, and so note them too;
That will defy our own, his English stuff,
And the Author is not rotten long enough:
Alas* how ill are they compared to thee,
In thy Philaster, or maids Tragedy?
Where Is such a humor as thy Bessus? nay,
Let them put all their treasures in one Play,
He shall out-bid them, their conceit was poor,
All in the circle of a Bawd or Whore,
A cozening -- take the fool away,
And not a good jest extant in a Play:
Yet these are wits, they are old, that is it, and now
Being Greek, or Latin, they are learning too;
But those their own times were content to allow
A thriftier fame, and thine is lowest now,
But thou shall live, and when thy name is grown
Six ages elder, shall be better known:
When thou art of Chaucers standing in thy tomb,
Thou shall not shame, but take up all his room.
J. EARL.

On William Shakespeare.
REnowned Spencer lie a thought more nigh
To learned Chaucer, and rare Beaumont lie
A little nearer Spencer, to make room
For Shakespeare in your threefold, fourfold tomb,
To lodge all four in one bed make a shift
Until Dooms day, for hardly will a fifth
Betwixt this day and that by Fates be slain,
For whom your curtains may be drawn again.
If your precedence in death do bar
A fourth place in your sacred sepulcher,
Under this sacred Marble of thine own,
Sleep rare Tragoedian Shakespeare! sleep alone.
Thy unmolested peace in an unshared Cave,
Possess as Lord, not Tenant of thy grave;
That unto us, and others it may be,
Honor hereafter to be laid by thee.
On Ben Johnson.
HEre lies Johnson with the rest
Of the Poets; but the best
Reader, wo'dst thou more have known?
Ask his Story, not this Stone;
That will speak what this cannot tell
Of his glory. So farewell.
Another on Ben Johnson.
THe Muses fairest light in no dark time;
The wonder of a learned Age; the Line
That none can pass; the most proportioned wit
To Nature; the best Judge of what was fit:
The deepest, plainest, highest, clearest pen;
The voice most echoed by consenting men:
The soul which answered best to all well said
By others; and which most requital made:
Tuned to the highest key of ancient Rome,
Returning all her music with her own;
In whom with nature, study claimed a part,
And yet who to himself owed all his Art.
Here lies Ben Johnson, every age will look
With sorrow here, with wonder on his Book.
On Mr Edm. Spencer, Famous Poet.
AT Delphos shrine, one did a doubt propound,
Which by the Oracle must be released,
Whether of Poets were the best renow'nd:
Those that survive, or they that are deceased?
The Gods made answer by divine suggestion,
While Spencer is alive, it is no question.
On Michael Drayton buried in Westminster.
Do pious Marble, let thy Readers know,
What they, and what their children ow
To Drayton's sacred name, whose dust
We recommend unto thy trust.
Protect his memory, preserve his story,
And a lasting Monument of his glory;
And when thy ruins shall disclaim
To be the Treasury of his name,
His name which cannot fade, shall be
An everlasting monument to thee.
On the Tombs in Westminster.
MOrtality, behold, and fear,
What a change of flesh is here!
Think how many Royal bones
Sleep within these heap of Stones;
Here they lie, had Realms, and Lands,
Who now want strength to stir their hands;
Where from their pulpits sealed with dust,
They preach, In Greatness is no trust.
Here Is an Acre sown indeed,
With the richest, royall'st seed,
That the earth did e're suck in
Since the first man died for sin:
Here the bones of birth have cried,
Though Gods they were, as men they died:
Here are Sands, ignoble things,
Dropped from the ruined sides of Kings.
Here Is a world of Pomp and State
Buried in Dust, once dead by Fate.
The Ex-Ale-tation of ALE.
NOt drunken, nor sober, but neighbor to both,
I met with a friend in Ales-bury Vale;
He saw by my face, that I was in the case
To speak no great harm of a Pot of good Ale.
Then did he me greet, and said, since we meet,
(And he put me in mind of the name of the Dale)
For Ales-bury's sake some pains I would take,
And not bury the praise of a Pot of good Ale.
The more to procure me, then he did adjure me
If the Ale I drank last were nappy and stale,
To do it its right, and stir up my sprite,
And fall to commend a etc.
Quoth I, To commend it I dare not begin,
Lest therein my Credit might happen to fail;
For, many men now do count it a sin,
But once to look toward a etc.
Yet I care not a pin, for I see no such sin,
Nor any thing else my courage to quail:
For, this we do find, that take it in kind,
Much virtue there is in a etc.
And I mean not to taste, though thereby much graced,
Nor the Merry-go-down without pull or hale,
Perfuming the throat, when the stomack's afloat,
With the fragrant sweet sent of a etc.
Nor yet the delight that comes to the sight
To see how it flowers and mantles in graile,
As green as a leeke, with a smile in the cheek,
The true orient color of a etc.
But I mean the Mind, and the good it does find;
Not only the Body so feeble and frail:
For, Body and Soul may bless the Black Bowl,
Since both are beholden to a etc.
For, when heaviness the mind does oppress,
And sorrow and grief the heart do assail.
No remedy quicker than to take off your liquor,
And to wash away cares with a etc.
The Widow that buried her husband of late,
Will soon have forgotten to weep and to wail,
And think every day twain, till she marry again,
If she read the contents of a etc.
It is like a belly-blast to a cold heart,
And warms, and engenders the spirits vitale,
To keep them from damage, all spirits owe their homage
To the Sp'rite of the Buttery a etc.
And down to the legs the virtue does go,
And to a bad Footman is as good as a sail;
When it fills the veins, and makes light the brains,
No Lackey so nimble as a etc.
The naked complains not for want of a Coat,
Nor on the cold weather will once turn his tail;
All the way as he goes he cuts the wind with his nose,
If he be but well wrapped in a etc.
The hungry man takes no thought for his meat,
Though his stomach would brook a ten-penny nail;
He quite forgets hunger, thinks on it no longer,
If he touch but the sparks of a etc.
The Poor man will praise it, so has he good cause,
That all the year eats neither partridge nor quail,
But sets up his rest, and makes up his feast
With a crust of brown bread, and a etc.
The Shepherd, the Sower, the Thresher, the Mower,
The one with his Scyth, the other with his flaile,
Take them out by the poll, on the peril of my soll,
All will hold up their hands to a etc.
The Blacksmith, whose bellows all summer do blow,
With the fire in his face still, without e're a veil,
Though his throat be full dry, he will tell you a lie,
But where you may be sure of a etc.
Who ever denies it, the Prisoners will praise it,
That beg at the grate, and lie in the Goal:
For, even in their fetters, they think themselves better,
May they get but a two-penny black pot of Ale.
The beggar whose portion is always his prayers,
Not having a tatter to hang on his tail,
Is as rich in his rags, as the churl in his bags,
If he once but shakes hands with a etc.
It drives his poverty clean out of mind,
Forgetting his brown bread, his wallet, and maile;
He walks in the house like a six-footed Louse,
If once he be enricht with a etc.
And he that does dig in the ditches all day,
And wearies himself quite at the plough-taile,
Will speak no less things than of Queens and of Kings,
If he touch but the top of a etc.
It Is like a Whetstone to a blunt wit,
And makes a supply where Nature does fail:
The dullest wit soon will look quite through the Moon,
If his temples be wet with a etc.
Then DICK to his Dearling, fall boldly dares speak,
Though, before (silly fellow) his courage did quail,
He gives her the smouch, with his hand on his pouch,
If he meet by the way with a etc.
And it makes the Carter a Courtier straightway,
With Rhetorical terms he will tell his tale;
With Courtesies great store, and his Cap up before,
Being schooled but a little with a etc.
The Old man, whose tongue wags faster than his teeth,
(For old age by nature does drivell and drale)
Will frig and will fling, like a dog in a string,
If he warm his cold blood with a etc.
And the good Old Clarke, whose sight waxes dark,
And ever he thinks the Print is to small,
He will see every letter, and say Service better,
If he glaze but his eyes with a etc.
The Cheeks and the Jaws to commend it have cause;
For where they were late but even wan and pale,
They will get them a color, no Crimson is fuller,
By the true die and tincture of a etc.
Mark her enemies, though they think themselves wise,
How meager they look, with how low a wail,
How their cheeks do fall, without spirits at all,
That alien their minds from a etc.
And now that the grains do work in my brains,
Me thinks I were able to give by retaile
Commodities store, a dozen and more,
That flow to Mankind from a etc.
The MUSES would muse any should it misuse:
For it makes them to sing like a Nightingale,
With a lofty trim note, having washed their throat
With the Caballine Spring of a etc.
And the Musician of any condition,
It will make him reach to the top of his Scale:
It will clear his pipes, and moisten his lights,
If he drink alternatim a etc.
The Poet divine, that cannot reach wine,
Because that his money does many times fail,
Will hit on the vein to make a good streine,
If he be but inspired with a etc.
For Ballads ELDERTON never had Peer,
How went his wit in them, with how merry a gale;
And with all the sails up, had he been at the cup,
And washed his beard with a etc.
And the power of it shows, no whit less in Prose,
It will file one's phrase, and set forth his tale:
Fill him but a boule, it will make his tongue troule,
For flowing speech flows from a etc.
And Master Philosopher, if he drink his part,
Will not trifle his time in the husk or the shale,
But go to the kernel by the depth of his Art,
To be found in the bottom of a etc.
Give a Scholar of OXFORD a pot of Sixteen,
And put him to prove that an Ape has no tail,
And sixteen times better his wit will be seen,
If you fetch him from Botley a etc.
Thus it helps Speech and Wit: And it hurts not a whit,
But rather does further the Virtues Morale,
Then think it not much if a little I touch
The good moral parts of a etc.
To the Church and Religion it is a good friend,
Or else our forefathers their wisdom did fail,
That at every mile, next to the Church style,
Set a consecrate house to a etc.
But now, as they say, Beer bears it away;
The more is the pity, if right might prevail:
For, with this same Beer, came up Heresy here,
The old Catholic Drink is a etc.
The Churches much ow, as we all do know;
For when they be drooping and ready to fall,
By a Whitson or Church-ale, up again they shall go,
And owe their repairing to a etc.
Truth will do it right, it brings Truth to light,
And many bad matters it helps to reveal:
For, they that will drink, will speak what they think;
TOM tell-troth lies hid in a etc.
It is Justices friend, she will it commend,
For, all is here served by measure and tale:
Now, true-tale, and good measure are Justices treasure,
And much to the praise of a etc.
And next I allege, it is Fortitudes edge:
For a very Cow-heard, that shrinkes like a snaile,
Will swear and will swagger, and out goes his dagger,
If he be but armed with a etc.
Yea, ALE has her Knights and Squires of degree,
That never wore Corslet, nor yet shirt of maile,
But have fought their fights all, 'twixt the pot and the wall,
When once they were dubbed with a etc.
And sure it will make a man suddenly wise,
E're-while was scarce able to tell a right tale:
It will open his jaw, he will tell you the Law,
As made a right Bencher of a etc.
Or he that will make a bargain to gain,
In buying, or setting his goods forth to sale,
Must not plod in the mire, but sit by the fire,
And seal up his Match with a etc.
But for Soberness needs must I confess,
The matter goes hard: And few do prevail
Not to go too deep, but temper to keep,
Such is the Attractive of a etc.
But here is an amends, which will make all friends,
And ever does tend to the best avail;
If you take it too deep it will make you but sleep;
So comes no great harm of a etc.
If (reeling) they happen to fall to the ground,
The fall is not great, they may hold by the Rail:
If into the water, they cannot be drowned,
For that gift is given to a etc.
If drinking about they chance to fall out,
Fear not the Alarm, though flesh be but frail,
It will prove but some blows, or at most a bloody nose,
And friends again straight with a etc.
And Physic will favor ALE as it is bound,
And be against Beer both tooth and nail:
They send up and down all over the Town
To get for their Patients a etc.
Their Ale-berries, Cawdles, and Possets each one,
And Syllabubs made at the Milking-paile,
Although they be many, Beer comes not in any,
But all are composed with a etc.
And in very deed the Hop's but a weed,
Brought over against Law, and here set to sale:
Would the Law were renewed, and no more Beer brewed,
But all good men betake them to a etc.
The Law, that will take it under her wing:
For, at every Law-day, or Moot of the hale,
One is sworn to serve our Sovereign the KING,
In the ancient Office of a CONNER of ALE.
There Is never a Lord of Manor or of Town,
By strand or by land, by hill or by dale,
But thinks it a Franchise, and a Flower of the CROWN,
To hold the Assize of a etc.
And though there lie Writs, from the Courts Paramount,
To stay the proceedings of the Courts Paravaile;
Law favors it so, you may come, you may go,
There lies no Prohibition to a etc.
They talk much of State both early and late,
But if Gascoign and Spain their Wine should but fail,
No remedy then, with us Englishmen,
But the State it must stand by a etc.
And they that sit by it are good men and quiet,
No dangerous Plotters in the Commonweal
Of Treason and Murder: For, they never go further
Than to call for, and pay for a etc.
To the praise of GAMBRIVIUS that good British King
That devised for his Nation (by the Welshmen's tale)
Seventeen hundred years before CHRIST did spring,
The happy invention of a etc.
The North they will praise it, and praise it with passion,
Where every River gives name to a Dale:
There men are yet living that are of the old fashion,
No Nectar they know but a etc.
The PICTS and the SCOTS for ALE were at lots,
So high was the skill, and so kept under seal:
The PICTS were undone, slain each mothers son,
For not teaching the SCOTS to make Hither Eale.
But hither or thither, it skils not much whether:
For Drink must be had, men live not by Keale,
Nor by Havor-bannocks, nor by Havor-jannocks,
The thing the SCOTS live on is a etc.
Now, if you will say it, I will not denay it,
That many a man it brings to his bale:
Yet what fairer end can one wish to his friend,
Than to dye by the part of a etc.
Yet let not the innocent bear any blame,
It is their own doings to break over the pale:
And neither the Malt, nor the good wife in fault,
If any be potted with a etc.
They tell whom it kills, but say not a word,
How many a man lives both sound and hale,
Though he drink no Beer any day in the year,
By the Radical humor of a etc.
But, to speak of Killing, that am I not willing;
For that, in a manner, were but to rail:
But Beer has its name, 'cause it brings to the Bier^,
Therefore welfare say I to a etc.
Too many (I wis) with their deaths proved this,
And therefore (if ancient Records do not fail)
He that first brewed the Hop was rewarded with a rope,
And found his Beer far more bitter than ALE.
O ALE ab olendo, thou Liquor of LIFE!
That I had but a mouth as big as a Whale!
For mine is too little to touch the least tittle
That belongs to the praise of a etc.
Thus I trow) some Virtues I have marked you out,
And never a Vice in all this long traile,
But that after the Pot there comes a Shot,
And that is the only blot of a etc.
With that my Friend said, That Blot will I bear,
You have done very well, it is time to strike sail,
We Will have six pots more though I dye on the score,
To make all this good of a Pot of good ALE.
The Good Fellow.
When shall we meet again to have a taste
Of that transcendent Ale we drank of last?
What wild ingredient did the woman chose
To make her drink withal? It made me lose
My wit before I quenched my thirst; there came
Such whimsies in my brain, and such a flame
Of fiery drunkenness had singed my nose,
My beard shrunk in for fear; there were of those
That took me for a Comet, some afar
Distant remote, thought me a blazing star:
The earth methought, just as it was, it went
Round in a wheeling course of merriment;
My head was ever drooping, and my nose
Offering to be a suitor to my toes;
My pock-hole face, they say, appeared to some
Just like a dry and burning honey-combe;
My tongue did swim in Ale, and joy'd to boast
It self a greater Seaman than the toast;
My mouth was grown awry, as if it were
Laboring to reach the whisper in mine ear;
My guts were mines of sulphur, and my set
Of parched teeth struck fire as they met:
Nay, when I pist, my Urine was so hot,
It burnt a hole quite through the chamber pot:
Each Brewer that I met I kissd, and made
Suit to be bound Apprentice to the Trade:
One did approve the motion, when he saw,
That my own legs could my Indentures draw.
Well Sir, I grew stark mad, as you may see
By this adventure upon Poetry.
You easily may guess, I am not quite
Grown sober yet, by these weak lines I write:
Only I do 't for this, to let you see,
Whose 'ere paid for the Ale, I Am sure 't paid me.
The virtue of Sack.
FEtch me Ben Johnson's scull, and fill't with Sack,
Rich as the same he drank, when the whole pack
Of jolly sisters pledged, and did agree,
It was no sin to be as drunk as he:
If there be any weakness in the wine,
There Is virtue in the Cup to make 't divine;
This muddy drench of Ale does taste too much
Of earth, the Malt retains a scurvy touch
Of the dull hand that sows it; and I fear
There Is heresy in hops; give blockheads beer,
And silly Ignoramus, such as think
There Is powder treason in all Spanish drink,
Call Sack an Idol; we will kiss the Cup,
For fear the Conventicle be blown up
With superstition; away with Brew House alms,
Whose best mirth is six shillings beer and qualms.
Let me rejoice in sprightly Sack, that can
Create a brain even in an empty pan.
Canary! it is thou that do inspire
And actuate the soul with heavenly fire.
Thou that sublim'st the Genius-making wit,
Scorn earth, and such as love, or live by it.
Thou make us Lords of Regions large and fair,
Whilst our conceits build Castles in the air:
Since fire, earth, air, thus thy inferiors be,
Henceforth I Will know no element but thee:
Thou precious Elixar of all Grapes,
Welcome, by thee our Muse begins her scapes,
Such is the worth of Sack; I am (me thinks)
In the Exchequer now, hark how it chinks,
And do esteem my venerable self
As brave a fellow, as if all the pelf
Were sure mine own; and I have thought a way
Already how to spend it; I would pay
No debts, but fairly empty every trunk,
And change the Gold for Sack to keep me drunk;
And so by consequence till rich Spaines wine
Being in my crown, the Indies too were mine:
And when my brains are once afoot (heaven bless us!)
I think my self a better man than Croesus.
And now I do conceit my self a Judge,
And coughing, laugh to see my Clients trudge
After my Lordships Coach unto the Hall
For Justice, and am full of law withal,
And do become the Bench as well as he
That fled long since for want of honesty:
But I Will be Judge no longer, though in jest,
For fear I should be talked with like the rest
When I am sober; Who can choose but think
Me wise that am so wary in my drink?
Oh admirable Sack! here is dainty sport,
I am come back from Westminster to Court,
And am grown young again; my Ptisick now
Has left me, and my Judges graver brow
Is smoothed; and I turned amorous as May,
When she invites young Lovers forth to play
Upon her flowery bosom: I could win
A Vestall now, or tempt a Queen to sin.
Oh for a score of Queens! you would laugh to see
How they would strive which first should ravish me:
Three Goddesses were nothing: Sack has tipped
My tongue with charms like those which Paris sipt
From Venus, when she taught him how to kiss
Fair Hellen, and invite a fairer-blisse:
Mine is Canary-Rhetorick, that alone
Would turn Diana to a burning stone;
Stone with amazement, burning with loves fire,
Hard to the touch, but short in her desire.
Inestimable Sack! thou make us rich,
Wise, amorous, any thing; I have an itch
To to other cup, and that perchance will make
Me valiant too, and quarrel for thy sake.
If I be once inflamed against thy foes
That would preach down thy worth in small-beere prose,
I shall do miracles as bad, or worse,
As he that gave the King an hundred horse:
The Other odd Cup, and I shall be prepared
To snatch at Stars, and pluck down a reward
With mine own hands from Jove upon their backs
That are, or Charles his enemies, or Sacks:
Let it be full, if I do chance to spill
Over my Standish by the way, I will
Dipping in this diviner ink, my pen,
Write my self sober, and fall to it again.
Canto, In the praise of Sack.
LIsten all I pray,
To the words I have to say,
In memory sure insert 'um:
Rich wines do us raise
To the honor of baies,
Quem non fecere disertum?
Of all the juice,
Which the Gods produce,
Sack shall be preferred before them;
It Is Sack that shall
Create us all,
Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum.
We abandon all Ale,
And Beer that is stale,
Rosa-solis, and damnable hum:
But we will crack
In the praise of Sack,
Against Omne quod exit in um.
This is the wine,
Which in former time,
Each wise one of the Magi
Was wont to carouse
In a frolic bouse,
Recubans sub tegmine fagi.
Let the hop be their bane,
And a rope be their shame,
Let the gout and colic pine um,
That offer to shrink,
In taking their drink,
Seu Graecum, sive Latinum.
Let the glass go round,
Let the quart-pot sound,
Let each one do as he is done to:
Avaunt ye that hug
The abominable Jug,
Amongst us Heteroclita sunto.
There Is no such disease,
As he that does please
His palate with Beer for to shame us:
It Is Sack makes us sing,
Hey down a down ding,
Musa paulo majora canamus.
He is either mute,
Or does poorly dispute,
That drinks ought else but wine O:
The more wine a man drinks,
Like a subtle Sphinx
Tantum valet ille loquendo.
It Is true, our souls,
By the lousy bowls
Of Beer that does naught but swill us,
Do go into swine,
( Pythagoras it is thine)
Nam vos mutastis and illos.
When I Have Sack in my brain,
I Am in a merry vain,
And this to me a bliss is:
Him that is wise,
I can justly despise:
Mecum confertur Ulisses.
How it cheares the brains,
How it warms the vains,
How against all crosses it arms us!
How it makes him that is poor
Courageously roar,
Et mutatas dicere formas.
Give me the boy,
My delight and my joy,
To my tantum that drinks his tale:
By Sack that he waxes
In our Syntaxes,
Est verbum personale.
Art thou weak or lame,
Or thy wits too blame?
Call for Sack, and thou shall have it,
'Twill make thee rise,
And be very wise,
Cui vim natura negavit.
We have frolic rounds,
We have merry go downs,
Yet nothing is done at rodome;
For when we are to pay
We club and away,
Id est commune notandum.
The blades that want cash
Have credit for crash,
They Will have Sack whatever it cost 'um;
They do not pay
Till another day,
Manet alta mente repostum.
Who never fails to drink
All clear from the brink,
With a smooth and even swallow,
I Will offer at his shrine,
And call it divine,
Et erit mihi magnus Apollo.
He that drinks still,
And never has his fill,
Has a passage like a Conduit,
The Sack does inspire
In rapture and fire,
Sic ether aethera fundit.
When you merrily quaffe,
If any do off,
And then from you needs will pass ye,
Give their nose a twitch,
And kick them in the britch,
Nam componuntur ab ass.
I have told you plain,
And tell you again,
Be he furious as Orlando,
He is an ass
That from hence does pass,
Nisi bibit ab ostia stando.
The answer of Ale to the challenge of Sack.
COme, all you brave wights,
That are dubbed Ale-knights,
Now set out your selves in sight:
And let them that crack
In the praises of Sack
Know Malt is of mickle might.
Though Sack they define
To holy divine,
Yet it is but natural liquor:
Ale has for its part
An addition of Art,
To make it drink thinner or thicker.
Sacks fiery fume
Does waste and consume
Men's humidum radicale;
It scaldeth their livers,
It breeds burning fevers,
Proves vinum venenum reale.
But History gathers,
From aged forefathers,
That Ale's the true liquor of life:
Men lived long in health,
And preserved their wealth,
Whilst Barley-broth only was rise.
Sack quickly ascends,
And suddenly ends
What company came for at first:
And that which yet worse is,
It empties men's purses
Before it half quenches their thirst.
Ale is not so costly,
Although that the most lie
Too long by the oil of Barley;
Yet may they part late
At a reasonable rate,
Though they came in the morning early.
Sack makes men from words
Fall to drawing of swords,
And quarrelling ends their quaffing;
Whilst dagger-ale barrels
Bear off many quarrels,
And often turn chiding to laughing.
Sack's drink for our Masters,
All may be Ale-tasters,
Good things the more common the better.
Sack's but single broth:
Ale's meat, drink, and cloth
Say they that know never a letter.
But not to entangle
Old friends till they wrangle,
And quarrel for other men's pleasure;
Let Ale keep his place,
And let Sack have his grace,
So that neither exceed the due measure.
The Triumph of Tobacco over Sack and Ale.
NAy, soft, by your leaves,
Tobacco bereaves
You both of the garland: forbear it;
You are two to one,
Yet Tobacco alone
Is like both to win it, and wear it.
Though many men crack,
Some of Ale, some of Sack,
And think they have reason to do it;
Tobacco has more,
That will never give over
The honor they do unto it.
Tobacco engages
Both sexes, all ages,
The poor as well as the wealthy;
From the court to the cottage,
From childhood to dotage,
Both those that are sick and the healthy.
It plainly appears
That in a few years
Tobacco more custom has gained,
Than Sack, or than Ale,
Though they double the tale
Of the times wherein they have reigned.
And worthily too;
For what they undo,
Tobacco does help to regaine,
On fairer conditions
Than many Physicians,
Puts an end to much grief and pain.
It helps digestion,
Of that there is no question,
The gout, and the toothach, it eases:
Be it early, or late,
It Is never out of date,
He may safely take it that pleases.
Tobacco prevents
Infection by sents,
That hurt the brain, and are heady;
An Antidote is,
Before you're amiss,
As well as an after remedy.
The cold it does heat,
Cooles them that do sweat,
And them that are fat makes lean:
The hungry does feed,
And, if there be need,
Spent spirits restores again.
Tobacco infused
May safely be used
For purging, and killing of lice:
Not so much as the ashes
But heales cuts and slashes,
And that out of hand in a trice.
The Poets of old
Many fables have told
Of the Gods and their Symprosia:
But Tobacco alone,
Had they known it, had gone
For their Nectar and Ambrosia.
It is not the smack
Of Ale, or of Sack,
That can with Tobacco compare:
For taste, and for smell,
It bears away the bell
From them both where ever they are.
For all their bravado,
It is Trinidado
That both their noses will wipe
Of the praises they desire,
Unless they conspire
To sing to the tune of his pipe.
Turpe est difficiles habere nugas. The praises of a Country Life.
HAppy is he, that from all Business clear,
As the old race of Mankind were,
With his own Oxen tils his Sires left lands,
And is not in the Usurers bands:
Nor Souldier-like started with new Alarms,
Nor dreads the Seas enraged harms:
But flees the Bar and Courts, with the proud bords,
And waiting Chambers of great Lords.
The Poplar tall, he then does marrying twine
With the grown issue of the Vine;
And with his hook lops off the fruitless race,
And sets more happy in the place:
Or in the bending Vale beholds a-farre
The lowing Herds there grazing are:
Or the pressed honey in pure pots does keep
Of earth, and sheares the tender sheep:
Or when that Autumn, through the fields lifts round
His head, with mellow Apples crowned,
How plucking Pears, his own hand grafted had,
And purple-matching Grapes, he is glad!
With which, Priapus, he may thank thy hands,
And Sylvane, thine that keptst his Lands!
Then now beneath some ancient Oak he may
Now in the rooted Grass him lay,
Whilst from the higher Banks do slide the floods:
The soft birds quarrel in the woods,
The fountains murmr as the streams do creep,
And all invite to easy sleep.
Then when the thundering Jove, his Snow and showers
Are gathering by the Wintry hours;
Or hence, or thence, he drives with many a Hound
Wild Bores into his toils pitched round:
Or strains on his small forke his subtle nets
For the eating Thrush, or Pit-fals sets:
And snares the fearful Hare, and new-come Crane,
And 'counts them sweet rewards so taken.
Who (amongst these delights) would not forget
Loves cares so evil, and so great?
But if, to boot with these, a chaste Wife meet
For household aid, and Children sweet;
Such as the Sabines, or a Sun-burnt-blowse,
Some lusty quick Apulians spouse;
To deck the hallowed Harth with old wood fired
Against the Husband comes home tired;
That penning the glad Flock in Hurdles by
Their swelling udders does draw dry:
And from the sweet Tub, Wine of this year takes,
And unbought viands ready makes:
Not Lucrine Oysters I could then more prize,
Nor Turbot, nor bright Golden eyes,
If with bright floods, the Winter troubled much,
Into our Seas send any such:
The Ionian God-wit, nor the Ginny Hen
Could not go down my belly then
More sweet than Olives, that new gathered be
From fattest branches of the Tree:
Or the herb Sorrel, that loves Meadows still,
Or Mallows loosing bodies ill:
Or at the Feast of Bounds, the Lamb then slain,
Or Kid forced from the Woolfe again.
Among these Cates how glad the sight does come
Of the fed Flocks approaching home!
To view the weary Oxen draw, with bare
And fainting necks, the turned Share!
The wealthy shoushold swarm of bondmen met,
And 'bout the steeming Chimney set!
These thoughts when Usurer Alphius, now about
To turn more farmer, had spoke out
Against the Ides, his moneys he gets in with pain,
At the Calends puts all out again.
FINIS.

