A DIALOGUE OR, DISCOURSE BETWIXT Two old acquaintance of contrary OPINIONS,
UPON The way as they were Ryding from Northampton near unto Holmby House,
Concerning our present Government by Elders.

By O.B.

Printed for R.K. 1647.

A Dialogue between Senior John of of the old house, and Thomas Potgun a young
Presbyterian.
Tho. Presbyterian. HOw now Malignant? what news hear'st thou concerning the
King? or when intends he to come to London, can tell? Senior Ioh. 'Faith I
know not, for I think he likes the air where he is now, better then he likes
the City air, especially since this last Spring.


Tho. Pr. Your reason for it, pray sir?


Sen. Ioh. Why, both in City and Suburbs strange Planers reigning, has so
encumbered London and Westminster with Elders, gowing faster then Rue, that they
are almost crept into the Privy garden.


Tho. Pr. Why, dare you speak against Elders?


Senior Ioh. Yes, if they sproure up like so many thorns choking our Wheat,
and again, such fruitless Trees ought not to comber the ground.


Tho. Pr. Do you not read of them in the Apostles times?


Sen. Ioh. Yes, and in Susanna's time too.


Tho. Pr. Oh, but you ought not to condemn all for two?


Sen. Ioh. Neither ought you to censure so severely so many good ones for the
misdemeanour of one.


Tho. Pr. How mean you by that one?


Sen. Ioh. Why, to inlighten your dull capacity, it is this, you vilify
unjustly all our reverend and venerable Bishops, hating the title, and
excluding all their labors, though never so learned, for the default of one,
in this you do not immitate our Savior, who despised not all his Disciples,
though one were a Devil. Again, did you ever read of one Simonides, a
Heathen, as Tertullian relates in Liber 5. how the poor old man was so
transported with joy, hearing how many good Bishops were at the translating of
the Bible, wished himself a Christian, which by the persuasions of these good
men, was accordingly before his death effected. Likewise Bishop Baylie writ the
Practice of Piety, but you regard not that.


Th. Pr. Seriously I like this Discourse well, but what more can you say then
for Bishops?


Sen. Ioh. Or whither for one thistles sake you would immitate Samson's Foxes,
carrying fire in your tails, burning up the good grain, and so if it were
possible to publish your ignorance more visibly in the world then lately it
has been. Thus much for Bishops, now to our present govenment in esse.


Tho. Pr. I, that favors well in my ears.


Sen. Ioh And in my nose too like a Glyster-pipe.


Tho. Pr. Well, I Will say no more to you, if you make a scoff of our Church
government guided by Elders


Sen. Io. Shall I define their pedigree of old, and where they first sprung up.


Tho. pr. Prithee let me hear that?


Sen. Ioh. My Author cites us sundry places of a Stigian Lake called by some
stix, by others the dead sea, but by most the sink of sodom, situate for air
so pleasant* that the poor Birds attempting to fly over it, in a swelling
condition dropped down dread into it; and it is observed that part of the river
Tiber runs into it, where the pretty silver scaled fishes come wantonly
swiming in, posting to their own destruction, and there died; on whose
odoriferous banks grow two certain trees, the one bearing Aples as pleasant
to the taste, as Elder to the smell, upon which accursed tree, it is said that
Judas hanged himself, a tree altogether unfit for any use but the fire.


Tho. pr. Why sure it is an argument so hot, it cannot hold long?


Sen. Ioh. No, especially if a second Joshua gives charge to the Sun to remain
in its fixed horizon or Sphere, whose ardent beams must needs exhale their
sap from them, and so by consequence leave them in a very dry condition.


Th. Pr. I must needs confess, there is an old Proverb for it, that is, the
dryer they are, the fitter to burn.


Sen. Ioh. And again, if unhappy Phaiton should once more prvaile with his
Father to guide the Charret of the Sun for one day, and the unskilful Ladd
overthrow it, and set the world on fire, who would be first consumed; the
steadfast and sound hearted Oaks, or the rotten withered and instable Elders, I
leave to any wise man's censure.


Tho. Pr. You harp too much of this one string, when I met you first, I
expected you would have acquainted me with some certain good news?


Sen. Ioh. You with some certain good news, why it is too true? I tell you,
I Will show you above a thousand old standers in London, to my grief, besides
some hourly dying, but a many daily springing up, Heaven blast them in the
bloome.


Tho. pr. Bloome, now beshrow me, l'ad rather see a thousand Triple-crown'd
affected persons, with each man a little Bishop or two in's belly in
Purgatory.


Sen. Ioh. Well, well, seeing you are possessed with such charitable thoughts, I Will
have you to understand, that there is in some fence a Purgatory provided
already for you, far nearer then the Popes Kitchen.


Tho. pr. A Purgatory for us sir, your meaning in this, I beseech you?


Sen. Ioh. Nay, for all your beseeching, we mean to do it.


Tho. pr. Why, let me hear what you dare do?


Sen. Ioh. Why, to clear and make a free passage against his Majesty's happy
return to London, we do intend for to spare for no cost in employing of good
store of workmen and laborers, with our own best assistance, to dig and root
out all old shrubbed Elders, that lie as so many stumbling blocks against the
feet of weak consciences, and so convey them by Cart to Scotland yard, there
to remain with the superstitious timber of the late erected Play house in
White Hall, but this wood must lie in the posture of a very large Bonfire ready
to welcome the King and his Nobles, at their arrival to London, and in this
posture to remain till Authority shall give this last word of command, that
is, Give fire.


Tho. Pr. Once more, let me entreat you to fall upon some other discourse?


Sen. Ioh. Why then briefly I Will recite you my Dream the other night.


Tho. Pre. Let me hear it, so it be not two tedious?


Se. Ioh. Me thoughts I saw in dead of silent night
A Comet fixed in the azure skies,
Like a victorious Champion armed so bright,
Whose splendant view dazel'd my weaker eyes.
My meaning's this, me thoughts I saw our King
Amidst his Peers, in Parliament to sit:
I praised the Lord, that he did safely bring
Our Sovereign home, whose mercies never forget;
But when I knew it but to be a Dream,
I sighed, and wept, and so brake off my theme.

FINIS.

