A DECLARATION AGAINST Prince Rupert, OR, An Argument, whereby it appears, that
Prince RUPERT, and all that join with him in this unnatural War against the
PARLIAMENT, are guilty of High Treason, With an exposition of the Stat. of 11.
HEN. 7. whereby it appears, that those who follow the advice and employment of
the PARLIAMENT, are freed from Treason, or any other offense concerning their
particular actions in that Service.

By P.B. Gent.

LONDON. Printed in the year 1642.

A DECLARATION AGAINST Prince Rupert.
THat all men may the better know their duty, and upon how sure a ground they
go that follow the judgment of Parliament for their guide; let them
judiciously consider the true meaning and ground of the Statute of 11. Hen. 7.
cap. 1. This Statute provides, That none that shall attend upon the King, and
do him true service shall be attainted, or forfeit any thing: What! was the
scope of this Statute to provide, that men should not suffer as Traitors for
serving the King in his Wars, according to the duty of their Allegiance? if
this had been all, it had been a very needless and most ridiculous Statute:
Was it then intended that they should be free from all crime and penalty that
should follow the King, and serve him in Wars in any case whatsoever, whether
it were for or against the Kingdom and the Laws thereof? that cannot be, for
that could not stand with the duty of their Allegiance, which in the beginning
of that Statute is expressed to be, so serve the King for the time being in his
Wars, for the defense of Him and the Land; and therefore if it be against the
Land (as it cannot be otherwise understood, if it be against the Parliament,
who is the representative body of the Kingdom) it is a declining from the duty
of Allegiance, which this Statute supposes may be done, though men follow the
Kings person in War: otherwise there had been no need of such a proviso in
the end of that Statute, that none should take benefit by that Statute that
should decline their Allegiance: that therefore which is the principle verb in
this Statute, is the serving of the King for the time being: which cannot be
meant of a Perkin Warbeck, or any that should call himself King; but such a
one, as what ever his Title might prove, either in himself, or in his
Ancestors, should be received and acknowledged for such by the Kingdom, the
consent whereof cannot be discerned but by Parliament; the Act whereof is the
Act of the whole Kingdom, by the personal suffrage of the Peers, and the
deligate consent of all the Commons of England: and Henry the seventh, a wise
King, considering that what was the case of Richard the third his predecessor,
might by chance of Battle be his own, and that he might at once by such a
Statute as this, satisfy such as had served his predecessor in his Wars; and
also secure those that should serve him, who might otherwise fear to serve him
in the Wars, l^st by chance of battle that might happen to him also (if a
Duke of York had set up a Title against him) which had happened to his
predecessor: he procured this Statute to be made, That no man should be
accounted a Traitor for serving the King in his Wars for the time being; that
is, which was for the present allowed and received by the Parliament in behalf
of the Kingdom; and as it is truly suggested in the preamble of that Statute.
It is not agreeable to reason or conscience that it should be otherwise, seeing
men should be put upon an impossibility of knowing their duty, if the judgment
of the highest Court should not be a guide to them: Now if the judgment of that
Court should be followed where the question is? W^ King, (as it must be
followed as appears by that Statute) much more then ought their judgment to be
fo^^^^ed, when they declare, What is the best service of the ^^ng and
Kingdoms, and therefore those that shall gui^^ themselves by the judgment of
Parliament, ought what^ver happen, to be secure and free from all account and
^ties, upon the ground and equity of this Statute of 11. 11. H. 7* ^ap. 1.

B^sid^s, ^t the Parliament (that made this Act in that eleventh year of Henry
the seventh) had intended, that those that served the King in his wars, though
never so unjustly begun, and though against the Kingdom and the Laws thereof,
should nevertheless have been free from Treason, and not punishable, then had
all the liberty of the Subject been inclusively given (by that Act) from the
Subject to the King: For if that were a good construction, and the right intent
of the Statute, then had Henry the seventh a lawful dispensation for his
observing those Laws, by which our liberties were ever preserved; but that
Parliament never intended so, as you may clearly discern by other wholesome
Acts passed the same Parliament for the preservation of every man's liberty and
propriety in his estate.

Besides, how can any people be persuaded, that that Parliament would so much
betray the Laws of the Land, and the trust reposed in them, when as they
themselves had in their own particulars so great an interest of honor and
estate: and whereas this present Parliament stands accused by some of desperate
fortunes and lives of the same temper, of that very fault which that Parliament
of Henry the seventh had been guilty, were the former construction rational, I
hope it will gain little credit with any that have the least use of reason,
that such as must have so great a share of the misery, should take so much
pains in procuring thereof, and spend so much time, and run so many hazards
for to make themselves slaves, and to destroy the property of their estates.

And whereas some except against this Parliament for being the authors of their
own presidents, and so varying from the course of former times; let them that
urge this against the Parliament know, that if they have made any presidents
this Parliament, they have made them for posterity; and upon the same or better
reasons or law, then those were upon which their predecessors first made any
for them: and as some presidents ought not to be rules for them to follow; so
none can be limits to bound their proceedings, which may and must vary
according to the different condition of times: And whereas you look for
presidents, to prove all the Kings Army that are now with him to be Traitors,
remember who were adjudged Traitors in Richard the seconds time; and if it were
Treason in them for levying a war before a Parliament was called, and for
keeping a Parliament from being called? shall it not be Treason in them that
war against a Parliament when it is called? Were there ever such practices to
poison the people with an ill apprehension of the Parliament? Were there ever
such scandals and imputations laid upon the proceedings of both Houses? Were
there ever so many and so great breaches of the privilege of Parliament, as
have been made this Parliament? Or were there ever so many and so desperate
designs of force and violence against the Parliament, and the Members thereof?
If the Parliament have done more then ever their ancestors have done, I am sure
they have suffered more then ever they suffered; and yet in point of modesty or
duty they need not yield to the best of former times: but they may safely put
this in issue, whether the highest and most unwarrantable president of any of
His Majesty's predecessors do not fall short and much below what has bin done
to this Parliament? And on the other side, whether if they should make the
highest presidents of other Parliaments their patterns, there would be cause
to complain of want of modesty and duty in them, when they not so much as
suffered such things to enter into their thoughts (as their Declarations tell
me) which all the world knows their Predecessors have put in act.

And whereas it seems a riddle to those that are with the King, that they
should fight for the King, and by his command, and yet be Traitors to him; for
if they be Traitors, the King himself has done as much, being present with
them, as they have done: and how can a King commit Treason against himself?

To those let me answer, that what ever the King does he is not to be
questioned, but yet that does not clear them, because the King himself does
countenance them by his personal presence, and by his Comissions: and that
their consequence might fall to the ground, let them understand, that a King
may commit Treason against himself, and so did King John in resigning of his
Crown to the Pope: and Mr Brook, who was Recorder of London, in his reading
upon the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 16. said, That if any to whom the Crown
is committed by Act of Parliament, usurp it, or demean it in other manner
then is expressed in the Act, it is high Treason: read the Statute of 35. Hen. 8.
c. 1. And thus you see, that they which join with the King may be punished for
Treason, though the King himself cannot.

Besides, though they intend not hurt to the Kings person, as we may guess by
several circumstances, yet they may be Traitors: for it is true, that in some
sense he is the only person against whom Treason can be committed, that is
meant, as he is King: But yet that Treason which is against the Kingdom, is
more against the King, then that which is against his person, because he is
King; for that very Treason is not Treason as it is against him as a man, but as
a man that is a King; and as he has relation to the Kingdom, and stands as a
person entrusted with the Kingdom, and discharging that trust: Now if that be
true, as indeed it is, that Treason against the Kingdom is more Treason
against the King, then that which is against the Kings person; what shall
become of the Kings Army, which now levy War against the Parliament, which is
the Kingdom? are they not all Traitors?

But for Prince Rupert, some are content to make this excuse for him, that he
is no liege man borne, and is not subject to our Laws, and therefore he is no
Traitor, for he owes no Allegiance:

The answer to them will be but shortly thus, that any man (and so consequently
Prince Rupert) whilst he is in England, and in the Kings dominions, is to yield
a local ligeance and obedience to the King and the Laws, and in lieu of that
he is to receive a local Protection from the King, and so is, Cook* lib. 7.
Now the difference between strangers, that are both aliens, stands thus, if he
be alien amy it is Treason for him to levy War against the Kingdom (that is)
against the King, and so 'twas adjudged: But if he be an alien Enemy it is not
Treason, but crimon lesae Majestatis, which is a thing of the same nature for
the punishment, though not for the manner of the trial: Now Prince Rupert is
an alien amy (and indeed has more reason to be a friend to this Kingdom then
an enemy, consideratis considerandis) so that his offense is as plainly
discovered as the rest; and appears to be no less then High Treason against
the Kingdom.

FINIS.

