A TESTIMONY AGAINST Drunkenness AND SWEARING, etc.

With a Postscript unto all such as have any Tenderness of Heart or Conscience,
either Male or Female, or any Fear of God in you, and are Grieved at the
ABOMINATIONS that you daily hear and see amongst your Families and Neighbors,
in what COUNTRY or NATION soever.

Being the Copy of a Paper written and given forth (at Polch-Ground within the
Haven of Long-Sound) in NORWAY (the 20th of the fifth Month, 1674.) in the
KING of DENMARK's DOMINION.

By WILLIAM BAILEY.

Printed in the Year 1675.

To a People much given to Drunkenness AND SWEARING, etc.
A Visitation and Warning from the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, unto all you
Drunkards, who are strong to drink Strong Drink, and who drink till ye are
inflamed therewith, and your Tongues utter Folly and Perverseness, glutting your
selves with the Good Creatures of God, and Abusing them which are given to be
received in his Fear with Thankfulness, and to be used in his Wisdom, and in
Moderation, to his Glory; for which End all things were made and created,; and
not to be Consumed and Wasted upon your Excessive Lusts, to the Dishonor of
God (and the Name of Christianity), and to the Grieving his pure Spirit (his
Witness in you), which you make merry over, and trample under foot the Pearl of
great Price, worse then the Swine and Beasts that perish, whilst many of your
poor Fellow Creatures are ready to Starve and Perish for Want. Do ye think or
believe there is no Just God, who will Reward every one according to his Deeds
done in his Body, or that ye shall not be called to an Account for these
things? How dare you take his Holy Name in your Mouths, and profess your
selves to be Christians, who are so filled with Wickedness, etc. as, Oaths,
Lying, Drunkenness, Sottishness, Pride and Vanity, exceeding the Turks,
Infidels and Heathens in your Abominations, who will rise up in Judgment
against you in the Day of your Account?

Woe unto the DRUNKARDS of England, Holland, Norway, Sweedland and Denmark,
says the Lord God, who beholds your Sottishness, Brutishness, Deceit and
Abominations, who have greatly Abused his tender Mercies, and make a Wrong Use
of his Long-suffering and Kindness toward you by these your Doings; and ye
have no Cloak for your Sins; but Condemnation is your Portion, and Woe and
Misery will be your End forever, without speedy Repentance.

What Lamentation shall I take up for you, O ye Rebellious and Stiff-necked
People, who live in Fullness, Pride and Abundance of Idleness! The Sins of
Sodom (whom God destroyed) do even cry against you, Isa. 20.
(as Isaiah did against the Drunkards of Ephraim), Woe to the Crown of Pride, to
the Drunkards of Ephraim; they shall be trodden under foot, even the Crown and
Pride of the Drunkards of Ephraim: Ye have Erred because of Wine, and are out
of the Way because of Strong Drink: The Priest and the Prophet have erred
because of Strong Drink; they are swallowed up with Wine; they have gone astray
through Strong Drink; they fail in Vision; they slumber in Judgment; for all
their Tables are full of filthy Vomitings; no Place is clean. Thus did that
Holy Man of God declare against their Sottishness, Drunkenness, Pride, Excess
and Uncleanness, as moved of the Lord, by his holy Spirit, in his Day; and thus
am I moved of the God of Heaven at this time to declare against you, and to
warn you all, both Priests, Rulers and People, in whom the same Beastlial Life
and Ungodly Practices are found: Ye are an Evil Example in your Generation, and
you grieve God's Spirit, and cumber his Ground worse then the Fruitless
Fig Tree; and a Stink you will be to Posterity, and your Memorial will be an
Abhorrence through Ages to the Upright in Heart, and your End will be
Everlasting Destruction and Misery, if ye Repent not speedily; the Lord has
spoken it.

Postscript.
AND now unto all you that have any Tenderness of Heart or Conscience, either
Male or Female, or any Fear of God in you, and are grieved at the Abominations
that you daily hear and see amongst your Families or Neighbors, in what
Country or Nation soever you are.

This is the Counsel of the Lord unto you, Stand Still, be Still and Low in
your Minds, and incline your Heart and Ear to that which you feel grieved in
you; for its the Seed that God loves, that is Oppressed and Burdened with the
Filthy Conversation of the Wicked; its pure, and clean and holy; Defilement
grieves and burdens it, as Lot in Sodom.

Therefore in Patience wait, in pure Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, in
the Fear of God, Low and Tender, and in due time Deliverance will come to his
Chosen: Therefore faint not, thou Worm Jacob, thy Helper is near thee: Blessed
are the Poor in Spirit, theirs is the Heavenly Kingdom of Everlasting Rest,
Peace and Comfort.

So, believe in the True Light, which manifests and reproves Sin and Evil,
and obey it, that thou may become a Child of Light (as Christ said) an Heir
of Light and Life of the Promises which are all in Christ Jesus, the True Light
of the World, which lights every one that comes into the World; and so will
the Darkness vanish away and thy Bondage, and thy Soul be freed from the
Thraldom of the Power of Satan; and then thou will Praise the God of thy
Salvation in the Land of the Living: Therefore consult not, reason not with
Flesh and Blood, which must never enter God's Kingdom; neither be discouraged
at Hardships and Trials; look not out at any Visible Things, but to the
Invisible God alone for Help, the Everlasting Hill from whence Salvation
comes; feel it near thee, thou Tender One; for unto thee this is the Counsel
and Words of the Lord, who is no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation
whosoever fears God and works Righteousness, is accepted of him, and none
else; for without Holiness no man shall see the Lord in Peace.

W. B.


