A HELP To Magistrates, and Ministers of Justice, also a Guide to Parish and
Ward-Officers.

Containing,

1. Plain Directions for Justices of the Peace, in material things relating to
their Office, in and out of Sessions. 2. To their Clerks, in drawing Forms of
Warrants, and other necessary Writings. 3. A Help to Grand and Petty Juries. 4.
Penalties upon Forestallers of Markets, Fairs, Badgers, Drovers, Butchers,
Tanners, Inholders, etc. 5. The Rates of Servants Wages, according to Statute
Law, etc. 6. Some Directions to Coroners, and their Inquests, in many material
things relating to their Office and Duty, etc. 7. Customs and other advantages
peculiar to the City of London, in Privileges, Law-matters, Proceedings in the
Court of Requests, Attachments, Court of Orphans, and other things. 8. The
Office and Duty of a High Constable, Petty Constable, Headborough, Tything-man,
Bailiff, etc. 9. The Office and Duty of Churchwardens and Sidesmen. 10. The
Office and Duty of the Overseers of the Poor. 11. The Office and Duty of
Toll-keepers and Fair-keepers 12. The Office and Duty of Surveyors of Highways,
Scavengers, etc.

The Second Edition.

With Amendments, and large Additions, agreeable to the several Acts of
Parliament, in these Cases made and provided. By P. B. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Boddington, at the Golden Ball in Duck Lane. 1700.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THIS little Book may be termed a Posy of choice Flowers, gathered out of
diverse curious Gardens: It contains a great many things useful and necessary to
be known by all English Men, who at one time or other may stand in need of
them, by way of Advice, as well as some may do it to put them in Practice. It
is a Collection indeed, but such a one, that of this nature scarcely has
appeared in any one Volume, though large, and at great Price; and certainly
never before in so small a Compass. It contains, however, in Quality more by a
great deal, than upon the first view, can reasonably be guessed by its
Quantity. I need not instance Particulars, seeing in the Title Page they are
briefly set down, and in the Table more at large, though in neither so exactly
as you will find them in Particulars, duly placed in the Book.

I cannot doubt but it will be Instrumental in doing a great deal of Good:
First, In giving Men an Insight what they ought legally to do. And secondly,
What they ought to avoid, as not warrantable in the one kind to rest secure,
and in the other to keep out of Danger, saving themselves thereby much Trouble
and Expense. I have mostly quoted the celebrated Books from whence it was
taken, and is warranted by those Men exceeding Skilful in the Laws of the Land;
and for that Particular especially have left Names behind them that cannot be
obliterated. Also I have cited such Statutes, Ancient and Modern, as the
Parliaments have been pleased to make for well ordering the Government, and
rendering us a happy People, in the Security they give us as to Life, Liberty,
Property, etc. So putting all this together, I doubt not but the Reader's
Expectation will be answered according to his desire, in that he will find
nothing omitted he can fancy material, as far as is proposed, or herein could
be contained; and then both of us have our Ends, I in Writing, and he in
Reading so useful a Work, as past all Peradventure will find Encouragement, and
descend to Posterity, which will be Grateful. Courteous Reader,

Your Friend to Serve you, P. B.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. THE Antiquity of a Justice of the Peace, his Power, and what he may
do in the Execution of his Office. Page 1 Chap. 2. What may be done by a
Justice of Peace, Ex Officio, etc. p. 3 Chap. 3. What one Justice of Peace may
do by power and virtue of his Commission, without requiring to be joined with
another or more in acting, in what relates to his Office, etc. p. 6 Chap. 4.
The Power of two Justices of the Peace, acting jointly within the Compass of
their Jurisdiction, by virtue of their Commission and Office, etc. p. 9 Chap.
5. What may be done by three Justices of the Peace conjunct, in the Execution
of their Office, according to several Statutes, etc. impowering and directing
them thereto. p. 13 Chap 6. What may be done by four Justices of the Peace
conjunct, in the Execution of their Office, as aforesaid, etc. p. 14 Chap. 7.
What six Justices of the Peace conjunct, in the Execution of their Office, may
do, etc. p. 15 Chap. 8. What is to be considered and meant by the next Justice
in a County, etc. p. ibid Chap. 9. Of certain Forfeitures by Statute, given by
eight Justices of the Peace. p. 16 Chap. 10. The Fees of Justices of the Peace,
or such as they ought to take. p. 17 Chap. 11. Where a Justice of the Peace
lies liable to be Fined for neglecting or transgressing in his Office or Duty,
etc. p. ibid Chap. 12. Where a Justice of the Peace lies liable to Punishment.
p. 18 Chap. 13. Some Directions in making out or granting Warrants by a Justice
of Peace, and how to be executed. p. 19 Chap. 14. Of Mittimus's, and their
Form, and what is to be considered in them, etc. p. 23 Chap. 15. Of
Recognizances, what they are, and how, and in what Cases to be taken by a
Justice of Peace, etc. p. 24 Chap. 17. Of Sessions, and Matters properly to be
done, etc. by Justices therein, etc. p. 25 Chap. 18. Instructions for Clerks to
Justices of the Peace, containing many necessary Forms or Precedents of
Warrants on several occasions, directed to Constables. p. 26 Chap. 19. An Order
of the Justices of Peace for a Bastard Child. p. 33 Chap. 20. A Warrant for the
Overseers of the Poor to give up their Accounts. p. 37 Chap. 21. The Form of a
Warrant for suppressing an Alehouse. p. 39 Chap. 22. Supersedeas grantable by
Justices of Peace to supercede Warrants, etc. their Forms. p. 40 Chap. 23. The
Forms of Recognizances on several occasions, to be taken by Justices of Peace,
and written by them or their Clerks, etc. p. 44 Chap. 24. The Forms of
Mittimus's to deliver Persons committed to Goal, etc. p. 48 Chap. 24. The Form
of Bailments by the Justices of Peace, etc. p. 51 Chap. 25. The Form of
Releases by Justices of Peace, etc. p. 54 Chap. 26. Somewhat of the Antiquity
of Juries, what things they must consider, and how they ought to be qualified
to be Juries. p. 55 Chap. 27. Of Indictments, Presentiments, and the difference
between them; the Oath administered to the Grand Jury, and how they ought to
enquire, etc. p. 58 Chap 28. Several material things relating to Juries, as the
Law directs, and according to the Opinion of the Learned Lawyers, etc. p 62
Chap. 29. Challenges to be made of Jurors, and other useful Instructions
tending to Evidence, etc. p. 64 Chap. 30. Penalties upon Forestallers of
Markets, Fairs, etc. Badgers, Drovers, Butchers, Tanners, Inholders, what they
may do, and what not, etc. p. 66 Chap. 31. Rates of Wages for Servants,
according to Statute Law, etc. and how to be ordered by Justices of Peace, etc.
p. 70 Chap. 32. The Office of a Coroner, his Fees, and upon what Statutes and
other warrantable Authority he is to proceed* p. 72 Chap. 33. Some other
Matters relating to the Coroner's Office and Duty in view of Dead Bodies, out
of Rastal, etc. p. 75 Chap. 34. Murder, how to be taken, and what is
observable therein, to make it so wilfully, etc. p. 77 Chap. 35. Homicide and
Manslaughter, Felo de se, etc. p. 79 Chap. 36. Involuntary Homicide. p. 82
Chap. 37. Customs, Advantages, etc. peculiar to the City of London; Statutes
made in its favor; of the Court of Request, commonly called, the Court of
Conscience, etc. p. 84 Chap. 38. Where an Action will lie before the day of
Payment, to find better Sureties, by the Custom of London. p. 85 Chap. 39.
Marking a Cause in the Mayors Court, after a Verdict given in the Sherriffs
Court, to be done. p. 90 Chap. 40. Some Matters relating to Orphans in London.
p. 91 Chap. 41. Of the Court of Common Council for London. p. 94 Chap. 42. The
An^iquity of a Constable, his Oath, and other things concerning his Office,
etc. p. 96 Chap. 43. The Office and Duty of a Constable, Headborough, etc. in
Serving or Executing Warrants directed to him by Justices in Commission, etc.
p. 102 Chap. 44. The Office of a Constable, etc. how it ought to be executed,
etc. relating to Affrays, etc. p. 105 Chap. 45. The Constables Office relating
to Arrests or Escapes of Prisoners, Felons, etc. p. 107 Chap. 46. The Office of
a Constable, etc. relating to Hue and Cry. p. 108 Chap. 47. The Constable's
Office, etc. more particularly to the Conservation of the Peace. p. 110 Chap.
48. The Office of a Constable, etc. relating to the strict Observation of the
Lord's Day. p. 113 Chap. 49. The Constable's Office, etc. about hired Servants,
Laborers, etc. p. 115 Chap. 50. The Constable's Office relating to Popish
Recusants and Conventicles. p. 118 Chap. 51. A Constable's Office relating to
such as shall disturb Ministers in time of Divine Service, etc. and what
relates to Physicians. p. 121 Chap. 52. The Constable's Office and Duty in time
of Plague and Pestilence, etc. p. 122 Chap. 53. The Constable's Office, etc.
relating to Routs and Riots, and what they are. p. 124 Chap. 54. The
Constable's Office, relating to Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, etc. p. 125
Chap. 55. A Copy of a Testimonial, as in this Case the Law directs. p. 126
Chap. 56. The Constable's Office in disposing of the Wives and Children of
Rogues, Vagabonds or sturdy Beggars. p. 130 Chap. 57. The Constable's Office
relating to Alehouses, Inns, etc. p. 131 Chap. 58. The Constable's Office
relating to Weights and Measures in Cities, Towns Corporate, etc. p. 134 Chap.
59. The Constable's Office in se^^ing and ordering the Watches, Forcible
Entries, etc. p. 135 Chap. 60. The Constable's Office relating to
Hedgebreakers, Destroyers of Underwoods. etc. p. 137 Chap. 61. The Constable's
Office in case of Landlords Distraining for Rent, etc. p. 139 Chap. 62. The
Constable's Office in providing Carriages for the King, etc. p. 141 Chap. 63.
The Constable's Office relating to the King's Game, Fishery, Excise and Custom.
p. 142 Chap. 58. The Constable's Office relating to Clothiers and Irish Cattle,
etc. p. 145 Chap. 64. Rates for the Relief of poor maimed Soldiers, Mariners,
Prisoners, etc. how to be gathered and ordered, etc. p. 147 Chap. 65. What
particular Things and Matters High Constables ought to return before the
Justices in Sessions, and to be returned to them by the Petty Constables, in
their respective Jurisdictions. p. 149 Chap. 66. The Constable's Office
relating to Stoned Horses. p. 151 Chap. 67. The Constable's Office relating to
such Persons as propha^ely Swear and Curse. p. 152 Chap. 68. The Constable's
Office farther relating to Vagabonds and Beggars, and Collecting Moneys for
Building and Repairing Goals. p. 154 Chap. 69. The Constable's Office relating
to such as make or put bad Malt to Sale, etc. p. 156 Chap. 70. The
Churchwardens Office, etc. Its Antiquity and Dignity; how to be chosen; what
they are to do in keeping the Lord's Day; and what relates to them as to
Church-Goods, etc. p. 157 Chap. 71. The Churchwardens Office in Repairing the
Pews, seating Persons in the Church, etc. what Rates to make for the Repair of
the Church, etc p. 160 Chap. 71. Choice of Surveyors, giving up their Accounts
making Distress, Forfeitures, Presentiments, and where they may give them in,
etc. p. 163 Chap. 73. The Grounds of Presentiments or Articles given whereon to
found Presentiments, that the Churchwardens may know what to do in this Case. p.
165 Chap. 74. Several Matters for the Instruction of Churchwardens, etc. p. 168
Chap. 75. The Office of the Overseers of the Poor, what degrees of Poor to have
regard to, etc. p. 169 Chap. 76. What relates to the Overseers in putting poor
Children Apprentice, etc. p. 174 Chap. 77. How far the Overseer is concerned in
settling the Poor; also concerning Bastards, etc. p. 176 Chap. 78. The Office
of the Overseers of the Poor in making Rates, and making and delivering up
their Accounts upon going out of their Offices, etc. p. 179 Chap. 79. The
Office of the Overseers of the Poor in receiving Fines to the Use of the Poor;
of Destroyers of Game, unlawfully Fishing; also relating to Measures, and
Burying in Woollen. p. 183 Chap. 80. Of Fairs, Markets, ^oll-keepers, Clerks of
Markets, Measuring and Sealing, etc. p. 185 Chap. 81. The Office of Surveyors
of the Highways in mending the Ways, and Rating. p. 183 Chap. 82. The Office of
a Surveyor i^ draining the Roads, making Presentiments, and how he may be
reimbursed for Moneys laid out, etc. p. 191 Chap. 83. Matters concerning
Surveyors, etc. p. 194 Chap. 84. Directions to Surveyors concerning Wains or
Carriages on the Road. p. 195 Chap. 85. Directions to the Scavengers and
Managers of Sewers. p. 197 Chap. 86. Within what times Rates are to be made,
and by whom; how the Scavengers are to account for them, etc. p. 200 Chap. 87.
Things useful to be known by Surveyors, Scavengers, etc. putting out Lights,
etc. p. 201
READER, Observe these short Directions to know the Authors being Alleged or
quoted, as you find them set down through the whole Book.
LAm. or Lamb. or Lambt. Mr. Lambert's Justice of Peace. Dal. or Dalt. Mr.
Dalton's Country Justice of Peace. Br. Brook; sometimes Ld. chief Justice of
the Common Pleas. F. or Fitz. Fitzherbert, sometimes one of the Judges of the
Common Pleas. Die. Dyer; sometimes Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Dr.
certain Directions or Resolutions of the Judges of Assize, Anno 1643. Co. Sr.
Edward Coke; sometimes Ld. Chief Justice of the King's Bench, viz. his Book of
Reports. Co Lit. Sr. Edw. Coke's first part of his Institutes upon Littleton.
Fi. M. Hen. Finch Apprentice del Ley. P. Pl. Plow. Mr. Plowden's Commentaries.
Ras. or Rast. Rastals Abridgment o^ the Statutes. Lib. Intr. The Book of
Entries. Cr. Cro. or Crom. Cromptons Justic^ of the Peace. P. Po. or Pol. Mr.
Polton's Abridg^ment of the Statutes P. R. Mr. Polton de^ pace Regis. B. A. Sr.
Francis Bacon his Element^ of the common Law. B. A. V. his use o^ the Law.
Resol. of the Judges Resolution of the Judges of Assize, Anno 1633. to certain
Queries. Wing. Wingates Abridgment of the Statutes.
As for the Statutes cited, I conclude they are easy to be directed to by what
is set down from the Names of the Kings and Queens, as 2 R. 2. the Second of
Richard the second. 6 Hen. 7. the sixth of Henry the 7. P. M. Philip and Mary
El. or Eliz. Queen Elizabeth. J^c. or Jacobi I. King James the first, and so of
others: For where there have been more Kings of a Name than one, the figure is
set down to distinguish that King in what Reign the Statute was made, from the
rest, as Edw. 1. Edw. 2. Edw. 3. Edw. 4.

The Experienced Justice of Peace. In Respect to his Power, in and out of
Sessions, in many Cases of great Importance; useful for Justices, their Clerks,
and others.
CHAP. I. The Antiquity of a Justice of the Peace, his Power, and what he may
do, the Execution of his Office in many material Cases.
THE Power of a Justice of the Peace is very great, and is a main Propp and
Pillar, of good Government, in taking Care to prevent and Punish Offenses,
whereby the Peace is Conserved, and Men maintained in their Rights, and the
Possessions of their Goods and Chattels, etc. peaceably; whereas, were there
not such Over-awing Magistrates, Offenders would be Imboldened to make more
frequent Depredations, and Strength and Violence would seize upon what the
Weaker could no ways defend against them, were not the Law by this means very
much their Aid and Safeguard. This Office is of great Antiquity, and has all
along held up a venerable Esteem, and Good-liking among the People, who find
great Advantage, and Benefit by those so Commissioned, being usually Men of
Estates, Discreet, and Judicious, capable of discerning Truth from Falsehood,
and to relieve the Injured, and restrain Oppressors, to punish Criminals, and
Discharge the Innocent and Faultless.

Justices of the Peace were Created, 1 Ed. 3. Chap. 15. Dalt. 6. Lamb. 10.

But they were first named so by 36 Edw. 3. Chap. 12.

A Justice of the Peace is a Judge of Record, from whence called Justices, and
before 1 Ed. 3. they were called Conservators. 3. Cro. 29, etc. He may take
Recognizance of Peace, which none can do but a Judge of Record, Lam. 186. Dalt.
8. Crompt. 196. a Number. 1.

He is called Commissioner of the Peace, by reason he is Authorized by the
King's Commission, so Custos Pacis, or Keeper of the Peace, the same with
Justiciarius Pacis, or Justice of the Peace. And the Constitution of Justices
of Peace is Inherent, and Inseparable from the Crown, Stat. 27. Hen. 8. And
this Power cannot be Transferred, 20 H. 7.

His Warrant is not to be disputed by the Constable for any thing wherein he
has Jurisdiction of the Cause, Dalt. 8. Cap. 147. 6. etc.

In some Cases the Testimony of a Justice of the Peace is of as great Force,
and in some Cases greater than an Indictment of 12 Men upon Oath, viz. In Case
of Presentiments of Highways, Force, Riot, Dalt. 9. Lamb. 65.

A Justice of the Peace being Assaulted, may Commit the Party so offending to
prison, Dalt. 371. Lamb. 134. Crompt. 68. a. If a Justice see one about to make
an Affray, and charge him to keep the Peace, and he answers he will not, he may
bind him to his good Behavior, Dalt. 294.

A Justice of the Peace must proceed by Prescript of the Statute and
Commission, Dalt. 22.

Where the Statute refer to the Trial to the Justice's Discretion, it seems
he may examine upon Oath, Dalt. 20. Every Justice of the Peace is a proper
Conservator of Rivers within his County, Lamb. 189. And Justices of the Peace
at Sessions are of equal Authority, Lamb. 385, etc. Vide Crompt. 122. a Nu. 33.

If a Felon be brought before a Justice of the Peace upon suspicion, though it
appear to the Justice, he be not guilty, nevertheless he may not be set at
Liberty, but so that he may come to his Trial, Lamb. 233. Dalt. 389. Cro. 40.
b. Nu. 20. Otherways it will prove a voluntary Escape in the Justice; for he is
not to be delivered by any Man's Discretion, Dalt. 8. Lamb. 223.

CHAP. II. What may be done by a Justice of Peace, Ex Officio, etc.
HE may Record a Demurrer upon Evidence, Lamb. 539.

He may give Day to the Party to bring in Records, which is before other
Justices, which is Pleaded by way of Justification, Lamb. 539.

In Absence of the King's Attorney, a Justice of the Peace may take Issue with
one that Pleads a Pardon, that he is one of the Parties Excepted, Lamb. 540.

A Justice of the Peace may take Money for the Security of the Peace, in
deposito, where Bail cannot be procured, and which, upon the Party so
depositing the Money, breaking the Peace shall be forfeited to the King. Just.
Berkley, 1 Cro. 446.

If upon supposing an Indictment to be void, the Justices have discharged the
Prisoner, paying his Fees, yet upon change of their Opinion, they may stay him
any time before Judgment. Lamb. 540.

Justices of the Peace may inquire of all manner of Felonies at the Common Law,
or given by any Statute, and of all manner of Trespasses against the King's
Peace, and such Trespasses wherein Actions of the Case will lie for Trespasses
or Deceit, and in the end of the Writ grounded upon the Case, It is contained,
Contra Pacem nostram. Crompt. 8. a. Number. 25.

Defaults against the Statute of 3 Hen. 6. Chap. 11. For Levying of Wages for
Knights of the Shire, are to be heard and determined by Inquiry for the King,
or Action for the Party before the Justice of Peace. Lamb. 512.

A Justice of the Peace has no need to show his Commission, by which he is made
Justice of Peace, when he Justifies the doing of any thing as a Justice, for
he is Justice of Record, and the Commission remains with the custos Rotulorum
of the same County, and he is called by Commission in open Assize, or Sessions.
Crompt. 120. b. Nu. 13. Lamb. 387.

A Justice of Peace may have his Action of the Case against the Party that
calls him false Justice of the Peace; it also seems that he may be
Indicted, for they may inquire of all Trespasses, where a Man may have his
Action of the Case. Crompt. 121. a Number. 21, and 122. a Number. 29.

A Justice of the Peace, Certifying into the King's Bench, that such a one
broke the Peace in his Presence, the Party shall be put to his Fine, without a
Traverse to the same. Cromp. 132. a.

A Justice of the Peace, who is of the Quorum, ought to be Resident in the
County where he is a Justice of the Quorum. 2 Hen. 5. Chap. 4. Cromp. 122. a.
Number. 32.

The Justices at Newgate sit by Virtue of 2 Commissions, Goal Delivery, and
Oyer and Terminer, 4 Eliz. Chap. 2. And where the same Persons are Justices of
Goal Delivery, and Oyer, etc. They may sit the same Day, and Place, and inquire
by the same Jury, yet the Entry of the Records must be several as the
Indictment is, Dalt. 168.

A Justice of the Peace commands one by his Precept, under Penalty of 10 l.
to be at the Quarter Sessions next ensuing it, and he appears not, no Scire
Facias shall go forth more than if there had been a Subpoena, however it
seems he shall be Attached to be at the next Sessions upon Contempt. Cromp.
123. a. Number. 9.

CHAP. III. What one Justice of Peace may do by Power and Virtue of his
Commission, without requiring to be joined with another, or more in Acting, in
what relates to his Office.
HE may cause all such as are fit, to Work in Harvest, or Hay-time, and after
License them to go unto any other County.

He may Rate the Prizes of deceitful Malt, to be sold by 2 Edw. 6. 10.

He may compel one fit in his Discretion to be bound Apprentice, by 5 Eliz. 4.

He may it seems give Directions to Watchmen, Keepers, and Searchers of
infected Persons. Crompt. 126. b.

He may cause to be Whipped Trespassers in Orchards, Corn, Hedges, or Woods,
not able to give any Satisfaction. And it seems he may hear and determine by
Examination, or otherways by his Discretion the Offenses committed in
Tile-making.

One Justice of Peace may command Vagrant Persons to Prison, if they will not
serve.

He may upon his View of forceable detainer, Record it by 15 Rich. 2. Chap. 2.
Dalt. 81, 82.

He may Punish Deceit in Cloth by Tenters, etc.

He may cause Highways to Markets to be enlarged, and cleansed of Trees and
Bushes. 13 Edw. 1. Chap. 5.

He may Punish Keepers of Places for unlawful Games, and the Players at those
Games.

He may Punish Profane Swearing in his Presence, made out by Testimony or
Conviction by the Party's own Confession.

He may Punish Offenses in Watermen, and Transporters of Corn.

He may Punish Defaults of Collectors of Sheriffs, Amercements, and of Bailiffs
of the Hundreds. Soldiers that Purloin their Horse or Harness.

He may prevent a Riot, stay it, and Commit them that are concerned in Acting
of it.

One Justice of the Peace, upon Complaint may Commit till the Assizes, or
Sessions, any Popish Recusant Convicted, above 18 Years of Age, under the
Degree of a Baron; so for refusing the Oath of Allegiance, 7 Jacobi 1. Chap. 6.

He may cause to be set in the Pillory in the next Market Town, Persons
Convicted of Breaking the Assize of Fuel, and not able to pay the Forfeiture,
with a Billet, or Faggot bound to his Body. 7 Edw. 6. C. 7.

Quaere whether one alone can Commit him,

He may cause an Unlicensed Ale-house-man openly to be Whipped after
Conviction, where there is no sufficient Distress to pay the Penalties. 3
Caroli 1. 3.

He may upon View, or Proof by two Witnesses Warrant the Levying 20 l.
Forfeiture for an Unlicensed Alehouse, to be given to the Poor.

One Justice may demand the Peace against an other Man. Lamb. 81. And he may
Punish Persons, going, or riding Armed, contrary to the Statute of 2 Edw. 3.

A Justice may inquire of Felo de se, hid, or cast into the Sea, where the
Coroner cannot have the View of the Body, 3 Inst. 55. And he may send Writs for
Fugitive Laborers, by 2 H. 5. C. 4. St. 1.

He may take an Information out of the County against an Offender in the
County. 1 Cro. 213

So a Recognizance to Prosecute by Assent of the Parties out of the County, but
cannot use Coercive Power, Ibid.

A Justice of the Peace Inhabiting in the Hundred where one was Robbed, may if
he be at York, or London, take the Party's Oath, being but an Examination, and
no Act of Jurisdiction.

A Justice of Peace in London ought to send Felons to the Common Goal, not to
the Counters. 1 Co. 120.

He may take an Indictment of Barretry, without a special Commission. 2 Cro. 32.

A Justice in open Court may alter the Panel or a Jury Sworn only for the King,
2 Co. 59.

One Justice of the Peace is sufficient to certify carrying of Corn from one
Place to another, to sell against the Statute of Fore-stalling, joined with the
Customer.

He may Bind a Cheater to his good Behavior, etc. Dalt. 63. 7 Jacobi (1.)

He may Convict of Drunkenness, by 12 Jacobi (1.) C. 7.

He may Seize the Goods of Gipseys, within a Month after their Arrival, etc. By
the 22 Hen. 8. C. 10.

He may Record a Riot in his View, and Commit the Rioters, or bind them to
their good Behavior; but single, or alone proceed no further. Dalt. 195.

He may punish Spoilers of Fish Ponds, and cause their Nets to be cut and
burnt. 17 Rich. 2.

He may take the Claim of a Horse Stolen. 31 Eliz. 12.

He may Examine and Bind over unlawful Hunters in the Night time, etc. 1 Hen.
7. C. 7. The like of taking or killing Conies in the Nighttime. 22, 23 Caroli 1.

He may compel a Vintner to draw a Man Wine, who demands it, and offers
Payment, 24 Hen. 8. Dalt. 242.

He may Convict of the Breach of the Lord's day, against Stat. 29 Caroli 2. And
may allow of Cause for Traveling in a Boat on the Lord's Day, according to the
said Statute.

CHAP. IV. The Power of two Justices of the Peace, Acting jointly within the
Compass of their Jurisdiction, by Virtue of their Commission and Office, etc.
TWO Justices of the Peace upon View of a Riot, or Rout, may Record the same,
and with the Sheriff, or under Sheriff. 13 Hen. 4. C. 7. Crompt 16. Number. 9. to
inquire by a Jury, and fine the Rioters. Dalt. 195. Quaere.

Two Justices on Complaint that a Servant departed before his Term ended, etc.
Are to Examine, and Commit if they see Cause. See more of Laborers and
Servants, of a Constable, etc.

They may Bind one to the Quarter Sessions to Answer his Offense against a
Penal-law. Lamb. 187. Vide Dalt.

They may Allow and discharge an Ale-housekeeper at Discretion.

There must be two Justices of the Peace for appointing Overseers for
Woolen-cloth for a Year, etc. So to convene Persons fit to discover any Offense
in the making deceitful Cloth.

They may Imprison for a Year, or less at their Discretion, Servants Assaulting
their Masters; may compel Women to serve for such Wages, and manner as they
think fit. They may Tax a Hundred toward the Relief of the Poor of a Town
within it, wherein the Inhabitants are thereby overcharged, and not able to
keep their Poor; and they may Tax others of a County for the Relief of places
Infected.

They may dispose of at Discretion all Forfeitures to grow and become due on
the Statute of Rogues.

They may Assess all the Parishes within the Hundred, proportionably, toward
Contribution for the Partys charged upon a Robbery.

They shall take Order to set poor Soldiers on Work, who cannot get Work, for
want of Work, Tax the Hundred for Relief. 21 Jacobi C. 28.

Two Justices may Fine the Head-Officers in Buroughs and Market Towns, who are
remiss in viewing the Weights and Measures, and break and burn those that are
Defective; and Fine all Buyers and Sellers with unlawful Weights, at Discretion.

They may allow Surveyors, and their Servants to make Materials in another
Parish for the Mending the Highways where they are defective.

Two Justices, one being of the Quorum, upon Complaint of the Churchwardens,
may Convene before them the Bailiff and High-constables, and take their
Accounts of Forfeitures and Defaults Estreated concerning Highways.

Two Justices of the Peace in London, may determine the Matter of Buildings, and
Inhabitants there. 35 Eliz. c. 6.

They shall allow Scavengers under their Hands, to Confirm a Tax of Constables,
Churchwardens, and Surveyors, etc.

Two Justices of the Peace may take an Oath of the under Sheriff, Bailiffs, etc.

Two Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum, may Commit any Person
under the Degree of a Baron, being above 18 Years of Age for refusing to take
the Oath of Allegiance, etc.

They may take the Submission of Persons brought up in a Jesuits College.

The may, one being of the Quorum, Bail a Person Arrested for Manslaughter,
Felony, or on Suspicion of them.

They may take Order about a Bastard-child laid in the Parish. 18 Eliz. 7
Jacobi, etc.

They may Administer the Oaths of Supremacy, and of the Office, to Bailiffs of
Franchises.

They may punish Destroyers of the King's Game, or such as keep Hunting-dogs. 1
Ja^ 1. 27. 7 Jacobi 1. 11.

They may sign a Testimonial of a Servant turned out of Place; or one whose
Master is dead. 27 Eliz. c. 11. Lamb. 331.

Two Justices may Convict any one of Opposing the Execution of the Statute
against Planting Tobacco in England. 12 and 13 Caroli 2. Dalt. 237. So to
Warrant destroying it, and Convict Refusers to Assist. Ibid.

They may License poor People Diseased, to Travel to the Bath for Remedy, etc.
39 Eliz. 4.

They may send to a Workhouse. Prisoners brought before them by Habeas Corpus,
according to 30 Caroli 2.

Two Justices, one of the ^uorum, may take an Indictment and Inquisition. Lamb.
48.

Two Justices of the Peace may Warrant Constables in Searching Houses for
Setting-dogs, and Nets for taking Partridges. 7 Jacobi 1. C. 11.

They may commit for 3 Months Shooters of Partridges contrary to 1 Jacobi 1. C.
27. Unless each so Offending pays 20 s. They may proceed upon Offenses against
the 13 Eliz. of Hedge-breaking, etc. Done to one of them.

Two Justices of the Peace, with the Bishop and Chancellor, may call Collectors
of Hospitals to Account, 14 Eliz. Chap. 5.

They may bind over one Suspect of Counterfeiting Tokens and Letters. 33 Hen.
8. 1.

They may search for Popish Books and Relics. 3 Jacobi 1. C. 5. They may
Punish Defaults in the Overseers of the Poor.

They may Punish Offenders in disturbing the Execution of the Statute against
Rogues.

They may send to the House of Correction Persons about to leave their Family
to the Parish. 7 Jacobi 1. c. 4. They may Examine Offenders in Buck-stalls,
against the 19 Hen. 7. At the Sessions, etc.

They may Warrant the Churchwardens and Overseers to Levy Arrears of the Rates
for the Poor.

Two Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum, may Reform false Measures,
or Neglect of Clarks of the Market. Dalt. 251.

Two Justices of the Peace to Convict of not Reading Common Prayer. 14 Caroli 2
chap. 14.

They may Bind over to the Assizes, or Sessions, one suspected of Deceit, by
Counterfeit Letters, and proceed in like Nature in some other Matters of lesser
Moment; and for many things more fully set down and Explained, vide, the
Offices of Constable, Churchwarden, Overseer of the Poor, Surveyors, etc.

CHAP. V. What may be done by Three Justices of the Peace, Conjunct in the
Execution of their Office, according to several Statutes, etc. Impowering and
directing them thereto.
THree Justices of the Peace may call unto Examination before them, the
bestowing of Money in Mending the Highways, by the Statute for mending
Highways, or Bridges. 14 Eliz. 5. 30 Eliz. 18.

They may, one of them being of the Quorum, License Glass-men, to Travel
without Begging in the County. 39 Eliz. C. 4.

They may take the Oaths of two Witnesses of Depraving the Sacrament. 1 Ed. 6.
1.

They may License under their Seals, one of them being of the Quorum, Badgers
and Drovers. 5 Eliz. 12.

They may Confirm Bylaws in Norfolk for Norwich Stuffs with others, etc.

They may Consent to a Petition, by 13 Caroli 2. 5.

They with the Bishop and his Chancellor may Examine the Employing the Poor's
Money, etc. 14 Eliz. 5. 39 Eliz. 10.

They may, one of them being of the Quorum, take Examination of those that Maim
Horses, Cattle, or that destroy Nurseries, or other young Trees, and throw down
Enclosures in the Night unlawfully, etc.

They may License Buying of Corn, to carry from one Port to another. 5 Eliz. 12.

CHAP. VI. What may be done by 4 Justices of the Peace, Conjunct in the
Execution of their Office, as aforesaid, etc.
FOur Justices of the Peace may Discharge under Seal an Apprentice Hardly, and
Ill-used. 5 Eliz. Dalt. 120.

They may Tax the Inhabitants, and make Collectors and Overseers for the
Repairing a Bridge, where it is not known who ought to Repair it. 22 Hen. 8. C.
5.

They may Seize a Recusant's Arms, and Armor, Ammunition, etc. 3 Jacobi 1. c.
5.

They may consent with the Sheriff, or Jailer of a Corporation, for the
removing of Sick Persons that are Prisoners, or others. 19 Caroli 2. C. 4.

They may License a Recusant to Travel above 5 Miles with the Assent of the
Bishop, or Lieutenant, etc. 35 Eliz. 3 Jacobi 1. c. 5.

They may Remand by Warrant under Seal, Malefactors flying into England. 7
Jacobi 1. C. 1. Dalt. 541. And indeed thus Conjunct they have great Power in
the Execution of the Office of the Peace, where Matters lie within their
Jurisdiction, as to what relates to the Conservation of the Peace, and keeping
good Order in the Government, and saving the Subject from Wrongs.

CHAP. VII. What Six Justices of the Peace, Conjunct in the Execution of their
Office may do, etc.
SIX Justices, one being of the Quorum, may Execute the Laws of Commissioners
of the Sewers. Dalt. 219.

They may appoint a Common-goal for the Sheriff to have the Custody of it. 13
Hen. 8.

Six Justices in Commission of the Peace, with the Justices of Assize, by 12
Rich. 2. C. 1.

Eight Justices of the Peace, beside the Lords, by 14 Rich. 2. c. 11. So two
Lawyers in every County. 18 Edw. 3. c. 2.

The greatest part of the Justices of the Peace, to order the House of
Correction in every County.

The greatest part to Tax other Parishes for the Poor, where there is an
Insufficiency in the Parish, or Hundred. 43 Eliz. c. 2. So to employ the
Overplus of the Maimed Soldiers Stock to the Use of the Poor. 43 Eliz. c. 3.
And to Tax for the Relief of Maimed Soldiers. So to Accounts of Treasurers for
Maimed Soldiers 43 Eliz. c. 3.

CHAP. VIII. What is to be considered and meant by the next Justice in a
County, etc.
THE next Justice may License Mariners to Beg, having been Shipwracked. 39
Eliz. c. 4. Lamb. 303. Dalt. 209, 227.

Where the Statute orders the Justice most nigh to do Execution, etc. As in
13 Hen. 4. Of Riots under the Penalty of 100 l. for Forfeiture, he is excused,
if another Justice, (not next) do the Office.

He may choose Fishermen to be Mariners by the King's Commission. 5 Eliz. c. 5.
Lamb. 359. Dalt. 139.

The next Justice is to send a Prisoner to a Workhouse, etc. 30 Caroli 2.

CHAP. IX. Of certain Forfeitures by Statute given to 8 Justices of the Peace.
FOR every Day he sits upon the Statute of Laborers, not exceeding 3 Days, 5
s. So the Mayor, or Head Officer in Corporatins, etc. Out of the Fines arising
on the Stat. etc.

For every Day which Sessions is kept, which may be 3 Days, they shall have out
of the Fines coming to the Sheriffs Hands, by reason of the Sessions, 4 s. and
their Clerk 2 s.

Two Justices of the Peace shall have a part of defective Cloth Seized and
Forfeited, 5 Edw. 6. Lam. 359.

Justices who examine Offenses of Deer-Hays, and Buck-stalls shall have the
tenth part of Forfeiture. 19 Hen. 7. c. 11.

CHAP. X. The Fees of Justices of the Peace, or such as they ought to take in
the following Cases, according to Crompt. 176. a. and Dalt. 78.
FOR a Recognizance of the Peace, 2 s.

For a Recognizance to Bail a Prisoner, 2 s.

For a Supersedeas of the Peace, 2 s.

For a Warrant of the Peace Sealed, 2 s.

For a Release of the Peace, 2 s.

For a Warrant not of the Peace, 4 d.

For a Recognizance of an Ale-house-keeper, 12 d. For the Inrolment of a Deed,
the Land not exceeding 40 s. per Annum. To the Justice one Shilling, and to his
Clerk one Shilling. But if the Land exceed 40 s. then 2 s. 6 d. to the Justice,
and the like to his Clerk.

CHAP. XI. Where a Justice of the Peace lies liable to be Fined for Neglecting,
or Transgressing in his Office or Duty, etc.
IN the Case of Bailing one not Bailable, and refusing to Bail one Bailable,
and Detaining him, he lies liable to a Fine, and to pay double to the Prisoner.
3 Edw. 1. C. 15. 23 Hen. 6. C. 10.

In the Statute against Riots, if he does not Execute it, he is Finable 100 l.
13 Hen. 4. So in that of forcible Entry, 10 l. 8 Hen. 6.

In neglecting to take Order about a House of Correction, 5 l. to go toward
the building it. 1 Jacobi (1.) C. 4.

Exercising his Office before the Oath taken. Dalt. 14. For not being present
at the Annual Tax of Servants Wages, 10 l. 5 Eliz. c. 4.

If a Justice of the Peace does not in 40 Days certify unto the King's Bench
Presentiments of Extolling the Pope's Power, he forfeits 100 l. 5 Eliz. C. 1.

For Imbeseling, wilfully Raising, maliciously Inroling an Indictment not
found, changing an Indictment of Trespass into Felony, is Fine and
Imprisonment, and loss of Office, Lam. 631.

CHAP. XII. Where a Justice of the Peace lies liable to Punishment.
HE may be Imprisoned for taking Bond in his own Name, and not in Domino Regi,
the Matter concerning the King, 33 H. 8. C. 9.

For Conspiring with another to Indict a Stranger at the Sessions, otherwise as
a thing done by him as Judge. Crompt. 122. a. Number. 32.

Where a Justice fails to do Justice, he may be put out of Commission, and
Punished. 4 Hen. 7. C. 12. Crompt. 120. H. Number. 6. Lam. 370. So for refusing to
take Surety for the Peace, when it is Tendered. Vide Crompt. Jurisdiction of
Courts. 31 B.

For Embeseling and Rasing Records, he forfeits his Office, and may be Fined,
Vide antea.

CHAP. XIII. Some Directions in making out, or granting Warrants by a Justice
of the Peace, and how to be Executed.
A Warrant in Writing must be under the Justices Hand and Seal, his Hand at
least. Dalt 460. Lamb. 85. 88. However it is better if it be Sealed, as the
usual way is. Dalt. 460.

A Warrant of the Peace, or good Behavior must contain the special Matter.
Dalt. 460. Lamb. 87.

A Warrant for Treason, Murder, or such like capital Offense, need not contain
the special Matter, or Cause, Dalt. 160. Crompt. 148. a.

If a Justice of the Peace, being out of the County, Grants his Warrant to be
served in the County, the Officer making the Arrrest, must carry the Party
before some Justice of the Peace within the County. Lamb. 91. Dalt. 461.

A Justice of the Peace may make his Warrant to come before himself, yet in a
Warrant for the Peace, the usual manner is otherways. Co. 5. 59. Dalt. 461.

Upon a General Warrant, an Officer may choose to go before what Justice he
pleases. Dalt. 49. 5. Co. 59. B.

If a Justice of the Peace make a Warrant beyond his Authority, it is not
disputable by a Constable, or other Officer, but must be obeyed, unless it be
to do a thing out of the Justices Jurisdiction in a Cause where there is no
Judge; for if in this latter Case the Officer Execute the Warrant, he is
punishable. Dalt. 8. 465. Lamb. 65. Crompt. 147. B. Lamb. 91, 92. Dalt. 865.

A Warrant directed to two jointly to Arrest a Party, he may be Arrested by
either of them.

A Warrant made in the King's Name, ought to be made to all Ministers, as well
within Liberties as without. Dalt. 355.

Warrants may be made either (1.) in the Name of the King, or (2.) in the Name
of the Justice, and either of them must be testified by the Justice from whom
they Issue, or (3.) without style by Superscription of the Justice. Dalt. 385.

See more of Warrants in the Office of Constable in this Book, and how they are
to be Executed.

Sessions held by one Justice of the Peace is not good, though it were Summoned
by two, and Styled by their Names, but two sufficient Justices Warrants Sealed
( Quorum, etc.) Vide Dalton, etc.

Quarter Sessions are to be held 4 times in the Year, viz. The first Week after
St. Michae^ The Epiphany, the close of Easter, and after the Translation of
Thomas the Martyr, which is July 7. 2 Hen 5. Chap. Lamb. 597. Dalt. 531.

Justices of the Peace shall hold their Sessions 4 times in the Year, viz. One
within the Octaves of Epiphany, the second in the second Week of Lent, the
third between the Feasts of Pentecost, and St. John Baptist, the fourth within
the Octaves of St. Michael. 36 Edw. 3. Chap. 12. Dalt. 531. Crompt. 123. B. Nu.
15. etc.

The place where Sessions is to be held is Arbitrable, and therefore though by
Summons they are to be kept in one place, yet they may be kept in another, but
then there can be no Amercement for Default of Appearance. Lamb. 383. 384. But
they must be kept within the County. Dalt. 531.

So in a Town Corporate, but not to intermeddle.

Two Sessions at one time for one County Lawfully Summoned at two Places are
good, but Appearance at one shall excuse the default of an Appearance at the
other, and Presentment taken before either of them, shall stand good, Lamb.
384, But Punishable without notice.

At a General Sessions, all Matters Enquirable by Justices of the Peace, either
by Statute, or their Commission ought to be given in Charge; otherwise at
special Sessions. Lamb. 613. And may be held 3 Days. 606. 12 R. 2. Chap. 10.

At the Quarter Sessions, Officers and Ministers of the Court, and Jurors of
the County owe their Attendance. Lam. 386.

Jurors not appearing according to Summons, are Punishable for loss of Issues,
the usual part of Estreats.

Constables making Default are Fineable.

The Justices of the Peace, if need require, may keep a special Sessions by
Virtue of their Commission, or by the Statute. 1 Hen. 5. Chap. 4. Lamb. 623.

All Matters within the Commission, or Statute may at a special Sessions of the
Peace be given in Charge, yet they are at liberty to give in Charge, either
all, or any of them. Lamb. 623, 624.

If two Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum, make a Precept to the
Sheriff for the holding a Sessions at such a Place, and Day, and to return a
Jury before them, other Justices cannot by their Supersedeas Inhibit it.
Crompt. 126. B. But the King by his Writ of Supersedeas may Discharge it. Ibid.

All that come to the Sessions for public Service, or upon Compulsion, upon
Complaint, and Examination of the Matter upon Oath shall be freed from any
Arrest upon Original Process. Lamb. Cro. 190. B. Lamb. 402.

Indictments are many times Tried the same Sessions wherein the Persons were
Indicted, yea the same Day before Justices of Goal Delivery, or Justices of
Oyer, etc. Dalt. 537. 1 Cro. 315, 438, 448.

But in Case of Felony it seems very reasonable to be deferred to the next
Sessions, upon Cause shown; it being so in an Indictment of Nuisance generally,
and life is more to be valued and favored, etc. Dalt. 537.

Many things of great Import cannot be done but at the Sessions, and some but
at such a particular Sessions. Dalt. 537.

Of the first sort are the Discharge of Apprentices Ill-used, Badgers, Licensed
Officers Sworn (after the Sacrament received proved) and declaring against
Transubstantiation, etc. Dalt. 538.

The second is taking Accounts for Maimed Soldiers of the Treasurers, and for
Charitable Uses, etc. 43 Eliz. in Easter Sessions, the Rates of Wages in Easter
Sessions, and 6 Weeks after. Dalt. 538.

Making Order in the Chamber after the Adjournment of the Sessions, as for the
Bastard-Children, and Settlements, and some other Things and Matters. But not
to be tedious to the Reader, I shall hear close Treating of Matters of this
Kind, and proceed to others Executed.

CHAP. XIV. Of Mittimus's, and their Form, and what is to be considered in
them, etc.
A Mittimus must contain the name of the Party, or Parties, his, or their
Offenses, and the time of Imprisonment, that it may appear whether the Prisoner
be Bailable, or not. Lamb. 297. Dalt. 439, 406. Crompt. 153. A. Number. 11.

If one be Committed without Bail, or Main-prise, and the Cause be expressed in
the Mittimus, and yet is Bailable, other Justices may Bail him; yet Quaere,
seeing their Authority is equal. Dalt. 439. But if no Cause be expressed, other
Justices shall not do well to Bail him without the Privity of the first
Justice, or Justices; because the Cause of Commitment probably may not be
Bailable. Dalt. 439.

If the Mittimus be General, the other Justices that Bail must take notice at
Peril. Ibid.

There is a Writ called a Mittimus, for removing Records of Outlawry, Judgment
in the King's Bench, etc. Unto the common Place, or an Act of Parliament unto
the King's Bench, etc. See of this. 1 Cro. 134, 298. Hob. 111, 135.

The Form of the Mittimus see.
To send Rioters to Goal. Lamb. 321. To send Shooters in Pieces to Goal. 229.
Dalt. 515. To send upon Forcible Entry, etc. Lamb. 150, 520. To send to the
House of Correction. Dalt. 513. To send an Ale-seller without License. Dalt.
512. To send a Reputed Father of a Bastard. Ibid.

CHAP. XV. Of Recognizances, what they are, and how, and in what Cases to be
taken by a Justice of the Peace, etc.
A Recognizance of a Bond of Record, Testifying the Recognizor to owe a certain
Sum of Money to some other, and that Acknowledgment of the Sum is to remain
of Record, and none can lawfully take it, but a Judge or Officer of Record.
Dalt. 457.

Every Recognizance taken by a Justice of the Peace must be made by these words
(Domino Regi) and great Care to be had in so doing; for it is Imprisonment for
any Person to take it otherwise. For these Words, Domino Regi import and Imply,
the Recognizor is bound to our Lord the King, and not to any other. 33 Hen. 8.
Chap. 9. Crompt. 196. B. Number. 11. Lamb. 162. Dalt. 276.

Sureties in Recognizance ought to be Subsidy Men, and they must be two besides
the Party himself. Dalt. 276. Lamb. 101.

It is in the Discretion of a Justice of the Peace, if he take a Recognizance,
Ex Officio, to appoint the Number of the Sureties, their Sufficiency in their
Goods and Lands, and the Sum of Money, and how long the Party shall be Bound.
Dalt. 275. Lamb. 100.

Recognizance for the Peace, unless the words be expressed, for keeping of the
Peace seems void. Lamb. 103. Dalt. 204, 276. Coram non Judice.

So it is if a Recognizance be that the Recognizor shall not Beat or Maim. B.
without the Expressing the keeping the Peace in it. Ibid.

A Recognizance expressing no Time of Appearance, but generally to keep the
Peace is good. Ibid. And so these few may serve to give a Light into others;
for they are many; and in the Main they tend to one and the same thing, though
in Circumstances many.

CHAP. XVII. Of Sessions and Matters properly to be done, etc. by Justices
therein, etc.
THE Sessions is the Assembly of any two, or more Justices of the Peace, one
being of the Quorum, at a certain Day and Place within the Limits of their
Commission, appointed to Enquire by a Jury, or otherwise to take Knowledge, and
thereupon to hear and determine according to their Power, of Causes within their
Commission and Statutes referred to their Charge. Lamb. 378.

A Sessions held without Summons is good, but in such Case none shall lose any
thing for Default of Appearing. Lamb. 380, 381.

Summons of the Sessions is usually by Precept Written to the Sheriff, and by
him to be returned at Sessions. Lamb. 381.

Precepts for Summoning the Sessions, may be made by any two Justices of the
Peace, one being of the Quorum, but not the Custos Rotulorum alone; and Summons
cannot be discharged by Supersedeas of all other Justices, but by Supersedeas
out of Chancery. Lamb. 382, 383.

CHAP. XVIII. The Justice of Peace his Clerk, etc. his Business relating to
Warrants, Hue and Cry, Order for Bastard-Children, Recognizances, Mittimus's,
Releases, Bailments, Supersedeas, etc. in due Form, Latin and English, and
other things, with Observations, or Notes thereon for better Information.
Instructions for Clerks to Justices of the Peace, containing many necessary
Forms, or Precedents of Warrants on several Occasions directed to Constables.
As for Warrants grantable by Justices of the Peace, they may be styled and
made after several manners, viz.

1st. In the Name of the King, and yet the Test may be under the Name of the
Justice, or Justices of Peace who grant them.

2dly. Or they may be styled and made only by the Name of the Justices so
granting.

3dly. Or else be made without any such Style, and only under the Test of the
Justice of Peace, or only subscribed by the Justice, as the cause requires, But
not having room for every Particular the Nature of things in this case
requires, in so small a Book, I shall only set down what are most common and
useful in their order.

The Form of a General Warrant for a Misdemeanour.
Bucks. T. G. Esquire, one of the Justices of the Peace, etc.
to the Constables of D. etc. in the said County, and to every of them:
These are to will and require you, in his Majesty's Name, straightly to charge
and command you upon sight hereof, to attach, and forthwith to bring before me
the Body of I. P. Baker, to answer such Mattters of Misdemeanour in his
Majesty's behalf as shall be objected against him; and hereof fail not at your
Peril;

Given under my Hand, etc. (or) Dated, etc.
The Form of a Warrant for the good Behavior to the Constables, etc.
Bucks.
Forasmuch as A. B. of your said Town, is not of good Name, or Fame, nor of
honest Conversation; a Rioter and Disturber of the Peace of our Sovereign Lord
the King, as we are given to understand by the complaint of sundry credible
Persons, Therefore on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, we straightly
charge and command you, or either of you, immediately upon sight hereof, you or
one of you require the said A. B. to come before me or some other of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, to find sufficient Sureties and Mainprize as
well for his good Abearing toward our said Sovereign Lord, and all his
Leige-People, until the next Quarter Sessions to be holden in the said County,
as also for his Appearance then and there; and if he shall refuse so to do,
that then you him safely Convey, or cause to be Conveyed to the common Goal of
the County aforesaid, or to the next Goal of His Majesty's in the said County,
there to remain until he shall willingly do the same. So that he may be before
the Justices of the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King within the said
County, at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the County,
and there to Answer our said Sovereign Lord for his Contempt on this Behalf.
And see that you certify your Doings in the Premises to the said Justices in
the said Sessions, bringing then thither this Precept with you.

Given at B. under my Hand and Seal the fourth Day of December, etc.
The Form of a Warrant immediately in the King's Name, Grantable by Justices of
the Peace.
William by the Grace of God, King of England, etc.
To our Sheriffs of our County of Oxford, the high Constables of the Hundred of
R -- The Petty Constables of the Town of B -- And to all, and singular, our
Bailiffs, and other Magistrates in the said County, as well within Liberties,
as without, Greeting;
forasmuch as L. B. of etc. has come before Sir W. M. Knight and Baronet, one
of our Justices of the Peace within the said County, and has, etc. Concluding
in the Justices Name thus.

Witness the said W. M. at B. the (...) Day of (...) etc.
Here Note, that wherever the Warrant is made in the King's Name, as before,
there it seems it ought to be directed to all Ministers, as well within
Liberties as without; for the King is made a Party; and so it may be done it
seems in all other Warrants, especially for Felony, or for the Peace, or good
Behavior, etc. because it is the Service of the King, and no Franchise or
Liberty shall be allowed, or hold place against the King, Br. Franch. 31.
However it is further held, that the Justices of the Peace of the County may
not Intermeddle in any City, Town, or Liberty which have their proper Justices,
Vide Dalton, Chap. 6. Folio 25. Where you will find it set down more largely.

The Form of a Warrant for the Peace.
Surrey. To the Constables of C. etc. and to either of them.

Forasmuch as A. B. of your said Town, Yeoman, has required Sureties of the
Peace against T. L. of your said Town, Labourer, and withal has taken his
Corporal Oath before me, that he, requires the same, not for any private
Hatred or Evil Will, but simply that he is afraid of his Life, or the Hurting
or Maiming his Body, or the Burning of his Houses; These are therefore to Will
and Require you in His Majesty's Name, straightly to charge and command you, that
immediately upon the sight hereof, you, or one of you require the said T. L. to
come before me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the
said County, to find sufficient Sureties, as well for his Appearance at the
next Quarter Sessions of, etc. to be holden for this County; as also that the
said T. L. shall in the mean time keep His Majesty's Peace as well toward his
said Majesty, as toward all People, and especially toward the said A. B. and
that if he shall refuse so to do, that then immediately you do convey the said
T. L. to the common Goal of the said County, there to remain until he shall be
willing to do the same, and see that you certify your Doings in the Premises
to the Justices of the said Sessions, and have there this Warrant. Dated at,
etc.

The Form of a Warrant to search for Stolen Goods.
Com. Surrey. To the Constables of R. etc. and to either of them.

Whereas Complaint has been made to me W. C. Esquire one of the Justices of the
said County, by L. G. of C. That upon Tuesday Night last, he had Feloniously
taken from him certain Goods [here name them] And that he is given to
understand that there are diverse Parcels of such Goods in the Hands, or Houses
of diverse suspected Persons within your Town: These are to Will and Require
you, and in His Majesty's Name, straightly to Charge and Command you, that
immediately upon the receipt hereof, you make diligent search in all and every
such suspected Houses, and Places within your Town and Parish, as you, and this
Complainant shall think convenient, and it upon your said Search, you find any
of the said Goods, or any other just Cause of Suspicion, that then you bring
all such suspected Person as you shall find, together with the said Goods,
before me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said
County, to make Answer thereto, and hereof fail not at your Peril, Dated, etc.

The Form of a Warrant to search after a Robbery Committed, directed to the
High Constables.
Whereas there have been of late many Robberies committed about D. Now for the
better finding out such Lewd Persons, we whose Names are here underwritten,
being his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, have
thought fit, and do hereby Will and Require you in His Majesty's Name, that
forthwith you direct your Precepts to every Petty Constable within your several
Hundreds, Commanding them to make Search in all Inns, Alehouses, and other
suspected Houses within your Precincts; for all such Persons as are Masterless,
or out of Service, as also for all Idle, Vagrant, wandering Rogues, Beggars, and
other Persons: And further, that they the Petty Constables within the
Precincts, do take Examination and account of all those, and such other Persons
as be common Ale-house-haunters, or which expend their Money in Riot, or which
do not Labor for their Living, and have not whereon to Maintain them, and that
the same Searchers be holden all over your Hundreds the same Night, and at such
other several times, as in your Discretions shall seem meet. And if any such
Persons shall be found in the same Searches, and that upon yours, or the
Petty-Constables; Examination taken of them, or any of them, there shall be
found any Cause of Suspicion in them, or any of them, that then they bring the
said Persons so suspected before us, or some one of us, or some other of the
Justices of the Peace of this County, to be further Examined in the said
Causes, and to be further dealt withal according to Law and Justice. And for
the better doing hereof, we require you to Command in His Majesty's Name, that
every Petty-Constable within their respective Precincts, do Require and Charge
two chief discreet Head-boroughs in every Parish to Assist the Petty-Constable
in this Service, And hereof fail not at your Peril, etc. Dated, etc.

The Form of a Warrant for a Person who has dangerously Hurt, or Wounded
another, etc.
Surrey. To the Constables of C. etc.

Forasmuch as I am Credibly informed that C. G. of your Town, Carpenter, has
now, or lately dangerously Hurt, or Wounded one G. F. of your said Town,
Brick-layer, by a Blow, or Blows which he has given to the said G. F. on the
Face and Head, etc. So that the said G. F. is in danger of Death thereby. These
are therefore in His Majesty's Name, straightly to Charge and Command you, that
immediately upon sight hereof, you, or one of you do bring the said C. G.
before me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County,
to find sufficient Sureties, as well for his Appearance before His Majesty's
Justices at the next General Jail-delivery to be holden for the County, then,
and there to Answer unto the Premises, and to do and receive therefore that
which by the Court shall be Enjoined him, as also that he the said C. G. shall
in the mean time keep the King's Peace toward his said Majesty, and all his
Liege People, and especially toward the said G. F. and hereof fail not at your
Perils, Dated, etc.

The Form of a Warrant for a Reputed Father of a Bastard-child.
Surrey. To the Constables of P. etc.

Whereas Complaint has been made unto me L. C. Esquire one of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the said County, by M. G. of your Town, single Woman,
that she is gotten with Child by R. B. also of your said Town, Barber. These
are therefore to Will and require you, and in His Majesty's Name straightly to
Charge and Command you, and either of you, that immediately upon Receipt hereof,
you Attatch the Body of the said R. B. and thereupon bring him before me, or
some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County, to find
sufficient Sureties, as well for his Appearance at the next General Sessions of
the Peace to be holden for this County, as also for his good Behavior toward
His Majesty, and all his Liege People in the mean time, and hereof fail not, as
you will answer the contrary at your Peril, Dated, etc.

CHAP. XIX. An Order of the Justices of Peace for a Bastard-child.
The Order of L. C. Esquire and R.G. Esquire two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
for the County of S. made for the Relief of the Parish of C. of the said
County, for the keeping of E. a Bastard-child Begotten by R. B. of C. etc. On
the Body of M. G. etc.

Imprimis. Upon the Examination of the said M. G. duly by us taken, we do find
that the said R. B. is charged to have diverse times Bodily and carnal
Knowledge, between such Times, (Here name the Times) and to be the only Father
of the said Bastard-child, etc. And therefore we do Order and Adjudge him the
said R. B. to be the Reputed Father of the said Child.

We do further Order as follows.

First, That the said M. G. shall keep her said Child till it come to 8 Years
of Age.

Secondly, That the said R. B. upon notice of this Order, shall after such
Notice pay unto the Hands of one of the Overseers of the Poor of C. for the
Time being, after the Rate of 2 s. 6 d. every Week, to be paid Monthly every
Year, toward the Relief of the said Child, until it come to 8 Years of Age.

Thirdly, That after the said Child shall come to the Age of 8 Years, etc. That
the said R. B. pay to the Overseers, etc. Five Pounds toward putting out the
said Child to be an Apprentice, etc.

Fourthly, That the said R. B. presently give good Security to one of the
Overseers, etc. To perform this our Order.

Note, that by altering the Names, and Sum, as the Order in that Case shall be
made. This Order in Form with the Variation of the Town, and County, may
generally serve on this Occasion.

The Form of a Warrant for a Fugitive Servant.
Middlesex. To the Sheriffs, etc.

Whereas G. C. being Lawfully Retained in Service with M. B. of D. etc. is
departed from his said Master's Service before the end of his Term, without his
Master's Leave, or License, (or without any reasonable Cause) contrary to the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm in this behalf provided. These are therefore to
Command you, and every of you, that you, or some of you do Attach the Body of
the said G. C. and bring him before me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices
of the the Peace, to find sufficient Sureties, well and faithfully to serve his
said Master according to the Covenant between them made. And if he shall refuse
thus to do that then you cause him to be conveyed safely the Common-goal of the
County aforesaid, there to remain till he shall be willing to do the same, and
see you certify such your Doings at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace,
to be held for the said County. Given under the Hand of me W. S. one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the said County, Dated, etc.

Or thus, That if the said G. C. is willing his said Master to serve again, you
do cause him to be delivered, and if that to do he shall refuse, that then you
cause him to be conveyed to the Goal, etc.

To Bind one to give Evidence.
Surrey. To the Constables of B. etc.

These are in His Majesty's Name, to Charge and Command you, or either of you,
that immediately upon sight hereof, you, or some of you do cause to come before
me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County,
the Persons hereunder named, to the end that they, and every of them may be
bound to make their Personal Appearance at the next General Goal delivery (or
Quarter Sessions) to be holden for this County, then, and there to testify
their, and every of their Knowledges concerning certain Felonious Acts
committed by one C. D. now Prisoner in the Marshals's Prison in Southwark, the
Common Goal for the County aforementioned, and hereof fail not at your Peril,
Dated, etc.

The Form of a Hue and Cry after Robbery, etc.
To all Constables and others, His Majesty's Officers, as well within the
County of Warwick, as elsewhere within the Realm of England.

Whereas Complaint has been made unto me T. C. Esquire one of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace within the County of Warwick, by J. C. of D. etc.
Grasier, that upon Wednesday Night last, being the 18th. of October Instant, he
was Robbed of one Hundred Pounds in Moneys numbered, by two Foot-padds on the
Road, or King's High way, between D, and C. in the Day time, and has Cause of
Suspicion of A. B. and C. B. two Lewd Rogues. Here describe their Persons and
Apparel, Setting down all such Marks as they may be known by. These are to
repair you, and every of you, to make Search within your several Precincts for
the said A. B. and C. B. And also to make Hue and Cry after them from Town to
Town, and County to County, and that as well with Horsemen as Footmen, and if
you shall find them the said A. B. and C. B. both, or either of them, That then
you carry the Party, or Parties so taken, before some one of the Justices of
the Peace within the County where he or they shall be taken, by him to be dealt
with according to Law, etc.

And thus you may do, putting one, two, or more Names in, according as the Case
requires, whether a Robbery on the Highway, or a Felony and Burglary committed
in a House, or such like, in Barns, Stables, Outhouses, Stealing of Horses, or
other Cattle, always describing the Parties in the Hue and Cry. So that they
may be known, as also the things taken, that if the whole, or any part be found
about them, or in their Possession, the may be known and brought as a Testimony
against them upon Examination.

The Form of a Warrant to Attatch a Felon, or for Felony.
Essex. To the Constables of D. etc.

Forasmuch as Complaint has been made unto we by W. W. That of late he has
had certain Gods Feloniously taken from him, and that he has in Suspicion one
L. C. of your said Town. These are therefore to Will and Require you, and in
His Majesty's Name straightly to Command you, and every of you, that immediately
upon the receipt hereof, you do Attatch the Body of the said L. C. and thereupon
to bring him before me to Answer the Premises, and hereof fail not at your
Perils, Dated, etc.

CHAP. XX. A Warrant for the Overseers of the Poor to give up their Accounts.
Surrey. To the High Constable of the Hundred of B. etc.

These are in His Majesty's Name, to Charge and Command you forthwith to give
notice to the Churchwardens, and other Overseers of the Poor of every Parish
within your Hundred, that they do Personally appear before us at Kingston upon
Thames, at the Sign of the Swan, on Thursday the 29th. of December next coming,
by 10 of the Clock in the Morning, or Forenoon of the same Day, to yield up,
and make a true and perfect Account in Writing, Subscribed with their Names or
Marks of all such Sums of Money, as they have received, or Rated, and Sessed,
and not received, for and toward the Relief of the several Poor of their
several Parishes, and also of such Stock (to set the Poor on Work,) as is in
their Hands, or in the Hands of any of the said Poor and of all other things
concerning the said Office, and hereof that they fail not at their, and every
of their Perils. And further we require you, that you give warning to the
Petty-Constables of every Town, within your said Hundred, that they, or one of
them be also then present before us, to Inform and Certify us of the Names of
such other Persons as are meet and fitting to be Overseers of the Poor within
their several Towns for this Year next ensuing, and hereof fail not at your
Peril.

Note that this Warrant must be under the Hands and Seals of two Justices at
the least, the one to be of the Quorum^.

The Form of a Warrant to the new Overseers to take their Charge.
Middlesex. To the Overseers of D. etc.

By Virtue of a Statute made in the 43 Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth (Entitled An Act for the Relief of the Poor.) These are to
Will and Require you whose Names are here Underwritten, That you together with
the Churchwardens of your Parish, for the Time being, do (according to the
Form of the same Statute,) take Order from Time to Time, for the Year to come,
for the setting to Work the Poor within your Parish, and for raising a
convenient Stock of some Wares or Stuffs in your Town, to that Purpose, and
providing necessary Relief for such as are Lame and Impotent amongst you, and
for the placing Apprentices, such Children whose Parents are not able to
Maintain them: And hereof see that you fail not at your Peril. Dated, etc.
Under the Hands and Seals of us, etc.

This Warrant must be under the Hands and Seals of two Justices of the County.

The Form of a Warrant to Distrain such as refuse to pay their Rates to the
Poor, etc.
To the Churchwardens, and other Overseers of the Poor, within the Parish of
K. and every of them.

Warwick. Forasmuch as we are Credible Informed, [or that it has been duly
proved before us] That the Persons here under-named, do refuse to Contribute,
or pay the Sums of Money here undermentioned, set upon their Heads, being
sessed and rated upon them severally, for, and toward the necessary Relief of
the Poor of your said Town, according to the Form of the Statute in that behalf
lately provided, These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, straightly to charge
and command you and every of you, forthwith to require the said Persons so
refusing, to be before us, to show cause of their said Refusal, and if they or
any of them shall refuse to come before us, that then immediately you do Levy
all and every the said several Sums of Money unpaid, and all Arrearages thereof,
of all and every the said Persons so refusing, by Distress and Sale of the
Offenders Goods, you rendering to the said Parties the Overplus that shall
remain upon the Sale of the said Goods, if any be, and this shall be a
sufficient Warrant for your so doing, Dated, etc.

Note, the Parties offending must be named here, etc.

CHAP. XXI. The Form of a Warrant for suppressing an Alehouse
Surrey. W. L. and C. L. two of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, within the
said County of S. To the Constables of G. and either of them Greeting. Whereas
we are credibly informed that M. B. of your Town, Victualler, is himself a Man
of Evil Behavior, and besides does suffer Evil Rule and Disorder to be kept in
his House, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, These are therefore
to will and command you forthwith to repair to the House of the said M. B. and
to charge him to surcease keeping any longer any Alehouse or Tipling-house,
and from common selling of Ale or Beer at his Peril, and withal that you cause
his Sign to be pulled down, and hereof fail not as you and either of you will
answer the contrary at your Peril. Given under our Hands and Seals at T. the --
Day of -- and in the -- Year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord
King William the third, etc.

But it is usual with the Justices ever they grant this last Warrant, or a
Warrant to Levy Moneys forfeited by Alehouse Haunters, to send for the
Offenders and Examine them of the Offense, that the Truth may be known, and that
the Information be not upon the Account of Brangling or Malice between the
Parties so informed against, and the Party informing, but the Truth known upon
plain Conviction. Forfeitures in the latter Case may be Levied, upon refusal to
pay, by Distresses and Sale of Goods, and for want of such Distress the
Offenders set in the Stocks, etc. See more in the Office of a Constable in this
Book.

CHAP. XXII. Supersedeas Grantable by Justices of the Peace to supercede
Warrants, etc. their Forms
The Form of a Supersedeas by a Justice of Peace.
Sussex. R. D. Esquire one of the Justices of Peace of our Sovereign Lord the
King; within the County of Sussex, To the Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and
other of the Faithful Ministers of our Sovereign Lord within the said County,
and to every of them, sends Greeting. Forasmuch as L. T. of C. etc.
Husbandman, has personally come before me at D. etc. and has found sufficient
Sureties, that is to say, W. C. and R. B. etc. Yeomen, either of which has
undertaken for the said L. T. under the pain of Twenty Pounds, and the said L.
T. has undertaken for himself under the pain of Forty Pounds, that he the said
L. T. shall well and truly keep the Peace toward our Sovereign Lord and all
his Liege People, and especially toward R. M. of etc. Baker, and also that he
shall personally appear before the Justices of the Peace of our said Sovereign
Lord at the next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County of
Sussex: Therefore on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord, I command you and
every of you that you utterly forbear to Arrest, Attatch, Take, or Imprison, or
otherwise by any means for the said occasion to molest the said L. T. and if
you have for the said occasion and no other, taken or imprisoned him, that then
you do cause him to be delivered and set at Liberty without farther Delay.
Given at D. in the County aforesaid under my Hand and Seal this 29 of January,
etc.

Note, a Supersedeas of this Nature is held good though the Sureties are not
named, nor the Sum they are penally obliged in; yet it is better to express
them both; for in such case if it shall appear the Sureties are not
sufficiently Responsible, nor bound in sufficient Sums, better Sureties may be
taken, and accordingly all the Supersedeas issuing out of the Court of
Chancery, King's Bench, and Common Pleas do mention the Names of the Sureties,
and the Sums they are obliged in for the Delinquents forthcoming to answer,
etc.

And further note, that upon good Sureties taken for the good Behavior, a
Supersedeas of good Behavior may be granted, as for the Peace, Mutatis
mutandis. Crompt. 237.

Also a Supersedeas de capias indictamentum de Transgressione, and so of an
Exigent may be granted by the Justices of Peace out of the Sessions, otherwise
it would be Mischievous for the Party, not only by Reason of his Imprisonment,
but also that he may be outlawed before the Sessions, if so it were that the
Justices of Peace might not take Sureties of him for his Appearance, and all is
no more than to appear and answer to the Indictment.

And these according to Crompton's Opinion, Cromp. 234. may be granted by one
Justice of the Peace, and with him agree the Books of Entries. However Lambert
thinks it not in the lawful Power of any one Justice of Peace, to grant such
Supersedeas at this Day, but that it must run in the Names of two Justices, one
to be of the Quorum, Lam 508. However a great many Presidents run in the Name
of one Justice of the Peace, which seems to be the ancient Practice:
Notwithstanding the joining of two Justices of Peace herein, and one of them of
the Quorum is on all Hands concluded most Authentic, and so Dalton is of the
Opinion it ought to be.

The Form of a Supersedeas to deliver one out of Prison for Trespass, or the
like.
Wigorn. T. B. Armig. Vnus Just. Dom. Reg. nunc ad Pacem in Com. Praed.
Conservand. Constabut. Ville de S. nec non custodi Gaolae dicti Domini Regis in
Com. praed. Salutem Quia M. B. de C. Labourer venit coram me and invenit
suffic. securitat. essendi coram Justic. dicti Domini Regis ad Proximam
Generalem Session. Pacis in Com. praedict. tenend. ad respondend. tam Domino
Regi quam C. B. de quibusdam Transgr s. seu Contemptibus, etc. per ipsum
perpetratis, ideo vobis and cuilibet vestrum Mando quod praedict. M. B. a
custodia vestra sine dilatione deliberari faciatis, and alio mandato meo inde
direct. interim supersedere; and hoc Mandatum meum erit vobis and cuilibet
vestrum Warrant. Datum apud V. tali Die etc.

Or you may begin it thus, ss. T. B. Armig. Justic. Constabul. Ville de S. nec
non, etc.

Supersedeas de Exig. Fac. de Felonia.
Ebor. Gulielmus, etc. Vic. Com. Ebor. Salutem. Quia D. C. de B. in Com. tuo
Pistor venit coram F. E. and invenit sufficien. Manucaptor. essendi coram
Custod. Pacis nostrae (ac Just. nostris ad diversas Felon. etc.) ad General.
Session. Pacis nostrae apud G. tali die tenend. ad respondend. nobis de
quibusdam Feloniu unde indictatus est, Ideo tibi praecipimus quod de ulterius
Exigent. praefat. D. C. ad aliqu. Comitat. tuum vel Imprisonand. sive ipsum ea
occasion aliqualiter molestand. omnino supersed. and habeas ibi tunc hoc
breve. Test W. M. apud L. tali Die and Anno. etc.

Supersedeas de capias pro fine.
Cantab. I. B. Armiger unus Justic. Dom. Regis nunc ad Pacem in com. praedict.
Salutem Quia L. C. de N. in dict. com. Tonsor venit coram me and invenit
sufficient. Manucapt. essendi ad proximam Generalem Sess. Pacis in Comitat.
praedict. tenend. ad faciend. Finem cum dicto Dom. Rege pro quibusdam
Transgres. Contempt. and offensis unde indictatus existit. Ideo tibi praecipio.
quod de capiend. praef. L. C. Imprisonand. seu ipsam ea occasion aliqualit.
molestand. omnino supersed. and habeas ibi tunc hoc praeceptum Test me, etc.

There are other Supersedeas's on several occasions; but finding these Forms, I
thought good to set them down as a Light to further Matter of this Kind; and
for a Treatise of them more at large, I refer you to Dalton, Chap. 133.
Crompton. 234.

CHAP. XXIII. The Forms of Recognizances on several occasions, to be taken by
Justices of Peace, and written by them or their Clerks, etc.
The Form of a single Recognizance to be taken before a Justice of the Peace.
Surrey. Memorand. quod -- die -- Anno Regni Domini nostri Gulielmi tertii Dei
Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc.
Venerunt coram M. D. and W. C. Armiger. Justiciar. dicti Domini Regis, ad Pacem
in Com. S. conservand. Assignat. S. I. de B. in comitatu praedict. Yeoman, and
W. S. de eodem Textor ac D. R. de S. in comitat. praedict. Suitor and
Recognover. se debere Dicto Domino Regi viz. quilibet Manucapt. praedict. december
Libr. and Praedict. S. I. in viginti Libr. bonae et legalis Monetae Angliae
solvend. eidem Domino Regi in Festo Purificationis Beatae Mariae Virginis
proximo futur. post dat. present. and nisi fecerint concesserunt pro se Haered.
Executor. and Administ. suis per presents quod dicta separales summae levent.
and recuperent. de maneriis Mesuagiis. Ter. Tenement. Bonis Catallis and
Haereditament. ipsor S. I. W. S. and D. R. Haered. Executor. and Assign. suor.
ubicunque fuerint. invent. Dat. etc.

The Form of a Recognizance for the Peace.
Sussex. Memorand. quod -- Die -- Anno Regni Domini nostri Gulielmi Tertii, Dei
Gratia, etc. P. P. de E. in com. praedict. Auri faber, in propria persona sua
venit coram me T. L. Armig. uno Justic. dicti Dom. Reg. ad pacem in dicto com.
conservand. assign. and assumpsit pro seipso sub poena Quinquaginta Libr. and
W. I. de M. in com. praed. Yeoman and T. N. de etc. Agricultur. tunc and ibid.
in propriis personis suis similiter vener. and manuceperunt pro praedict. P. P.
viz. quilibet cor. separat. sub poena vigint. quinqu. lib. quod idem P. P.
personalit. comparebit. coram Justic. Dom. Reg. ad pacem ad prox. Generalem
Sessionem pacis in com praedict. tenend. ad faciend. and recipiend quod ei per
curiam tunc and ibid. injungetur and quod ipse interim pacem dict. Dom.
custodiet. erga ipsum Dom. Reg. and cunct. populum suum praecipue versus N. M.
-- Yeoman and quod dampnum vel malum aliqu. Corporale and gravamen Praef. N. M.
aut alicui de populo dicti Dom. Regis quod in Laesionem aut Perturbationem
pacis ipsius Domini Regis seu praef. N. M. cedere valiant quovis modo non
faciet nec fieri procurabit Quam quidem sum. Quinquaginta lib. praedict. P. P.
and quilibet Manucapt. praed. praedictas separales summas viginti quinque Libr.
se debere dicto Dom. Regi de Terris and Tenementis bonis and catallis suis
quorumlibet and cujuslibet eor. ad opus dict. Domini Regis Haered. and
successor. suor. fieri and levari ad quarumcumque manus devenerit si contigerit
ipsum P. P. praemissa vel eorum aliquid in aliquo infringere and inde Legitimo
modo convinci. In cujus rei Testimon. ego praedict. T. L. sigillum meum apposui
Dat. apud. etc.

Note here, if the Justice only subscribe his Name to the Recognizance without
putting his Seal, it may be well enough. And further, that all Bonds,
Obligations, and Recognizances that shall be taken by any Justice of the Peace,
or any other Person, for any cause touching the King, must be made and be taken
in his Name, and by these words; Domino Regi, etc. under a Penalty to him that
takes them, as I have elsewhere said.

The Forms of Conditions of Recognizances to be set under the Recognizance, or
Indorsed.
The Form of a Condition to keep the Peace,

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, that if the within bounden P. P.
shall personally appear before the Justices of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, at the next General Sessions for the Peace, to be held in the said County
of Sussex, to answer to such matters, as shall be objected against him, by N.
M. within named, to do and receive what the Court shall then and there enjoin
him; and that he do in the mean time keep the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord
the King, toward the King's Majesty, and all his Liege People, and especially
toward the said N. M. of E. aforesaid Yeoman, that then this Recognizance to
be void and of none effect, or else to be and remain in full Force and Virtue.

The Form of a Condition for one to appear before the Justices of Peace at
their next Sessions.
The Condition of this Recognizance is such, that if the within Bounden W. A.
shall make his Personal Appearance before the King's Majesty's Justices of the
Peace at the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be holden for the said
County of S. then and there to make Answer unto such Matters, as on His
Majesty's behalf shall be objected against him (by W. A. or concerning, etc.)
[and there show the Matter shortly] and shall also stand and abide such further
Order as the said Court shall award, or set down therein, that then and from
thenceforth this present Recognizance shall be frustrate and void, or else to
remain in full Force and Virtue.

The Form of a Condition for one that has dangerously hurt another.
The Condition of this Recognizance is such, that whereas the within bound K.
R. has now dangerously Hurt, or Wounded L. G. of R. within the said County of
S. Butcher, giving him diverse Blows, or Cuts on the Head, Face, etc. with a
Chopper made of Iron and Steel, so as the said L. G. is in danger of Death
thereby. If therefore the said K. R. shall make his Personal Appearance before
the King's Majesty's Justices at the next General Jail-delivery to be held in
the said County of S. then, and there to make Answer to the Premises, and to
receive that which then shall be by the Court Enjoined him, and that he the
said K. R. in the mean time do keep the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the
King toward the King's Majesty, and all his Liege-people, that then, etc. as
before.

CHAP. XXIV. The Forms of Mittimus's to deliver Persons Committed to Goal, etc.
The Form of a Mittimus to send a Disorderly Servant, or other Disorderly
Person to the House of Correction.
Berks. I Have send you herewithal the Body of D. B. of R. in the said County
of B. being an Idle, Dissolute, and Disorderly Fellow, or one that will not
keep his Service, nor follow an Honest Course of Life. These are therefore to
Will and Require you to receive the said D. B. and him safely to keep till he
shall be thence delivered by Warrant from my self, or some other His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for this County of Berks, and in the mean time to hold
him to hard Labor, giving him the moderate Correction of the House, by
Whipping, and otherways, according to Law in such Cases provided, and hereof
fail not at your Peril, Dated, etc.

Note, that the Justice at his Discretion may Limit a Time for his Imprisonment
in the Mittimus, as two or three Days, and then to be Discharged, etc.

The Form of a Mittimus of a Felon after his Examination taken.
Surrey. I. B. Knight, one of His Majesty's Justices for the County aforesaid,
to the Keeper of His Majesty's Goal at the Marshalsea in the Borough of
Southwark, in the County aforesaid, etc. Greeting, I send you herewith the Body
of B A. late of G. Labourer, brought before me this present Day, and Charged
with the Felonious taking five Swine, (which he has also confessed upon
Examination before me) And therefore these are on the Behalf of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, to Command you that you immediately receive the said
B. A. and him safely keep in your said Goal, until that he shall be thence
delivered by due Course of Law: Hereof fail not, as you will answer the
Contempt at your Peril. Given at C. the -- Day of -- in the -- Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord, etc.

Note, here the Party Confessing the Felony on Examination, is held to Bar
himself of being Bailed by the Justice, etc.

The Form of a Mittimus upon Suspicion of Felony, etc.
Essex. I. D. Esquire one of the Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid, To
the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal at Chelmsford in the said County, or to his
Deputy there, Greeting. These are in his Majesty's Name, to Charge and Command
you, that you receive into your said Goal the Body of B. K. late of D. Mariner,
taken by L. C. Constable of the Town of C. and by him brought before me for
Suspicion of Felony, etc. and that you safely keep the said B. K. in your said
Goal, until the next General Jail-delivery for the said County, [if he be not
Bailable, or if Bailable, then thus] until he shall be thence delivered by due
Course of Law. And hereof fail not, as you will answer the Contempt at your
Peril, etc.

The Form of a Mittimus to send the Reputed Father of a Bastard-child to Goal.
Warwick. I send you herewithal the Body of C. R. of B. in the County of W.
Labourer, brought before me this present Day, and Charged by S. J. of the same
Town, to have gotten her with Child, and for that the said C. R. refuses to
put in Security for his Appearance at the next Quarter Sessions, and to the end
he may be forth coming, when as Order shall be taken for the Relief and
Discharge of the said Town of B. and for the keeping of the said Child (when it
shall happen to be Born) according to the Statute in that Case made and
provided. These are therefore on His Mejesties behalf, to Charge and Command
you that you immediately receive the said C. R. and him safely keep in your
said Goal, until such time as he shall be from thence delivered by due Order of
Law, and hereof fail not, as you will answer your Contempt at your Peril,
Dated, etc.

Note that in every Mittimus, the Cause of the Commitment is to be set down, to
the end that it may appear, and be made known whether the Prisoner be Bailable
or not, and the Mittimus must be directed to the Goal-keeper or his Deputy.

Also where the Justices of the Peace out of their Sessions may hear and
determine, and so may Commit Offenders for the Offenses, or Fine, it is
necessary that in their Mittimus there be contained the Manner of the Offense,
and how long time the Prisoner is to be kept in Prison for it, and after this
manner, with varying the Names of Places, and Persons, as it shall happen on
the Occasion, and some other Variations i^ Point of Fact, etc. These may direct
a Clerk to make others, etc. And Mittimus's may be directed thus, etc. To the
Keeper of His Majesty's Goal of N. and to the Deputy, or Deputies there, and
every of them. And in case one be Committed for a Fact where the Statute
appoints the Fine upon the Parties being Convicted before a Justice of the
Peace, by Witness, or his own Confession, the Fact must be at large set down,
as also the Penalty or Sum, and then it must be to continue him till he pays
the Money therein mentioned, as in Case of Unlawful Fishing, Hunting, Shooting
of Conies, Pigeons, or the like with Hand-gun, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. The Form of Bailment by the Justices of the Peace, etc.
The Form of the Liberate, to deliver a Prisoner Committed for Felony.
Rutland. A. D. and C. D. Esquires, two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
to the Keeper, etc. of His Majesty's Goal in the County aforesaid, Greeting,
Forasmuch as G. F. etc. Labourer, has before us found sufficient Main-prize,
to appear before the Justices of the Jail-delivery at the next General
Jail-delivery, to be holden in the said County, there to answer to such things
as shall be then and there (...) ^he behalf of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, objected against him, and namely to the Felonious taking five Geese, for
the Suspicion whereof he was taken and Committed to your said Go l* we Command
you on the Behalf of our Sovereign Lord, that if the said G. F. do remain in
your said Goal for the said Cause, and for none other, Then you forbear to
Grieve or Detain him any longer, but that you deliver him thence, and suffer
him to go at large, and that upon Pain that will fall thereon. Given under our
Hands and Seals, this, etc.

The Form of another Bailment, where the Jailer can conveniently bring the
Prisoner before the Justices.
Cantabr. Memorandum quod Decimo die Novembris, etc. L. C. de G. etc. W. W. de
M. etc. Venerunt coram nobis S. T. and P. T. Militibus duobus Justic. Domini
Regis ad Pacem Com. praedict. conservand. Assignat. apud H. in Com. praedict.
and Manucep. pro G. L. de, etc. utrumque eorum sub poena viginti Libra, etc.
and praedict. G. L. nunc and ibidem similiter Assumit sub poena Quadraginta
Librar. consimilis Monetae Angliae de Bonis and Catallis and Tenement. eorum
and cujuslibet eorum ad opus and usum dicti Dom. Reg. Haered. and Successor.
suorum fieri and levari si praefat. L. C. defecerit in condition indorsata.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, that if the within Bounden L. C.
shall make his Personal Appearance before the King's Majesty's Justices of the
Peace at the next general Sessions, to be holden for this County, then and
there to make Answer to our Sovereign Lord the King, for, and concerning the
Suspicion of Stealing five Sheep, whereof he stands charged, then this
Obligation to be void, and of none Effect, or else to be, and remain in full
Force and Virtue, etc.

A Warrant to deliver a Servant out of a Goal.
Sussex. F. B. Armiger unus Justic. Domini Regis etc. Custodi Gaolae dicti
Domini Regis in compraedict. Salutem Quia C. W. de R. Labourer coram me invenit
sufficient. Securitat. essendi coram Justic. dicti Dom. Reg. ad pacem in com.
praedict. conservand. etc. ad proximam Generalem Sessinem pacis in com.
praedict. tenend. ad respondend. tam dicto Dom. Reg. quam D. C. de N. de
Transgres. and contemptu suis contra formam Stat. de servientibus nuper edit.
and provis. ideo tibi ex part dicti Dom. Reg. mando quod. praedict. C. W. a
Prisona tua si ea occasion and non alia ibid. deteneatur, sine dilatione
delib. fac. Dat. etc.

Note, wheresoever a Justice of the Peace upon his own Motion or Discretion,
has committed a Party to the common Goal, or any other Goal or House of
Correction for want of Sureties for the Peace, good Behavior, or for being a
vagrant or idle Person or such like, it seems the same Justice in like
discretion may afterward discharge him again, and make his Liberate or Warrant
to deliver such Prisoner, etc. vide 14 Hen. 6. Folio 8. Tit. Impris. 27.

The Form of a Bailment for the Peace, the Party being in Prison.
Memorand. etc. B. A. de C. C. D. de L. and L. and L. C. de M. venerunt coram
me G. W. etc. and manuca erunt pro R. B. de L. quod ipse pacem geret erga
cunctum Populum Domini Regis and praecipue erga S. I. sub poena cujuslibet
manucaptor. viginti Librar. and quod praedict. R. B. comparebi^ coram Justic.
Domini Regis ad proximam Generalem Sessionem Pacis pro Com. praedict. tenend.
apud L. in Com. praedict. etc. Dat.

CHAP. XXV. The Form of Releases by Justices of the Peace, etc.
The Forms of the Release of a Justice of the Peace
EGO praefat. L. D. qui supra nominatum A. B. ad praed. Securitat. Pacis
inveniend. ex mea Discretione compuli eandem securitat. Pacis quantum in me est
ex mea Discretione primo die Decembris etc. remisi and relaxavi. In cujus rei
Testimon. huic praesenti relaxationi meae sigillum meum apposui. Dat. Die and
Anno superdictis.

The Form of the Release of a Party before the same Justice that took it.
Ebor. Memorand. quod Decimo Die Novembris etc. praefat. L. K. venit coram me
R. G. and Gratis remisit and relaxavit quantum in se est praedict. securitat.
pacis per ipsum coram me versus supra nominatum B. A. petitam. In cujus rei
Testimon. ego praefat. R. G. sigillum meum apposui, Dat. etc.

Note that these two Releases are to be written under the Recognizance it self;
and if the Justice shall only Subscribe his Name without his Seal, it is
sufficient; especially where the Recognizance is not Sealed. Or the Release of
the Party may be by it self, in this Form.

Cantab. Memorand. quod D. C. de S. in compraedict. Yeoman, Vicesimo Die
Decembris, Anno Regni Dom. nostri etc. venit coram me B. I. Armig. uno Justic.
dicti Dom. Regis ad Pacem in Com. praedict. conservand. assign. apud W. in com.
praed. and ibi remisit and gratis relaxavit W. L. de S. in Com. praed. Labourer
Securitatem pacis per ipsum D. C. versus dictum W. L. coram me petitam. Dat.
Die and Anno supradictis.

And if the Release be made before another Justice who took not, or has not
the Recognizance, it may be thus.

Memorand. quod D C. de S. in com. praedict. Yeoman Vicesimo Die Decembris,
venit coram me D. N. Armig. uno Justic. dicti Dom. Regis ad Pacem in com.
praed. conservand. assign apud S. in com. praedict. and Securitatem Pacis quam
habet versus I. D. de V. etc. penitus Remisit and relaxavit. Dat. Die and Anno
supradictis.

Note that none of these Releases will discharge the Recognizance, or
Appearance of the Party bound thereby; but that he must appear according to the
Condition of the Recognizance for the Safeguard of his said Recognizance.

Brief Directions, or Helps to Gentlemen of the Grand and Petty Juries, whereby
those that are not used to be on Juries may inform them in many Material Things
concerning the Weighty Trust reposed on them in discharge of their Duty.

CHAP. XXVI. Somewhat of the Antiquity of Juries. What things they must
consider, and how they ought to be Qualified to be Jurors.
IN this useful Book promising to say somewhat of Grand and Petty Juries, to
give those an Insight into what they ought to know, who take so great a Trust
upon them when sworn Jurors to enquire, etc.

The Trial by Juries is very ancient in this Kingdom, and it is our Happiness
above other Nations, that a Man has so great a Benefit to be Tried by his
Equals: Men unprejudiced and unbyassed to deliberate upon Hearing the Evidence,
and Weighing in their Consciences, the Merit of the Cause. This way in some
degree was not unknown to the ancient Britains, as by some of their Books and
Monuments of Antiquity appears: and we find it practiced by the Saxons, as Mr.
Lambert makes Remarks in King Ethelred's Laws, Page 118. and Cook 1 part
Institutes Folio 155. and since more amply confirmed after the Norman Conquest
by Magna Charta, Every Day growing more and more in Esteem, because no Man's
Life, unless it be in Parliament, which is a Supreme Court and is supposed will
never do any Man wrong, shall be touched for any Crime whatsoever, but upon
being found Guilty on two several Trials, for so may that of the Grand and
Petty Jury be rightly termed, and the Judgment of twice Twelve Men at least,
all of his own Condition, viz. 12. or more to find the Bill against him, and 12
more to find him Guilty or Acquit him on the General Issue: All which Jurors
ought to be Substantial, Honest, and Impartial Men, being Neighbors of the
Party Accused, or supposed Place where the Fact was committed.

A Jury in this Case upon hearing the Evidence must be fully satisfied in their
Consciences, that the Party is guilty, and so unanimously pronounce him upon
their Oaths, or else he may not be condemned; for the Office and Power of these
Juries is Judicial, from whose Sentence the Indictment is to be valid or
invalid, or to speak plainer, the Party Indicted to be found Guilty or
Acquitted, for from their Verdict there lies no Appeal. As for the
Qualifications of such as are to be upon Juries, the Law has provided that they
shall be Persons of Honesty, Ability, Integrity, and Indifferency, and Coke in
the first part of his Institutes, Sect. 234. Folio 155. says, that a Juror must
be Liber Homo, not only a Freeman not bound, but one that has such Freedom of
Mind, that he stands indifferent Sworn, as he stands unsworn; that he must be
Legalis Lawful, and by the Law these Properties are required in a Juror: 1. He
ought to have his dwelling most near to the place, where the Question does
arise, or is moved; 2. He must be most sufficient both in competency of Estate
and understanding, 3. He ought to be least suspicious, viz. be indifferent as
he stands unsworn, and then He is accounted Liber and Legalis Homo, otherways
it is held he may be challenged and not sworn, for the Prisoner may challenge
35 in case of Treason, and 20 in Case of Felony; without showing Cause; and as
many more as he can assign just Cause against: In brief, Jurors must be free
from all manner of Bondage, Obligations, Affections, Relations, and Prejudices;
they must be the Peers, or Equals of the Party they are to try, and of the full
Age of one and Twenty or upwards.

They were anciently all Knights, as you may find it in Glanvil and Bracton,
and still must be Men of Worth and good Repute, and as they are returned by
sworn Officers of the Sheriff, so they of the Petty Jury are to be sworn
severally on every Trial, the better to mind them of their Oath, or they to be
charged upon their Oath with each Party they are to try.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Indictments, Presentiments, and the difference between them;
the Oath administered to the Grand Jury, and how they ought to enquire, etc.
THough both of them, as I have said, are Juries, yet there is made a small
distinction between them in the Title, as Grand and Petty Juries; The first is
so called, as it seems, because it usually consists of a greater Number than
the other, as 17, 19, 21. or the like, yet they can make no Verdict, or
Presentment, unless Twelve of them at the least agree; and then though the rest
consent not, it is held sufficient. And they are further so called, because
they generally are of the greater quality; and likewise in regard of their
Power, because their Office is more great and general, extending to all
Offenses throughout the whole County for which the serve as Jurors.

The Petty Jury, commonly called the Jury of Life and Death, consisting of 12
Men, are all to agree in a Verdict, or the Verdict cannot be taken, and is no
Verdict.

The Grand Jury, or Grand In^uest, for so they are often called, have
Principally two things in their Consideration, viz. Indictments and
Presentiments; Indictments are those that are usually drawn up in Form at the
instance of the Prosecutor, or by the Order of the Courts, and then brought
before, and delivered unto the Grand Jury, and the Witnesses Sworn attend them,
to be Examined by them upon the Oath they have taken; and according as they
Credit, or Discredit the Evidence, or find cause, they Indorse the Indictment,
Billa vera, or Ignoramus, it is a true Bill, or we are ignorant; the latter
concluding the Jury does not find the Matter, or there does not upon Evidence
appear a sufficient Ground for the Accusation, that the Party's Life or
Reputation should be brought into Question or Dispute.

As for a Presentment, it is when of their own Knowledge, or upon Enquiry, the
Jury themselves do take Knowledge of a Nuisance, or Offense to the Injury of the
Public, which they think fit to have removed, or punished, and of which they
Inform the Court to that purpose, briefly in Writing without Form, viz. The
Nature of such Offense, or Thing, and the Persons Name and Place, who is the
Agriever, or where the Nuisance is, being a Ground and Matter whereon to Form an
Indictment, the Presentment differing from the Indictment in two Particulars,
viz. Its not being drawn up in due Form; and whereas the Indictment is commonly
drawn up by the Order of the Court, or the Instance of some Prosecutor, as is
said.

The Presentment on the other Hand is always Originally the Act of the Grand
Jury.

The Form of the Oath Administered by the Court to the Grand Jury when they are
to Enquire, etc.
You shall diligently enquire, and true Presentment make of all such Matters,
Articles, and Things as shall be given you in Charge, as well as of all other
Matters and things as shall come to your Knowledge, touching this present
Service. The King's Council your Fellows, and your own you shall keep secret;
you shall Present no Person for Hatred or Malice, neither shall you leave any
one Unpresented, for Fear, Favor or Affection, for Lucre or Gain, or any Hopes
thereof; but in all things you shall Present the Truth, and nothing but the
Truth, to the best of your Knowledge, So help you God,

And now from what has been said, it appears that this Important Office is
Branched twofold; The first is to preserve the Innocent from the Disgrace and
Hazards, which by Malice, or any sinister Means they may be brought into; for
by the express Words of the Statute of 25 Edward the Third, c. 3. and the 43
Edward 3. c. 3. it is said, That for preventing Mischiefs done by false
Accusers, none shall be put to answer, unless it be by Indictment, or
Presentment of Good and Lawful People of the same Neighborhood, where such
Deeds be done, and this no doubt may be taken to Imply a Grand Jury.

The other Branch is to enquire after, and give Notices of all Nusances,
Offenses, Crimes and the like, in the County for which they serve, that so
Offenders may be brought to Trial if they are forth coming, or if fled from
from Justice, may be proceeded against upon the Outlawry, and so Criminals
Punished according to their Demerit.

A Grand Jury, or Petty-jury, where there is no Witness against the Prisoner
for the Crime he stands Indicted for, yet knowing him guilty of their own
Knowledge, may find it accordingly, and this especially in the Petty-jury
appears pretty plain by the Words spoken to them by the Court; for if no
Witness appears, the Court thus speaks to the Jury, or to this Effect.
Gentlemen of the Jury, here is L. C. stands Idicted of such a Crime (naming it)
and there is no Witness come against him. So unless you of your own Knowledge
know him Guilty, you must Acquit him. But where there is Evidence, the
Grand Jury must Industriously Examine the Evidence for the King, and the
Petty-jury must have the Prosecutor and his Evidence, if he have any beside,
Face to Face with the Prisoner, and patiently hear what can be Alleged in
charging the one, and the others defending himself, and deliberately weigh the
Matter, and may pray the Court to ask such proper Questions of the King's
Evidence, and of the Prisoner, and his Evidence, as they think fit for their
better Satisfaction, and sifting out the Truth of the Matter, and to Judge of
Matter of Fact according to their Evidence, as in their Consciences they shall
believe; and where a thing is doubtful to them that they cannot well Determine,
they may find it Special, and leave it to the Determination of the Judges, and
so acquit themselves where such Doubts or Scruples shall arise of falling into
an Error in Points of Law, of which the Jurors are not held proper Judges, but
where it so requires, must leave it Special.

And thus having spoken mostly in Generals, I now come nearer to Particulars,
which may briefly give a further Light into these weighty Matters, that Men
Warned upon a Jury, and Empanalled, may be prepared a little to know what is
Requisite in so great a Charge and Trust.

CHAP. XXVIII. Several Material Things to be known relating to Jurys, as the
Law directs, and according to the Opinion of the Learned Lawyers.
JUries both for Enquiry, and Trial, ought to be Probi and Legales Homines,
Lamb. 396.

Jurors must be inhabitants, or Free holders within the County, to the value of
4 l. per Annum, by 27 Eliz. 6. But in Cities and Buroughs to the value of 40
l. in Goods, Lamb. 396, 397.

Juror 70 Years Old, or Decripid, must serve, if returned by the Sheriff, if
the Justices will have him to serve, but he may, if he will Sue the Sheriff
upon the Statute of Westminster, 2. Chap. 38. Lamb. 397.

A Jury of Denizens is good, where a Party is Extraneus, unless he pray a Jury,
per meditatem Linguae, 3 Cro. 869.

Where a Baron is Sued, a Knight must be returned on the Jury, ibid.

Jurors for the Trial of Indictments within the County Palatine of Lancaster,
must have five Pounds per Annum, ibid.

Jurors must not be nominated by any but the Bailiffs, as well in Inquisitions
before Coroner, as Indictments before the Justices of Peace, 1 Cro. 134.

Jurors Exempted by Charter, with the Words (Licet Tangat nos) are to be
Discharged upon Appearance, showing it to the Sheriff; but when there is want
of sufficient Jurors, no Exemption can discharge, Stat. West. 2. Chap. 38.
Lamb. 197.

If the particular Juries for the Hundred cannot be supplied by those of the
Hundred, it is better to take Tales de Circumstantibus, of another Hundred,
than to be renewed with a Tales from one Sessions to another, Lamb. 398.

A Jury of one Hundred may present an Offense done in another Hundred, Lamb.
399.

Justices may Command the Sheriff to alter the Panel, and he upon Refusal
forfeits 20 l. ibid. 3 Hen. 8. Chap. 12.

All Jurors ought, and must be Sworn, otherways their Presentiments are void*
but the Record being that all the Jurors were Sworn, the Presentiments are good,
though all be not Sworn, Lamb. 399.

Jurors may be Amerced for refusing to Present, being Sworn, 8 Co. 39. a.

A Juror after he is Sworn, upon sufficient Cause appearing, may by the
Justices be removed, Lamb. 400.

Jurors of Enquiry must be twelve, as I have already said, but they may be more
and usually they are an odd Number, though 12 of them Agreeing, the Presentment
is good, and an Indictment may be found, Lamb. 400.

Juries of Inquiry ought not to be Committed to a Keeper, nor kept without
Victuals, nor carried out of the Town, but may be Ajourned to another Place to
give up their Verdict, Lamb. 400.

Jurors wilfully concealing Offenses Presentable, and which be complained of by
Bill, may be enquired of by Persons, whereof every one may spend Forty
Shillings per Annum, and such Concealment being found within a Year after,
every Juror shall be Amerced in open Sessions, 3 Hen. 7. Chap 1. Lamb. 410, 401.

No Juror to be returned without an Addition whereby he may be known, 27 Eliz.
Chap. 7. Lamb. 432,

Jurors that discover what they have done, are Fineable, Lamb. 402. And in Case
of Treason, or Felony it has been Adjudged Felony, Dalton 377.

Jurors taking any thing to make a favorable Presentment, shall be Imprisoned,
and Ransomed, Lamb. 441. Crompt. 84. a. 5 Edw. 3. Chap. 10.

1. Persons Attainted in Conspiracy. 2. Attaint by Verdict. 3. Decies tantum.
4. Concealment. 5. Subornation of Perjury, these on a Jury are not Probi, and
their Presentiments void, unless there be twelve Men besides on the Jury, whose
Reputations are not Blemished, Lamb. 396. Also Persons Outlawed, Persons
Condemned in Praemunire, Persons Abjured, Persons Attainted of Treason, or
Felony, and Clergymen are not to be of Juries.

CHAP. XXIX. Challenges to be made of Jurors, and other very useful
Instructions tending to Evidence, etc.
SO Tender were our Ancestors of the Lives and Fortunes of Men, that in making
wholesome Laws, they took great Care that nothing, as near as human Wisdom could
foresee, should happen to the Prejudice of the Innocent, the Laws being only
intended, and made rather to Deter Men from Crimes, than to punish those who
Transgressed the Bounds of them; and because Prejudice, nor no other thing
might sway any Party to Injure a Person Indicted, if on his Jury he has, as I
have already hinted, the Privilege of challenging such as he suspects, to a
certain number formerly mentioned, peremptorily, and more if he can show Lawful
and just Cause, For the Parties better Instruction.

Note, if a Peer of the Realm be returned on a Jury, he may be challenged by
either Party, or he may challenge himself, 1 Inst. 156.

The Array may be challenged where a Peer is Party, and no Knight returned on
the Jury. Ibid. But in Case of a Noble-man's being put upon his Trial by his
Peers, he cannot challenge any of them, they being to Try the Cause on Honor.

One Indicted of Felony may challenge as many as he will, showing Cause: but if
he can Assign no Cause for such Challenges, over and above 20, he can challenge
no more than that twenty, 22 Hen. 8. Chap. 14. 28 Hen. 8. Chap. 1. Lamb. 554.

What is properly a good Challenge.
1. Where the Party has no Lands to the clear value of 40 s. by the Year,
Lamb. 554.

2, He that was Indictor of him. Lamb. ibid.

3. A Party either in City, or Borough, that has not Goods to the value of 40
l. Lamb. ibid.

4, He that is not Probus and Legalis, as if he be Attainted of Forgery,
Perjury, Felony, etc. Lamb. Ibid.

5. In Case of Champerty, which is when a Party for Hope of having part of the
Thing in Contest or Variance, moves, or causes the Suit to be moved at his
own Cost, and which is Fineable, and for it he is to be Fined, 33 Edw. 1. Chap.
1. Lamb. 441. and in some other Cases. So that the Law of England may be said
to be the Law of Liberty; because the Party to be Tried has all the Liberty the
Nature of the Thing will bear, or a Person under Circumstances, reasonably
desire; the Law it self that directs this, Seeming to Compassionate Men's
Miseries and Misfortunes, as well in Criminal Matters, as in securing their
Rights and Properties, Skreening them as it were from powerful Men, that else
would Oppress and Ruin them.

CHAP. XXX. Penalties upon Forestallers of Markets, Fairs, etc. Badgers,
Drovers, Butchers, Tanners, Inholders* what they may do in some Cases, and what
they ought not to do, etc.
THere are several good Laws made to hinder Abuses in one Man's Intrenching on
another, and Engrossing Commodities to himself, in Hinderance of the Trade of
others, and making the Commodity dear, etc. Of which, and other things
nceessary to be known, I shall Treat in this Chapter.

A Forestaller is a Party, either he or she who Buys, or Contracts for any
Victuals, or Wares before they come to the Fair, Market, or Port, or moves any
Party to Enhaunce the Price, and not to bring such Victuals, or Wares to any
Market, Fair, or Port, Lamb. 450. Of which the Party being Convicted before the
Justices of the Peace at the Quarter Sessions, by the Examination of two
Witnesses, or a Presentment of Forestalling within two Years, for the Offense
the first time shall lose the Goods, and be Imprisoned two Months, without
Bail, or Mainprize; for the second Offense lose double the Value of the Goods,
and be Imprisoned for the space of Sx Months; for the third Offense to forfeit
all their Goods, stand in the Pillory, and be Imprisoned during the King's
Pleasure, 5 Edward 6. Chap. 14. Dalt. 87. Lamb. 570.

The Moiety of these Forfeitures upon Forestalling, due unto the Party
Informing upon the Statute of Forestallers, is to be Levied by Fieri Facias, or
Capias, to be Awarded by the Justices of the Peace, Lamb. 548.

A Man or Woman Buying Corn for Seed, and not bringing so much to the Market,
Forfeits double the Value, 5 Edw. 6. Chap. 14.

No License shall be but in open Sessions for Drovers, Badgers, etc. A Drover
is meant here one that Buys Cattle in one Place, and carries them another to
Sell. A Badger, one that buys Corn, or Victuals in one Place, and carries it
into another. Either of these so Trading must be a Married Man, and a
Householder, 30 Years Old, or upwards, and Licensed, under the Penalty of Five
Pounds, by 5 Edw. 6. Chap. 14. Also he must have dwelt 3 Years in the County,
Selling in open Fair, or Market, for Provision of Houses, not Prohibited to
Badgers, Licensed by 5 Edw. 6. against Engrossing; and these must give Bond not
to Forestal, etc. Nor to Buy Corn out of Fair, or Market, under the Penalty of
five Pounds, unless so Limited by special Words in the License.

Traders in Butter and Cheese Prohibited in open Sessions from Buying, if they
do, are subject to the Penalties, in the 3 and 4 of Edw. 6. Chap. 12. and the 5
and 6 Edw. 6. Chap. 14. Notwithstanding they extend not to such Traders,
Freemen of London.

None shall Ingross Oak Bark, under Penalty of Forfeiting it, 1 Jacobi 21.

So of Hides coming to Market; nor Buy, except of the Owner of the Beast to be
Spent in his House, under the Forfeiture of 6 s. 8 d. for every one.

Excepted out of 5 Edw. 6. Barley, or Oats to be made into Oat-meal.

So things belonging to Butchers, Fish-mongers, Poulterers, Sold again at
Reasonable Rates.

So Corn, Cattle, etc. Reserved in a Lease taken. Also Wine or Victuals by
Innkeepers* dried Fish, Corn, Butter, and the like by Licensed Badgers, etc.

So Provision for a City, Shipping, Castles, or Ports.

So Fish brought by persons dwelling within 1 Mile of the Sea; so Wine, Oils,
and Foreign Victuals, (Fish, and Salt-fish excepted.)

Excepted out of 3 and 4 Edw. 6. and 5 Edw. 6.14. Butter and Cheese Bought by
Freemen of London, and Sold again in the Liberties of the said City, Borough
of Southwark and Westminster.

Any Butcher that Gasheth, Slaughtereth, or Cutteth the Hide of the Ox, or
Steer, or Bull, or Cow, so that it is Impaired, loses 20 d. or that Wetteth,
or Waters any Hides, unless in June, July or August; or puts to Sale any
putrified, or rotten Hides, for every one of them loses 3 s. 4 d. 1 Jacobi
Chap. 22. Lamb. 462.

A Butcher using the said Craft, and also the Mystery of a Tanner, loses for
every Day 6 s. 8 d. ibid.

A Tanner using also the Mystery of a Shoemaker, Currier, Butcher, or any other
Artificer, Using, Cutting, or Working in Leather, loses the Hides and Skins
Tanned, ibid.

None may Buy or Contract for, or bespeak any rough Hides or Calveskins, but
only a Tanner, or Tawer of Leather, except Salt Hides, for the necessary use of
Ships, on Penalty of 6 s 8 d. for every Hide so Bought, or Contracted for, 1
Jacobi 22. Lamb. 463.

None shall Forestall any Hides coming to a Fair, or Market, except such as
kill for the Provisions of their House, on Penalty of 6 s. 8 d. for every Hide.

None may buy Tanned Leather, or Wrought, but such as will convert them into
made Wares, except Necks, and Shreads of Sadlers, and Girdlers, upon Penalty to
lose the said Leather, 1 Jacobi c. 22. Lamb. 463.

A Tanner putting to Sale any Insufficient Leather, not thoroughly Wrought and
Tanned, or not well and thoroughly dried, and the same so found by the Tryers
appointed, 1 Jacobi Chap. 22. loses so much as is Insufficient, Lamb. 464.

See more of this in Statute 1 Jacobi 1. Chap. 22, etc.

All sorts of Spices and Merchandises Garblable in the City of London, and the
Liberties thereof, shall for the usual Fees be Garbled by the Garbler, or his
Deputy before they be Sold, upon Penalty of the Forfeiture thereof, or the
Value Sold for, and so if afterward mixed with Garbles, 1 Jacobi 19. Dalt. 131.

The Garbler of London, his Deputy, or Assign in the Daytime, may enter any
House, Shop, or Warehouse, to see if the Wares, etc. be Garbled; if not, to
cleanse them, and Forfeitures of this kind to go to the King and Informer, ibid.

An Inn-holder in a Corporation, or Market Town, where there is a common Baker
that has been an Apprentice therein Seven Years, may not make Horse-bread
within his House, 32 Hen. 8. c. 41. 21 Jacobi c. 12.

An Inn-holder, or Ostler in a Thorow-fare Town, Corporate, or Market Town,
being a Baker, and one that has been an Apprentice thereto seven Years, may
make Horse-bread within his House, 21 Jacobi 1. Chap. 21.

This sort of Bread, called Horse-bread, must be of a Lawful and sufficient
Size, according to the Price of Corn, as it is at a Rate in the Neighboring
Markets at that time, according to the 21 Jacobi 1. Chap. 21.

CHAP. XXXI. Rates of Wages for Servants, according to Statute Law, etc. And
how to be Ordered by Justices of the Peace, etc.
RAtes of Wages for Servants and Laborers, are to be made by the Justices of
the Peace in their Respective Divisions, or Counties, at Easter
Quarter Sessions, and by them to be Engrossed in Parchment under their Hands
and Seals, and after it is Lawful for the Sheriff of the said County wherein
this is done, to cause Proclamation to be made of the several Rates so Rated in
so many Places with in his Jurisdiction, as to him shall seem Meet and
Convenient, and as if the same had been set down Printed by the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, after Declaration thereof to His Majesty, and
Certificate thereof in Chancery, 39 Eilz. Chap. 4. 1 Jacobi, c. 6. Lamb. 474.

Any giving Wages contrary to the Rates appointed, Forfeits 5 l. 5 Eliz. Chap.
4. 1 Jacobi Chap. 6. Lamb. 474.

Every Justice (not showing Lawful Excuse Testified by Oath of one that is in
Subsidy, five Pounds, etc.) that shall not Assemble at Easter Sessions, or
within 6 Weeks after, to Rate the Wages of Servants, Forfeits 10 l. 5 Eliz.
Chap. 4. Lamb. 632.

Any having the Authority to Rate Wages by the 5 Eliz. Chap. 4. may Rate the
Wages of Laborers, Weavers, Spinsters, or of any Working by the Day, Week,
Month, or Year, or by the Great, 1 Jacobi Chap. 6.

No Penalty for Certifying the Rates of Wages into Chancery, if they be duly
Proclaimed, 1 Jacobi Chap. 6.

Rates of Wages Engrossed in Parchment, are to be kept by the Custos Rotulorum;
if in a Corporation, among the Records thereof, ibid.

Any two Justices of the Peace may Imprison such Master or Mistress for 10 Days
without Bail, and their Servants, Workmen or Laborers for 20 Days upon their
Respective, giving, or taking greater Wages than are Assessed by the Justices
of the Peace, and Proclamation thereof made in the County, 5 Eliz. Chap. 4.
Dalt. 823. Every Retainer, Payment, or Promise of Wages, or any other thing,
whatever contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of 5 Eliz. Chap. 4. and every
Writing and Bond to that Intent and Purpose, is utterly null and void, Dalt.
823.

A Justice of the Peace may have his Action of Debt against the Sheriff for his
Wages at the Sessions, Crompt. 177. a. Numb. 23. The Justice of the Peace shall
be paid his Wages out of the Fines and Amercements of the same Sessions, and
they ought to Assess the Fines in the Court, etc. And it shall be allowed the
Sheriff upon his Account in the Exchequer, 14 R. 2. c. 11. Lamb. 628. Crompt.
177, etc.

CHAP. XXXII. The Office of a Coroner in the Material Things he is to observe
in the Executing of it, His Fees, and upon what Statutes, and other Warrantable
Authority, he is to proceed.
THE Office of a Coroner is very Ancient, and has been, and yet is held in high
Esteem: For the Lord Mayor of London, is held to be Coroner there, 2 Cro. 531.
And the Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench is Sovereign Coroner of all
England, 4 ^o. 57, b. And he upon view of the Body of one killed in open view,
as a Coroner may make a Record returnable into the King's Bench, ibid.

But to come nearer to the intended Purpose, amongst other Matters, It is the
Coroner's Business to view the Bodies of such as come to Casual Deaths, make
away themselves, or are made away by others, or suspected to be put out of the
World by a violent Death, or Dying Languishing in Prison, where there may be
any Suspicion the Party Dyed not Naturally, but, by hard Usage, Starving, or
that the Imprisonment caused his Death, etc. For he is to know, and certify
how the King came to lose a Subject.

He is, says 3d Institute, fol. 129. to have Visum Corporis of a Prisoner Dying
in a Goal, by reason of Duress. And the Jury or Inquest, before the Coroner, is
to be of Persons within the four next adjacent Vills, made by the Bailiffs or
Constables, and no Challenge lies to any of them so legally Summoned on the
Inquest, 1 Cro. 135. And upon a View of the Body, and a strict Examination how
the Party came by his Death, they must give in their Verdict to the best of
their Judgment, according to the Evidence, or other Matters appearing to them,
whether it be Felo de se, he Killed or Drowned himself, etc. or Died by the
Hand of other Person or Persons, or by the Fall of a House, Wall, Timber, Kick
of a Horse, or any other Matter or Thing that brought the Party to an untimely
End; and the Coroner being so satisfied, he is to give his Warrant for the
Burial of the Party, according as it shall be found upon Verdict, and an
Indictment may be grounded thereon against such Party or Parties as shall be
found concerned. And in this Case he has Power to Commit and Bind over Persons
accused before him of Murder, or the like, as he sees Cause. And for doing his
Office of one Slain or Murdered, he may lawfully take 13 s. 4 d. of the Slayer
or Murderer; and if he have none, then of the Town where the Murder was
committed, or the Murderer suffered to escape, 3 Hen. 7. Chap. 1. Lamb. 434.

A Coroner refusing to do his Office of one Slain by Misadventure, without
Fees, loses 40 s. 1 Hen. 8. Chap. 7. Lamb. 434.

Writs shall be Awarded to the Coroner, where the Sherriff is Party. The Writ
of Covenant in a Fine, Venire facias, etc. 1 Cromp. 416.

One Person may be Coroner of the King's House [Hostel] within the Verge, and
of the County too, 4. Co. 46. B. But where there are several, one cannot meddle
within the others Jurisdiction, ibid.

Coroners, as Ministers, must all join* 4 Co. 57. B. A Coroner, to whom a Writ
of Estrepement is directed, is to provide against Wast, by taking Posse
Comitatus, H. 7. chap. 85.

An Appeal, or an Accusation, by an Approver, is to be entered before the
Coroner, 3 Inst. 129.

A Coroner may be removed by being Minus Idoneus, 5 Co. 58. B.

A Coroner concealing, and not doing his Office, through Fear, or for Prayer,
or Affinity, etc. shall be Fined and Imprisoned for a Year, or 3 Years, if he
cannot pay the Fine, by 3 Eliz. So of other Officers.

Coroners ought to certify their Inquisitions at the general Jail-delivery, and
not at the Sessions, 1 and 2 P. and M. 13. Lamb. 365.

Coroners being Parties to the Exigents and Judges of the Outlawry, ought to be
present at the Sessions, ibid.

Coroners are Conservators of the Peace, and may in some Cases Commit Men to
Prison, i id.

There lies no Traverse to an Indictment before the Coroner super visum
corporis, 3 Inst. ^5.

Coroners may be Convicted of Offenses against the Statute, 1 Hen. 8. Chap. 7.
by Examination of Witness, and touching Extortions, or not Executing their
Office before the Justice of Peace, Cro. 130* b. Lamb. 435.

Coroner exacting above a Noble for the View, and 2 s. for his Clark, Fine 40
s. See 1 Inst. 149.

CHAP. XXXIII. Some other Matters relating to the Coroners Office and Duty in
View of Dead Bodies, out of Rastal, etc.
THE Law, says he, is, if any Man or Woman, etc. be Wounded, and thereby, in
Peril of Death, the Party that did it, or was helping in doing it, being
apprehended, may be Committed and kept in Custody, till it be perfectly known
by the Testimony of Skilful Persons, whether the Wounded Party will Live or Die
of those Wounds or Blows given, and if he Die, the Coroner, upon view of the
Dead Body, shall enquire of him, or them that have done the Fact, whether Man
or Woman, and take the Names of them that were present as Witnesses, or any
otherways knowing of it. Also he shall take especial notice of the Abettors and
Concealors in, or toward the Fact, or any way therein concerned, and so found
to Enrole and Certify the same.

The Coroner, according to his Inquest, shall give in their Verdict, if their
be Cause; for he is to take care to Prosecute the Offender or Offenders, if the
Relations of the Deceased or others refuse, or are slack in so doing; so that
if any Man, etc. be Slain or Murdered, and thereof the Slayers, Murderers,
Abettors, Maintainers and Comforters may be Indicted, and brought to
Arraignment and Trial of the Issue, whether they are Guilty of the Murder,
Manslaughter, etc. or not Guilty, which may be done any time in a Year and a
Day after the same Flony and Murder Committed which must be Dated from the
Time of the Wounding, or Beating, not from the time of the Dying, if the Party
Languish, and live any time after, though somewhat considerable, as a Week, a
Month, or more.

And the Wife, or Heir of the Person so Slain, or Murdered, as the Case
requires, may Commence his, or her Appeal in proper Person any time within the
Year after the said Felony done, before the Sheriff, and Coroner of the County
where the said Felony and Murder was done, or before the King in his Bench, or
Justices of Jail-delivery. And the Appellant in any Appeals of Murder, or
Death of a Man, etc. where Battle by the Course of Common Law sees not, may
make their Attorneys, and Appear by the same.

And the said Appeals after they be Commenced, may be proceeded in to the end
of the Suit and Execution.

If a Murderer, or Manslayer escape, the Justices of the Peace have Power to
enquire of such Escapes, and to certify 'em in the King's Bench, and that
after the Felony found; the Coroners deliver their Inquisitions before the
Justices the next Jail-delivery in the Shire, or County where the Inquisition
is taken; and they are to proceed against such Murderers, if they be in Goal,
or else certify the Inquisition in the King's Bench, or as it is worded, put
the said Inquisition before the King in his Bench.

All such Coroners as are Remiss in their Office, or Duty of their Place, and
make not their Respective Inquisitions upon the view of the dead Body, and
certify not according as aforesaid, or Ordained, every Coroner for such
Offense Forfeits to the King 5 l. by 3 Hen. 7. Chap. 1.

And now that the Coroner may not be ignorant what is Murder, I shall briefly
lay it down in general, and many material Particulars.

CHAP. XXXIV. Murder, how to be ta^, and what is Observable therein to make it
so wilfully, etc.
Murder is when a Man or Woman upon Malice propense, Precedent, or
Forethought does Feloniously Kill another living within the Realm, or under
the Protection of the King, whether openly, or privately done, or whether the
Party Slain be English, or an Alien, Lamb. 237. Dalt. 342. Cromp. 21. a. Number.
1. Clergy taken away, 1 Edw. 6. And in this Case Killing shall have Relation to
the Death, and not to the Stroke, 4 Coke 42, Crompt 21. a. Number. 1.

Malice is either expressed, Crompt. 21. a. Dalt. 241. or Employed, Lamb. 239.

Malice Expressed, is in a Case where it is known there is Malice between the
Parties, Crompt. 21. a. and is apparent, and where there is a preceding
Falling out, or lying in Wait, or Time and Place Appointed, Lamb. 238. Dalt 343.

Malice Employed is to be taken where a Man or Woman, etc. is killed suddenly
without Defense, Crompt. 21. a. Numb. 2. Dalt. 343. As one busy at Reading, or
going over a Style suddenly Killed by a Party, or where one Kills another
without Provocation, one Stabbed, and not having a Weapon drawn, Dying in six
Months, these are Murder, and so noted by Dalton, Lambert, Crompton and
others, and the Statute of Stabbing, 1 Jac. 1. c. 8. Dalt. 343.

To Kill an Officer known in Executing Process, Dalt. 343.

So to Kill an Officer unknown, if he show his Warrant; and if an Officer has
the King's Writ or lawful Warrant, though the Process be Erroneous in Awarding,
or one Process taken for another, and the Officer be Slain in Executing it, it
is Murder, Dalt. 343. 2 Cro. 280. 9 C^. 68. Lamb. 240. So though the Arrest were
made in the Nightime. But where the Arrest is Tortious, or where an Officer
not known shows not his Warrant, or the Arrest be made on the Lord's Day,
usually called Sunday, (by Stat. Caroli 2.) it is but Manslaughter, ibid.

It is Murder to Kill a Magistrate or Minister of Justice, in Executing his
Office, or in keeping the Peace, Crompt. 25. B. Numb. 51. Dalt. 343.

An Officer Whipping or Branding to Death, is Murder, 344. A Rioter Killing an
Officer, or Assistant coming to Suppress a Riot, it is Murder in the Rioters,
Dalt. 443. Crompt. 23. B. Numb. 28. Lamb. 241.

A Thief Killing a True Man resisting, it is Murder of Malice Propense, for
here Malice is employed by the Law, because the Thief came purposely to do an
ill Act, though not purposely to Kill the Man. See Lamb. 241. Dalt. 344. Crompt.
22. a. Numb. 13. 9 Co. 67.

One Assaulting another, after the Assault flies to the Wall, and then Kills
the other, it is Murder; for he Slew him in the said Malice wherein he did
Assault him, Lamb. 239.

One Condemned to Die, is Killed by a private Person without Warrant, or by the
Judge who Condemns him, or by the Officer contrary to the Judgment, it is
Murder, Dalt. 340. Lamb. 24^. 5 Eliz. 1.

So a Physician or Surgeon, having Malice, Applies a contrary Medicine, of
which the Patient Dies, Dalt. 344.

A Person carrying his Sick Father, etc. and laying him in the cold Frost, etc.
so that he Dies, is Malice; for by it the Law presumes he intended his Death.
So a Strumpet covering her Child with Leaves in the open Way, etc. to hide it,
and a Beast tramples on it, and Kills it, or a Cart goes over it, etc. Lamb.
240 Dalt. 352. and of the former, Dalt. 344. Lamb. 740. And many the like
Cases, too long to be here set down, where there is Malice forethought,
Propense, or that the Law presumes, or implies it to be Malice in the Party who
Kills another, or sets on another to do it, by Assassinating, etc.

CHAP. XXXV. Homicide and Manslaughter, Felo de se, etc.
HOmicide is Killing of a Man by Man, Dalt. 339, 349. Exivi Termini comprehends
Treason, Murder, etc. It is no difference whether the Party Slain be a Denizen,
Alien, or English Man, if he lives under the King's Protection, Dalt. 340.
Lamb. 237. Crompt. 221. ^. Numb. 1.

To kill one Attainted for Treason or Felony, or Outlawed for Felony, or
Attainted in Praemunire is Felony, by 4 Eliz. Stamford. 13 Dalt. 342. Crompt.
24. a. Number. 39.

Homicide is either killing himself, Felo de se, or by another, and Felo de se;
a Man by killing himself Forfeits to the King his Goods and Chattels, Real and
Personal, and his Debts due by Speciality, Dalt. 341. But no Lands nor Blood
Corrupted, ibid. But his Goods are not forfeit till his Death. ibid.

An Infant, or non Compos mentis, does not forfeit, but a Lunatic killing
himself out of his Lunacy, does forfeit his Goods, Dalt. 340.

Homicide of another, is either Voluntary, or Involuntary; Voluntary is
Murder, vide Murder, or Manslaughter.

Manslaughter is when two Men, etc. fight together on a sudden without
precedent* Malice, and one of them kill the other, Dalt. 349. Lamb. 248.
Crompt. 16. a.

Manslaughter is either by Chance-medley, or se defendendo, House and Goods.

By Chance-medley is Felony, but may have Clergy, Dalt. 349.

One Fighting breaks his Weapon, another standing by puts one into his Hand, or
otherways lends it him, and with it he kills another, it is Manslaughter in the
Lender, Dalt. 134. Crompt. 16. b. Numb. 12 Lamb. 252.

The Servant Fighting in his Master's Defense, though there were Malice in the
Master, and not told to the Servant, and one be killed, Lamb. 248.

So a Stranger taking part, Lamb. 238. is Chance-medley, Dalt. 348.

If two that were in Malice are Reconciled, and fall out upon a new Occasion,
and is killed, it is Manslaughter only, Dalt. 350. Lamb. 250.

Se defendendo, is where one kills another in the necessary Defense of
himself, or his, thereby to save himself, or his Possessions or Goods, or some
other Person which he is bound to defend from Peril, and it is either against a
Felon, Murderer, Thief, or Loyal Subject, Dalt. 356. Lamb. 152.

Against a Loyal Subject, if he be Assaulted by another Man, he must fly so
much as he may till he be let by some Wall, or other material Hindrance,
that his Necessity of Defense may seem Inevitable; and he shall be Committed
till the time of his Trial, lose his Goods, and Sue out his Pardon, Lamb. 253.
Dalt. 35. It is not material if he strikes again before he gave any deadly
Wound, if he flies to the Strait, Dalt. 357, 358.

If a Man fly to a Wall, and hold out his Weapon, if the Pursuer run upon it
and is killed, it is se defendendo, and forfeiteth his Good, Crompt. 28. a.
Numb. 7. Dalt. 349. But if he had fallen on the Ground, and the other fall on
it and kill himself, there is no loss of Goods; for he could not fly, and the
Slain is in a sort Felo de se, ibid. P. R. 122. b. Stam. 16. a.

If a Man fall to the Ground, there his flying to a Strait is not necessary,
because he might be there inevitably killed, if he did not defend himself,
Dalt. 347, 358.

An Officer or Minister of Justice Executing his Office, is not bound to fly.
Dalt. 358. Coke 99, 98.

If a Servant Kill one that Robbed or Killed his Master, so it be done
presently, or in defense of his Master's Person or Goods, if he could not
otherways have avoided the same, Dalt. 358. Crompt. 28. Numb. 2.

To Shoot at one that comes to Burn a Man's House, is justifiable in him or his
Servants, Dalt. 356. etc.

In the Defense of the Possession of a Man's Goods or House, he may justify to
Beat him, but may not Kill him, though the Party come wrongfully to take his
Goods, unless he be a Thief, Dalt. 358. etc.

To Kill a True Man in Defense of House, Goods or Land, is Manslaughter, Dalt.
358. Crompt. 27. b. Numb. 4.

CHAP. XXXVI. Involuntary Homicide.
THis is either by Mis-adventure or Necessity.

The first is, when a Man, doing a lawful Act, Kills a Man: This is not
Felony of Death, but he shall have his Pardon of Course for Life, and Lands,
but forfeiteth his Goods, Lamb. 254. Dalt. 351.

For Example: A School master, Father, Mother or M ster Correcting a Child,
Scholar or Servant: Moderately Shooting at Pricks, Butts or lawful Marks: A
Workman casting Tiles, Timber or Stone from off a House, or any thing from a
Cart, and giving warning, or doing other lawful things, giving warning.

But the Killing of a Man in doing any unlawful Act without evil Intent, is
Felony; as shooting Arrows, casting Stones into Highways where People resort,
or unto other places of usual Resort, Dalt. 352.

If a Man be Slain by the Fall of a House or Tree, by a Beast, etc. Any Party,
by a wilful Default, causing it, it is Felony, Dalt. 251.

The thing that causes the Death, is a Deodand, and forfeited to the King,
Dalt. 353. Crompt. 35. a.

Deodands are not Forfeit, till the Matter be found on Record.

If a Man be Slain under 14 Years of Age, nothing is forfeited as a Deodand,
Dalt. 353. Lamb. 21, etc.

These Generals and Particulars among others, are to be taken notice of by the
Coroner, on the view of Dead Bodies; hearing of Evidence upon their
Inquisition, and others concerned, as Occasion shall administer, that Justice
may be done, and Matters so ordered, as may make things bear a true Face in the
Eye of the Law. And so in this Briefness, for want of a larger Scope, I am
constrained to end what relates to the Office of a Coroner, out of which he may
gather many useful Matters and Things, to his great Easement, in performing,
the weighty Trust reposed in him.

CHAP. XXXVII. Customs, Advantages, etc. peculiar to the City of London.
Statutes made in its Favor. Of the Court of Request, commonly called the Court
of Conscience, etc.
THE City of London enjoys many Privileges, by Charter and Customs, which in
some Cases bear the Force of a Law, or are Equivalent to it, as well as many
Statutes made in Favor of that City, the Metropolis of England, and for Trade
and Riches Famed throughout the known World; some of which Advantages, for the
better Information of those that are Ignorant of them, I shall set down in
their Order.

Feme sole Merchant.
A Feme Covert shall have Action without her Husband, she being the Wife of a
Freeman of London, by the Custom of the City of London, and an Action may be
brought against such a Woman, sole Merchant, without naming her Husband; but it
seems her Dealing must be different from his, etc. 1 Edw. 4. P. 1. 35 Hen. 6.38.

Where Plaint is entered against the Husband and Wife in London, because the
Wife is a sole Merchant, or against another to find better Sureties there, if
the Suit be here in Trespass, or otherwise, and the Wife appears upon an
Exigent, upon a Habeas Corpus, or comes in upon a Cepi Corpus, so as she
cannot make an Attorney here, although the Plaint be upon the Custom only, for
which at the Common Law there is no Remedy, yet the Prisoner may be Discharged
of the first Suit, and shall be sent to the Fleet, etc.

And if he who is Outlawed, coming to Sue forth his Charter of Pardon, be
Arrested, he may have his Privilege; and so it is of one who comes to Sue
forth a Writ of Error, he shall have his Privilege here, if be be Arrested in
the King's Bench, M. 9. E. 4.35, 36.

Where a Gift of Goods by a Woman is Pleaded in Bar in an Action of Trespass
brought, if the Plaintiff say the Woman was his Wife at that Time, if he say
that the Custom of London is that Women are sole Merchants, etc. The same is a
Departure, Hen. 7.21. H. 18. B. 1.

In London a Debt upon simple Contract is good against an Executor, M. 1. E.
4.6. P. 1.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Where an Action will lie before the Day, or Payment, to find
better Sureties by the Custom of London.
IT is Ordained that a Merchant may cause his Debtor, to come before the Lord
Mayor of London, or of any other Town, and a Clerk by the King appointed to
acknowledge his Debt, and the Day of Payment, etc. Vide Stat. Burnel, 11 Edw.
1. Recog. 1. And afterward it is enlarged by the Statute de Mercatoribus, and
a more speedy Remedy is given, 13. Edw. 1. Recog, 2.

The Custom of London is, if a Man be Fugitive, who is Indebted, that the
Creditor may Arrest him to find better Sureties, but he shall not Recover
before the day of Payment, 5 Edw. 4. Land. 24.

Where one is Arrested in London, to find better Sureties, if the Suit be here
in Trespass, or otherwise, and he comes by Cepi Corpus, although the Plaint be
upon the Custom only, for which Remedy is at the Common Law, yet the Prisoner
may be Discharged, 9 Edw. 4, 35.

The Custom of London is, that one may be Arrested before the day of Payment,
to find better Sureties, 11 Hen. 6.3. P. 1.

Covenant without Deed.
In London an Action of Covenant lies without a Specialty, and diverse other
Actions by Custom, which do not lie at Common Law, and of small Contracts under
40 s. for which an Action does not lie by Writ, Hen. 14. Hen. 6* 36. P. 1.

Concessit Solvere, Upon a Contract made at Sea.
Of a Contract made beyond the Sea, and upon the Account between the Parties,
if the Party, by Bill, grant to repay it upon their coming, concessit solvere
lies in London upon the recoming; for before that Account there was no Remedy
within England, nor no Remedy for it at Common Law. And although that the Bill
does Recite the Merchandise, yet the concessit solvere does not rehearse the
Merchandises Sold; but generally for certain Merchandises, Goods and Chattels,
Sibi primo venditis concessit solvere, P. Hen. 6, 30. P. 1.

Of Mainpernors for the Defendant.
By the Custom of London, he who is Bail for another for Debt, or Trespass, to
answer the Action, that if he be Condemned, that the Plaintiff shall have
Execution as well against the Bail, or one of them, as against the Principal,
at his Election. And it was holden, that in such a Case he may maintain for the
Charges that shall be upon him.

The Custom of London was alleged, that if any Matter be pleaded to Issue,
which cannot be Tried by those of the City; that then the Party shall be
Examined upon it, and then that Judgment shall be according to that which is
found by the Examination; and if the Party refuse to be Examined, that then the
Judgment has been used to be given against him, Book of Entries 203.

Taking Goods to Pledge.
It was agreed, that the Custom to keep Goods of any Person put to him in
Pledge by the Custom, until he be paid, is not good; and if it were a Custom,
it ought to be by ancient Charter of the King, and by continuance after. But
the Custom of Attaint in London is good, and also that the Creditor may Arrest
such Goods which the Debtor has in his Possession, and that if none come
within the Year to make Claim, that then they shall be Appraised for the Duty,
and there a feme sole Merchant may be Sued without her Husband, as has been
said before; and every one in London claims to have a Market in his Shop, and
his Shop is his Market for such Goods as belong to his Trade, either in Buying
or Selling. As if a Goldsmith buy Stolen Plate in his Shop openly, not knowing
it to be Stole, and give for it a Lawful Marketable Price, he may maintain it;
but if he buy it in an Alehouse, or any other Tradesman's Shop, or in the
Street, the Case is altered; it is Unlawful buying not in the proper Market.

Sequestration by Custom of London.
By the Custom of London in an Action of Debt the Defendant shall have four
Defaults, and if he cannot be found, but has shut up his Shop, and is gone, a
Precept shall be to the Sergeant at the Plaintiffs Request, to Sequester the
Goods of his House, 11 Hen. 7. 2 P. 2.

Contribution.
Debt was upon the Custom in London, because the Plaintiff, and 3 others were
bound jointly and severally in one Bond, and one Pays all the Debt, or part, or
the whole is recovered against him, he may have an Action of Debt for Partition
against the other Obligors, Enter, 1660.

Debts under 40 s. in London.
Every Citizen and Freemen of London, and every other Person Inhabiting, or
that shall Inhabit within the City of London and Liberties thereof being a
Tradesman, Victualer or Labouring-man, which have, or shall have any Debts
owing to him, or them, not amounting to 40 s. by any Citizen or Freeman, [or by
any other Person, or Persons, being a Victualer, Tradesman, or Labouring-man,
Inhabiting within the the said City or Liberties thereof, should, or might
cause such Debtor, or Debtors to be Warned to appear before the Commissioners
of the Court of Request in Guild Hall, and the said Commissioners, or any 3, or
more of them shall have Power to set down such Orders between Plaintiff and
Defendant, Creditor and Debtor, touching such Debts not amounting to 40 s. as
they shall find to stand with Equity and good Conscience. And also the said
Commissioners, or any 3, or more of them have Power to Administer an Oath to
the Creditor, or Debtor, and to such Witnesses as shall be produced on either
part, and also to commit to Prison in one of the Compters, such Creditor or
Debtor, as shall not appear upon lawful Summons, or not perform such Order as
the said Commissioners, or any 3, or more of them shall set, 1 Jacobi 1. 3
Jacobi 1. the first Act being strengthened by the latter, and by it the Court
of Requests, commonly called the Court of Conscience, is Established to this
Day; happy for the poorer sort, keeping them from many Misfortunes that would
else befall them, to the farther filling and crouding the Goals by Strifeful
Vexations, for small and trivial Matters, were not this Court a Bar to restrain
them to the great Ease and Security of poor people.

It is held before the Commissioners at the East end of the Guild Hall,
Wednesday and Saturday, Weekly, beginning usually about 11 in the Morning, and
sometimes if Business require it, it may be sooner.

CHAP. XXXIX. Marking a Cause in the Mayor's Court, after a Verdict given in
the Sherriffs Court to be done.
THere is a Practice in London, called, Marking a Cause before the Lord Mayor,
which is after a Verdict given in the Sheriffs Court for the Plaintiff; in this
Case, the Defendant is to get the Cause marked before the Lord Mayor's Court,
and is like an Injunction in the Chancery, to stay Judgment and Execution,
until the Matter be Examined in Equity, where the Lord Mayor does oftentimes,
if Cause be, Mitigate the Damages, or give the Defendant time to pay it.

Other Customs in London in this Court, etc.
The Custom of London is, if a Plaint of Debt be entered in the Sheriffs Court,
upon Suggestion of any of the Parties, the Lord Mayor may send for both of
them, and Examine them upon the Truth of the Matter before Judgment, and if he
find that the Party is satisfied so much of it, he may bar him, but not after
Judgment, 10 Hen. 6. Chap. 14, 15.

Where he in the Reversion upon a Lease for a Year, is impleaded of Lands in
London, and makes Default, the Lord Mayor is to enquire by Neighbors, in the
presence of the Termor and Demandant, whether the Plea be moved by a good
Right, or by Fraud, to make the Termor to lose his Term, and if it be found
upon a good Right, the Demandant shall have Judgment presently, and if not, the
Termor shall have his Term, and the Execution of the Judgment shall be
suspended, Stat. Glouc. Chap. 11. Deceit. 1.

Of Foreign Attachments, etc.
By the Custom of London, one may Detach either Money or Goods of the
Defendants, either in the Plaintiffs own hands, or in the Custody of a third
Person, in either the Mayor or Sheriffs Courts, and there, if the Defendant
appear not, the Goods or Money may be Condemned. The Attachment is entered in
the Office, as Actions are, but with this Difference; they enter the hour of
the day when the Attachment is made; for if many Attachments be made, and come
against one Man's Goods, the first is first served.

He whose Goods are attached in another Man's hands, may come and offer himself
to Prison, or put in Bail, and dissolve the Attachment, and after have a Writ
of Privilege, though he render himself to Prison gratis, because he was is
there by Virtue of a Plaint. But the Plaintiff may have a new Plaint against
the Defendant, and attach him by his Goods, and then the Defendant may remove
it by Certiorari, and when the second Plaint is removed to the Common Pleas,
the Justices shall Examine if the Goods were attached for Costs of Suit, and
then the Defendant may be discharged; but if it be found by Oath, that they
were attached for Merchandises, or for any Cause than before, it shall be
Remanded.

But if the Party were in Execution in London, and afterward Suit is commenced
in the Common Pleas. A Writ shall go to the Mayor and Sheriff, to have the
Prisoner there, and make an Attorney, and then he shall be sent back; but if he
were impleaded in the Common Pleas, and afterward Arrested in London, and the
Mayor's Court send for the Party, he shall be Discharged of the Suit in London,
by the Privilege of the Mayor's Court, M. 38. Hen. 6.12. P. 2.

When an Attatchment is made in the Hands of a third Person, there after a
Default the Defendant within a Year and a Day, may put in Sureties to Answer
the Plaintiff the Duty, or may render his Body to Prison, if he cannot find
Sureties; and therefore in a Writ of Privilege, after he had yielded his Body
to Prison, he was Bailed, because the yielding his Body to Prison, was after
the Su^t in the Common Pleas, by the Defendant G^atis^ where the Attatchment
was before the Suit in the Common pleas the Defendant was sent back again to
prison in London. But where upon a Capias out of the Common Pleas, and a Nihil
Returned, the Defendant is Arrested in an inferior Court, coming to this
Court, he shall have the Privilege of his Court, because it is an Arrest of
his Body, N. 20. Hen. 6.3. P. 1.

Note the Defendant shall not be Attatched by such Goods as he carries with
him to disburse upon his Suits which he has here, although it be more than he
need to disburse. But he shall have Privilege for them; so that they shall not
be Attatched after a Suit Commenced in the Common Pleas against him, although
he comes unto London in a Vacation for the Defense of his Suit here. And this
may suffice in this small Book, to give the Reader an insight relating to these
kind of Attatchments; for further Instructions see in the Complete Solicitor in
Mayor and Sheriffs Courts, etc.

CHAP. XL. Some Matters relating to Orphans in London.
By the Custom of the City of London the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City,
shall have the Custody of all Orphans within the City, and they may commit the
Custody of such Orphans to their Guardians; and if an Orphan be taken away from
any other Man; etc. to whose Custody he is committed, he shall have a Writ of
Ravishment of Ward, so that in this case the Court does in some wise resemble
the Court of Wards.

Likewise the Lord Mayor and Chamberlain of the City of London for the time
being, shall have the keeping of all the Lands* and Goods of Orphans within the
City; saving to the King and other Lords, their Right of such as hold of them
out of the same Liberty.

Executors and Administrators are to exibit true Inventories before the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and give Security to the Chamberlain for the time
being, by Recognizance; and upon refusal so to do the Court may commit them to
Prison till they shall do it.

And all such Recognizances or Bonds made to the Chamberlain concerning
Orphans, shall go to him and his Successors, the Chamberlain of the City being
a sole Corporation for Orphans. If the Ecclesiastical Court does impugn the
Custom of the Court of Orphans, and if any Orphan sue in the Ecclesiastical
Court or elsewhere for a Legacy or any Duty due to them, the Court of Orphans
may by Custom grant a Prohibition; Coke Institut. 4. Part Folio 249.

Also by the Custom of London, if a Father advance any of his Children with any
part of his Goods that shall bar them to demand any further, unless the said
Father, under his Hand, or by his last Will and Testament, does declare, that
it was but in part of Advancement, and then that Child so partly advanced,
shall put his part so received in Hotch-potch with the Executors and Widow, and
have a full third part of the whole, accounting that which was formerly given
him as a part thereof, and this the Civil Law calls Collatio Bonorum.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Court of Common Council for London, etc.
THis dignified Court is held by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty,
resembling the High Court of Parliament, and consists of two Houses, viz. The
Lord Mayor and Aldermen, being of the upper House, and such as are chosen in
every Ward out of the Commonalty, Constitute the lower House of Commons, and
represent the whole Commonalty of the City of London.

Here they make Acts for the better Government of the City, and for the better
Execution of the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, for the public Good, and
for the better Advancement of Trade and Traffic, so as these Laws be not
Contradictory to Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom; and these Acts of
Common Council so made are binding within the City of London and the Liberty
thereof, carrying with them the Force of Laws, etc.

Of the Court of Wardmoot Inquest in London.
This Court resembles the Court of Leets, every Ward being as a Hundred, and
the Parishes as Towns; and in every Ward there is an Inquest of twelve Men or
more, Sworn every Year to enquire of, and present Nusances and other Offenses
within their Ward, etc.

The Chamberlain's Court for Apprentices.
Before the Chamberlain of London all Indentures of Apprentices are, or ought
to be Enrolled, and if they be not Enrolled, the Apprentice may Sue out his
Indenture at his Discretion in this Court, and so be discharged from his
Master; and the Chamberlain is the Judge in all Complaints, either of Masters
against their Servants, or Servants against their Masters, and to Punish the
Offenders at his Discretion; and in this Court are all Apprentices made Free;
and to be made Free, there are three several ways, viz. 1. By Service, as an
Apprentice. 2. By Adoption or Birthright, as being the Son of a Freeman: And
3. By Redemption by the Order of the Court of Aldermen.

Briefly of the Court of Conservator, and of the Water of the River of Thames.
The Lord Mayor for the time being, is the Conservator or Governor, and has
the Rule and Government of the Water of the River of Thames, its Issues,
Breaches and Land-over-flowings, from Stanes-bridge to the Water of Yeudale and
Medway, and has Authority touching the Correction and Punishment of such as
use unlawful Nets and Engines in fishing, or do take Fish under size or
unseasonably, etc. 4 Hen. 7. Chap. 15. and in all Commissions touching the
Waters of Lee the Lord Mayor of London is to be one, 3 Jacobi (1) Chap. 14. And
this in brief may suffice to give a light in these necessary matters to be
known by all Citizens and others whom they may in any case concern.

CHAP. XLII. The Antiquity of a Constable, his Oath, and other things
concerning his Office, etc.
THE Office and Duty of a High Constable, Petty Constable, Head-burrough*
Tithing Man, etc. in the discharge of them any weighty Affairs that they are
obliged to undertake; with safe Directions how to act on the several Occasions.

The Office of Constable is very ancient; for no sooner had King Alfred given
the Danes many fatal Overthrows and forced them to retire to their own Country,
but for the better Ordering his Kingdom, he divided it into Shires and other
Subdivision, as Tythings, Rapes, Waping-takes, Ridings, Leets, Boroughs, etc.
That proper Officers being appointed in each County and Subdivision, the Civil
Government might not only be well administered, but the People quickly gathered
and brought to the Field, in order to quell any Insurrections and Invaders; and
this proved so effectual for the preventing of Robberies, that Historians of
good Account tell us the Roads were so well guarded that Gold Bracelets,
Saddles, and other things of Value were fastened to Pillars in Cross Ways, and
rarely any one was so hardy as to take them thence. This King began his Reign
Anno Dom. 872. And ended it 898. and is held to appoint the first High and
Petty Constables in England, which Offices have ever since continued in good
Esteem; nay, the Saxon Word makes the Antiquity of Constables plain in
Etymology. The Saxon being Coning or Cyng and Staple or Stable, which signifies
a Stay or Prop to the King, that is, to the Government, in laying Hands on
Offenders, and bringing them to Justice; and though the High Constable of
England's Office, usually a Noble Man appointed by the King, is ceased, yet the
High Constables of Hundreds in a great measure retain and hold up the Power, as
to what concerns the Civil Government; and these are chosen most usually in
each County by the Justices in their General Quarter Sessions, or their
respective Divisions; for they have Power to give them Authority, and to
discharge them of their Office, as they shall see cause.

The High Constable is as it were Overseer or Director of the Petty Constables,
Headboroughs, or Tything-men, which are chosen under him, in the respective
Towns, Villages, or Precincts within his Hundred, or such Franchises as are
under his Jurisdiction, by the consent of the Inhabitants, or the Majority of
them, and their Duty it is to execute the High Constables Office in his
Absence, in keeping the Peace, and good Order in their respective Limits, and
upon the High Constables Order to be aiding and assisting to him so far as
concerns his Office. And now since both these are necessarily Sworn upon
entering on their respective Offices, it will be requisite for the better
understanding of what they undertake by entering on so weighty a Trust, to set
down the Form of their respective Oaths before the Justices, etc.

The Oath to be taken by a High Constable
You shall swear that you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the
King in the office of a Constable; you shall see and cause his Majestys Peace
to be well and truly kept and preserved so far as in your Power lies; you
shall Arrest all such Persons as in your sight or presence shall Ride or go
Armed offensively, or shall commit or make any Riot, Affray, or any other
Breach of his Majestys Peace; you shall do your best Endeavor upon complaint
to you made, to apprehend all Felons, Barretors, and Rioters, or Persons
Riotously assembled, and if any such Offenders shall make resistance with
force, you shall Levy Hue and Cry, and shall pursue them till they be taken;
you shall do your best endeavor that the Watch in and about your Hundred be
duly kept for the apprehending Vagabonds, Rogues, Night-walkers, Eves-droppers,
Scouts, and other suspected Persons, and of such as go Armed, and the like, and
that Hue and Cry be duly raised and pursued, according to the Statute of
Winchester, against Murderers, Thieves, and other Felons; and that the
Statutes made for Rogues, Vagabonds, and such other idle Persons, as come
within your Bounds and Limits, be duly put in Execution; you shall have a
watchful Eye upon such Persons as shall maintain or keep any Common House, or
Place where any unlawful Gam^ is, or shall be used, as also to such as shall
frequent or use such Places, or shall use or exer^c se any unlawful Games there
or elsewhere contrary to the Statutes. At your Sessions, A^ size, or Leets; you
shall present all and every the Offenses done contrary to the Statutes of the
1.4. and 21 of James the first, to restrain the inordinate haunting and tippling
in Inns, Alehouses, and other Victualling Houses, and for the repressing
Drunkeness; you shall there likewise true presentment make of all
Blood-sheddings, Affrays, Outcries, Rescous, and other Offenses, committed or
done against the Kings Majestys Peace within your Limits* you shall once every
Year, during your Office, present at the Quarter Sessions all Popish Recusants
within your Liberty, and their Children above Nine Years Old, and their
Servants, ( viz. their Monthly Absence from the Church) 3 Jacobi 1. Chap. 4.
You shall well and duly execute all Precepts and Warrants to you directed from
the Justices of the Peace of the County or Superior Officers; you shall be
aiding to your Neighbors against unlawful purveyances: In time of Hay or Corn
Harvest, upon request, you shall cause all Persons meet, to serve by the day
for the Mowing, Reaping, or getting in of Corn and Hay; you shall in Easter
Week cause your Parishoners to choose your Surveyors for the mending the High
Ways in your Parish or Liberty* and you shall well and duly, according to your
Knowledge, Power, and Ability, do, and execute all other things belonging to
the Office and Duty of a Constable, so long as you shall continue in the said
Office.

By this Tenor of an Oath, a Constable may gain a considerable Light into what
he is to do, in the Management and Execution of his Office, being as it were an
Epitome of what I shall hereafter set down more intelligibly and plainly to be
understood: But this Oath is often administered in Abstract to a Petty
Constable, Tything-man, etc. So that what I now recite suffices.

The Petty Constable, etc. his Oath.
You shall swear that you well and truly execute the Office of a Tything-man,
of the Tything of B. (or Headborough, etc.) his Majesty's Peace in your Person,
you shall keep and see it kept in others, as much in you lies; in the Presence
of the High Constable, you shall be aiding and assisting to him, and in his
Absence you shall execute his Office, according to your Power and Knowledge,
till an other be chosen in your Place, or you be Legally Discharged. So help
you God.

The High Constables in their respective Hundreds are Conservators of the Peace
at Common Law, as are the Petty Constables in their respective Towns and
Liberties, and have a large Power to back and support them in the Execution of
their Office, if they proceed within the Bounds of it; for it is so ordered,
that if an Action be brought against a Constable, Headborough, etc. or their
Assistants, for any thing done by reason of their respective Offices, they may
plead the General Issue, and give the special matter in Evidence, 7 Jac. 1.
Chap. 5. 21 Jac. 1. Chap. 22. Wingate's Abridg. Stat. Tit. Evidence, etc. And
if it so happen any Action be brought against one or more of them, it is so
provided, that it shall be laid in the County where the Fact commenced, and if
the Verdict pass for the Defendant, he is to have double Costs; and this to be
recovered as other Defendants recover their Costs, by 7 Jacobi 1. Chap. 5. 21
Jacobi Chap. 1^. Windg. Abridg. Stat. Tit. Evidence.

For indeed a Constable Legally chosen is compelled to serve the Office, being
a fit Man, able of Body and in Substance; and it would go hard if for every
trivial slip he should run the risk of being Ruined by Vexatious Suits; for if
a Constable, etc. Legally Elected to the Office, do refuse to serve and take
the Oath, unless a Quaker, and then, according to the late Statute for taking
the Oaths, etc. his Affirmation will hold good in lieu of an Oath; he may be
bound over by the Justices to the next Sessions or Assize, and there Prosecuted
for a Contempt.

But passing over these, I now come to direct the Constable, etc. in the more
material Parts of his Office, wherein he may readily order and manage his
Affairs, in d scharge of his Duty, without running into Inconveniences, or
Hazards, that may being Trouble and Charges upon him; for whatever the Fancy of
some is, a Constable is no more a Privileged Man, than any other, where he
exceeds the Bounds of his Office, in unaccountable Actions: And the first
Particular I shall offer, is his Duty in Serving of Warrants directed to him by
Justices in Commission for the Peace, or other Magistrates having Power to
grant Warrants* and how far he may be safe in this, and where he may err.

CHAP. XLIII. The Office and Duty of a Constable, Headborough, etc. in Serving,
or Executing Warrants directed to him by Justices in Commission for the Peace,
etc.
IF a Warrant be brought to a Constable, or other Sworn Officer, his safest way
is to Charge the Party making the Plain, to Assist him in the King's Name, and
show him the Party, or Parties mentioned in the Warrant, unless himself be well
acquainted with him, or them, lest a Mistake by the Names agreeing, may run him
into an Error, in taking the wrong Party; and if he be a Sworn known Officer,
he may refuse to show his Warrant; but must declare to the Party he goes to
Arrest what is therein charged against him; but it is otherwise where a Warrant
is given to be served by one who is not a known Sworn Officer; as a Justices
Servant, etc. For there upon demand he must produce the Warrant, or the Party
on whom it is Served, may refuse to Obey, and Lawfully Resist.

If a Constable Arrest a Man or Woman in the Kings Name, pretending he has a
Warrant, and at that time has none, but presently goes and gets one, the Party
may bring an Action of false Imprisonment against him, and recover such Damages
with Cost, as shall be Awarded, Coke 6.69.

If a Constable have a Warrant against A. B. the Son of L. B. and he takes into
his Custody A. B. the Son of R. B. though he happen to be the Offender against
whom the Complaint was made, yet he goes from his Warrant, and doing thereby an
unjustifiable Action, there lies an Action of false Imprisonment against him,
10 E. 4. Fol. 12.

If a Constable Arrests a Man with a Warrant from a Justice of the Peace, and
having him in Custody, takes his Word to come again another time; by his so
dismissing him, the Warrant is void, and cannot be Served again. But if a
Rescue be made, or the Prisoner Escapes without the Officer's Consent, then
upon fresh Pursuit he may take him with the same Warrant, as often as he is
Rescued, or Escapes, and may pursue him into another Town, or County, though he
be out of sight, C ompt. 214. a. and 184. Cro. 53, 114.

If a Justice send a Warrant for a Matter wherein he has Jurisdiction, though
he goes beyond his Authority, yet the Officer is bound to obey it, and his
producing his Warrant saves him harmless, the Justice being then to answer for
it: but on the contrary, if a Justice Issues out a Warrant for a Matter out of
his Jurisdiction, where he is no Judge of the Cause, the Constable is not bound
to Obey it; for he is bound to take notice of the Jurisdiction and Authority of
the Judge; and where the Justice, as is said, can be no Judge of the Matter
charged in the Warrant, he is no more bound to Obey him, than if he had no
Commission, 14 H. 8. Co. 10.^6.

If a Warrant be directed to an Officer to serve on a Person for ordinary
Matters, the Warrant not specifying the Cause, but only to answer to all such
Matters as shall be objected against him or her; this is held to be an illegal
Warrant, and the Officer that Executes it lies liable to an Action of false
Imprisonment, Cook's Institutes, part 4. Tit. de Frangent. Prison. However for
Reason of State Warrants for Treason, or such as are Granted by the Lords of
the Privy Council, Secretaries of State, or the Lord Chief Justice of England;
these need not set forth the Cause, by reason they are usually granted on
Matters of great Importance, where Secrecy is required.

If any Party be taken by a Legal Warrant, and make Resistance, the Constable
in the King's Name may command Assistance; and if the Resisting Party be
Beaten, or Wounded, the Amends is in his own Hand, for Opposing the King's
Authority; but if the Constable, or any of his Assistants be Beaten or Wounded,
the Party is Indictable, as likewise liable to an Action at Common Law; and if
any of them Die of the Beating and Wounds within 12 Months, it is Murder.

Persons refusing to assist a known Sworn Officer, charging them in the King's
Name, lie liable to be bound over to the Sessions, and Fined at the Discretion
of the Justices; and the like for those that shall contemn or abuse a Justices
Warrant, by tearing, treading under Foot, or any way defacing it, etc. over and
above being bound to the good Behavior; for it is a Contempt against the
King's Process, Crompt. 144.

CHAP. XLIV. The Office of a Constable, etc. How it ought to be executed,
relating to Affrays, etc.
IF a Constable be present at an Affray, he may command the standers by in the
King's Name to assist him in keeping the Peace, and upon Complaint of the
Constable, the Inquest may Indict the Party refusing, and be F ned by the
Justices at their Sessions, for refusing to do his Duty.

If a Constable, or other such like Officer be present when one Man or Woman
Assaults another, or with violent Words threatens to beat or kill any one, and
be in a fury, ready to break the Peace. In such case the Constable,
Headborough, etc. may commit the Offenders to the Stocks, or some other safe
place of Custody, till he can carry them before a Justice, who may upon
Complaint compel them to find Sureties for the Peace or good Behavior; and for
want of such Sureties, commit them to Prison, 3 Hen. 4, 9 and 10. Bacon's use
of the Law, etc.

Where any Affray is like to be, the Constable in the King's Name may command
them to depart on Pain of Imprisonment; and if they refuse, he may take them
into Custody, or Indict such as refuse, if any harm be done, at the next
Sessions; and if a Constable be present at an Affray, and does not his
Endeavor to prevent it, and seize the Offenders, he lies liable upon a
Presentment of the Jury to be Fined, Dalton's Justice of the Peace, c. 1. Fol.
4. 5.

A Constable may resist the Affrayers after Proclamation made to depart, and
compel them to it by force, and if he, or any of his Assistance be Wounded,
they have their Remedy by Statute and Common Law, and if Killed, or Dying of
their Wounds, it is Murder in the Affrayers, Lamb. 135. 1 Hen. 7. 7. 3 H. 7.
10.

If the Affrayers be in a House, the Doors locked or bolted, the Constable may
break them open to part the Affray, and keep the Peace, though none have taken
hurt; and if they fly into another House, the Constable upon fresh Pursuit may
break into that House to apprehend them, and so till they shall be taken, Lamb.
125. 7 Edw. 3. 19.

If any be dangerously hurt in an Affray, though the Constable be not present
at the Affray, yet may he seize the Offenders, and carry them before a Justice
of the Peace, who is to require Sureties of them, or the Wounds being supposed
Mortal, to commit them to Prison, till it be certified by Chyrurgeons or
Physicians, whether the Pa ty will live or Die, Dalt. Just. P. c. 8. Fol. 33.

After the Affray is over, the Constable not being present at it, cannot seize
them without Warrant, unless some one be dangerously Wounded, and much Blood
drawn. If Affrayers escape into an other County, or Franchise, a Constable upon
fresh Pursuit may seize them there, and carry them before a Justice of the
Peace of the same County to find Sureties for the Peace; but then he must see
the Affray.

All Contests a^e not properly Affrays; for to make it such there must be some
Blows given, or offered to be given; for hasty Words will not warrant an
Affray, unless they threaten to Beat, Kill, or Wound one another; and in such
Case a Constable may Apprehend the Offenders, and carry them before a Justice,
to find Surety for the Peace; and yet such threatening Words are not properly
taken for an Affray, Dalt. Just. P. c. 8. Fol 34. 38. Hen. 8.

CHAP. XLV. The Constables Office relating to Arrests, or Escapes of Prisoners,
Felons, etc.
UPon a Constable, or any Swo n Officer of the Peace, having Arrested a Felon,
or taken any Person into Custody on Suspicion thereof, and he is conniving at
his Escape, or gives him leave to go out of his Custody at Liberty, so that he
does escape, it is no Felony in the Prisoner, but it lies upon the Constable,
and he must Answer for it; but if the Prisoner accidentally escape without the
Constable's Consent, he is then Guilty of Felony, and the Constable Finable for
his Negligence.

If a Constable by his Negligence let a Prisoner in his Custody have
Opportunity to make away with himself, by Stabbing, Drowning, or any violent
Death, he is Fineable, Dalt. Just. P. c. 1 6. Fol. 272.

Where a Felony is committed, and one is taken by a Constable on Suspicion of
committing it, though afterward the Constable be very well satisfied he is
innocent, yet may not he discharge him without carrying him before a Justice of
the Peace; for being once taken into Custody, he must be delivered by due
course of Law; nor may a Constable suffer the Compounding any Felony; for if it
be done after he Arrests the Party, or before, he is to declare his Knowledge
of such Compounding before the Justice, or for Conniving to Extenuate the Fact,
and set the Prisoner at Liberty, he is Finable; and some hold he may be brought
in as an Accessory.

A Constable may use all lawful Means to secure his Prisoner, as setting him in
the Stocks, or putting Irons on him, if he be Unruly, till he can carry him
before a Justice; or Pinion his Hands behind him with Cords, to prevent his
Escape in carrying him thither, or to Prison.

If the Jailer will not receive a Prisoner of a Constable where he is lawfully
committed, he must not however let him go, but bring him back to the Town or
Village where he was taken, or where the Constable dwells, and the Town where
he was taken shall be at the charge of keeping him until the next Goal
Delivery, to be raised by way of Tax amongst the Inhabitants, if the Prisoner
has no Money or Goods to defray it; and in such Case the Jailer shall be
Punished by the Justices in their Sessions or Assize, for his Refusal and
Contempt. If there be much Charge in carrying a Prisoner to Goal, the
Inhabitants where he was taken may be obliged to contribute to it, to be Levied
by such of the principal Inhabitants as shall be thereunto appointed at their
Discretion.

CHAP. XLVI. The Office of a Constable, etc. In Relation to Hue and Cry, and
how he must discharge his Duty therein.
WHen a Hue and Cry is Levied and Issued out, whether for Robbery, Murder,
etc. when it comes to the Hands of a Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, etc.
They must forthwith make diligent Search in all suspected Houses, Barns, and
Outhouses, and other Houses at their Discretion, and all Places within their
Liberty or Precincts, and have Power to stop any Suspected Persons, as in
Search or Pursuit they shall find or suspect to have done the Fact, comparing
him or her, or their Horses, with the Description given in the Hue and Cry, and
if Cause be found to carry the Party before the next Justice of the Peace in
the County where taken, there to be strictly Examined where he or they were at
that time of the Fact committed, and for the neglect of this Duty, the Officer
lies liable to be Fined by the Justices in Sessions, and search being
diligently made, must without delay send it to the next Constable or Officer of
the Peace, unless the Party or Parties be taken who are known to have committed
the Fact mentioned therein, Dalt. Just. P. c. 28. Fol. 75.

Where a Robbery is committed in a Hundred, and the Hundred is sued for it,
though the Damages are recovered against one or two of the said Hundred, yet
they are not to bear the Charge, but the rest must proportionably contribute
according to their Ability; and two Justices of the Peace, one to be of the
Quorum, dwelling in or near the said Hundred, may set a Tax on every Parish
within it, and then it is the Duty of the Constable or Tythingman of each
Parish to settle the Gross Tax proportionably on the Inhabitants in particular,
and may upon refusal of Payment make Distress and Sale of Goods, delivering the
Overplus on due Appraisement to the Owner; and the Money so collected is to be
put into the Hands of the Justices, or some of them that made the Rate, within
Ten days after, according to 27 Eliz. Cap. 13. etc.

If fresh pursuit on the Hue and Cry shall cease in any Hundred, it is liable
to pay half the Damages to the Hundred wherein the Robbery was committed, to
be recovered by Action in any of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, at the
suit of the Clerk of the Peace for the County; and though in the mean time he
die or be changed, the Suit shall not fall or abate; and when so recovered, it
is to be levied on the Inhabitants by way of Tax as the former, 27 Eliz. Chap.
13.

If any one of the Robbers be apprehended and brought to Justice and Convicted,
it saves the Hundred their Money, because it is looked on they have regard to
watching the Roads for the secure Traveling of Passengers. Also when the
Action is not brought within one Year after the Robbery committed.

The Robbery must be committed in the King's High Way, between Sunrise and
Sunset, and Oath made of it, with the Sum lost, before the next Justice of
the Peace, with all convenient speed. The Hue and Cry thereupon issued out,
must be made with Horse and Foot, or else it is held illegal, Bracton Book 3.
Folio 121. Dalton Just. P. Fol. 133.

Who so goes not Armed and fitly prepared at the Command of the Sheriff, or
Constable, when the Hue and Cry is issued out, (to Arrest the Robbers or
Felons) after attainder may be severely Fined and Imprisoned Westminster. 1. Chap. 9.
Cook second part of Institutes, Folio 172.

CHAP. XLVII. The Constables Office, etc In what more particularly Relating to
the Conservation of the Peace.
THough a Constable may do his Endeavor to keep the Peace, yet if it be
broken, he cannot take Surety for it at the request of any one, H. 7. Fol. 18.

Before a Warrant of the Peace be served, the Constable or other Officer ought
to acquaint the Party with it, and charge him in the Kings Name to go along
with him, to put in Sureties, if required; and if he refuse so to do, then to
compel him to do it; and if it be an unseasonable time, that the Justices be in
Bed, or not to be found, he may secure him under a Guard, or in Prison, if he
will be so Rigorous, till he can convey him before a Justice, and is not bound
to run up and down from place to place with him, nor lose his time in staying
till the Prisoner can send for Sureties, (...) may immediately carry him before
what Justice he pleases, and not submit it to the Prisoners Election, nor to
that of the Party that makes the Complaint, unless the Warrant be special, of
which particular I shall speak more fully in an other place.

If a Constable have a Warrant of the Peace against a Person to find Sureties,
where the matter is palpable, the Party having notice of it, may supersede it,
by putting in Surety before another Justice, to answer the Complaint the next
Sessions, and then if that Justice, being of the same County, send a
Supersedeas to the Officer to discharge further Surety, and he notwithstanding
Arrest the Party to find Surety, or Imprison him, he may bring his Action of
false Imprisonment against the said Constable, or for the like contempt of the
Officer upon a Supersedeas out of Chancery, or the King's Bench, for a
Supersedeas is a Discharge of the former Warrant, Dalt Just. P. Chap. 69 Folio
158.

Upon Notice given to a Constable or other Peace Officer, or if it be upon his
or their own Knowledge that a Man or Woman Adulterously cohabit together, or
live in Fornication, being of Evil Report, he may search any suspected House
for them wherein he is informed or knows they are in the Night time, and there
apprehend them and carry them before a Magistrate to find Sureties for their
good Behavior, 13 H. 7. 10. Dalt. Just. P. Chap. 75. Folio 189.

If any one abuse or affront a Constable in the Execution of his Office, either
by Word or Action, he may have him bound over to the good Behavior for such
his Offense, and Fined before the Justices in their Sessions as they see fit
upon Proof, etc. Fitz. 207. Crompt. 135.

All injurious Force and Violence used against the Person, Lands, Goods, or
other Possessions or Chattels, of a Man or Woman is held a breach of the Peace,
whether it be by threatening Words, Furious Gestures, or Bodily Force, Dalt.
Chap. 3. Fol. 9.

Note, upon any Disputes in an Alehouse or Tavern, etc. about paying the
Reckoning, and the Parties offer to make their Escapes without paying, if there
be no Swords Drawn, Beating, Wounding, or visible breach of the Peace, the
Constable is not bound to go though sent for, nor is it Warrantable for him to
Arrest and carry them before a Justice, unless a Warrant be put into his Hand;
for this is only a Debt, and the Party aggrieved must bring his Action, for the
Credit he gave for the Victuals or Drink, etc. being freely delivered by his
Consent, and those Constables that are over Officious to trouble themselves
this way, may bring themselves into Trouble, and only be laughed at by those
that set them on work, and counted their Stalking Horses.

No Warrant, Writ or Process shall be served on the Lords Day, commonly called
Sunday, except for Felony, Treason, or the Breach of the Peace; for otherways
the Service shall be void, and the Justice may discharge the Warrant without
examining the Parties, and the Party serving it shall be obliged to answer
Damages, as if no Warrant had been to the Party who is Arrested and detained
by such a Warrant on the Lords Day, 29 ^aroli. 2. Chap. 7.

CHAP. XLVIII The Office of a Constable, etc. Relating to the strict Observance
of the Lords Day
IF any Butcher Kill and Sell any Victuals on the Lords Day, or any one do it
for him, the Constable by Distress and Sale of his Goods may levy 6 Shillings 8
Pence upon Warrant from a Justice, etc: But the Complaint or Information must
be made within six Weeks, and the Party thereof Convicted before a Justice of
Peace, Mayor or Chief Officer, upon their own view, proof of two Witnesses, or
the Parties own Confession; and they may at their Discretion gratify the
Informer with the third part of the Penalty, 3. Car. 1. Chap. 1. Daltons Just.
P. Chap. 50. Fol. 134.

If any one on the Lords Day be present at, or keep any Shooting, Wrestling,
Ringing of Bells for Pleasure, Bowling, Church-Ales, Wakes, Masks, or any
Games, Sports or Pastimes whatsoever, they shall forfeit Five Shillings, if
above the Age of 14, if under that Age 1 Shilling, to be paid by him or her
that has the Government of the Party, to be levied by the Constable on Sale of
Goods taken in Distress, by Warrant from a Justice of Peace or Chief
Magistrate, and for want of such Distress the Offender to be set in the Stocks
for the space of 3 Hours: And any Carrier going by way of Traveling with his
Horse on this Day, or any Carrier, Waggoner or Waynman going with any Cart,
Wagon, Wayn, or Drover with Cattle, Forfeits 20 s. for every such Offense, to
be levied by Distress and Sale of his or their Goods, if charged and duly
convicted within six Weeks after the Offense committed, as in the Case of
Butchers, and the Money shall be had to the use of the Parish where the
Distress is first made; for though they pass through several Parishes, yet are
they to pay but 20 s. for one Journey, 3 Car. 1. Chap. 1. Dalton Chap. 50.
Folio 134.

If any Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting, Enterludes, or other unlawful Games and
Pastimes of the like Nature, be held in the Parish or out of the Parish on the
Lords Day, upon Warrant to him directed, the Constables, etc. may levy 3 s. 8
d. by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering the Overplus to the
Owner, if any b^^ or set the Party for want of such Distress in the Stocks by
the space of 3 Hours, but then the Party offending must be questioned within
the space of a Month after the Offense committed, 1 Caroli 1. Chap. 1 Dalt.
Just. P. Chap. 23. Folio 6^.

None shall do any work by Labor or Business on the Lords Day, Works of
Necessity and Charity only excepted, but that the Offender if above the Age of
14 Years, or upwards, shall forfeit 5 s. None shall cry and expose to sale any
Wares that Day, on pain to forfeit them, except Milk, and that before Nine in
the Morning, and after Four in the Afternoon. No Drover, Higler, Horsecourser,
Butcher, or their Servants shall Travel on the Lords Day, upon pain of
forfeiting 20 s. No Person shall Travel on this Day on Horseback, or with Boat,
or Wherry, unless on extraordinary Occasions, to be allowed by a Justice of the
Peace or Head Officer of the Place, under penalty of forfeiting 5 s. No Hackny
Coaches to Travel that day, unless such as are allowed by the late Act of his
present Majesty King William 3. etc. for Licensing Hackney Coaches, etc. 29
Caroli 2. Chap. 7. And Penalties upon this Act are for the use of the Poor of
the Parish where they are levied, or the Offense committed, saving the Justice
or other Head Officer may reward the Informer if he think fit, with a Third
Part. And further note, that the Prosecution of this Act must be made within 10
Days after the Fact committed.

Dressing Meat in Inns, Cooks Shops, and private Families are not prohibited on
the Lords Day, by the Statute of 29 Caroli 2. And for the better encouragement
of the Mackrel Fishery, they are in the Season to be Sold on this Day, but
before and after Sermon time only.

CHAP. XLIX. The Office and Duty of a Constable, etc. required about hired
Servants, Laborers, etc.
IF Laborers are wanting in Harvest or Hay time, the Party so standing in
need, may require the Constable to cause such Persons as he thinks fit to Mow,
Reap, or do any Work relating to getting in the Hay and Corn Harvest, and they
to be paid by the Day, according as they are able to perform; and if they
shall refuse to work after they are requested thereunto by the Constable, he
has Power to set them in the Stocks by the space of two Days and one Night, and
upon the Constables neglect to perform his Duty in this Case, he forfeits 40 s.
5 Eliz. Chap 14.

Servants, etc. After the time of their Work be expired, they being employed in
Husbandry, or any Arts appointed in that Statute, they shall not depart the
Parish, City or Town where they last served, to any other without a
Testimonial, (that is) in a Town Corporate, under the Hand and Seal of the
Chief Magistrate and two Householders there, and in the Country, under the Hands
and Seals of the Constable or other Officers, and two Householders of the said
Town or Parish where he or she last served; and the Minister is to receive Two
Pence for Registring the said Testimonial, which is to be delivered by him to
the Party whose Name is mentioned therein, according to the Statute of the 5
Eliz. Chap. 5. and the Testimonial is to run in this Form.

The Form of a Testimonial, etc.
Memorandum, That John Digs, Servant to James Dillion of Stretham, in the
County of Surry, Grazier, is licensed to depart from his said Master, and is at
full Liberty to serve elsewhere, according to the Statute in that Case made and
provided; in Witness whereof we have hereunto set our Hands and Seals on the
28th. of September, in the 12th. Year of the Reign of our Gracious Sovereign
Lord King William the Third, and in the Year of our Lord 1700.

James Wade Constable of Stretham.
Householders there.
Richard Tims John Nobs


If the Party lives with a Widow or any single Person, then instead of Master
set down Mistress, or Dame, with the Woman's Name, and the Name of the Servant,
be it Man or Maid Servant, or what else they term themselves; and if the
Parties they live with be Handycrafts, or any other Calling, their Calling,
with their Names, and the place of Abode, must be set down and testified in all
respects, as aforesaid.

He or She that Entertains any Servant without such a Testimonial, forfeits
Five Pounds, being lawfully Convicted upon Indictment before the Justices in
Sessions, and every Servant not producing such a Testimonial to the Mayor,
Constable, Churchwarden, Minister, or other Officers empowered to inspect it,
may be Imprisoned till such a one be procured; and if he or she procure not one
in 21 Days ensuing the Day of Imprisonment, or produce a false and counterfeit
one, he or she so doing is to be Whipped, and used as a Vagabond, 5 Elizabeth
Chap. 4. Dalton Just. P. Chap. 31. Folio 63. And this Statute relating to
Testimonials, was punctually observed; though of latter days it has not been much
regarded, that people taking Servants at they knew not what Hand, have been
frequently Robbed by them, not knowing afterward where to find them or enquire
after them, and therefore it would be well if it was yet strictly kept in use;
and indeed the penalties are in as much force to be inflicted as ever.

CHAP. L. The Office of a Constable, as to what he is to do relating to Popish
Recusants and Conventicles.
ANY one exceeding Sixteen Years of Age, being a Popish Recusant, must within
40 Days after Conviction repair to their usual and known Dwellings, and not to
remove five Miles thence, under Penalty of forfeiting all their Goods, Lands
and Chattels, Anuities, etc. during Life; and if they can assign no certain
place of Abode, then are they to repair to the place of their Birth, or where
their Father or Mother dwell, if they are living, and in 20 days after their
Arrival give in their Names to the Minister, Constable, and Headborough in
Writing, which Minister is to enter them in a Book to be kept for the purpose,
and he with the said Officers are to certify the same the next Quarter
Sessions, where the Justices of Peace are obliged to cause the same to be
enrolled, 35 Eliz. Chap. 2. Wingate's Stat. Title Crown.

Note, that the Church Wardens and Constables of every Parish, or one of them;
and where there are none such, the High Constables of the Hundreds are every
Year once in the Year at the General Sessions held for the Peace, to present
Popish Recusants for their Monthly Absence from Church, and return the Names of
their Children above Nine Years of Age, being then with their Parents; also
their Servants, together with the Age of their Children, as near as they can
compute, or to forfeit 20 s. for every such Default, which Presentiments the
Town-Clerks, or Clerks of the Peace are to Record, without taking Fees for
them, under a Penalty of 40 s. 3 Jacobi 1. Chap 4. Wingates Statutes, Tit.
Crown. And if the Minister, Petty Constable and Church Wardens of any Parish
shall make a Complaint to the Justice of Peace, that he or they suspect such a
one to be a Popish Recusant, but have no Proof of it, then the Justice may
tender the Party the Oaths in that case appointed; and upon Refusal, if above
the Age of 18, he may commit the Party to Prison till the next Assize, and then
if again refused, it is Praemunire in a Man, but a Woman Covert shall only
suffer Imprisonment, and remain without Bail till she take the Oath of
Allegiance, etc. 7 Jacobi 1. Chap. 6. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Crown, Dalt. Just.
P. Chap. 45. Folio 108.

By a Statute, the first of William and Mary, no Papist, or reputed Papist
refusing to make and subscribe the Declaration, they are obliged to by the 30
Caroli 2. and the Oaths enjoined in an Act for removing and preventing all
Questions, etc. about the Assembling and Sitting of this present Parliament,
shall at any time after the 15th. Day of May, 1689, have, or keep in his own
Possession, or at his Disposal any Horse, or Horses valued above Five Pounds,
they are to be sold; and that any two or more Justices of the Peace, by a
Warrant under their Hands and Seals, may or shall Authorize any Person, or
number of Persons, assisted by a Constable, or his Deputy, Headborough, or
Tything-man, who are herein required to be Aiding and Assisting, to search for,
and seize to the use of their Majesty's and their Successors, all such Horses
above Five Pounds value, as aforesaid.

And further note, that upon any time a Proclamation being issued out to amove
Papists at a distance from the City of London and Westminster, other Cities and
Towns Corporate; the Constables by Warrant from the Justices of Peace, are to
make diligent search, and give in the Names and places of Abode of such as stay
beyond the time limited; that so they may be prosecuted for their Contempt.

And note, that ignorant persons may not be mistaken, by bearing too much upon
the Act made in the first Year of K. W. Q. M. for Exempting their Majesty's
Protestant Subjects Dissenting from the Church of England, from the penalty
mentioned in the 35 of Elizabeth, and the 22 Caroli 2. It is thereby Enacted,
That all persons that take the Oaths, and make and subscribe the Declaration
therein mentioned, shall not be liable to the penalty of the two former penal
Acts against Conventicles. However if any such Assembly of persons Dissenting
from the Church of England, meet for Religious Worship, with the Doors Locked,
Barred, or Bolted, during any times of such Meeting together, all and every
such person, or persons that shall come to, and be at such Meeting, shall not
receive any Benefit from the new Law, but be liable to all the Pains and
Penalties recited in the Statute of 35 Eliz. and 22 Caroli 2. for such their
close and concealed Meeting.

And further, if any person differing from the Church of England, a Protestant
Dissenter shall be chosen to the Office of High Constable, Petty Constable,
Churchwarden, or Overseer of the Poor, or any Parochial, or Ward-Office, any
such person shall scruple to take upon him any of the said Offices, in regard
of the said Oaths, or any other Matter or Thing required by the Law to be taken
or done, in respect of such Office, may execute the said Office or Offices by a
sufficient Deputy by him to be provided, that will comply in taking the Oath,
etc. and such a one as shall be well approved.

Note that the People called Quakers, in Cases of Oaths, may tender their
Affirmation by Virtue of a late Act of His present Majesty King William the
Third, and that in Breach of such Affirmation they incur the Penalties, as in
case of Perjury.

CHAP. LI. A Constable's Office relating to such as shall disturb Ministers in
time of Divine Service, etc. And what relates to Physicians.
TO keep Peace and Decency in Churches, Chapels, and such like Places of
Divine Worship.

Note, That if any one, not having Authority to do it, shall disturb a Preacher
Lawfully Licensed, Preaching, Praying, or at the Administration of the
Sacrament, either by entering into Dispute, Humming, Talking, Laughing, or any
voluntary Disturbance in Ridiculing, etc. Any Constable or Churchwarden of the
place is Authorized immediately to Apprehend him or her so Offending, and carry
the Party before a Justice of the Peace of the same County, who may commit the
Offender to safe Custody, and within six Days, Conjunct with another Justice of
the Peace examine the Matter, and if it be evidently proved by two Witnesses,
Commit him or her to the Common-goal, there to remain by the space of 3 Months,
and from thence to the next Quarter Sessions; where upon the Offenders
Reconciliation, and entering into good Security for his good Abearing by the
space of one whole Year he may be Released; but upon standing in Contempt, and
remaining obstinate, he shall be continued in Prison without Bail till
Penitent, 1 Mary 1. Sess. 3. Chap. 3 Wingate's Stat. Tit. Sacraments. etc.

And any one Rescuing such an Offender shall suffer the like Imprisonment; and
over and above forfeit 5 l. And the Inhabitants suffering such an Offender to
escape, upon Presentment before the Justices in their Sessions of the
Corporation or County, by the Authority aforesaid, are liable to forfeit five
Pounds.

In the City of London, and seven Miles adjacent, the Constables and other
Officers are to be Assisting to the President of the Physicians College, in
order to the due Execution of the Laws and Statutes belonging to the said
College, on Pain of a Contempt against the King's Majesty, according to the
Statute of 1 Mary 1. Sess. 2. Chap. 9. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Physicians, etc.

CHAP. LII. The Duty and Office of a Constable in any Calamitous Time of Plague
and Pestilence, etc.
IF Persons Infected with the Plague, be by the Constable commanded to keep
their Houses, and yet Contemptuously go abroad and Converse with other People,
then having the Plague Sore upon him or her, it is Felony; and if Infected, and
not having any Plague Sore, yet for such Offense they are liable to be punished
as Vagabonds by the Order or Appointment of a single Justice of Peace, and
further be bound to the good Behavior for the space of one whole Year upon
Proof the Infection at the time he or she so Offends, 1 Jacobi 1. Chap. 13.
Wingate's Stat. Tit. Plague, Dalt. Just. P. Chap. 39. Folio 91.

If a Constable, or such other Officer whom it concerns, shall neglect, or
willingly refuse to Levy the Money by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of two
Justices of the Peace, upon the Statute for the Relief of any Town or Place
Infected with the Plague, by Distress and Sale of the Goods of such persons as
neglect or refuse to pay, on such emergency for every such Offense, the said
Officers are liable to forfeit Ten Shillings, to be distributed among the Sick,
as by the Statute is directed, 1 Jacobi 1. Chap. 13. Dalt. Just. P. Chap. 39.
Folio 91. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Plague.

The Justices of Peace, one, or more of them are to appoint in their several
Limits, Watchmen, Keepers, Searchers and Buryers; as likewise may the Head
Officers in Towns and Corporations do the same. And if any Infected person,
contrary to the Commandment of the Justice, Constable, or other Head Officer,
etc. shall wilfully attempt to go abroad and Resist their Keepers, or
Watchmen, they may Restrain them by Violence, and Compel them by Force to keep
their Houses; and if they be Hurt or Wounded, the Watchman shall not be
Troubled for it, because it was their Duty after such Warning to have kept
their Houses, 1 Jacobi 1. Chap. 13. Crompt. 122, etc. Dalt. Just. P. Chap. 39.
Folio 91. Wingate's Stat. Tit. Plague.

CHAP. LIII. The Office of a Constable, etc. Relating to Routs and Riots, and
what they are.
THE Power of a Constable in Disorders of this Kind is very great, and it is
his Business to be diligent in Suppressing them; as also that of the Sheriffs,
and others the King's Officers, by reason such Tumults are of dangerous
Consequence to the Government, and many times, as it has been known, from small
beginnings, broke into open Rebellions, and disturbed the Peace of the whole
Kingdom; and therefore,

Note, where three or more Persons shall Meet and Assemble themselves together,
to the intent to do any unlawful Act with Violence or Force against the Person
of another, his Possessions or Goods; as to beat, kill, or otherwise to hurt,
or without Authority to Imprison a Man in his own House, or elsewhere. To pull
down a Wall, Pale, House, Hedge, Ditch, or wrongfully to enter upon, or into the
Possession of another Man's House or Land, etc. Or without Right to cut or take
away Wood, Corn, Grass, or other Goods, or Unlawfully to Hunt in any Warren, or
Park, or with Force or Violence do any other unlawful Act against the King's
Peace, to the manifest Terror of the people. And if they only meet to such
Intent or Purpose, though they afterward depart of their own accord, without
putting their Intentions in Execution; it is nevertheless an unlawful Assembly,
by reason their first Intention which occasioned them so to Assemble, was with
an evil Design, Bro. Tit. Riots 4, 5. Co. 3. Part Institutes, Folio 176. Dalt.
Just. P. Chap. 85. Folio 217. Stat. 27 Rich. 2. Chap. 8.

CHAP. LIVE. The Office of a Constable, in what concerns it relating to Rogues,
Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, etc.
TO disencumber the Kingdom of lazy persons who loyter about, and decline
Working, in expectation to live upon others Labors by Begging or Pilfering,
the Law has in the following manner provided against such Nusances. Therefore,

The Constable, Headborough, or Tythingman, assisted by the Minister, and one
other Inhabitant of the Parish, may take any Rogue, or sturdy Beggar, Vagabond,
etc. they shall find Loytering up and down in their Parish, or Precinct, and
strip him or her naked from the middle upwards, and whip, or cause to be
whipped openly, the said Rogue or Vagabond till the Body be bloody, and then
forthwith be sent away from Parish to Parish, or Tything to Tything, the next
strait way guiding or leading to the place of the Birth of such Vagrant; and if
that may not be known, then to the place where he or she last Inhabited, or
Resided by the space of one whole Year before such punishment Inflicted; and if
that be unknown, then to the Town through which the party last past Unpunished;
and being there, if it cannot be discovered where the party was Born, or last
dwelt, then the Constable of that Town, or place is to convey him or her to the
House of Correction, or Common-goal of the County, there to be employed at hard
Labor, or put to Service for the space of one Year; and if disabled by Age or
Casualty as maiming, etc. and so not fit for Labor, that Town is to be at the
Charge of keeping the said Vagrant till such time as he may be placed in some
Almshouse within the County, by 39 Eliz. Chap. 4. Wingate's Stat. Tit.
Vagabonds, Bulst. 2. part Reports, Folio 257, Resol. Judges, Sect. 417.

It is further provided that after such punishment is inflicted, that the
Vagrant shall have a Testimonial under the Hand and Seal of the Constable,
Tythingman or other Officer, subscribed also by the Minister of the Parish,
testifying the Place and Day of such Punishment being inflicted, and the time
he is to have in going to the Place to which he is directed; and if he or she
loyter by the way till the time is out, such Punishment may again be inflicted,
and so as often as the Default is made, till arrived at the limited Place; and
such Testimonial Especial in Substance is to be registered by the Minister in a
Book kept for that purpose, or in defect he to forfeit 5 s. Dalt. Folio 129.

CHAP. LV. A Copy of a Testimonial in Manner and Form as in this Case the Law
directs.
N. T. A Sturdy Vagrant Beggar aged about 30 Years, of middle Stature, black
Hair, fresh Colored and Round Visaged, with a Cut on his left Cheek, was this
26 Day of September in the 12th Year of the Reign of our Gracious Lord King
William the Third, etc. openly whipped at D. in the County of C. according to the
Law, for a wandering Rogue and Vagabond, and is assigned to pass forthwith from
Parish to Parish by the Officers thereof, the next straitway to L. in the
County of M. where he declares himself to be Born; and he is limited to be at
L. aforesaid within 14 Days next ensuing the Date hereof at his Peril.

Given under the Hands and Seals of us James, Forbs Minister, and Timothy Darcy
Constable of D.

Given the Day and Year aforesaid.
This may be granted also by a Justice of the Peace alone under his Hand and
Seal.

And if the Act of the Thirty ninth of Elizabeth be neglected in the Execution
of it by any Constable, Tythingman, Headborough, etc. he so neglecting forfeits
10 s. for every Default, and he that hinders any Execution of this Law, upon
Rogues, and Vagabonds, incurs the Penalty of five Pounds, and may be bound over
to the good Behavior; And if a Constable or Peace Officer who ought to do it,
refuses such Rogue, or Vagabond, or if he does receive him and does not carry
or send him to the next Constable, in order to his being sent to the place
appointed, he forfeits for every such Offense Five Pounds, and the Justice
furthermore may bind him over to the good Behavior, 39 Eliz. Chap. 4. Dalt.
Chap. 47. Folio 128, etc.

If any such sturdy Rogue, or Vagabond shall come begging to any House, the
owner of it seeing it, is to apprehend him or her, and deliver the Offender to
the next Constable, or else he forfeits Ten Shillings, and the Constable is to
whip and convey such Rogue as before directed, under the Penalty of 20 s. 1
Jacobi (1) Chap. 7. Dalt. 147. Folio 128.

Two Justices of the Peace, one to be of the Quorum, may by Warrant under their
Hands and Seals cause to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods
all Forfeitures and Fines before mentioned, the party being first convicted
either by his own Confession or the proof of two Witnesses before the said
Justices, 39 Eliz. Chap. 4. 1 Jacobi (1) Chap. 7. Dalt Chap. 47. Fol. 149.

Constables, Headboroughs, or Tythingmen, neglecting to make search for Rogues
or Vagabonds upon the Justices Warrant directed to them, or to appear at their
Meeting to give up their account what Rogues, etc. they have punished, or sent
to the House of Correction, or upon neglect to send such to the House of
Correction as by order of Warrant are committed, the Justices at their
Discretion may fine those so transgressing in a Sum not exceeding 40 s. 7
Jacobi (1.) Chap. 4.

If any one not being an Officer shall apprehend a Rogue, or Vagabond, and
carry him before a Justice of the Peace, the Justice has power to reward the
said person, by granting to him a Warrant under his Hand and Seal to the
Constable or Tythingman of the place through which he passed unapprehended,
ordering thereby the said Officer to pay 2 s. for every Rogue so apprehended,
and upon refusal of payment the Justice may proceed against the Officer,
pursuant to the Statute 1 Jacobi (1.) Chap 7. and constrain him to pay his
Forfeiture limited by the same Statute, and out of it to allow the said two
Shillings, with charges for loss of time as to him shall seem meet, 1 Jacobi
(1) 7. 14 Caroli 2. Chap. 12. And considering Constables, Tythingmen, etc. are
at much charge many times in rebearing and carrying with Passes such as come to
their Hands; The Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, and other Inhabitants
may make a Rate to Tax the Inhabitants of the Parish who are lyably chargeable,
by the Statute of the 43 of Elizabeth, to be confirmed under the Hands and
Seals of two Justices of the Peace, and upon refusal of any to pay, the
Constable may by Warrant levy it by Distress and Sale of Goods, returning the
Overplus to the Owner if any such there be, 4 Caroli 2. Chap. 12.

As for Rogues or Vagrants of both Sexes they are under several Circumstances
or Denominations; and that an Officer may know who are such, and who not, viz.
All Scholars and Seafaring Men that Beg, all wandering persons that use
unlawful Games, subtle Crafts or Plays, and such as pretend to have Skill in
Phisiognomy, Figure-casters, or Fortune Tellers; all Proctors,
Pattent-gatherers, unless such as are empowered to do it by Letters patents
under the great Seal upon the account of Losses by Fire, all Collectors for
Goals, Prisoners, or Hospitals, wandering abroad on that Occasion, without
sufficient Warrant to authorize them: All Fencers and Bearwards, Common players
of Interludes, Minstrels, Fiddlers, if so they be found wandering abroad.

All Laborers that wander abroad without the Limits of their respective
parishes, and refuse to work for such Wages as shall be reasonably taxed,
having no other visible way to maintain themselves, all such as go with general
Pasports not directed from parish to parish.

All Juglers and such as use Tricks by slight of Hand, Artists, Tinkers,
Pedlers, and Petty-Chapmen; also Glass-men wandering abroad^, unknown and
without a sufficient Testimonial, all those that counterfeit themselves
Egyptians, not Felons upon the Statute made in that case all persons delivered
out of Goal, that wander, begging for Fees or otherways begging; all such as
pass and repass to and from the Bath for the recovery of their Health, not
pursuing their License; all Soldiers and Mariners, that beg, and counterfeit a
Certificate of their Commanders, that is to say, either Male or Female, being
above seven Years, and so transgressing as aforesaid, and those if they do not
beg yet if they wander and loiter about without any Pasport or sufficient
Testimonial, are accounted Rogues and Vagabond^; those that beg in their own
Parish, or in the High ways without the Appointment or License of the
Overseers, are liable to be sent to the House of Correction.

And to authorize the Constable, Tything-man, and other Officers, to apprehend
and order them as aforesaid, See 39 Eliz. Chap. 4. and 17. 43. Eliz. Chap. 2.
21 Jacobi (1) Chap 28. 7 Jacobi (1) Chap. 4 5 Eliz. Chap. 4. Dalton Chap. 47.
Folio 123, 125, 134.

CHAP. LVI. The Constables Office in disposing of the Wives and Children, of
Rogues, Vagabonds, or Sturdy Beggars.
THE Wife of such Sturdy Rogue or Beggar, the Children being under Seven Years
of Age, must be placed with the Husband, and if he be dead, then the Children
to be placed with the Wife in the Parish where she was born or last dwelt, and
the Vagrant Children exceeding Seven Years of Age, must be sent to the place of
their Birth; and if with Children under Seven Years of Age, the Vagrant Parents
are placed at the place of the Birth of the said Children, or in the place
where they last dwelt; if afterward the Parents or either of them happen to
die or run away leaving the said Children, yet they once settled must still
remain in that Settlement, and ought not to be sent to the place of their
Birth, though they have attained to the Age of 7 Years or upwards, according to
the 2. Eliz. Chap. 4. Resol. Judges Sect. 45. Dalton Just. P. Chap. 47. Folio
135.

The Vagrant Wife must be sent to her Husband, though he be no other than a
Servant in any Parish or Town, and a Rogue or Vagrant not able to assign any
place of Birth, if he have a Wife and Children under Seven Years old, they must
be sent with the said Vagrant Rogue to the Parish or Town through which they by
Sufferance last past unpunished, and the Children relieved with the Work of
their Parents, though they be committed to the House of Correction, if it be
possible they thereby can relieve them.

CHAP. LVII. The Duty and Office of a Constable, etc. relating to Alehouses,
Inns, etc.
HE that without a License shall presume to keep an Alehouse, selling Ale or
Beer, forfeits 20 s. to be levied by Distress and Sale of Goods, and converted
to the use of the Poor of the Parish, and this to be done by the Constable and
Churchwardens by Warrant from a Justice of the Peace of the same County, and
upon Distress and Sale, the Overplus to be returned to the Owner of the Goods
if any such remain, and a Constable, etc. refusing or neglecting to execute any
such Warrant to him directed, forfeits for such his contempt 40 s. upon failure
of Goods to levy the Distress upon such Alehouse keeper; the Constable being
empowered by the Warrant aforesaid, may openly whip or cause the Offender to be
whipped in his presence; the Goods upon Distress are to be sold in three Days;
the Offense to be proved before the Justice of the Peace who grants the
Warrant, and the Justice upon Default of the Constable in executing his Office
relating to the Premises may commit him to Goal till he causes the Offender to
be whipped, or pay the Forty Shillings to the use of the poor, 3 Car. 2. Chap.
3. Dalt. Just. P. Chap. 7. Folio 31, 32.

If a Warrant be directed from a Justice of the Peace to a Constable and
Churchwardens against an Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, or Victualer, for
suffering excessive drinking, or tippling in his House, as any Townsman or
others so tippling or being Drunk, and he neglects to do his Duty, he forfeits
10 s. to be levied by Distress and Sale of Goods, to the use of the poor of the
parish: Any person for excessive tippling is to pay 3 s. 4 d. or to sit in the
Stocks 4 Hours; for being drunk 5 s. or to sit in the Stocks 6 Hours if the
Money be not paid, or there be no Goods belonging to the Offender whereon
Distress is to be made, and the Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper or Victualer for
suffering such Offenses in his House, upon due proof forfeits 10 s. and the
Distress made must be sold in 6 Days, if the Money of the Distress be not in the
mean while paid; and if such Alehouse-keeper, Victualer, etc. refuses to sell
a full Ale Quart of the best Ale or Beer for one penny, or two Quarts of small
Beer for a penny, or selling less than such Measure, the party so offending
forfeits 20 s. for every Offense, to be levied as aforesaid: And if in these
particulars no Distress be found, or if the Officer neglects within 20 Days to
certify the Default to the Justices, the Officer forfeits 40 s. to levied by
Distress and Sale of Goods to the use of the poor, by Warrant to be directed to
any indifferent person under the Hands and Seals of one or two Justices of the
Peace; and for Default of such Distress, the Justice may send send the
Offenders to prison, there to remain till the Forfeitures are paid, pursuant to
the Statute, 1 Jacobi Chap. 9. 1 Car. 1. Chap. 4. and some other Statutes
relating to these Forfeitures and Penalties in Particulars and Generals; but
Offenses of this Nature are to be enquired into, within 6 Months after they are
committed, and the Constable and other Parish Officers may be charged upon Oath
to make a due presentment of them.

As for Ale-measure, here it is meant Winchester Measure, the Statute not being
repealed, by reason of Excise and Dearness of Hops and Malt, to what it was in
former times, the price of Drink is raised by the Brewers, that a Winchester
Quart of strong Beer or Ale stands the Victualler in more than a penny, yet let
them beware of raising it to an extorting price, lest this Statute may be made
use of to keep their Consciences within Bounds of Moderation.

If any Alehouse-keeper, refuse to lodge a wafaring Person or Traveller, he or
she offering Money for the Victuals and Drink, etc. in present pay, the
Constable upon such Refusal may cause such Alehouse-keeper, or Innkeeper to be
indicted at the Sessions or Assizes, where he may be Fined or Imprisoned, or
the Party so refused may bring his Action on the case; but then ready Money must
have been offered beforehand, if required, Coke 9. Rep. Folio 87. b. 10. Hen.
7. 8. Dalton Just. P. Chap. 7. Folio 28. They lie liable to Penalties also for
keeping any gaming in their Houses or Backsides; and indeed the Laws are very
strict in these Cases, to prevent Mischief and Inconveniency.

CHAP. LVIII. The Office of a Constable, etc. relating to Weights and Measures
in Cities, Towns Corporate, etc.
IN the Market Towns, Cities, and Borroughs, there ought to be common sealed
Weights and Measures, at which the Inhabitants may be freely allowed to weigh,
and all Foreigners must pay for every Draught under 40 l. one Farthing, and for
a Draught between 40. and 100. a Halfpenny, and for a Draught between 100. and
1000. a Penny, which Money is to go toward the maintaining the Weights and the
Person that attends the Service; or the Officers that attend the Service may
have his Reward at the Discretion of the Inhabitants, 8 Hen. 6. Chap. 5.

And if in a City such common Weights and Measures are wanting, it forfeits to
the King 10 l. every Borough 5 l. and every Town where public Market is held
40 s. and the Chief Officers of such places are upon the Request of the
Inhabitants, etc. to them made, to Seal and Mark such Weights and Measures for
any of the King's Subjects, taking for Sealing and Marking, as the Statute in
that case directs, and none ought to Weigh or Measure with any other than what
are Sealed and Marked, 8 Hen. 6. Chap. 5. 11 Hen. 7. Chap. 4.

And for the more regular and due observing of this, that no Frauds in this
kind may be, the Mayors and Chief Officers in Cities, Buroughs, etc. once
every Year at the least, are to view all Measures and Weights within their
Jurisdiction, and to burn or break such as are not Sealed, or less than Measure
or Weight, according to the King's Standard; also to Amerce the Offender, viz.
For the first Offense, 6 s. 8 d. for the second Offense, 13 s. 4 d. and for the
third Offense, 20 s. and over and above the Offender may be Adjudged to to be
set in the Pillory, 11 Hen. 7. Chap. 4.

CHAP. LIX. The Office and Duty of a Constable in setting and ordering the
Watches, Forcible Entries, etc.
FOR the better Security, and quiet Repose of the Inhabitants in every Town,
Village, Parish, and Tything, a Watch every Night from Ascension day till
Michaelmas ought to be kept from Sunset, to Sunrising, which the Constables
and other Officers there appointed, must cause to be set by two, four, or more
able Men, according to the largeness of the Place, 13. Edw. 1 Chap. 4. Poulton
Tit. Watch, 1, Dalt. 60. Folio 140.

The Watches thus Lawfully set by Authority, have Power to Examine such Persons
as pass by them in the Night, being Strangers on others, and finding a
reasonable ground for Cause of Suspicion, they may secure them till the
Morning; and such as refuse to obey, they may levy Hue and Cry in pursuit of
them: And where they resist, if the Watchmen beat them it is justifiable; and
to secure them, they may put them into the Stocks, or Cage till the Morning;
and then if they give a good account of themselves, or that no further
Suspicion appear, but that they may be honest people, they may let them go; but
if otherwise, then they are to deliver them to the Constable, who is to convey
them before a Justice to be examined, who may commit them, bind them over, or
utterly discharge them according as he finds Cause.

The Watch in this Case is to Apprehend such as Ride, or go Armed, Scouts,
Evesdroppers, Noctivagrants, Night-walkers, and all sorts of Rogues and
Vagabonds, etc. 1 Dalt. Chap. 60. Folio 140. 5 Hen. 7. 5. 5 Edw. 3. 14.

The Watch so set by Authority must be Men Healthy, and of able Bodies, and do
their Duty, sufficiently Armed; and no person not being an Inhabitant within
the Town or Parish where the Watch is kept, can be compelled to Watch.

The Inhabitants are to take their Watching in turns as it comes to them by the
Number of Houses, as the Custom of the place has been, and may not by compelled
out of order by the Constable to do it.

If any Inhabitant be lawfully Warned in his Turn by the Constable to Watch,
and refuses it, he may Present him at the next Sessions or Assize, or to make
his Complaint to a Justice of Peace, who has Power to bind him over to his good
Behavior, and so continue him to the next Assize, or Sessions to answer the
Contempt; and this is the surest way, though Dalton holds the Constable, Ex
Officio may set him in the Stocks for such Contempt.

If a Constable, or any private person do make a Refusal to attend on a Justice
of the Peace, being so Requested to do, in order to remove a Force, or convey
any party to the Goal for such a Neglect of his Duty, he may be Imprisoned, and
over and above Fined to the King, 15 Rich. 2. Chap. 2. Dalt. Just. P. Chap. 22.
Folio 57.

CHAP. LX. The Office of a Constable relating to Hedge-breakers, Destroyers of
Underwoods, etc.
THE Constables, Headboroughs, Tything-men, etc. are Empowered to Apprehend, or
cause to be Apprehended any such persons they suspect to have carried away any
Burdens, or Bundles of Poles, Underwood, young Trees, or the Bark of any
Trees, Pales, Rails, Gates, Posts, Hedge-wood, Broom, Furzes, or any Bundles of
Wood, etc. And by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of one Justice, may enter
into the House, or any place belonging to the House of such Offender, or person
suspected, and where they shall find any such Wood, etc. To Apprehend the party
suspected for cutting the said Wood, and those in whose Custody it is found,
and to carry them before a Justice of Peace, in order to be examined; and if no
sufficient Account can be given how they Lawfully came by it, or shall not
within a Time Limited prove who he bought it of, then shall he stand Convicted
of cutting and spoiling Wood within the Statute of 43 Eliz. and for the first
Offense shall give such Satisfaction to the Owner as the Justice shall appoint,
and over and above pay to the Poor where the Offense was committed, such Sum
as the Justice shall Amerce him in, not exceeding ten Shillings, and for
Non-payment, the Justice has Power to Commit the Offender to the House of
Correction for a limited Time, as he shall think fit, not exceeding one Month,
or at his Discretion to be Whipped by the Constable, or other Officer.

For the second Offense the Offender is to be sent for one Month to the House
of Correction, and there to be held to hard Labor; and upon a third Offense to
be Punished as an incorrigible Rogue, 15 Caroli 2. Chap. 2.

If any Person procure for Money any Burden of Sticks, Wood, or Under-wood,
etc. of such Persons as may reasonably be suspected to have gotten them
Unlawfully, and a Complaint be made to a Justice of the Peace, and it appear
upon Examination that the Wood so bought was Unlawfully come by, the Justice
may compel the Party who bought it, to pay treble the value to the proper
Owner; and for want of such Payment upon Warrant granted, the Constable may
Levy it by Distress and Sale of Goods, rendering the over plus to the Owner, if
any there be, and in defect of wherewith to make Distress, to Commit the Party
to the Goal at his proper Charge, to continue there for the space of a Month,
not liable to Bail, 15 Caroli 2. Chap. 2.

Note, that by Virtue of this Statute, no Person is to be punished, that for
the same Offense has been punished by a former Law, and every Offender to be
brought within the force of this Statute, must be Prosecuted within 6 Months
after the Offense is committed.

CHAP. LXI. What is required of a Constable in the Performance of his Office,
in case of Landlord's Distraining for Rent, etc.
ACcording to the late Act made the 1st Day of June, in the second Year of W.
and M. 1690. If a Distress be made on the Premises, and the Tenant or Owner of
the Goods or Chattels so Distrained, do not within five Days after the Distress
made, and notice thereof given with the cause of such taking, left at the chief
Mansion House, or most noted Place on the Premises charged with the Rent, for
which the Distress is made, Replevy, giving sufficient Sureties to the Sheriff
according to Law; That then the five Days expired, the Person so distraining,
has Power with the Sheriff, Undersheriff of the County, or with the Constable
of the Hundred, Parish, or Place in which such Distress shall be taken; who by
this Statute are required to be Aiding and Assisting, to cause the Goods and
Chattels so taken in Distress, to be Appraised by two Sworn Appraisers, whom
the Sheriff, Undersheriff, or Constable are by this Act Empowered to Swear, to
Appraise the same truly according to the best of their Understandings. And such
Appraisement made, Seisors may lawfully Sell and Dispose of the Goods and
Chattels for the best Price that may be gotten for the same, toward
Satisfaction of the said Rent for which the Distress is made, and of the
Charges of such Distress, Appraisement and Sale, leaving the overplus, if any
be in the Hands of the Sheriff, or Undersheriff, or Constable, for the Use of
the Owner. And the ^oods being left on the Premises till Sale can be made, as
aforesaid, upon any Pound, Breach of Corn, etc. or Rescues of Goods or Chattels
Distrained for Rent, the person or persons thereby Aggrieved, shall upon a
special Action of the Case for a Wrong thereby sustained, recover his or their
Treble Damages and Costs of Suit against the Offender, or Offenders, of such
Pound, Breach or Rescues, any, or either of them, or against the Owner of the
Goods, in case any, after the Distress, have been found to come to his Use or
Possession by such means.

But note, that in case any such Distress, or Sale as aforesaid, shall be made
by Virtue or Color of this Act for Rent, pretended to be Arrear, and due, when
in truth there is no Rent in Arrear, or due to the person or persons
Distraining, or to him, or them in whose Name or Names, or Right, such Distress
shall be taken, as aforesaid, his Executors and Administrators, shall and may
by Action of Trespass upon the Case to be brought against the person or persons
so Distraining, or either of them, his, or their Executors, or Administrators
recover double the Value of the Goods and Chattels so Distrained and Sold; as
likewise full Costs of Suit.

Note, that Hay, Corn, or any Grain are not to be hastily, or wastfully removed
from the Premises before due Appraisement and Sale, to the damage of the Owner,
in scattering or wasting it, etc.

CHAP. LXII. What relates to the Office of a Constable in providing Carriages
for the King, etc.
ACcording to the Statute of 1 Jacobi 2. In this Case the Clerk or chief
Officer of His Majesty's Carriages, shall 3 Days before His Majesty's Arrival,
give notice to the Neighboring Justices, two, or more of them by Warrant from
the Green-cloth, to provide such a number of able Carriages, as shall be
requisite for the Service, to be drawn by 4 able Horses, or six Oxen, or four
Oxen and two Horses, to meet and be ready at the Time appointed to Load without
delay; and for so Loading they are to receive in Hand after the rate of
Sixpence a Mile, and not to be compelled to go above a Days Journey from their
Habitations, and the Carriages Summoned to give their Attendance on Default,
being Convicted of Neglect or Refusal, by the Oath of the Constable or other
Officer, or two other credible Witnesses before the said Justices of Peace of
the County, or Mayor or other Chief Officers of the City or Corporation where
he or they so neglecting inhabit, and who have a Power to tender the said Oath,
the party so neglecting or refusing shall forfeit the Sum of Forty Shilling to
the King's Use, forthwith to be levied by Distress and Sale of Goods, the Over
plus if any be, to be returned to the Owner, and this to be done by Warrant
from the said Justice of Peace, Mayor or other Officer, and in Case any
Justice, Constable or any other Officer shall take any Gift or Reward to excuse
any person from this Service, or shall injuriously charge or grieve any person
through Hatred, Envy, or Evil Will, who ought not to make such Carriage, or
Impress more Carriages than shall be directed by Warrant of the Green Cloth,
upon Proof and Conviction thereof the Party so offending shall forfeit the Sum
of Ten Pound to the Party grieved, or to any other who shall sue for the same,
to be recovered by Action of Debt in any of the King's Courts of Record,
wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed; and if any
Person or Persons shall Impress any Horses, Oxen, Cart, Wain or Carriages for
the King's Service, other than such as are lawfully empowered, he or they so
offending, upon due Proof and Conviction shall incur and suffer the Punishments
contained in the Act of 12 Car. 2.

All High Constables, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Officers who warn the said
Carriages, or whose Duty it is so to do, must make a Return in Writing, to the
Clerk or other Officer of the Carriages, of the Names and Places of Abode of
every such Person who is so warned to bring in his Cart or Carriage, so that
the Defaulters may be known, and the said Officers appointed by the Act to warn
them may be Discharged and Indemnified, and the Defaulters punished as
aforesaid.

CHAP. LXIII. The Office and Duty of a Constable relating to the King's Game,
Fishery, Excise, and Custom,
UPon a Warrant directed to a Constable, Headborough, etc. under the Hands and
Seals of two or more Justices of the Peace, the Constable, etc. may search
suspected Houses for Setting-Dogs, Nets, and other Tackle for taking Pheasants,
Partridges, and other the King's Game, and destroy them so found; but in Case
they have Free Warren, or are Lords of the Manor, or are Freeholders of Forty
Pounds per Annum, or more of Estate of Inheritance, or Eighty Pounds per Annum
for Term of Life, or be worth in Goods 400 l. they are exempted from this
Seizure.

As to the Constables Office relating to Fishery, he may by Warrant under the
Hand and Seal of a Justice of Peace, apprehend such as destroy the Spawn or Fry
of Fish along the Seashore, or in any Creek or Haven, or within five Miles of
the Mouth of either of them, or such as fish with unlawful Nets to destroy the
young Fry, the Meshes of their Nets not being 3 Inches and a half between Knot
and Knot, for which Default they are to pay 10 Shillings, to be levied by
Distress and Sale of Goods, the Overplus to be returned to the Owner, if any
remain, 3 Jacobi 1. Chap. 12. Wingate's Abridg. Title Fish, Fishers, Fishing.

And for the Encouragement of the English Fishery, if any Herrings, Ling, Cod
or Pilchards Fresh or Salt, Dry or Bloated, or any Eels or Congers or Salmon he
^^ought in and uttered to Sale by Foreigners, it may be lawful for the
Constable Headborough, etc. or any other Person to seize them, the one half to
the poor of the Parish, and the other half to the use of him that seizes; and
if any one shall refuse to assist a Constable or other Officer hereto empowered
on this occasion; being commanded so to assist him in the King's Name, he upon
complaint and Proof of such contempt, lies liable to be prisoned and fined at
the Discretion of the Justice before whom he shall be convicted, 18 Caroli 2.
Chap. 2.

As to the Duty of a Constable relating to the Excise, note that he is to be
aiding and assisting when required, to the Gaugers, and Underofficers employed
therein, and to go with them in the Night time to such Houses where any Liquors
are to be gauged. They are moreo-to levy Forfeitures where a Conviction is made
before the Justices or Commissioners, of any Concealment, Fraud, or the like
thereupon, by Warrant for that purpose directed to make Distress and Sale of
the Offenders Goods, and to render the Overplus if any be, to the Owner, and
for want of such Distress to carry the Party so offending upon commitment to
Goal, there to remain till there be Satisfaction made, and upon Warrant
directed to a Constable from the Commissioners, he is to summon all
Alehouse-keepers within his Division, at such Days and Places as shall be
appointed in the said Warrant from time to time, etc.

As to what concerns the Constables Office relating to Customs by the Act made
the 14 Caroli 2. such as have Authority by Writ of Assistance under the Seal of
the Court of Exchequer, may take to their Assistance the Constable, Headborough
or other Peace Officer, inhabiting near the place, and in the Day time enter
the House, Shop, Cellar, Warehouse, Rooms, or other place, and in case of
Refusal or Resistance break open Doors, Packs, Chests, Trunks or such places,
and take away such uncustomed and prohibited Goods as they shall there find,
and convey them to the King's Storehouse in such Port as is next to the place
where the Merchandise shall be seized, see further, 13 Car. 2. Chap. 11. And if
the Officers of the Customs or any acting, being assisting or aiding to them,
shall be sued, indicted, prosecuted or molested, such Person or Persons, his or
their Heirs, Executors and Administrators may plead the general Issue, and give
any of the Acts relating to the Customs, in Evidence in any of the King's
Courts of Justice, 14 Car. 2. chap. 11.

CHAP. LVIII. The Office of a Constable relating to Clothiers and Irish Cattle,
etc.
IT is the Headborough or Constable's Duty, upon Request, to be aiding and
assisting to the Wardens and Assistants, for regulating the Worsted Trade, and
other Stuffs made at Norwich in the County of Norfolk, and usually called
Norwich Stuffs, 14 Car. 2. chap. 5.

And the Constables in the West Riding of Yorkshire, by Warrant directed from
the Justices of the Peace, the Masters and Wardens of the Corporation, or any
13 of them, are empowered to levy such Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures, as by
Virtue of the Statute mentioned, shall become due from any Clothier, and this
to be done by Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods, etc. the overplus to
be restored to the Owner (if any remain) upon demand, 14 Car. 2. chap. 5.

The Justices of Peace and High Constable have power to search any House,
Warehouse or other place, for Tenters, Ring-ropes, Head-wrenches, or such
other things used in the Stretching Cloth, and such as they find, they may
deface; and the second time they are used* they may take them away and sell
them, the Money to be to the Use of the Poor, to be distributed as they shall
see fit, 33 Eliz. chap. 20.

All the Clothiers must pay their Spinsters and other Workfolks in ready Money,
and not in Wares, and their Wool to be delivered to them in due weight, under
the Penalty of 6 d. Forfeiture for every Default; and those Workfolks are to do
their Work faithfully, under forfeiting double Damages to the Party grieved, 4
Edw. 3. Chap. 1. Fitz. Just. P. 103. And the Masters or Head-Officers in a
Corporation where no Master is, and out of a Corporation the Justice of Peace,
High-Constable, and Stewards of Leets, shall hear and determine such Matters as
arise upon Complaint, as Non-payment of Wages or Damages, as beforementioned;
and upon due Examination, if they find cause, they commit the persons offending
to Goal, till such time Satisfaction be made to the party aggrieved, Stat. ibid.

Irish Cattle are not to be brought into England, under the Penalty of their
being seized by the Constable, Head-officer, or any other person or persons;
and to prevent fraudulent Seizures and Compositions, the party or parties so
seizing, shall within six days after, cause the said Cattle, Sheep or Swine to
be Killed, and the Hides and Tallow to be to the Seizor, and the rest
distributed by the Churchwardens and Overseers among the poor of the Parish,
where any large Cattle, Sheep or Swine shall be Imported or found; and such
Seizure the Overseer of the poor or Churchwarden so neglecting or failing in
his Duty, shall for every one of the large Cattle forfeit 40 s. and 10 s. for
any of the smaller Cattle, as Sheep, Swine, etc. which should have been Killed
and distributed, as aforesaid: To be levied by Distress, and Sale of Goods, one
half to the Poor of the said Parish, and the other to him that does inform; and
this to be done by Warrant, and under Hand and Seal of any one Justice of the
Peace; and for want of such Distress the Offender to be Imprisoned without Bail
for the space of 3 Months.

Mutton or Lamb Imported is subject to the like Seizure and Penalties; as Beef,
Pork and Bacon; as also Butter and Cheese Imported from Ireland, and English
Cattle purposely intermixed with Irish, to color a Defraud, shall be reputed
Irish, and liable as the same in all Respects, 32 Caroli 2. Chap. 2. And indeed
all Cattle Imported into England from any Country beyond the Seas, or into the
Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, are seizable, unless from Man
Island, and they to be landed in the Port of Chester, or Members thereof, and
they not to exceed 600 in one Year, and to be of no other Breed but of that
Island.

Note, the Cattle seized as aforesaid, are to be kept in some public place by
the space of 48 Hours; and if in that space the Owner, or Owners, or any for
him or them, shall before a Justice of the Peace of the fame County where the
Seizure is made, make out by the Oath of two Credible Witnesses, that the said
Cattle were brought from no part beyond the Seas, the Isle of Man excepted,
then upon Warrant from the Justice they are to be Re-delivered to the Owner, as
the 18 of Caroli 2 directs, revived with some others on this Subject, and made
perpetual by the 32 of Caroli 2.

CHAP. LXIV. Rates for the Relief of poor maimed Soldiers, Mariners, Prisoners,
etc. How to be gathered and Ordered, etc.
WHere Money is Rated for Relief of the Poor maimed Soldiers, Mariners,
Prisoners, etc. The Constable within his Constabulary, upon refusal or neglect
of Payment, may, as also the Churchwardens Levy it by Distress and Sale of
Goods, rendering the overplus to the Owner, if any there be, 43 Eliz. c. 3.
Wingate's Stat. Tit. Captains and Soldiers, etc.

All Money in this manner, and to the use aforesaid Collected, must be
quarterly delivered to the high Constable ten Days before the Quarter Sessions,
or in Default, the Constables, Churchwardens, their Executors or
Administrators are to pay 20 s. by way of Forfeiture, and the high Constable so
receiving, is to pay it to the Treasurers appointed by the Justices to receive
it, or upon Default he forfeits 40 s* the Forfeitures to be Levied, and
Employed by the Treasurer for increasing the Stock for the aforesaid Uses, 43
Eliz. Chap. 3, etc.

The high Constables are under the Penalty of five Pounds, to pay such Money
Quarterly at every Sessions, to such Treasurers or Collectors as is raised in
the respective Parishes, and paid to them by the Constables and Churchwardens
for the Relief of poor Prisoners, 14 Eliz. Chap. 5. etc. And they may make
Distress, as in case of maimed Soldiers aforesaid, upon refusal or neglect of
payment, for Money so Rated for the Relief of poor Prisoners in the Marshalsea
or King's Bench; as likewise for the Relief of the Poor in Almshouses and
Hospitals; and for want of Distress, the Party may by the Justices of the
County, be Committed to Prison, there without Bail or Mainprize to abide till
the Sum be paid. And the Constable or Churchwarden neglecting to pay it in ten
Days before the Quarter Sessions as aforesaid, forfeits 10 s. each, and the
high Constable 20 s. if he pay it not in at the Quarter Sessions, as directed,
which Forfeitures the Treasurer may Levy by Distress and Sale of Goods, and
employ to the Increase of the Stock, 43 Eliz. Chap. 2. etc.

CHAP. LXV. What particular Things and Matters High Constables ought to return
before the Justices in Sessions, and to be returned to them by the Petty
Constables in their Respective Jurisdictions.
1. THey are required to return the Christian and Sir Names, Additional Names
and Qualities of all Popish Recusants, as well Lodgers as Householders, Residing
or Dwelling in any of their Respective Parishes or Divisions.

2. The Names of such as shall profanely Curse and Swear, with the Number of
their Oaths, immediately, or within Ten Days, informing the Justice of Peace of
such Offense.

3. The Names of such Persons as shall Drink or Tipple in any Inns, Alehouses,
or Taverns at any time, especially on the Lord's Day; and such persons as they
shall find Drunk, with the Names of those that entertain them.

4. Such persons Names as suffer any Unlawful Games to be used in their Houses,
Gardens or Backside, with the Names of such as haunt Gaming.

5. They are to return all such Ale-house-keepers or Victualers as Sell Ale or
Beer without License.

6. Such persons as are to Watch and Ward, who neglect or refuse to do their
Duty therein.

7. The Names of such persons as divide their Houses into Tenements, and take
in Lodgers or Inmates, that Annoy their Neighbors, or are likely to be a
Charge to the Parish.

8. The high Constable is to return the Defaults of Petty Constables,
Tything-men, etc* for neglecting to Apprehend and Punish Beggars, Rogues,
Vagabonds, or refusing to Pass them, etc.

9. They are to certify the Names of such persons as refuse to take Apprentice
poor Parish Children according to the Statute.

10. All Masterless Men and Women living at their own Hands, such as are Idle,
refusing to Labor, and can give no Satisfactory Account how they get their
Living, and all suspicious Persons; as Mothers of Bastards, Whores,
Noctivagrants, Night walkers, or such as are likely to be Chargeable to the
Parish wherein the Reside.

11. The Names of such as neglect, or wilfully omit to make due Rates and
Collections for the Relief of the Poor in every Parish, or that cannot, or do
dot give a just account how the Rent and Stock of the poor is employed.

12. They ought to return all defects in the Highways and Bridges; also
Pavements in their Districts where there are no Commissioners, or Defaults are
neglected by them, with the Names of such as ought to repair them, and have
neglected or refused so to do.

13. They ought to Present all such Scavengers as are found negligent in
Cleansing the Srreets, or in other parts of their Duty; and all common
Annoyances in the Streets, Lanes or Alleys.

14. The Name or Names of every such Person or Persons who keep Swine, to the
common Annoyance of their Neighbors, or any other in and about the Liberty and
Precincts, where Hogs ought not to be kept; more particularly referring to the
Cities of London and Westminster and their Liberties.

15. They ought to Present Bakers, putting Bread not due Weight to Sale, with a
particular Account thereof. Also Brewers Selling Beer or Ale to Unlicensed
Alehouses, or Victualling-houses; likewise all Regrators, Forestallers of
Markets, Ingrossers of any Corn, or Grain, Butter or Cheese, Bacon, or any kind
of dead Flesh, or Provisions whatsoever.

And in order to make out these Matters against the Delinquents, they are to
return the Names of such persons as can testify or prove the Offenses before
the Justices in their Sessions or Meetings; and thereupon they are to be
Summoned in order to be Examined, that it may be known how far they can inform
them in the Particulars alleged; and such as pave not before their own Doors,
or such places as ought to be paved, are liable to be returned by the Petty
Constable to the High-constables in their several Precincts, or Districts, and
by them presented before the Justices in their Sessions, etc.

CHAP. LXVI. The Office of a Constable, etc. Relating to Stoned Horses.
IN this Case there are several Laws provided to prevent Damage, which Owners
may sustain by the hurt or unseasonable covering of their Mares, in which Case
it is provided by the Statute 32 Hen. 8. Chap. 13. That none shall put to Feed
upon any Forest or Common, except a Common or Forest where Mares are not
usually put, or kept, any Stoned Horse exceeding two Years Old, and not fifteen
Hands high from the lower part of the Hoof, to the upper part of the Withers;
and if any Stoned Horse of a lower Stature be put to Feed in any such Common or
Forest, unless it be in the Fenny grounds of the Isle of Ely, and in other
parts of Cambridge-shire also, Northamptonshire, Huntington shire, Lincoln,
Nottingham, Suffolk and Norfolk, where they are required to be but thirteen
Hands high, any person may Seize them to his own Use by the Assistance of the
Constable, Keeper of the Ground, Headborough, Bailiff, or other such Officer,
conveying the Horse to to the next Pound, there to be measured by the Officer
in the presence of three sufficient Witnesses, and being found lower than the
Statute directs, there to be disposed on, 8 Eliz. Chap. 8. Wingate's Abridgment
of the Statutes, Title Horses; and so according to the Statute of Hen. 8.
before mentioned; and such as are required so to do, refusing to Measure, or be
present at Measuring, forfeit 40 s. each for every Refusal or Default, one half
to the King, and the other half to the Prosecutor; but however the Horse must
be wilfully put in the Common or Forest by the Owner or his Order, for if he
escape thither he shall not be questioned in this Kind, unless he remain there
above 4 Days after Notice given to the Owner at his House, or in his Parish
Church, 32 Hen. 8. Chap.

Note that all Forests and Commons require to be driven every Year at
Michaelmas or within 15 Days after, by the Keepers of the Ground, Constables or
other Officers thereto appropriated under the Penalty of 40 s. upon failing so
to do. And they have power likewise to drive them at any other time of the Year
as they shall see it convenient in their Discretion; the like privilege has
the Owner of the Ground. But by the 21 Jacobi (1) Chap. 28. this Statute of the
32 Hen. 8. is not to extend to the County of Cornwall, that being a Royal
Duchy.

CHAP. LXVII. The Constables Office and Duty relating to such Persons as
Profanely Swear and Curse.
BY a late Statute made in the 6 and 7 Year of the Reign of William the Third,
Chap. 11. it is enacted for the restraining that Dangerous and Unprofitable Sin
of Swearing and Cursing, that such as in the Presence or Hearing of a Justice
of the Peace of the same County wherein the Offense is committed, or Head
Officer or Justice of Peace of the City, do Swear or Curse, or are thereof
convicted by Witness or Confession of the party before any Magistrate, the
Offender if a Common Soldier, Labourer, or Servant shall pay for every Oath,
etc. 18. for the use of the poor of the Parish wherein the Offense is
committed, and every other person is to pay 2 s. for the like Offense; for the
second double, for the third treble, to be levied by Distress, by Warrant from
one Justice of the Peace; and where no Distress is found, the Offender if above
Sixteen Years of Age is to be set in the Stocks by the space of one Hour for
one Offense, and two Hours for more than two Offenses; but if under Age, to be
whipped by the Parents or Master in the Presence of the Constable. All Justices
of Peace, Constables, etc. who neglect to put this Act in Execution, being
knowing of the Offense, to forfeit 5 Pounds, and none are to be prosecuted upon
this Act beyond the Expiration of Ten Days; therefore Information must be given
within the said Ten Days after the Offense committed. And for the better
deterring Offenders to commit Offenses of this Kind, it is ordained to mind
them of the Danger and Shame they are like to incur thereby, that this Act be
publicly read in Churches next Sunday after every Quarter Day, immediately
after Morning Prayer under Penalty of 20 s. for each Omission, and Justices,
etc. are to keep a Register of all such Convictions before them, and to
certify the same at the Quarter Sessions, to be there Recorded, where any one
may search for the same, and see it without paying any manner of Fees.

CHAP. LXVIII. The Constables Office and Duty further relating to Vagabonds and
Beggars, and Collecting Moneys for Building and Repairing Goals.
BY an Act of the 11 and 12 of W. 3. it is Enacted, that after the 24 of June
1700. That if any Vagabond, Beggar or any person whatsoever, shall be brought
to any Constable, Headborough or Tythingman or other Officer, with a Pass,
Testimonial, Letter of Request, or other Writing whatever, pretending thereby
either to be Relieved or Conveyed: The said person or persons shall by such
Constable or other Officer, or by some other sufficient person or persons whom
he shall order or depute, be carrryed before some one Justice of the Peace of
the County, which Justice is carefully and diligently to Examine him or them,
and if he finds they ought by Law to be punished, he is to send them to the
House of Correction, and take such further Course as in that Case the Law
directs: But if no such Cause appear, then he or they are to be immediately
conveyed out of the County to such Town of the next County, unto or through
which such person or persons are to pass or be conveyed, as the said Justice
shall think most proper; and every Constable or other Officer is to convey them
to the House of Correction, or to such Town as aforesaid, without delay; and
further, the Justice is by this Act obliged to give the Constable or other
Officer a Certificate without Fee, of the Number of such persons as he shall so
order to be punished or conveyed, as also the manner how, when, and from whence
such persons are to be conveyed: And further, the Justice ought to Tax the
Charge on the back of the Certificate, which the Constable, etc. delivering to
the High Constable of that Division, he is to pay him his Charges out of the
Moneys of the Goal and Marshalsea Money, and take a Receipt for the same, which
Receipt shall be Accepted by the Chief Treasurer of the County, and allowed in
his Accounts as so much Money, and if the Goal and Marshalsea Money fail to be
sufficient, then the Justices in their Quarter Sessions may raise a Tax in
their Counties, Ridings and Divisions, in such manner as they raise it for the
County Goals and Bridges, the Money to be paid to the Chief Constable of each
Division, so as they shall have a quarterly Payment in their Hands before hand,
and as often as the said Petty Constables or Deputies shall produce the said
Certificates, they shall be paid their Charges according thereto, and the High
Constable must Account for so much at the next Quarter Sessions, and the Petty
Constable is not to Charge the Inhabitants of his Constabulary wirh any Sum or
Sums of Money, or any Provisions, to the Relief or Conveyance of such Rogues or
Vagabonds.

And if any Constable or other Officer to whom it belongs, shall neglect to
Apprehend such Vagabonds or Beggars, or be remiss and negligent in doing his
Duty by this Act required, then for such Offense he shall pay 20 s. one fourth
part to go to the Informer, and the other 3 parts to the poor of the Parish,
and he may be Convicted before a Justice by the Oath of one Witness, and upon
refusal to pay, Distress may be made by Warrant as in other Cases: But this Act
is to continue but 3 Years, and from thence to the End of the next Session of
Parliament.

By another Act of Parliament 11 and 12 W. 3. Intiuled, An Act to Enable
Justices of the Peace to Build and Repair Goals in their respective Counties.
The Justices of the Peace at their General Quarter Sessions are to direct their
Warrants or Precepts to the High Constable, Petty Constable, Bailiffs or other
Officer or Officers as they shall think fit for the Collecting and Levying the
Money in order thereto; and upon denial of any Assessed after 4 Days demand to
pay the same, they are Empowered to make Distress and Sale of Goods, and after
4 Days keeping, if the Money be not paid, to sell the same, and deducting
Charges, immediately to render the Overplus to the Owner, the Distress being
first Appraised by two or more of the Inhabitants, and the Constable, etc. to
pay the Moneys so Collected to the Treasurer or Treasurers Appointed by the
Justices to receive it; and for refusing to Account after four days demand, the
Justices of the Peace, or the greater number of them are Empowered to Commit
him or them so neglecting or refusing, to Prison, there to remain without Bail
or Mainprize, till he or they shall have made a true Account.

CHAP. LXIX. The Constables Office relating to such as make or put bad Malt to
Sale, etc.
THE Constable's Office relating to Malt, is to see such Malt as comes to be
sold within his Division, or there made for Sale, that it be well conditioned,
and no evil Malt mixed with the good: And if upon View it prove bad, the
Constable and Bailiff of the Liberty with the Allowance of one Justice of the
Peace may sell it for such price as can be got, or at such rate as the Justice
shall set upon it, 2 Edw. 6. Chap. 10. 21 Jacobi (1) Chap. 28. 3 Caroli (1)
Chap. 4.

The Office and Duty of a Churchwarden, Questman, Sidesman, etc. In all
respects relating to what concerns them in the due and safe discharge of their
respective Trusts. CHAP. LXX. Of the Office of a Churchwarden, etc. Its
Antiquity and Dignity. How to be chosen. What they are to do in keeping the
Lord's Day, and what relates to them as to Goods of the Church, and well
ordering Matters, etc.
THE Office of a Churchwarden appears in Effect to be much Antienter than in
name, though the latter is of conderable Antiquity, the Office it self being as
Ancient as the tolerating Christian Churches in the due Exercise of Religion,
by the Civil Power, but often interrupted and laid aside by the Persecutions
and Turns of Government; however the Office is exceeding Necessary and
Beneficial to the Churches, and Inhabitants of the respective Parishes; for
they are in the manner of a Corporation as they are taken at Common Law,
properly termed Chu chwardens at the Common Law, because by that Name they are
enabled to take the Chattels and moveable Goods, and to implead or be
impleaded, sue or be sued, relating to such Goods and Chattels as belong, or
are to the use and behoof of the Parish, of which they are such Officers, and
the Preservation of the Goods of the Church are more immediately and
particularly under their Care, as the Communion Plate, Books, and other
Ornaments and Furniture, their Care being not to suffer any thing to be wasted
or diminished, they find, at the time of their entering on their said Office^ at
what time they ought to be put in their Custody and Charge to take notice of.
As for the Choice or Electing these Officers, it is to be annually in the
Easter, unless the Custom in a Parish alter the time; and in the Book of the
Constitution of Canons Ecclesiastical, in the first Year of the Reign of King
James the First, The Churchwardens, Questmen, Sidemen or Assistants in the
respective Parishes, are to be chosen or elected by joint Consent of the
Minister and Parishioners, if so it may be; but upon disagreement, the Minister
to choose one, and the Parishioners the other, and without such a Joint or
several Election, no person ought to take upon him the Office of a
Churchwarden, nor when chose, to continue any longer than the space of one
whole Year in the said Office, unless in the same manner again chosen. However,
there are several Cases that have set aside this Canon, where the Custom in any
Parish has been contrary to it, for in such Cases the Custom has been allowed
and observed before the Canon; And the Church, the Churchwardens, etc. being
chosen are to be diligent in observing that the Parishioners make due resort to
the Parish Church on the Lord's Day, and upon Holy Days, and there to continue
Devoutly and Reverently during the Time of Divine Service, and such as neglect
without lawful Excuse or urgent Occasion for Absence, after Admonition, if they
further neglect, their Names must be presented by the Churchwardens to the
Ordinary of the place, See Canon 89, 90. 5 Edw. 6. Chap. 1.

They are strictly to see the Lord's Day kept in, and out of the Church, and to
visit Inns, Taverns and Alehouses; and if in the time of Divine Service they
find any persons Tippling there, they may carry them before a Justice of Peace,
who may cause them to pay 3 s. 4 d. for Tippling, over and above the 12 d. due
for being absent from the Church; and he that keeps the House, for so suffering
them to Tipple, forfeits 10 s. and these Sums to go to the use of the poor of
the Parish, 4 Jacobi Chap. 5.

The Minister and Churchwardens are not to suffer any person to preach within
the Church nor Chapel, not producing a License to authorize him so legally to
preach, and such a one as shall to them appear sufficient, Can. 50. 85. No
Sports are to be suffered in the Church, Chapel, Church, or Chappel-Yard, on a
Sunday or other Days, or any thing unseasonable or tending to the profaning
those places, nor the Bells to be rung for Sport or Pastime, but to be rung
only upon Suitable and Solemn Occasions.

The Churchwardens, as I hinted, being in the Nature of a Corporation, have
power to take Gifts for the purchasing Furniture to the Church, or for other
Advantages to the Behoof of the Parish; but they may not take an Estate of Land
by the name of Churchwardens only; for if there be a Feoffment made to the
Churchwardens of the Parish, the Use is void in it self; for they are not in a
Capacity to take such a Purchase, nor may they subscribe to have Lands to
themselves or their Successors; for as to Lands they are no Corporation, but to
Goods only.

If a Bell be broke, or any ways spoiled, so that it is not Tunable, the
Churchwardens by the Agreement of the Parishioners, or the greater part of
them, may cause it to be new cast, leaving it in the Founder's Hands till he is
paid, and by that means the Churchwardens may bar their Successors of that
Account.

If any indifferent person, or other in place, buy a Bell, set up a Pew, or any
Ornament to the Church, it cannot be taken away by him or his Heirs, etc.
Because it is a Dedication, and the Churchwardens may sue those that attempt
it; but the Action must be commenced for Goods for the use of the Parish, and
not in the Churchwardens own name; nor can any Churchwardens sell, impair, or
release any of the Goods of the Church, without the free Consent of the
Sidesmen or Vestry, under pain of being brought to Account for it, by the
Succeeding Churchwardens, and forced to make sufficient Satisfaction.

If the Church-windows or Walls be broke, the Trees cut down in the Churchyard,
or the Grass eaten up there, this lies in the Parson's Care to redress, and not
the Churchwardens, for he is Conservator of the Body of the Church and
Churchyard, as the Churchwardens are of the Moveable Goods only.

CHAP. LXXI. What relates to the Office of a Churchwarden in repairing the
Pews, about Seating persons in the Church, and keeping good order: What Rates
they may make for the repair of the Church, and what not, with other things of
the like Nature.
THE Churchwardens have the Care of repairing the Pews in the Body of the
Church, etc. and other seats; but it is held in most cases they have not the
disposing of them in the Body of the Church, the Disposal belonging to the
Ordinary of the place, to place and displace whom he pleases, though in this
there are excepted or exempted Cases; for suppose a Man and his Ancestors, and
all those whose Estates he has in his possession in certain Messuages, have
time out of Mind continued to repair an Isle or Pew, or fit there, this alters
the Case, and the Ordinary cannot meddle nor displace; for if he do, a
prohibition lies; for by prescription he has and enjoys it for a reasonable
Consideration: But if there be no Care taken to repair such a Pew by the party
claiming by prescription, and it run to ruin; the Ordinary may take it into his
hands; yet he has nothing to do in this Case in exempted Chapels belonging to
Noblemen.

The Churchwardens beside the looking after the Books and other Necessaries and
Ornaments of the Church to see them kept in good Order, are to provide Bread
and Wine for the Sacrament, proportionable to the number of the Communicants,
and a parish Rate may be made for supplying this and other Necessaries. The
Churchwardens and Questmen are likewise to see that in every meeting of the
Congregation, the Peace, and a due Decorum be kept. Also to put out of the
Church such as are Excommunicated.

In case of making a Rate for the defraying of Charges, it must be done by the
Churchwardens, with the Consent and Assent of the major part of the
Parishioners, Housekeepers, of which they are to have convenient Notice before
such time appointed, for the said Meeting, to fix and settle such Rates: Now if
upon the setting upon these Rates, a Man dwell in one Parish, and have Land in
another which he occupies there, he lies chargeable for his Lands so occupied
in the Parish where his Land lies, but if he Lease out the Land he has in
another Parish, reserving Rent, then is he not to be charged for his Lands
there, because there is a Parishioner and Inhabitant liable to be charged
elsewhere, Co. 5. Report, Folio 57.

No person keeping a Stall in a Market, and not being an Inhabitant of the
parish where that Market is kept, can be rated toward the Reparation of the
Church; but if a Citizen build a House in an Out-parish, and partly live there,
and partly in the City, not having any Land to lease out or occupy in the
Parish where his Country House stands, he is however as an Inhabitant liable to
the Church Rate, and no prohibition lies in this Case in the Court Christian,
because the Jurisdiction of the thing is not in their power, though he be rated
more than they that have 50 or 100 Acres of Land in that parish.

If there be in a Parish a Chapel of Ease, and one part of the parish time out
of Mind is wont to repair it, hear Service, and have a Custom to Marry in it,
and all other other Rites, except burying their Dead at the parish Church, they
are however liable to be rated for repairing the Mother Church, Mich. 13 Jacobi
(1) C. B.

Where only part of the Parishioners are rated, and for defect of payment sued
in the Ecclesiastical Court, the matter must be pleaded in this Court, for in
this Case a Prohibition will not lie; and if the Majority of the Parishioners
agree to increase the number of Bells or Ornaments of the Church, it is binding
to the rest, and they are liable to the Rates that shall be made, though not
consenting to it; and for any Ornaments for the Church, they ought to be rated
only for their personal Estates, and not for Land, etc.

And among other things it is enacted relating to the City of London, that
where any Churchyard or Church be fronting or adjoining to any of the Streets,
Lanes, or Passages mentioned in the said Act, the persons thereby appointed and
authorized may for the paving the said Streets, etc. so far as the Church or
Churchyard extends, assess the Inhabitants of the parish a reasonable Rate, to
be paid by the Churchwardens of every such parish for the time being, who in
the behalf of the parish are required by that Act to pay the said Rate, 22 and
23 Caroli 2. Chap. 17.

CHAP. LXXI. Their Choice of Surveyers, giving up their Accounts, making
Distress. Of Forfeitures, Presentiments; and where, and where not they may give
them in; with other things.
THE Business of the Churchwardens is to be conjunct with the Constables, in
choosing the Surveyors for the High Ways, and appointing proper Days for their
Work; also in the Oversight of the High Constable, to account for Moneys levied
by way of Forfeitures relating to the Highways; and with the Assistance of two
Justices of the Peace, one to be of the Quorum, oblige the High Constable to
account for, and pay the Money so coming to his Hands; and to execute the
Justices Warrant for Forfeitures and Penalties for not cleansing the Streets or
repairing the Highways, 14 Caroli 2. Chap. 2.

The Churchwardens taking to them the Assistance of the Overseers of poor, have
power to execute the Warrants directed in the Woolen Burying Act, and levy the
Five Pounds Penalty by Distress and Sale of Goods for Non-payment, to be
employed to the poor of the parish where such Offense is committed, 18 Caroli
2. Chap. 4.

In London, Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, etc. The Churchwardens
together with the Constables, Overseers of the poor and Surveyors of the
Highway in every parish respectively, or a greater number of them are on
Monday, or Tuesday in Easter Week yearly, upon giving public Notice to call
together such other Inhabitants as have born the like Offices, to nominate and
make choice of two fit persons being Tradesmen of their Parish to be Scavengers
for the Lanes, and Streets, other open passages of each Ward or Division within
the said parish, to continue for the space of a Year, or till others are chosen
and settled in their place, 2 W. and. M.

At the end of the Year, or within one Month after at furthest, the
Churchwardens are to give up the Account of their Receipts and Disbursements
before the Minister and Parishioners, and upon quitting their Offices, to
deliver up to the Parishioners such Money and things as are remaining in their
Hands, that it may by them be delivered over to the succeeding Churchwardens by
Bill Indented, Cannon 89.

Upon Refusal of this they may at the next Visitation-court be presented for
it, or an Action of Account may be brought against them at Common Law by the
Succeeding Churchwardens, to compel them to it, and their needful Expenses and
Disbursements upon the Account and Business of the parish, upon making up their
Accounts, shall be allowed them.

As for Presentiments, they are not obliged to make them above once in the Year,
where by Custom it has been no oftener a use, nor in any Diocese whatever above
twice a Year, unless it be at the Bishop's Visitation; and for such
presentiments of every Parish Church or Chapel, the Register of the Court where
they are Exhibited, is to receive no more than 4 s. a year his so Registring
them. But the Churchwardens of their own accord may oftener make their
presentiments, Canon 116.

One of the Times of presentiments is ever to be about a Fortnight after Easter,
and at that time they are to resign their Office to the Succeeding
Churchwardens, and the new ones cannot be Sworn be; fore the old ones have
given in their presentiments and every Parson, Vicar, or in their Absence their
Curates, in the said presentiments, are to join with the Churchwardens, etc. And
upon the Refusal of the Churchwardens, to make presentiments, the Parson, Vicar,
or their Curates in their Absence, may make their presentiments to their
Ordinaries at all such Times, and when else they shall think fit, Cannon 113,
118.

It is provided that no Churchwardens, Sidesmen, or Questmen shall be cited or
called, but only at the Times limited to appear in the Ecclesiastical Court, or
before any Ecclesiastical Judge whatsoever, for refusing to present any Faults
committed in their Parishes at other times, and by the Ecclesiastical Law
punishable; nor be further troubled after their Presentiments delivered at the
usual Times, unless it manifestly appear they have wilfully neglected, and
wittingly omitted for Favor, Affection, or otherwise, to present some one or
more notorious Crime, or Crimes; or upon just Cause arising, to call them in
order to Explain their former Presentiments; and the Ordinary in case of such
wilful Omission may proceed against them, as in the Ecclesiastical Courts, in
case of wilful Pejury the Law has provided, Can. 117.

CHAP. LXXIII. The Grounds of Presentiments, or usual Articles given whereon to
Found their Presentiments, that the Churchwardens may know what to do in this
Case.
1. WHether the Church, Chancel, Bells and Ropes be in good Repair. The Lord's
Prayer, Ten Commandments, and Creed be drawn in fair Letters; what Assessments
are made for the Repair of the Church, and the Names of such as make Default in
paying them; whether there be a Communion Table, Carpet, and Font in the
Church, and all other necessary and useful Ornaments in Church and Churchyard;
whether the Parsonage-house, and Outhouses are in good Repair.

2. Whether the Parson, Vicar, or Curate Read the Common Prayer at Morning and
Evening Service, with his Surplice, or Preach every Lord's Day, Read Homilies,
Catechize, keep Perambulation, Preach sound Doctrine, and use no Seditious
Expressions against the Government; whether he Celebrate the Lord's Supper at
least three times every Year, once to be at Easter; whether he Baptize Infants
with Godfathers and Godmothers, Bury the Dead according to the Form prescribed
in the Book of Common Prayer, Preach in his Gown,, Visit the Sick, and Pray
with them; whether he Marry Clandestinely; that be a Sober-Man, live Chastely,
and be a Peacemaker in his Parish; whether once every Year at least he Read
the Canons to the Parishioners, and twice every Year the 39 Articles.

3. Whether the Parishioners at due Age resort to the Parish Church to hear
Divine Service, and there Reverently and Decently behave themselves; whether
any Work, or Sell Wares on the Lord's Day, etc. Whether Vintners, Innkeepers,
or Ale-house-keepers, keep Tippling in their Houses on the Lord's Day.

4. Whether any be Married within the prohibited Degrees, or be Adulterers,
Fornicators, Swearers, Drunkards, Blasphemers, Sorcerers, etc. whether all the
Parishioners above 16 Years receive the Communion, at least thrice in the Year,
Easter to be one time; whether any unseasonably keep their Children from being
Baptized, or Women decline the usual Time of being ^hurched after their
Delivery; whether any ^^ing not their Dead to be decently Buried after (...)
Service of the Church; whether any have ^^en Married without the Publishment of
Banns, (...) License, or at unlawful Hours; whether their ^^spitals,
Almshouses, Schools, or Spittles, if (...) belong to them, be well and Godly
used, (...) any thing detained from them; what Le^^cies are given to Pious
Uses, and if the Pa^^shioners are orderly placed in their Seats without
^^ntention.

5. Whether the Parish-clark or Sexton be ^^ly chosen, can Write, Read, make
the Re^^ses, and be an honest Man. If the School-^aster, Usher, Physician,
Chyrurgeon, or Mid-^ife, if any be in the Parish, Teach or Practice without
License; whether the Churchwardens (...) duly chosen in the Week after Easter,
by the ^^^ister and Parishoners, according to the Ca^^^ or Custom; whether the
old Churchwar^^ns have been careful to keep the Church in ^epair, to keep, and
carefully secure all Furni^^re belonging to the Church, etc. And whether (...)
the middle of Divine Service, they walk out (...) the Church to visit Taverns,
Inns, Ale-hou^^s, etc. where Tippling may be used, and to see ^ho are Loytering,
or Exercising any Sports on ^he Lord's Day.

These are the chief things to be presented; that other Matters may occur, are
rather Ac^^dental than Certain; and therefore these may ^ell suffice for the
Churchwardens Instructi^n.

CHAP. LXXIV. Several Nice Matters laid down for the Instruction of
Churchwardens in their Office and Duty, etc.
IF a Bell be broke, the Churchwardens may have an Action against him that so
broke it, or caused it to be broken, and recover Damages to the Use of the
Parish.

If any one take the Organs out of the Church, the Churchwardens may bring an
Action of Trespass; for the Organs appertain to the Parishioners, and not to
the Parson; so no Action will lie in the Parson's Name, nor can he Sue the
Party that took them in the Ecclesiastical Court.

The Churchwardens have no Action at Common Law to recover a Legacy never in
their Possession: But for any Goods and Ornaments of the Church, being once in
their Possession or Custody, they may maintain an Appeal of Robbery against any
one or more persons that Steals them, and an Action of Trespass against him
that does, without Right, take them away, even against the Parson or Vicar so
offending; and the Damages so to be recovered against such Offenders, shall be
converted to the Use of the Parish. But if it so fall out, that those
Churchwardens, from under whose Custody the Goods were taken, chance to Die
before they have brought any such Action, the succeeding Churchwardens, have
no Right by Law to bring an Action for the same Goods.

If a Churchwarden presents that any Parishioner, certifying his Name, is a
Railer, common D^^turber, or sower of Discord among the Neighbo^^s, unless it
be done in the Church or Churchyard, a Prohibition lies, if the Presentment be
made in the Ecclesiastical Court; because it is the Leet, and not in the
Churchwarden, if the Offense be committed elsewhere, that is to present it.

If a Suit be commenced by the Churchwardens in the Court Ecclesiastical, for
a Church Way claimed as a Right belonging to all the Parishioners by
Prescription; here a Prohibition lies, it is a Temporal Case, and not in the
Jurisdiction of the Spiritual Court.

If any one be Sued in the Ecclesiastical Court, for refusing to Feast and
Entertain the Churchwardens and those that go with them in their Perambulation
or Procession, with Bread, Cakes, Cheese and Ale, though his Ancestors living
in the same House had done it on the like occasions, time out of mind, a
Prohibition will lie against it; for that in such Cases the Churchwardens
claim it in the nature of a Corody.

And now for Brevity sake I pass over some other little Matters, not mainly
significant, belonging to this Office, directing the Churchwarden for his
better Information, of many things that concerns his Office, to peruse the
Office and Duty of a Constable, where he is jointly empowered to act with him
in many particulars, not here so expressly set down, and in which he may see
more copiously what in Criminal Matters he is to do.

The end of the Office of a Churchwarden, etc.
The Duty and Office of the Overseers of the Poor. CHAP. LXXV. The Office of
the Overseers of the Poor; how to be Qualified and Chosen, where they may Act,
and what degrees of Poor they are to have regard to, in order to Relieve them.
THis is an Office very commendable, and of great Trust, chiefly requiring
Diligence, and a good Conscience in the performance of it. It is of great
Antiquity, and the Roman Senators gloried more in this than in all their
honorable Trusts and Promotions; they were prouder to be styled Patrons of the
Poor, than of any Dignity whatsoever; and well administered, it gains not only a
good Name here, but has God's Blessing along with it, to make those that well
discharge their Duty, eternally Happy hereafter.

These Officers ought to be credible, honest, substantial Men. They are to be
yearly chosen, and joined with the Churchwardens of the Parish, in the
Oversight, due Regard, and Care of the Poor; they are to be made choice of by
two or more of the Justices of the Peace, one to be of the Quorum, who are
enjoined yearly, at Easter, or within a Month after, under their Hands and
Seals, to appoint 4, 3 or 2 Substantial Housekeepers, according as the Parish
requires to be joined with the Churchwardens, to oversee and look to the Poor
in their Parish, according to the Statute of 43 Eliz. Chap. 2. 21 Jacobi 1.
Chap. 28.

In this Case the major part of the Officers, without the remainder, may do any
thing belonging to their Office, with the Allowance and Consent of them, either
in particular or general, with two Justices of the Peace, one to be of the
Quorum, and when they are not hindered by just Occasion, the Excuse to be
allowed by two Justices of the Peace; they are to meet on the Lord s-day in the
Church monthly, after Evening-prayer, to consult of such Matters relating to
their Office, as may turn to their best Advantage; and upon neglect, without
such reasonable Excuse, are liable to forfeit 20 s. for every Default, 43 Eliz.
Wingate's Stat. Tit. poor People.

And if according to the 43 of Eliz. they be not regularly and duly appointed,
then every justice of the Peace, or Head Officer of that Division forfeits 5 l.
which may be levied by a Warrant of Sessions, and employed to the Use of the
Poor where such Default is made.

Of the Poor, there are reckoned 3 sorts or degrees; and first, those by Defect
and Impotency, as the Aged and Decrepid, being past their Labor.

The Infant, Fatherless and Motherless, not capable of being set on Work.

Those naturally Disabled, either in Wit or Members, as the Lunatic, Idiot,
Lame, Blind, and the like, not being able or capable to Work; and Persons being
visited with grievous Sickness and Diseases, though Casually; however, being
for a time, thereby rendered Impotent.

These in their degrees are to be provided for, and the Overseers are to take
care they have necessary Relief, and such proportionable Allowances as shall
appear convenient, according to the measure and continuance of their Needs and
Maladies.

Secondly, Such Poor by Casualty, such as are casually Disabled or Maimed in
Body, as Laborers, Soldiers, Mariners, etc. Maimed, or so Disabled in their
proper or lawful Calling. Also the decayed Householder, by Casualty of Fire,
Losses at Sea, Suretyship, Robbery, or Decay and Loss in Trade, etc. A poor Man
or Woman over charged or burdened with Children, and not able to keep them by
their Labor. All these, and the like, having Strength and Ability of Body, but
no means whereby to Sustain themselves or Children, are to be set to work; but
if the Profit thereby arising, procure not a sufficient necessary Maintenance,
so that they cannot live thereby, they are Objects of Charity, and to be
relieved at the Charge of the Parish, in some reasonable proportion and
measure, as their respective Wants and Necessities shall render them deserving
in the just Opinion of the Overseers, under whose Care they are.

Thirdly, Such as are Thriftless, who have wasted what they had by Prodigality
and Riotousness, Playing, Drinking, Debauchery, and the like, or such as are
Dissolute, Strumpets, Pilferers, idle Persons refusing to work, Vagabonds that
will settle in no place, nor be content with Service; and for these the House
of Correction is appointed, where they are to be sent; and if of able Bodies
put to hard Labor, to maintain themselves by it, without being chargeable to
the Parish, Town or County for any Allowance; however, they are not to be
suffered to perish for Want; but in case any of these last sort prove Impotent,
by Sickness, want of Ability of Body, or that their Work will not supply what
is needful for the Necessaries of Nature, then in their extreme Necessity there
must be an Allowance by the Town, etc. Dalt. Just. P. Chap. 73. Folio 170. And
where the Parents are able to Work for their Children, so that it will maintain
them, they may be compelled to do it; but if overburthened, the Overseers, at
their Discretion, may take what Children they think fit off their hands, and
put them Apprentice, or otherways dispose of them to Nurses, or else allow the
Parents something to enable them to keep them.

The Father, Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother, Children and Grandchildren
are obliged to relieve those so allied to them, that are poor and impotent, if
themselves are of Ability, in such manner as the Justices shall order it at
their Quarter Sessions, by assisting the Party or Parties, and upon obstinate
Refusal or neglect to obey their Order, a Penalty of 20 s. every Month is
forfei ed to the Poor of the Parish, to be levied by the Churchwardens,
Overseers, o^ one of them, by Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods, having
first, to that end, received a Warrant under the Hands and Seals of two ustices
of the Peace, one to be of the Quorum; and in defect of such Distress, the
Justices may commit the Offender to Prison without Bail or Mainprize, to remain
there till the Forfeiture be paid, 4^ Eliz. 2 Dalt. Just. P. Chap. 73. Fol.
156. Resol. Judges 16, 17. But a Grand-father-in-Law, if he has no Estate with
the Grandmother in Marriage, or that after comes to her, is not held liable to
this, though he brings her considerable of his own, or is afterward enabled by
his Industry, or at least if the latter, which is held doubtful, he is ^bliged
to it no longer than his Wife lives, Second Part of Bulst. Reports, Fol. 245,
246, 247.

If any Poor Beg in the Parish, a License must be granted for it by the
Overseers; and if in the Highways, by those Overseers. And by an Order of
Sessions, a Cottage may be erected on the waste of a Manor, and poor Inmates
may be lodged therein; but it is afterward to be employed to no other Use. And
such Poor as cannot get Work, and are able, are to be set on Work by the
Overseers; and a Justice of Peace may send such to the House of Correction,
that being employed by them and the Churchwardens, will not Work, being not
otherways able to maintain themselves, and they, with the consent of two
Justices of Peace, or more, one being of the Quorum, may set up, occupy, and
use any Mystery, Trade or Occupation, for the better Relief of the Poor in the
Parish, Town or Place within their Districts, to set them on Work, which is
very commendable, and may be wished it were more put in Practice.

CHAP. LXXVI. What relates to the Office of the Overseers, in taking care to
put poor Children Apprentice, and what Indenture is required to find them, etc.
IN this, Care must be taken, that they must be so placed, as not again to be
chargeable to the Parish, and that they may learn such s^l^able Crafts and
Mysteries, as when their Time expires, with Labor and Diligence, they may be
enabled to keep themselves and Children, their Age to be above 7, and under 15,
when they are so placed; and in doing this, the Overseers must have the Consent
of two Justices of the Peace, and they may Bind Men-children to the Age of 24,
and the Female to the Age of 21, or till she be Married, which first shall
happen; but it must be within the Parish or Hundred, and they may give Money,
if they cannot put them off without, and the Master's refusing to take them;
when so offered, may be presented and indicted for the same upon the Statute of
43 Eliz. at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace; and Parents refusing to let
them be so put Apprentice, without good Cause showed for it, may, by the
Justice, be bound over to answer the Default, and the Children refusing, may be
sent to the House of Correction, till they will comply. He or she must be Bound
by Indenture, and the word Apprentice specified in it, or else it is not
Binding. The Form of which, for the better Transcript on occasion, by those
that are ignorant of it, I shall here set down.

The Form of an Indenture of an Apprentice put out and Bound by the Overseers,
etc.
THis Indenture made the 20th of December, in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of
our most Gracious Sovereign Lord William the Third, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Anno
Dom. 1700. witnesses, That A P. and L. G. Overseers of the Poor in the Town of
Nottingham, and K. M. Churchwarden of the same Town, by and with the Consent
of G. B. Esquire and L. G. Esquire two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the
County of Nottingham, have by these Presents Placed and Bound L. C. being a
Poor and Fatherless Child, as an Apprentice to W. H. of Nottingham aforesaid,
Shoemaker, and as an Apprentice with him the said W. H. to dwell from the day
of the Date of these Presents, until he the said L. C. shall come to the Age of
24 Years, according to the Statute in that Case made and provided, by, and
during all which Time and Term, the said L. C. shall the said W. H. his Master,
well and faithfully Serve in all such lawful Business as the said W. H. shall
put him the said L. C. unto, according to his Power, Wit and Ability; and
honestly and obediently in all things shall behave himself toward his said
Master and all the rest of the Family of the said W. H. And he the said H. W.
for his part promises, covenan^eth and agrees, that he the said W. H. the
said L. C. in the Art and Mystery of Shoemaking, in the best manner that he can
or may, shall Teach, Instruct or Inform, or cause to be Taught, Instructed or
Informed as much as thereunto belongs, or he the said W. H. knows: And also
during all the said Term, to find unto him his said Apprentice, Meat, Drink,
Linen, Woollen, Hose, Shoes, Washing, and all other things necessary or
needful for an Apprentice. In Witness whereof we the said W. H. and L. C. have
interchangeably set our Hands and Seals, the Day and Year of Date abovesaid.

Note, In this Case the Binding is effectual to all Purposes, as if the
Children were of full A^^e, and did Bind themselves by free Consent of
Indenture and Covenant, and they so Bound may safely be received and kept by
their Masters or Mistresses, to whom they are Bound; only if she be a Female,
her Marriage will release her, though the time of her Indenture be not expired,
as in all other Cases of Indenture on that account, and here, otherways neither
Sex can be discharged from their Masters or Mistresses, to whom they are Bound
as Apprentices, but by a Justices of Peace at least in open Sessions, or else
by the Agreement of the Master, etc. and Apprentice, under the Master's Hand in
Writing.

CHAP. LXXVII. How far the Overseer is concerned about settling the Po^r, and
what otherways relates; with some nice Points relating to Bastards, etc.
BY Settlement of the Poor, it is here meant such as are likely to be
troublesome and chargeable to the Parish or Place where they reside. And by the
13 and 14 of Charles 2. Chap. 1^. The Overseers and Churchwardens making their
Complaint to any Justices of Peace within 4 days, after any Person that is poor
and likely to trouble the Parish, comes to settle in a Tenement under 10 l. by
the Year, 2 of the Justice^, one being of the Quorum, by Warrant under their
Hands and Seals, may remove such a Person to the Parish where they last had a
legal Settlement by the space of 40 days or more, unless Surety can be by them
given, that the Justices shall approve of, to secure the Parish, etc. from
Damages or Charges that may ensue, and all Persons agrieved have free Liberty
to appeal to the Quarter Sessions.

In Harvest or Work-time, poor Persons settled in a Parish, having a Certificate
under the Hands of the Minister of the Parish, one Churchwarden and one
Overseer of the Poor, declaring them Inhabitants there, may go into any of the
adjacent or distant Parishes to Work, and if they do not return, by reason of
Sickness or any other Impediment, it shall not be accounted an Impediment,
though they stay after their Work is done; and if any return from the Parish
from whence they are removed, it is in the Power of the Justice of the Peace to
send them to the House of Correction, where they may be punished as Vagabonds,
or, at his Discretion, he may send them to a common Work house, there to be
employed at hard Labor, and upon the Refusal of the Churchwardens or
Overseers of the Poor to receive them, and provide them Work, etc* they may, by
the Justice, be bound over to answer it at the Sessions or Assize.

In Case of a Bastard Child Born in any Parish, the Churchwardens and Overseers
for the Poor may, in saving the Parish harmless, seize so much Goods, Profits
or Lands to its use, belonging to the Lewd Mother or Reputed Father, as will
discharge the said Parish, or toward the discharging of it, from such Charges
as may thereby in^ur, which is to be awarded and settled by two Justices of the
Peace, and confirmed at the Sessions; and there an Order may be made to the
Churchwardens and Overseers, by Sale, or otherways, to dispose of the Goods,
as to them shall seem meet, and the Profits, or so much of the Profits of their
Lands as by Sessions shall be ordered* Vide if the Act of 13 and 14 Car. 2. c.
2. be revived.

No Man is to be put out of his Dwelling in a Town where he is lawfully
settled, or to be sent to the place of his Birth, but a Vagrant Rogue, nor to
his last Habitation, nor is he to be maintained by the Town, unless he be
impotent, but they ought to settle themselves to Labor if they are able, and
can get Work, and if Work cannot be gotten by them, the Overseers are to set
them on Work, and if after they wander begging in other Parishes, they may be
charged as Vagabonds, and sent to the place of Birth, Dalt. J. P. C. 84. Fol.
209.

If a Scholar in a Grammar School or University, be suspect to be an
Encumbrance, if he does become impotent and is like to be a charge to the
Parish where he is, he may be sent to his Parents if he have any, otherways to
the place where he was last Legally settled before he came to School, Resol.
Judges 1633. Sect. 32.

If a Woman be sent to the House of Correction and there delivered, the Child
must be sent to the Parish whence the Mother came, and there relieved.

If a Woman be Traveling and has her Child with her, and is for any Fault or
Breach of Statute apprehended and sent to Goal, although she be executed for
her Crime, the Child is not to be charged on the Parish where the Goal is, but
must be sent to the place where it was Born, if it can be known, otherways to
the place where the Mother was apprehended, according to the Opinion of Sir
Nicholas Hide, 3 Caroli 1.

If a Woman unmarried be hired Weekly or Monthly, or by the half Year or Year,
in a Parish, and there be gotten with Child, and so goes into another Parish,
and there for 2 or 3 Months is settled in Service, and being then discovered to
be with Child, in this case she must be settled in the Parish where she is, and
must not be sent to the Parish where she before was, Resol. Judges 1633. Sect.
12. If a Woman be delivered of a Bastard Child in one Parish, and so departs
into another Parish with her Child, in this Case the Child after being Nursed,
is to be sent to, and settled in the place where it was Born, and not to remain
with the Mother, Resol. Judges 1633. Sect. 23.

CHAP. LXXVIII. The Office of the Overseers of the Poor in making Rates, and
how they must behave themselves therein; and of making and delivering up their
Accounts upon going out of their Offices, etc.
THE Overseers for the Poor, with the Churchwardens, or the major part of
them, for enabling them to perform the things they have in charge, may raise
weekly, or otherways, by Taxation of every Parson, Vicar, and the Occupier of
Land, House or Tithes, Colemines, or Underwoods salable within their Parish or
Divisions, such a Sum as in moderation they shall think fit; but the Rate must
be allowed and confirmed under the Hands of two Justices, one being of the
Quorum, and then may be levied by Distress and Sale of Goods upon refusal of
Payment or neglect, by Virtue of a Warrant from any other two Justices, one
being of the Qu rum, rendering the overplus to the Owner* and for default of
Distress, two Justices may commit the Party to remain in Prison, without Bail
or Mainprize, till Payment be made, or the Justices think fit to discharge him,
43 Eliz. Chap. 2. Dalton ^ust. P. Chap. 73. Folio 148. Wingates Stat. Tit. Poor
People. And these Rates ought to be made according to Men's real and visible
Estates within the pla e only, and not according to Estates elsewhere and
further.

Observe, that a Parish in Reputation is deemed good within this Law: For
granting G. a Parish ^ery Ancient, having Officers in it, never^heless here is
a Town within the Parish, that for time out of Mind, at least a long time has
been used and reputed as a Parish, and has all parochial Rights, as
Churchwardens, etc. in such a Case it may be Rated as a Parish toward the
Poor, Hutton's Report Folio 93, and others.

And there must be care taken in Rating and Levying this Tax, for it must lie
on the Tenants occupying Land, etc. and not on the Landlord, in nor out of the
Parish, for the first is only chargeable for the Land, Bulstrod, 1 part Rep.
354.

Any Parson having a full Tenth in a Parish may be Ra^ed a Tenth part, Resol.
Judges 1633. Sect. 33.

If any Person occupy Land lying in several Pa ishes, he must in this Rate be
accountable for them proportionably in the Parishes where they lie; but it
seems reasonable that for his Personal Estate he should be chargeable in the
Parish where he is an Inhabitant

In Rating Stock or Goods it is to be Rated according to the proportion of Land
Rent, as five or six Pounds a Year in Land to be held equal with 100 l. in
Goods or Stock.

In a Parish where the Inhabitants by reason of their own Poverty or f^wness,
are not able to relieve their Poor, two Justices, one being of the Quorum, may
by Rate Tax other places and Parishes within the Hundred, or all the Hundred if
necessity requires it; and th^s not proving sufficient, the Justices in their
Sessions may Tax the County in part, or wholly if they think fit, 43 Eliz.
Wingates Abridg. Stat. Tit. Poor People. And if any Person find himself
agrieved by any Act done by the Justices of the Peace or Overseers, they may
for Redress apply themselves to the Justices in the Quarter Sessions, Dalt.
Just. P. Chap. 73. Folio 160. etc.

If a Parish shall reach to and lie in two Counties, or one part thereof to lie
in any City or Corporation Town where there are proper Justices, in that case
the Justices of each County are to meddle so much as appertains to the Party
lying in the County of which they are Justices, and so of the other parts, and
yet the Overseers shall without dividing themselves, execute their Office in
all places within the said Parish, but shall give up their Account to the
Justices or Head Officers of both places, Wingates Abridg. Stat. Tit. Poor
People, 43 Eliz. Ch^p. 2. Dalton Just. P. Chap. 73* Folio 156.

The Overseers of the Poor are within 4 Days after their Year is expired and
other Officers nominated their Successors, to give up their Account in Truth
before two Justices of the Peace, one to be of the Quorum, chiefly to this
purpose.

1st. What Stock of Money they have received or Rated, and not come to their
Hands. 2d. What Stock of Stuff or Ware is in their own, or in the Hands of any
of the Poor. 3d. What Apprentices they have put out, and bound according to the
Statute. 4th. What Poor they have set to Work or relieved. 5th. What Poor they
have suffered to beg or wander out of the Town in the High Ways, or in their
Town without their Direc ions. 6th. Whether they met Monthly to consi^er of
such Matters as are properly belonging to their Office. ^th. Whether they have
made their Rates indifferent upon the Parishoners, according to their Ability.
8th. Whether they have truly endeavored to gather and levy all Assessme^^^
9th. Whether in them there has been any neglect of the Justices Warrants
directed to them on any Account, especially those for collecting any
Forfeitures, according to the Statute, 43 Eliz. Chap. 2. Dalton Just. P. Chap.
73 Folio 153.

Note, by the Statute made for the Burying in Woollen, 30 Caroli 2. the
Justices may nor allow the Accounts of the Overseers of the Poor, till such
time as they have given them an Account of the Burial^ and Certificates, and of
their levying the penalty by that Statute directed.

If they refuse to give in their Accounts, or make and yield a true and perfect
Account to the said Justices, of such Money and Stock in their Hands, as has
been mentioned, two Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum, may commit
them to the Common Goal, not to be dismissed till they shall render a true
Account, and paid or satisfied the succeeding Overseers, so much of the Sum
and Stock as shall any ways appear to be remaining in their Hands, and upon
making a false Account, lie liable to be bound over to the Sessions or Assizes,
where an Indictment may be preferred against them, Dalt. Just. P. Chap. 73.
Folio ^5^. Or the Justices, or any two of them may grant a Warrant to the
succeeding Overseers to levy the Sum upon the Goods and Chattels of the
Offenders, by Distress and Sale, and for want of such Distress, may commit them
to Goal till Satisfaction be. But note, upon Sale the Overplus is to be
returned to the Owner, 42 Eliz. Chap. 2.

If it so happen that any part of such Stock shall be found or known to be in
the Hand of any Poor, upon refusal of delivery, two Justices may by Warrant
cause the value to be levied, or for want of wherewith on which to make
Distress, commit the Party to Prison, as in the former Cases, Dalt. Just. P.
Chap. 72. Ibid.

And for these all other Faults and Negligences of Churchwardens and Overseers,
^lating to the Execution of their Office, as to the Poor, etc. for every such
Default made by any of them, he is to forfeit 20 s. upon Proof, by Confession,
or Examination of Witnesses, to be levied by Warrant of two Justices of the
Peace, by Distress and Sale of Goods, or for want of it the Offender to be
Imprisoned, and the Money so levied to be Employed to the use of the Poor of
the Parish, Dalt. Just. P. Chap. 73. Folio 155. 43. Eliz. Chap. 2. So that by
the Law great care is taken that these Officers shall not be wronged in their
^ust R^ghts, nor the Parish or Poor be wronged by them.

CHAP. LXXIX. The Office of the Overseers of the Poor in receiving Fines to the
use of the Poor in some Respect; of Destroyers of Game, unlawfully Fishing,
also relating to Measures and Burying in Woollen.
IT is the Business of the Overseers of the Poor, to receive such Fines or
Forfeitures as accrue from Offenses in such, as in the Night time Kill, or take
any Coneys upon the Borders of Warrens, or such Grounds where the Owner may
lawfully keep Coneys, the Parties so Killing or Destroying, not being
Proprietors, nor allowed by the Owner.

Also of such as use Hare-Pipes, Snares, or such like Implements, or take Fish
by any Nets, Angling, or other Device, in any Water or River not lawful, or
shall be assisting thereunto, without the consent of the Lord of the Manor or
Owner of the Water; and the Sum for these Offenses is to be amerced by the
Justice of Peace before whom the Party offending shall be convicted, the Sum
not exceeding Ten Shillings, over and above what the Owner may have or recover
his Damage sustained for; and the party for Default of payment may be sent by
the Justice to the House of Correction, for any time not exceeding a Month,
unless he enter into Bond with one or more Sureties to the party aggrieved, the
Sum not exceeding Ten pounds, never in the like manner to offend any more; and
for these Offenses the Offenders Goods are liable to Distress and Sale, but
then the Imprisonment must be remitted upon Satisfaction that way made, 22 etc.
23 Caroli 2. Chap. 24.

As to Weights and Measures the Overseers for the poor as well as other
Officers, ought to have a special Regard to them, and in this case there ought
to be one Weight, one Measure, and one Yard, according to the Exchequer
Standard in every part of the Realm, as well within as without places
privileged; and every Measure of Corn is to be striked, and those that keep
different Weights and Measures not agrreeing in all respects with the Standard
to buy and sell by, being convicted thereof by the Oath of two Witnesses,
before any Justice of Peace, or Head Officer of the Town or place where the
Offense is done, shall forfeit Five Shillings, to be levied by the
Churchwardens or Overseers of the poor in the parish where the Offense is
committed, by Distress and Sale of Goods upon Warrant, and for want of such
Distress the Offender to be committed to prison without Bail till payment be
made; and if any person be troubled for any Matter concerning his Office, in
this case he may plead the General Issue and give in Evidence, the Act of 17
Caroli 2. And to have treble Costs if the Suit so brought prove vexatious,
Dalt. Just. P. 112. Folio 246. etc.

The penalty of 5 l. is to the use of the poor where any persons shall be
buried in any Garment, Winding Sheet, Shroud or other Materials not made of
Sheeps Wool only; or if the Coffin the Dead Body is put into, be lined or
faced with any thing made of any Material but Sheeps Wool; and the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor are to take care of this in all
Respects that the Forfeitures be duly Levied. See more, 30 Caroli 2. Chap. 3.
etc.

And thus much briefly for the Office of the Overseers of the poor. See more in
the Office of a Constable and Churchwarden, where many things belonging to
their Office are intermingled, and therefore here omitted, or but slightly
touched on.

CHAP. LXXX. Of Fairs and Markets, Toll and Toll-keepers, Clerks of Markets,
their Office and Duty in some Particulars, etc. Measures, and Measuring,
Sealing, etc.
A Fair must be kept no longer than the Grant or Use by Custom will Warrant for
what is Warrantable; and Goods so Sold after the Expiration of the Time, as
Merchandise, etc. The Seller shall forfeit to the King double the Value of what
is Sold, and the prosecutor shall have the fourth part; the Fair must be duly
Proclaimed by the Sheriff, or Lord of the Fair, and the Time it is to continue
mentioned, the place or ground appointed, set out, and care taken that there be
no Riots or Disturbance, but an Orderly keeping of it during the Time it lasts.

Where there is a Beast Fair for Horses, Mares, Geldings, and other Cattle,
they must have their appointed places, that those that resort thither may have
a Certainty where to find them. And one sufficient person, or more must be
appointed to take Toll, and keep the same place from Ten in the Forenoon, every
Day till Sun Set, during the Time of the Fair or Market, upon pain to forfeit
for every Default 40 s. And in Tolling, the party thereto appointed must have
before him the paries Bargaining, upon his Tolling any Horse, Mare, etc. And
must Write in his Book the Christian Names, and Sir Names of all the Parties;
also their Dwelling places, with the Colors and some particular Marks of the
Horse or Mare, etc. so Sold or Bargained for, on Penalty to forfeit for every
Default 40 s. and he is to have one Credible Person known to him to Vouch the
Horse or Mare, etc. and testify his Knowledge of the Seller, and his Name and
place of Abode must be entered with the others in the Book, with the Color,
Mark, or Price of the Horse or Mare, Sold or Exchanged, and the Buyer requiring
it, may have a Note in Writing out of the Book, Reciting the Contract and
Tollman's Hand thereto, for which he may take Twopence.

If any Toll keeper suffer a Sale to pass without a Voucher, unless he well
know the party, and every Party making a false Testimony, or Avouchment, or
every Seller unknown, not bringing a Voucher, and causing the same to be
entered, forfeits Five Pounds, one Moiety to King, and the other to the
Prosecutor, and the Sale of the said Horse, etc. to be void. Yet
notwithstanding such Vouching, the Owner of a Stolen Horse, etc. so Sold, his
Executors or Adminstrators, claiming him within six Months after the Stealing,
may Redeem at the price he was Sold for, making proof that it is his, and that
it was Stolen by two sufficient Witnesses before a Justice of the County where
he is found, or the Head Officer or Magistrate of a Corporation, and the price
to be such, as the Buyer upon Oath shall testify before the Justice, he paid
for him; and if the Stolen Horse be not Sold in open Fair or Market, and
lawfully Tolled, the Right is in the Owner from whom he was Stole, and he may
Seize or Replevy him in any place where he finds him.

If any person Buy Oxen, Goats, Sheep, Calves, Heifers, Lambs, etc. alive, he
shall not Sell them again alive till he has kept them in his pasture by the
space of five Weeks.

As for Measure, there shall be only the Winchester Bushel, and no other
Bushel, and that to contain 8 Gallons; and whosoever Sells by any other, according
to the 22d. Caroli 2. Chap. 8. forfeits 40 s. And upon the Clerk of the
Market's refusing to Seal such Measure as shall be full Gauged, he forfeits for
the first Offense 5 l. for the second 10. l. Or if the King's Clerk of his
Market of his House exact, or take more Fees than his due, that is, above one
penny for Sealing a Bushel, a Half penny for half a Bushel, and one Farthing
for Measures of less proportion, he incurs, and shall undergo the penalty in
the Statute, Caroli 1.

A Brass Bushel is to be chained to a post, or public place in the
Marketplace, at the Charge of the person taking Toll for the public Use of
Measuring, upon penalty of forfeiting of five Pounds, 22 Caroli 2. Chap. 8.

Whosoever shall Sell or Buy Corn without Measuring, being thoreunto required,
so Selling or Buying it in Sacks, or Bags, or in any other thing, shall forfeit
the said Corn, or the value thereof to the party making his Complaint of this
Offense against the Statute, 22 and 23 Caroli 2. Chap. 12. And upon Complaint
the Defendant by the Oath of one or more Witnesses before a Justice of the
Pcace, must prove that he or they did Buy or Sell according to the Statute of
22 Caroli 2. and 23 Caroli 2. or else pay the Forfeitures by the latter
directed, which upon Warrant may be Levied by Distress and Sale of Goods; the
Warrant to be given under the Hand and Seal of one or more Justices, before
whom such Conviction shall be, one half to the poor of the parish where the
Offense is committed, and the other to the Informer, Ibid.

The Duty and Office of the Surveyors of the Highways and Bridges, Scavengers
in London, Westminster, Borough of Southwork, etc. With more particular
Directions what they are to do and observe therein, and how to behave
themselves, and order Matters for the due Discharge of the said Office. CHAP.
LXXXI. Surveyors of the Highways, their Office and Duty in mending the Ways,
and Rating.
THough Ways are generally called the King's Highway, yet of Ways there are
three sorts: 1. A Way where Men have a just Right to walk in, Pass and Repass.
2. A common Foot way and Horse way. 3. A Way for Carts and Wains, and all sorts
of Carriages; and this latter is most properly called the King's Highway, free
for himself and Subjects to pass and Re-pass at all times; whereas some in the
other Sense, are Ways only to Grounds, Houses, etc. And Ways by Custom, and
some again upon Sufferances in the public Ways. All Nusances or Stoppages are
Indictable, especially if not timely removed on Notice given, or the Lord of
the Soil for any digging or spoiling the Highways, may bring his Action
against the Offenders.

The Surveyors duly chose by the other Officers, with the Advice of the
Inhabitants, or the major part of them upon public Notice before given, are
diligently to oversee those that Work on the days appointed, for the digging
and carrying Gravel and other Materials, for mending such Ways where they shall
find them defective, giving them Directions in order thereto; and upon public
Notice or Wa ning, the Persons so qualified are to send their Carts and
Laborers.

Every Person having in his own Occupation a Plough-Land, in Tillage or
Pasture, or keeping a Plough or Draught in the same Parish, is liable to send,
according to the Fashion and Custom of the County wherein he resideth, or is so
legally Charged, a Wain or Cart with Oxen or Horses, fit for Carriage and Work
of this nature, attended by two able Men, who shall do such Work as shall be,
by the Surveyors, appointed them, for the space of days, Working 8 hours every
such day, under the Penalty of forfeiting for every days Default 10 s. and
every other Householder, Cotter or Labourer, not being a hired Servant, shall in
Person attend the Service to Work, or send an able Man in his stead, under
Penalty for every days Default to pay 12 d. and all other Persons, being no
otherways chargeable; but Cottages being Subsidy 5 l. in Goods, or 40 s. by the
Year in Lands, or above, they must find two able Men to Work in the Service.

It is in the Discretion of the Surveyors* if there be more Carts, Wains, etc.
than are necessary, to appoint two able Men instead of a Team, on forfeiture of
12 d. each, in case of Defect. And if in 6 days the Ways cannot be conveniently
mended, as is the usual time, they may set a farther time; but then they must
make Payment for it according to the Rate of the County; and if hereupon there
be no Agreement, the Justice may settle the Rate.

If Materials be wanting, the Surveyors may take the small loose Stones from
any Man's Quarry, and such Rubbish as he finds there, it being near the Road,
without paying for it, but must not dig not take away the great Stones. They
may dig Gravel and Sand for the like Use, near any Highway, in other Men's
Ground, not being their House, Yard, Orchard or Garden, without paying for it,
the Pit not exceeding 10 Foot in breadth, and the like in width; which, as soon
as the Work is over, must be covered up and made good at their Charge who
caused it to be dug; or if it be so filled up within the space of one Month,
they forfeit 5 Marks, to be recovered by the Owner, by Action of Debt.

All Owners of Ground adjoining to the Highways are to keep their Hedges low
and upright, that the Boughs or Brambles standing out may not hinder or offend
Travelers, and that so the Sun may shine on the Ways, to dry them; and such as
are negligent in this, may be Presented and Indicted, and thereupon forfeit 10
s. besides their Charges.

And in case Ditches are stopped up with Mud or Ouse that should be Drains to
the Highway, so that the Water lies in it, and cannot have a current Passage,
the Owner of such a Ditch or Water-drain shall forfeit 12 d. for every Rod so
neglected to be Scowred, by 18 Eliz. Chap. 10. And the Surveyor has power to
make Conveniences for draining the Highways, as Sluices, Outlets of Water, etc.
into any Man's Ditch or Ground, for the better and more speedy Convenience of
passing the Road. If any Man, upon Cleansing a Ditch, cast the Soil into the
Road, and suffer it to lie there above the space of six Months, he is liable to
pay 12 d. per Load for as many as shall be adjudged to be there.

If a Justice of the Peace shall, upon his own Knowledge of any Nuisance on the
Road, make a Presentment, it stands good, and two Justices, one being of the
Quorum, may make the Amercement or Fine to be levied on the Offender.

These Officers, viz. Surveyors, have in their Care all Bridges witnin their
several Parishes or Liberties, to see they are kept in good Repair, from time
to time, at the Charge of the Parish, Hundred, or as the Custom has been, and
is continued; and if a Custom has therein ceased for a time, it may be revived;
for in some Cases particular Persons are bound, by Tenure of Land, etc. to
repair part or the whole of a Bridge, etc. without a Parish Charge. But to
instance these Particulars, would be too tedious for my intended Brevity; and
many times a whole County Isles chargeable to be Rated for the Repair of a
Bridge, etc.

CHAP. LXXXII. The Office of a Surveyor, in draining the Roads, making
Presentiments; and in what Case a Justice of Peace may Present; how the Surveyor
shall be Reimbursed for Moneys laid out for Materials, etc.
A Surveyor may Cause a Watercourse or Spring in the Highway, within his
Parish, to be turned into another Man's Ground, or his Ditch next adjoining to
the said way, for the Convenience of keeping the Road dry, as in his Discretion
shall seem fitting, Dalt. Chap. 50. Fol. 103.

The Surveyors, o any one of them, have power to present to the next Justice of
the Peace every Default, upon the 2 and 3 of Philip and Mary, Chap. 8. and 5
Eliz. Chap. 14. within one Month after the Default made, on the Penalty of 40
s. and the Justice under Penalty of 5 l. must certify the same at the next
Quarter Sessions, where the Bench of Justices have power to enquire of the
Default, and to set such Fine on the Offender as any two of them, one being of
the Quorum, shall think fit, 5 Eliz. Chap. 1^.

If any Justice of the Peace present in Sessions upon his own Knowledge, it
shall be a good Conviction, whereupon any two of the Justices, the one being of
the Quorum, may assess a Fine as well as if the Matter had been found on the
Verdict of 12 Men: But in this Case the Offender shall be, as in other Cases,
admitted to his Traverse, 5 Eliz. Chap. 13. Rast. 199. and all such Fines and
Forfeitures are to be bestowed and employed toward the mending and bettering
of the Highways in the Parish where the Offenses are committed, Wing. Abridg.
Stat. Tit. Highways, 2 and 3 P. and M. Chap. 8.

Where Surveyors have laid out their Money for Materials to mend the Ways,
where without there were none fitting to be had, it is enacted 2 and 3 of
William and Mary, That upon notice given by the Surveyors of Highways, to the
Justices of the Peace, at their Grand Sessions, and Oath made of what Sum or
Sums of Money are expended to that Use and Behoof; the Justices thereupon, or
any two of them, under their Hands and Seals, may cause an equal Rate to be
made, for the reimbursing the Surveyor or Surveyors, the Moneys by them to the
Use aforesaid laid out, upon all the Inhabitants of such Parish or Township
where it was expended, in Rates according to the Rules and Methods prescribed
in 43 Eliz. Chap. 2 for the Relief of the Poor; which Act directs the Tax to be
laid on each individual Inhabitant, as Parson, Vicar and others; and every
Occupier of House or Land, Tyths Impropriate, Impropria ions of Tyths,
Colomnies or Salable under Woods in the said Parish, so to be R^ted; and the
Rate so allowed and settled by the Justices, in their said Sessions, shall be
gathered and collected by the Surveyor or Surveyors of the Highways; and if any
one refuses to pay the Money according to the Rate assessed, it is lawful for
the Surveyors to levy it by Distress and Sale of Goods and Chattels of the
Person's so refusing, reserving reasonable Charges, for making the said
Distress, and rendering the Overplus to the Owner, if any there be.

By the 3 and 4 of William and Mary is farther provided, That whereas the Fines
imposed and set on the Presentment of a Justice of the Peace, and other Fines
and Issues, for not repairing the Highways, being oftentimes returned into the
Court of Exchequer, and other Courts, and so levied upon some particular
Inhabitants, and no Provision made to reimburse them; now on the contrary,
Fine, Issue, Penalty or Forfeiture shall not for the future be returned into
any of the said Courts, but be levied and put into the hands of the Surveyors,
to be applied toward the Repair of the said Highways; and if it be hereafter
levied on one or more of the Inhabitants, his or their Complaint, for Redress
lies to the Justices of the Peace, at their special Sessions; and they, or any
two of them, by Warrant under their Hands and Seals, may cause a Rate to be
made, according as before set down, for the reimbursing the Surveyors of their
Money laid out for the Repair of the Highways, or of such Inhabitant or
Inhabitants, as the Money shall be levied upon; which Rate so made and
confirmed, shall be collected by the Surveyor or Surveyors; and he or they,
within a Month next after the making and confirming the Rate, must pay unto the
Inhabitant or Inhabitants such Money so levied on him or them, as before
recited.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Several Matters relating to Justices of Assize, and Justices in
their Sessions of Peace, concerning Surveyors; with Law Matters relating to
them.
JUstices of the Assize, and Oyer and Terminer, Justices of the Peace in their
Sessions, and Stewards of Leets on Law-days may hear and determine Offenses
against the Statute of the 18 Eliz. and the Surveyors who are to Levy the
Penalties and Forfeitures of that Statute, and the Constables and Churchwardens
who are in default of the Surveyors, to Levy the same, are to yield up their
Accounts to them, as appointed in 2 and 3 Phil. and Mary Chap. 8. and 5 Eliz.
Chap. 13.

All defects of Repairs of Causeways, Highways, Pavements or Bridges, shall be
presented in the County where they lie, and not elsewhere; and that no such
Presentment or Indictment shall be removed by Certiorari into the King's Bench,
or otherwise, out of the said County, till such Presentment or Indictment be
first traversed, and Judgment thereupon given, 22 Caroli 2. Chap. 12.

And no Indictment, or Presentment, or Order, by Virtue of the Statute of 3 and
4 W. and M. is to be removed out of the County unto any other Court relating to
Highways, etc. but are to be determined in the County where the same does lie,
and not elsewhere.

All Actions against any Person or Persons for any thing done by means of the
Act of 22 Caroli 2. for Repairing the Highways, shall be laid in the proper
County where the Fact was done, and not elsewhere, and to it the Defendant may
plead the General Issue; and if there be a Verdict for the Defendant or the
Plaintiff be Nonsuited, or discontinue his Action, the Defendant shall recover
treble Cost, sustained by reason of such Action or Suit, and by the 3 and 4 of
W. and M. in such Cases the Defendant may plead the General Issue, and give the
Special Matter in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff be Nonsuited, or forbear
prosecution, or a Verdict pass against him or her, the Defendant or Defendants
shall recover double Costs.

Trustees of Lands given to the use of maintaining Pavements, Causways,
Highways and Bridges, are obliged to Let them to Farm at the m^st improved
Rent, without any Fine, and the Justices of the Peace in their open Sessions
may order the improvement and employment of such Lands, or the profits arising
thereby, other than such Lands as have been given to the uses aforesaid, to any
College or Hall in either of the Universities, that have Visitors of their
own, according to the Will of the Donor; if it appear to them the persons have
been faulty or negligent in the performance of their Trust, 22 Caroli 2. Chap.
12. Kebles Statutes, Folio 1394 Sect. 2. Wingates Highways, Section 32.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Directions to Surveyors in case of Rescues upon Seizure, and
what relates as to Penalties concerning Wains or Carriages on the Road.
IF any person or persons shall resist or make forcible Opposition against any
of the persons employed in the due Execution of the Acts of Parliament 2 and 3
P. and M. 5 and 18 Eliz. 22 Caroli 2. made for the more effectual Amendment of
the Highways, or shall Rescue any Goods or Cattle taken in Distress, by virtue
thereof, being convicted by the Oath of one credible Witness before any one
Justice of the Peace, or by the view of the Justice himself; for every such
Offense the Offender shall forfeit 40 s. and if not paid in seven days, the
Party to be committed to the County Goal, where the Offense was committed, to
remain till paid; and this is to be delivered to the Surveyor or Surveyors of
the Highways in the Parish where the Offense was committed, and employed for
the amending the said Ways, 22 Car. 2. Chap. 12.

All Traveling Wains, Carts or Carriages, by way of common Carriage, are not
to go with a Team on the public Highways with above Five Beasts at length, and
if they shall Drive with a greater number of Horses or Oxen, they shall all
Draw in Pairs, that is, two a Breast, for such number as they shall use, except
one Horse: And in defect of this, the Offender or Owner of the Wagon,
Carriage, etc. forfeits 40 s. one third part to the Surveyors of the Highway of
the Town, Village or Hamlet where the Offense shall be committed, another third
to the Overseers of the Poor, and another to the Informer; and this to be
imposed on the Offender by any one Justice of the Peace of the place or
Division where the Offense is committed, upon the Oath of one credible Witness,
or upon the Justices own view, and to be levied by the High Constable or other
Officer of such place or Division, by Warrant. And a Surveyor seeing and
suffering Wagons or Carts to pass with more Horses, etc. than mentioned, or in
any other Order, may upon Conviction for such his neglect, be Amerced by the
Justice in any Sum under Forty Shillings, to be levied on his Goods and
Chattels.

CHAP. LXXXV. Directions to the Scavengers and Managers of Sewers in the Cities
of London and Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, relating to their Duty and
Office.
AS for the Cities of London and Westminster, their Scavengers are in the
Nature of Country Surveyors, where Commissioners are over them appointed, to
take care they do their Duty, and to take Cognizance of Vaults, common Drains,
or Common-shoars, to amove Nusances, and to s^e after the Pavements, Payment of
Raker, and what else shall be amiss, also in the Borough of Southwark, and
places adjacent, the aforesaid Cities, in them the Housekeepers are to sweep
and cleanse the Streets, Lanes and Alleys, and public places before their
Houses, and bring out their Dirt or Soil fit for the Raker to take up and carry
away, and the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, may
set out and purchase Grounds for Laystalls, to receive the Dirt and Rubbish
carried out of the City, and for other Materials and Commodities. And any
person upon Complaint of Nusances in Defect of Pavement, Dirt or Rubbish lying
beyond the usual Time, neglect in Rakers in not duly coming and giving Notice
to bring out Dust or Dirt by Ring of Bell or such like Warning, may by the
Commissioners be redressed, and the parties offending punished as the Statutes
in those cases provide and direct.

No person under the Penalty of Five Shillings, is to throw any Dirt, or
Rubbish, or Noisome thing into the Streets that may be a hinderance or give
Offense, nor into any Lanes or places of public passage, etc. or against a
Wall of any Church, Churchyard, or any House; and if they throw it into any
common Vault, or Sink, to hinder the Current of the Drains, they forfeit 40 s.
14 Car. 2. Chap. 2. And those that sweep not up their Dirt for the Scavenger to
take away before their Houses in Streets, Alleys, and other public places,
forfeit 13 s. 4 d. for every Neglect, 13 Caroli 2. Chap. 2.

If any Hoop, wash or cleanse any Barrels or other Cask, or set out empty Cask
to mend, or hew rough Timber, saw Stone, for each of these Offenses they are to
pay 20 s. and every Householder is to keep the Streets, Lanes, and other
public passages, so far us belongs to him paved, well paved unto the Channel
or middle of the Street or Lane, under the Penalty of 20 s. for every Rod that
shall be defective, and 20 s. a week till it shall be paved or mended. To
enquire after Offenders, and make such Redresses as are found Agrievances, by
applying themselves to the Commissioners, etc. and by the Statute of the 2
William and Mary, among other things it is enacted, that the Rakers, Scavengers
and other Officers thereto appointed, shall every Day in the Week, Sundays
excepted and other Holy Days, bring their Carts and other Carriages unto their
several Charges and Divisions where they can pass, and give Notice at or before
by the ringing of a Bell there, and in Alleys and other places where they
cannot pass, that the People may sweep up and bring out their Soil, which the
Rakers are every day obliged to carry away uuder Penalty of 40 s. for every
Offense.

In the Place and Division where any new Street shall be made, the Justices of
the Peace of that Division may take a View, and if they think it convenient to
be paved, or otherways amended, they are to certify the same under their Hands
to the Justices of the Peace at the next General Quarter Sessions for the Place
where the Street or Streets are, who are to take order for the paving or
amending as they shall think fit, and all People concerned therein, by a
limited time ordered by the Justices, are to be complying under the Penalty of
40 s. for every Perch, upon such Offense or Default, and accordingly for a
greater or lesser Quantity, and the like Sum for every Week it shall remain so
unpaved or amended; and any Scavengers duly chosen, refusing to take upon them
the Office forfeits Ten Pounds for such Refusal, then other two to be chosen
within seven Days after such refusal, and to forfeit as the Former upon
refusal, and the Penalties to be paid to the Surveyors of the High Ways of the
place, to be employed toward the amending the High Ways and Streets of the
same Parish, Ward or Division, to be levied by Distress and Sale of Goods and
Chattels of the Offenders, by Virtue of Warrant from a Justice of the Peace in
any of the Places where the Offense is committed, to be directed for that
purpose to the Constables or other Officers of the said Parish, to any two or
more of them, and reasonable Charge for the Distress being deducted, the
Overplus is to be returned to the Owner if any there be, and for want of
Distress or Non-payment within six Days, upon Demand or Notice left at the
House of the Offender in Writing, he or they so offending may be committed to
the common Goal of the County, City or Place respectively, by Warrant from any
of the said Justices of the Peace under Hand and Seal, and there to remain
without Bail or Mainprize till payment be made as aforesaid, and so for every
person elected and refusing the Office, etc.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Within what time Rates are to be made, and by whom. How the
Scavengers are to account for them, and the Penalties upon Refusal. Assessment
how to be made and levied, etc.
WIthin Twenty Days after the Scavengers are elected, the Constable, other
Officers and Parishioners, or the greater number of them present, are to make a
Rate or Assessment, according to Pound Rate upon the Inhabitants of their
Parish, to be allowed and confirmed by two Justices of the Peace of the place,
etc. to be collected Quaterly; and if upon Demand of the Scavenger or other
Officer appointed to collect the same, Payment be refused, Distress may be made
by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of two Justices of the Peace, to be levied
by Distress and Sale of Goods, or for want of such Distress and Non-payment,
the Offender to be Imprisoned till payment be made, unless a Peer of the Realm.

The Money so collected is yearly to be accounted for by the Scavengers, for the
time being, to two or more of the Justices of the Peace residing in or near the
Places, for which Scavengers are appointed, within 28 Days after the new
Scavengers are chosen for the Year ensuing, and to be paid into the Hands of
the new Scavengers, if any remain undisbursed in their Hands; and two such
Justices of the Peace upon refusal to make Account, may commit the Refuser or
Refusers to Prison without Bail or Mainprize, till he or they account and pay
the Remainder.

Where in a Parish there are such High ways as cannot be amended without the
Help of Assessment, then one or more Assessments from Time to Time may be made
upon all the Inhabitants, Occupiers, and Owners of Lands, Houses, Tenements, or
any personal Estate there, usually ratable to the Poor, to be allowed, levied,
and colleted by such Persons as the said Justices of the Peace at their General
Quarter Sessions shall appoint and direct, and the Money so raised to be
accounted for, and employed toward repairing such Highways from Time to Time
as the Justices shall appoint or order to be levied, by the Distress and Sale
of the Goods of the Persons so assessed, upon Non-payment of the same within 14
Days after Demand.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Several things very useful to be known to Surveyors,
Scavengers, as Commission of Sewers, Weights of Hay. Hay or Straw-carts
standing in the Streets, Wheels of Carts, their Size; keeping of Swine, and
putting out Lights, Lamp-lights, etc.
ALL the Sinks, Sewers and Vaults made since the Twelfth of King Charles the
Second, in the City and Liberties of Westminster, etc. are under the Care of
the Commissioners of Sewers, who have power to cleanse, alter, or so order them
as to them shall seem best for Convenience, or to make new ones, and to take
away all Nusances, and to take away any cross Gutters or Channels in all or any
of the Streets or Lanes within their Division.

Every Truss of old Hay brought or offered to be sold within the Cities of
London and Westminster, and other places within the Weekly Bills of Mortality,
is according to Statute to weigh 56 Pound at the least, from the last Day of
August to the first Day of June, and from the first Day of June, to the last
Day of August, being new Hay of the Years growth to weigh Sixty Pounds; but if
old Hay of the last Years growth, 36 as aforesaid, and none to suffer their
Wagons or Carts to stand in the places aforesaid, ^oaden with Hay or Straw, to
sell the same after two of the Clock in the Afternoon, from Michaelmas to
Lady Day, nor after Three from Lady Day to Michaelmas, on Penalty of Five
Shillings for every Offense or Neglect, one half to the poor, and the other to
the Informer, upon Commission of the Offense; but if the Justice of Peace see
it on vsew, then upon Conviction one half to the poor, and the other half to
the Scavenger, upon Default of Payment for the paving and cleansing the place,
or otherways to the relief of the poor as aforesaid,. This to be levied by
Warrant, by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, and Chattels, by the
Constable, Headborough, etc. of the Parish where the Offense is committed, and
in Default of Distress or Non-payment within Six Days upon Notice or Writing
left at the Offenders House by the Constable, or Headborough, where it is not
by the Act of 2 W. and M. otherway provided, unless the Party be a Peer of the
Realm, he is to be committed to the common Goal of the City or County
respectively by Warrant; and to remain without Bail or Mainprize till payment.
And by the same Statute the Wheels of every Cart or Dray to be used for any
Carriage whatsoever, from any place within the said Cities and Places within
the same, where the Streets are paved, are to be made to contain in full
Breadth 6 Inches in the Felly, and must not be shod or wrought about with Iron
Work, nor drawn with above two Horses after they are up Hill from the Water
side, upon Forfeiture of 40 s. for every Offense, to be levied by Warrant on
Goods and Chattels, in Distress, as other the like Cases, though this extends
not to Country Carts or Wagons that shall bring Goods to the Cities or Places
aforesaid, or shall carry any Goods half a Mile beyond the paved Places of the
Cities, Streets, etc. However by an Act of 3. and 4 W. and M. Chap. 12. this
last Clause seems to be altered; for any Inhabitant of any of the Parishes
within the weekly Bills of Mortality, who dwells off and from the Pavement, and
uses his Cart as well off as upon the Pavement, or any Brewer or Scavenger or
other Person employed in carrying away the Dirt and Soil in Lanes, Streets and
Alleys, may use shod Wheels for Dray or Cart, and narrower than Six Inches in
the Fellies, notwithstanding the former Act or any Law or usage to the
contrary. But this seems not to affect Cars, and such as carry Merchants or
Shopkeepers Goods.

By the Act 2 W. and M. no person or persons are to keep, breed, or feed Swine
in any part of the House, Backsides of the paved Streets of the said Cities,
Boroughs, or Parishes, where such Streets, are contiguous, on penalty of
forfeiting them to the use of the poor of the Parish where such Swine shall be
kept.

All Householders in the Cities and Liberties of Westminster, and Counties of
Surry, and Middl^sex, comprised within the Bills of Mortality, are by a new
Act, where their Houses adjoyn to, and are near the Street, to hang on the
outside of their Houses next the Street, every Night from Michaelmas-day to
Lady Day, Candles, or Lights in Lanthorns, from time to time as it shall grow
Dark, to continue burning till Twelve of the Clock in the Night, on pain of
forfeiting 2 s. for every Default, unless such as shall agree to pay and make
use of the Unequal Lights or Lamps, to be placed at such Distance in convenient
places of the Streets, as two or more Justices of the Peace shall approve of.

As for the several Acts for mending particular Ways, Bridges, etc. they are
very many, and not concerning a Surveyor, in general. What is written may
suffice, not doubting but considering what is set down, which is the most
material, it will in a great measure inform him well to discharge his Office,
to the Content and Satisfaction, not only of the Parishioners, but of the Laws,
requiring him in all respects to perform his Duty, as a Trusty and knowing
Surveyor or Scavenger.

FINIS.

