A REMONSTRANCE Of all the Proceedings, Passages, or Occurrences at Nottingham,
York, and New Castle, from the 3. of September. to the 10.

FIRST, Relating the manner of a Powder Plot at Nottingham against his Majesty,
but discovered.

SECONDLY, The great preparations that is making at York to defend the City
against Sir John Hotham.

THIRDLY, What Forces the Lord Strange, and the Earl of New Castle is sending
to the King.

With many other Passages of moment, to satisfy you of the Truth of the
present Affairs of the Kin^^ome.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. Sept. 13.

News from York, Nottingham, and New Castle, September 9. 1642.
SIR,
MY Love tendered unto you, I here present to your view, some observations and
remarkable passages that has passed here in these parts this week, and in
these distracted and dangerous times.

Upon Saturday, Septem. 3. the Earl of Cumberland Lord General for
Yorkshire, and the Lord Mayor of York, met at the Common Hall again this
day, who had appointed the Court of Aldermen and Common Council of this City
to meet them, concerning the putting of the City into a p^sture of defense both
with Horse and Foot, but there was but a slender appearance, for not a above 6.
came there that day; The cause of their meeting was this, to summon the
Citizens to appear before them which was done, but half of them never came
there, and to take the names of those that would stand for the King, and the
names of those that were for the Parliament; or absented themselves, which
makes a great distraction in this City, and diverse well ^ffected people are put
into a continual fear; But as the Court broke up, the Lord General, the Lord
Mayor, Sir John Gotherick, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir John Gibson, with
two or three Aldermen, passing up the Streets toward the Minster, there
followed a great company of the Citizens, Ad prentices and others (throwing up
their Hats) and crying, For the King, For the King, but about the middle
Stonegate some gave out words, that there lived a Roundhead, and one ihat was
for the Parliament, and sent letters up to the Parliament, and gave inteligence
thither, he is a watch-maker, but the multitude slocked to his door in a
Tumultuous manner ^alling him Roundhead, and bid him come out of his shopP, or
they would fetch him out, and bring out his arms to serve the King against the
Parliament, and if he refused, they would pull down his house, be speaking some
words to them for so coming about his doors in a riotous manner, they with
some Caveleers, drew their swords, and brook all his windows* making such
spoil and kept such disorders, that the Lord General could scearce appease
the people, such confusion is here amongst us, no mao here dare speak well
of the Parliament, but he is threatened, and goes in danger. This night the Lord
general caused the gates of the City to be guarded with the Trained bands, and
some horse at every gate stood Centinell, and others to scout about 2. or 3.
milles without the City, and after the watch is set no man can pass with
safety, or get out or into the City.

This night about twelve of the Clock at night, was a great uprore within the
City crying up and down the streets, Arm, Arm, Horse, Horse; And suddenly
the Trained Bands, and three Hundred Horse, that is Quartered in the City was
raised.

These Horse are Raised in the County, for defense of it, some Reports was that
Sir John Hotham was coming out of Hull to surprise them, and others said the
Roundheads was rising to cut their throats, this is the style that is given to
all those that are for the Parliament, but in conclusion the cause of this
uproare was found to be by 2. or 3. Scotchmen that came this day from
Nottingham, and being drunk discharged their Pistols at that time of night,
this uproare did not a little fright the Lord General and the Lord Mayor, that
they would not go to bed no more that night, thus vigilant are they in his
Majesty's absence, others of the Trained Bands and some Troopers this night
broke open into some of the Houses of those they call Roundheads, and because
they did not rise and Arm themselves this night, they carried 2. or 3. to
prison.

This Evening His Majesty caused his Instructions for his Commissioners of
Array for the several Counties of England and Wales to be publissied in
print, and to be observed by all Sheriffs, Majors, Juffices of the peace,
Bailiffs, Headboroughs, Constables, and all other His Majesty's loving Subjects
whatsoever.

Sunday 4. of September, one Sir Henry Griffen, that lives near Hull, brought
news, Sir John Hotham, was preparing to come for York, and how he had
plundered his House, and taken his Arms from him, and that he had taken
prisoner, Searjant Major Ellis, that lay in his house that night, upon which
report the trained Bands was again raised, and the troops of horse caused to
watch all night, in this fear are they now within the City, that after it
grows dark, none can pass without examination, or else in danger to sustain
some mischief.

Monday, September 5. the Earl of Cumberland sent the 12. pieces of great
Ordinance, the King left at the Manor to the 4. Gates of the City, 2. at avery
Gate, mounted upon carriages? and the other four to be mounted upon several
places of the City, and that a Troop of Horse shall watch evsry night for the
securi-of it.

Tuesday, September 6. Post came hither that 300. Horse with 12. pieces of
Ordinance, raised by the Earl of Newcastle, in Durham, and Northumberland, and
are coming hither for the Kings service, and that this day they was at Darnton.

This day Post came with Letters to the Earl of Cumberland from His Majesty at
Nottingham that two Barrells of Gunpowder was sound under His Privy Chamber at
Nottingham to the great Amazement of His Royal Person, and all about him, but
how it came it is not yet known; Also he sent Command to him to have the
Trained Bands of the County in reabinesse, upon all occasions, for He intends
upon Monday next, Sept. 12. to be in the field with His Army.

Wednesday, Sept. 7. Post came hither also, to certify the Earl of Cumberland
that my Lord Strange has raised 2000 foot, and some horse, which came
yesterday to his Majesty at Nottingham, the last week, and that his Majesty
has not stired from Nottingham, but is gathering all his forces together to
go into the field if his Message (sent by the Earl of Newport, the Lord
Spencer, and the Lord Viscount Falkland, on Friday, Sept. 2.) should be
rejected.

This day Letters came to York, that 80. pieces of great Ordinance, and a
hundred Cannoneers are Landed at Newcastle, and will be here by such a day, all
which came from the States of Holland, by means of the Queen.

Thursday, news was brought to York, that Sir John Hotham was at Pocklington,
within 10. miles of YORK, with 2. troops of Horse, which put this City into
such a fright, that all was up in Arms, both horse, and foot, the gates kept
shut all day with a strong Gaurd of the trained bands.

This day came 300. Horse into York, from the Bishoppricke of Durham, and
Norrhumberland, and raised by the Earl of Newcastle, and his adherents there,
to aid the King against the Parliament.

On Monday next, Sept. 12. the Assizes begins at York, so appointed and dcreed
on by his Majesty, and the Grand Jury, and G^ntry of Yorkshire, to determine
some businesses concerning the Oyer, and Terminer.

Thus fare have I made you accquainted with the state of these parts of the
Kingdom, I rest,

York Sept. 9. 1642. Your loveing friend Tho. Belwood.

FINIS.

