A POEM To His most Excellent Majesty Charles the Second.

Ego Beneficio tuo (Caesar) quos ante Audiebam hodie vidi Deos: Nec feliciorem
ullum vitae meae aut Optavi, aut sensi Diem. Paterc', etc. By H. BEESTON
Winton'. Together with another By HEN. BOLD olim Winton'.

DVM PREMOR ATTOLLOR



LONDON: Printed by Edward Husbands, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the
Commons House of Parliament, 1660.

emblems of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland
SIR,
THe Business on Our Language is too great:
Our Mother Tongue stutters beneath the weight
Of Sovereignty: To speak You, she must ligue
With all the Neighbor Nations, and beg
Their Dialects which Your Majesty can frame
Slaves to Your Use, as them unto Your Fame:
So that Your Praise is Yours; You must allow
Matter, and Form: Theme, and Expression too.
ON which side shall we trace Your Stock? beyond
The Loins of Egbert, or of Pharamond:
Low sunk in Adam's Entrails it is found,
And thence shoots throw the World, to You, all crowned.
Vain Boldness of the Age, (Age of Deceits)
Knew this, and therefore coined Prae-Adamites!
This Blood (then) issuing from that distant source,
Exalted, Maturated in its course,
In Veins of sundry Monarchs Rectifid,
(Made All Elixir) through Your Heart does glide.
(Not Wine All, nor All Milk, but) mingled so,
That Courage thence, and Innocence do flow,
To animate the exactest Fabric, Heaven
Has, since its Mould, to wondering mankind given.
And seeing Beauties chiefest part does lie
In Shapes and Lines (not fading Colors) I
(Too low to praise, too true to flatter) dare
Aver this truth, That You are CHARLES the Fair.
Such Grace in Your Heroic Mien we spy,
Where, all the strokes are sharp, and masterly.
Be You then CHARLES the Fair, and Great, and Good,
Your Sire bought CHARLES the Martyr with His Blood.
-- Stay forward Nymph of Helicon!
And with thine un-dy'd Buskins, go not on!
Thou Wilt weep thine Eyes out, into sorrows hurled,
And I shall lead thee blind about the World.
(Thus) Rich Your Blood is, and Your Make is Free,
Compleatest Product of the Noblest Tree,
Shrining a Soul (to favor our weak sight)
Pure, Active, Subtle, as a Beam of Light.
And here we are lost, 'less some Intelligence
Be settled 'twixt Divinity and Sense.
My Quil's no Jacobs Staff, or if it were,
It could not take Your Height, nor reach Your Sphere.
Your Minde's a Constellation fixed above
The Orbs, where Kepler, and where Tycho rove.
Your Intellectual, and Your Moral Parts
(Vast Comprehensions of Arms and Arts)
Are for Your Peoples Veneration fit:
Fit for Your Wonder, not so for their Wit.
Courage inhabits there so quick and clear,
It warmed an Army (once) from Van to Rear;
(Cold as the North that formed it, bleak and thin,
Covered and lined with naught, but fear and sin)
And made it stand -- The brave Gustavus so
Opposed his naked Fins to the armed foe,
And showed the World, His gallant Breast alone
Was Currace, Gauntlet, Gorget, Morion.
But had You Conquered, You had been subdued,
Lost Your peculiar part of Fortitude,
Your Patience; which You may singly own,
Since none (but You) suffered into a Throne.
This was Your way; old Heroes cannot share,
Even let them pass for Barreters in War.
The Wisdom and Experience of Your Soul
Is such, as no Disaster could control.
The Flitting French, and the Unable Dane,
The Trade-led Dutch, Remote Iberian,
Nor Honest German did Your Cause restore;
You knew their strength, and knew Your own was more.
Firm as a Tabled Diamond and square,
Against coldness, force, or treachery You are.
Of Dubious Friends You scanned the various Clues,
What meant Your Courtships, Treaties, Enterviews?
Of open Enemies You skilled the Intents,
The Causes, Counsels, Progresses, Events:
No Prince so intimately versed has been
In the Resorts of Business, and of Men.
You are Your Self a Senate, Diet, One,
A single Council, Parliament alone.
In You, so justly constituted, we
Safely enchace our Jewel Liberty,
Handed before to many a Roytelet,
Sometimes in Steel, sometimes in Lead it was set.
The dusky Intricks of Your Enemies
May be supposed: All Cunnings, Not one wise.
Each of our Rulers had more Worms in's Head,
Then a Male Deer before he is Cabossed.
So all their Projects brake, not any held,
One by another out-Achitophel'd.
The several Fore-parts through the Hedge make way,
Behind the Hated Tail is forced to stay,
Till Hedge and Tail the Bonfire overtakes;
(The Fore-parts will be seen on Poles and Stakes.)
They think the Vessel of the Nation will
Sail tight, if cun'd by Confidence, not skill:
Boldness is Gospel, Law, and Policy,
Jointure, Debt, Interest, and Legacy.
The Frontless Swine with Impudence so tan'd,
Were (in the Face) high Car'bin-proof at hand.
I purpose not to violate this Page
With the unhallowed Monsters of this Age,
Whose due Description should I dare to write,
My Paper would appear a Sanbenite.
The Guards of Heaven, Your subjects care and love,
Such Objects from Your Royal Eyes remove!
Not from Your Word --
-- As the Ocean does move
About Your Land, so let Your Peace above:
And by Your Mighty Pardon let us guess,
How Good the Almighty is -- for him You bless.
A readier step to Him, may through You shine,
Then any in the Scale of Bellarmine.
These Beasts a Grateful Sacrifice cannot be,
They come to the Altar so unwillingly.
Let the Grand Seignior in pieces rive;
Let the Defender of the Faith forgive.
Reward them with the Christians Amends,
Make those that pierced Your Bowels through, Your Friends.
So when the Greedy Operator sounds
The Wealthy Entrails of unsearched Grounds,
The powerful Mine will change into it is self
(In time) the very Tools that dug the Pelf.
Your Fathers Lovers, and Your own so crossed,
Committee-scourg'd, Rump-rid, and Safety-toss'd,
Tempted, or scared by Force, or by Consent,
Part one, part the other, scarce are Innocent.
The Nation's Criminal! Almost each one
Lep'rous by Nature or Contagion:
Yet now are cleansed by the tears they shed,
(Tears due to CHARLES his Crown recovered.)
Shed Tears; which like Oyl-Bennet, did increase
The Flames of that Triumphant Night of peace:
Night! that turned out the Day! The Welkin shone;
Lighted with thousand fires besides it is own:
And where is the Roman, or the Greek Parade,
Can march with Glorious Tuesdays Cavalcade?
-- Day of Your Birth and State! from every Eye
Strictures of unsuborned Joy did fly.
Poets (but Male factors until now)
Resume their wit and spirit under You;
Soaring about Your Throne with freer Wing,
Working themselves in Your Palace, will sing
Such Prophecies, shall make wise Annalists
Attent to heed, and Register Your Gests;
Which, will the Orb in servitude engage
Rapt and Enamored of its Vassalage.
Bold with Allegiance, and with Duty rude,
With these brisk happy thoughts, we may conclude,
Sit still and taste the Blessings of Your Reign:
United so as not to start again.
Our Hearts directed unto You our North,
Shall never vary from our Faith. Henceforth
The Volatile spirits of this Region
Shall here be fixed beyond Reduction.
So the keen wind (as Muscovites relate)
Quick with Refining Force does operate
And make a Gem, which cannot Apostatize
From solid Crystal, into Brittle Ice.
H. BEESTON.

To His Sacred Majesty Charles the Second, at His happy RETURN.
SO comes the Sun after a half-years night,
To the be-numb'd, and frozen Muscovite,
As we (Great Britain's Influence!) welcome You
Who are our Light, our Life, and Glory too.
Your Presence is so Sovereign, counter Fate,
It makes, alone, our Island Fortunate:
Whilst we (like Eastern Priests) the night being done,
Fall down, and Worship You, our Rising Sun.
But! --
As Devotes (of old) did use to stay
Below the Font, nor durst approach to lay
Their Duties on the Sacred Shrine, so I
(Not qualified for the solemnity
Of Offering at Your Altar) stand at door,
And wish as much as they, who give you more.
May You live long and happy, to improve
In Strangers, Envy; in Your Subjects, Love!
And married may Your Computation run
Even, as Time; for every year a Son!
Until Your Royal Offspring grow to be
The Hope, and Pride of all Posterity!
May every Joy, and every choice Content,
Be trebled on You! and what ever was meant
My Sovereign's care and trouble, may it prove
Quiet, and Calm, as are the Effects of Love!
Last, having lived a Pattern of such worth,
As never any Age did yet bring forth,
Ascend to Heaven; where the Eternal Throne
Crowns You with Grace, shall Grace You with a Crown.
HEN. BOLD olim Winton.

FINIS.

