MORE SULPHUR FOR BASING: OR, God will fearfully annoy and make quick riddance
of his implacable Enemies, surely, sorely, suddenly.

Showed in a Sermon at the Siege of BASING On the last Lords day, Sept. 21.
1645.

Together, with a word of advice, full of love and affection to the Club-men of
Hampshire.

By William Beech Minister of the Army there, elect: Min: of O. in the County
of Suffolk.

Imprimatur.

Ja. Cranford.
Sept. 26. 1645.
REV. 14.11. And the smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore, and they
shall have no rest day nor night which worship the beast and his image.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1645.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL Mr. NICHOLAS LOVE A Member of the Commit of Parliament
for Hampshire.
SIR,
IT does not a little rejoice me, that I see you have been so firm and
resolute for the Country of your Birth, and Birthright: Worthily therefore
has the State of the Land entrusted you (amongst other singular Worthies) with
the Affairs of that County. You were pleased to call me from another
invitation, and halfe-engagement, to this service; and I did the more readily
embrace it, not only because I saw personages of such honor and worth in
jeopardy, but also for that entire, and yerning affection I bear to my
Contrymen, many of whom (I heard) were lost (as well as others) in the
general fog of Ignorance and Popish dilusions. Sir, were I able to do much this
way, it must be yours, and Hampshier's; yours, by right of inheritance, as you
are your Fathers Heir; and the Countrey's, for the first motion of life I had
in that sweet air. I do, and shall, ever acknowledge the little All I have
(such as it is) the Foundation thereof was freely laid by your reverend Father
in Winton College, Doctor Love, the Learned and most Orthodox Warden.
and that it has received no better growth, and thrives no more all this
while; you may remember the Stock (whereon my hopes had been grafted five
years) died before Autumn. I have two words more to say, the one is touching
that County, that it will be famous and sounding unto posterity for two things,
viz. for Honorable Burgesses and Renouned Champions that stood all together
(save one strange one that was lost) to defend it: and secondly for two
faithless Garrisons, and unworthy Catalines that labored as much to destroy
it. The other is concerning my self, Malice has dogged me these two years
(the Lord knows causelessly) by sea and land, and has bespattered me
exceedingly, and many are taken up, and affected with Halifax Law. Sir, I pray
be you an indulgent father to this weakling, and Patron too, to bestride it
from too many injuries; I see Envy already grinning at it, it will bite too;
and tear, and invenome, and corrupt, if you be not watchful. If you vouchsafe
the Office of a Patron, and foster it, you may live to see it grow stronger,
and abler to do you, and the Country service. The porch is large, I need no
more. Let Charity or Ingenuity but turn the leaf, and your eyes will see
streams of my purest affections, gliding through the Army there, through the
Country, through your own grounds, through the whole Land; Be pleased but to
reflect on your servants, and my mean, (but honest) parentage, and you will
remember, (and be able to confirm others) that I did derive and draw such
principles, if possible, from the breasts of a dear mother deceased. But I
crave pardon: I am Sir,

From my Quarters at Basing, Sept. 22. 1645, Your humble Servant, William Beech

A Sermon Preached at the Siege of BASING.
PSALM. 83.9. Do unto them, as to the Midianites, as to Sisera, as to Jabin at
the ^rooke of Kison.


THe words are an amplification of David's prayer, verse. 1. wherein he humbly
desires God not to be still, while the Enemies are so busy; that he would not
keep silence, while the Adversaries roar and make a tumult; that he would not
hold his peace, and lie down, while these vant themselves so proudly, and lift
up the head.

He strengthens his humble requests with very strong and prevailing Arguments.

The first he draws from God himself, and his glory; which must needs suffer,
if the Enemy might prevail: and therefore he does wisely interest him in the
cause and quarrel in hand, Lo! Thine Enemes! O Lord! and they that hate thee!
Joshua uses this kind of Argument, chap. 7.9. And what will thou do for thy
great name? and so Moses.

A second he draws from Gods people, They are thy people, O Lord, thy hidden
ones.

The third he insinuates, is from a due apprehension of the Enemy, and in them.

Their 1. Pride. Their 2. Hatred. Their 3. Cruelty. Their 4. Cunning. Their 5.
Multitude.


First, Their Pride, they have lift up the head.

Secondly, Their hatred and conspiracy against God, They hate thee; they are
confederate against thee, thine Enemies, those are the expressions.

Thirdly, Their Cruelty against the people of God, (Gods darling Israel)
malicious purposes, bloody resolves. They have said, come, and let us cut them
off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

Fourthly, Their cunning and craft, They have taken crafty counsel together,
Cogita^^runt unanimiter, they have made a league, entered into vow and covenant,
as sometimes Paul's conspirators, Acts 23.12.

Fifthly, Their multitude, They, and They, and Thine Enemies, and the
tabernacles of Edom, the Ismaelites, the Moabites, and the Hagarens, etc. By
all which enerveticall Arguments, he labors to endeare God unto his Church and
people; that he would so arise, that they with all their purposes,
machinations, and conspiracies, may be scattered, that he would so roar, and
utter his voice, that all those cruel beasts of the forest might tremble and
be dismayed, that is meant by verse. 1. Keep not still silence, or let not
silence be to thee, hold not thy peace, be not still: That is, Arise, O Lord,
and show thy self in thy peoples behalf, manifest thy power, thy wisdom,
and thy goodness, thy power in sustaining and upholding thy weak people, and
in over-mastring thine, and their Enemies: thy wisdom in counter-plotting,
and overreaching them in their devices, they are digging pits, O Lord, but do
thou dig below them, do thou undermine them: thy goodness in protecting them
from the intended destruction, and depopulation of thine inheritance, that they
may not be cut off and cease to be a Nation; let it not be, Lord, that the
memory and posterity of Israel be rooted out.

So then, if you take the words simply and literally, as an imprecation without
any respect had to the spirit of prophecy, by which David here speaks, they
are an amplification, as I said, of his first suit, and do reflect upon those
motives by which he had enforced his humble petition, ver. 2.3.4.5. as if he
had said, O Lord, we have heard of thee in times of old, how graciously thou
have dealt with our fathers even in their greatest streits, against their
Enemies, even then, Lord, when they were in their greatest pride and
presumption; and in the very highest pinnacle of their jollitie and confidence:
and namely, how bare thou made thine arm then upon the Midianites, when they
lay at the foot of Carmell, by the river Kison, for number and multitude, as
the Grasshoppers; how thou did exercise thy mighty power in the overthrow of
those innumerable multitudes, by such weak means, as 300 silly men, under the
command of thy servant Gideon, and did totally rout them, so that not a man
was left; and thereby thou, of thy goodness, did give thy people quietness
and rest from their Enemies about them. Nay, Lord, how thou did magnify thy
power, wisdom, and goodness, together, in delivering up the strength and
multitude of the Cananites unto the weakness of a woman, even thy servant
Deborah: Nay, that thou did so provide for thy people, that the valiant, and
renowned Sisera, should fall at the rent of a weak woman, even Jael, the wife
of Heber the Kenite. Now, O Lord, true it is, the Midianites are dead, Sisera
and Jabin are cut off, but more are risen in their stead; Lo! now, the
Tabernacles of the Edomites, the Israelites, the Moabites, and the Hagarent,
etc. these are as cunning, and cruel, and numerous, and proud, as ever those
were, and thy name is as dear, and thy people as precious to thee now, as
ever; and therefore, Lord, Do unto them as to the Midianites, etc.

But we shall look upon the words at this time, as a prophecy; for albeit they
run in form of an imprecation, yet, it being considered what David was, a
Prophet; we must needs think the ground of his speech was the knowledge he had
touching the future estate of Gods Church; for which cause, he makes the desire
of his soul suitable to the purpose and determination of God; I say, this is
nothing else but a prophetical speech of David, as therefore David well knew,
and had said, that burning co^les would fall upon the wicked, and that they
should be cast into the fire, and into the deep pits that they rise not
again, Psalm. 140.10.11. so here he testifies the fullness of his assent, and
desire that it should be so.

Do unto them as to the Midianites. I remember, Deborah and Barak, have the
like prophetical imprecation, Judge. 5.31. So let thine Enemies perish, O Lord,
but let them that love him, be as the Sun when he goes forth in his might.

From hence then we have this ancient undeniable Truth to discourse upon; that,

The Enemies of God shall surely perish, as did the Midianites, and as Sisera,
and Jabin perished.

Before we make any further progress, it will be most necessary that we
explicate the terms, what is meant by the Enemies of God, and who those
Midianites were; what was Sisera, and what was Jabin, and how they perished.

1. In general terms, they are the enemies of God, that hate the Church and
people of God, thus you shall find the Lord reputed Amaleck, an utter, and
almost irreconciliable enemy to himself, because he was Isreal's enemy; he
swore he should have no quarter, but he would have war with him from
generation to generation, beause he fought with Israel, Exodus 17.8, 9. and
David is plain Psalm. 9.4, 5. That those which reproached the footsteps of Gods
anointed reproached the Lord. So Acts 9.4, 5. Saul's spite was at Damascus, but
says Christ, Why persecutest thou me? the enmity was against him in Heaven.

In this very sense Zenacherib is said to rail against the holy one of Israel,
because he railed against the Church and people of God in Israel, Whom have
thou reproached and blasphemed? says God, and against whom have thou exalted
thy voice? and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the holy one of
Israel, Esaias 37.23.

God has enemies of two sorts:

First, open ones, and more tolerable. Secondly, secret ones, and most
intolerable.

1. They are open enemies to God, that seek to root out, and abolish his truth
professedly, such were of old the Philistims, the A^^orites, the Amalekites,
the Midianites, etc. and after that the Babilonians, and other Monarchs whom
Daniel prophesied of, and (...) at this day are the Turks, to whom the very
name of a Christian is abominable.

2. The closer ones, and most intolerable, are such as shroud themselves under
the name of the Church, and Religion, but yet in deed and truth are enemies to
the sincerity of Religion, i^ and power of godliness. And these again must be
distinguished some do profess a different kind of Religion, and use another
manner of worshipping God then the true Church uses, such were the Samaritans
in ancient times, who after their rent from the Jews, retained circumcision,
boasted of their fathers, and expected the Messiah, yet were not Gods people,
but were deadly enemies to the Jews, and therefore the Jews had no commence,
no dealing with them, John 4.9.

And such at this day are the bloody Papists, who boast they only are of the
Church, but yet under this pretense are against the Church, persecute, and are
in continual opposition thereunto. Hence it is that their Church is typed out
by the name of the great whore, Rev. 17.6. And she is said to be drunk with
the blood of the Saints and Martyrs, whereof these late times have had
lamentable and sad experience.

Now these bloody enemies use a double course, either open violence and
hostility; hence it is Revel. 13.7. the Antichristian Church is said to have
war with the Saints; and what wars they have made with the Protestant
Church, there is none can be so ignorant as not to know it. The other course
they take is underboard, under deck, secret practizing, which is either by
conspiracies, poysonings, Armado's, Powder-plots, and (as now) civil wars, and
all to bring our Kingdom and Religion to utter devastation and confusion, as
they have done (already) upon Germany; or else, by privy suggestions of their
creeping Jesuits, and Seminaries, to corrupt the minds of the unsettled, and to
poison them with their Popish drugs; They come, (as one observes well) out of
the Sea of Rome as the Sammons out of the Maine up into the fresher Rivers, and
beget a new Spawne and Fry of Catholics, These compass Sea and Land to make
one of their profession, Mat. 23.15.

A second order of these enemies, that pass under the name and notion of the
Church, are such amongst us that profess true Religion, but yet are
adversaries to the power of Religion, such as those of whom the Father
complained of old, Miseros nos qui Christiani dicimur and gentes agimus, etc.
such as were Christened, and are therefore called Christians, or else you could
not know them to be such, because of their scandalous, (and worse then
heathenish) lives and conversations, having says Paul, (a few of them) a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. Such as these, (the
Lord be merciful unto us) our Church is pestred with at this day, and the Land
is even dark and overspread with them, as Egypt was of Grasshoppers, Exodus
10.15. These cannot endure the yoke of the Gospel, will not abide to be ruled
by the Word and Discipline of Jesus Christ. David complains of some, Psalm. 2.
Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Now
Christ accounts those his enemies, not only such as are in terms of defiance
against him, (as he that said vicisti Galilaee) but such also as will not
suffer him to reign over them, Luke 19.27. But those mine enemies which would
not suffer me to reign over them, bring them hither and slay them. They again
are Gods enemies, that hinder the passage and preaching of the Word, and such
as seek, like Elim^^, to turn away others from the faith. All seeming
(worldly) wise men are Gods enemies, for the wisdom of this world is enmity
against God. And so are covetous wretches Gods enemies, for the amity of the
world is enmity against God, Romans 8.7. So are Epicures, and such as mind their
bellies too much, Gods enemies, Phil. 3.18, 19. They are enemies to the cross
of Christ. And so are ob^tinate perverse sinners, who will not be reclaimed,
but not withstanding all admonition, go on still in a course of ungodliness,
they are Gods enemies too, Psalm. 68.21. God will surely wound his enemies and
the hairy Scalp of such an one as goes on still in his ungodliness.

These, and all these are Gods enemies and without repentance come within the
list of this prophesied destruction, but yet they are not the enemies here
chiefly intended; for albeit my Text includes one as well as another, yet it is
to be collected from this president or pattern, by which the Prophet humbly
beseeches God to punish the enemies of his Church, that the closer enemies are
here principally aimed at. The cause why Moses was commanded to vex the
Midianites was because they had drawn Israel to idolatry and whoredom. Now
although the open enemies to Christianity, the Turk and Jew uncalled shall
assuredly perish, yet they have not drawn so many from the true Religion, nor
yet corrupted Gods worship so much as our closer enemies have done. It may be
here and there a renagadoe has been corrupted with Mahumetanisme or Judaisme,
but millions in our Land have been leavened with popish doctrine, and heresies
from time to time, and thousands daily are by their creeping Seminaries
insinuated into, infected with idolatry, and therefore, Do unto them as unto
the Midianites, as unto Sisera, etc.

The next thing for the opening of the point, is this, we must make an enquiry
who these Midianites were, what was Sisera, and what was Jabin, what and where
was this brook of Kison, this I say, must nec^ssarily be unfolded, because the
ruin of these is made a patttrne for the destruction of Gods enemies.

Midianites, these were of the posterity of Abraham by his concubine Keturah, 1 Chronicles. 1.32. who being turned Idolaters drew Israel to sin in the
Wilderness, for which Moses revenged the Israelites of them, by the slaughter
of all their males, and their five Kings, and a wonderful great spoil. But
after recovering gain, and oppressing Israel in their own Land, were by
Gideon and 300 men vanquished when they lay in the valley, like Grasshoppers for
multitude, Judge. 6.1.

Sisera was Captain General of Jabins host, King of Canaan, he had 900
Chariots of Iron, and vexed Israel sore, but by Deborah a Prophetess, and
Barak a Captain of Nepthali the Lord destroyed him and all his Host and
Chariots, there was not a man left, and Sisera flying was killed by Jael Hebers
wife, who drove a nail into the temples of his head, Judge. 4.2, 3, 4, 21.

Jabin was King of Canaan, as is said, who upon the death of his General
Sisera was subdued and destroyed, verse. 23. of the said chapter.

Brook of Kison, Brook, or in the Bourne, i. e. the valley of Kison, the
original, (as my author tells me) signifies a valley, and a river running in
it, which our English calls a Bourne. Kison was a river at mount Carmels foot,
by it Sisera and the King of Canaan fought with Israel, and were vanquished, as
I said, and the Bourne Kison swept them away.

For the better illustration of the point in the discovery of the condition and
fall of these people, you shall do well to note these particulars, and the
point will be clear. In the Midianites then observe:

1. They did entrench upon the rights and privileges of the Israelites, they
did invade their Land, and sought to drive them out of that inheritance which
God (the great Lord of the earth) had given unto them.

2. They did vex poor Israel exceedingly, says the Text, destroyed their Corn,
and other provision, Judge. 6.4. and they encamped against them, and destroyed
the increase of the earth, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither Sheep,
nor Ox, nor Ass. And the children of Israel were greatly impoverished because
of the Midianites.

3. The time of their destruction is noted to be when they were in their
greatest height, they were as the Grasshoppers for number, they were most
confident and secure.

4. The means of their defeat is noted to have been weak and improbable;
Gideon and 300 men against so great a multitude, and that the blowing of a
Trumpet and the breaking and clashing together of frail earthen Pitchers
should so affright and annoy such a terrible host of men.

5. The manner of the foil given is not to be forgotten, it was an
irrecoverable destruction, they were utterly routed, there were of them taken
prisoners and slain Zebah and Zalmana Princes, Oreb and Zeb Princes; nay in
fine, all Midian was subdued, so that they lift up the head no more, Judge. 8.18.

Again in Sisera and Jabin observe three passages:

1. These were in their jollity too, very presumptuous they were, and confident
of the day. They had 900 Chariots of Iron, and they made no doubt of the
conquest upon Israel.

2. The means also of their discomfiture, and most dishonorable overthrow, the
brave Sisera was sold into the hands of a silly woman, and the King Jabin lost
his life by an inconsiderable party who had likewise but a woman to be their
Commander in chief, Judge. 4.9.

3. The manner of their overthrow, it was a fatal and irrecoverable blow they
received, All the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the Sword, there was not
a man left, Sisera himself sanke down at Jaels feet, and lay dead, and Israel
prevailed against Jabin King of Canaan.

It will be easy to prove the truth of this Doctrine, by Scripture.

1. That the enemies of God shall perish as these did, namely, first in the
height of their security, and in the top of their jollity, so much David notes,
Psalm. 37.35, 36. I have seen the wicked strong, in great power, and spreading
himself like a green Bay Tree, yet he passed by and to be was gone, I sought
him, but his place could no where be found. So Psalm. 92.7. When the wicked
spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is
that they shall be destroyed for ever. And that of Paul is most consonant to
the truth of this, 1 These. 5.3. For when they shall say, peace, and safety,
then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child,
so sure it shall come.

2. By weak means in comparison. It Is a general rule with the Apostle, 1 Cor.
1.27. God, says he, has chosen the foolish things of this world to confound
the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound those
that are mighty, and things which are not to bring to naught things that are.
Though all the creatures be at Gods beck, and the most noble creatures must
obey when he commands, yet he can, (and does often) make use of the baser and
most contemptible creature to destroy and bring down the pride of his enemies.
Thus he had an Army of worms to destroy proud Herod, to eat him up, Acts
12.13. And we read of another army, Joel. 2.25. The Locust, the Cankerworme,
the Catterpiller, the Palmer worm, my great Army, says God that I sent among
you.

3. The overthrow shall be irrecoverable, like the breaking of a Potters Pot,
as it is, Esaias 30.14. And he shall break it like the breaking of a Potters
Pot, that is broken to pieces, he shall not spare, so that there shall not be
found in the bursting thereof, asheard to take fire from the hearth or to take
water out of the pit; Hence it is that the ruin of Antichrist is compared to
casting of a Millstone into the Sea, with such violence, says the holy Ghost,
shall the great City Babylon be cast, and shall be found no more, Re. 18.21.

It is so, enemies of God shall surely perish (as these did) in their
confidence? in their blood thirstinesse? by weak means? irrecoverably? O then
how should our souls be filled with thanks? and how full ought our mouths to
be, of praise? Psalm. 136.
O give thanks to God, says David, for he is good, for his mercy endures for
ever; O give thanks to the Lord of all Lords for his mercy endures for ever!
This is almost all his Language, expressed and implied in this and many other
Psalms. What Is the matter David? who remembered us when we were in our low
estate, Verse. 23.24.
for his mercy endures for, etc. Who redeemed us from our enemies, for his
mercy endures for ever. And may not the Prophets in England compose such
another Psalm in the behalf of England, as this holy singer does in the
behalf of his dearest; Jsrael; O give thanks, etc. For his mercy endures for
ever: who remembered us when we were in our low estate, for his mercy endures
for ever, Who Redeemed us from our enemies for his mercy, etc. Which remembered
us at Knasby, for his mercy, etc. Which remembered them of Pembrook shire, for
his mercy endures for ever, Which remembered us at Leicester for, etc. Which
remembered us at Tanuton for, etc. Which redeemed them of Bristoll for, etc. O
give thanks unto the God of all Gods, for his mercy endures for ever. Annos
jam revolvitur Platonicus, what will you say if the Midianites be alive again?
Indeed it is true, their carkases are rotten, The Edomites, the Moabites, and the
Amonite, are long since dead, and destroyed, I, but yet their cruelty and
oppression does yet survive, their pride and bloodthirstinesse remain to this
day; the same Tragedy is still acted, the Theater removed into another climat,
it is but Vetus fabula, per novos Histriones. And therefore to quicken you to
this duty, note these paralells.

1. The old Midianites did first invade Israel entrenched upon their Rights and
the Proprieties of Israel, sought to drive them out of the inheritance which
God gave them. Did vex them thus many years together, spoiled the fruit of
their ground and did utterly impoverish them, and I pray have not our new
Midianites, Assirians, (call them what you will that is heathenish and cruel)
taking since to their assistance the French Philistims, Welsh Egiptians,
Cornish Hangarims. The degenerate Ismalites of the Renegado English; have not
these I say (or most of them) wrested away our lives? our liberties? our
houses? our all? and have they not shed our blood like water on every side of
Ireland? and England too?

Nay have not the bloody miscreants of Ireland (since assisted by the enchanted
English, who have since owned the massacre and made it theirs by cessations and
pardons.) have not these I say followed over Sea those poor exiles, having
left them nothing but their lives for a prey? and have they not since cut more
throats by authority? And have they not bin rewarded with immunities? and the
name of Subjects? And is it not therefore, because they should contribute their
assistance to butcher more?

O Brethren how have all these vermin (amongst them) spoiled a fruitful Land?
and made the Land dark with them? have not their swords (touched with the
magnetique stone of inhumanity to draw blood) made many a wife a Widow? many a
poor child, fatherless? many a woman, childlesse? Nay in conclusion, have
they not utterly ruined families? Cities? Towns? Houses? Have not their
confederacy, burnt, spoild, wasted; Cities? Villages? Houses? and do you not
think the late baptizing of the Irish into the name of catholic Subjects, was
not accompanied with a cross to England? will not all these Acts of grace,
Cessations, pardons, immunities, privileges, etc. produce one ten thousand
more?

Well, we grant these Midianites are very strong and numerous, and inferior
to no monsters in their desires after blood.

2. The old Midianites vexed Israel 20 years. And how many years, (suppose
ye,) has this fatal spirit of Division been working? how long has this
intoxicating drink of dissension and civil war been brewing? How busy have
the Jesuits and Seminaries been for these many years to bring us to this
pass? And now at last, unhappy day! to charm the Prince from his people, and
these from one another miserably.

How truly may poor England take up that of the Psalmist? Psalm. 129.1.2, 3.
Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth up (may England now say,) yea
many a time have they afflicted me, but they have not prevailed against me,
the Plowers plowed upon my back, they made long their furrows, but the
Righteous Lord will cut their snares asunder.

3. The Midianites were very strong and numerous, lying in the valley like
Grasshoppers for multitude, secure enough, nay asleep in security, for one of
them dreamed. And have not poor England enemies? nay, who has she to friend,
but God that made the Island? Oh the numberless number of enemies all about
us; none but Midianites, Cananites, Egyptians, Philistims; enemies within us,
without us; How truly may we say of our enemies as David in this Psalm?
Cogitaverunt unanimiter; The Tabernacles of the Edomites, the Jsmalites, etc.
and yet note, (for I drive at this use of thankfulness) these Midianiies were
destroyed, in their jollity, in their security, for all their multitudes, and
so (blessed be God,) were ours at Nasby, when they did pride it in their
hearts, when they had shared the inheritances of our worthies between them, and
had in their thoughts ransackt that great City, London, the blessing of this
Land.

Nay were not these Midianites so confident of the Estates of the Protestant
English Rebels (as they pleased to style them) that they had gotten empty
titles aforehand of Knights, Vicounts, Lords, etc. suitable to such addition of
estates and inheritances as should (no doubt) be graciously conferred on them
for their great service against the state and happiness of England.

4. These Midianites were overcome by weak means, so great a multitude, so
formidable an army, were overcome by Gideon, and (as it were) by 300 silly
Musquiteers. And were not our enemies very numerous? Many of your eyes beheld
it, and had they not a little before been fleshed with many victories? And
yet, see, were they not overcome by our new molded, despised contemptible army?
the very object of their friends fear, and pity, and their enemies contempt
and scorn?

5. The old Midianites were irrecoverably discomfited, totally routed, many of
their chief and principal men taken prisoners, and put to the sword, Oreb and
Zeb, Zeba, and Zolmana, (as before) so that they lift up the head no more.

And have not ours received a great Foil, a Rout, and (we hope) an
irrecoverable one too? and though we cannot say they lift up the head no more,
or that they were so overcome that they could not Rally, and do more
mischief, yet it may be said of this conquest, as was of Isreal's victory,
Judge. 4.14. The hand of the children of Israel prospered and prevaled against
Jabin King of Cannan until they had destroyed Jabin King of Cannan, (so
blessed be God,) our armies have bin ever since in a prevailing condition, they
have almost in every place prospered and prevailed over the enemy, and many
occasions have bin given to the Church of public thanks unto God for many
victories.

From the destruction of the Midianites we are next to bend our thoughts and
meditations on the ruin of the Canaanites, and amongst them, their General
and King here mentioned.

1. These were overthrown too, in their greatest height, (as were the
Midianites) Sisera, was well appointed and provided, he had the command of 900
Iron Chariots, which was in those days, a great strength, and by these were
the children of Jsrael oppressed a long time.

2. The means of Sisera's ruin, it was effected by a weak woman so Deborah
notes that especially in her song, Jud. 5.27. At her feet he bowed, he fell, he
lay down, At her feet he bowed, he fell, where he bowed there he fell down dead.

3. It was a final, a total, an irrecoverable rout, a perpetual destruction,
all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword, there was not a man
left, Judge. 4.16.

Thus have I showed you the manner how the adversaries of Gods Church, and
people shall perish, as the Midianites, and as Sisera, and as Labin King of
Cannan.

1. In their greatest Pride, Security, Confidence and Presumption.

2. By means (in man's opinion) unlikely, most improbable, absurd, foolish.

3. And after their fall, they shall not recover to do any more hurt. Blessed
be God, our times do verify the truth of this prophesy, by Gods indulgent care
and providence over his people of this nation at this day.

1. Our enemies were once this Summer very confident, very sure of us. They
said one to an other, as Sisera's Mother did, to her Ladies, Judge. 5.30. Have
they not gotten? have they not divided the spoil? those that lived most
remote, in places far distant from our Metrapolis? were most confident by that
time (the time of their defeat) they had been possessed of our Associated
Counties, had divided the spoil there, had assuredly distressed London, nay
possessed London; I need say no more for discovery of their pride and
confidence, The Cabinet opened speaks much hopes and many promises to that
party. Thine eternally assures them of their ends, and expectations. Much good
now in each man's thoughts to the Catholic cause, nay this Monster, was almost
come to the birth. They made now full account of the golden day, (lost in 88
and Powder plot) in which they should wash their hands, (as some had said,) in
the blood of all English Protestants, and re-establish their old Idolatrous
service of their Breaden god. That for their pride and confidence.

2. By weak means, as I have said, the Lord knows there was no man could
promise to himself any comfort at all, if he look no further then unto second
causes, There was nothing but ill presaging clouds and gloominesse in every
good man's look, that walked the streets of that great City. The self denying
vote was past, the army was not only new molded, but now mouldred also, our
soul was brought very low, and did even melt, yet God remembered us when we
were in our low estate for his mercy, etc. Psalm. 136.23.

3. They were overthrown with an overthrow, 'twas the greatest foil they ever
received, and we hope in the mercies of a good God, that shortly either their
faces will be filled with shame that they may seek Gods Name, v. 16. or else
that they shall be utterly, irrecoverably subdued, as Midian was, as Sisera and
Jabin were, so that they shall lift up their head no more, according to this
prophetical imprecation.

Do unto them as unto the Midianites, etc. Basing too) it will certainly go
ill with them, for the reward of their hands will be given them, Esaias 3.11. Let
this be terror and astonishment to them, more then either the roaring of our
Cannon, or the terrible bur^ing asunder of the Granado, let their joints loosen
for fear, and their knees smite together for horror, for as true as God is in
Heaven they shall perish, I say unless they repent, they shall assuredly
perish, and come to a fearful end.

Tell them from the holy Ghost, from the word of truth, that their destruction
shall be terrible, it shall be timely, it shall be total.

1. A woeful day says Jeremy. Jer. 17.16. A day of wrath, a day of trouble
and distress, a day of wastnes and desolation, a day of thick darkness,
clouds and gloomines, these are dreadful, (yet true) expressions, they shall
be devoured, the fire of thine enemies, O Lord shall devour them. Ps. 7.12.13.
He has whet his sword he has bent his bow and made it ready, he has also
prepared for him the instruments of death, and ordains his arrows against
the persecutors. So Moses Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42. J will, says God, Render vengeance
to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me, I will make mine arrows
drunken with blood, Cruel judgments* So Psa. 11.6. upon the wicked he shall
rain snares, fire and brimstone; and an horrible tempest, this shall be the
portion of their cup.

2. It shall come suddenly and unexpectedly. Deuteronomy. 32.35. To me, says the
Lord, belongs vengeance and recompense, their foot shall slide in due time,
(that is, their fall shall be sudden, as the fall of a man when his foot
slideth, and down he comes at once) the day of their calamity is at hand, and
the things that come upon them make have, and so Psalm. 64.7. It is said of them
that bend their bow and aim at Gods perfect ones, that the Lord shall shoot at
them with a swift arrow suddenly: suddenly shall their stroke be. And the
Prophet Esaias tells us, that the multitude of the terrible ones shall be ^^ the
chasse which passes away, and it, (that is there scattering) shall be at an
instant, and because they are a rebellious people, and will not hear the Law
of the Lord, Esaias 30.9. but despise the preaching of the word, and trust in
oppression, v. 12. therefore v. 15. Their fall and breach shall be suddenly as
the swelling in a high wall, the breaking whereof comes suddenly, at an
instant.

3. It will be a total ruin, every one of all sorts shall perish, these here
all perished, there was not a man left, how long will ye imagine mischief
against a man? ye shall be slain, all the sort of you, as a bowing wall shall
ye be, and as a tottering fence, Psalm. 62.3. Their Pastors are become brutish,
says Jeremy therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be
scattered behold the noise of the bruit is come, and a great comm^tion out of
the North Country, to make the Cities of Juda desolate and (...) Den of Dragons.

Will ye have examples? they will affright you, 2 Pet. 2.6. And turned the Cities
of Sodom and Gomorah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, etc. and
made them an example to them that afterward should live ungodly, etc. When God
is moved and incensed against a people, he commands an uttter extirpation of
them; Thus we have a precept, that when the children of Beliall had drawn any
Town, or City or people to Idolatry, the people were commanded utterly to
destroy that City, that people Deuteronomy. 13.15. Thou shall surely smite the
inhabitants of that City with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and
all that is therein, and the cattle thereof with the edge of the sword, here is
a total destruction commanded.

Will you see one or two executions? You shall find plundering Achan (the
troubler of Israel) and his whole family executed, Is. 7.24. Corah and all the
malignants with him in the same conspiracy were swallowed up. Number. 16. and of
all Ahabs family and persecuting house, there was not a man left to make water
against the wall. All Bails Priests fared alike, were all cut off, and of all
the wicked court faction that conspired against Jeremy, the Lord says, cast
them out of my sight, let them go forth, such as are for death to death: and
such as are for the sword to the sword, and such as are for the famine to
famine, and those for captivity to captivity, and though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, says God, my mind should not be toward them Jer. 15.1, 2.

3. If it be so that the enemies of God shall surely perish, David teaches,
they that hate mount Zion shall be ashamed and turned backward, Psalm. 129.5.
And God will arise and his enemies shall be scattered, they that hate him shall
fly before him, Psalm. 68.1. This cordial is to be applied to England in
respect of the continual working of her restless adversaries the Papists.
They brag in their talk, says David, and swords are in their lips, Psalm.
29.7. They imagine deceitful words against the quiet in the Land, Psa. 35.20.
They encourage themselves in a wicked purpose, and commune together how they
may lay snares privily, but the word of God shall be true when they are liers,
they shall all speed as did the Midianites, as Sisera, and Iabin, they may
conceive mischief, but they shall bring forth a lie.

It Is true, God has suffered our enemies lately to take their pastime (like
the Leviathan) in a Sea (of Protestant blood) here and in Ireland, and has let
them loose to woory this secure Nation for their baseness and beastliness,
for their oppression and neglect of Gods word, and has given up many of our
besotted brethren to be led away with strong dilusions, to believe lies,
because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved; But
shall they escape for their wickedness, do they think? no God shall find them
out, says David. The blood they have drunk so greedily they shall be made to
spue out again. But I hear an objection.



Halcion days. This very business so pusled Jeremy that he expostulates with
God about the matter, but yet in very humble and submissive way Jer. 12.1.2.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, says he, when I plead, with thee, yet let me talk
with thee of thy judgments, wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? and
why are they blessed that deal teacherously? thou have planted them, they have
taken Boot, they grow, and bring forth fruit, thou art near in their mouth,
but far from their Reins. The Prophet Habacuck uses greater boldness, Hab.
1.2, 3. O Lord how long shall I cry unto thee, and thou do not hear? Even
cry out of violence and thou do not save? why do thou show me iniquity,
and cause me to behold grieveance? for spoiling and violence are before me, and
there are that raise up strife and contention, therefore the law is slacked,
and Judgment does never go forth, for the wicked does encompasse about the
Righteous. Those in Malachy were more stout and peremptory, did even mutiny
with God that they had no better pay. Mal. 3.14. It is in vain to serve God
and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and walked mornefully
before the Lord of Hosts, and now we call the proud happy, and they that work
wickedness are exalted, and even they that tempt God are delivered. This
troubled David not a little, though he were a holy man, see his
acknowledgement, Psalm 73.23. But as for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps
had well nigh slipped, for I was envious at the foolish when I saw the prosperity
of the wicked, for their strength is firm, they are not in trouble, pride
compasses them as a chain, violence covers them as with a garment, they speak
wickedly concerning oppression, they set their mouths against Heaven, etc.

But now this truth which I have here brought unto you, may serve as a remedy
to cure this repining fit: The enemies of God, and his people shall perish,
they shall fall, they shall surely fall. This David found out at last, after
the vain expense of many a sad thought, Ver. 18, 19. He sets them in
slippery places, and casts them down to destruction, How are they brought
into desolation as in a moment? They are utterly consumed with terrors. When
the wicked spring as the grass, and the workers of iniquity do flourish, it
is that they shall perish for ever. And so confesses his folly verse. 22. So
foolish was I and ignorant, yea even as a beast before thee. And this may serve
for answer, God to show the riches of his bounty toward his very enemies lets
them feed well, but it is (as the Ox) for the slaughter, Prove. 7.22. The decree
is past, Tell the wicked, Woe be to him, for the reward of his hands shall be
given him, Esaias 3.11. Let them not flatter themselves with hopes of immunities,
Deus judex justus est, God will give no immunities for bloodshed. The holy
Ghost to assure us of the certainety hereof, speaking of the ruin of
Antichrists Kingdom, speaks as of a thing already past. Rev. 14.8. Babylon is
fallen, is fallen, that great City, because she made all Nations drink of the
Wine of the wrath of her fornications. And therefore tell the righteous it
shall go well with them. Let this comfort them.

4. Here is matter of caution and advertisment for all, Separate, separate your
selves, as you are commanded, Rev. 18.4. come out of Babylon, lest ye partake
of her plagues, come out, I say, both in action and affection. Such as are
against Reformation, and Religion, and good Laws, are Gods utter enemies, and
his soul abhors them; such as are lovers of old profane sensual customs
that feed the corrupt humors of sinful flesh, (the greatest and most
prevailing enemy to the souls well being for ever) such as are lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.14. such as deny the power of
godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. I tell them again, (for I cannot stay long upon this
Use) the force of this curse touching the ruin of Gods enemies, will fall upon
them. 'Twill not serve the turn then, to say, you are not Papists, you are no
Roundheads, for although ye have Lord, Lord, and The Temple of the Lord in
your mouths, Jerem. 7.4. yet if you set your selves against the government of
Christ, the powerful and constant preaching of the Word, and thus obstinately
hate to be reformed, Psalm. 50.17. The Lord will not be merciful to you, Deuteronomy.
29.20
says Moses, but the wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against
you, and he will cut off your name from under Heaven.

Gods purpose; why, has not God power in himself to do it? O yes, says one,
speak Lord, speak to the fire, and with flashes it shall consume them. To the
air, and with pestilent vapors it shall choke them. To the waters, and with
deluges it shall overwhelme them. To the earth, and with yawning chops it shall
devour them. God will have his enemies destroyed, but it shall be by means,
his people shall sweat for it. The Philistims shall be destroyed, but Sampson
must work hip and thigh for it. Goliath shall sink, but little David must have
his sling, Sisera must fall at Joels feet, but the woman must drive a nail
through the temples of his head first. It is determined that Midian shall
receive an irrecoverable overthrow, but yet Gideon must advance and encounter
him, though he muster but 300 men. In this sense that is true, He that made
thee without thee, will not save thee without thee, he that made England
without England, will not save England without England, our utmost endeavors
must seasonably accompany outward deliverances.

Rouse up therefore brave England, be thou (...) at last recovered of thy
sleepy Lethargy, for s^^^e, and thine o^^e safety too, arise all are up but
thee I mean, all are up for themselves but poor England. France for France,
Spain for Spain, Barbary for Barbary, Ireland for Ireland, Hell for Hell.
Englands up, it is true, that is our misery, but for what? can you tell? yes, for
the Protestant Religion, and both parties for that; Nonsense absurdity! Ireland
now at last for Protestants? are they converted and grown pitiful? believe it
who is will: Ah poor England! thou art stained with folly, thou art branded by
all Nations of madness, and art thou yet yawning? do hear? the night of thy
destruction, if thou slumbrest, comes on speedily; if thou awakest now, thy
happy days will be perpetuated Not yet? I prithee rise: I tell thee news; Thy
sister Germany is dead, and Ireland newly in her goare; thine own children are
not, and many a Rachel makes bitter lamentation, they lie dead all about thee,
I pray thee be stirring, Rome has got a new trick worth all, all her former
treacheries, conspiracies, and powder-plots are but love-tricks in comparison
of this: The beast has dismembered and disjoynted us, miserably divided head
from body, and lamentably lacerated and torn one member from another. O
remember England, thou wast christened, and call to mind how thou have engaged
thy self to be on Christ's party against all his enemies. Do thou hear how
thy dear Lord Christ has been dis-throaned? his Messengers abused? Do not
thou hear his Drums sound for a party? who is on my side, (as sometime Jehu,)
who stands for Reformation, Religion, Liberty, and good Laws, who? Do thou
not hear those many murdered souls, crying under the Altar, How long, Lord,
how long holy and true, will thou not judge and be revenged of our blood, etc.
Art thou in a dead sleep that thou hear not the screeches of man, woman, and
child massacred and murdered? the pitiful crying out of gasping Ireland? O
mother England, help, brother Juda, why, brother Levi, brother Zebulon, brother
Nepthali, all, or some pity us, etc.

Brethren how can you hear the name of Ireland, and not be filled with
indignation; of England, and not be moved to compassion?

I, but it is pity there should be any more blood shed,

It Is true indeed, too much innocent blood; Whosoever sheds man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed? or will thou have this prophecy frustrate? or if man
should prove accessory to his own ruin, will God put it up, think thou?

And ah poor Hampshire? deceived people! deluded Countrymen! for whom my
spirit is in bitterness, and my bowels yerne (for that first breathing of air
I had amongst you,) and once happy Hampshire, Bona si sua norint Agricolae, if
they knew their happiness; and how can thou endure a snake in thy bowels, a
limb of that cruel beast of Rome, and be silent? and sleep? nay, two
Garrisons of Countrey-destroyers, and not resolve against them, and not
contribute your clubs toward the rooting of them out? But you will say:





And is this your spite, O ye Tigers of Rome? first to blind them, then to
butcher them? first to destroy their souls, then their bodies? monstrous
cruelty! And because you could not undo us by your Spanish Armado's, nor your
Powder-plots, nor yet presently root us out by your Irish rebellions, thus to
divide us, then to destroy us; so to enchant a poor people, that they should
direct their Swords against their own breasts, to further your bloody
designs; to make way for your tyranny, and another Mary-martyrdome? Well, God
knows what may be the upshot, yet this we are certain of, that when God has
sufficiently scourged this Nation by your serpentine rod, (as he did of old his
own Israel by the Assyrians) he will cast away that rod in indignation, and
burn it, and receive his people graciously. (This is a Riddle to you) and when
we have drunk the top of this bitter cup, the lees and dregs shall be for your
share; and we shall be all made friends for your utter ruin and destruction.

How truly may England say of this your conveyance and hidden treachery, as
Jacob did sometimes of the fact of Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.7. Cursed be their
wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage for it was cruel. Cursed be this
device of all inventions, cursed be this cruelty of all butcheries. How much
cause have this Island out of bitterness of soul, to take up the speech of
those Jews that were held long in Babylonish captivity, Psalm. 137.9. Blessed
shall he be that takes thy children and dasheth them against the stones. No
Nation has more cause to perform this duty then this, and I would have it
inferior to no Nation in acts of mercy.

But I was almost swallowed up between compassion and indignation, I return
again to the Objection: They have no sting, they do no harm, are of our own
people. Why, what a besotted generation have we? Is it not true, the nearer the
worse? What said David in the like case, Had it been an open enemy, that had
done me this dishonor, peradventure I might have hid my self from him, but it
was thou my companion, and my guide, we took sweet council together, and
walked to the house of God as friends. Church-Papists, Church-Friends, are the
deadliest Enemies, when Enemies; their wounds are secret, and sure; did not
Judas betray his Master with a kiss? And what course took Joab with Amasa?
Estne pax, mi frater? and then murders him. And are not these two Garrisons
Members of Rome? Is not Basing a limb of Babylon? And have they not to friend
the Monsters of cruelty? I need not name them. They are the Roman Catholic
Subjects in Ireland: May it not be truly said of them, they have Jacobs voice,
but Esau's hands? The words of Saints, but the works of Satan? And are we so
senseless to expect Grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? The simple
credulity, and foolish pity of that Countryman (in the Fables) comes to mind,
and falls pat to our purpose. This well-meaning poor man, seeing an Adder in
the field (Frigore prope enecatum) almost dead with cold (as ours with fear)
alas poor creature, quoth he, and brings it home in his bosom, applies it to
the fire, fosters it with the warmth thereof: The subtle creature no sooner
recollects his spirits again, but with all his venomous activity, annoyes the
whole house, affrights the family, and so unpeoples the place; De te narratur
fabula, England! Hampshire! Thou have a long time fostered a serpentine
Generation, in thy bosom, thou have given thy daughters to them, and have
taken theirs to thee: And all this while they have been visibly quiet, (though
every moment since the last plot, visibly, underground-workers) because they
have been frozen with some fears; The Laws made against Papists, had somewhat
abated the open activity of their spirits, especially in this land, but you
shoud have seen what a few more warming victories would have done, did you not
observe to what height they were ascended? Did not a few long wasted
Protestants in the Oxford Junto, make it a mungrell Parliament? Yes, it did
(for all the Apology) and so it was kindly accepted at France. Do ye not
think these tame harmless friends of ours would not for your warming
contributions have lovingly contributed each man his number of faggots to make
Smithfield hiss again, with the flesh of those who would not be so base, as
to prostitute their pure Religion to be defiled, nor yet subjugate their
freeborn necks to slaverie?

Object. I, but it seems the streams of learning run that way, the Doctors
and great Scholars are of another opinion: And for our parts, say others, we
are not Booke-learned; And by whom should we be taught, if not by these? I hope
they be understanding men, etc.

Answ. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures. Observe the current of Scripture,
and you shall find that Christ was little beholding to the high Priests, and
read the Chronicles of England, and you will see how little Reformation has
been furthered by the fatter sort of the Clergy. There are enough to harp
upon this string, I forbear, I will only mind you of David's saying; Had it
been an open Enemy, etc. but it was thou my guide: I pray God forgive these
guides, and for further satisfaction, I shall refer you to a Doctrine and two
Reasons; The Doctrine is raised by Hosea, Chap. 4. Verse. 5. speaking there of
false Prophets, and people misled by them, The point is,

Wicked men shall all fall, the people by day and the Prophets by night.

The Reasons are twofold, and rendered by the Apostle Paul: The first out of 2
These. 2.11, 12. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved, therefore God shall send them strong dilusions, that they
should believe lies; that all they might be damned which believe not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness. That Is the first reason, because they
would not receive the truth. The second reason is, Because they would not make
known the truth, Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness. They did hold it, that is, they did not communicate it to the
simple: for so some interpret the words, or at least, gloss them.

2 Ans. Or secondly, I might answer, and speak modestly, that learning is not
confined within the walls of Oxford, blessed be God there are such lights this
day in London, and elsewhere, in obedience to the Parliament, not to be compared
with in the whole Christian world besides.

Object. Can you give us any soule-satisfying grounds, why we should use our
clubs against our own Contrymen, and not come within the guilt of blood?

Ans. You may ground the equity of such an undertaking by the practice of the
Israelites against their own Contrymen, and near friends, nay, their
brethren the Benjamites; because they rescued and kept from justice the sons of
Belial, that had ravished the Levites wife, Judges 20.

Here Religion was not so much the matter in question, as Common Justice, which
the Benjamites peremptorily denied to the Israelites: hence the difference,
Israel takes up arms, and encamps against Gibeah of Benjamin; and albeit the
Israelites were foiled at the first (and shamefully too) to the loss of forty
thousand, because they sought not the Lord as they ought to do, yet as soon as
they took the right course, Phinehas the son of Eleaz^r moves the question,
whether they might go against their brethren the Benjamites, or no, verse. 28.
Shall I go out to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother? or shall
I cease? and the Lord said go up, for to morrow I will deliver them up into thy
hands. Where we see the Lord does both own, and bless the enterprise, even
against Benjamin their brother.

But the quarrel we have in hand, dear Countrymen, is of a different
nature; here Religion, and Laws, and Liberties, and the very being of our
English Nation lie at stake; and our posterity, yet unborne, lie a bleeding;
and, I speak it from a sad heart, if we do not now quit our selves like
freeborn English men, for our Kingdom, and for our Religion; within less
than a few ages, the name of an English man will sound as bad here in England,
as the name of a Jew in Christendom, or of a Christian in Barbary. I make no
question, (unless you have stopped your ears (as they say) with wool, or
corrupted reason with will) you have heard of their motto's in the North, Now,
or never; Now, if ever: You may ken their meaning, they cannot, they must not
speak plainer.

Object. O but the King is engaged in the quarrel, and shall we fight against
the King? shall we touch the Lords Anointed? I hope he is none of Gods enemies.

Answ. The Lord be judge between him and us, and the Lord judge where the fault
lies in respect of duty. There is a reciprocal answer of duty between
Prince and People: as the people by the laws of God and Nature are bound to
render lawful obedience to their Prince, so ought the Prince reciprocally, to
be, not only the Defender of the Faith, but a Protector of his Subjects:
every Schoole-boy has learned so much of State matters, and of his Princes
duty, that it is, Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos; to be indulgent
to his own people, and to suppress proud Rebels; we feel the contrary.
Homer calls him the Shepherd of his people: we know the duty of a Shepherd is
to keep off the wolf, and other vermin from his flock, and not to set them on,
and not to make way for the destruction of his sheep. I Will say nothing of the
sending for the Irish vermin, etc. A good Prince is called Pater patriae, a
Father of his Country and Kingdom: A father will love his children better
than strangers, will protect his children, and provide for the future
well-being of them; sure he will not murder them, nor reward them that do so.
Have his children been undutifull? No: Was ever Parliament of England
treacherous to the Crown of England? No: Were ever children more observant and
dutiful to their parents, than they have been to their Prince? No: Have they
not besought? have they not humbly petitioned? have they not wept? have they
not fasted, and prayed, to have him again? could more be done? have they not
undergone many brunts? escaped many treacheries? received many unspeakable
discouragements? and yet do they not still long for his return? do they not
yet contend with God by prayer for him?

Brethren, may not despised and cast-off England say of him, Est mihi namque
Romae Pater, est injusta noverca. Rome has captivated his natural affections,
and turned the stream from hence thitherward; have we not a cruel
stepmother, who has taken him off from us, and calls us Rebels, and endeared
him to her children, Ireland, France, etc. in aeternum, eternally? Nay, have
not all the Confederacy, these many years, kept Englands womb barren? And no
sooner was there a man child, the heir, the renowned Parliament borne, but
they sought to kill it, that the inheritance might be theirs.

How truly may England say of Rome, as it is in the Comedy, Meretrix meum herum
miserum intulit in pauperiem, spoliavit bonis, etc. The Whore Rome has robbed
me of my Husband, my Father, widdowed my sisters Ireland and Germany, murdered
my children, and have laid all the ignominious loads of treason and disloyalty
upon me?

Well then, let not that trouble thee; We honor our King, we fight for him, we
are resolved (by Gods blessing) it shall cost us our lives, but we will have
his love, his presence again. We have covenanted with God to preserve him,
with his lawful Rights, and to rescue him, if possible, from their bloody
hands, who have the dexterity to murder Protestant Princes, and to make way for
the happiness of him and his posterity, that he may be, not Rex Asinorum, a
King of slaves, but Rex Hominum, a happy King of a happy people. Let us
therefore bravely and stoutly take Joabs counsel in the like case, 2 Samuel
10.12. For our Religion and our Laws, Let us be of good courage, and let us
play the men, for our people, and the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that
which seems him good.

Have you any thing else to satisfy us, and we are ready? We must have better
ground before we do any thing, before we fight.

Will Scripture satisfy you? then note, you have

1 A Precept: God commands Moses, Moses again the Israelites, to execute
vengeance upon the Midianites, because they drew the people of God to fin, and
allured them to whoredom, and enticed them to Idolatry: this Idolatry drew
down the judgments of God upon the Israelites, whereby thousands were
destroyed; therefore God commands Israel to vex the Midianites, Numb. 25.17.
Vex the Midianites, and smite them, for they vex you with their wiles,
wherewith they have be guiled you in the matter of Peor. So then, we have a
command to vex those that seek to draw us to whoredom and Idolatry. The like
precept they had touching Amalek, the first of Nations that fought against
Israel after they came out of the Land of Egypt; they fought with Israel in
Riphidim: God notes the very place, and therefore says Moses to Joshua, his
Commander in chief, Choose us out men, and go fight with Amalek, Exodus 17.9.

2 We have a Pattern to warrant us: God himself is said to have war with a
Nation, and to fight with them; and he is therefore called a Man of War; The
Lord is a Man of War, says Moses, His name is Iehova, Exodus 15.3. This is
the condition that Saul made with David, when he promised to give him his
eldest daughter, 1 Samuel 18. Only be a valiant son unto me, and fight the Lords
battles. And so 1 Chronicles. 5.22. it is said, that many of the enemies of God and
his people fell down wounded, because the war was of God. So then, if God be
called a Man of War, and the battle be the Lords battle, and the war be
of God, we have a pattern to follow, we are on a safe ground.

3 We have a promise of good success too, in our just and honest quarrels.
When Joshua was to go up against Jericho, which was shut up, and closed,
because of the Children of Israel, the Lord said. Behold, I have given into
thine hand Jericho and the King thereof, and the strong men of war. And
afterward, when sundry Kings gathered themselves together against the
Gibeonites that had subjected themselves to the Israelites, the Lord said unto
Joshua, Ios. 10.8. Fear them not, for I have delivered them into thine hands,
none of them shall stand against thee: We have a promise too to warrant us.

4 We have an answer of prayers to encourage us: Sun stand thou still (says
Joshua) and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon, Josh. 10.12. And there was no
day like that day before it, nor after it, that the Lord heard the voice of a
man, for the Lord fought for Israel. When the Philistines were assembled
against Israel, the Children of Israel said to Samuel, 1 Samuel 7.8, 9, 10. Cease
not to cry unto the Lord our God for us, that he may save us out of the hands
of the Philistines: Samuel cried unto the Lord, who heard him, and thundered
with a great thunder that day, and scattered the Philistines; so they were
slain before Israel. So then, if God hear us when we go about such matters,
surely the action is very warrantable. The blind man could say, Ioh. 9.31. We
know that God hears not sinners, but if a man be a worshipper of God, him he
hears. And surely England has just cause to say, God has heard her prayers,
has granted her requests, has given her deliverances: If God hear, and
grant, surely the Petition is warrantable.

5 The Spirit of God sets down the duty of such as manage matters of the
field, as of the Captain, and common Soldier, which it would never do, if the
course were not good: hence it is, that God instructs Joshua, that he should be
strong, and of a good courage; that he would be with him, and never leave him,
nor forsake him. So when the common Soldiers come to John for instructions
what they should do, he tells them briefly what they ought to do: Master, and
w^^^ shall we do? Do violence to no man, said John. And what else? Accuse none
falsely, said he: what more? Do not mutiny, Be content with your pay. Our men
may do well to observe these Orders, it would bring a good report upon
themselves, and those that employ them.

But to give you more particular satisfaction; that saying is true, Causa non
poena facit martyrem; A lawful cause makes the action lawful and warrantable.

1 It is lawful for us to defend true Religion against the oppugners thereof:
that this is a matter of equity, may be gathered from the words of Ahijah to
Jeroboam, and all Israel, 2 Chronicles. 13.8. And now ye think to withstand the
Kingdom of the Lord in the hands of the Son of David, and ye be a great
multitude, and there be with you golden Calves, have ye not cast out the
Priests of the Lord? but as for us, the Lord is our God, and we have not
forsaken him; and behold God himself is with us for our Captain. O ye children
of Israel, Fight not against the Lord God of your Fathers, for ye shall not
prosper. This very business of corrupting the worship of God, and making
Calves, was the ground of this godly Kings quarrel more then any thing else.

2 Such as are oppressed for true Religion may seek, this way, to be freed, as
we see in the history of the Judges, who always raised wars to defend the
people of God out of the hands of cruel oppressors.

3 A third cause that carries equity with it, is when men fight for the
necessary defense of the Commonwealth, we may beat off wrongs and injuries
offered to us, as appears by that charge of the Ammonites against Israel, and
Jephthahs Apology, Jud. 11.13. The Ammonites allege that to be the cause of
their quarrel with Israel, Because (says he) the Israelites took away my land
when they came out of Egypt: now therefore (says he) restore those lands
peaceably: now Jephthahs answer necessarily implies the equity of taking up
arms for the defense of such a propriety, and so cleers the matter to them,
Ver. 14, 15. He shows them how Israel did Ammon no wrong at all, but that
those lands fell to them by Ammons attainder: And so we may rescue and recover
things lost, whether they be our wives, our sons, our daughters, our goods, our
lands, our cities, our possessions, Genesis 14.16. You shall find when Abraham
heard that his brothers son was taken prisoner by the Kings of Sodom and
Gomorrah, etc. that he armed the Trained Bands of his own household, rescues his
nephew, and recovers all the rich plunder they had gotten, and so procured
enlargement for the women and other people that were captivated. And thus you
shall find that we have good Commission to lay siege to any house, city,
town, or hold that is possessed by enemies and rebels, and to take them too.
1 Chronicles. 18.1. David took Gath and her towns out of the hands of the
Philistines, who then held them, to the annoyance of the Children of Israel.

If then the causes of our quarrel be just, surely the action must be just
too, we may lawfully oppose the opposers of our Religion, and the enemies of
our Nation, and we may then seek relief by arms when we are oppressed by
violence. If the Commonwealth fail, farewell Religion; and if Religion be
corrupted, cursed is the Commonwealth: Experience tells us, that the decay or
flourishing estate of the Church depends upon the well or ill being of a
Commonwealth: the Church and State (like Hippocrates Twins) live and dye
together: And therefore if the Heathen could say, Pro patria mori pulchrum, To
dye for the Republike were honorable, shall they herein go beyond us? Have we
greater light, and ampler right, God and Reason, beyond their reach? and shall
we do less? have we a word of promise, nay a certain word of Prophecy, that
the enemies of God shall be destroyed? And shall not we that are called by Gods
name help forward their ruin? Must Babylon down, and shall any of us seek to
keep her up? Must Basing (a limb of Babylon) be demolished? and will you not
now, as well, contribute your axes, and other instruments to raze it down, as
you did your shovels to make up her fortifications? Shall England be made a
desolation, a place for the wild beasts? wild Irish? and can we look upon her
flames without an outcry of help, help? Saevis inter se convenit ursis.

Shall Bears and Woolves agree together to preserve their kind? And is there
an agreement in Hell to propagate and enlarge the Kingdom of Satan? and shall
not we strive to keep up England from sinking? Shall every creature strive to
preserve its issue from hurt, and shall we basely betray our wretched
posterity to perpetual slaverie? What will they then (yet unborn) say of us?
will they not out of bitterness of their spirits cry out against us? Who were
our Ancestors? and what kind of shape did they bear? were they men or beasts?
If men, were they Turks or Jews? If beasts, were they Wolves or Tygres, that
could find in their hearts to let our liberties, and our happiness dye before
them? And could they bequeath no better legacy unto us, than shame and
obloquie? And for their King Idolatry, give away our happiness, our all, but
misery? and thus to expose us to be a byword, and a proverb of reproach? Will
they not say, Cursed be their memory, and cursed be their covetousness,
cursed be their negligence, cursed be their unnaturalness, that might and
would not save us? that had clubs, and would not use them to preserve us?

Contrymen, give me leave to speak, Have ye chosen the Worthies of your
Country, and by free vote have ye elected them to speak your wrongs, to plead
your liberties, proprieties, safeties, and to be a means by the blessing of God
to remove your grievances, and to convey a blessing upon your posterity? And
now they have already labored for you these four years, and being, at
present, about a principal branch of that work, do ye leave them? do ye not
know them? have ye not heard where they are? about what they go? have they
hazarded their persons? estates? have they undergone many losses to save you
from damage? and do you requite them thus? have they toyled for you the whole
night, and ought nothing? the night of fears, the night of treacheries and
discomforts, the night of many discomfitures? And now the day is come, a day of
comfort, a day of many victories and deliverances, and are you not yet
stirring? Arise, arise in the name of God, let cursed neutralitie go to Hell
(if Hell will receive it) let it not stain your generation; but be ye
resolute for God and your Country. Redeem (as others) your estates and
credits together, and before we part too, take along with you Joabs counsel to
Israel against the Aramites, and the Ammonites, 2 Samuel 10.11, 12. Be strong,
and let us be valiant for our people, and for the cities of our God, and the
Lord do that which is good in his eyes.

Brethren and Contrymen, I speak this, not that I apprehend you can be so
wanting to your selve, as to slight the service, but to persuade you rather to
hearty alacrity, and a speedy resolution, in easing of your selves, and the
Kingdom too, of the oppression of the two Garrisons. I believe their over-awing
power formerly has somewhat made your freeborne spirits retire into some secret
cell of your breast; and (me thinks) that saying of David may fitly be taken up
by you, I held my tongue, and spoke nothing; but it was pain and grief to me:
at last the fire kindled, and I spoke with my tongue, Psalm. 39.3. And that
other saying of his may as aptly be used to this very purpose, Psalm. 50.21.
These things have thou done, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest I was
altogether such an one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes. I hope I need no more for motives, I doubt not but
your zeal to God and your Country will move you, your loyalty (nay pity) to
the person and posterity of your Prince will prevail with you, your piety to
the flourishing estate of the Gospel will persuade you; your hatred to the
massacres of those horrible Monsters of blood and rebellion, will animate you:
All things all upon you to help forwards the ruin of Gods enemies, and to
suppress those inhumanities, murders, burnings, spoylings; to quench those
flames, to stanch those wounds; God calls, man calls, mercy calls, judgment calls,
the Church calls, the Commonwealth calls, the wife calls, the child calls; this and
future ages and generations, all call upon you, presently to set about the work.

Take these Breviaries (for I post to a conclusion) by way of military
instruction.

Do not wink (I mean with both eyes) be not timorous, get Christian courage.
This was Hezekiahs principal charge, when Sennacherib came with a bloody
purpose, to fight against him, says he, to his Captains and Soldiers, 2 Chronicles. 32.7. Be strong, and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of the
King of Assure, neither for all the multitude that is with him, for there is
more with us, then with him; with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the
Lord our God, for to help us, and fight our battles.

There must be three ingredients in this courage, to make it useful and
serviceable for a Christian to fight Gods battles.

1 Knowledge of the Cause and quarrel in hand: the conscience must be informed
of the equity of it; as namely, that it is for God, and the Cities and People
of God, and for our wives, our sons, and daughters, our houses, etc. and this
will make men as bold as Lions, to trample death, etc.

2 There must be a casting and a rolling of our selves and our proceedings of
the business on God, with an assurance, that not a hair shall fall from our
heads without his providence.

3 A serious acknowledgement that the issues of War are from God, as the
battle is his, so is the honor also his: he gives, and he takes, and it is
all one with him to save with many, or with few.

Now here stands one maine difference between Moral and Theological
Magnanimity and Courage, that must have some proportionable number; and
strength of men to ground the enterprise or undertaking, but this puts men (you
would think) upon strange hazzards and absurdities, sets David upon Goliath,
sets Luther upon Rome, sets weakness upon strength. And thus you shall find
that in Religion, the work of God was never set forward with the greatest
number, They are too many for me to deliver them into thy hands, says God to
Gideon, Judges 7.2. The profession of godliness had always fewest in number,
yet no enemy was able to stand against them: The Apostles of Christ were few in
number, and the weapons of their warfare were not carnal, but mighty, through
God, casting down imaginations, and every high thing, that is exalted above the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ.

And in this respect how truly may those worthy Champions, and Patriots of this
County use Paul's words to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. At my first answering no
man assisted me, but all forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to
their charge, notwithstanding the Lord assisted me, and strengthened me. Well
then, let their courage and constancy be for our imitation, and let us write
after this copy of theirs. But before we pass to another instruction, will ye
see the picture of a Dastard, it was faint-hearted Ahab, 1 Kin. 20.4. when
Benhadad, King of Aram, sent Messengers to him, at the siege of Samaria, with
this message, Thy silver and thy gold is mine, also thy women and thy fair
children are mine, very poorly he yielded at the first Summons, would have
given up all, my Lord the King, according to thy saying, I am thine, and all
that I have. Labor for courage: that is the first Instruction.

2 Get and use honest craft, the Enemy is subtle, he serves a cunning master:
Therefore out v^e him too, in point of policy; It Is commendable, Christ
commands it, Be wise as Serpents. Yea, and he blames those of his own that are
not so, The children of this world are wiser in their generation, then the
children of light: And you shall find that anciently the most godly wars were
managed with stratagems, subtlety, and policy; The Commanders of Gods
holiest Wars did lay snares and ambushments for the Enemy, to circumvent him.
God commands this, Jos. 8.2. Thou shall do unto As and her King, as thou did
unto Jericho, and her King, etc. lay an ambushment for the City behind it.

Will ye have examples for this too? Abraham intending to recover his nephew
Lot out of their hands, that had taken him captive, did not fight with him in a
pitched field, and display his Ensign in the open day, but politikely divided
his company, and smote it by night. When David asked counsel of the Lord,
whether he should go against the Philistines, Thou shall not go up, but turn
about behind thee, and come upon them over against the Mulberie trees, and when
thou hear the noise of one going in the Mulberie trees, then remove, for
then shall the Lord go out before thee, to smite the Host of the Philistines; so
that it is lawful, nay it is required of us, that we be wise and politic, to
hide our purposes from our enemies; to make show of one thing, and do another.
True it is, we must keep promise with our enemies, though they faulter, and
prove base and treacherous to us, we must not promise to save them, and then
destroy them; we must not agree to receive them to protection, and afterward
work their confusion. That Is the second Instruction, you must have martial
craft and cunning.

3 And chiefly, Be religious. Religion does not make men cowards, but is rather
very friendly and assistant unto true valor: Religion informs the conscience,
that the cause undertaken is just and honorable: this puts life and vigor
into men's spirits and resolutions. Religion takes us off from self-confidence,
and from leaning on the broken staff of the bruised reed of Egypt, Esa. 36.6.
and to hang on God, for all we want; it will teach us to be Evangelicall
enemies, to show mercy unto such as fall into our hands: and Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5. I say, it will make us depend
on God; and the more dependent we are that way, the better still it is with us,
and the better it fares with our Armies: but when we grow independent, and
rely on the arm of flesh, that presently withers, and fails us; and
therefore says brave Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Hear ye O Judah, and ye
inhabitants of Jerusalem, put your trust in the Lord your God, and ye shall be
established; believe his Prophets, and ye shall prosper; and so Ver. 12. see
how he casts himself upon God, We have no might against this great multitude,
but our eyes are upon thee. Thus Religion will teach us to pray well, and say
well; and so it will teach us to do well too. The old saying is, Inter Arma
silent Leges: when war is proclaimed, the Trumpet sounds, and the Drum beats,
all Laws (for the most part) keep silence, and equity is buried, Religion (for
ought we can discern) is the least of men's thoughts. The Soldier thinks he may
do what he list; he thinks, rapine, uncleanness, drunkenness, swearing, and
all that is bad, Law; but let him know, God gives better precepts, Deuteronomy. 23.10,
11. When thou go forth with an host against an enemy, then keep thee from
every wicked thing, (not commit every wicked thing, as it is with most) If any
be unclean, etc. where Moses tells us plainly, that when we take up arms, we
may not give our selves over to a lawless liberty, to commit any sin. I pray
do not think that you may live as you list, nor run into all outrage, more now
then at other times: let that be the brand of the enemy, and of those that
fight for Antichrist, liberty and lewdness; let it not be named in our camp:
but seeing the quarrel we have undertaken is Gods, let us be as becomes Gods
soldiers. Take heed, I say once more, that by your lewdness and intolerable
impieties you do not turn God, in the front of the enemy, against you; think
then how terrible your overthrow must needs be! What shall I say Lord (says
Joshua) when Israel turns their back upon their enemy, Ios. 7.8, 10. Israel,
has sinned, says God, neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy
the wicked from among you.

Was it not the cursed miscarriage of Officers and Soldiers, that brought a
curse upon our former Armies? I am sure it did help well on our miseries. Did
not pillaging Achan bring a curse upon the whole Camp? Did not the ill example
of these persons bring an odium upon the Cause? (especially in the ignorant,
who knew not how to discern between the equity of a Cause, and the iniquity of
the Instruments) did it not make them think ill of the just and honorable
proceedings of the Parliament? how justly may those honorable and grave
Senators take up that complaint against some of you, as sometimes Jacob did
against the act of Simeon and Levi, Genesis 34.30. Ye have troubled me, to make
me stink amongst the inhabitants of the Land, and I being few in number, they
shall gather themselves together against me and slay me. And have not many of
this Army too, done what they were able (for all their good pay) to destroy the
Parliament, though their faces have been this way, and their hands happily have
wrought for them? yet did not the works go backwards? and that now it goes
forward, no thanks to many of them; so while those are weeping, these are
laughing, whilst those are mourning, these are rejoicing, while those were
fasting, these were feasting, and whilst many of them were fainting on their
beds with tired out-spirits in the public, these were stretching themselves on
beds of ivory, of Delights and Venerie: and to this day, while the people of
God are at Church (I speak it with grief) I would I could say but few of ours,
were tippling and drunk in alehouses and other houses of dis-order: Is this to
help on the destruction of Gods Enemies? or is it to bring ruin upon our
selves and the Kingdom? I will now here propound unto you two Patterns, for
your imitation, worth your notice, and then I will hold you no longer, and it
shall be to cross that old Proverbiall Hexameter, Nulla fides pietasque viris,
qui castra sequuntur.

The one is Captain Cornelius, commended for his Religion, Act. 10.1, 2. and
the other is the Centurion, commended for his Faith, Mat. 8.10. and so liberavi
animam meam, I have commended unto you no other orders and instructions, but
what you have in the pure word of God.

FINIS.

