A TRVE RELATION OF THE ABOMINABLE Injustice, Oppressions and Tyranny, which
Captain Henry Bell suffered nine years together at the Councell-board, before
this Parliament began, as the said Captain Bell did humbly Exhibit the same to
the King at White Hall, on the second day of December 1640. and what His
Majesty was graciously pleased to do thereupon.

AND ALSO, HEREIN THE SAID CAPTAIN Bell does exhibit his humble Petition to
the Right Honorable the Lords Assembled in Parliament.

Wherein he truly shows, what Lamentable passages have happened unto him, and
what misery he has suffered now almost six years together since the
beginning of this Parliament; only by reason their Lordships have not yet taken
his grievances into hearing, which the King did refer and send unto their
Lordships, by the Lord Privy Seal, and by Sir John Banks when this Parliament
began.

Printed in the year 1646.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent MAJESTY. The humble Petition of Captain Henry Bell.
Most gracious Sovereign:
I Your Majesty's most humble Petitioner, would rather be a Bond slave among
the Turks, then Your Majesty's Freeborn man (as I am) to be used as I have
been nine years together before this Parliament began, at your Councell-board
here in England: For the courses which were taken against me by the whole
Council board, were more unjust then the ungodly proceedings that were taken
against Naboth, in the time of wicked King Ahab, who by false accusation was
unjustly bereaved of his Vineyard, whereby both Ahab and Jezabel were
destroyed: which fearful example of Gods wrath may well serve at this time to
be a looking-glass for my Adversaries at the Councell-board, who likewise did
bend their utmost endeavors u^justly to bereave me of my Vineyard also (that
is) of my poor estate, which I disbursed in a service, wherein I was employed
by your Majesty's Royal Father King James, amounting to 5268 l the Service
being of no less moment then for the preservation of both your Majesty's
lives, as M. Secretary Morton, by your Majesty's command did certify your
Majesty in writing at Holbery shortly before his death.

Wherefore I do most humbly pray your Majesty will be graciously pleased to
refer this Petition and my grievances hereunto annexed, to be speedily heard
before the Assembly sitting in the Commons House in Parliament, that so I may
have and receive payment of such moneys, as are due unto me from your Majesty,
together with such satisfaction for my nine years wrongful Imprisonment,
Losses and Disgraces, as shall be found agreeable with Justice and Equity.

And I shall ever pray for your Majesty's long and happy Reign. HENRY BELL.

A true Relation of the state and proceedings of Captain Henry Bells Cause,
nine years together at the Councell-board.
I. THAT I Captain Henry Bell was employed beyond the seas four years
together by your Majesty's Royal Father King James, about the pretended loving
Letter which the Empress wrote to her Highness the Lady Elizabeth your
Majesty's Sister, Anno 1618. under the color of which Letter that horrible
plot should have taken effect at Ratisbone, which was contrived at Vienna,
against the Lady Elizabeth, and the young Prince her then only Son, and also
against King James and your then Princely person, certified more at large unto
your Majesty by Secretary Morton, as is before related.

II. That in the said employment (as also in another employment here in this
Kingdom) I disbursed out of purse for the use and service of King James, of
your Majesty, and of this State the Sum of 5^ 38 l, in moneys.

III. That in satisfaction of the said Sum disbursed, his Majesty Anno 1619.
(with the full consent of the whole Councell-board) did grant unto me under the
great Seal of England the yearly Pention of 500 l, for the Term of 31. years
to endure.

IV. That after the death of King James (in regard my Pention could not be duly
paid unto me) your Majesty (upon the foresaid Mr. Secretary Mortons
Certificate) did graciously grant two Privy Seals for the payment of 900 l in
part of the foresaid sum disbursed, therewith to relieve me in my then
present wants.

V. That Anno 1630. your Majesty was graciously pleased to give order to the
Lord Treasurer Weston to cause another Privy Seal to be drawn up and passed
unto me for the payment of 5000 l more in liew of my foresaid Pention, and in
satisfaction of the moneys by me disbursed as aforesaid.

VI. That I attended the said Lord Treasurer two years for the passing of the
said Privy Seal, in which time I had nothing from him, but only fair promises
(without any performance) for the passing of the same, insomuch as I was forced
to make my griev^ us case known unto him, and tell him that my self, my wife
and children were like to perish for want of my moneys and means, and
therefore I humbly prayed his Lordship to give directions for the drawing up of
the said Privy Seal according to your Majesty's order in that behalf,
otherwise (I told him) I should be forced to complain of him to your Majesty,
and to the State.

VII. That his Lordship thereupon grew very angry, and said thus unto me,
Captain Bell, seeing you are so peremptory, you shall stay yet longer for your
Privy Seal, and because you say you will complain of me, therefore I will go
to the Council Table and complain of you to the Lords; which he did forthwith
according, and told the Lords that I threatened to complain of him.

VIII. That within a few days after the late Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Lord Treasurer the Lord Cottington, and others of the Austrian and Spanish
faction, who conceived, and did bear an inward hate toward me ever since I
performed the foresaid service, did procure a warrant from the whole
Councell-board to commit me to prison in the Gatehouse Westminster without
showing any cause why they committed me.

IX. That upon the said Warrant I suffered nine years imprisonment most
wrongfully, and innocently by apparent oppression, injustice, and tyranny.

X. That after I had been two years in Prison, and without intermission did
daily petition their Lordships to know the cause why they kept me in prison,
then (because for shame of the world they must show some color of cause for
keeping me in Prison) there was most wickedly contrived such a Bill against
me, as that the like thereunto was never heard of nor known so long as this
Kingdom has stood, for from the beginning of the first word in the said Bill,
to the end of the last, there was nothing true in the whole Bill, neither was
the said Bill drawn upon any information at all, but it was only devised by
and upon their Lorships mere conceits, and pretended cogitations and weenings.

XI. That I forthwith did put in my answer to the said Bill, and thereupon I
sent continually one petition after another to the Council board humbly
desiring their Lordships to give order that the said Bill and answer might be
brought to a speedy trial.

XII. That when the Lords understood that I would not cease from petitioning to
have that Bill and answer brought to a trial, then their Lordships directed
Sir John Banks Attorney General to send for me, who said unto me as
follows; Captain Bell, the Lords of the Council have commanded me to send
for you, and to tell you that the Bill was not drawn against you with any
intent to bring it to a trial, but only to see what answer you would make
thereunto, and the Lords are now satisfied with your answer to the same, and
they have ordered the Bill to be dismissed, and that the reason they committed
you to Prison was, because you kept such a continual clamouring for your money
which the King owes you, whereas my Lord Treasurer many times told you, that
there was not yet money to pay you, and the Lords have commanded me to tell you
further, that if you will be bound with good security in a Bond of 2000 l that
you will be quiet, and not make a clamouring for your money, but with patience
will forbear yet one year to trouble their Lordships until money comes in to
pay you, then the Lords will set you at liberty, and for your maintenance their
Lordships will continue your allowance, which you have had in Prison, (viz.) a
Noble per diem, until you receive your money due unto you from the King;
whereupon I told Sir John Banks, that I would be bound with good Security to
perform the same.

XIII. That two days after I sent word to Sir John Banks that I had my
Security ready, and I sent him their names, and gave him notice where they
dwelt, then he sent for us to come unto him to his chamber in Grayes-Inne,
where we entered into Bond of 2000 l for the performing of the particulars above
related; whereupon Sir John Banks took the said bond and told us he would
show it unto the Lords, and that the next morning he would send a Warrant to
the keeper of the Gatehouse to set me at liberty.

XIV. That I was not only kept still in Prison five years after we had given
Bond as aforsaid (without any warrant for my enlargement) but also Sir John
Banks kept our Bond still in his hand, and would neither deliver it up unto
us, nor would he give Warrant for my enlargement, whereby my Security were
forced to neglect all their own affairs in Trading, and to attend continually
in Petitioning, either to have the said Bond delivered up unto us, or else that
a Warrant might be given for my enlargement out of Prison; But all petitioning
was in vain, insomuch as thereby I forfeited my Counterbond of two thousand
pounds which I gave my Security to save them harmless.

XV That during the time of my imprisonment I sent 214 Petitions to the
Councell-board, in all which my Petitions, I made humble suit unto their
Lordships only for Justice, that I might know why they kept me in Prison,
seeing no man could justly charge me that I had offended the King either in
word or in deed, or that I had transgressed the Laws of this Land, but that on
the contrary I had done good and exceptable service to and for the King and
this State, all which I offered to prove apparently if their Lordships would be
but pleased once to hear me, but all my Petitioning was in vain, I could
never obtain so much Justice at their Lordships hands, as once to be called
before them, nor to be heard to speak so much as one word, nor could I ever
know any cause why they kept me in prison, but only they sent me word many and
oftentimes (especially the Lord Privy Seal) that they were assured if I were
set at Liberty, I would keep a Clamouring for my money, and there was not yet,
money for to pay me, insomuch that thereupon I sent a Petition to the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, and another to the Lord Privy Seal, wherein I told
their Lordships that if ever it pleased God to send us a Parliament, their
Lordships would (...)these courses they took against me; The Lord Privy Seal
showed my said Petition to the Lords at the Councell-board; And said; By this
petition we may easily gather, that Captain Bell would be a very troublesome
man unto us if we should set him at liberty, therefore (he said) by my consent
he shall still remain where he is, until his money can be paid him.

XVI. That these tyranicall unjust and oppressive courses taken against me at
the Councell-board, did cause and work the untimely deaths of my wife and of
my young children, who lamentably perished and were starved to death, in the
time of my nine years unjust, and wrongful imprisonment, whose innocent
bloods and untimely deaths God will reveng, and will require the same at the
hands of the authors and causers thereof.

Thus and hereby your Majesty may be graciously pleased plainly to find and
see, that this Land is even now ripe for punishment, and it is much to be
feared that Gods Anger is already kindled against us, by reason of the heavy
sins of injustice which fearfully have taken the upper hand, do sway and
flourish here amongst us, and that Gods Judgment will ere long be powered
down upon this Kingdom.

Given this second day of December, 1640. HENRY BELL.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS Assembled in Parliament. The humble
Remonstrance and Petition of Captain Henry Bell.
Humbly showing:
I. THAT before this Parliament began, after the Petitioner had suffered nine
years imprisonment most wrongfully and innocently, and that his moneys
amounting to five thousand two hundred sixty eight pounds, were most unjustly
detained from him, whereby his wife and two small children lamentably perished
and were starved to death, in the time of his said wrongful imprisonment,
which with many more oppressions, injustice and tyranny, your petitioner
suffered only by warrant from the Councell-board, then at the beginning of this
Parliament your Petitioner humbly besought his Majesty to referr his grievous
complaint against the Councell-board to be heard and determined in and before
the Honorable Houses of Parliament, whereupon his Majesty presently reading
the said grievances did straightly charge the Petitioner that he should not bring
his great complaint against the Councell-board into the House of Commons, but
his Majesty did forthwith refer, and did send the same to your Lordships by
the Lord privy Seal, and by Sir John Banks, requiring your Lordships to take
the Petitioners grievances into a speedy and a private hearing, and to
determine thereof for your Petitioners just relief, and to the intent your
Lordships might be pleased the sooner and with the more ease dispatch the same,
his Majesty did then also send unto your Lordships the Empress letter which
she wrote to his Majesty's Sister the Lady Elizabeth, and Mr. Secretary Mortons
Certificate touching the same, which do clearly demonstrate the service done
by your petitioner, in his Majesty's employments beyond the Seas, in and about
the discovering and preventing that horrible plot which was contrived at Vienna
Anno 1616. against her Highness the Lady Elizabeth, and also what moneys he
disbursed therein, the which letter and Certificate were by your Lordships
directions delivered into Mr. Smithes custody one of the Clarks attending on
your Lordships.

II. That since his Majesty did send the said perticulars unto your Lordships,
the Petitioner has received diverse Orders from your Lordships in writing, and
days of hearing his cause set down, but nothing at all has been done
therein.

III. That near three years past the right Honrable, the Lords and others,
Commissioners of Scotland did write their letters unto your Lordships in the
Petitioners behalf, and therein did earnestly entreat, that your Lordships
would be pleased to take a speedy hearing of the Petitioners grevances, in
regard his moneys and means were still detained from him, and was not able to
subsist any longer without order for maintenance to be allowed him, until his
cause were heard and determined, upon which letters your Lordships were pleased
to return this answer following to the Commons of Scotland viz. that whereas
your Lordships had not time and leisure to hear the Petitioners cause by
reason of many other weightyer affairs: your Lordships therefore with the
house of Commons would order a competent maintenance to be allowed unto the
petitioner until his cause were heard and determined.

IIII. That notwithstanding your Lordships said answer and promise made and
sent to the Commissioners of Scotland: there has been no order at all yet
taken for your Petitioners relief or maintenance: by reason whereof another
child of his came likewise to an untimely death and perished in lamentable sort
for want of necessary sustainance, and the Petitioner himself is now thereby
also sunck into such a depth of misery and poverty, that he is merely destitute
of Food, Raiment and Lodging, and must needs likewise perish if he be not
speedily relieved.

And so he leaves it to the Worlds censure whether the perticulars above
related do any way agree with Justice, or do concur with the solemn Oath
and Covenant lately taken and sworn unto, or whether they be not quite
opposite to the same.

Forasmuch now as it was not his Majesty's will and pleasure to suffer the
Petitioner to address himself with his greevances to the House of Commons
(where he might long since have been relieeved) but was graciously pleased to
put him and his cause into your Lordships hands Justly to be repaired.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays that your Lordships will not suffer
him to be destroyed, to starve and perish in your Lordships hands for want of
Justice, but rather to order and nominate a certain day unfayleably for the
hearing of his grievances either in public or in private as your Lordships
shall think fitting, and thereupon, that your Lordsh ps will be also pleased
(together with the Honorable House of Commons) to order unto the Petitoner,
payment of such moneys as he shall make plainly appear to be justly due unto
him from his Majesty, and also to order him satisfaction (out of the estates of
these Privy Councellers and others whether they be living or dead) that are and
have been the authors of the petitioners nine year wrongful imprisonment,
and who have caused the untimely deaths and starving of his wife and Children
as is above related, a List of whose names are set down hereafter following,

And your Petitioner shall pray for your Lordships healthes and prosperity.
HENRY BELL.

Hereafter are set down the names of those Privy Counselors, and others,
that were and are the Authors of my foresaid, and other wrongful sufferings.
THe late Archbishop of Canterbury. The Lord Covintry, Lord Keeper. The Earl
of Portland, Lord Treasurer. The Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy Seal. The
Earl of Pembrooke, Lord Chamberlein. The Lord Cottington. The Lord Falkland.
Master Secretary Cook.
These eight above named, did subscribe their names to the warrant for my
Commitment*

The Earl of Strafford. The Earl of Arundell. The Earl of Dorsot. The Earl
of Suffolk. The Earl of Salisbury. The Earl of Bridge-water. The Earl of
Holland. The Earl of Exeter. The Lord Wimbleton. The Lord Savill Comptroler.
The Lord Goring. The Lord New-burgh. The Bishop of London, Lord Treasurer. The
Arch Bishop of York. Doctor Neale. Sir Thomas Edmonds. Sir Julius Caesar. Sir
Robert Naunton. Secretary Windebanke. Sir Thomas Iermin. Sir John Banks.
FINIS.

