THE PERVSAL OF AN OLD STATUTE CONCERNING DEATH and JVDGMENT As it was lately
delivered in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. FRANCES BEDFORD.

BY James Bedford B. D. Sometime Fellow of Q. Coll. in Oxon. and now Pastor of
Blunsham and Erith in Hun^ingtonshire.

(...). Senibus in januis mors stat, Juveni in insidiis.
Mar. 5.39 The Damosel is not dead but sleeps. LONDON. Printed by J. M. for
Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at his shop at the three Daggers near the
Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street. 1657.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
THere are two Points that can never be enough thought upon: our last end, and
our great account, the one is liable to sense the other is matter of faith; the
one calls for serious consideration, and the other sound belief, both
exceedingly conduce to fortify us in Christian practice and hope: This Text
upon which my Reverend Brother has happily laid out his thoughts treats of
both, and therefore the discussion of such an Argument cannot be unwelcome to a
gracious Reader; we need all kind of helps to enforce the remembrance of these
grand Truths, a duty so necessary, and so frequently to be revived, that it is
to be feared our own private furniture, will not yield us plenty enough of
savory and affective thoughts, to warm our hearts with these meditations; every
help in this kind is a mercy, and accordingly should be entertained.

I doubt not but when thou have read this Sermon through, thou will find thy
heart a new set a work upon these Truths, and by thy cheerful acceptance of
this piece, encourage the Author, my choice Friend, to publ^sh his very
elaborate Meditations Mal. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. etc.
on another portion of Scripture, which he has gone over with much exactness
and care, and will not (I hope) conceal it from public use and benefit: Now
the good Lord fit us more for our great change, that we may always stand ready
with our Lamps burning, and when our Master comes, he may find us so doing.

I am thine in all Gospel Bonds, THO: MANTON.

To my much esteemed BROTHER Samuel Bedford Esquire; Member of the Honorable House
of Parliament, and Justice of Peace in the County of Bedford, and Frances
Bedford his dear Consort, and my beloved Sister.
MOurning Suits, use to be plain; yet if made fit, are never the less useful:
Such was this plain Sermon (preached upon a mourning occasion) seasonable, and,
if the Lord give a blessing, it may be profitable both to others (who heard it)
and to you, and these Christian neighbors (who desired the sight of it) I have
granted your, and their desire, which (in things feasible and coming within the
verg of my power) has the force of a command, though in gratifying it I have
denied my self. If I fall under the lash and scourge of any censorious tongue,
be it known I have learned not only to do but to suffer for my friends; Love
being a passion and the truth of it more discovered by passion than action. It
is a small thing to me to be arraigned at the bar of man's judgment, Judicium
humanum vix Alphabetum illius divini.
who am in my text cited together with others before the judgment seat of God.
I can hazard the being a sufferer for you, who have already been a sufferer
with you. And indeed if sympathy which has wrought very strange effects (as
Naturalists observe) had not wrought wonderously in me, I (who never did
before) had not now appeared in print. You have the discourse in white and
black, the wonted colors of a funeral solemnity. You might have thought paper
had been very scarce with me, if I should have withheld from such a dear
friend a winding sheet to wrap up her Name and preserve the Memorial of it. My
Notes in transcribing (as is the manner of things in transplanting) have
admitted of some alteration, whether for better or worse judge ye. Solomon
says, Prove. 27.9. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so does the
sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel. Such is that which with the
boldness and faithfulness of a friend (standing in a very near relation) I
offer unto you in these following Proposals, that have (at least as I conceive)
a specialty in them for your direction to a right demeanor under this sad
providence wherewith you are now exercised. Lift up the name of God in proper
attributes, put your selves upon the exercise of suitable graces, set upon the
performance of seasonable duties which belong to an afflicted condition. Seek
of God a sanctified use of this smart dispensation, and then you shall find
your loss to prove your gain. You have lost a child, I more than a child, a
dutiful child, a child of early hopes; in respect of knowledge and
discretion, an aged child; and though I think verily you have lost many
children in one, yet consider you have not lost all your children as Job did.
Though you have lost your child, yet you have not lost your The sun shines
still when the glass-windowes are broken.
God. Walk closely with God, and you shall find him at all times your best and
at some times your only comfort. Labor to taste the goodness of God in all your
good things while you have them, and to see enough in the all sufficiency of
God to make a supply when you are deprived of them. Call to mind the scripture
discovery of those particular sins (as they were represented to you in a
private fast) which cause God to withhold or withdraw these fading comforts,
and try your own hearts by them. God at times has taken away the greater half
of the dearest pledges and pieces of your selves; be the more careful to
instruct those that are left behind. As you expect that what you do, should
be pleasing to God, let not that which God has done be displeasing to you.
When God does not bring down his will to yours, bring up your will to his, and
you shall have full contentment. In every thing give thanks, and say as Hierome
advises a friend of his in the like case, Thou Tulisti liberos quos ipse
dederas, non contristor quod recepisti, ago gratias quod dedisti.
have taken away whom thou had given me; I grieve not that thou have taken
them, but praise thee Lord that was pleased to give them. What you received
joyfully as a token of God his love to you, part with contentedly as a
testimony of your love to God. They that part with any thing willingly a little
sooner than ordinary in a way of duty, which must be once parted with in a way
of necessity, shall in no wise loose their reward. Forget not the speech of
Christ, he that loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me,
Mat. 10.37. Make use of that wisdom which teaches, when the stream of
affection is strong to turn it into the right channel, and to sorrow more for
your sins, which are the cause of your sufferings, than your sufferings which
are the fruit of your sins, for which end God has made that Organ the outlet
of sorrow which was the inlet of sins. Lachrymas angustiae exprimit crux,
lachrymas poenitentiae peccatum.
Tears are pearls, do not prodigally cast them before swine; the carnal sorrow
of some professors in the want, has furnished worldlings with an argument to
defend their carnal joy in the use of the creature. If Idolaters have
sacrificed their sons and their daughters to devils, Pal. 106.37. shall not the
true Worshipers much more resign them up to God, whose grace, mercy, love,
power is infinite, and can do infinitely more for them than they. Borrow a
jewel of an Egyptian, make use of that speech of an heathen, who having but the
dim light of natural reason to help him, when the news of the death of his
child was brought him said, I know it was born mortal. Another going forth one
day and seeing a woman weeping for her pitcher of earth that was broken, Heri
vidi fragilem frangi, hodie vidi mortalem mori.
and going forth the next day and seeing a woman weeping for her child that
was dead, thereupon wondered no more at the dying of a mortal creature, than at
the breaking of an earthen pitcher. Apply as a plaster fitted for your sore
that of the wise man, Remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy
flesh, for childhood and youth are vanity, Eccl. 11.10. Take special notice of
the readiness of Abraham, who upon a call from God, Genesis 22.2. rose up early in
the morning ver. 3. to offer up with his own hand Isaac his son, his only son,
the son of his love, the son of the promise, a son long waited for, and at last
obtained when his own body and Sarah's womb was dead, and surveying the
circumstances of the story make the father of the faithful your pattern of
obedience and self-denial. Think seriously how that death which has lopt off
the branches, The Egyptians mourned for Jacob 70. days, Genesis 50.3. Joseph
mourned but 7 days, ver. 10. Though he had more cause, yet more grace and a
better hope than those Infidels: Lugeatur mortuus, sed ille quem gehenna
suscepit, quem Tartarus devorat, in cujus poenam aeternus ignis aestuat. Nos,
quorum exitum Angolorum turba comitatur, quibus obviam Christus occurret, etc.
gravemur magis si diutius in tabernaculo isto habitemus.
will as certainly lay the axe to the root and hew down the tree. You have been
covered with the shadow of death, and it has come as near you as possibly it
could, and yet missed you, that you might never have cause to say it did not
give you warning. Admire the goodness of God, who has clearly revealed the
doctrine of the resurrection on purpose, to be an help against excess of grief
in the departure of friends, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14 And if you mourn much now, how
much more would you have mourned if God had made no promise of a resurrection.
God deals but with your child, as sometimes you have done with it; sends it to
bed before you, it shall awake and rise again. Though you are deprived of your
child's company, yet thousands for their childrens good are content to want
their company, as when they put them out to school, though they are not with
them, they are satisfied with this that they hear they are well: And is not
heaven the best school? There is no want in that place which affords the best
of every thing, and so the best company, a glorious God, a glorious Christ, the
spirit of glory, glorious angels, glorified saints, faithful Abraham, devout
Isaac, holy Jacob, ancient Patriarchs, blessed Apostles, courageous Martyrs,
and other heroical Worthies. Since God has set prosperity and adversity one
over against the other, Eccles. 7.14. and Christ filled the waterpots with
wine, Joh. 2.7. and the usual course of providence toward the saints is to
make consolations abound according to the rate and degree of their sufferings,
2 Cor. 1.5. and to usher in joys unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8. by sighs
unutterable, Romans 8.26. make use of that prayer of Moses the man of God, Psalm.
90.15. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us: and
the years wherein we have seen evil. Now darkness is round about you, the Lord
be a light within you, multiplying glorious manifestations of himself, shining
through the shower of the present calamity, shooting forth no less than ten
thousand beams of joy to revive and refresh your sad hearts: God that
comfort those that are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. cause his comforts in the
multitude of your thoughts to delight your soul, Psalm. 94.19. So prays

Your brother and servant in Christ, James Bedford.
From my study at Blunsham, Febr. 20. 165^.
Mistress FRANCES BEDFORD her Character.
A Beauty crystalline, but brittle.
Woman it self, in volume little^.
Incarnate Ang l, Spark divine
Housed in soft alabaster shrine.
God's image stamped upon a Mite.
('It Is meet that God should have his right.)
Upon her sickness, and death, and the advantages thereof.
NIpt in the bud, then steept (alas!)
In vinegar of pain she was:
Such buds so p^ckled as was she
Sauce for the King of Kings may be:
Or rather fruit of estimation
Pulled green she was for preservation.
Like to fair Cynthia in her prime
She rose, shone, set, all in short time:
Or to the other Hemisphere
She rather was translated, where
By direct sight of her great Sol
She has an everlasting full.
As the salt-issues of the Main
By percolation sweetness gain:
And the rare bird of Arabie
Does from his spicie ashes fly,
So shall these virgin atoms rise
Into a perfect ed^fice,
Not subject to deaths undermining:
Urnes now shall be pots of refining:
And through Redeemers inhumation,
The grave an house of Reformation.
Luke Samden:

Upon the death of the early virtuous and hopeful Mrs Frances Bedford; who
dyed of a Consumption Anno aetatis XII.
When after his full noon, the Sun,
Does sink, and fall into the West,
'Cause both his and our works done,
We laugh and sing and go to rest.
But if the blush of Morn turns pale,
And her eye clouded be; Each flower
Hangs down the head; Each hill and dale
Expect that heaven should weep a shower.
The flinty Stoic whose dull eye
Was never moist, yet on the hearse
(If blooming virtue fade and dye)
He drops a tear and hangs a Verse.
Ah! when stern death with eager pace
Drew on to ravish her from hence,
How each limb startled at the Embrace,
Pleading both Youth and Innocence?
Her faint lungs drew on so much air,
And took in only so much breath
As might give wings unto a prayer,
And serve to keep alive her death.
See how affrighted with cold dewes
The purple flood of life retires
From its fair channels, and renewes
At the spring of heat its fires.
Then sprightfully returns to thaw
The crystal cheek and snowy breast,
Till chil'd by vapors cold and raw
It yields it self to the Arrest.
In vain weak arts are used to mend
And trimm such shining Lamps, which more
Of Oil in ten years space do spend
Than sluggish flames do in threescore.
In vain we call her back: she hastes,
Her weak breast heaves with strong desires
Of being dissolved. As incense wastes
Into sweet clouds, so she expires.
Farewell (wise Virgin) who the spite and rage
Had rather feel of sickness, than of age;
And to escape those evils that wait on
The life of every mother, would be none;
But on thy Grave more gently lay'st thine head
Than other Maidens on the Nuptial bed.
Where thou in secret shade, and silence deep,
Free from the noiss o'th busy World shall sleep.
Till the dread blast of the shrill trump of Doom
Shake and affright each hollow Vault and Tomb.
And Time let fall his sith; and Vanity
Aged and Sick, give its last groan, and dye.
Then shall the lofty Quire with holy song
Awake thy ashes, and the youthful throng
Waft thee away on soft and golden wing,
And thee to calm, and peaceful Regions, bring.
Where the bright Troops shall wait and meet,
And with immortal welcomes greet.
Truth shall before with golden ray
Scatter the mists and clouds away.
And winged Contemplation
Soaring a loft shall lead thee on:
Next shall Love and Joy appear,
Floating on the balmy air:
And blessed Peace come hovering,
And ore thee spread her Turtle wing.
And still as thou approachest near,
New pleasures catch thine eye, and ear;
Till thou reach the brightest sphere
And highest stage of Glory; where
The burning lamp of endless day
Sheds abroad his hottest ray,
And where in holy Ectasy
Glittering ranks of Cherubs lie
Drench't in streams of liquid light
And floods of joy; who bow their bright
And flaming heads before the Throne
Of the most High and Holy One,
The holy Lamb: At whose blessed feet
In perfect Vision thou shall sit,
And solemn Jubilees shall hear,
Such as n'ere blessed mortal ear.
H. C.

An Elegy upon the much lamented death of the truly virtuous and most
ingenuous Gentlewoman Mrs Frances Bedford, who dyed in the 12th year of her
age, Jan. 18. 1656.
ANd art thou gone? Ah pretty, pious soul!
A flood (me think's) too little to condole
Our loss, would every eye, an Ocean were,
And every drop a Pearl, unto thy Beer
We Would sacrifice them all; for living such
Thy worth was, that it is hard to weep to much.
Who e're beheld Natures composure rare
Of thy clay-house, each room most neat and fair,
Thy gesture grave, thy disposition mild,
And said not (STRANGE!) a woman in a child.
Yea as the glittering Crown of all the rest,
With virtues such thy nobler part was blessed,
As did demonstrate thee, though Virgin pure,
To thy Redeemer Christ, espoused sure.
But richest flowers who sees not soonest cropped,
Rose buds are plucked, the fragrant Clove Gilly-flower.
is topt.
When worthless plants stand still: His Lambs most de^
Christ loves to have in's Royal bosom, where
No raging wolf of pain shall 'gain them tear,
Nor gnawing worm of sorrow vex: Oh there
We Will leave thee, to enjoy pleasures most sweet,
Till in eternity we all shall meet.
Rich. Read.

The perusal of an Old Statute concerning Death and Judgment.
We read in one of the Evangelists that Jesus took a little child [a living
childe] and set it in the midst of them, to teach them the doctrine of
humility: In like manner we have a little child this day [a dead childe] set
in the midst of us, to teach us the lesson of our Mortality. He that runs can
read it, but it will ask some time to stand still and learn it. Yet such is the
temper of God his people, of such teachable spirits are they, She died in the
12th. year of her age; proportionably here are twelve meditations offer
themselves to you.
that [as it is prophesied of them Esaias 11. and I may allude to it [ a little
child shall lead them. And I may say of our dear sister [as the scripture
says of our brother Abel] being dead she yet speaks. The language of the
present providence speaks these twelve things.

They rue Adams sin who have not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression.

The day of ones death is better than the day of ones birth, as much as the
outgate of troubles is better than the in let to it. The Thracians were wont
when a child was born to weep or lament, considering the miseries it was to
undergo: but when one died there was mirth and joy, considering the miseries
he was freed from.
It was not Lazarus his rest that Christ wept over, but he wept that Lazarus
must come to his conflict again.

There is a time to be born, and a time to die; and the time of life is so
short, that the Holy Ghost does not vouchsafe to mention it, and the experience
of some find it to be but a step [a tumulo ad tumulum] from the womb to the
grave.

God gives life to whom he will, and he may take away life when he will.

A Babe in Christ is better than a Man out of Christ: it is better to sleep in
Jesus than awake to sin; to die in the Lord than to live to your selves.

If not a sparrow from the house top, surely not such a flower out of ones
bosom as a child, can fall to the ground without a providence.

How much better is it to be a ch^lde of God, than to have a child from God?
for once a child of God, and for ever his.

Dying comforts give up the ghost, but still there is a living God to rest upon.

There is a name better than of a Son or Daughter, an Everlasting name that
shall never be cut off: How much better is it to have our name written in
heaven, than to have our name propagated in a lineal descent upon earth?

You must not fix your eye upon the worlds movables, a wandering glance
suffices when you look upon flitting objects, which you ought to look upon as
going as well as coming: When you see how light some it is upon the sun rising,
think how dark it will be when the sun sets.

Children are uncertain joys and certain griefs; witness the imposition of
the names upon the two first children that ever were born, Eve the mother of
all living called her first child Cain, which signifies a possession; yet
calls her next child Abel which signifies vanity.

Some whom God hates [as the wicked] may live long, but it is to fill up the
measure of their sins, and to increase their torment in hell, and their misery
is to be pityed: Others whom God loves [as the godly] dye sooner, and are
quickly in Young ones ripe for heaven God crops off as choice flowers, and puts
them in his bosom.
heaven, and their happiness must not be envyed.

All these things the party deceased while dead yet speaks: there is one
thing more which the party now dead (while living) did bespeak, and that was a
Text of Scripture to be discoursed upon by me; yet before I name it, I shall
carry you to the consideration of this observable circumstance: I can say of it
[as it is in the place of Proverbs concerning Lemuel, mutatis mutandis] The
words and the prophecy that her mother taught her: A good pattern for mothers
[whose opportunities a e many] to be dropping good instructions betimes into
the hearts of their children: It was Timothy's commendation, that from a child
he had known the holy Scriptures. For them that travel into a far country,
how beneficial is it beforehand to learn the la^g^age of that country? You
train up your children [I hope] for heaven, you intend they should travel to
Canaan, be feeding them in state of Infancy with the milk and honey of Canaan,
teaching them to speak the language of heaven before they come thither.

The divine Sentence chosen to my hand, and the Oracle at which we are now to
consult, is,

HEBR. 9.27. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
judgment.

THe design of the Apostle in this Epistle is to hold forth Christ in the
excellency of his Nature, Person, Offices; chiefly in his Pri^stly Office, as
appears by chap. 8. 1. Now of the things which we have poken [or which are to
be spoken (...) will bear either] this is the sum [or the he^d, the c^^t,
the ^^p of all; so he word (...) will signify.] We have such an hig^ Pri^^ct,
etc. so that the main subject and argum^nt yea the emi^^^^ and the top noti n
of the Epistle which he disc^urses, is the priestly Office o^ Christ: And of
it he speaks largely in this nin^^ chapte^, and h^e touch^th upon it in the
contex.

The words in this seven and twen ieth verse being the branch of a similitude,
they cannot be re^d with the full s^ns^ o^ them, without calling in the
following word, v. 28. so Christ was on^e offered, etc. and therefore I shall
not so much take the l berty, as submit to the necessity of handling them in
this conjunction.

I seeking rath^r to profit than to please and knowing that [aeque mala est and
nimi^ and ^ull^ di^^^isio,] m^^cing a text is as bad as not to divide it, shall
rest in this plain and ^^m^liar division of the words.

Here is, 1. A word of connection, And. 2. The notes of comparison, As and So.
3. The terms of the similitude, It is appointed for men once to die, etc.
Christ was once offered, etc.


I shall not dwell upon the connection, nor descant upon the notes, nor spend
time in a curious suit^ng and exact fitting the several parts each to other;
for a similitude is a tender thing and must not be vexed, and though it suit
not in every word and syllable, every letter and punctilio; it suffices if it
agree in the main, the drift and scope of it being illustration. Now the
Apostle discoursing the sufficiency of Christ his sacrificing himself once for
all, shows it by a resemblance, men dye once, Christ offered himself once,
nothing comes between man's death and judgment, and no other sacrifice between
Christ his offering up himself and his coming to judgment.

I shall gloss upon the letter of the words, and give you what I conceive to
be the mind of the holy Ghost in them, and then raise doctrinal conclusions
out of them. For the opening of the words, I will propound and answer, These
five Queries:

1. Q. What it is to dye?

Answ. The Scripture mentions, 1. A death in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. 2. A death to
sin, Romans 6.2. 3. A death for sin, Romans 6.23. The first is proper to the
unregenerate. The second is proper to the regenerate. The last, if you
understand it of eternal death, is only the portion of reprobates; if of a
temporal death, is the lot both of the wicked and the godly. Spiritual death is
the separation of the image of God, holiness and righteousness from the soul;
temporal death is a separation of the soul from the body; eternal death is a
separation of soul and body from a sight of the face of God for ever. The death
I shall discourse is temporal or corporal; and thus [as I hinted before] to die
is to have the knot untyed, the union dissolved between soul and body. As for
God to depart from the soul is the death of it; so for the soul to depart from
the body is the death of it. Rachels soul departing, she died, Genesis 35.18.

2. Q. What is meant by appointed?

Answ. The Greek word is (...), rendered statutum est, divine scil. consilio: It
is appointed in the Decree of God. The Scripture gives us a copy of that
Decree, pronounces the Statute, and if we search when and where, and upon
what the Statute was enacted, we shall find the original Record and Roll is
Genesis 3.9. Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return: which was spoken in
prosecution of that threatening Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thou shall
dye. Both which texts, though primarily spoken of Adam, yet secondarily include
us, he being set up as a public person and the representative of all his
posterity. Note also, that it is sin that has brought upon men this necessity
of dying; for though Genesis 2.7. it is said, God formed man of the dust of the
ground: yet it was not said, Unto dust thou shall return, till man had fallen
by sin. God decreed death as a punishment of sin. Sin grafted death upon the
stock of nature. Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin.

3. Q. What Men are here meant?

A. The expression is indefinite and equivalent to an universal call in the
fore-quoted place Romans 5.12. and hear what mo^e it can say, By one man sin
entered, etc. and so death passed upon all men for that all have sinned. Our act
being included in Adam's [with his eyes we saw, with his hands we took, with
his mouth we did eat the forbidden fruit] by a just law the sentence of death
passed on re^cheth him, all men. If you do not flatter your selves, in both
these glasses God sets before you this day, both of Scripture and Providence,
you may see the image of death in your own faces. All of you may look upon your
selves as dead men, the sentence is passed upon you: And such a one is, and is
called in law, a dead man that is sentenced, though he be not executed till
many days after.

4. Q. What is meant by once dying?

A. Once in Scripture is taken two ways: 1. As opposed to inconstancy and
uncertainty of continuance, Psalm. 89.35. Once have I sworn by my holiness that
I will not lie unto David. And thus it signifies firmly irrevocably, it shall
surely be accomplished. I find a late Commentator of great worth referring the
word once in my text to, appointed, reading the place thus, It is once
appointed for men to dye, and that once shall stand, there shall never be any
altering of the Statute, there is no need to make a new law upon the point, God
has once settled it, and it is settled for ever. Though this be a truth, yet
the letter of the words in the origin^l seem not so much to favor it; for it
is not (...), but (...). 2. As opposed to repe^ition or frequency, to a second
time; as in that speech of Abishai, 1 Samuel 26.8. Let me smite him to the earth
at once, and I will not smite him the second time: and thus it signifi s once
and no more, once and not again. And so is it taken in this Ep^stle: ver. 26.
of this Chapter, once is opposed to often: ver. 28. it is said that Christ was
once offered; which is interpreted Chap 10 10. where he speaks of the offering
of the bo^y of Jesus Christ once for all.

Now take the word once either of the ways; both ways doubts may be started
concerning some who did not dye once, concerning others who are said to dye
twice. For the former sort, the in^^ances of Elijah and Enoch are urged; the
one went up by a whirlwinde into heaven, 2 Kings 2.11. the other was translated
that he should not see death, Hebr. 11.5. But it is answered, These persons
were under the obligation of death as well as others: As Adam, though he did
not dye tha day h^e sinn^d, for his life was reprieved till h^e was nine
hundred and thirty years old, yet from the moment he sinn^d m^rtal^ era he
was subject to death, and brought himself d wn to^h c^^d i n of mortality. So
Elijah and E^och, though the^r soul^ and bodi s were not sep^rated as other
men's, but caught up og^^her on a sudden to partake of the glor fie^ state, were
in just c lvable to ^he str^ke of death even whilst mercy ward^d of the blow.
Again, these persons did undergo that which was p^op^^table an logical: this
their translation was in stead of d a^h; they did suffer a change, as they that
are living at Christ his last coming shall, 1 These. 4.17. and which is the
m^stery Paul shows us, 1 ^or. 15. 51. And he expresses it as his desire [^t it
might be] ^o go to heaven on this manner, and takes it for grant that others
are as ready to wish it as himself, 2 Cor. 5.4. Not that we would be
unclothed, but clothed upon, [if men might have their choice, who had not
rather keep on the clothing of his body and have a new suit of glory put upon
it than lay it down] that mortality might be swallowed up of life [of life
eternal, then that temporal life should be swallowed up of mortality]. Lastly,
these persons who were bound to have paid the debt of nature, as well as others
if God had strictly held them to it, were freed by the special di^pensation his
grace for special purposes of his glory. Much might be said in the gen ral
concerning the extraordinary holiness of both these persons, and God as an act
of favor taking them up alive to glory, would let the world know how highly
he esteems those that walk with him, fear him, love him and obey him in very
sinful corrupt times, such as were those in which they both lived. The special
reasons assigned are these: For Enochs translation, God hereby [in the very
nonage of the world and infancy of the Church] would give the faithful
Patriarchs a document of the resurrection and life eternal. It may be thus made
out: the first man that dyed was a martyr, and dyed for religion; now as in
Abels death they were taught to prepare for sufferings, so in Enochs
translation they were taught a lesson of the happiness of the glorified estate
which would make amends for all. And you may observe Hebr. 11.4, 5. presently
after the Apostles mentioning the death of Abel, he mentions this translation
of Enoch, giving notice in both of the different fruit of holiness in respect
of God and evil men; by men it is persecuted even to death, by God rewarded
even to everlasting life. For Elijahs rapture, this is made a type of Christ
his ascension. Elijah was caught up to heaven as he was talking with Elisha.
And the Lord Jesus after he had spoken unto them (i. e. Apostles) he was
received up into heaven, Mark 16.19. Elisha was an eyewitness of Elijahs
rapture, he saw it, says that text 2 Kings 2.12. And so Acts 8.1. Ye shall
be witnesses unto me -- but what witness^s? eyewitnesses too, ver. 9. When he
had ^poken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up, etc. For the
other so^t of Instances, concerning those that are laid to be twice dead,
Epist. Jude ver. 12. I answer the Apostle here speaks of a spiri^ual death, of
hypocrites that were dead in their natural condition, and dead after
profession. Simulata pietas duplex iniquitas: dead originally in the first
Adam, dead actually in their own personal transgressions. Twice dead (i. e.
according to some) thoroughly dead, finally and irrecoverably dead: dead not
only in reality but in appearance, as it follows, plucked up by the roots,
plainly discovered to be such as had no vital influence from Christ. And for
those proper and pertinent instances concerning Lazarus, who had dyed once and
then was raised again, John 11.44. and the bodies of other Saints which arose
cut of the grave, Mat. 27.52. the note of Beza upon my text may be of use to
untye the knot, loquitur Apstolus de consueta and naturali hominum condition,
nam quod Lazarus and alii aliquot bis mortui sunt, extraordinarium fuit. Though
it be otherwise in the ordinary course of providence, yet room must always be
left for God to make use of his prerogative when and where and how he pleases.
Particular exceptions do not destroy a general rule. Exceptio firmat regulam in
non exceptis.

5. Q. What is meant by Judgment, and what Judgment is here meant, whether
general or particular?

A. I shall not run through the various acceptance of the word (...) in the
new Testament, I shall take it as Verbum forense, and so Judgment imports a
judiciary scanning and trying of causes and persons, and accordingly
pronouncing and executing a sentence upon them either of absolution or
condemnation. Now judgment thus taken in my text may be understood both of
particular and general judgment, of little and great doomsday; which two admit
of these differences. The particular is at the end of man's life, the general at
the end of the world: the particular is of some particular persons; the general
is of all that either have been or shall be [called therefore the Judgment of
the great day, because of the great appearance]: the particular is hidden and
secret, known to the person judging and the party judged, not so to others; the
general shall be public and manifestative, sinners shall be openly shamed, and
saints openly honored. In the particular judgment and moment of death, the soul
knows what it shall hold to, being sentenced and accordi gly conveyed to a
state of happiness or misery. At the general judgment and resurrection of the
body, soul and body being united shall together partake either of the joys of
heaven or torments of hell.

The Doctrines are these: It is appointed for men to dye. 1. Death is a stated
appointed business. 2. First or last death shall be every man's case.
But after this comes judgment. 3. That which makes death so considerable is
somewhat that comes after. 4. As death leaves men judgment finds them.



5. Christus mel in ore, melos in aure, jubilum in cord. Paul names Christ ten
times in the ten first verses of 1 Cor. 1. chapter
Meditation of Christ and his death will sweeten thoughts of death and judgment
to us. The Apostle weaves Christ into the discourse [and I would not leave him
out] making him the other branch of the similitude, So was Christ once offered
to b^a^ the sins of many, etc.

I assume these in order:

1. Doctr. Death is a stated appointed business. Job 14.5, 6. seeing his days
are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed
his bounds that he cannot pass. Turn from him that he may rest, till he have
accomplished as an hireling his day. Not only because man's time is full of
travel and labor, but because he works for a set time, he is likened to an
hireling. Our death, the time of our death, the kind of it, the manner of it,
that we shall dye, when we shall dye, how we shall dye, how long we shall
be dying; whether we shall be taken off the stage in infancy, youth, or old
age by a natural or violent death; whether we shall take a short step to our
long home, or walk through a long and dark entry of tedious sicknesses and
lingering diseases to the black hall of the king of terrors, all these fall
under the decree and appointment of God.

Inferences from the point are these:

1. Inf. We should reckon upon death, the decree of God Voluntas Dei
necessitas rei.
carries all before it. Job 30.23. I know that thou will bring me death, and
to the house appointed for all living. Those indeed that by men are appointed
to dye, God by the greatness of his power can preserve, Psalm. 79.11. and loose,
Psalm. 102.20. but if God has appointed one to dye at such a time, all the men
up, on earth cannot rescue him. Philip King of Macedon had a young monitor that
came every day and saluted him with this antheme of mortality, Philippe
mortalis es, Philippe mortalis es. The Emperors of Constantinople had a Mason
came to them on their coronation day, with choice of tombstones, and these
verses in his mouth, Elige ab his saxis ex quo (invictissime Caesar) Ipse tibi
tumulum me fabricare velis.
Our days are numbered with God, and let us say as Psalm. 90.12. Teach us so to
number our days that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. True wisdom of
improving our days begins at numbering our days, and this wisdom is not
learnt but by God his teaching. God keeps reckoning for us, but we should in a
spiritual way be reckoning of them our s lves on this manner, I cannot live
always, I shall not live long. O let me live well. Job 16.22. When a few years
are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall not return; not return by any
power of nature, not return again to the state of nature.

2. Inf. We should not be overwhelmed with immoderate sorrow, when we see
^his Statute, Law and Ordinance of heaven executed upon any of our nearest
relations, husband, wife, father, mother, child, brother, friend, etc. all
this was set down beforehand in the Calendar of God his eternal decree. Under
affliction we must be dumb, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth,
because thou did it: but not deaf, Micah 6.9. Hear the rod and who has
appointed. The rod has a voice, when you feel the smart of it, hear the voice
of it: What does it say? this comes by God his appointment. Job 23.13, 14. We
are of many minds, off and on in our resolves and purposes; but he is in one
mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul desireths even that he does;
for he performs the thing that is appointed for me. That I may speak
briefly and fully to the present case, I shall descend to particulars: 1. It Is
lawful to lament the loss of our friends. Abraham came to mourn for Sarah and
to H^e that looks into the Hebrew text, may see that the word for weep has one
letter less than ordinary, quia luctus ejus fuit moderatus, so Buxtorf. to
signify he exceeded not in his sorrow.
weep for her, Genesis 23.2. Grace does not come to destroy nature but to rectify
it. 2. To be insensible of the hand of God in it is sinful. It is an
heathenish sin to be without natural affection, Romans 1.31. and it is a charg
drawn up against Ephraim, Hos. 7.11. he is like a silly dove, without heart.
Only the dove laments not when her young are taken away. God will not hold them
guiltless to whom the loss of a child in the house is no more than the loss
of a cow in the yard: They have the less to provide for (think they) and yet
through the curse of God upon their stupidity are as worldly as ever; like the
hen that now looses one chicken, then another, till the kite has snatched away
almost all her brood, and yet she followts her scraping still. 3. If you keep
up the lawfulness of the thing, and keep out the sinfulness of it, your care
must be, that natural affections do not hinder the exercise of gracious
dispositions. We must not weep out the eye of faith, nor sorrow without hope,
Nec sicci sint oculi nec fluant.
1 Thessalonians. 4.13. you may water your plants but not drown them. They wept, yet
said, The will of the Lord be done, Acts 21.13, 14. 4. Yet sometimes the
affections of the best Saints have been too strong for their judgments, and
strangely overflowed all banks and bounds of reason and moderation. When Jacob,
upon a sight of the bloody coat, supposed an evil beast had devoured Joseph, --
he refused to be comforted, and he said, I will go down into the grave unto my
son, mourning, Genesis 37.33, 35. So though time was when David could bear war
and blood, the fireing of Ziglag, the captivating of his wives, and still
encourage himself (as the text says) in the Lord his God [1 Samuel 30.6.] yet
when God struck him on the weak side, he changed his behavior, and in the
business of Absalom carried himself like a very puny, or baby; he wept, and
as he went thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom: would God
I had for thee, O Absalom my son, my So Virgil expresses Hercules his passion
when he had lost Hylas: Rursus Hylan and rursus Hylan per longa reclamat avia.
son, 2 Samuel 18.33. 5. The great cause of inordinate grief is inordinate love.
If our love be too much, our grief will be overmuch. The excess of one
affection turns into the excess of another, [as the sweetest wine degenerates
into the sharpest vinegar]. Jacob doted too much upon Joseph. David was too
fond of Absalom. It is the Apostles rule, that they that have wives [and it
holds as true of children] be as though they had none, 1 Cor. 7.29. We must
use perishing things with perishing affections, love them as always about to
leave them. Outward things must hang loose, like outward garments which we can
soon lay aside. If the heart was but weaned, and we had buried our friends
alive [that is acted over their deaths aforehand in our own thoughts] it would
be such an amazing astonishing thing to part with them when God calls for them.
6. Having pointed at the cause, I will attempt the cure of this distemper, by
laying down a few Considerations that may calm our discontents and quiet our
minds, when God shall take away the sweetest flower out of the nose-gay of our
creature comforts. 1. He does it that best may. Why do thou strive against
him, for he gives not account of any of his matters? Job 33.13, 2. He takes
away nothing but what he first gave. 3. When he gives any thing to us, he does
not relinquish his own right. 4. Is so he may call for his own when he
pleases. 5. He takes away nothing but what he will again restore, and that a
hundredfold, if not in kind, yet in worth, making it up some ways in
something else that is better for thee. 6. God may take any thing away from me
in love but his love. 7. Earthly things are but indifferent things, and why
should not I be indifferently affected to them? Here a little joy and a little
sorrow is enough. They that rejoice must be as though they rejoiced not; and
they that weep as though they wept not, 1 Cor. 7.30. 8. It was God that did
comfort me by the creature, and God is able to comfort me without it. I lived
upon God alone in the use, and can I not live upon God alone in loss of the
creature? My child, my friend dies, but the Lord lives, and blessed be my
rock, etc. Psalm. 89.46.9. These worldly comforts are uncertain, but O my soul
thou art interessed in covenant-mercies, that are the sure mercies of David.
Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting
covenant, in all things ordered and sure: for this is all my salvation and all
my desire, although he make it not to grow, 2 Samuel 23.5. 10. Blush O Christian
and be ashamed, if a principle of the grace of God in thee, do not cause thee
to do that in obedience to God, which length of time will do; for that will
wear off the greatest cross. 11. Lastly, whenever the Lord removes any
comfort, if we find our selves ready to say to the instrument, as did the
Owners of the colt, what do you loosing it? you should be silenced, though not
with that answer which was returned by the disciples to them, the Lord has
need of it; yet with this, the Lord sees it needful for us that thus it should
be. It was said of Reuben, he went up to his fathers bed, and so the creature
intercepts and way-lays the respects due to God, and then the cistern shall be
broken, to bring us to the fountain. If a child have that room in the parents
affection which is peculiar to God, though it be a very hopeful child, God
uses to remove it. As if a wife come once to love a servant better than her
husband, though he be otherwise a most useful servant, yet the master will
turn him out of doors. If in the fullness of creature-enloyments we wax wanton
and insolent against God, death brings a voider, and God bids take away those
abused comforts, Ezekiel. 24.21. -- When I take from them the joy of their glory,
the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons
and their daughters. If you set your mind upon a thing, and the heart once
grow to it, look for an unsettlement. You may hug a creature so long till you
kill it with kindness. You may soon wither your best flowers by smelling too
often on them. God takes away that from us, which had first taken our hearts from
him.

3. Inf. This doctrine teaches us a lesson of patience: Gods appointment must
be man's quietus est. God has set down before hand how many tedious days and
wearisom nights thou shall have, ere the bright morning of eternity dawn out
upon thee; how long thou shall lie upon a sickbed, before it prove thy
deathbed. Job 7.3, 4. I am made to possess months of vanity, and wearisom
nights are appointed to me. When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and
the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro until the dawning of
the day. Though the time appointed b^ long, Dan. 10.4. yet At the time
appointed the end shall be, Dan. 8.19. Compare Job 7.1. Is there not an
appointed time to man upon earth? with Job 14.14. All the days of my app^inted
time will I wait, till my change come. Job's condition was sad and sorrowful,
but he believed a change, and he resolved to wait to the uttermost. Though
for the present God show you hard things, yet wait upon God who has ordained
better things for you. In due time you shall have deliverance, in the mean time
exercise patience. Till then, mercy must not be bestowed, and it would be no
mercy in comparison, if patience be not tried. Certainty countervails all
delays. And withal remember, the weights and plummets of man's restless
impatience cannot make the clock of Gods appointed time to strike one minute
sooner than he has set it.

4. Inf. This discovers the sinfulness of sudden rash wishes for death before
our appointed time is come. This is in effect to ask God to alter his own
purposes: And such persons do but as it were call for death in jest; if it
should come in good earnest, they would be loath to give it entertainment. As
the old man in the fable, casting down his burden called for death, but when it
appeared in its horrid shape, he desired it to help him to take up his burden,
etc. To wish for death, only to be freed from the troubles and afflictions of
life is very sinful [which was the infirmity of Elijah, 1 Kings 19.4. and
Jonah chapt. 4.8.] And absolutely to wish for death, though it be to be with
Christ in glory, is not lawful; [therefore Paul, when he was in a straight
betwixt two, by submission Sancti habent mortem in desiderio, vitam in
patientia.
to the pleasure of God for the time made a fair escape, Philip. 1.22, 23, 24,
25.] We must not live how we list, nor think to die when we list. None of us
lives to himself, and no man dies to himself: whether we live therefore or
die, we are the Lords, Romans 14.7, 8. If the removal (says one) of the ancient
bounds and landmarks which our fathers have set be a sin frequently
prohibited, how heinous a thing is it to attempt a violation of the ancient
boundary of our days fixed by the decree of God himself? All the time you would
live beyond, and all the time you would die before that, is of your own
appointment.

5. Inf. This consideration that it is appointed [in the D^cree of God] to men
to die, should make men willing to die [which is to make a virtue of a
necessity]. It Is an excellent thing to be a Volunteer in death, when it can be
said, Anima egreditur non ejicitur. God comes upon the hypocrite firma
ejectione, seals a lease of Ejectment, and takes away his soul, Job 27.8.
the soul was not haled and pulled out of the body, but came out surrendering
and resigning it self to God. That familiar discourse that Jacob had with
death, and his cheerful entertainment of it without dismayment, is admirable;
Genesis 48.21. chap. 49.29, 33. And Israel said, beh ld I die: I am to be gathered
unto my people: He gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the
ghost. They who died for the Lord [as the blessed Martyrs] did, and they who
die in the Lord [as all Believers do] should, die willingly. Very notable is
that speech of Hilarion, Egredere, quid times? Egredere, anima mea, quid
dubitas? sexaginta prope annis servisti Christo, and mortem times?
Go out my soul, why art thou afraid? Go out, why lingerest thou? thou have
served Christ well nigh sixty years, and do thou now fear death? If
Christians will dye as Christ did, let them have that in their eye which Christ
had. He became obedient unto death, 2 Philip. 8. he willingly offered up
himself, John 10.18. No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my
self, [and he laid it down in conformity to the pleasure of God, as it
follows] this commandment have I received of my father. He dyed in
contemplation of the decree of God, was slain and crucified according to the
determinate counsel of God, Acts 2.23. Paul says of himself, 2 Timothy 4.6. I am
now ready to be offered up, etc.

6. Inf. This doctrine informs us, that no man can outlive, and every man
shall live out God his appointment. For the first branch: looking upon thy body
and finding it in good plight [fish-whole, as sound as a ro^ch] thou say thus
to thy self, Death shall not take me yet, the grave shall spare me a while
longer, but know thy Covenant with death shall be disanulled, and thy agreement
with the grave shall not stand, Isai. 28.18. There was one, Luke 12.19. who
promised himself many years, when he had not days to live: And the spirit of
God throws the fool in his face for it, ver. 20. God said unto him, Thou fool,
this night shall thy soul be required of thee. Man cannot add a cubit to his
stature, nor a minute to the time God has assigned him. If God call for it,
thou can not keep thy breath in thy body a moment longer. No man has power
over the spirit, to retain the spirit, neither has he power in the day of
death, and there is no discharge in that war, Eccl. 8.8. For the second
branch: Though it be said of some men overmuch wicked, they die before their
time, Eccl. 7.17. yet is it thus to be understood, They dye 1. before the time
they made account of; 2. before the time they might have reached unto, in the
course of nature; 3. but not before the time God had appointed. Psalm. 31.15. My
times are in thy hand: not in the hands of my friends to lenghthen them, not in
the hands of my enemies to shorten them, not in my own hands to dispose of them
as I please, but in a better hand, in God his hand, who determined the time of
my entrance into, and departure out of the world, and that by an immutable
decree, saying, Hitherto thou shall come and no further.

2. Doctr. First or last death shall be every man's case. It is appointed to men
to die, of what sort, rank or degree soever. What man is he that lives and
shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave?
Psalm. 89.48. hence death is called, Josh. 23.14. the way of all the earth,
Eccles. 9.5. The living know that they shall die. The longest day has its
night. He died: this is mentioned eight times in the fifth of Genesis, and
added there to the relation of the long lives of the ancient Patriarchs [when
one man was as many men had many ages now] to show the unmovable certainty of
that threatening of death against the disobedience of our first parents. In the
third chapter o^ Job [upon your perusal of it you may see it] there is an
elegant particular enumeration of the several conditions of men, and it is
shown how death seizes upon all sorts, Kings and Counsel rs of the earth, ver.
14. Rich men and Princes that had houses full of gold and silver, ver. 15.
Children whether abortives, or perfection of nature, ver. 16. Oppressors and
oppressed, prisoners and those that imprison them, small and great, master and
servant, ver. 17, 18, 19. The Grave (...)
is one of those four things that are never satisfi^d, it says not it is
enough, Prove. 30.16. when it (...) postulavit, petiit.
has had the husband, it gapes for the wife: [ Mat. 22. ver. 26, 27. there was
a woman that had outlived seven husbands; and, says the text, last of all the
woman died also] when it has had the child, it gapes for the parent [witnesse
David his Funeral meditation, when the child was dead, he said, 2 Samuel 12.23.
Can I bring him back again? I shall The Romans taking their leave of the dead,
used this form of words; Vale, vale, nos te ordine quos natura permiserit
sequemur. Hence the word Exequiae. And the custom amongst us of following the
hearse has the like significancy in ie.
go to him, but he shall not return to mee] when it has had one generation,
it gapes for another. [Eccles. 1.4. One generation passes away and another
generation comes.] The latter crowds the former out of the world; one goes
away to make room for another. But I come to particulars: Excellencies of the
Body [as beauty and strength] of the Mind [as wisdom and knowledg] Worldly
excellencies [of riches and honor, power and authority] are no protection
against the arrest of death. For the first, strength and beauty, Job 21.23, 24.
One dies in his full strength, his breasts are full of milk, his bones moistened
with marrow. Beams of bodily beauty are soon eclipsed by sickness [ Psalm.
39.11] wholely darkened by death. Esaias 40.6, 7. All flesh is grass, and all
the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field; the grass withers,
the slower fades, etc. Pluck up the flower by the roots, and what then becomes
of the goodl ness of it? Man is compared to a flower and a shadow, Job 14.1, 2.
and beauty is but the shadow of a shadow, and the goodliness of the flower
which often decays before it, always with it. Lucian brings in the skeleton of
Narcissus, showing his bones and bare skull, wondering what was become of his
beauty? Let the beauteous Galate^'s, beloved Dinah's, enamouring Bathsheba's of
the world, that have so many roses blown and lilies displayed in their
youthful cheeks know, that ere long their lips must kiss the dust, the filth
o^ the grave shall ascend the very throne of There is this distich in our
English chronicle of the famous Rosamund,

Hic jacet in numba r^sa mundi n^n rosae mun^a, Non redol^t sed ole^ quae
redolere solet.


beauty, worms shall crawle between their fair eye-lips, and eat out those
wanton windows of lust. For the second: Wisdom excells folly as far as light
excels darkness, yet wise men dye, likewise the fool and the brutish
person, etc. Psalm. 49.10. Abraham is dead and the Prophets, J^h. 8.52. For the
third: Wealth cannot here raise a ransom Dive^sne prisco natus ab Inacho nil
interest, and infima de gente sub dio moreris, victima nil miscrantis Orci.
Horat.
Luke 16.22. It came to pass that the beggar dyed, the rich man also dyed.
Wherefore should I dye being so rich? said that wre ch^d Cardinal Henry
Beauford Bishop of Winchester in Henry the Sixths time. F^e, quoth he, will
not death be hired? will money do nothing? Lastly, a title of honor is no
shield against the stroke of death, and a scepter of power cannot give a man a
dispensation from the grave. This short account is given of those These are the
several lots they draw in their courses, Regnabo, regno, regnavi, sum sine
regno.
Kings o^ Edom they reigned and dyed [Gen. 36.32. to 38.] Princes are likened
to twofaced pictures; if you look on the one side of them, they are Gods; if on
the other side, they are Men, and shall dye like men, says Psalm. 82.6, 7. Upon
Cyrus his tomb was written this Epitaph, (...). And Psalm. 146.3, 4. several
arguments are brought to take off our confidence in Princes, because 1. They
are men, 2. helpless, 3. mortal, 4. corruptible, 5. not only in the frame of
their bodies but projects of their minds. And the order of the words is so
set, that the members following are either a reason or some confirmation to
what went before: Trust not in Princes, why? because they are the sons of men;
why not in the sons of men? because there is no help in them; why is there no
help in them? because when their breath goes forth, they return to their
earth; what if their flesh be corrupted? nay their thoughts also perish. I, and
your great swordmen too, Alexanders and Caesar's, lie down in the slimy valley,
and after all their co^q^ests of others, yield themselves up as conque^ed by
death, which bears this motto, Nulli cedo: while living they aspired in their
desires after great Territories on earth; but dead, a little Nonne telluris
tres tantum cubiti te expectant?
measure of ground for length and breadth will suffice to bury their bodies in:
Behold, great and victorious Hercules, the subduer of the monsters of the
world, when he was dead, and his body resolv^d into ashes, scarcely filled an
earthen Ecce vix totam Hercules implevit urnam.
pitcher. Saladine the great Turk provided to have no solemnity at his funeral,
and ordered that before his co^ps a black cloth should be carried on the top of
a spear, and this proclaimed, Saladine the Conqueror of the E^st has nothing
left him but this black shirt to att^nd him to the grave. I have read of a
famous Library that has the Globe of the world set at the one end of it, and a
Skeleton at the other, to teach if a man was Lord of the whole world, yet he
must dye. And let me add, the grave puts no d fference between Monarchs and
Vassals: As Diogenes told Alexander, he could not in the grave distinguish
between the bones of King Philip and other m^ns bones. Who can see a difference
between the ashes of a tall Oak and an humble Shrub? The grave-dust of
beautiful Vashti a Queen, will smell no sweeter than that of the blackest
Egyptian b^nd woman.

Appl. If death shall be every man's case, then let every man think of, prepare
and provide for death. Ashes keep fire alive, and thoughts of our dissolution
into dust and ashes will keep the spa^ks of Gods grace alive in us. What place
can a man be in, what action can a man go about, what creature can a man behold
o^ make use of, but it may put him in mind of death? Eglon was slain in his
parlour, Saul in the field, Ishbosheth upon his bed, Zen^charib in the Temple,
Joab at the very altar. Jobs sons and daughters were taken away in the midst of
their Feasting; the old world in the midst of their building and planting,
marrying and giving in marriage; Unus introitus innumeri exitus.
some have dyed of grief, others of joy; some have been consumed by fire,
others drowned with water; others torn in pieces by wild beasts, etc. though
there be but one way of coming into the world, yet I had almost said, there are
as many ways of going out of the world as there are men in the world. I have
read of some Ph^losophers that had their graves always open before their gates,
that going out and coming in they might consider their latter end. Think of
death in the midst of your purchases. Abraham bought of the sons of Heth a
burying-place It is the m^re remarkable, because it is the first purchase of
possession mentioned in Scripture.
for his dead, Genesis 23.14, 15. Think of death in the midst of your pleasures.
Joseph of Arimathea built his Sepulcher in a garden, Joh. 19.38, 41. Let me
tell thee, death looks for thee every where, do thou look for it every where.
Every step we take is toward the grave, how careful should we be that every
step we take be in the way to heaven? How safe is it for you to look into the
grave before you drop into it? It is said, he that sees the Basil^sk before he
be seen of it, avoids the poison: He that with an eye of preparation sees death
before it comes, shall not feel the sting of it when it comes. You that will
confidently look for life in death, must seriously think of death in life. Some
look for death and cannot find it, but O how sad is it when death finds men
before they look for it! Since you came into the world, how many have come into
the world and gone out of the world too? Have you seen so many going before
you, and will you not think of following after? Away with such brutish
stupidity amongst men as is in a herd of fatting cattle, where the Butcher
comes to day and fetches away one, to morrow and fetches away another, etc.
and the rest that are left behind neither miss their fellows nor dread their
own desti^y. Physicians better their knowledge Experimenta per mortes agunt.
and gain experience, and shall not we mend our lives, by the death of others?
Shall the Christian only be unskilful in his profession, which is to live
religiously and dye comfortably? The Sun knows the time of his going down O
that the children of men were but as wise! Rise in the morning, as those that
know not whether ever they shall go to bed again, unless in the grave:
Entertain every day with such as this, Art thou the last, or lock I for
another? Close your eyes to sleep at night, as those that know not whether ever
they shall open them again till the morning of the resurrection. As soon
Nascentes morimur. Qu^ti lie dempt^ est aliqua p^rs vitae and cum cres^ ^t vita
tum de^rescit.
as we begin to live, we begin to dye; and how much the longer time we have
lived, so much the the shor^er time we have to live. Let us live as those that
are always dying, and yet as such that are ever to live in another world. T^
dye is a work that never any of us yet did, but to provide for death is a work
we should be doing every day of our life. Th^^ we must dye, is a thing
generally known and granted by all, but (...) live as those that veril^ believe
they must dye once and may dye speedily, is a thing that most ^re altogether
strangers unto, and none are so well aq^ainted with as they should. It Is
appointed to men once to dye, we had need look to it that we dye well, because
we are to dye but Quod statutum est semel, diu deliberandum est.
once: We have most reason not to err at all, where it is not possible to err a
second time. As one well observes upon the place, actually to err twice is most
sinful, but not to have a possibility of erring again is most dangerous. As
the Heathen man said, He would be C^oesus while he lived, but Socrates when he
dyed: so says the wicked man with Balaam, Let me dye the death of the
righteous; but if so, you must live the life of the righteous. If you mean to
be happy, you must be holy. If you expect happiness, as an host should give you
good entertainment when you come to your journies end, you must take holiness
for your companion while you are in the way. If you hope to see the face of God
in heaven, you must hear the voice of God on earth. To dye in your sins is
damnable, and to live in your sins but one day longer is very hazardous. If you
will hearken to counsel [as it will be worse for you if you will not] take this
advice [it is God that sends it, though by the mouth of a worm] repent of your
sins, believe on Christ, that your sins being pardoned, your persons justified,
you may live in Gods sea^, and dye in his favor, rest in his peace, and be
raised by his power, and so partake of everlasting glory.

3. Doctr. That which makes death so considerable, is somewhat that comes
after. As that which makes life so considerable is somewhat that comes after,
and that is death. -- the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness
is in their heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead, Ecles.
9.3. so there is somewhat that comes after death which makes it so considerable:
And if you ask what is that? I answer, Judgment, the Resurrection, Eternity.
The one is of the Soul, the other of the Body, the last is of Soul and Body.

1. Judgment, I mean the particular judgment [the general I shall touch upon in
the next point] which is an instating of the soul immediately after death in a
condition of weal or woe. Christ said to the penitent thief, To day shall thou
be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. And Judas dying went to [hell which is
called] his own place, Acts 1.25. Death in comparison was no death if judgment
followed not. Immediately after absence from the body follows presence with the
Lord, 2 Corinthians. 5. verse. 8: And the Sodomites are suffering vengeance, etc.
Epist. Jude ver. 7.

2. The Resurrection. Man being arrested by death for a debt of nature, is laid
up in the grave, from which common prison there is no bail or main-prise, yet
may we hereafter sue out an Habeas corpus, which the Judge of all the world will
not deny us at the general Assize, that we may make our corporal appearance, at
which time there is to be a Jail-deliver of all deaths prisoners. There is a
shadow of this truth in nature, The body not being cast away, but sown like
corn that being buried for a time under the clods, afterward appears above Each
night^^ but the past days funeral, and the morning his resurrection.
ground: But the substantial proofs of it must be fetched out of the scriptures
of old and new Testament. Esaias 26.19. Thy dead men shall live, together with my
dead body shall they arise: Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust, etc. That
text Mat. 22.32. proves two things; the souls immortality, and the bodies
resurrection: Our Savior proves Abraham to be living, because God long after
the death of Abraham had said, I am the God of Abraham; so that death is not an
utter extinction, for God is not the God of the dead but of the living: He was
alive then as to his soul, and as to his body it should live and rise again;
for God is the God of Abraham, and it is not the soul only, but the conjunction
of the body and soul together that makes up the person Quomodo felices si
exparte perituri? Idon^us est reficere qui reficit.
There are types of it in the blossoming of Aarons dry rod, and in Ezekiels dry
bones which in a vision he saw moving one toward another, till they were tied
together by sinews, and covered with flesh, and received the breath of life,
and stood up like an army. There is a certain demonstration of it from the
power of God, who can as easily raise the dead, as he did at first c^eate them.
Therefore Mat. 22.28, 29. Christ tells the Sadduces which say there is no
Resurrection, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God: That
almighty power of God which made the Whale after its swallowing of Jonah to
cast him upon dry land again, shall one day make the grave (this great eater
and devourer of our bodies) to disgorge and vomit them up again. The earth
shall cast up her dead, Esaias 26.19. God will say to the sea, Give up Rev. 20.13.
, and to the earth Restore, and all the creatures in the world that have
swallowed man's flesh, shall find they have eaten morsells of too strong and
hard a digestion for their weak stomachs. The sum of Epicurean doctrine is
this, Ludo, bibas, comedas, post mortem nulla voluptas.

Nemo tam carnaliter vivit, quam qui negat resurrectionem carnis.

To show that he arose not as a private but public person, he arose with a
multitude, Mat. 27.52, 53.


Herein man differs from a beast; in dying they are alike, not so in rising
again. And for such who think it shall be with them but as w th the beasts
after death, they carry themselves but as ^ruit beasts in their lifetime. If
after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ep^^sus, what advantageth
it me if the dead rise not? Let us eat and drink for to morrow we dye, 1
Cori^^h. 15 32. Christ is risen, therefore we shall rise; he arose a^ the
first fruits, as a second Adam, 1 Cor. 15.16, 20, 21, 22. If the dead rise not,
then is not Christ raised. But now is Christ ris^n from the dead, and be me
the first fr its of them that sl pt (...) by man came death; by man came also
the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all dye, even so in Ch^^ist shall
all be made alive. There are instances of such as have been restored t^ l^^, v.
Heb. 11.35
and raised out of the grave [as the S(...)s ch^ld^, the Rulers daughter,
Lazarus etc.] and that which ha^h been may be; for the hand of God is not
withered, nor his power lesssened, nor the difficulty of the thing increased.
The Resurrection of the body is called a mystery, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. and it is
one of those flowers in the garland of our Creed, properly an Article of Faith,
and therefore no wonder though reason do so much b^g^le at it. The Philosophers
dreamed of a transformation of bodies [into new shapes] and a transmigration of
souls [into new bodies] but the resurrection of the body [to be united to the
same soul again after a long separation] was a point they understood not, and
therefore derided it, Acts 17.18. Certain Philosophers said, What will th
b^bler say? because he preached unto them the resurrection. The Funeral
solemnities of the Jews about the de^d in their imbal nings [ Genesis 50.26.] and
washings [ Acts 9.37.] showed they expected a resurrection, which is called the
hope of the twelve tribes, Acts 26.7, 8. The very same body that dies, shall
rise again. Aquileiensis Ecclesia in symbolo dicebat, Credo. resurrectionem
carnis hujus.
Th^^ plac^ is express, Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer lives, an^
tha^ he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And thou^h after my skin
worms destroy this body yet in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall see for
my self, and mine eyes shall behold and not another, etc. And there is a great
emphasis in that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 15.^3. This mortal shall put on
immortality. This, not another. Though the ^ame body for substance shall be
raised, yet there shall be an alteration of in r^g^^d of these qualities: 1.
Immortal^ty, 2. Incorruptibility, 3. Spirituality, 4. Pow r, 5. Glory.
Concerning other particulars of stature, age, etc. I cease to enqui^e, because
God has fo^born to reveal them.
You have an enum^ration of all these, 1 C^r. 15.43, 44.53. A clock grown rusty
is taken asunde^ and d^^^o^^^d wheel fr m wheel, pin from, in, not to b^ lost
but re^^sh^d^: Death lays us in the grave where limb^rem limb, joyn^ from
joint, memb^r from member, not t be just but set tog^t er again in a more
glorious manner. H nce ^^e tim of the ^^^u^^^ction is called the regen^ration,
Mat. 19.28 ^^cause the ^ll shall be pe^f^ctly renewed again. In Scr p^u^e we
g^t t^^^ ^l^mp^es of the be^u^y of a glorifie^ body: 1. in Moses's ^^c, Exodus
34.35. which ^one so that it d^zled the p oples eyes to behold it. 2. In
St^p^^en's countenance, Acts 6.15. which was as ^f he had been ^he c^untenance
of an Angel. 3. In Christ's ^an figura^ion, Ma. 17.2. when his fac^ d^^ shine as
the sun. H^s ^o^y ^s the st^ndard ^o which ours shall be conform^d, Phil. 3.21.
who shall change our vile body, that it may b^ fashioned like unto h^s glorious
body. The bodies both of good ^n^ b^d shall be raised, Acts 24. ver. 15. --
there shall be a res^rrection of the dead, both ^f the just and u just. Bod^es
as we l as souls of men are now instruments of sin or service, we^pon^ of
unrighteousness or holiness; and therefore justice ^eq^^es that hereafter they
should be suitably punished or reward^d, and be v^ssels of wrath or glory.
Christ shall raise the bodies of the s^ints as an Head [Coloss. 1.18.] of the
wick^d only as a Judg^ [J^hn 5.25 27.] In the resurrection there shall be an or
er kept [1 Cor. 15 23.] and the saints shall rise first [1 Th^ss. 4.16.] Though
all shall rise, yet with a differen^ s^^^ or even, J^^n 5.28, 29. All that are
in ^he graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done
good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the
resurr ction of damnation. As Pharaohs servants came both out of prison but
with d^ff^re^t success; the one was restored to his place, the other was
h^nged. So Dan. 12 2. amongst them that sleep in the dust of the ea^^h, some
sha l awake to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting con^empt In
the Creed the resurrect on of the body s placed b^^w^en the remission of sins
and eve^lasting l^fe. Then only the resu^rection is a benefit when remission of
sins goes before and eternal life follows after.

3. Eternity. It is observed that most of other creatures live long, but dying
perish all to nothing: Therefore let them, who complain nature has given too
long a life to a raven and too short to a man, consider that though man be
short-lived here, yet dying he lives elsewhere Libenter sum mortalis, qui
futurus sum immortalis.
eternally. After death men's conditions are cast for ever. Mercy has made an
eternal provision of happiness to entertain all God his holy ones in heaven:
Justice has prepared eternal torments for all ungodly ones in hell. A word of
each. For the former, see 2 Co^. 5.1. For [this is argumentative and brought in
as a sweet support under bitter suffering mentioned in the foregoing chapter.]
We [this glorious privilege belonged not to Paul alone, but to other sa nts
with him] know [not only conjecturally but certainly] that if our earthly house
of this tabernacle was dissolved [death is but the dissolution of the parts
whereof man is composed, and taking asunder the soul from the body: as a tent
or tabernacle, to which Paul a tent-maker elegantly compares the body, is
destroyed not by consuming ^he p^rts but taking them asunder. The other words
are emphatical too: The body is but an house, and houses will be out of repair,
houses will fall in time: An earthly house, a piece of earth neatly made up,
which may and must be resolved into its first principles: It is the earthly
house of this tabernacle, which was a moveable house pitched into the ground,
fastened with a few cords and pins easily removed] We have a building of God
[so celestial glory is represented in Scripture under the notion of a city
whose builder is God, Hebr. 11. All that rich worldlings can say when they die
is this, We know when this house of our body is taken down, we have a stately
tomb or s^pulchre framed by the skill of a cunning artificer; all which is but
terrestrial glory, and amounts but to the building of man.] An house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens [mark the opposition, an house in the
heavens, by way of contra-distinction ^o the earthly house: Not made with
hands, so differing from those houses that are set up by carpenters and masons,
which are man's handiwork, in framing of which they make use of their hands:
Eternal, and so most unlike a tabernacle that is presently dissolved.] For the
latter, see Mat. 25 41. Then [the when to this then you have ver. 31. when the
son of man shall come in his glory and all the holy Angels with him, and he
shall sit upon his throne of glory, then] shall he say [Christ shall at that
day judge not only as God but as man, John 5.27. Acts 17.31. hence you read of
the sen^ence of his mouth what he shall say] to them on his left hand [ungodly
men now give every base lust the right hand of Jesus Christ, then Jesus Christ
will set ungodly men at his left hand, which is a place of disrespect, as the
right hand at which the godly are set, ver. 33. is a place of dignity] d part
from me [the wicked now say to Christ, depart from us, Mark 5.17. In the word
depart there is the punishment of loss, in the word fire the punishment of
sense, and everlasting makes it insupportable, burning hotter than the fire.
and then will Christ return their own words upon them, depart from me: Oh but
bless us before we go, No, d^part] Ye cursed [and whither are these cursed
ones sent? the next words tell you] into everlasting fire [so the wrath of God
and pains of the damned are set out by fire, because of the tormenting nature
of it. Dives said, Luke 16. I am tormented in this flame. H ll fire burns the
soul as well as the body; though it burns both, yet it consumes neither; bodies
and souls of those wretched cast-aways shall be incorruptible immortal, that so
their pains may be endless, as well as easeless and remediless. Hence you read
of unquenchable If a drunkard had all his cups about him in hell, he could not
with them quench one spark of that fire.
fire, Man. 3.12. the vengeance of eternal fire, Epist. Jude v. 7. these shall
be punished with everlasting perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. these shall go into
everlasting punishment, Mat. 25.46. This present world shall have an end, the
covenant of day and night shall be changed, the stars shall finish their
course, summer and winter shall have an end, but the prisoners of hell shall
never be released.] eternal punishments for temporal transgressions: in
intention peccantis, in regard of their inward d^sposition of mind: Deus
punit nos in aeterno suo, quia nos peccamus in aeterno nostro.
If they should live etern^lly, they would with full purpose of heart set
themselves to sin against God eternally. 3. Upon the damned reprobates there
ever remains guilt, and therefore it is not against justice they should ever
suffer punishment. 4. Some add, not only does there remain upon them the guilt
of all their sins committed on earth, but there is a continual addition of
new guilt by sins committed in hell [this is asserted by some, though
controverted by others]. 5. The damned are clapped up prisoners in hell in order
to satisfaction: And because they can never satisfy God, they must never be
set free: N^ man that comes there comes forth till he has paid the uttermost
farthing, and not satisfying to the uttermost, he must be tormented to the
uttermost, which is the undergoing of an infinity of torments. Add but
eternity in any good, it makes it infinitely good: Oh the bottomless Ocean of
sweetness in the word ever, when it is joined with being with the Lord! it is
(says one) like the faggot bond that binds all the scattered parcels of
heavens blessedness together, and keeps them from dropping out. And so on the
other side, add but eternity to any evil, it makes it infinitely evil.
Eternity amazes me to speak of it, and it may astonish you to hear of it,
especially you wretched sinners, the smoke of whose torment with fire and
brimstone shall ascend for evermore. When as many thousands of years are passed
over as there are hairs on your head, as many millions of years as there are
sands on the seashore, as many ten thousand mill^ons passed as there are drops
of water in the Ocean, yet these will not reach eternity. Which is described to
be an unbounded possession of life which is perfect and altogether. Time is
fluid, but Eternity is a standing moment.

Appl. I shall improve the point, By way 1. of instruction to All, 2. of
comfort to the Godly, 3. of terror to the Wicked.

1. Use of Instruction to all in two branches: And it teaches, 1. -- dicique
beatus A^te obitum nemo suprema^que funera debet.
Not to judge of the happiness or misery of men by their present condition in
this present world, but by what comes after in another world. He cannot be
miserable in this world, that shall be eternally happy in the next world; nor
c^n he be truly happy in this world, that shall be eternally miserable in
another world. Luke 16.25. Re^ember that thou in thy l fe time receivedst thy
good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted and thou
art tormented. I have read of a stubborn refractory sinner that is brought in
saying on this wise: I will drink, I will swear, I will swagger, I will do what
I list, and what then? I will quarrel, I will kill, and I will care for no man,
and what then? why then conscience is brought in wispering on this manner, Ah
could thou say, I will go to heaven, I will be saved, I will be happy
hereafter; this was something, but thou must dye, thou must come to judgment,
and must h^ld up thy hand at the tribunal of that just God that will render to
every one according to his doings. 2. Not to suffer your selves to be wedged
down to the present things of this life, but to look beyond life to death,
beyond death to judgment, beyond the particular to the general judgment, and so
to Eternity. Look beyond life to death, Eccles. 11, 8. If a man live many years
and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the days of darkness for they
shall be many. Look beyond life and death to the particular judgment, Rejoice O
young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth,
and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know
thou that for all th^se things God will bring thee into judgment. A woeful
Irony: as if he had said, Tumble down the hill as fast as thou will, but be
sure thou shall break thy neck. Take thy fill of thy lusts, but remember
thereby thou will damn thy soul. Look beyond the particular to the general
judgment, Romans 14.10. We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
And think of eternity, 2 Cor. 4.18. We look not at the things which are seen,
but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are
temporal but the things which are not seen are eternal. Your bodies are mortal
[like a Venice-glasse goodly beautifu^l Splendemu^ licet heu quam cito
frangimur: Corpora nostra sunt vere vitrea.
, and f^ail, brittle, soon broken] but your souls are immortal [and must
triumph eternally in the joies of heaven, or fire eternally in the flames of
hell] therefore labor for the true treasure of grace, that you may have
somewhat in you immortal besides your souls. Oh s^ek after such excellen^
spiritual good things as may stand you in stead when soul and body shall part
at the moment of death, and when s^ul and body shall meet again at the time of
the resurrection mutually to partake of an everlasting condition. A wicked rich
man is compared to a sumpter-horse that bears much treasu^e on his back all
day, but is eased of it at night and ^urned into the stable with his back full
of galls and bruises. A greedy Wo^ldling is also likened to the hedg-hog that
by rolling and tumbling up and down scrapes together a great deal of world^y
pelf, but is forced to leave it behind him when he creeps in at the narrow
hole of the grave. F^r we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain
we can carry nothing out: But they that will be rich fall into a snare, etc. 1 Timothy 6, 7, 9. Earthly things forsake men [a^ Absalom his mule that went from
under him] in the time of extremity, but spiritual blessings will stick to us
when the world shall leave us and we must leave the world. I have sometime met
with a story of a man that had a suit, and when his Cause was to be heard, he
applied himself to three friends to see what they would do for him: One
answered him, he would bring him as far on his journey as he could. The second
promised him to go with him to his journies end. The third engaged himself to
go with him before the J^dg and to speak for him, and not to leave him till his
Cause was heard and determined. These three are a man's riches, his friend, and
his graces: His riches will help him ^o comfortable accommodations while they
stay with him, Plus valebunt pura corda and conscientiae bonae quam marsupia
plena.
but they may take wings and fly away from him before he dye. His friends and
kindred will go with him to his journies end, bring him to the grave, and
interr his body, and then leave him. But his grac^s go further, and accompany
the soul when it goes before God, and do more for him tha^ both the other can
do. Life is fading, but there is somewhat better than this life which is
lasting, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. -- That they do good, that they be rich in good
works, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to
come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. Esaias 51.8. The moth shall eat
them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool, but my
righteousness shall be for ever, etc.

2. Use of Comfo^t to the godly. There is somewhat after death that make^ it a
blessed thing to you. R^vel. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord,
that they may r^st from their labors, and their works do follow them, v^z. in
the glorious rewards and recompenses that free grace h^th allotted to them.
Death ^o the saints is an outlet to sin and an in let to happiness: so that
looking upon death in the consequence of it, Mors janua vitae, porta coeli^
they may say as J^c^b, Surely this is n^ne other but the gate of heaven. Since
no man can see the face of God and live, why should not you be willing to die,
that you may see the face of God? O Believers this is you^ priv l^dg; things to
come are yours, 1 Cor. 3.22.

3. Use of Terror to ^h^ wicked, because the wor^t is yet behind; the end of
their days shall be the beginning of those sorrows which shall never have end.
They have no true comfort in life, no hope in death, but a fearful expectation
of punishment after death. Death will ^u^ a period to all the pleasures of sin,
and like a trap-door let them down to hell where nothing will remain but the
worm and the fire. The grave and hell have the same word in the Hebrew (...)
Sepulchrum infernum.
, and to a^ ungodly man they are in a manner the same thing: His body cannot be
so soon in the grave, but his soul w ll be as soon in hell. Revel. 6.8. Behold
a pale horse, and his nam^ that sat on him, was death, and hell followed with
him. The wicked live as if they bad no souls, as if there was no God no
judgment to come, no hell, but in another world they shall k^ow all this to
their torment: There are many jolly Atheists on earth, but none in hell.

4. Doctr. As death leaves men judgment finds them. I spoke before of the
particular, and I might now enter in^o a discourse of the general Judgment but
the point is obvious, the field large, and therefore I shall confine my self to
these three things: 1. To give dem^nstrations that th^re shall be a d^y of
judgment, 2. prove the doctrine, 3. apply it. Of these very briefly. For the
first, amongst others I will n^me three argumen^s of a day of judgment: 1. The
inwaard tribunal erected in men's private consciences, shows there is a
supreme power to which they must be accountable [^s petty Sessions foretell
the great Assizee]. Romans 2.15, 16 -- their consciences hearing witness, and
their thoughts the mean w^ile accusing or excusing one another: th^n the n xt
thing we hear of is, the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, etc. 2.
Since there are so many unrighteous proceedings of men in their courts of
Judica ure, the justice of God r^quires that they should app a^ at a higher
bar, where things being called over again all shall be set right and streigh^.
[Many a^ unjust Judge that now sits confi ent^y upon the bench, shall then stand
trembling at the barr] R^m 2.5. it is called the day of the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, in opposition to the unrighteousness of men, as it
follows ver. 6. Who w^ll render to every man according to his deeds. 3. The
decree of God stands firm for a day of judgment. Acts 17.31. He has appointed
a day in the which he will judge the world, etc. Death and judgment are
appointed [death prevents judgment amongst men, yet shall one day give up ^ts
dead to the judgment Rev. 20.13.
of God]. For the second: con ult Eccles. 11.3. If the tree fall toward the
South, or toward the North in the place where the tree falls, there it shall
be. As trees must down, so men must die. Trees being cut down, some fall toward
the South, some toward the North: When men are cut down by death, some go to
heaven, others to hell, which two are as far distant as North and South. The
bent and byas of men's desires and actions in the course of their lives will
show whither they are like to go at last. whether to God or the Devil: As where
the boughs are most, and greatest, and on which side the tree leans while it
stands on that side, no doubt it will fall. The tree once fallen bears no fruit
for ever: so death deprives men of further opportunities of doing good. You had
need up and be doing, and so while lasts lay hold upon eternal life, least when
death comes eternal death lay hold upon you. The harvest is the end of the
world, Mat. 13.39. And Gal. 6.7. Whatsoever a man sows that shall he also
reap. When seed-time is over, it is in vain for them that have sown bad seed to
look for a good crop. For the third: This point discov^rs Morsus morientium
ferarum sunt ferocissimi.
which is the hour of temptation: A besiegers l^st onset upon a castle is most
furious, dying beasts b te sore. The D^vil must now roar or hold his peace for
ev r; if he let go a soul now, it is for ever out of his gunshot; if he get a
soul now, he gains it for ever. 2. The excellency of a good conscience and
walking before God with an upright and perfect heart, such a one need not be
afraid in health to think of sickness, in life to think of death, in death to
think of judgment, but with confidence and com ort may brea he forth his last
(...), was the speech of a heathenish philosopher, but may be a lesson for a
Christian professor.
breath into the bosom of him from whom he r^ceived his first breath, because
though as death leaves men, judgment shall find them, yet neither death nor
judgment shall find him out of Christ. Which leads to the next point.

5. Doctr. Meditation of Christ and his death will sweeten thoughts of death
and judgment to us. See how the point rises page 9. For my method in handling
it, I will give you 1. Meditations of Christ, 2. of the death of Christ, 3. of
Christ as Judge of the world, 4. Apply it.

Three Meditations of Christ.

1. Christ has delivered the Saints from the power of the grave and from the
dominion of death. Hos. 13.14. I will ransom them from the power of the grave:
I will redeem them from death. O death I will be thy plagues. O grave I will be
thy destruction. And the Apostle with a little variation app^ies this to Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.55.57. Death is not the same thing to the godly and the
wicked, Psalm 49.14, 15. Qui pro nobis mortem semel vicit, semper vincit in
nobis.
Like sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall feed on them, etc. but God
will redeem my soul from the power of the grave. Death the King of terrors [Job
18.14] is so far^ subdued by Jesus Christ the King of saints [Revel. 15.3.]
that though it may touch it shall never hurt any of his servants. As in the
saints though sin remain, yet the dominion is taken away: so though death
remains, the ghostliness, the evil, the horror of death is removed and taken
away by Jesus Christ. But in regard of the wicked it is still in its fu l force
and strength, and it is said, the firstborn of death shall devour them, Job
18.13. and they are killed by death, Revel. 6.8.

2. Christ has so ordered it, that as death shall not hurt any, so i shall
befriend all his servants, and be so far from doing them an injury, that it
shall do them a courtesy. Christians complain not so much of the death of the
body as of the body of death, corruption which they carry about with them; now
I may say to all such at the day of death as Moses ^o the Israeli^es conce^ning
^he Egyptians, The enemies [your lusts] whom you see t day you shall see them
again no more for ever. You l^ok upon sins being in you as your greatest
misery, and your being with Christ as your greatest happ^ness; now in both
these regards, death is put into your jointure or the charter of your
p^iviledges Its notable how death is put among Sions privileges and amongst
Babylons Plagues, Rev. 18.8.
by Christ, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All things are yours, etc life and death for ye
are Christ's. But how is death yours? did you not hear in the second doctrine,
that in a sense death is every man's? but it is yours [O Christians] in a
peculiar manner as subservient to your happiness. If there was no dissolution,
how could you come to be with Christ in glory? A d again, the Leprosy of sin
has so eaten the walls of the house, that it will nev^r wholely be gotten out,
till the house it self [I mean of this earthly tabernacle] be plucked down, as
it is exactly shadowed out Levit. 14.43, 44, 45. But Romans 6.7. He that is dead
is freed from sin.

3. Upon Christ are founded all a Christians hopes for glory and everlasting
life [no argument being sound in heaven any further than it proves men to be in
Christ] Christ in you the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. If in this life only we had
hope in Christ, we were of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. But now we are
of all men most happy, for the righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14.32.
What hope, but that of Eternal life which is the gift of God through Jesus
Christ? Romans 6.23. Christ has delivered his, from the second death, Rev. 20.6.
Hence it is said, Our Savior Jesus Christ has abolished death, and has
brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. Christ
says, Rev. 1.18. I have the keys of hell and of death. None of his can be
fetched out of this world by the pursuivant of death, but he must first open
the door, much less can any go to hell without his warrant: What need we fear
death and hell when Christ our redeemer has the keys of both? And how
comfortable is it to think that Christ also has the keys of the kingdom of
heaven Mat. 16.19. to open to whom he will? The space between heaven and earth
is wondrous great [the comparison is used to set forth the sublimity of God his
thoughts above man's, Esaias 55.9.] many hundred thousand miles as Astronomers
say, yet is there one ladder by which we may climb up, Jesus Christ, who is the
true Jacobs Ladder [Gen. 28.12. Scala Paradisi quae fracta est in Adamo
reparata est in Christo.
John 1.51.] the bottom of which touches earth in his humanity, the top
reaches heaven in his divinity. The first Adam th ew us down, the second Adam
helps us up again; the one cast us out of, the other lets us into Par d se
[Gen. 3.23. Luke 23.4^.]

Three Meditations of the Death of Christ.

1. As by the death of Christ the hypostatical union was not dissolved, nor the
humane nature separated from the divinity: so by the death of saints the
mystical union is not dissolved, neither bodies nor souls are separated from
Christ: The very dust of the saints is still in Christ his keeping, and though
n a most mysterious manner, yet both souls and bodies are united unto him.
Hence they are said to sle^p in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.24. to be d^ad in Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 4 16. and their souls to be under the Altar, Rev l. 6.9. Christ is the
Sacrifice, the Priest, and the Altar.

2. The grave [that otherwise affords but a noysom smell] is perfumed ever
si^ce the Rose of Sharon and the Lily of the Valleys lay in it. This dark hole
is m^de lightsom ever since the true light [eclipsed for a time] shone out of
it. Sampson found an honeycomb in the Li^ns cark^sse: Christ is the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, from whose death we may suck abunda^c^ of sweetness. His Se
ulchre is the sweetest knot in all Joseph's garden. Your thoughts cannot be dyed
into a richer color than the meditation of Christ crucified. As Paul did
always bear about in the body [so do you in your mind] the dying of the Lord
Jesus. The pale face of death looks ruddy when the blood of sprinkling is upon
it: Look upon it in the red glass of Christ's blood, and you may see it
changing its visage, altering its complexion, putting off its deformity and
putting on beauty; Mors Christi mors mortis.
Deaths courage is cooled ever since it ran through the veins of Christ: The
edg of its sword i^ abated, since it was sheathed in Christ his side. Our
combat is facilitated by his conquest, M^rs Christum gust^vi^, non degluti vit.
who by dying conquered and disarmed death, and so beat it at its own weapon.
Christ died (^^ith the Apostle Romans 14.9.) that he might be Lord of the dead:
And exercise Lordship over death too, Romans 6 9. Christ being raised from the
dead dies no more, death has no more dominion over him, nor over us who have
an interest in him. The Be stinging a dead body takes no harm, but stinging a
l ving body often looses both sting and life. So long as death stung mortal men
dead in sin [which is said to be the sting of death, 1 Cor. 5.56.] it self was
in no dang^r, but going to sting Christ [who is the resurrection of the life,
John 11.25.] it lost both sting and strength and is become a dr^ne.

3. The ends and intendments of Jesus Christ in his death were such as may be a
comfortable support to us in our death. He died for these ends, 1. To make up
the breach that sin had made between God and us. Sin bred a distance between
God and man, Christ died upon this account, to remove that out of the way which
hindered their frindly closing, and so to bring God and man together. He
suffered once the just for the unjust that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet.
3.18. He suffered as a public person, as the representative of Gods elect, as
a surety of Believers, as a sacrifice, to satisfy God and justify us sinners.
Hence he is said in scripture to be a propitiation for sin, to bear our sins in
his own body on the tree, to be our peace, to make our peace through the blood
of the Cross: the places are known. I will urg but that Romans 5.10. where we
are said to be reconciled to God by the death of his son. 2. To make sure all
the promises to us which are our great cordials of comfort. I will name one
that takes in all, and that is the promise of heaven, Heb. 9.15. He is the
Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, they which are called
might receive the promise of eternal Inheritance. As sin is the strength of the
Law and all the threatenings thereof: so the satisfaction of Christ in his death
is the strength of all the promises in the Gospel. 3. To put the devil out of
office, who is the accuser of the brethren, and to take away those slavish
fears of death that might arise from our own guilty consciences. Heb. 2.14, 15.
-- that through death he might d^stroy him that had power over death, that is,
the devil, and deliver them who through fear of death were all their life
subject unto bondage. How had Satan power over death, but as the hangman over
the gallows, or an executioner over the prisoner; now if a Judge set a prisoner
free, what has an under-officer to do with him? That blood of Christ which
satisfies God his justice, may answer all the quarrels of Satan, and satisfy
all the scruples of our own conscience. We all standing indebted to the Moral
Law; herein lay the devils power over us, that he could boldly accuse us and
sue our bond, but Christ by his death has taken away this power [paying the
debt and cancelling the bond] so that Satan is now not an accuser but a
slanderer. It is very observable how Old Testament Saints did decline and
deprecate death, says David Psalm. 39.13. O spare me a little, that I may
rec^ver strength before I go hence and be no more. And Psalm. 102 24. O my God
take me not away in the midst of my days, etc. So when it was told him that he
must die, how lamentably does he take on, and what pitiful moan does Hezekiah
make? Esaias 38. v. 2, 3. He turned his face to the wall and wept sore. v. 10,
11, 14. I am deprived of the residue of my years: I shall behold man no more
with the inhabitants of the world. Like a crane or a swallow so did I chatter:
I did mourn as a dove. Whereas on the other side New Testament Saints welcome
their departure and wish for their dissolution. Says Simeon Luke 2.29. Lord
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. Says Paul Philip. 1. ver.
23. -- having a desire to depart and to be with Christ. You may see a
difference, now the reason follows. The faithful before the coming of Christ
had not so manifest and clear a light concerning the future resurrection,
concerning the joys of heaven, concerning the happiness of the everlasting
state, concerning the pardon of sin, the freeness of grace, and the abundance
of mercy that was revealed by Jesus Christ when he actually made our atonement
by the blood of the cross. I do not say that the faithful before the coming
of Christ were ignorant of these things, but that their knowledge in these
things was not so clear and full as the knowledge of the faithful after the
coming of Christ; hence their hearts did more recoil upon them, their servile
fears more prevailed, and they could not throw themselves with such confidence
into the jaws of such a devourer as death.

Three Meditations of Christ as Judge of the World [for so ver. 28. the Apostle
mentions not only Christ and his death, but his second appearance] to sweeten
thoughts of judgment to the saints.

1. There are many sweet relations in which Christ stands to the saints that
is a comfort; our friend, our brother, our husband, our head shall be our Judge,
and he will not endure to have his own members cut off. Think of these
relations Relationes sunt minimae entitatis sed maximae efficaciae.
, and the affections of them, and the effects of those affections amongst
fellow creatures, and look upon them all but as so many shadows of Christ,
whose alliance to us being so near, and his heart so constant, that no glory or
advancement of his shall make the least alteration of any respect or office of
love which such relations call for at his hand. Greatly comforting and
refreshing (says one) must the thoughts of Christ's appearance be to us, when
we think of beholding him to be the great Judge of the world, who has took on
him our flesh, who has given us his spirit, upon whom we fixed our expectation
of happiness, for whom we suffered from this vile world, whom we always looked
upon as our treasure and portion, and for whose c^ming we have so groaned and
longed.

2. Christ the Judge will take the saints as joint-assessours with him in he
work of judgment, that is an honor, Matthew. 19. v. 28. -- When the son of man
shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. The saints are said to be the glory of
Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. And it is sa^d he shall come to be glorified in his
saints, and to be admired in all them th t believ^ 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. This is part
of the revenue of glory tha shall come to him by you in that day, not a
sentence shall pass wit^out your votes. And is not this a thing to be admired,
that a company of poor contemptible saints [that formerly were vilified and
scorned] should when Christ appears appear with him in glory? Col. 3.4. And not
only so, but be advanced to such height of glory and dignity as to be admitted
into an honorable ass^ssourship with the Lord Christ, in sitting with him upon
the Bench and about the throne of Jud ca^ure, and having all th ir enemies
stand before them to be justly judged by them whom here they judged unjustly?
And which is yet more, they shall in that judgment appear with Christ trampling
not only upon the pride and malice of men out devils al o, consenting to and
approving the sentence which Christ shall pass on evil men and evil angels. 1
Cor. 6.2, 3. Do ye not know that the saints shall Judicio approbationis, laudis
and glorificationis.
judge the world: Know ye not that we shall judge angels?

3. Though a sentence of absolution shall be passed upon the saints, yet Christ
will not pass^ on them a sentence of condemnation, that is their safety. I know
it is doubted by some, whether at the last day the sin of the saints shall come
into the judgment of discussion and discovery, but if the r sins be brought
forth, they sh ll b^ br^ught forth but as a cancelled bond, and that they
themselves shall escape the judgment of condemnation, is clear, Joh. 5.24. He
that believes shall not come into con^emnation: and it is uttered by Christ
for the comfort of bell evers upon that foregoi^g speech ver. 22. where he said
All judgment was committed unto him. When mention is made Rev. 20.12. of the
books being op^n d, the next words are these, and another b ok was opened which
was the book of Life. Venturus est judicare te qui venit judicari pro te.
(...). Non una condemnatio.
Shall not Christ save those from death for whom he suffered death? H shall
come to judge the saints who came to be judged for them. They shall never be
condemned, for whom Christ was sentenced, condemned and executed. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ J. Rom 8.1.

Appl. I shall imp ove the point by way of 1. Instruction, 2. Exhorta ion, 3.
Consolation.

1. Use of Instruction serves to discover the miserable condition of people out
of Christ. Ephesians. 2. ver. 12. At that time ye were without Christ having no
hope, etc. S n and the Law, the curse and wrath of God, death, hell, devil, and
eternal condemnation, as so many f ll lions roar upon them, and with open mouth
gape for them and threaten their ruin. Such lie open to all danger, have no
guard nor shelter. Death gripes them and stings them to the very soul, carries
them away us Gods executioner, seizes on them as a merciless officer, takes
them by the throat as that cruel servant in the Gospel. There is no special
shield against death and judgment, but only an interest in Christ. Lewis the
Eleventh charged those about him that they should not name that terrible word
death. But you must hear of it, I and there is a dr^adfull clause in the
statute of dying [as my text tells you] after thi^ the judgment, and there is
no armor of proof will keep the arrow from the quick, but only faith in
Christ. You that live in your sins, and love your sins, and sli^ht and contemn
that Jesus who alone can save you from your sins, in stead of disa ming death
and judgment, you put a sword into their hand and arm them both against you.
It Is storied of a Christian King of Hungary, who being on a time marve l us sad
and heavy, his brother that was a resolute Courtier would needs know what he a
led, O brother (says he) I have been a great sinner against God, and I know
not how I shall app ar before him when he comes to judgment: These are (says
his br^ther) melanc^oly thoughts, and made a toy of them as Gallants use to do:
The King replies nothing for the present, but the custom of the Country was,
that if the Executioner of Justice came and sounded a trumpet before any man's
door, he was presently to be led to execution. The King in the dead time of the
night sends his deaths-man and causes him to sound his trumpet before his
brothers door; who hearing and seeing the m^ssenger of death, springs in pale
and trembling into his brothers presence, and beseeches the King to let him
know wherein he had offended? O brother (replies the King) thou have loved me
and never offended me, and is the sight of my Executioner so dreadful to thee,
and shall not I so great a sinner fear to be brought to judgment before Jesus
Christ? If your consciences tell you that you are sinners and not saints, no
friends but enemies to Jesus Christ, I must tell you J. Christ is an enemy to
you, and what a fearful thing must it needs be for a man to think that his
enemy shall be his judge?

2. Use of Exhortation stirrs up all true Christians to three things, to
thankfulness, diligence, watchfulness.

1. To thankfulness, blessing God above all for Jesus Christ. He is called the
gift of God, John. 4.10. and shall we not say as 2 Cor. 9.15. Thanks be unto
God for his unspeakable gift? Presently after Paul had said, Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief, his heart was full, he
could not hold, he must have a vent, he adds his doxology, Now unto the King
eternal be glory, etc. 1 Timothy 1.15, 17. Judah [out of which tribe it is evident
our Lord sprang, says the Apostle Hebr. 7.14.] signifies confession, praise,
celebration, implying [as some have observed] that God is principally to be
praised for Christ, who being the only begotten Son of God was the choicest
love-token that ever was bestowed upod the sons of men. To calm the sea of God
his wrath Christ our Jonah was cast into it. When the floods of vengeanc^ are
rising, Christ is out Ark, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. when the avenger of blood is
pursuing, Christ is our City of refuge, Hebr. 6.18, 19.20. when the Angel is
destroying, Christ is our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7. A leaf plucked from the tree
of Life is the only plaster for a bleeding soul. No rest for the wearied soul,
till it sit down on the cr^sse of Christ, and there it must sit and sing, Bless
the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me, etc. In and through Christ all
losses are recompensed, all wants supplied, all curses removed, crosses
sanctified, promises accomplished, sins pardoned, corruptions subdued, the
grave sweetened, death destroyed, life merited, Satan conquered, hell shut up,
heaven opened, in a word, all blessings procured. Blessed be the God and father
of our Lord J. Christ who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
Christ. Ephesians. 1.3. Christ the blessing of blessings calls for a song of songs

2. To diligence in a daily bearing Christ in your thoughts and heeding him in
your whole course. Where should a Christian dine but in the grave of Christ?
where should he sup but in the wounds of Christ? where should he lodge at night
but in the arms of Christ? what work has he to do all day but to walk with and
exalt his crucified Lord? for the father will be glorified in the son, Joh.
14.13. This is to glorify God in a gospel way, in a higher way than Adam in
innocence glorified him, and now it is the only way of honoring God; for Joh.
5.23. he that honoreth not the son honoreth not the father. Marvel not that I
press you to make room for Christ in your meditations, since hereby the
comfort of your life will be much sweetened, the bitterness of death allayed,
and the evil of death wholely removed. For Christ is your wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. your peace, Ephesians. 2.14.
your strength, P^il. 4.13. your hope, 1 Timothy 1.1. your delight, Cant. 2.3. your
riches, Ephesians. 3.8. your honor, 1 Pet. 2.7 The Greek word is (...).
: your glory, Luke 2.32. your life, Col. 3.4. natural life, Joh. 1.3.4. All
things were made by him, in him was life and the was the light of men:
Spiritual life, Joh. 5.21. The Son quickens whom he will. Eternal life, Fp.
Jude v. 21. looking for the m rcy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
In a word, your All, Col. 3.11. Christ All and in All. So all in all to the
Church, that the Church is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. As the body is one and
has many members, etc. so also is Christ A synecdochical speech putting the
head for the whole body.
.

3. To watchfulness against all such doctrines as derogate from the honor of
Christ: Remember, all your comfort in life and all your hope in death depends
upon Christ, ^s the vesse^s of a house hang upon a nail fastened in a sure
place. Oppose with all your might such as deny Christ in his person, natures,
offices. Oppose Judaism, Arrianism, Socinianism, Papism. Oppose the Jews that
wholly deny Christ's person, calling him the deceiver, disowning him for the
promised Messiah. Oppose such who deny either the Godhead or the Manhood of
Christ, or deny the personal union of the two natures in Christ. Oppose the
Socinians, who falsely teach that Christ did not die as a surety in our place
and stead, and so deny Christ in his priestly office. Oppose the Papists, who
deny Christ's prophetical O^fice, while they set up the Pope as the infallible
judge of controversies, and deny Christ in his priestly Office, while they
mingle the blood of Martyrs with the blood of Christ, and make the Mass a
propitiatory sacrifice, as if the sacrifice of Christ was imperfect, and deny
Christ in his Kingly office, while they give the Pope a power to make laws to
bind the consciences of people and set him up as universal Bishop and head of
the Church. Let me leave this note with you, great and fundamental truths are
to be maintained with much boldness and strength of resolution. Epist. Jud. v.
3. Contend earnestly for the faith Non fides qua credimus sed quae creditur bic
intelligitur.
that was once delivered to the saints: for the doctrine of faith contained in
the Gospel that holds forth to you the incarnation, l^fe, death, resurrection,
ascension, intercession, whole work of the r^demption of Jesus Christ.

3. Use of consolation to all believers, to whom to live is Christ, and Sit
scopus vitae Christus quem s^^^qua vis in via ut ass^quaris in patria
to die is gain, Phil. 1.21. To such death is not so much a punishment as an
emolument, not so much a loss as an advantage, a postern to let out temporal a
fore-door to let in everlasting life, the grave not not a prison but a b d Esaias
57.2. and the time of the last judgment a time of refreshing, Acts 3.19. That
Christian that has often parlied with death, in the meditations of the death of
Christ, and in the contemplat^on of the cons^quences of his own death cannot
but rejoic^ in death, if he know but what the death of Christ means, and what
follows on his own death which he has m^ditated upon. The day of a Christians
death may be called his marriage-day with Jesus Christ, his ascension-day to
glory, his coronation-day, the birth day of eternity. And i^ Sc ipture it ss
called a sleep Churchyards are called sleeping places; I wish our Churches
were not so too.
Acts 7 60. a sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. a gathering to our fathers, 2
Kings 22.20. a change, J^b 14. ver. 14. a departure, 2 Timothy 3.6. The nature of
death to you is altered, and therefore the name of it is changed. When
Tiribazus a noble Persian was arrested, at first he drew his sword and defended
himself, but when they charged him in the Kings name and informed him that they
came from the King to carry him to the King then ^e yielded himse^f willingly.
So when death claps ^n arrest upon a christian at first he startleth and
strugleth [as a man at first putting his feet in^o cold water shrinks] but when
he r^collects his though^s and conside^s that death is sent as a mess^ng^r from
Jesus Christ to bring him to Jesus Christ, then he embraces it, and his soul
go^th as readily as ever Rebeccah did with Abraham's servant to meet Isaac.
Though heathens (^s mythologists observe) made death (the d^ughter of the
night) a goddess, yet they gave her no divine honor, nor Templ^, nor Pri^st,
nor Altar, nor Sacrifice, nor festival days as they gave to other gods; they
had no hope in death, as thinking it did ut^erly destroy them, or bring them to
endless punishments and torments due to a bad life: But a Christian may wish
for it [rath^r than fear it] as putting a period to sin, sorrow, misery, and
leading him by the hand to eternal happiness and the rewards annexed to a holy
life: As that Martyr said, It is but winking and you are in heaven.

FINIS.

