By the Honorable Sir WILLIAM BEESTON Knight. His Majesty's Lieutenant Governor
and Commander in chief, In, and over this his Island of Jamaica, and other the
Territories depending thereon in America, and Vice Admiral of the same. A
PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS I have received Commands from His Majesty by the Right Honorable
James Vernon Esquire one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State,
Signifying to me, That His Majesty is unacquainted with the Intentions and
Designs of the Scots Settling at Darien; And that it is contrary to the Peace
entered into with His Majesty's Allies: And therefore has commanded me, that no
Assistance be given them. These are therefore in His Majesty's Name, and by
Command, strictly to Command all His Majesty's Subjects whatsomever, that they
do not presume, on any Pretense whatsomever, to hold any Correspondence with
the said Scots, not to give them any Assistance of Arms, Ammunition,
Provisions, or any other Necessaries whatsoever, either by themselves or any
other for them, or by any of their Vessels, or of the English Nation, as they
will answer the Contempt of His Majesty's Command to the contrary, at their
outmost peril.

Given under my hand and Seal of Arms this 8th day of April 1699, and in the
Eleventh Year of our Sovereign Lord William the Third, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland King, and of Jamaica Lord, Defender of the Faith, etc.
WILLIAM BEESTON.

By his EXCELLENCY. Barbados
A PROCLAMATION
Whereas His Majesty has been pleased to signify his Pleasure to me by Mr.
Secretary Vernon, that he has been advised, that several Ships of Force fitted
out in Scotland, were arrived at the Island of St. Thomas, with an intention
(as they declared) to settle themselves in some parts of America: Their design
being unknown to his Majesty, And least the same should derogate from the
Treaties His Majesty has entered into with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise
prejudicial to any of his Majesty's Colonies in the West Indies.

THese are therefore in his Majesty's Name, by, and with the Advice and consent
of the Council, strictly to command all his Majesty's Subjects, inhabiting
within this Island, that they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or
giving any Assistance to any of the said Persons; And that no Provisions, Arms,
or other Necessaries whatsoever be carried to them, as they shall Answer the
same at their Peril.

Given under my Hand this 13th of April 1699, and in the Eleventh year of his
Majesty's Reign. R: GRAY.

BY HIS EXCELLENCY Richard Earl of Bellomont. ^aptain General and Governor in
Chief of his Majesty's Province of New York and Territories depending thereon
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas His most Excellent Majesty has received Advice, That several Ships
of Force, fitted out of Scotland, were designed to settle themselves in some
parts of America; and lest the same should derogate from the Treaties his
Majesty has entered into with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial
to any of his Majesty's Colonies in America, His Majesty has been pleased to
signify his Royal Pleasure ^o Me, That I should strictly ^orbid all his
Majesty's Subjects, or others, inhabiting within the Districts of my
Government, that they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or giving any
^ssistance to any of the said Persons, while they are engaged in the aforesaid
Enterprise; and that no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other necessaries
whatsoever, be carried from hence ^o them, nor be permitted to be carried,
either in their own Vessels, or any other Ship or Vessel for their Use. In
pursuance of his Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure, I have thought fit, by
and with the Advice of his Majesty's Council of this Province, to publish and
Declare his Majesty's said Pleasure, and by these Presents do strictly Charge
and Command all and every of his Majesty's Subjects, and others within this
Province and Territories depending thereon in America, That they forbear
holding any Correspondence with, or giving any assistance to such Person or
Persons, who have been fitted out of Scotland in manner aforesaid, and are said
to have settled in a certain place, which they have called Caledonia, That no
Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever, be carried
either in their own Vessels, or in any other Ship or Vessel for their Use, from
this Province, or any part thereof. And his Majesty's Collector and Receiver
General, and all other Officers of his Majesty's Custom-House, are hereby
Required to take notice hereof accordingly.

And I do further strictly Charge, Command and Forbid (by and with the Consent
of his Majesty's Council, as aforesaid) all his Majesty's said Subjects, and
others within this Province, That they neither by themselves, nor by any other
Persons, Authorized by them, contrary to his Majesty's Royal Pleasure as
aforesaid, hold any Correspondence, or give any assistance, or enter into any
Traffic or Commerce with such Persons as are said to be settled in Caledonia
aforesaid. And if any Person or Persons within this Province, by themselves,
their Factors or Agents, shall contrary too, and against the true intent and
meaning of this his Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure ^ignified unto me, as
aforesaid, hold any Correspondence, or give any assistance, or enter into any
Traffic or Commerce, in manner aforesaid, then all such Person or Persons so
acting, as aforesaid, shall incur such Pains, Penalties, and Fofeitures, as by
Law in such Cases are provided. And all his Majesty's Subjects, and others,
within this Province, are hereby Required to take due Notice hereof, and to
Observe His Majesty's said Royal Will and PLEASURE in All and Every of the
Premises, as they will Answer the Contrary at their peril.

Given at Fort William Henry in New York, the 15th day of May, 1699. And in the
Eleventh Year of His Majesty's Reign. Bellomont.
By Order B. Cose: Cl. Concilii.


GOD save the King.
Printed by W. Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, in
New York. 1699.

By His EXCELLENCY Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of His Majesty's Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay, Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England.
New York, etc. in America, and of the Territories thereon depending, and
Vice Admiral of the same. A PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS His most Excellent Majesty having received Advice, That several Ships
of Force fitted out in Scotland, were arrived at the Island of St. Thomas, with
an Intention (as they declared) to settle themselves in some parts of America:
Least the same should derogate from the Treaties His Majesty has entered into
with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any of His Majesty's
Colonies in the West Indies, His Majesty has been pleased to signify His
Royal Pleasure to Me, That I should strictly forbid all His Majesty's Subjects,
or others inhabiting within the Districts of my Government, holding any
Correspondence with, or giving any Assistance to any of the said Persons* while
they are engaged in the foresaid Enterprise. And that no Provision, Arms,
Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever be carried to them from thence, nor
be permitted to be carried either in their own Vessels, or any other Ships or
Vessels for their Use.

IN Observance therefore of His Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure, I have
thought fit, by and with the Advice of His Majesty's Council of this Province,
to Charge and Command and do hereby charge and command all and every of His
Majesty's Subjects, and others within this Province and Territories thereon
depending, That they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or giving any
Assistance to any Person or Persons, who have been fitted out of Scotland in
mannner aforesaid, and are said to have Settled in a certain place in the
West Indies, by them called CALEDONIA, Or to enter into any Traffic or
Commerce with them, or any of them. And that no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition,
or other necessaries whatsoever be transported or carried unto them from this
Province, or any part thereof, either in their own Vessels, or any other Ship
or Vessel for their use. Of which all his Majesty's Subjects and others within
this Province, are hereby required to take due notice, and conform themselves
accordingly, as they will answer their acting hereunto, under the utmost pains,
Penalties, and Forefeitures, as are by Law in such Cases provided. And the
Officers of His Majesty's Customs, and all other his Majesty's Officers, are
hereby also required to take effectual Care that his Majesty's said Royal Will
and Pleasure in all and every of the Premises be duly observed and kept as
they will answer the contrary at their Peril.

Given at the Council Chamber in Boston, the third day of June 1699, In the
Eleventh Year of His Majesty's Reign. BELLOMONT
By Order of His Excellency and Council. Isaac Addington Secr.


GOD Save the King.
BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR, and COUNCIL, 1699.

EDINBURGH, Re Printed Exactly according to the Originals, Anno 1699.


