A PLEA For the Commonalty of LONDON, OR, A Vindication of their Rights (which
has been long withheld from them) in the choice of sundry City Officers.

AS ALSO, A Justification of the power of the Court of Common Council, in the
making of Acts, or Bylaws, for the good and profit of the Citizens,
notwithstanding the Negative votes of the Lord Major and ^^^ermen.

Being fully proved by several Charters granted to this City, by sundry Royal
Kings of England, confirmed by Act of PARLIAMENT, and by Records witnessing the
particulars in the practice of them.

In a Speech delivered in Common Council, on Monday the 24th of February, 1644.

By JOHN BELLAMIE.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The LORD MAJOR, AND To the Right Worshipful the
ALDERMEN, and the rest of the Common Council of the City of LONDON.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful,
THat which lately I presented in a Speech unto your ears, I now presume in
this little Manual to put into your hands; It neither then was, nor now is,
any conceit I had, or have, of my own abilities (for I know my self the
unmeetest, because the unablest, of many others,) that put me upon this task;
But that duty and service, which I owe unto this Court, and in it unto all the
Commonalty of this City, made me to adventure my self (in the presence of your
Lordship, and the worthy Aldermen,) to enter the lists, and to put in this
plea, for the defense of our Liberties, and vindicating of our rights and dues.

And as sometimes it falls out in a case of danger, when the loss of all lies
at stake, that the forwardness of a young and unexperienced Soldier, who
perhaps is also more hardy then wary, yet loving his Countries liberty,
adventures to begin the onset, and thereby provokes and stirs up Courage in the
more grave and able Commanders, to follow on in hope of victory; So if now by
my example, I may but encourage some of you, who are also with me members of
this Council, and which I know are far more able then my self, to improve
your Parts and Abilities for the Common good, in using your best endeavors in
this Court, for the pleading of our Cause, and thereby the regaining of those
Rights and Liberties, which by the Charters of our City, do belong unto us; I
shall then be in good hope, that by the evidence of Truth and Reason, all our
Privileges and Immunities will be, as freely, so also lovingly, and
consentingly granted to us; Which is, and ever shall be, the earnest desire and
endeavor of him, who is and ever will be

Your Lordships, and this Cities servant, for the public welfare of it, JOHN
BELLAMIE.

The Proeme.
Upon the 16th of January last, I made an humble Motion in the Common Council
to the Lord Major and Aldermen, that one special means which I had often
observed to obstruct the good proceedings of that Court, might be removed, viz.
His Lordships causing the Sword to be taken up, and then going away, and so
dissolving the Court, without the consent, yea against the desires of the Major
part. The remedy I proposed for the redress of this grievance, was this, that
by the power of this Council, there might be a Law established, that the Court
might not at any time be dissolved, or adjourned, without the consent of the
Major part both of Aldermen and Commons in Common-counsell assembled; The
ground upon which I took the humble boldness to make that so necessary a
motion, was from the example of that never too much to be admired wisdom and
prudence of those Noble Peers and Sages of this Kingdom, the Lords and
Commons now assembled in this present PARLIAMENT, who seeing the sad effects
(almost to the ruin of this Nation) that fell out by reason of the sudden
breaking up of Parliaments, did thereupon address themselves, with one consent
unto his Majesty; that he would be pleased to pass an Act, that this
PARLIAMENT might not be dissolved, prorogued or adjourned, without the consent
of both Houses of PARLIAMENT, first had and obtained thereunto: As I could not
in my judgment find out a fairer Copy to write after in this my motion, for
the Cities safety, then that unparalleld practice of those Lords and Commons
for the Kingdoms security: so neither could I present a better pattern then
our Royal Sovereign, nor in all his actions, since the diadem of this
Kingdom adorned his Kingly head, could I find out one, which in after ages
will bespeake him more truly Royal, then this his so readily granting that
their so just a desire; I also upon the 24 of January, prosecuted this my
motion with some pressive arguments, hoping thereby to prevail; and they were
such as I found made ready to my hand, by the most solidst and ablest
judgments that this Nation has, viz. the arguments which the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, laid down before his Majesty (and which wrought his
Royal consent) you may find them in the preface before the Act for the
continuance of this present Parliament, all that was mine therein, was only the
paralelling of the Condition of the Kingdom, for which they were made, with
the condition of the City, to which I brought them, and applied them to the
present case in hand; and let us but change the terms of the Kingdom, into
City, and Parliament, into Common Council, which is as it were a
City-Parliament, and then they will almost in every thing, as fully agree with
our condition, as with the condition of the Kingdom for which they were
framed; the particulars I principally insisted upon were these three; 1. The
raising of moneys for the Kingdoms Cities
occasions. 2. The repayment of those moneys so raised by the Parliament.
Common Council.
3. The redress of the public grievances of the Kingdom. City.
Now as the Parliament could not, so the Common Council, cannot so fully with
power and credit, either raise, or pay such moneys as they shall have occasion
to use for the service of the Kingdom, City,
nor remove the public grievances of the Kingdom, City,
without the power of continuing together, and of not being dissolved, till
they have fully effected that which in these or any the like particulars shall
come under their debate or consideration, but seeing that neither so fair a
prcedent, nor so forceable arguments could then prevail as was desired, I
thereupon endeavored; First, by the Charters of our City; Secondly, by Records
witnessing our power in the practice of it; and thirdly, by equity and reason,
to prove our Rights and dues, as in this following Plea, I have laid them down
and therein have made our claim.

A Plea for the Commonalty of LONDON: OR, A Speech delivered in
Common Council, on Monday the 24th. of February, 1644.
My Lord,
MAster Recorder having fully and faithfully reported the truth, in showing the
little success, or good, that after three days debate has been done, in that
Committee, which was appointed to state the question in controversy, between
the Aldermen and Commoners, members of this Court of Common Council, and I
being by this Court added to that Committee, thought it therefore my duty
(according to the best of my abilities) to give an account to this Court, whom
it chiefly concerns, how in my judgment I conceive the right and truth
therein does stand; and for methods sake, I shall deliver what in this I have
to speak, under these three heads.

First, That this City (by those favors and bounties which we and our
predecessors have received from sundry Royal Kings of England) is now invested
with many excellent immunities, franchises and privileges.

Secondly, Who are the proper recipients of those favors, or to whom the power
of using and maintaining those favors and privileges granted to us by our
Royal Kings of England is committed.

Thirdly, The reasons or arguments, wherefore those persons unto whom this
power is committed, should carefully and conscionably maintain and use those
privileges, with which they are entrusted.

For the proof of the first, I have a large and a pleasant field to walk in;
and truly I want both time to recount them all, they are so many; and words to
set forth the worth of them, they are so excellent.

When I thoroughly view them, I know not well whether I should more magnify the
grace and favor of those royal Princes, in giving us so many privileges, or
admire our own happiness in the enjoyment of them.

But I must only do in these, as men usually do in a curious garden, pluck
here a flower and there an herb, which are most pleasing to their senses, and
most useful for their service; and when I have done the best I can, I must
leave many behind me, for want of time and skill to collect and improve them
for the common good: But my hope and desire is, that some more able and
skillful hand, will shortly set them forth in their use and luster, before your
Lordship and this Court.

I can no way cast my eye, but it beholds many witnesses of this truth; for
that we are here, at this time in the capacity of a City Council, to consult
upon, debate about, and determine of, such things which do or may concern the
common good, this pleades, this proves our privilege: That Emblem of
Authority, which ere while was borne before your Lordship, and now presents it
self within your view, is another argument to prove your power, and in it the
power of this City, whose head (under his Majesty) your Lordship is.

Very much has been anciently written by many Authors, in the praise and
commendation of London, but it has been lately, as truly, so fully summed up
together, by that learned Lawyer Sr Edward Cook, sometime Recorder of London,
and after Lord Chief Justice of England, in his fourth part of Institutes, p.
247. In these three expressions; 1. Camera Regis. 2. Rei Publicae Cor. 3.
Totius Regni Epitome. The Chamber of the King, the heart of the Commonwealth,
the Epitome of the whole Kingdom.

But, my Lord, I must come to the proof of these proofs, for it is not
sufficient to show that we are thus, and that your Lordship is possessed of such
a power, for this and more then this may be by usurpation, and without warrant;
But that which is my part to prove, is, That your Lordship and this City, is
invested with a just and a full power thus to be, and thus to do, and that by
the free and clear grants of sundry royal Kings of England, manifested in
their several and respective Charters, which by their grace and favor they
have granted to us.

Those pleasant flowers and useful herbs which I shall now endeavor to
present you with, are such as will chiefly make a flourishing and populous
City to be truly happy, which are these two.

First, To have the power to choose our own chief Governor, and subordinate
Officers amongst our selves.

Secondly, To have also the power to make such Laws, which are or shall be for
our own welfare, and best accommodation.

London was anciently governed, both before the conquest, in the time of the
conquest, and for about 120 years after the conquest, which was, until the
first year of Richard the first, by Port graves, or Port-greeves: Richard the
first, appointed the first Major of London, which continued for about 24
years, until the 14th year of King John; And King John was the first King of
England, that gave us the power to choose our chief Governor, viz. the Major
amongst our selves, as the words of the Charter in the 16 year of his reign,
makes it plain, the words are these.

Know ye that We have granted to our Barons of our City of London, that they
may choose unto themselves a Major of themselves.

And that Charter of Henry the third, in the 37 year of his reign, gives us
the like power, in these words.

We grant also unto the said Citizens, that they may yearly present to our
Barons of the Exchequer, We or our Heirs not being at Westminster, every Major
whih they sholl choose in the City of London, to the end they may be by them
admitted, as Major.

And that Charter of Edward the second, in the 12th of his reign, confirms
to us the same power of choosing the Major, with this addition also, of
choosing both the Sheriffs, I say, of choosing not only one, but both the
Sheriffs, and that in these words.

That the Major and Sheriffs of the City aforesaid, may be chosen by the
Citizens of the same City, according to the tenor of the Charters of our
Progenitors, sometimes Kings of England, to that end made; Et nullo alio modo.

Which Charter, has reference to the Charter of King John, in the first year
of his reign, in these words.

And further, We have granted to the Citizens of London, that they may make of
themselves, Sheriffs, whomsoever they will, and may remove them when they will.

And the same Charter of Edward the second, gives us the power of choosing the
Chamberlain, Common Clarke and Common Sergeant, in these words.

And that the Chamberlain, Common Clarke and Common Sergeant of the City
aforesaid, be chosen by the Commonalty of the same City, and amoved at the
pleasure of the same Commonalty.

The same Charter, gives the choice of the Masters of the Way-house, to the
Commonalty, in these words.

And that the Weights and Beams for weighing of Merchandises betwixt Merchant
and Merchant, Whereof the issues growing, and the knowledge of them, pertain
to the Commonalty of the City aforesaid, remain to be kept at the will of the
same Commonalty, in the custody of two good and sufficient men of the same
City, expert in that office, to be hereunto chosen by the Commonalty
aforesaid; and that they be not in any otherwise committed to any others, but
to such as shall be so chosen.

And in the 22th of Henry the eigth, this is granted to the Major, Commonalty
and Citizens of London conjunctim.

I might tire out my self, and wear out your patience, if I should read all
the several Charters, which gives the choice of many other City Officers unto
the Commonalty, as the Sergeants of the Chamber, the Offices of Packing,
Garbling of Spices, Gaugers and Measurers, with many others, but I will at
present forbear, and go on to the next, which is this.

That this City is invested with power, to make such Laws, which are, or shall
be for our own welfare, and best accommodation.

That Charter of Edw. 3. in the 15th year of his reign, fully cleeres it in
these words.

We have granted further, for Us and our Heirs, and by this our present
Charter confirmed to the Major and Aldermen of the City aforesaid; That if any
customs in the said City, hitherto obtained and used, be in any part difficult
or defective, or any thing in the same newly happening, where before there was no
remedy ordained, and have need of amending; the same Major and Aldermen and
their Successors, with the assent of the Commonalty of the same City, may add
and or daine a Remedy, meet, faithful and consonant to reason, for the common
profit of the Citizens of the same City, as often, and as such time, as to them
shall be thought expedient.

When I seriously consider, what Privileges by these Charters we are invested
with, I know not well what further in this kind, could be desired to make us a
happy people, were we not wanting in our selves toward our own happiness. I
have now done with the first, which I think makes fully good the thing
proposed, viz. That this City, by those favors and bounties which we and our
predecessors have received from sundry Royal Kings of England, is now invested
with many excellent Immunities, Franchises and privileges; and I pray God give
us grace, wisely and humbly to make a right use of them.

The second thing I proposed to speak to, was this, viz. Who are the proper
Recipients of those privileges, or to whom the power of using and maintaining
those privileges and favors granted to us by our Royal Kings of England is
committed.

I have only in this these two things to speak to;

First, To show to whom these privileges have been granted.

Secondly, To prove by whom these privileges have been practiced.

These two things being once well cleared, will fully prove the thing proposed.

For the first take a survey of all the Charters, which have been granted to
this City, since the date of that grant of King John to this day, which are
very many, and they all run thus, or to this effect.

To the Major, Aldermen and Commonalty of the City of London, or to the Major
and Commonalty of our City of London. And here I cannot but remind you of those
Charters of Edward the third, in the 15th year of his reign, where the Major
and Aldermen, with the assent of the Commonalty, have the power, as to
explain, so to amend the old, or to make new Laws, for the common profit of
the Citizens, And of that of King John, in the first year of his reign, and of
Edward the second, and in the 12th year of his reign, where the sole power
both to elect and to amove the Sheriffs, the Chamberlin, the Common Clarke, and
the Common Sergeant, is wholly left to the pleasure of the Commonalty, without
any reference to the Major and Aldermen.

Thus it is clear, that the Commonalty have by the Charters, an equal share
with the Major and Aldermen in the privileges granted to this City; and if
there be any difference, as there is, in the choice of some City Officers, the
advantage is unto the Commons.

The second particular in this second head, is this;

By whom these privileges have been practiced. I shall endeavor to make this
as clear as the former; For as the power in the aforesaid Charter of Edward
the third, does enable the Major and Aldermen, with the assent of the
commonalty, to amend the old, or to make new Laws, so suitable thereunto are
all our Acts of Common Council, which are our City Laws; they are made as in
the joint names, so by the joint power of the Major, Aldermen, and Commons in
Common Council assembled.

Give me leave I pray, to instance in a few particulars, which have been done
by the power of this Court, since I have had the happiness to sit as a
Scholar in this School.

As upon the 4th of March, 1641. The removing of Duputy Alden from being a
member of this Court.

Upon the 5th of September. 1642. The putting away of Mr John Wild, from being
Town Clarke of this City.

Upon the 18th of Febr. 1642. The expelling of Thomas Wiseman, the City
Remembrancer out of his Office.

Upon the 28th of April, 1643. The Amoveing of diverse Aldermens Deputies, from
their places of Deputy-ship; And all this by the joint and concurrent power and
authority of the Ld Major, Aldermen and Commons in this Common Council
assembled.

And that all the determinative, binding and concluding power of this Court, is
in the plurality of the votes of the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons
conjunctim; And that the Lord Major and Aldermen, have in this Court no more
power of a negative voice, then as single persons, which every member of this
Court has as fully as they, if their judgments in the debate sway them to the
negative; And that the Aldermen alone and by themselves, cannot hold the
negative against the Commons affirmative; I prove these three ways.

First by practice, Secondly by argument, Thirdly by equity and justice.

First, I will show by practice that it has not been so.

Secondly, I will prove by argument that it cannot be so.

Thirdly, I will make it appear, that in equity and justice it ought not to be
so.

First, That it has not been so, I thus prove by practice.

Upon the 17th of Febr. 1641. A Petition was brought into this Court, directed
only to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and because it was not directed to the
Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council assembled, this Court
refused to take any cognizance of it; But the then Lord Major, Sir Richard
Gurney, with the major part of the Aldermen then present, in that
Commoncouncell, would have the Court to admit of that Petition; and the Court
refusing, for the reason aforesaid, the Lord Major and Aldermen (conceiving, as
I suppose, that they should carry it by plurality of votes) would have the
Court divided and numbered by the Pole, and so it was done; there was for the
Petition, the Lord Major, 7 Aldermen, and 61 Commoners; and against the
Petition, 5 Aldermen, and 85 Commoners, and thus the members of this Court,
both Aldermen and Commoners being reckoned together by the Pole on both sides,
as members of this Court, the question was determined, the Petition rejected,
and the power and authority of this Common Council maintained.

Secondly, That it cannot be so, I thus prove by Argument.

That Court which has the power to make a Law, and by that Law to confer a
power upon the Lord Major and Aldermen, which as Lord Major and Aldermen they
had not before, must needs be quo ad hoc, unto the making of a Law above the
Lord Major and Aldermen: But this Court of Common Council has the power to
make a Law, and by that Law to confer a power upon the Lord Major and Aldermen,
which as Lord Major and Aldermen they had not before. Therefore this Court of
Common Council, so far as unto the making of a Law, must needs be above the
Lord Major and Aldermen.

That this Court has the power to make a Law, and by that Law to confertre a
power upon the Lord Major and Aldermen, which as Lord Major and Aldermen they
had not before, I prove de facto, as appears by an Act of Common Council,
made in the 6th of Henry the 7th, upon the 15th of April; by which this Court
conferred a power upon the Lord Major and Aldermen, that at the election of the
Chamberlain, the Lord Major and Aldermen should present two men to the
Commonalty, and the Commonalty to choose one of them to be Chamberlain. And in
the same Act of Common Council, this Court conferred a power upon the Ld Major
and Aldermen, that at the election of the Bridg-masters, the Ld Major and
Aldermen, should present four men to the Commonalty, and the Commonalty to
choose 2 of them to be Bridg-masters. Which power of presenting two men for the
choice of Chamberlain, and four men for the choice of Bridg-mastere by the Ld
Major and Aldermen, they as Ld Major and Aldermen had not before, Ergo, The
Court of Common Council quo ad hoc, as unto the making of a Law, must needs be
above the Lord Major and Aldermen.

2. Argument.

That Court which has the power to make a Law, and by that Law to take from
the Lord Major and Aldermen, that power which before was by a Law conferred
upon them as Lord Major and Aldermen, must needs be, quo ad hoc, as unto the
making of a Law above the Lord Major and Aldermen; But this Court of
Common Council has the power to make a Law, and by that Law to take from the
Lord Major and Aldermen that power, which by a Law was formerly conferred upon
them as Lord Major and Aldermen; Therefore this Court of Common Council must
needs be quo ad hoc, as unto the making of a Law above the Lord Major and
Aldermen.

That this Court of Common Council has the power to make a Law, and by that
Law to take from the Lord Major and Aldermen, that power which formerly was by
a Law conferred upon them as Lord Major and Aldermen. I prove as before de
facto, as appears by an Act of Common Council, made the 21th of June, 1643.
by which this Court repealed the former Act of Common Council of Henry the
7th, and so took away that power from the Lord Major and Aldermen, which
before was by that Law conferred upon them, as Lord Major and Aldermen, and so
settled the choice of Chamberlain and Bridge-masters in statu quo prius;
Therefore this Court of Common Council, quo ad hoc, as unto the making of a
Law, must needs be above the Lord Major and Aldermen. 3. Argument.

If the Court of common council so far as unto the making of Laws be above
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, then the Lord Major and Aldermen can have no
negative voice, as Lord Major and Aldermen, so as to hinder the Court of
Common Council from making of a Law, but the Court of Commoncouncell, so far
as unto the making of Laws, is above the Lord Major and Aldermen; therefore the
Major and Aldermen, as Lord Major and Aldermen can have no negative voice, so
as to hinder the Court of Common Council from making of a Law.

That the Court of Common Council so far as unto the making of Laws, is above
the Lord Major and Aldermen, the two former arguments fully prove, therefore
the conclusion stands firm upon it is true foundation, viz. That the Lord Major
and Aldermen, as Lord Major and Aldermen, can have no negative voice, so as to
hinder the Court of Commoncouncell from making of a Law.

Thirdly, That it ought not to be so, I prove by equity and justice. The
Aldermen are but in number 26, the Commoners in this Court about 250. in
person, and in representation many thousands. Now if there should be a power of
a Negative voice, in 26. single persons, Members of this Court; and they
thereby have the power to hinder the passing of Law, which upon serious and
solemn debate, has been upon good grounds assented unto, and desired by so
great a number (and that for the common good and welfare of the Citizens of
this City, every one of which greater number, being as fully interessed in the
good or evil that may come by the passing or not passing of the Law in
question, as any of the 26. Aldermen are; O then how many, and how great
advantages may we see before us, which being by the passing of a Law obtained
might make us happy. And on the other side, how many pressive and
unsupportable evils may we see ready to swallow us up; and for want of power to
pass a Law to prevent them, will make us irrecoverably miserable; and yet we
must all sit still and sigh, with our fingers in our eyes, and morn and die
for the mere will and pleasure sake of 26. single persons, nay of seven
persons, for thirteen Aldermen make a Court, and seven of them being the
greater number of thirteen have the power of the Court, and so the power of a
negative vote, to hinder the passing of an Act in Common Council; If this be
granted, into what a remediless way of ruin may we fall, as in the case of Sr
Richard Gourney, in standing out against the just desires, yea commands of
Parliament.

And thus I have, I hope fully and clearly proved, both by Charters and by
practice, that the Ld Major, Aldermen and Commonalty conjunctim, and not either
alone, as separated or disjunct from the other, are the proper recipients of
those grants and privileges, which our Royal Kings have in their bounty and
favor invested this City with.

Therefore my Lord, we honor your Lordship, and all those worthy Senators
your Associates, and we cannot but acknowledge your Lordship, to be under his
Majesty the head of our City, yea a head of our own choosing; if therefore we
should go about in the least measure to eclipse your Honor, or to diminish
your just power, we should in so doing wound our selves, whose head you are.

But as we give you the honor of a headship, O take not from us, I beseech you
the right of Membership, but acknowledge us as Members of your body, though we
be (as truly we confess our selves to be) with reference to your Lordship, and
the Aldermen, but inferior Members, as suppose the hands and feet of this
great body, whereof your Lordship is the head; yet as in the Natural body, the
soul diffuseth it self into all the Members of the body, to make them fit for
action, as into the feet to walk, into the hands to work. O suffer us I pray
you to do that, which God, which nature, and which all our Royal Kings, in
all their Charters have granted to us, and does require of us, that is, that in
our places we may act our parts; And then you will easily see, that as in the
Natural body, the head cannot walk without the feet, nor work without the
hands, nor can your Lordship and those worthy Aldermen, though the head and
chief of this great Council, yet act nothing without the concurrent power of
us your hands and feet for to assist you.

The soundest and best of bodies are subject to diseases, and those maladies in
the most noble parts, are ever most dangerous; if therefore there breeds an
ulcer, or tumor in the head, and cause it so to swell, as it hinders the
necessary and natural motion of the rest of the Members, and thereby
endangereth the life of all. Oh then blame not, I beseech you blame not, the
feet, if they run forth to seek a remedy, nor yet the hands, if they apply it;
for every Member, as it tenders it is own well-being, ought to seek the
welfare of the whole body.

And if the distemper be in the head, as sad experience daily proves, no
member of the body can then be well at ease. But I foresee an objection that
may here be made, against a part of what I have before spoken, which is this.

That the choice or election of some City-officers have been time out of mind
in the power of others, and not in the Commonalty, as one of the Shrieves to be
chosen by my Lord Majors Prerogative, and the common Clark and common Sergeant
by the Court of Aldermen.

I shall give to this objection a twofold answer.

First, that which our Savior Christ gave to the Pharisees in the case of
divorce, they then pleading (as these now) prescription for it, and saying,
that time out of mind, even ever since Moses days, it had been so; True, says
our Lord Christ, Moses for the hardness of their hearts, suffered them to give
a bill of divorce, and to put away their wives, but from the beginning it was
not so. The same say I, it is confessed, that a great while the choice of these
and some other City-Officers, have been suffered to run along in these Channels
of pretended Prerogative and unwarranted custom, but from the beginning it was
not so; therefore as our Savior Christ said in that case, What God has joined
together, let no man put asunder; So say I in this, what God and what the
Charters of our City has joined together, let not man, let not not your
Lordships pretended Prerogative, let not unwarranted custom, either put or
keep asunder.

The second Answer I give to this objection is this.

That this power has either been given from the Commonalty by their own
consent, or else taken away from them by usurpation, if by usurpation, then it
behooves this Court, the only representative body of this City to use all good
means to regaine what has been so long unjustly taken from them.

But if given away by consent, as I will not deny, but our forefathers in
their times, might be persuaded upon specious shows and fair pretenses, and
peradventure in their esteem upon solid reasons, to make over a part of their
power, into the hands of the Ld Major and Aldermen, who knew better for their
own advantage, how to use it, then they to keep it, yet I hope, if reason and
just cause require, the power of this Council may reassume it again into the
hands of the Commonaltie, as it did in the like case upon the 21. of June,
1643. reassume the sole power of choosing the Chamberlain and Bridge-masters
into the hands of the said Commonalty.

I come now to the third and last head I am to speak to, viz. The reasons or
arguments, wherefore those persons unto whom this power is committed, should
carefully and conscionably, maintain and use those privileges with which they
are entrusted: I will insist only upon two Arguments to press this.

First, from that damage and loss which our Predecessors have under-gone for
mis-using and non-usage of those Privileges and Immunities, which by the
favor and bounty of former Princes have been bestowed on them.

Secondly, from that obligation of a sacred Oath, by which we all as free men
of this City stand bound for to maintain them.

The omission and misusage of Privileges have been exceeding detrimentall to
our Predecessors, and may be of as dangerous a consequence unto us; but before
I prosecute this Argument, give me leave to acquaint you, how careful one of
the Kings of England was to preserve this City from loss and danger in this
respect. I read that Edward the third, in the first year of his reign made
provision for this City, that our Liberties should not be seized into the hands
of the King for any persionall Trespass of any one minister of Justice in this
City, but did ordain that such a minister of Justice should be punished
according as the quality of his Trespass should require.

But if the City it self (which is only represented in this Court) shall so
far undervalue, or slight the grace and favor of our Royal Princes, as not
to use or to misuse such graunts and privileges, as they are pleased in their
bounties to invest us with, then as this neglect, and non-usage, or misusage of
our privileges has made our Predecessors to pay dear for it: So we may also
mourn under the loss of it, and smart for it: For in the same Edward the 3.
days, in the 15. year of his reign, it cost this City 1000. marks, for not
fully using those free Customs and Liberties which had been formerly granted
to them, where observe that it is not sufficient to use some of our free
Customs and Liberties, but we must use them all, yea and fully use them in that
way and manner, as in which they were granted to us by our Charters, else as
then, so now, the non-usage, or mis-usage of them may occasion a mulct or fine
to be imposed on us.

For there is no man that is any whit conversant in our City Charters, but can
easily and truly testify, that not once or twice, but 10. if not 20. times,
this City has been forced to receive a pardon for non-usage, and mis-usage of
their privileges, and for City-Officers to be chosen, and not by the persons
appointed by Charter to choose them, is a plain mis-usage of power and
privilege.

Therefore my Lord, if your Lordship will by your Prerogative still choose one
of the Shrieves, and the Court of Aldermen will still choose the common Clarke
and common Sergeant; Why I beseech you may you not as well share the choice of
all the City-Officers amongst your selves? but if you will grant us of the
Commonaltie, our rights in the choice of some of them, I pray deny us not our
rights in all. For do you not think it is much better to use and keep that we
have, then by neglect, disusage, or mis-usage to loose all.

And is there not still some about the King, which would fain take hold of any
occasion to fill their own Coffers with our City Coin, if according to the
Country Proverb, they could any way find a hole in our Coat.

Suffer me I beseech you to relate unto you, what I have sometimes read to this
purpose.

In the 16. year of Richard the 2d, there was a Commission procured from the
King to the then two Dukes of York and Gloucester with others, grounded, as then
pretended upon a Statute of Edward the 3d, in the 28. year of his reign; which
Statute in King Edward the 2d days was by a byword called, as says Sir Henry
Colthrop, sometimes Recorder of London, Flagellum Civit. Londini. the whip and
scourge of the City of London, God keep us from the like whip again, least it
fetch life, as well as blood from us.

It was to enquire (I will give it you in the words of the Record) of all and
singular errors, defects and mispritions in our City of London, for want of
good Government of the Majors, Shrieves and Aldermen of the same City. And as
there does not now, so it seems there did not then want informers, for the
then Major, Aldermen and Shrieves, were convicted and adjudged to pay for their
first default a 1000 Marks, for the 2d 2000 Marks. And for the third, the
liberties of the City was taken into the hands of the King, and did there
remain, until by the mediation and intercession of the Queen, a pardon was
procured, and their Privileges restored.

My author tells me not what this Mediation of the Queen cost this City, but we
may well think the pardon came not off at a low rate, I Will close this with a
good lesson I long since learnt.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, Happy are they whom other men's
harms, do make to beware. The second Argument is from the obligation of a
sacred Oath, by which we all as freemen of this City stand bound to maintain
all the Liberties and Franchises thereof.

Sacred Oaths I conceive may admit of a twofold distinction.

1. Assertorie.

2. Promisorie.

I am only to speak of the second, and of it but three things; and of those
almost in as few words. As

1. The Antiquity of it.

2. The Authority of it.

3. The Obligatorines or binding power of it.

For the Antiquity of it, I find it as ancient as Abraham, and the Authority of
it from God himself, both these in Genes. 22.16, 17. By my self have I sworn,
says the Lord, that in blessing, I will bless thee, etc.

The Obligatorines or binding power of it, is also from God himself, Numb.
30.1, 2. This is the thing which the Lord has commanded; If a man swear an
Oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do
according to all that proceeds out of his mouth. And if any man dare do
otherwise, God himself will likewise be a swift witness against him for it.

And that we are all bound by Oath to maintain the City Liberties, this clause
in a freemans Oath, (viz. The franchises and customs of this City you shall
maintain) does fully prove.

I have now gone through all I proposed to my self, and J hope fully proved
every particular.

Give me leave J beseech you to close all as St Paul did to Philemon in the
case of Onesimus, Though I might enjoyne thee that which is convenient, yet for
loves sake I rather entreat thee.

So J, though we might require our rights of your Lordship and those worthy
Aldermen, as that which is our dues, by the City Charters, yet for love sake we
rather become suitors to your Lordship, and all your Associates, those grave
Senators, the worthy Aldermen; And do as for love, so for peace sake also,
entreat you to join with us, by your consent and assistance to settle them all
aright upon their own Basis, that so we may be in such a condition, as upon
every emergent occasion to be able, by the blessing of God, to be safe within
our selves, and serviceable in our places unto King and Parliament.

I could in this way of supplication to your Lordship even weep out my own
eyes, yea let out my own bowels, could J but thereby penetrate in the breasts
of your Lordship, and those worthy Aldermen, to draw some compassion from you
in this very nick of time to help to save a sinking City, if not a dying
Kingdom. Is it not the enemies maxim, Divide and impera, divide and rule; and
has not Division already proved too destructive to us; and is there any means
under heaven, so hopeful for our helps as Unity and Concord: Has not that
God, who is the God of Unity, made us One: Has not the Charters of our City
made us One, and does not the Constitutions of this Court make us one entire
Council; and yet shall we who are thus made one by this threefold bond break
in two, and run to ruin. O my Lord J want words to express my sorrow, we
who are the Commons stand with our stretched out Arms, ready to embrace your
Lordship, and all those worthy Aldermen in the nearest and firmest bond of
Unity and Love; look not upon us I Beseech you with a displeasing countenance,
but afford us the like mutual embraces; disdain us not, though below you, for
we are as your flesh and your bones, If therefore there be any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels
of mercies in you, grant our just desires, and in love and peace settle and
estate us in our rights and dues, and be of the same mind with us, having the
same love to us, for O how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in Unity.

I might further press this by a threefold argument; As

1. That as you are the head and Governors of this City.

2. That as you are bound by several sacred Oaths.

3. That as you tender the welfare and liberty of your posterities, You ought
to do it. But I Will forbear, hoping that a word to the wise will be
sufficient, and shut up all with the relation of a City History upon Record,
which I beseech you seriously to consider of, and make such an application of
it to your selves, as in your wisdoms shall seem most meet unto you. In Anno
1389. William Vennor Major, and John Walcut and John Lony Shrieves, with the
then Aldermen, who all by name in their order stand blemished upon Record, That
for the Errors, defects and mispritions in their Government, they were fined
at 3000 marks, and the City Liberties seized on by the King. Can you imagine
that every or any water or aqua fortis, will wash of or wear away this their
obloquie and repreach, Abundans cautela non nocet, Very much cautiousnes will
no way hurt you.

Consider on the other side, that the wisest of Kings, spoke very wisely, when
he said, A good name is rather to be chosen then great riches, and that it is
better then a precious ointment. And will it not be so to you, when for your
long lasting fame and glory, it may stand upon Record to after ages, when we
are dead and gone, That in Anno 1644. when the Right Honorable Thomas Atkin
was Lord Major, the right Worshipful William Gibbs, and Richard Chambers were
Shrieves, and that learned and able Lawyer and Patriot of his Countries
liberty John Glyn was Recorder, and such and such worthy Knights and
Gentlemen, reading you all according to your degrees by name, was Aldermen:
That then by your assistance and consent, London, I say the Commonalty of
London, was restored to their long lost Liberties and Privileges.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

