A DOOR OF SALVATION OPENED Unto all Men: OR A SHORT TREATISE, Discovering That
all mankind as they are considered under the fall of Adam, have an equal and
a like respect with Almighty God, and that by Jesus Christ he has prepared
eternal Salvation for All, and afforded unto All, means sufficient to bring
them thereunto.

In which also, Sundry Objections, Grounds of Reason, and Texts of Scripture,
for the contrary Opinion are alleged and answered.

By R. B.

Ezekiel. 18.4. Behold all souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the
soul of the son is mine: the soul that sins it shall die. London, Printed
for Will. Larnar, and are to be sold at the sign of the Blackmore near
Bishops-gate, 1648.

TO The Impartial READER.
AS concerning what I here present unto thee, I am neither ignorant of my
swerving therein from the common Opinions of the Times, nor yet insensible of
the many censures I shall incur from some by reason thereof; But He that
observes the wind, shall not sow: and he that regards the clouds, shall
not reap. (Eccles. 11.4.) The scope of Scriptures, and light of reason is the
ground of my belief, and my only rule in this: From which I have not
consciously erred in any thing contained therein. Notwithstanding considering
mine own, with the common frailty of all men now living, I crave not thy
acceptance in any thing more, than what after a diligent perusal, with a free
and impartial examination upon the foresaid Grounds, shall appear warrantable
unto thee. All which I humbly desire thee, as well for thine own happiness
(depending thereupon) as for the good and benefit of others, thankfully and
gladly to receive in the love thereof, faithfully to practice, and
industriously to promote in thy whole Conversation: And so referring thee to
the Discourse it self, and the Grace of God discovered therein, I rest

Thine in all Christian duty R. B.

A TABLE Directing to some of the most principal Heads contained in this
TREATISE.
A
ALL men as they are considered in Adam have a like esteem and respect with
God, page 5, 7, 8. Adam made mutable, and why, page 33. Adams first offense
incurred not the damnation of hell, 58.
C
Children not dead in trespasses and sins, nor liable to the damnation of hell
by birth, page 57, 58. Christ was sent into the world to be a Savior for all
men, page 16, 17, 18, 19. Christ has redeemed all men from death brought upon
them by Adams disobedience, 13, 32, 58, 92. Christ has prepared and opened a
way to eternal life for all men, page 13, 14, 47, 48. When the Covenant of
Grace was given, p. 92, 93. That it is extended unto all men, p. 90. How works
are required thereby to Salvation, p. 79, 80. Wherein it is most properly
distinguished, from the Covenant of works, p. 83, 84, 85, 86, 87. And in what
respects it is to be esteemed a Covenant of Grace, p. 87, 88, 89.
E
None elected to Salvation as they are considered in the estate of
disobedience, p. 72, 73, 80.
F
Wherein Faith consists, p. 51. How it is begotten in men, ib. That none are
unavoidably enforced thereunto, p. 5, 6, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. That
if Faith were enforced none could be justified by it, p. 44, 45, 46, 54, 55,
56. In what respect it is said to be the gift of God, p. 50, 51, 52, 53, 54.
That men may possibly fall away from it, p. 11, 12, 14, 101, 102, 103, 104.
G
That God requires not more of any men to their Salvation, then what by the
improvement of the means they may perform p. 22, 23, 24, 27, 36, 37, 42, 43.
God neither hardens the hearts, blinds the eyes, nor works wickedness in
any men. p. 31, 32.
H
That all virtue and vice proceeds from the hearts of men, p. 44, 45, 54, 55,
56. That every man's judgment at the last day shall be according to the things
only that were freely chosen and entertained therein, ibid
M
In what respect it is said, That the natural man perceives not the things of
the Spirit of God, p. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66. How men are
taught of God, and drawn unto Jesus Christ, p. 66, 67, 68, 69. How it is
wrought in them to will and to do, etc. p. 69, 70, 71. How it is given unto
them to repent, p. 77, 78, 79. To believe in Christ, and to suffer for his
sake, p. 76, 77. And how God puts his Laws into the minds of men, p. 95. to
the end of the Chapter.
S
That no man can be saved without the grace of God, nor no man be saved thereby
without his obedience unto it. p. 15, 16. In what nature Salvation is given by
God unto men, p. 15, 16, 49, 50. And what in general is required of all men
for the obtaining thereof, p. 55, 56, 81, 82.
To the Reader.
Reader,
THrough want of opportunity to attend the Press, several escapes have been
made in the Printing hereof (and some of them such as pervert the very sense of
the place where they are committed) most of which (in the two first sheets) I
thought good (more especially) to give thee notice of, to the end that thou
might correct them, as well as any other, which thou shall observe in the
reading of the whole.

Errata.
PAge 4. lin. 4. for from the enjoyment, read and the enjoyment. p. 18. l. 28.
for other, r. greater. p. 19. l. 18. for made in under, r. made in him under.
p. 20. l. 3. for deny, r. denies. p. 24. l. 5. for tendreth, r. renders. p.
27. l. 19. for we, r. men. p. 27. l. 22. for inveterable, r. inveterate. p. 30.
l. 5. for magnified, r. imagined. p. 38. l. 14. for oppose, r. opposes. p. 62.
l. 31. add which. p. 67. l. 1. for Israel, r. Ephraim. p. 69. l. 32. for and
happiness, r. and of obtaining happiness. p. 74. l. 11. for apprehended, r.
applied. p. 80. l. 24. for with r. by. p. 95. l. 23. for he, r. I. p. 99. l.
24. dele from this text. p. 100. l. 6. add and. p. 105. l. 1. for this, r. his.
Postscript, p. 2. l. 12. for internity, r. infirmity. ibid. p. l. 19. for
offered, r. afforded.

A DOOR OF SALVATION OPENED UNTO AL MEN.
The Introduction.
FOrasmuch as mankind comes not into this. World always to continue
therein, but is appointed after a short space to leave the same, and return to
corruption: And forasmuch as we are abundantly admonished by God in the
Scriptures of our Restoration from thence to an estate of Immortality in the
World that is to come; wherein every man shall receive according to his deeds
done in this life, and are thereupon often required to remember their latter
end, Deuteronomy. 32.20. (to wit) death and Judgment to come; to the intent that from
the consideration thereof, they may be lead so to pass the time of their being
here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. that it may go well with them at that day: It
having otherwise been (according to the saying of Christ, though here they had
gained the Dominion of the whole World) good for them that they had never been
born, Mat. 16.26. In which regard, there cannot possibly be any thing of
greater concernment unto men, than to be informed what it is that God requires
of them in this World to the aforesaid end, and how they may be enabled to the
doing thereof; because that what a man knows not, or knows not how to
perform, he can in no wise dispose or apply himself to the performance
thereof.

And yet there is not any thing wherein most men are more wanting, than in this
so necessary knowledge, to the great disquietnesse and perplexity of their
minds all their days, apprehending themselves in the greatest danger, and not
understanding how or by what means they may avoid the same; which misery (as
may justly be supposed) happens unto them chiefly by reason of their
dependence for information in the things of this nature upon those persons
only, who unduely arrogate unto themselves to be the infallible teachers of the
ignorant, and dispensers of the Oracles of God appointed and sent into the
World for all men to ask counsel of, in their Spiritual affairs. Whose
principals are such as these.

First, That by Adams transgression all men were brought under the guilt of
Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal death. The first consisting in the miseries
of this life, and the dissolution of man's nature in the end thereof. The second
in the depravation of the inward man, whereby al men are disabled from
descerning spiritual things, or choosing the things that are good, or doing
any thing pleasing or acceptable unto God. The third in the destruction and
perdition of the whole man body and Soul, in hell fire, for ever and ever.

Secondly, That of mankind thus considered God in his eternal counsel was
pleased to choose and elect for his sons and daughters only some few persons
(in comparison of the whole) whom also he decreed to deliver from the foresaid
guilt, to call them to the knowledge of himself, to work in them faith by the
effectual operation of his Spirit, and in the end to give them salvation; But
decreed to leave all the rest of mankind in that estate wherein they were
fallen; and that although by the doctrine of the Gospel, he decreed outwardly
to call them to repent, believe, etc. yet to the intent that they might not
escape the damnnation of hell, whereunto they were designed (by reason of Adams
transgression) by answering his call, and giving obedience thereunto, he
further decreed, not only to deny them the benefit of such means which he
knew to be necessary to enable them to repent and believe, etc. but he also
decreed to blind their eyes, harden their hearts, and to make their ears dull
of hearing, least at any time they should see with their eyes, hear with their
ears, and understand with their hearts, and come unto him and be healed, or be
converted and have their sins forgiven them. By which opinions pressed and
received as fundamental points in Divinity, men are generally brought to
believe, that as the damnation of some persons is altogether impossible, God
having decreed so as of necessity to work in them faith, etc. and to bring
them to eternal life; so on the contray, That the salvation of the greatest
part of men is as impossible to be obtained, God having denied unto them all
necessary means for that purpose.

The evil of which belief so necessarily diverting and disabling all men from
the prosecution and obtaining of these ends that God proposes unto them (to
wit) an exemption from everlasting death, and from the enjoyment of eternal
life; discovers unto us the error and false-hood of these doctrines before
recited, whereby these opinions are begotten and fostred in them, in regard
that it may not be conceived, that God who is truth it self, should require all
men to believe his love and favor toward them, manifestly employed in his
frequent, fervent and pathetical exhortations unto them in the Scriptures, to
hearken unto wisdom, to choose his fear, to choose life, to work out their
own salvation, with fear and trembling, etc. When as in his eternal counsel,
for Adams offense he has utterly excluded them from his love, and
irrecoverably sealed them to everlasting destruction.

And also (although it be a most certain truth that God before the World, did
elect and choose some men unto salvation, and appoint others to be punished)
yet this may justly lead us to conceive, that neither the one sort were
elected, nor the other rejected upon the grounds that these men pretend, or
upon any other than those grounds whereupon God in the Scriptures promises
unto men adoption and salvation, and denounces unto them death and
reprobation, or those where-upon Christ at the last day will graciously reward
some men with eternal happiness, and punish others with everlasting pains;
except we will set the secret and revealed mind of God at an irreconcilable
variance; or fancy two minds in God, opposite each unto the other; one whereby
he hates and abhors in time, those persons whom he loved and elected before
time; and the other whereby he loves in time those persons whom he hated and
abhorred before time: which may not be imagined.

And therefore originally, or as men were considered under the fall of Adam; we
are to conceive that God makes no difference, or distinction betwixt them, but
of his great and abundant grace in Christ Jesus, makes and opens unto them
all a door of salvation, excluding none, who through their own wilful and
voluntary disobedience and contempt of his goodness, exclude not themselves; nor
saving any but those who from a thankful apprehension of his rich mercy
revealed unto them in his Word and works, or both, do cheerfully, and
willingly submit themselves to the obedience of his will, known and understood
by them.

For the Probation of which two general heads jointly discoursed, and the
detection of the contrary opinions, exhibited in sundry objections, reasons and
texts of Scripture, the sum of that which follows is applied; beginning
with the first.

CHAP I. That God being no respecter of persons cannot choose one man in his
disobedience, and reject another; or enforce one man to believe and not another.
IF that God should necessitate the salvation of some men and not others, then
he should be a respecter of persons contrary to the Scriptures. As will appear
by several texts thereof. As first by Acts 10.34. Where Peter when he
perceived, that God had received unto adoption Cornelius a Gentile as well as
himself, and others that were Jews, he thus expresses himself. Now I
perceive of a truth that there is no respect of persons with God, but in every
Nation he that fears him and works righteousness is eccepted of him:
Arguing plainly, that if God should accept of one person working righteousness
and not of another as righteous and just as he; that therein God should be a
respecter of persons, and that the reason why God does not accept of one man
working righteousness, and reject another, is because that he is no respecter
of persons.

Secondly the same Apostle in 1 Peter 1.17. exhorting Believers to take heed
and fear least that they disobey, and displease God, groundeth his exhortation
upon the impartiality of Gods proceeding toward all men without respect of
persons; in which argument there would be no force to dissuade them from
disobedience, if that God without respect of persons could dispense with one
man in his disobedience, more than with another.

Again Paul in the Romans 2.4. to the 11. Admonishes all sorts of men, Not to
despise the riches of the goodness of God leading them to repentance; but
through patience to continue in well-doing, and not to obey unrighteousness,
for this reason. That there is no respect of persons with God. And upon the
same reason Jehoshaphat charge the Judges whom he had appointed to judge the
people, To administer righteous judgment, 2 Chronicles. 19.7. And likewise Paul,
upon the same ground instructs servants to serve their masters, not with
eye-service: but in singleness of heart as to the Lord, Ephesians. 6.9. Col. 3.25.
Clearly evincing, that God being no respecter of person, he cannot accept of
one man and reject another in the same estate and condition, (an evil which he
reproves, Jam. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.) Condemn one man for his offense, and acquit
another under the same guilt: but to all men in one and the same capacity
equally and alike, administreth his mercies and favors, reproofs and
punishments.

Which equality of proceedings toward all men is by God himself in Ezekiel.
18.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. plainly avowed in the words following. If that the
wicked will turn from his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not die, all his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not
be mentioned unto him, in his righteousness that he has done he shall live.
Have I any pleasure at all, says the Lord, that the wicked should die, and not
that he should return from his ways and live. But when the righteous turns
away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does according to
all the abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? All his
righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, in his trespass that
he has trespassed, and in his sins that he has sinned he shall die. Yet you
say the way of the Lord is not equal. Seeing then that God is no respecter of
persons, but dispenses his favor and displeasure in an equal proportion and
even measure unto every man, not prefering one before another; it must needs
thereupon, follow, that in the estate of nature wherein all men are concluded
to be alike, every man has a like esteem with him, and receives alike from
him.

And although that sometimes he affords more means of Instruction unto some
people in the estate of nature, than he does unto others; as formerly he did
to the Jews, more than to the Gentiles. Yet if it be considered that where he
gives much, he asks the more again, Luke 12.48. And that such means does
not necessarily enforce those persons to whom it is granted to the love and
obedience of the giver thereof; nor that the want of those extraordinary
means, does necessarily hinder any men from walking acceptably unto God, but
that as the Scriptures declare, the Gentiles who faithfully served God
according to the Law written in their hearts, Romans 2.15, 16, 26. etc. found as
good an acceptance with God, as the Jews that served him according to the
Letter of the Law delivered unto them; Nothing can be inferred from hence, to
prove that God in the estate of nature loves one man more than another, so as
to necessitate his salvation rather than another

Object. The Scriptures declare, Titus 3.3. etc. 2 Timothy 1.9. That God calls
and saves some men, not according to their works: but according to his Grace
which was given them before the world, but he does not so call and save all;
therefore he does respect the persons of some men above others?

For Answer to this Objection, I shall only endeavor briefly to clear the
Scripture alleged for the countenance thereof, the first of which is Tit.
3.3. etc. wherein is declared, First, what the Cretians were, before the Grace
of God in Christ was made known unto them, (to wit) foolish, disobedient,
serving diverse lusts, etc. verse. 3. Secondly, what they became, after this
Grace of God was revealed unto them, (viz.) they were regenerated and renewed
by the holy Ghost. Thirdly, the benefit that did redound unto them thereby,
(viz.) they were justified and made heirs according to the hope of eternal
life. The sum whereof, I take to be this. That the love and kindness of God
in Christ toward men, appearing unto them in the Ministry of the Apostles,
verse. 4. They were thereby taught and persuaded (not necessarily enforced by a
power which they could not resist) to deny all ungodliness and worldy lusts
(wherein before they lived) and to live righteously, soberly, and godly, in
this present evil World. And hereupon (forasmuch as the same Apostle shows
that godliness has the promise of the World to come) they obtained the hope
and assurance of eternal life. According to Titus 2.11, 12, 13. Which I take to
be the natural exposition of this text.

And whereas it is said that they were renewed by the Holy Ghost, it must not
be conceived that they were irresistably so renewed thereby: Because it is
evident that the Spirit as it is vouchsafed for these ends does not so operate
in any men. According to the Scriptures the Spirit is communicated unto men,
only these two ways.

First, Ministerially in the preaching of the Gospel, to instruct men in the
knowledge of the same; and from thence to lead them to the unfeigned obedience
thereof. In which respect Jesus Christ who spoke not of himself, but according
as the Spirit of God that was upon him, wherewith he was Anointed to preach
the Gospel, Luke 4.18. taught him, what he should say, and what he should
speak, John 12.49. says, The words that I speak unto you they are Spirit,
John 6.63. So likewise the Ministry of the Apostles, wherein they delivered
nothing but what they had heard or seen, 1 John 1.1. nor spoke otherwise than
according as the Spirit gave them utterance, Acts 2.4.) Is called the
ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. and in like manner, in 1 Pet. 3.17, 18.
the spirit is said to preach repentance to the World in the days of Noah. And
thus the natural man is instructed in the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
2.13, 14.

Secondly, Actually to those that have received and subjected themselves to the
obedience of the Gospel, (the Spirits instruction.) Repent and be Baptized, and
ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.38. Have ye received the Holy Ghost
since ye believed? Acts 19.2. In whom also after that ye believed, ye were
sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.12, 13. For ye are all the
Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, Galat. 3.26. And because ye are Sons,
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, Galat. 4.6.

By the first of these wherein the Spirit by doctrine with signs and wonders
for the confirmation thereof, Heb. 2.3, 4. Speaks to the ears and eyes of
men, graciously and lovingly striving thereby, to convert them from their evil
ways; Genesis 6.3. beseeching them by all the mercies of God to present
themselves living sacrifices unto him, holy and acceptable, which is their
reasonable service, Romans 12.1. he enforces none in any such sort, but that
possibly they may resist and rebel against him therein: according as the
Israelites are often charged. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in hearts and
ears (says Steven speaking unto them) ye do always resist the holy Ghost,
as your Fathers did, so do ye Acts 7.51.

They rebelled against, and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to
be their enemy, and fought against them, Esaias. 63.10. Yea, so far may the
wickedness of men heerin be extended, as not only wilfully and stubbornly to
resist and oppose; but most maliciously to blaspheme him, and to attribute his
very doctrines and wonders to Beelzebub the prince of Devils, Matthew. 12.24-27.
John 8.48.

Nor yet in the second place, are any of those who are actually possessed with
the holy Ghost necessitated thereby to the obedience thereof; as is manifestly
employed, first, in those many exhortations contained in the Scriptures. To
walk in the Spirit. Gal. 5.16. Not quench the Spirit. 2 These. 5.19. Nor grieve
the holy Spirit, whereby ye are sealed to the day of redemption. Ephesians. 4.30.

But secondly and more especially in those Scriptures wherein it is clearly
supposed (and by the Apostles of Jesus Christ taken for granted) that those
persons who have been made pertakers of the Holy Ghost, may fall away from the
obedience of it, Hebr. 6.4. do despite unto it, heb. 1.29. and so defile their
bodies the temples of it, as to bring the sorest destruction and condemnation
upon themselves by reason thereof. Know ye not (says the apostle) that ye are
the temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you? If any man
defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. compare here
with Heb. 10.29.

And this more evidently may serve to demonstrate that the Spirit in the
Ministry thereof does not enforce regeneration and purity in any; for if that
it should enforce purity in the unclean, much more should it preserve purity
in those that are clean, and become temples thereunto.

And therefore when it is said, That the Cretians were renewed by the holy
Ghost, it must be understood, that they were renewed thereby no otherwise than
through their diligent harkening unto and receiving the blessed doctrine
thereof, revealed unto them by the Apostles preaching. From whence it is, that
the Apostle Peter in his first Epistle the second chap. verse 22. writing unto
Believers, thus expresses himself; Having purified your own souls in obeying
of the truth through the Spirit: Plainly intimating, that no man is renewed by
the Spirit any otherwise than through their applying themselves unto the
doctrine and instruction thereof.

The other Text is 2 Timothy 1.9. (the words whereof are these) Who has saved us
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose and grace that was given us in Christ before the world.
Which will not prove that God does necessitate the faith and salvation of any
man, seeing that that the grace, that was given to the persons here spoken of
before the world, by which they were called and saved, in verse the 10. is
declared to be none other, than the grace that was manifested by Christ at his
appearing, (so also in Titus 1.1, 2, 8.) and therefore by the latter we are to
measure the former; and by the grace manifested, judge and determine what that
grace was that was given them before the world.

Now the grace of God toward mankind; manifested by Christ at his
appearance, is by Paul in Titus 2.11, 12. (before cited) thus discribed, The
grace of God (says he) that brings salvation to all men, has appeared
teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, etc. to look for the
blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ; which general description in other Scriptures is unfoulded into these
particulars (viz.) That God so loved the world that he sent his Son to be a
Savior thereof. Joh. 3.16, 17. And on purpose by his death to destroy death,
Heb. 2.14. and therely deliver man from the curse of the Law consisting
therein. Gal. 3.13. of which all men stood guilty. Romans 3.23. And by his
resurrection to bring life and immortality to light. 2 Timothy 1.10. And in that
estate to prepare mansions of glory and happiness, to be possessed of all
those that repent, believe, etc. That is to say, That love God for his grace
and mercy manifested toward them, 1 John 4.19. Which consists in keeping
his commandments. 1 John 5.3. Or in loving of Jesus Christ being revealed unto
them, and keeping his precepts. John 15.10. And that thus repenting, believing,
etc. men are required with confidence to hope, and with patience to wait for
the promised Salvation, 1 John 3.19, 20, 21. and 4.17. Titus 2.11, 12, 13. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Heb. 10.36.

This then being the substance of the grace of God manifested by Christ at his
appearing; the grace that was given to men before the world, is to be
understood as follows, (viz.) That God forth of his rich grace, pity, and
compassion, considering all mankind fallen from their first estate, and become
guilty of everlasting death; resolved to send his Son into the World, to redeem
them from thence, to restore them again to immortality, to prepare for them
therein a heavenly Kingdom, to open unto them a way thereinto, to invite them
to walk therein, and walking therein, in the end to give them the possession
thereof. According to which grace Paul and Timothy were called and saved, and
not according to their works of righteousness by the Law; which is all that
can rationally be inferred from this Scripture.

And this is further confirmed by that which follows in the 13. verse, where
Paul exhorts Timothy, To hold fast the form of sound words which he had
heard of him in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus, which exhortation
seems to be grounded upon the turning away from the truth of many in Asia,
mentioned verse 15. the which would be altogether inpertinent (as also that
caution which he gives him, 1 Timothy 1.19. To hold faith and a good conscience
whereof some had made shipwreck) If that before in the 9. verse (as it is
pretended) he had concluded that God in his eternal purpose had decreed to
necessitate and enforce his faith and salvation, for where it is known there is
no danger of miscarriage, there is no ground to exhort to beware, or to
admonish him to hold fast, when both the admonisher and the admonished
understand that God has decreed not to suffer him to let go his hold if that
he would.

Object. If that God does not enforce men to believe, and so enforce their
salvation thereby; then man is the author of his own salvation.

This consequence is badly collected: As well might it be said, that man is the
author of his own subsistence in this life, because the food wherewith his
life is mainteyned and preserved is not brought unto his hand, minced and
violently put into his mouth by the immediate hand of God.

There are two things required to the Salvation of men (viz.) Gods Grace in
Jesus Christ, and man's obedience thereunto; as no man is saved by the former
without the later, so neither can any man be saved by the later without the
former. That no man can be saved without the Grace of God in Christ, appears
in this: That no man is able to deliver himself from the curse of the Law,
raise himself from corruption to immortality, create and set up that Glorious
Fabric of the World to come, or that Heavenly Jerusalem which is to be
possessed therein, for these, as also for his own being, the means of his
Salvation, the promises of Adoption, Justification, etc. through Faith and
obedience every man must acknowledge himself to be infinitely engaged to the
unspeakable mercy and goodness of God in Christ. And that no man is saved by
the Grace of God, without his obedience and conformity thereunto, appears
from hence. That men are punished with damnation, for turning the Grace of God
into wantonness, Jude 4. For neglecting Salvation, Heb. 2.3. And walking in
darkness when light is come into the World, John 3.19. Upon which ground it
is, that Paul to Timothy thus exhorts, 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed unto thy self,
and to thy doctrine, continue therein; for in so doing thou shall both save thy
self, and them that hear thee. And yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as we our
selves, the means which is improved, and the end thereof which is Salvation,
is all of God; we are by the Scriptures instructed to attribute the honor and
glory thereof wholly unto him. He gives us (says the Apostle,) 2 Timothy 6.17.
(speaking of the things of this life procured no otherwise than through a
laborious industry in the use of means) richly all things to enjoy.

CHAP. II. That it cannot stand with the love of God unto all, to enforce some
men to believe and not all.
IF that God should necessitate the Faith and Salvation of some men and not
others, it would argue a repugnancy in the Doctrine of his love to mankind;
unto whom he has expressed an equal affection, in giving his Son a Savior
for all, and in desiring the salvation of all.

First, That God sent his Son into the World to save the World, appears by
several plain Texts of Scripture, as John 3.17. God sent not his Son in to
the World to condemn the World; but that the World through him might be saved,
and John 6.11. I am, says Christ, the living Bread which came down from
Heaven; If any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever. And the bread
that I shall give is my Flesh, which I will give for the life of the World.
Again in John 12.47. If any man, says he, hear my words and believe not, I
judge him nor, for I came not into the world to judge the world, but to save
the world. And in the 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. the Apostle says, There is one God, and
one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a
Ransom for all.

And whereas it is by some objected, That by the World here spoken of, is not
to be understood the whole lump of mankind, but only the Elect, a part
thereof; and that by this term (all) is not meant every particular man and
woman in the world, but only some of all sorts, etc. The Scripture as it were
foreseeing this objection, adds in Hebr. 2.9. That Christ tasted death for
every man. And in the 2 Pet. 2.1. That as there were false prophets among the
people: even so there shall be false teachers amongst you, who privily shall
bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them; and bring
upon themselves swift destruction. And Romans 14.15. Destroy not with thy meat
him for whom Christ dyed. And 1 Cor. 8.11. Through thy knowledge shall the
weak brother perish for whom Christ dyed. Plainly intimating, that Christ dyed
not only for the Elect (as they use to say) but for every man; for those that
deny him are destroyed, perish, and are damned.

And furthermore, whereas it is objected, That the persons here spoken of, were
not really of the number of those for whom Christ dyed; only in the judgment
of charity were so reputed.

The Scriptures affords unto us diverse evident grounds, to prove that Christ
came into the World to save every particular person therein, without exception.
As First, the Gospel is declared to be glad tidings unto all, Luke 2.10. And
Secondly, is commanded therefore to be preached unto all, Matthew. 28.19. Mark
16.15. And Thirdly, all men to whom it is preached, are required to believe it,
Mark 16.16. Matthew. 11.20. And Fourthly, Such as do not believe and give
obedience unto it, are threatened with damnation, Mat. 10.4. Joh. 3.8. And
Fifthly, those that have had it preached unto them, and refused to give
obedience thereunto, are declared to judge themselves unworthy of everlasting
life, Acts 13.46. and to neglect Salvation, Hebr. 2.3.

Now forasmuch as the Gospel in general is none other than the fruits of
Christ's death, and that Salvation in particular is otherwise altogether
impossible; it could not in the nature thereof be glad tidings unto all, nor in
equity or justice be proclaimed unto all; nor the obedience thereof be required
of all; nor disobedience thereunto be punishable in all; nor could it truly be
said, That those that are damned for their disobedience unto it, have neglected
Salvation, if that Christ had not shed his Blood for all.

And furthermore, whereas it is replied by some, That although Christ dyed for
all, yet his death was intended only to save the Elect.

It is by God declared, that he sent his Son into the world forth of his love
to mankind; to the end that thereby they might be saved, (for so says the
Scripture) God so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son, etc.
John 3.16.

And for the further confirmation of all men's Faith in this behalf, he most
solemnly professes, yea, and having no other to swear by, he swears by
Himself, That he desires nor only the Salvation of those that are saved; but
of those also who through contempt of his goodness, dye in their sins and
perish, as we may read in Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live: Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways, for why will ye dye O House of
Israel? And herewithall accords the testimonies of his servants, in the 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. This is says Paul, good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior (to wit) That we should pray for all men, verse. 1, 2. because he would
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth. And Peter in
his Second Epistle the 3. chap. 9. to the same effect says, The Lord is not
slack concerning his promise (as some men count slacknesse) but is long
suffering to us wards, not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance, and consequently to Salvation, as the end thereof.

Now as there is nothing more opposite than yea, and nay, (which as the Apostle
informs us in the 2 Cor. 1.19, 20. Is not in Jesus Christ or in the promises
of God made in under the New Covenant:) so can there be nothing more repugnant
to the Doctrine of Gods Love to mankind expressed, in sending his Son into the
Word, that the world through him might be saved, and in his oath whereby he
professes, that he would not have any thereof to perish, etc. Then this
Doctrine which says, That God does necessarily enforce some men to believe, to
the end they may be saved: and denies sufficient means unto others to enable
them to believe, to the end they may be damned. The First says, That he loves
and desires the Salvation of all alike, and would have none to perish. The
latter says, That he desires but the Salvation of a few in special, and
wills the damnation of many. The first says, That through the mercy of God
vouchsafed in Jesus Christ, every man may possibly be saved. The later says,
That no man can possibly obtain Salvation thereby, without a special
assistance vouchsafed unto him, to enable him to believe, etc. and so deny
Jesus Christ to be the Door and way to eternal life, and concludes mankind
(whom he came into the world to save) as incapable of obtaining the end of his
coming, as if he had not at all come into the world to be their Savior: And
so in a word makes the Death of Jesus Christ in relation to the Salvation of
mankind of none effect: And the solemn Oath of Almighty God, as touching his
desire of the Salvation of all, and the death of none (with reverence be it
spoken) worse then jesuiticall delusion and equivocation; which alone may serve
as a sufficient evidence against this Opinion.

CHAP. III. How the Doctrine of Gods enforcing men to believe, leads the
Reprobates to Blasphemy against God, and makes them excusable in their
condemnation.
IF God should necessitate the Salvation of some men, and not others, it would
fill the Reprobates with Blasphemy against him, by reason of their condemnation
contrary to the Scriptures. From this consideration, That in the point of
Salvation he does that for others, which he refused to do for them, and yet
professes that he has done as much for them in that behalf as he could.

That God professes, that he has done as much for the Reprobates to make them
fruitful to Salvation, as he could: The words of the Prophet Isay in his 5.
chap. do plainly declare, I will sing to my wel-beloved (says he) a Song of
my beloved touching his Vineyard: My wel-beloved has a Vineyard in a very
fruitful hill, and he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and
planted it with the choicest Vine, and built a Tower in the midst of it, and
also made a Wine Press therein; and he looked that it should bring forth
Grapes, and it brought forth wild Grapes. And now, O Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and men of Judah, judge I pray you betwixt me and my Vineyard, what could have
been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done to it? Wherefore when I
looked, that it should have brought forth Grapes, it brought forth wild
Grapes: And now go to, I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard, etc.
Under which similitude, the Prophet declares unto the Inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem; whose destruction for their unfruitfulnesse and disobedience toward
God, he denounces in the following part of the chapter, from the 8. v. etc.
That God to make them fruitful unto all good works, to prevent their
destruction, and to bring them to eternal life, had vouchsafed and granted
unto them all convenient and necessary means conducing to those ends. Insomuch
that when he appealeth unto them for judgment therein, before he proceeds
to pronounce his definitive sentence against them, they are left altogether
speechless, not having any thing to reply unto God in their own behalf;
whereas if their understandings had been informed that any necessary means had
been wanting unto them, without which they could not possibly render unto God
that which he requires of them; or that he had not vouchsafed unto them as
effectual means, as he did unto others in the like case; their answer might
have been ready in words to this effect.

Lord we are poor helpless Creatures (who alone by reason of thy decree, in
reference to Adams transgression, which we could no ways possibly prevent) are
made altogether incapable by any such means as thou affordest unto us, to do
any thing pleasing or acceptable in thy sight, no not so much as to think one
good thought; and this Lord thou know, and from the consideration thereof,
thou give unto such and such men and women, thy good Spirit; whereby they are
enabled to the doing of those things that thou requirest of us; without which
Spirit, our inflicted condemnation is altogether unavoydable. And therefore if
that we must perish, it is only for thy wills sake, and neither for omitting or
misdoing any thing that we were able rightly to do.

Whereas, therefore the Scriptures informs us, that when the greatest enemies
of Almighty God, shall take into their most strict and severest examination, all
his sayings and proceedings against them; that forth of their own mouths,
like unto those wicked Husbandmen (in the Gospel, Matthew. 21.40, 41.) they
shall fully acquit and justify him in them all. Romans 3.4. And that we are
thereby also plainly informed, That if our consciences do not accuse and
condemn us, we have peace with God, 1 John 3.21. And so consequently that then
he will not condemn us; we are hereby necessarily led to this conclusion, That
Salvation is not confered upon men through necessity: nor that it is any
otherwise to be obtained, than through men's improvement of the means granted
unto them for that purpose.

Object. Gods not doing so much for the Reprobates as he does for others, is no
direct cause of Blasphemy in them, in regard that he is not thereunto bound; so
that if they Blaspheme, it is without cause on Gods part.

Answ. First, Wherein any man's conscience accuses him not as touching such
things whereof he is accused and condemned by another, he is inevitably
compelled to contradict and gainsay in that respect: And so likewise, if that
the Reprobates should be condemned by God for impenitency and the works
thereof, and yet in their own consciences be infallibly assured that
repentance was altogether impossible unto them, they should therein directly
(nil they will they) be enforced to contradict and gainsay in such their
condemnation; which in the Scripture sense is none otherwise than Blasphemy,
Acts 13.45.

Secondly, And therefore although that God as he is Lord and Creator of all,
cannot be bound unto any of his creatures, yet considering that he does not
pretend to condemn any of them; thereby to exercise (like a cruel tyrant) his
power and prerogative upon them, but only to punish them for their voluntary
and wilful disobedience against him; for the Honor of his Justice he is
absolutely bound not to condemn them for any such thing which is impossible
unto them, because that then his Justice cannot appear nor be acknowledged by
them in their condemnation, as he has declared it shall.

CHAP. IV. How the Doctrine of Gods enforcing men to believe tendreth the
exhortations of God to the Reprobates, and his lamentations for their damnation
hateful and odious.
IF that Faith and Salvation were attainable only through an necessitating
power, and not through men's improvement of the means, it would render all the
invitations and exhortations of God to the Reprobates to hear his voice and
partake of Salvation by Christ contemptable and all his lamentations for their
refusal thereof; and their destruction thereupon ensuing, hateful and odious,
because that such exhortations, invitations and lamentations (if real) are
always most infallible arguments of the strongest affection, toward those
persons in whose behalf they are made, but are not such toward them if that
Repentance, Faith, etc. be attainable only through necessity, and not through
their improvement of the means afforded unto them, they otherwise being wholly
incapable of themselves, of obeying his exhortations, etc. And God unwilling to
grant them that assistance which he knew to be necessary for the avoiding of
their threatened destruction, notwithstanding such his lamentations

That God exhorts and inviteth the Reprobates, to hear his voice, and partake
of the salvation prepared in Christ, the Scriptures do plentifully declare
unto us, as in Proverbs 1.20, to the 24. Wisdom cries without, she utters
her voice in the streets, she cries in the chief place of the concourse, in
the opening of the Gates in the City she utters her words, saying, How long
ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity, and scorners delight in their
scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn ye at my reproof, behold I will pour
out my Spirit (or mind) unto you (as some read) I will make known my words
unto you. And Prove. 9.1. etc. Wisdom has builded her a House, she has hewn
her out seven Pillars, she has killed her Beasts, she has mingled her Wine,
she has also furnished her Table, she has also sent forth her maidens, she
cries upon the highest places of the City, who so is simple let him turn in
hither; as for him that wants understanding, she says to him, come eat of my
bread and drink of the Wine which I have mingled, forsake the foolish, and
live, and go in the way of understanding. And Matthew. 22.2. etc. The Kingdom of
Heaven is like unto a certain King, which made a Marriage for his Son, and
sent forth his Servants to call those that were bidden to the Wedding, and they
made light of it, and he sent forth other Servants, saying, Tell them which are
bidden, behold I have prepared my dinner, my Oxen and my fatlings are killed,
and all things are ready, come unto the Marriage, but they made light of it.

And that the Lord does express himself in way of sorrow and lamentation, for
the disobedience of men to his loving invitations, exhortations, and their
punishment following thereupon, is as manifest as the former. In Jer. 15.5, 6.
he thus speaks; Who shall visit thee, Oh Jerusalem? Or who shall bemone
thee? Or who shall go aside to ask how thou do? Thou have forsakes me,
says the Lord, thou have gone backward, therefore will I stretch out my hand
against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting. Psalm 81.8-11-13.
Hear O my people and I will testify unto thee; O Israel, if thou will hearken
unto me: But my people would not hearken unto my voice, and Israel would have
none of me: O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my
ways. Ezekiel. 33.11. Turn ye turn ye, why will ye dye O house of Israel?
Ezekiel. 18.32. I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord
God, wherefore turn your selves and live. Luke 19.41. And when he was come
near he beheld the City and wept over it, saying, If thou had known, even
thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace. Matthew.
23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together even
as a Hen gathers her chicken, and ye would not? Hoseah 6.5. O Epraim, what
shall I do unto thee? O Judeah what shall I do unto thee? For your goodness
is as the morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away. 2 chronicles. 26.14,
15, 16. Moreover all the chief of the Priests and the people, transgressed very
much after the abominations of the Heathen; and the Lord God of their Fathers
sent unto them by his Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending, because he
had compassion on his People, and on his dwelling place; but they mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his word, and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of the Lord arose against them till there was no remedy.

Now as nothing can possibly be said by God to render him more gracious,
loving, kind and pitiful toward miserable men, or more to endear and inflame
their affections toward him, than what is here by him expressed, being
understood according to these rules which he has given unto us to judge of his
love and goodness by; in regard that such expressions do abundantly
demonstrate that he unfainedly and from his very heart (as it were) desires
that we all should hear his voice, obey his counsel, partake of the benefits
of his Son, obtain salvation through him, and that there is no defect, nor any
thing wanting on his part that can be judged or any ways conceived necessary
or requisite to enable us thereunto, and consequently to avoid and escape the
wrath that is to come: so neither on the contrary is it possible, that the
Almighty God should present himself to his creaturs more hateful and odious
then by any blasphemy that his most inveterate and malicious enemies forth of
their deepest despite and hatred against him, can any any ways imagine or
foment, which would be by such his exhortations and lamentations, where the
obedience and duty that he requires of men to their salvation, and the
escaping of perdition in the world to come are impossible unto them: forasmuch
as then all his love and affection, pity and compassion therein manifested,
could be esteemed no other then mere mockage, hypocrisy, delusion and cruelty
in the highest degree, because that whilst he pretends, the greatest love,
he should bear the greatest hatred; whilst he pretends to seek their
salvation, he should secretly aim at and intend their damnation; whilst he
pretends to lament their misery, he should laugh thereat, rejoice and delight
therein, having from eternity without any respect to their misdoings utterly
excluded them out of his favor, shut and fast sealed them up under his wrath,
hatred and sorest indignation; and from thence denying unto them the necessary
means of their salvation, which being the true and natural consequence of
that doctrine, which asserteth salvation to be through necessity, and not
through men's voluntary improvement of the means; may admonish all men that
tender the glory and honor of God, to beware thereof.

Object. The exhortations and invitations of God to Reprobates to partake of
good things prepared in Christ are not contemptible and odious, considering
that good things are prepared in Christ, unto which the Reprobates are invited,
which retain their goodness, though they be rejected.

Answ. Its not the goodness of the thing prepared in Christ, that can free the
exhortations of God to Reprobates, to partake thereof from contempt: if that
God forth of his hatred against them, should be conceived to exclude them from
the participation of them; because that thereby the Reprobates should be abused
with a specious show of love toward them, when as nothing but hatred is
intended to them; which must needs render such exhortations odious unto them.
Absaloms good cheer renders his invitations to Ammon to eat thereof far
worse than open hatred. 2 Samuel 13.26-28.

2. Therefore I further answer, That it is impossible that God who abhors
nothing more than men's drawing near unto him with their mouths, and honoring
him with their lips, when their hearts are far from him, Jer. 6.20. Isay 1.13,
14. Amos 5.23. And who has instructed all men not to eat the bread or desire
the dainty meats of him that has an evil eye, but to contemn his
invitations (eat eat) when his heart is not with them. Prove. 23.6, 7. That he
himself should so practice, do the thing which he detesteth, and exhort men
to eat in the same case, wherein he wills them to abstain; he cannot lie,
because he is truth it self, Titus 1.1. therefore as he speaks so he
thinks, and like as he pretends so he means.

Ob. 2. Secondly, concerning the lamentations of God in respect of those that
perish, it is objected, That they serve only to express the remedilesnes of
their misery: And that he is not delighted with their punishment as they are
his creatures, but with the glory of his justice which shines in their
wickedness.

Answ. The first part of which objection (viz.) That the lamentations of God in
the behalf of those that perish, serve only to express the remedilesness of
their misery, rightly understood may be admitted; But I desire to know, whither
their misery be remediless in respect of themselves, or in respect of God?
whether for want of means sufficient vouchsafed by God to prevent their
misery, or through their wilful neglect and abuse thereof? In the latter sense
I grant the objection to be good; For he that neglects the grace of God in
Christ vouchsafed unto him in this life, by what means shall his misery be
prevented in that which is to come, damnation in hell being the penalty
thereof? From which there is neither redemption nor Redeemer made known unto
us. But that their misery should be remediless for want of mercy sufficient
vouchsafed unto them in this life for the prevention thereof, may not be
magnified, because it is inconsistant with the integrity of Gods pure nature
(discovered unto us in his Atributes of Truth, Love, Goodness, Mercy and
Justice) to make lamentations in the behalf of his perishing creatures, when
as the reason thereof lies simply and wholly in himself.

Secondly, Whereas it is further suggested, That these lamentations are
intended to express, That God is not delighted with the punishment of his
creatures, but with the glory of his justice, which shines in their palpable
wickedness; its most absurd, Because that if God should be delighted to have
men wicked as they are his creatures, he must needs much more be delighted with
their punishment, as they are his creatures, the punishment of wickedness being
the most proper exercise of his justice: And therefore if the glory of his
justice against the honor of his mercy, should engage him to deny his grace
unto his creatures, to the intent that they might be wicked, it must needs much
more engage him to punish them being wicked.

Besides, the Scriptures do plainly inform us, That God does not only lament
the punishment of his creatures, but their ingratitude and wickedness also as
the cause thereof. In Ier. 2.2. etc. To the ungrateful Israelites he thus
speaks.

I remember thee, the day of thy espousals, when thou wentest after me in the
wilderness in a Land that was not sown, verse. 5. What iniquities have your
Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and are walked after
vanities and are become vain? verse. 6. Neither said they where is the Lord
that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt? That led us through the
Wilderness through a Land of Deserts and of Pits, through a Land of drought,
and of the shadow of death, through a Land that no man passed through, and
where no man dwelt, verse. 7. And I brought you into a plentiful Country, to
eat the fruit thereof, and the goodness thereof, but where ye entered ye
defiled my Land, and made mine Heritage an abomination. The Priest says not,
where is the Lord, and they that handled the Law knew me not; the Pastors also
transgressed against me, etc. verse. 12, 13. Be astonished O Heavens at this,
and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate says the Lord. For my people have
committed two evils, they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and
hewn to themselves broken Cisterns that can hold no water. verse. 31. O
Generation, see the Word of the Lord: have I been a Wilderness unto Israel? A
Land of darkness? Wherefore say my people, We are Lords, we will come no more
unto thee? Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her Attire? Yet my
people have forgotten me days without number. Isay. 1.2. Hear O Heavens, and
give ear O Earth, for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and brought up
Children, and they have rebelled against me. The Ox knows his owner, and the
Ass his Masters cribbe: but Israel does not know, my people does not consider.
Ah! sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquty, a seed of evil doers,
Children that are corrupted, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked
the holy one of Israel unto Anger. Ierem. 13.27. Woe unto thee O Jerusalem,
will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? How much more of this
nature might be added? Such as read the Scriptures know. Now that the
goodness of God should thus cause him to lament the wickedness of men, and
endeavor their repentance; and yet the glory of his Justice in opposition
thereunto, should cause him to delight in their wickedness; and from thence to
deny them the means of repentance, cannot be supposed, because that this would
quite invert the testimony of S. James, chap. 2.13. And make judgment in God
to glory and rejoice against mercy: nor yet can it stand any better with the
purity of God, to lament the wickedness of those whom he delights to have
wicked, then for him to lament the damnation of those, whom from eternity he
has excluded from his favor, and appointed thereunto. But secondly, I answer,
That it is inconsistent with the nature of Gods justice, to delight in the
wickedness of any man, because that justice it self can neither occasion nor
take delight in any thing that is unjust, or contrary to it self; as all such
things must needs be which are reprehended and punished thereby, Romans 2.1, 3,
21, 22. Romans 3.3, 6. Therefore seeing that the justice of God is declared to be
angry with, and provoked to wrath by the wickedness, hardness of heart, and
impenitency of men, Mark 3.5. Mat. 22.4, 5, 6, 7. It cannot possibly be
pleased or delighted therein, or be any ways accessory thereunto, Either by
working wickedness in men's minds, Jam. 1.13. (As some men too rashly affirm
from these and such like Scriptures, Romans 9.18. Acts 4.28. Ioh. 12.40.) or by
prohibiting means sufficient for the prevention thereof.

Object. God could have prevented both Angels and men from falling, and could
recover all and every one of men, as well as any; which argues that he would
have some to perish.

Answ. What God as he is Almighty and Omnipotent might have done, we will not
dispute, nor is it necessary to the present point: It is sufficient to our
purpose to prove, that God vouchsafed both to Men and Angels, means sufficient
to prevent their falling; the which, I suppose no rational man will deny;
seeing that whatsoever God has imposed upon his Creatures, by the Law of
nature and necessity (as hunger, drought, weariness, eating, drinking,
sleeping, etc.) are neither offensive, nor displeasing to him; it being
impossible, that he should blame or find fault with what himself does, or
necessitateth his Creatures for to do: so that if the fall of Men or Angels
had been unavoidable by them, by the Law of their Creation, their falling had
not been sinful in them, nor should they ever have incurred the displeasure of
God in any respect, by reason thereof, no more than we now do by our eating,
drinking, etc.

God Created both Angels and men in a mutable estate, sufficiently able to do
whatsoever he required of them; and furnished them abundantly with arguments of
his love and goodness, to endear and engage them to the perpetual love and
obedience of himself; and yet withal subject, (or incident) through the want
of consideration of his goodness toward them, to fall into ingratitude and
disobedience against him, because that otherwise, neither the one nor the other
could have been capable of manifesting their fidelity and thankfulness unto
him their Lord and Creator, (as it was most necessary they should) for how
should he express his subjection and obedience, who cannot possibly disobey?
And how God could have made a creature in such an estate, wherein his love and
goodness toward him, and sovereignty over him, could not thankfully be
acknowledged by him, cannot reasonably be imagined. In which respect, it may
justly be questioned, Whether God could have done any more to prevent the fall
of angels and men, then what he did?

2. Whereas it is implied, That God has not recovered by Jesus Christ, all and
every of men (as well as any) from under the curse of Adams transgression, it
is not to be admitted, because the Scriptures do inform us, That as in Adam
all die, so in Christ, all are made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22. And that as by one
man's offense, judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon al men, to the justification of
life, Romans 5.18. And that as the first man Adam was made a living soul, so the
second man Adam is made a quickening spirit, 1 Co. 15.45. But I suppose that by
these words (God could recover all, and every man, as well as any) is to be
understood only, That God could (if he were pleased) enforce the salvation of
all, and every man, as well as some: wherein that is taken for granted, which is
denied (to wit) that God does necessitate the salvation of some particular men,
and not others (which has already, and shall hereafter be further disproved:)
And although that it cannot be denied, but that some men do perish, yet is it
not therefore to be conceived, that they so perish for want of means sufficient
to accomplish their salvation, but by reason of their contempt thereof. All the
ways of God being mercy and truth, the goodness of God is always first
exercised in providing means sufficient for the Salvation of men; but when his
goodness therein is despised, and his Grace turned into wantonness; then, and
not till then, does his righteousness and justice call for judgment and
vengeance against the despisers and contemners of him, as the Scriptures do
witness, Jud. 3, 4, 5, 6. Romans 2.4, 5. 2 Chronicles. 26.14, 15, 16. In which
respect it is that God is said to be slow to anger, Nahum. 1.3. That he does
not willingly afflict nor grieve the Children of Men, Lament. 3.33. That mercy
glories against judgment, James. 2.13. And that his tender mercies are over
all his works, Psalm. 145.9.

CHAP. V. How the opinion of enforcing Faith and Repentance in men, opposes
the Wisdom of God.
IF that Repentance, Faith, etc. were through necessity, and not attainable;
only by the improvement of the means afforded, (viz.) the works and Word of
God; it would not stand with the Wisdom of God, to expect and wait for the
Repentance of men, as the Scriptures declare he does: Because that herein he
should not look for Figs of a Fig Tree, according to the practice of Christ;
But for Figs of Thorns, and Grapes of Thistles, which is much below the
wisdom of men; and therefore much more of God.

That God does expect and wait for Repentance from men, is plainly taught in
the Scriptures, Isai. 5.1, 2, My beloved (says the Prophet, speaking of God)
has a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill; and he fenced it; and gathered out the
stones thereof; and planted it with the choicest Vine, and built a Tower in the
midst of it; and also made a Wine Press therein, and he looked that it should
bring forth Grapes, and it brought forth wild Grapes.

Luke 13.6. And Jesus spoke also this parable: A certain man had a Fig Tree
planted in his Vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none;
Then said he to the dresser of the Vineyard, Behold these three years I come
seeking fruit on this Fig Tree, and find none; cut it down, why cumbreth. it
the ground. Jer. 13.27. O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean, when shall
it once be?

Now forasmuch as wisdom does prohibit a man to expect the effect without the
cause, or more from any cause, then can be effected thereby, or to wait for a
plentiful harvest in Summer, without ploughing and sowing in the Winter; who
can conceive that Almighty God the fountain of all wisdom, yea, who is
wisdom it self, should expect and wait for repentance from men, without
vouchsafing unto them means sufficient to answer his expectation therein! No
man seeks Figs of Thorns, or Grapes of Thistles, and shall God that makes
men wise, be conceived to be so far inferior unto him in wisdom, as to seek
and expect repentance of man, it being no less impossible to be found? Surely
nothing can be less imaginable; And yet for the further prevention of such
dishonor able thoughts concerning the God of all Wisdom, the Scriptures
before cited, note unto us these two things: First, the ground upon which God
does expect repentance from men, demonstrated to us under the similitude of a
man planting his Vineyard in a fruitful Hill, planting it with the choicest
Vine, fencing it, gathering out the stones, etc. As also under the similitude
of a Husbandman, dressing and digging about his Fig Tree. Secondly, the time
in which God expects repentance from men, which by Christ; in Mat. 21.34. (in
which Parable he alludeth to Isai. 5.1) is declared to be not until the time
of Vintage, and the more plainly to declare, how far he is from expecting
from men that which is unreasonable: in Luke 13.7. he uses these words, These
three years have I come seeking fruit and find none, etc. Under which forms
of speech, the Lord does instruct us, That as a wise Husbandman does not
expect to receive fruit from his Vineyard, without the use of all necessary
means required thereunto, nor until the season of the year wherein his
expectation may be answered; so neither does he himself look for any thing more
from men, then what he affords unto them sufficient means and opportunity to
effect.

And seeing then that if repentance, etc. were no otherwise attainable then
through the irresistible operation of the Spirit: that all impenitent wicked
and ungodly persons from whom he expects repentance, should neither have
means nor any opportunity afforded unto them for that purpose, (for if that the
means thereof do necessarily accomplish the same; then all those that have
that means must needs be enforced to repentance thereby.) Therefore repentance
must be acknowledged to be obtained only through the improvement of such means
which God vouchsafes unto all, and the nature thereof be acknowledged to be
such, that possibly may be neglected by those to whom it is granted, and from
whence (repentance) the end thereof is expected, Revel. 2.21. I gave her space
(says the spirit) to repent, and she repented not.

CHAP. VI. How the commands of God in Scripture are opposed by the opinion of
Gods enforcing Repentance, Faith, etc.
THis doctrine (to wit of Gods necessitating repentance, etc.) oppose the
Commandments of God given unto men, whereby he requires them to repent,
believe in the name of his Son, work out their own salvation with fear and
trembling. Now forasmuch as God cannot oppose himself, therefore that which he
requires of men to do, must needs be proper and peculiar to them to perform.

That God requires every man to repent, etc. is evident by the Scriptures,
Act. 17.30. The times of this ignorance God winked at, but now he commands
all men every where to repent, 1 John 3.23. And this is his Commandment, that
we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.12. Work out
your own salvation with fear and trembling whereby repentance, etc. is by God
made the peculiar work and duty of man, through the improvement of the means
vouchsafed unto him for those ends, opposite whereunto is the doctrine, which
averreth repentance, etc. to be the peculiar work of God, and not of men, That
it is by God made the peculiar work of man, through the improvement of the
means, appears from hence, that God threatens condemnation to those persons,
who through the use of such means, as he affords unto them for that end, do or
did not repent, Mat. 11.20, 21, 22. Then began he (says the text, meaning
Jesus) to upbraid the Cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done,
because they repented not: Woe unto thee Corazin, Woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if
the mighty works, which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sydon, they
would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sydon, in the day of judgment then for
you. For it cannot be supposed, that God should condemn men for not doing the
thing which does not peculiarly appertain unto them to do: And that it is by
the opinion of Gods necessitating repentance, etc. made the peculiar work of
God is as evident, the opinion it self plainly intimating, Then no man by all
his best endeavors in the use of the means, can possibly attain thereunto:
which opposition cannot be applied unto God, as proceeding from him, because
that in the Scriptures it is to be observed, that he is so far from requiring
of men the doing of such things, which peculiarly belong unto himself to
perform, that in all such cases he requires them to stand still, and wait upon
him for his help and salvation. As we may read, Exodus 14.13. where by his
Almighty power he made it his work to give the people passage through the red
sea, he commanded them that they should not fear, but stand still, and see his
salvation. As also in 2 Samuel 5.23. where having before undertaken to discomfit
the host of the Philistims in the behalf of the Israelites, he commands
David that he should not move until he heard the sound of a going in the tops
of the Mulbery trees: as also again, when he was pleased to make it his
peculiar work to deliver the Israelites forth of their captivity, he commanded
them only to wait upon him with confidence for their delivery from thence, Hab.
2.3.

Secondly, Because it is also to be observed, That when he uses the
concurrence of man for the accomplishing of any work, he always
distinguishes the work of man from that which belongs to himself to perform
therein: and whatsoever he requires of them in such cases, that he will have
to be performed by them: and will not himself do it for them.

As first, when he gave the people in the wilderness water out of the rock,
Numb. 20.8. he precisely distinguishes unto Moses, the work that he required
of him thereunto. Take the rod (says he) and gather the Assembly together,
thou and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes, and
it shall give forth his water.

Secondly, Likewise when he promised to deliver the City of Jericho unto his
people, for the overthrow of the walls thereof, he plainly and evidenty
declared, what he required of them to that end, Josh. 6.3, 4, 5. Ye shall
compass the City (says he) all ye men of war, and go about the City once;
thus shall thou do six days. And seven Priests shall bear before the Ark
seven Trumpets of Rams-horns, and the seventh day ye shall compass the City
seven times, and the Priests shall blow with the Trumpets. And it shall come to
pass, that when they make a long blast with the Rams-horns, and when ye hear
the sound of the Trumpets, all the people shall shout with a great shout, and
the wall of the City shall fall.

Thirdly, And also when he made it his work to destroy the Canaanites, and the
other Nations, for their great and abominable wickedness, and to give the
possession of their Land to the children of Israel, he clearly manifested unto
them, what he would have performed on their part for the accomplishment
thereof; They were to observe his Word, and to obey his voice: As we read,
Exodus 23.20, 21, 22. and in particular to go armed before the Lord unto
battle, Number. 32.20. And he himself would cause the hearts of their enemies to
fail them for fear, and make them turn their backs upon them, until they were
destroyed, Exodus 23.27.

And this he does, Because that he will not give his glory unto another, Isa.
42.8. which would necessarily follow upon his requiring of men, and assigning
unto them the performance of those things, which immediately concerns
himself, or by his not distinguishing the work of man from his own, in such
actions, wherein his concurrence is required. In regard that no man can
possibly ascribe unto him the honor of that work, which is not evidently
discovered to be wrought by him.

Whereas therefore we find that men are absolutely commanded to repent, etc.
and are no where required to stand still, or wait upon God, until such time as
he shall necessitate them thereunto, nor yet can find any distinction made
therein, as that man should do this or that, and that God will do the rest:
repentance, as it is considered, whether in the disposition of the mind, or in
the actions, and exercise thereof; must be concluded the peculiar work of men,
by the use and improvement of the means vouchsafed unto them by God for that
purpose; the which will further appear from these grounds.

1. Because that the penitent shall rise up in judgment against the
impenitent, and condemn them; as appears by the words of Christ, in Mat.
12.41. The men of Nineveh (says he) shall rise up in judgment against this
generation, and condemn them, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas,
and behold a greater then Jonas is here; which could not be, if that repentance
were the peculiar work of God, and not of men, by the improvement of the means.
For where there is no difference in men, but that which is enforced in them by
God, the one can be no accusation against the other, in respect of any such
difference: for as he that did repent would not have repented, if he had not
been enforced: so he that did not repent, would have repented, if that he had
been enforced. And therefore the men of Nineveh, if they were enforced to
repent, can be no greater an accusation against the Jews for their impenitency
in the day of judgment, then Benjamins brethren can be against him, in respect
of the cup that was put into his sack, against his will or procurement.

2. Because the Scriptures do plainly declare, That God does not require of
men, beyond what he gives unto them, means to attain unto, as we may perceive
in the Parable of the talents, in Luke 19.15. where none are called to give an
account before Christ at his coming, but those to whom before hand he had
delivered his money to be improved, nor nothing required of any of them, but
proportionably to that which was delivered to them, to whom he gives much, he
asks the more again, according to his saying, in Luke 12.48. And so on the
contrary, From whence it does follow, That seeing repentance is required of all
men, and that all men shall be accountable to God concerning the same, That
therefore all men have the means of repentance vouchsafed unto them, and that
repentance by the improvement thereof peculiarly appertains unto them, and is
no otherwise to be obtained.

3. Because that the impenitent are charged with rebellion against God in
respect of their impenitency, which plainly argues, repentance not only to be
the peculiar work of man, but also within his power to be performed, rebellion
being none other then a wilful and stubborn refusal of that known duty which
a man is enabled to perform. And so much the words of the text do evidently
declare, Ezekiel. 12.2. Son of man (says the Lord to the Prophet) thou dwell
in the midst of a rebellious house, That have eyes to see, and see not, they
have ears to hear, and hear not. Their rebellion being demonstrated from this
ground, That they have eyes, and see not, etc. (i.e.) they know and understand
how to perform their duty, but they will not do it; according to that in Chap.
33.31, 32. He that knows to do well, and does not, to him it is sin, Jam. 4
17. Whereas that which a man understands not, nor is any ways able to
perform, is imputed to his infirmity only, which God will never lay to his
charge, Heb. 5.2. For we have an High Priest that can have compassion on the
ignorant, and of those that are out of the way; I obtained mercy, because I did
it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1.13.

CHAP. VII. That the opinion of enforcing Faith and Repentance in men, cannot
stand with the nature of the last Judgment by Christ.
THis Doctrine (namely of Gods necessitating repentance, etc. in men) is
inconsistent with the last sentence of Christ, (which as the Scriptures
declare) shall be according to every man's works; And therefore forasmuch as al
such things whereunto men are enforced by a power which they cannot resist, are
imputable only unto that power whereby they are so enforced: It must follow
that if that some men should by God be necessitated to repentance, etc. they
could be no more justified according to the sentence of Christ in relation
thereunto, then any other men could be condemned with reference to such evil
actions whereunto they were enforced by a power which they could no ways
possibly resist. To make this evident by the Scriptures, in Mat. 16.27. it is
declared by Christ himself, That when he comes in the Glory of his Father
with his Angels, he will reward every man according to his works. In like
manner, Revel. 22.12. he says, Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with
me, to give to every man according as his work shall be; agreeable unto which
is the Testimony of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
boby, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. According to
which rule, (the Scriptures aforehand describing unto us the manner of the last
Judgment, as if it were already past) we find the sentence of Christ
denounced toward all persons, Mat. 25.34. with Rev. 20.12, 13.

Secondly, That all such actions, etc. whereunto persons are enforced against
the choice and assent of their own wills, are not imputed unto them as their own
actions, will plainly appear; first, by Deuteronomy. 22.25, 26. If a man says the
Text, find a betrothed Damsel in the field, and force her; then the man only
that forced her shall die. But unto the Damsel thou shall do nothing, there
is in the Damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a man rises against his
neighbor, and slays him, even so is this matter. Likewise by the words of
the Apostle, in Romans 7.2. If I do that I would not, it is no more I that do
it, but sin that dwells in me; from which in the 24, and 25. verses, he
concludes, That God would acquit him. And thereupon in the 1. verse of the 8.
chapter, declares unto all, That there is no condemnation belonging unto men
for such actions. The reason hereof is, Because that God looks only at the
heart of a man, 1 Samuel 16.7. and always judges of him according to what he
observes therein, whether it be good or bad; what is willed and determined
therein, he reckons it as if it were done, though through want of opportunity
or ability it never be effected: from whence it is that the Apostle declares
unto us for a general rule, in the 2 Cor. 8.12. That if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according
to that he has not; which we find verified unto us by a clear instance, in
the 1 King. 8.18.19. of Gods kind acceptance of David's affection to build him
an House, though that it was never built by him, Whereas it was in thy heart
(says the Lord) to build me an house, thou did well, that it was in thine
heart; nevertheles, thou shall not build me the House, etc. And we may also
observe that Solomon, who by Gods appointment did build it, received not a
greater reward for his action therein, then David did for his affection
thereunto: And so on the other side, Christ informs us, That the things that
defile a man, are only those that proceed from his heart, Out of the heart,
says he, Mat. 15.19, 20. proceeds evil thoughts (he speaks not of those
that are suggested, or that at unawares arise therein, and are forthwith
quenched, and suppressed, for these defile no man) but of those that are
conceived and harbored therein, which when opportunity serves, break forth
into murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies,
these defile the man; upon which ground it is, That the Scriptures declares
David to be a man according to Gods own heart, save only in the matter of
Vriah, 1 Kings 15.5. Wherein deliberately and with purpose of heart (as must
needs be conceived) he chose the thing which he knew to be evil, which in
other cases (wherein his actions much swerved from the rules of perfect
justice) he did not; and therefore is neither blamed nor accused for them.

Object. God does not justify men for Faith, but by Faith: nor reward them for
their works, but according to their works, the reward of good works being
Grace belonging to Adopted Children, not to servants for the work done.

Answ. The distinction betwixt Justification by Faith, and for Faith, is
altogether vain: seeing that he that is justified by Faith, or by reason
thereof, which is all one, is so justified for Faith: Because that without
Faith he cannot please God, Hebr. 11.5, 6. nor obtain acceptance with him. Thy
Faith, says Christ to the woman, has saved thee, Luke 7.5. The like may be
said concerning the distinction betwixt reward for works, and according to
works; in regard that he that is rewarded according to his works, is so
rewarded for his works: as he that is rewarded according as he has fed,
relieved, and feasted the poor, that were not able to feast him again, (as
Christ has promised in Luke 14.13, 14.) or as he that is rewarded according as
he has given a cup of cold water in the name of Christ, (having no better in
his power to give) he is so rewarded for that he has so done, by reason that
otherwise he should have received no such reward.

And yet it is not to be denied but that Justification through Faith, and
reward of good works, originally proceeds from the mere Grace and special
favor of God in Jesus Christ, considering that by the Law we can lay claim
unto no such thing, but must acknowledge our selves, according to that
Covenant, guilty of everlasting death, or the dissolution of our natures for
ever in the Grave; and therefore whatsoever we either do or shall receive from
God more or less than this, as our present being in this life, the enjoyment
of the Creatures, a time of repentance, with the means thereof, as redemption
from the curse of the Law, Resurrection to another life, Adoption and Salvation
through Faith, or conformity to the will of God, known and understood by us;
must be attributed to the alone Grace of God in Jesus Christ, through whom he
has obtained these things for us, and Covenanted and granted to bestow there
upon us. According to which distinction betwixt the Covenants, is that
distinction which runs through the Rodie of the New Testament, betwixt
righteousness and righteousness, works and works, reward and reward, to be
understood according to the first covenant, There is none that does good, none
righteous, but all have sinned and are fallen short of the Glory of God,
accursed, dead and excluded from all happiness for ever. But in relation to
the second Covenant made with us in Christ, as we were considered in this
estate; we are through his death and resurrection redeemed from death, made
alive from the dead, under a Law of liberty suitable to our frailty, and capable
of working righteousness thereby, under the promises of Adoption, of reward of
good works, and of reigning together with God and Christ for ever and ever. It
does not therefore follow, That because men obtain Justification and Adoption
through Faith, and are rewarded for their good works, that therefore all these
things are not obtained through Grace; seeing that it is from the unspeakable
Grace of God, that we who were dead do live, that we enjoy such precious
promises, and upon such gracious terms, whereby we are or may be made
partakers of them.

And yet although that Justification and Salvation, are thus founded upon the
Grace of God, yet has every man through the performance of those things
whereunto the same is promised as just, a right and claim thereunto, as our
first Father Adam could have had unto life by obedience to the Law, as the
words of the Apostle in Hebr. 6.10. do plainly witness, God is not
unfaithful (says he) to forget your work and labor, of love, the
righteousness of God is engaged to perform whatsoever, forth of his goodness
he has promised.

And as for the pretense of some (gathered from these and such like Scriptures,
1 John 5.10, 11. Luke 27.) That Salvation is freely bestowed upon men without
any thing required on their part thereunto; their mistake therein is clearly
discovered from these grounds.

1. That the Apostles of Jesus Christ who handled not the Word of God
deceitfully, but commended themselves to every man's conscience, as in the sight
of God, 2 Cor. 4.2. do every where in Answer to the Question, What men should
do to be saved? Declare, That men must repent and believe, Acts 2.37, 38. Acts
16.30, 31.

2. From the practice of the Apostles themselves, who being fully instructed in
the knowledge of the Grace of God, Acts 20.27. yet strove to obtain the Crown
of eternal life, And not un-necessarily, as men beating the Air, 1 Cor. 9.25,
26, 27. with 2 Timothy 2.5.12.

3. From the tenure of the promises, which all run conditionally; I will give
to him that is a thirst of the water of life freely, Romans 20.6. Be thou
Faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge will give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all
those that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. Rev. 3.11. Rev. 3.24.

4. And lastly, from hence that Salvation it self is entitled, The inheritance
of reward, Col. 3.24. Forasmuch as reward does always presuppose something
either done or to be done, in recompense whereof, the same is given. Moses
chose to suffer with the people of God, because he had respect to the
recompense of reward, Hebr. 11.25, 26.

5. And although in 1 John 5.10, 11. It is said that God has given us eternal
life; yet in verse. the 12. it is also said, That this life is in his Son, and
that he that has it must have the Son. And the same Apostle in his 2 Epist. v.
9, plainly declares, That whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, has neither the Father nor the Son; He is the author of
Salvation to those that obey him, Hebr. 5.9.

And as for Luke 1.77. where it is prophesied, That John the Baptist should
give knowledge of Salvation to the Jews, by the remission of sins. The
meaning thereof is best interpreted by the tenor of his own preaching unto
them; whereby they are taught not to expect either remission of sins, or
Salvation otherwise then through repentance, and amendment of life, Luke 3.3.
Mat. 3.8, 9, 10. Luke 3.8. according to that in Acts 3.19.

Object. Faith being the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Salvation in reference
whereunto it is given, is the gift of God also.

Answ. First, It is not clear in this Text that the Apostle does intend Faith
to be the gift of God; but rather that salvation is the gift of God, and in
what nature Salation is given by him, has been showed before.

2. But admit that Faith is the gift of God; it does not therefore follow, that
Faith whereunto Salvation is promised is the gift of God; for Faith in the
Scriptures is diversely taken: As first, it is taken for the Doctrine of Faith;
in which respect, they that have preached the same, are said to preach the
Faith, Galat. 1.23. and those to whom it was preached, are said to hear the
Faith, Gal. 3.5. and those that received and subjected themselves thereunto,
are said to be obedient to the Faith, Acts 6.7. Secondly, it is taken for the
bare credence and belief of the Doctrine of Christ; in which respect, The
Rulers that loved the praise of men more than the praise of God, are said to
believe in Christ, John 12.42, 43. And thus the Devils are also said to believe
and tremble, James 2.19. Thirdly It is taken for the knowledge, love and
obedience of the Doctrine of Christ; In which respect, those that have departed
from the love and obedience thereof, are said to make Shipwreck of Faith and a
good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19. And lastly, it is taken for an assured hope and
expectation of eternal life: begotten in men through a conscientious privity
of the truth of their repentance, sincerity of their obedience, and the
gracious promises of God made thereunto (according as the words of the Apostle,
in 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. before rehearsed do declare.) Now although that Faith in the
first and second acceptance; whereunto the Apostle in these words, (viz.) (It
is the gift of God) may have respect) be acknowledged the gift of God, and be
after a sort necessarily imposed upon men (especially when as the Doctrine of
Christ is clearly and evidently demonstrated unto them (by the miraculous power
of God, as it was by the Ministry of the Apostles.) Yet in the third
acceptance, by which alone men are entitled to Salvation, it cannot from
hence be concluded to be the gift of God; it being begotten in men only through
a due and serious consideration of the truth, certainty, worth, and excellency
of the Doctrine thereof discovered unto them: For like as a soft answer turns
away wrath, and a soft tongue breaks the bone, (according to Prove. 15.1. and
25.15.) Even so the unspeakable love and goodness of God appearing unto men,
received into, and laid up in their hearts, (as it is required in Deuteronomy. 6.6,
11, 18. Prove. 4.4.) begets in them a love toward God, obedience to his
Word, crucifieth them to the world, casts down imaginations and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and brings into
captivity every thought, to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Ephesians. 6.16,
17. From whence it is that those persons who have had the mercy and goodness
of God demonstrated unto them (in a more abundant measure than others) and have
not thereby been subdued to the love and obedience of him, are charged with
forgetting God their Savior and maker, with forgetting his works, Psalm.
106.21, 13. Deuteronomy. 32.18. With forgetting that they were purged from their old
sins, 2 Pet. 1.9. Are called forgetful hearers of the word, Jam. 1.25. and
resembled to a man beholding his natural face in a glass, and straight way
forgets what manner of man he was, Jam. 1.23, 24. plainly arguing that the
consideration of the love and goodness of God toward men, is the only and
effectual means to beget the love and obedience of God in them.

3. But let it be granted, That the Apostle in these words does conclude, that
faith whereunto Salvation is given, is the gift of God, yet it will not from
thence follow, That it is by him necessarily begotten or enforced in any men.

1. Because that in the Scriptures, that is declared to be given, which is only
offered to men's acceptance to receive or refuse, as themselves shall please:
So Ephron the Hittire gave the field of Machpelah, and the Cave that was
therein to Abraham, Genesis 23.11. And the soldiers that crucified Christ, gave
him to drink wine mingled with myrrh, but neither the one nor the other of
them, were thereby possessed with that which was so given unto them, because
they refused to accept thereof, Genesis 23.12, 13, 17. Mark 15.23.

2. That in the Scriptures is said to be given by God unto men, which is no
otherwise obtained, then through a free, voluntary use and improvement of such
means, which he has vouchsafed unto them for those ends. These are the
children, says Jacob, Genesis 33.5. which God has graciously given unto thy
servant, he gives food to all flesh. Psalm. 136.25. He gave the Israelites
their corn, and their wine, and multiplied their silver and their gold, Hos.
2.8. He gives us (says the Apostle) richly all things to enjoy, 2 Timothy 6.17.
And thus God has given eternal life to all men in his Son, 1 John 5.10, 11. So
God being said to give faith unto men, when he only affords unto them the
means thereof, Act. 17.31. That faith which is obtained by the use of that
means, must needs be acknowledged to be his gift also. And therefore as the
Scriptures testimony, that salvation is of grace, and the gift of God, is no
sufficient evidence to prove, that therefore it is conferred upon men any
otherwise then in the nature of a reward and recompense of their obedience,
repentance, etc. So neither is the Scriptures evidence, That faith is the gift
of God, a sufficient ground to prove, that therefore it is either infused into
men's hearts by the Spirit of God, or intruded upon them by the irresistible
operation thereof, or that it is any otherwise obtained by them, then through
the voluntary use and improvement of the means that God has vouchsafed unto
them for that purpose.

It is declared, That God gave the Israelites bread from heaven, and fed them
thereby, Psalm. 78.25. Joh. 6.31. Deuteronomy. 8.3. And yet none will from thence
affirm, That he either inspired them therewith, or enforced them to eat
thereof, or that their sustentation thereby, did not wholly depend upon their
own voluntary gathering and applying the same thereunto, according as the Lord
commanded, Exodus 16.16. Numb. 11.8.

To conclude therefore this Argument seeing (as it was showed before) that God
only regards the hearts of men. And that his love and displeasure is directed
toward them, according to that which he observes to be chosen or refused
therein, virtue and vice, life and death proceeding from thence, Life and death
is therefore said to be in the power of the tongue, Prove. 18.21. And that by
our words we shall be justified, and by our words we shall be condemned, Mat.
12.37. because that the tongue is presupposed to be the infallible Interpreter
of the heart, and that nothing is uttered by the one, which is not first
chosen, and determined in the other, Mat. 12.34. which plainly argues, That
all virtue and vice proceeds from thence, and that every man's judgment in
the day of Christ, shall be, not according to such thoughts or actions
whereunto they were enforced, but according to that which was freely chosen,
embraced and accepted by them in their own hearts.
Pro. 4. 23. If that faith and repentance did not proceed from the free and
voluntary choice of man's will, as thereby in the sight of God he should not be
distinguished from the impenitent and disobedient; so neither should he find
any favor or acceptance with God by reason thereof, or receive any reward
from him at the last day for the same. If I do this thing willingly (says
Paul) I have a reward, 1 Cor. 9.17. but otherwise not, as his words do clearly
imply.

And therefore to the end that all men may obtain eternal life, life and death
being by Almighty God set before them, Deuteronomy. 30.19. it concerns them to
hearken diligently to wisdoms voice, calling upon them to choose the fear of
the Lord, Prove. 1.29. And from a thankful apprehension of his goodness
discovered unto them, with uprightness of heart to apply themselves to the
obedience of him; and that whatsoever they do, to do it willingly, and not
grudgingly, nor of necessity, knowing that he only loves the cheerful giver:
from whence the widows mite, being offered with affection, becomes a most
acceptable sacrifice unto him. He desires not to reap, where he has not first
sowed, yet he expects from us, according to the talents delivered unto us,
the which therefore every man ought faithfully to improve. And in so doing,
when the Lord shall return to take an account of his servants, he may assuredly
conclude, That he will graciously embrace and receive him with this heavenly
Eulogy, Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord, when the wicked and slothful servant shall be cast into outer darkness.

CHAP. VIII. Serves for the clearing of such Texts of Scripture, which seem to
imply a disability in men to improve the means vouchsafed unto them, for their
salvation.
AGainst that which has been said there are two main Objections, which require
some further Answer to be given unto them; The first of which is grounded upon
such Scriptures which seem to imply a disability in men to improve the means
vouchsafed to their salvation: The second is grounded upon such other
Scriptures which seem to import repentance, faith, etc. to be necessitated in
men by the irresistible power of God.

The Scriptures appertaining to the first of these Objections are these and
such like, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 2.14. John 6.44. 2 Cor. 3.5. which in order
I shall endeavor to clear, and so proceed to those which belong to the second.

1. From the first of these Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. the words whereof are as
follows (And you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins. Where
in times past ye walked, according to the course of this world, according to
the prince of the power of the air, etc. fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, and
of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath) Its conceived that a
man deprived of his natural life, is not more incapable of performing the
actions of living men then a man in his natural condition, is of performing any
thing required of him to his Salvation. Which will appear very incredible, if
that we do but consider, that the Scriptures do evidently declare, that God
requires not of any men, but according to the talents delivered unto them, he
requires not five, where he gives but two, nor two, where he gives but one,
nor yet one, where he has not vouchsafed any: If ye were blind (says Christ)
ye had not sin, John 9.41.

2. Therefore secondly, I answer, That although that this text does declare,
that the Ephesians were dead in trespasses and sins: yet it does not argue that
they were necessarily dead therein, or that they might not have avoided the
same, for men's being bad is no good ground to prove that they could not be
good. If that they were necessarily such, it must be either by reason that they
were such by birth, or else through want of instruction, but that they were
such by birth, cannot be gathered from this text.

1. Because that those sins and trespasses, wherein they are said to be dead,
are declared to be such, as relate to their conversation, and time of ripe age,
they walked according to the course of this world, the prince that rules in
the air, fulfilled the desires of the mind, etc. which is not incident to the
estate of infancy.

2. It was observed before, That all sins have their original in the wills of
men; and then forasmuch as children cannot distinguish betwixt good and evil,
Deuteronomy. 1.39. they cannot possibly choose the thing that is evil; and therefore
cannot be guilty thereof, much less dead therein.

If it be objected, That they are said to be the children of wrath by nature.

Its answered, That by nature in this place probably may be understood that
fleshly, sensual or devilish course of life, wherein they had their
conversation (for so the word natural in the 3. Chapter of James the 15.
verse, compared with the margent, appears to be rendered) in reference unto
which, they may here be said, to be children of wrath: But if that thereby we
must understand their estate by birth, then in that respect are they to be
esteemed none otherwise the children of wrath, then as they were subject to the
wrath or curse of mortality, inherent to their natures by their descent from
Adam By wrath in this place cannot possibly be understood the condemnation of
hell, because that punishment relates to the resurrection, which could not have
been had not Christ died and rose again; and therefore the curse of the fall
(of which only we are chargeable by nature) must of necessity end in the grave,
and the being of fallen Adam, there ceasing, no punishment beyond the same can
be inflicted. And therefore the wrath or condemnation of hell must of necessity
be proper to the being that is to come, and the reward of disobedience in the
second Adam, and not of our fall in the first Adam.
. From whence being ransomed by the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, the
more to endear them unto him for his goodness toward them therein, the
Apostle in this place may put them in mind thereof.

And as they were not dead in trespasses and sins by birth: So neither were
they dead therein through want of divine illumination or demonstration (though
that neither the Mosaical Law, Doctrine of the Prophets, or of Christ, were
delivered unto them) as appears by Act. 14.17. where we read that Paul and
Barnabas, having before reproved the men of Lystra, for walking after strange
gods, and sacrificing unto them (to convince them, and discover to us, that it
was not through want of divine evidence that they so walked) They declare, that
God did not leave himself without witness, that he only ought to have been
worshipped by them, in that he did them good, and gave them rain from heaven,
filling their hearts with food and gladness: and the same Apostle further
declares, in Romans 1.19. That that which may be known of God was manifest unto
them (to wit the Gentiles) for God showed it unto them: For the invisible
things of him (says he) from the Creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead.

And yet the more fully to evidence this truth, in verse. 21, it is plainly
declared, that by the aforesaid means they did attain to the knowledge of God,
and of that worship that he required of them, when they knew God, says the
text, they glorified him, not as God, neither were thankful, etc. But knowing
the judgment of God, that they which did commit such things, were worthy of
death, did not only do the same, but took pleasure in those that did them,
verse. 32. And thereupon in Chap. 2.1, 3. are declared to be without excuse,
both in their disobedience and condemnation.

2. This is yet more clearly demonstrated by the words of the Apostle, in Chap.
2.14, 15. When the Gentiles (says he) which have not the Law, do by nature
the things contained in the Law: these having not the Law are a Law unto
themselves, which shows the work of the Law written in their hearts; their
consciences also bearing them witness, and their thoughts in the mean while
accusing and excusing one another in the day, when God shall judge the secrets
of men by Jesus Christ. In which words these two things are plainly declared;
First, That whatsoever was necessarily required of them to their salvation, was
fully known unto them. Secondly, That the things so known by them, was within
their power to perform and practice. That their duty was fully known unto
them, he demonstrateth from these two grounds.

1. That some of them did perform the same, which according as he argues,
they could not have done, had they been ignorant thereof, when the Gentiles
(says he) do by nature the things contained in the Law; they show thereby,
that they have the work of the written in their hearts.

2. From hence (viz.) that those of them which did not perform the things
required of them to their Salvation, had therein consciences accusing them at
present (and should accuse them) by reason thereof, in the day when God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ; the which should be impossible, were
not the same things known and understood by them, as we may perceive by a very
plain instance, in Genesis 20. where we read, That Abimelech having taken unto him
Abraham's Wife, upon his denying her to be his Wife, and of Gods threatening him
with death, in case that he did not restore her again unto him, he not being
privy to himself of any evil committed therein; In verse. the 4. and 5. thus
replieth in his own defense, Lord will thou also slay a righteous Nation? Said
he not unto me she is my sister? And she, even she her self said, He is my
brother; in the integrity of my heart and innocence of my hands I have done
this; the which grounds also serve plainly to demonstrate the truth of the
later position, (viz.)

2. That whatsoever was required of them to their Salvation, was within their
power to be performed by them. For by the same reason that some performed them
by nature; others in the same condition might have done so likewise, and
consciousnesse that they could not perform them, being known unto them, would
quiet their minds both in this world, and at the day of Christ, as much as
consciousnesse of their ignorance thereof could. For the conscience of a man in
the omission or misdoing of his duty not understood, acquitteth him therein
only upon this ground, That the doing or right performance thereof was
impossible unto him, notwithstanding his utmost endeavors; the which ground of
impossibility, to perform his duty will appease his conscience in the omission
thereof, in any other case whatsoever. And thus this Objection with the ground
thereof is taken away.

The second text is, 1 Cor. 2.14. the words whereof are these: But the natural
man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishnes
unto him, neither can he know them because they are Spiritually discerned; from
whence it is supposed that no man in the estate of nature, not endued with the
Spirit of God, can possibly understand or do any thing required of him to his
Salvation.

1. The groundlesnesse of this supposition was clearly disproved before, by the
testimony of the Apostle, concerning the Gentiles, their doing by nature the
things required of them to their Justification and Salvation.

2. But yet the more fully to take away the ground thereof. By the things of
the Spirit in this place must needs be understood, either such things which are
peculiar to the Spirits revelation to those which after their believing have
received the same, according to John 16.12. where Christ tells his Disciples,
That he had many things to say unto them, which they could not then ( viz.
before the Spirit was given unto them) bear: How be it (says he) the Spirit of
Truth when he is come, he will guide you into all Truth, and will show you
things to come. Or else secondly, By the things of the Spirit must be
understood the Doctrine of the Gospel in general, mentioned chap. 1.17,
18.21.2.4.5. By the wisdom of the World is accounted foolishness. If that the
things of the Spirit be taken in the first acceptance, (as may be conceived
from the 12, and 13, verses, where the Apostle intimates, that the things
whereof he here speaks, were none other then what was revealed or taught unto
himself and others, by the Spirit which they had received) then this text
pretends not at all to prove, that men in the estate of nature cannot
perceive or do any thing required of them to their Salvation, but only that
none can understand the mysteries or secrets of the Kingdom of God, until
first they believe the Gospel, Mat. 13.11. and are Baptized with the Holy
Ghost; which the World cannot receive, John 14.17. Nor yet secondly, If that by
the things of the Spirit are understood the Doctrine of the Gospel in general:
it will not thereupon follow, that a man in the estate of nature, by the
exercise of his understanding, cannot perceive or receive the knowledge
thereof, when it is plainly preached, and by the evidence of the Spirit
demonstrated unto him. Seeing it is manifest by the Scriptures, that the very
worst of natural men, The Rulers, Scribes and Pharisees, have attained to the
knowledge of the most fundamental points of Christianity; under which the
whole Doctrine thereof is comprehended. As 1 They believed that there was a God.
2. They believ that Jesus Christ was the Messiah and Savior of the World, and
so consequently that his whole Doctrine was none other then the undoubted
Oracles of God, John. 2.23, 24, 25. John 12.42, 43. And thirdly, They believed
the resurrection of the just and of the unjust, Acts 23.7, 9. Acts 24.15. And
the Gospel being thus understood by men, they are thereby sufficiently enabled
to the obedience thereof; whence it is that the Scriptures unto such persons
speaks on this wise, Receive not the grace of God in vain; having these
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
and perfect holiness in the fear of God: He that knows to do well, and does
not, or that knows his masters will, and does it not, to him it is sin, and he
shall be beaten with many stripes. Such manner of speech always presupposing
an ability in the persons to whom it is directed to improve the same to the end
thereof.

Wherefore we are not to conceive (that because it is said, The natural man
perceives not the things of the spirit, nor can receive them) that therefore
no man destitute of the spirit can possibly understand or give obedience to the
Gospel of Christ, when it is evidently (in the preaching thereof) demonstrated
unto them. But we are thereby given to know, That no man whatsoever measuring
the Gospel of Grace, teaching him to deny al ungodlines and worldly lust, and
to live righteously, soberly and godly in this present world, etc. Tit. 2.11,
12.) by the natural, earthly and sensual principles and wisdom of the world. S.
John in his 1 John 2.15. exhorting not to love the world, nor the things that
are therein, in ver. 16, teaches us, what he would have us to understand
thereby (viz.) the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of
life; whereby we are also taught to understand, whereunto the wisdom of the
world, so often spoken of in the first, second and third Chap. of the 1 Cor. is
to be confined ( viz.) to the promoting and accomplishing the foresaid ends,
because that it cannot extend beyond it self, or direct men unto any thing that
is not comprehended therein, the which may serve to admonish all men to beware
of branding the virtuous and just principals, whether of the Heathens, or any
other persons whatsoever (though learned in the book of Creation only) with the
odious infamy of worldly wisdom: An evil too ordinary in our times.
(teaching him to deny all godliness and goodness in this world, and to live
according to the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and pride of life,
1 John 2.16. can possibly receive the same, and become obedient thereunto, but
must reject it as foolishness. God and the world, the wisdom of God, and the
wisdom of the world, being so directly opposite and contrary each unto other,
That whosoever will love the one, must hate the other; or that will embrace the
one, must reject the other. If any man, says James, will be a friend to the
world, he must be an enemy unto God, James 4.4.

Joshua having put it to the Israelites choice, whether they would serve the
Lord, or the gods that their Fathers had worshipped, Chap. 24.15. And they
having in answer thereunto declared, That they would serve the Lord only, verse.
18. He replieth unto them, verse. 10. in these words. (Ye cannot serve the Lord)
wherein his meaning is not, that it was impossible for them to serve the Lord
(for then he would not have put it to their choice, whether they would serve
him or not) but his meaning is, that they could not serve him acceptably,
unless they did wholly cleave unto him, and reject Idols, verse. 14.19. So
likewise in this place, when the Apostle says, That this natural man cannot,
receive the things of the Spirit of God (that is to say, approve and subject
himself to the wisdom and instruction of God, contained in the doctrine of the
Gospel) we may not suppose that thereby he concludes it absolutely impossible
for them so to do; but impossible only so long as they retain and nourish in
themselves the vicious wisdom of the world; whereby they are instructed to
gainsay, resist and oppose all godliness, virtue and honesty.

The third Text, is, Ioh. 6.44. The words whereof are these, No man can come
unto me, except the Father that sent me draw him. From whence it is ordinarily
supposed, That no man can believe in Jesus Christ, except that he be
necessarily enforced thereunto by an immediate exercise or operation of the
power of God upon his soul.

For answer whereunto, I desire that it may be observed, that this word (draw)
whereupon the whole weight of this Objection stands, is diversely understood
in the Scriptures, and is not always taken for a necessary compultion, as it
is here supposed, but ordinarily for an argumentative persuasion only, as
appears by Act. 5.37. Where (speaking concerning one Judas, a seducer of the
people) it is said, That he drew away much people after him. As also by the
words of the Apostle, in Act. 20.30. where he declares to the Church, That
from amongst themselves men should arise, speaking perverse things, and should
draw away Disciples after them. And that God only draws men to the love of
himself, the Faith and Obedience of Christ, by the discovery of his goodness
toward them, and of the danger of their ingratitude toward him, does
evidently appear, by these following Scriptures, Hosea 11.3, 4. where
(concerning backsliding Israel, whose goodness like the morning dew passed away)
the Lord thus speaks, I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their
arms, but they know that I healed them, I drew them with cords of a man, with
bands of love, and I was to them as one that takes of the yoke on the jaws,
and I laid meat unto them. And in Heb. 10.38, 39. The just shall live by faith;
but if any man draw back (says the Lord) my soul shall have no pleasure in
him. But we are not of those (says the Apostle) that draw back to perdition,
but of those that believe to the saving of their soul.

In which Scriptures are discovered (besides the means whereby God draws men)
these two things.

1. That God draws all men, the backsliding, and those that draw back to
perdition, as well as those that believe to the saving of their souls. And

2. That he so draws none, but that possibly they may draw back to perdition
(as Ephraim, and those others supposed in the later Text) it being otherwise to
no purpose, to present men, with the danger of drawing back, nor would it be
any matter of commendations, either in the Apostle, or that number wherewith he
joyneth himself, that they did not draw back, as well as others: For what
praise is it not to draw back, when as it is impossible so to do.

Secondly, The words of the Text, compared with the former, and following
verses, do clearly import, That the drawing of the Father, whereof Christ
speaks, consists only in external means, and doctrinal instruction
delivered unto men by his preaching. In verse. 41. Christ declaring himself to
be the living bread, (or bread of life) come down from heaven, which gives
life unto the world, and that by eating thereof, a man should live for ever (of
which he had spoken before, verse. 33.35.) And the Jews carnally weighing his
words therein, and not considering that he spoke not unto them concerning
material bread, wherewith their natural lives should be sustained. In verse. 41,
42. Murmur against him, saying, Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose
father and mother we know? How then says he, I came down from heaven?
Whereupon in verse. 43, 44, 45. Christ that he might remove from before them the
occasion of their stumbling at him, by reason of his parentage, and instruct
them by what means they should attain to the Belief and Obedience of his
Doctrine; answers them to this effect, Although that my father and mother be
known unto you, yet notwithstanding, murmur not against me, because I said, I
am the bread which came down from heaven, to give life unto the world: For it
is not my bodies descending from heaven, but the promised Grace of God touching
your Redemption, Resurrection, and eternal Salvation through my Death, and
Obedience to my doctrine, which I intend, when I so spoke unto you, the which
you cannot receive, except my Father which sent me, draw you, according as it
is written in the Prophets, They shall be all taught of God: Every man
therefore which has heard and learned of the Father ( viz. received his
instruction, and submitted themselves thereunto) comes unto me. And then in
verse. 46. least that he should be mistaken in what he had here said concerning
the Fathers drawing and teaching, and be thought thereby to affirm, That none
could believe him to be the bread of life, and Savior of the world, except
that the Father immediately in his own person, or by his spirit should instruct
them therein, and enforce them thereunto. He subjoyneth these words, Not that
any man has seen the Father at any time, save he that is of God, he has seen
the Father; intimating thereby; That although that the Father teaches men, yet
he teaches them not personally or immediately, but mediately by the Ministry
of his Son, who is God with us, Mat. 1.23. and sent into the world, to the
end, that we may be taught of God by him, according to these plain Scriptures,
Ioh. 1.18. Heb. 1.2. Ioh. 7.16. Ioh. 12.49, 50. So that when it is said, That
none can come unto Christ, except that he be drawn thereunto by the teaching of
the Father; The meaning thereof is only this, That no man can receive Jesus
Christ to be the Savior of the world, and become obedient unto him, except
that he hear and learn, be drawn and persuaded thereto by the instruction of
the Father, in the Ministry of his Son.

The fourth Text alleged to prove men incapable of improving the means of
salvation, is, 2 Cor. 3.5. The words whereof are these, Not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God.

1. To which I answer, first, That this Scripture is least of all to the
purpose for which it is alleged, seeing that it is not pleaded, that of our
selves, as of our selves, or as we are men simply considered, without either
having the Law written in our hearts, or some discovery made unto us of our
deliverance from mortality and happiness in the world to come, to think any
good thought, either toward God, or of reforming our selves according to the
rules of virtue or Christianity. It being according to the testimony of the
Apostle, if that the dead were not raised, and consequently no felicity to be
expected after death, our only vvisdome to eat and drink, to free and acquit
our selves from all manner of troubles and sufferings whatsoever in this
world (as for conscience sake) 1 Cor. 15.32. with the 19.31, 32. To fill our
selves with costly wine and ointments, and to let no flower of the spring pass
by us, to crown our selves with Rose-buds, before they be withered, and to
leave tokens of our joyfulnesse in every place, it being our portion and only
lot, Wisd. 2.7, 8, 9. Its through Faith only in the Resurrection and eternal
Salvation, that we overcome the world, 1 John 5.4. The cross of Christ
crucifieth us to the world, Gal. 6.14. The blood of Christ, or the blood of
the Covenant sanctifies us in the world, Heb. 16.29. And we love God, and
keep his Commandments, because he has commended his love unto us, by sending
his Son into the world, that we might live through him, 1 Ioh. 4.19. with v. 9,
10. and cap. 5.3.

But the intent of the Apostle in this place does manifestly appear to be only
this (viz.) That neither he himself, nor any other of the Apostles were of
themselves, sufficient to think or conceive that glorious Ministry that was
committed unto them. For having in the 3. verse declared, That the Corinthians
were the Epistle of Christ ministered by them, not written with ink, but with
the Spirit of God, not in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of their
hearts, least that they should think of them, above that which was meet, 1
Cor. 4.6. And ascribe the honor of this ministration unto them, as if that
they had not received it, 1 Cor. 4.6, 7. In the fifth and sixth verses, he
adds these words, Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing, as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, who has made us able
Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit. And
therefore in 1 Cor. 4.1. desires, that they should account of them only, as
Ministers and Stewards of these things.

So that all that can rationally be inferred from hence, is only this, That
like as the Apostles of themselves were not sufficient to conceive that
Ministry, that was given unto them, nor to accomplish any such things, as
were effected in men thereby: So neither are any men sufficient of themselves
to conceive or believe the things declared therein, or to purify their hearts
thereby, unless that the same be revealed unto them: Faith herein (and the
effects thereof) being by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10.17.

Some other Scriptures there are of this nature, but the answers to these duly
considered, may be sufficient to enlighten any indifferent man's understanding
therein. And therefore I shall proceed to answer to the second main Objection,
and to such principal Scriptures which belong thereunto.

CHAP. IX. Containing several Answers for the clearing of such Scriptures,
which seem to import faith to be necessitated in men by the irresistible power
of God.
THe Scriptures alleged in favor of the second main Objection, are such as
these, Romans 8.28, 29, 30. Phil. 2.13. Phil. 1.19. 2 Timothy 2.25. Romans 11.5, 6.
Jer. 31.33.

1. From the first of which, the words whereof are these (And we know that all
things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the chosen
according to his purpose; for whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate
to be conformed to the Image of his Son; Moreover, whom he did predestinate,
them he also called, and whom he called, them he justified, etc.) Its conceived
that of mankind fallen in Adam, God in that estate before the world, chose a
certain number thereof unto himself for his sons and daughters. And that in
reference thereunto in time begets them to faith, in his Son justifies
them, etc.

1. To which I answer, first, That none are chosen to Adoption or Salvation
before the world, otherwise then in relation to their obedience to those duties
which God in the Scriptures by Jesus Christ, and his Apostles requires of men
unto those ends, 2 Timothy 1.9. with the 10. Tit. 1.1, 2. with the 3.

2. Secondly, The Scriptures do positively declare, That election is only in
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. with the 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God has chosen you to
Salvation from the beginning, through sanctification and belief of the truth.

3. If that God should choose men to Adoption and Salvation before the world,
otherwise then in relation to their obedience to his will made known unto them,
Then the will of God in this respect, should be twofold, and contradictions in
it self; The one whereby he chooses and accepts to Adoption and Salvation,
the wicked, disobedient and impenitent: The other whereby he will not choose,
nor receive to adoption or Salvation, any other then the godly, Philip. 4.3.
the rich in faith, Jam. 2.5. The penitent, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. And obedient,
Matthew. 22. the third to the fourteenth, which contradiction is impossible to be
in God.

4. Nor does the words of the Text prove the contrary; Wherein first is laid
down the happy estate of those that are called according to purpose, ver. 28.
And 2. the ground thereof, which in ver. 29. is declared to be this (viz.) That
all those whom God fore-knew (that is to say before the world beheld in his
Son through obedience unto him, who are therefore in verse the 28. described
to be such as love God, least that we should conceive that God knew the workers
of iniquity before time, whom he refuses to own or know in time, Mat. 7.23.)
those he predestined, that they should be conformable to the Image of his
Son in glory, Phil. 3.21. For the accomplishment whereof he administreth unto
them the means for their calling, and upon their obedience thereunto, receives
them to justification, and in the end to glory.

The second text is, Phil. 2.13. the words are these: For it is God that
works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. From whence it is
conceived, That whatsoever any man wills or does acceptable unto God and
tending to his Salvation, he is necessarily enforced thereunto by God.

Answ. For the removal whereof its to be observed, That in the Scriptures
things are apprehended unto God, as done by him upon several grounds: As

1. Such things are said to be done by him, which he only suffers, or
permits to be done, Job 1.12-21. whether by men or devils, Joh. 1.15, 16,
17, 21. Job. 2.7. with the 10.

2. Such things are said to be done by him, which are no otherwise effected, or
brought to pass, then by the use and improvement of the means that he
affords for the doing thereof. Thus he gives man day by day his daily bread;
and feeds the young ravens that cry, Ps. 147.9.

3. Also such things are said to be done by him, which he affords fit and
necessary means unto men for the doing of: Although that through their neglect
or abuse of those means the same he never accomplished, Ezekiel. 24.13. because I
have purged thee, and thou wast not purged; therefore thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness, until I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.

And that God in this sense only is said to work in the Philippians, to will
and to do, plainly appears by comparing the 12. verse with the 13. where the
same persons are required, to work out their own salvation with fear and
trembling, because that God works in them, etc whereby his working in them,
to will and to do, is necessarily implied, to consist only in providing and
propounding prompt and fit means to induce and persuade them to will, and to do
the things, that in the former verse is required of them, because that
otherwise the Argument which the Apostle uses to stir them up, to work out
their salvation with fear and trembling, should more fitly serve to persuade
them to sit still and do nothing, nor take any thought or care at all for that
purpose. For if that God did work in them the will and the deed, which is all
that is necessary to salvation, there should then remain nothing at all on
their part to be done thereunto. So that the words of the Apostle in this
place, are to be understood only; as if he should have said, Be you diligent
and careful to perform the things that God requires of you to your Salvation
God wrought in the Pharisees and Lawyers, to will and to do, the things
required of them to their Salvation, by the Ministry of John: or else in
rejecting the same, they could not be charged with frustrating and rejecting
the counsel of God within themselves, Luke 7.30. with the margent.
; for he (is not wanting, but) affords unto you al necessary means to enable
you thereunto.

3. And this may also serve to enlighten us in the understanding of Phil. 1.29.
(which is the next Scripture to be answered) the words whereof are these: For
unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but
also to suffer for his sake; being delivered in the very same nature as the
former, (viz.) as a ground to persuade the Philippians to stand fast in the
Spirit with one mind, striving together for the Faith of the Gospel, and in
nothing to be terrified by their adversaries. Forasmuch as that which is made
the ground of an exortation, must not only admit, but also with some kind of
vehemence, stir up and provoke to industry and diligence for the obtaining of
whatsoever is from thence urged, pressed or persuaded unto. And that the
presence and assured possession of a thing does prohibit a man to seek and
endeavor after the same, and any other to exhort him thereunto; therefore the
giving of Faith and perseverance in this place must not be conceived to consist
in the actual conveiance thereof, but in the giving of such means and helps,
through the use and well improvement whereof, they might be enabled to believe,
and believing to persevere therein, to the end, against all opposition
whatsoever: because that otherwise, the Apostle must be understood to exhort
them to strive for what they already have, or else to keep what they cannot
loose, yea to strive for them, because that they have these things already and
cannot loose them, which is most absurd, and not to be imagined: And therefore
as God is said to give food unto all flesh, Psalm. 136.25. By affording unto
them means for the obtaining thereof, Prove. 10.4. Prove. 20.4.

And as he is said to give assurance (or faith) unto all men (as touching the
resurrection and judgment to come by Jesus Christ) by his mere granting unto
them a ground for their assurance therein, Acts 17.3. Even so in this place God
is said to give unto the Philippians to believe in Christ, and to suffer for
his sake, by affording unto them means, through the improvement whereof, they
were brought thereunto, and might be furnished with power and strength to
persevere therein, against all the malice of their adversaries.

4. The fourth text is the 2 Timothy 2.25. the words are these, (viz.) In
meekness instructing those that oppose themselves: if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; from whence it is
conceived, that repentance is not to be obtained by the use of external means,
but is given unto men, or wrought in them by the immediate hand of God.

Answ. To which I answer, That this inference does neither suite with that
which is expressed in the 18, and 21, verses, afore-going in the chapter: nor yet
with the text it self.

For first, in the 18, verse. it is declared, that some by the error of
Hymeneus and Philetus (who taught, that the resurrection was past already) had
their faith overthrown, that is to say, were thereby seduced to the belief of
that opinion; and from the denial of that, the foundation of God and
godliness to Apostates, from all the duties of Christianity, and works of
repentance, employed verse 19, which must needs be imputed either to some change
and alteration in God, or else in themselves: but unto God it cannot be
imputed, for he changes not, Mat. 3.6. His foundation stands sure; therefore
it must be imputed to themselves: and if so, then it must thereupon needs
follow, That repentance in men is not any otherwise obtained, then through
their own improvement of the means vouchsafed for that end; for if that it did
not wholly depend upon themselves, then it should be altogether impossible,
either that any thing done or mis-done, omitted or committed, should be
prejudicial unto them in that respect.

And that this is so, does further appear by that in the 21, verse, the words
whereof are as follows: If a man therefore PURGE HIMSELF from these, he shall
be a vessel of honor, sanctified and meet for his Masters use, etc. Wherein
is plainly declared how, and by what means Sanctification (wherein repentance
consists) is to be endeavored and obtained, (viz.) That every man by the
Doctrine of the Resurrection and Glory in the World to come, through conformity
to Christ, verse 11, 12. DO PURGE HIMSELF from the foresaid opinions, with all
the evil consequences thereof. Flee youthful lusts, and follow after
righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with those that call on the Lord out of
a pure heart; the neglect whereof occasioned the falling away of those
aforementioned, as by the coherence of these verses does manifestly appear.

2. Nor does it any better suite with the Text it self: wherein Timothy is
required with meekness to instruct those that oppose themselves, the end
whereof, as also of Gods forbearance, being every where in the Scriptures
declared to be none other than men's repentance; and therefore to whomsoever the
same is vouchsafed, the possibility of their repentance thereby must needs be
supposed; because it does not stand with the wisdom of God to propound an end,
from such means whereby it cannot possibly be effected. And its frequently to
be observed in Christ, that he directs his instruction only to those that
have ears to hear, Mat. 11.15, 13, 43. Reve. 2.7, 11, 17, 29, verses, chapter
3, 6, 13, 22, verses, Thereby doubtless to inform us, that if men were
absolutely incapable of hearing and receiving the same, it should not at all be
preached unto them.

Besides, It cannot be supposed, that God should command his servants, to cast
holy things unto Swine to be trampled under their feet, or to spil the
immortal and incorruptible Seed of his Word, as water upon the ground, (the
consequence of the contrary opinion) seeing that it is delivered by him for a
general rule to be observed by them; That when men by their preaching unto
them were fully enlightened in the knowledge of his Grace, and of eternal
Salvation brought unto them by Jesus Christ, and should then wilfully and
stubbornly reject the same, put it from them, and judge themselves unworthy
thereof, (thereby declaring that no hopes of their repentance were to be
expected from thence) that then they should depart from them, and cease to
preach any further unto them, Acts 13.45, 46, 47.

And therefore it may not be imagined, that either the persons intended in the
text, whom Timothy was required to instruct, or any other to whom the Gospel
was sent to be preached, were altogether incapable of improving the same, to
the end thereof.

Which considered, the meaning of the Apostle in this place, must be understood
only as if he should have commanded Timothy to instruct with meekness, those
that oppose themselves, because that paradventure at one time or other they
might hearken thereunto, lay it to heart, and improve the same to their
repentance, etc.

God being said (as was showed before) not only to give unto us such things
wherewith we are immediately possessed by his mere devotion, but all such things
likewise which are obtained by our laborious industry, and improvement of the
means vouchsafed unto us for those ends: He gives unto us richly all things to
enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17. Day by Day, he gives unto us our daily bread.

5. The fifth text alleged, is Romans 11.5, 6. The words are these, Even so at
this present time also there is a remnant according to the Election of Grace,
and if by Grace, then is it no more of works, otherwise Grace is no more
Grace: but if it be of works, then it is no more of Grace, otherwise work is
no more work. From whence it is conceived that by the Covenant of Grace, all
works on men's part, either in reference to their Election or Salvation, are
wholly excluded; and that there is not any thing required to be done by them
thereunto.

Answ. To which I answer: first, That it was showed before in answer to Romans
8.28, 29, 30. That Election is not in the first, but in the second Adam; not of
the disobedient but of the repentant, godly, rich in Faith, etc. which with
comparing the 4, verse with the 5, before alleged, will receive further
confirmation; For when in the 4, verse. the Apostle having declared, That those
whom God reserved to himself in the days of Elias, were such only who in
obedience unto him, refused to bow the knee to the Image of Baal. In the 5,
verse he adds, That even so at this present time also, there is a remnant
according to the Election of Grace; which is as if he should have said, Whereas
a great number of the Israelites are rejected and cast off from the favor of
God, you are not to conceive them to be so rejected for any other cause, then
for their wilful and stubborn disobedience against his word revealed unto
them, chap. 1.17. chap. 10.18, 21. chap. 11.20. For as in the days of Elias he
reserved to himself, all those that hearkened unto him, and refused to bow to
the Image of Baal: Even so likewise at this time he reserveth to himself for
his sons and daughters, all those that submit themselves to his
righteousness, chap. 10.3. Harden not their hearts, Hebr. 3.8, 17, 18, 19. Nor
judge themselves unworthy of eternal life, Acts 13.46, 47. Nor yet does he so
reject any of them for their unbelief; but that he will readily accept of them
again, if that they do not continue therein, Romans 11.23.

2. I answer, That when the Apostle says, That Election to Salvation is not of
works, but of Grace, he does not thereby exclude all works in reference
thereunto, but the works of perfection, according to the law of innocence and
creation; only from which estate mankind being fallen, Eccl. 7.29. their
Justification and Salvation thereby must needs be altogether impossible.

That Grace does not exclude all Works, does evidently appear from hence,
(viz.) That integrity and uprightnes of heart (which properly consists in a
ready and cheerful conformity to all the Commandments of God made known unto
us, so far forth as opportunity and ability does afford) is required of every
man to his Salvation, Genesis 17.1, 2, 7. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Mat. 6.48. Mat. 19.16,
17, 21.

In which respect Christ implies the young man, Mat. 19.21, 23. (that refused
to sell all that he had and give to the poor, and to take up his Cross and
follow him, when it was required of him, to be imperfect, and incapable of
entering into eternal life. And S. John denies that man to have the love of
God dwelling in him, that sees his brother stand in need, and shuts up his
bowels of compassion toward him, 1 John 3.17. And from hence it is, that S.
James declares, That that faith which obtains justification is made perfect
thorough works, James 2.21, 22, 23 Abraham's integrity engaged him to offer up
his Son upon the Altar, when it was required of him; and by offering of him up,
he is said to fulfill the Scripture, which said that he believed, God, Jam.
2.23. Which plainly argues that all known duties, or works within a man's
power to be performed, are so essential to integrity and faith, that they
cannot possibly be distinguished: whence Abraham, that one while is said to be
justified by faith, Romans 4.9. is otherwhiles by S. James chap. 2.21. declared
to be justified by works.
. For where works (such as are within a man's power) are wanting, integrity is
wanting; and where integrity is wanting, faith is dead, verse 17, 26.
Unprofitable, Gal. 5.6. And not to be distinguished from that of the Devil,
Jam. 2.19.

And seeing then that all such works which are within men's power to perform,
are required of them to their Salvation: It must needs be granted, when the
Apostle says, That it is not of works, that his meaning therein is none other,
then that it is not of works of perfection according to the law of our
creation, which are impossible for any man to perform, so as to be justified
thereby, Gal. 2.16. And that the difference betwixt Works, and Grace, or the
Law, and the Gospel, stands only in this, (viz.) That the first requires
unto life, that which is impossible unto men in their fallen estate: the later
no more then what is possible unto them therein; and so consequently, that life
and Salvation which could not be obtained by any through the covenant of
works, may be obtained by all, through the covenant of Grace: which will more
evidently appear, if it be considered.

First, That the only and special reason, why the first Covenant was repealed,
and the second vouchsafed, is declared to be this, (viz.) That the first could
not give life unto men, (that is to say, in their fallen estate, for in the
estate of innocence, it must needs be acknowledged it could) If there had been
a Law that could have given life (says the text, Gal. 3.21.) verily
righteousness had been by the Law, but in regard it could not, therefore (as
the words of the Apostle in Hebr. 8.6, 7. do plainly intimate) the Lord found
fault therewith, abolished it, and gave unto men a more excellent Covenant
instead thereof, (that is to say, a covenant whereby salvation might be obtained
by them in their fallen estate) for, seeing that the goodness of God, and his
desire of men's Salvation was such, as caused him to abolish the first Covenant,
because it could not give life unto them: no reasonable man can conceive, that
his said goodness and love toward them would suffer him to give unto them a
second Covenant, as faulty and unable, to give life unto them, as that
abolished: and if not, Then forasmuch as by the later works are required to be
performed by men to their Salvation, as well as by the former; the excellency
of the later above the former, must needs be acknowledged to consist only in
this, (viz.) That the works required thereby, and the conditions upon which
life is promised therein, are performable by men in their fallen estate, whereas
those required thereunto by the other were not. In which respect it is, that in
the 6, verse, the Apostle declares, that the later is established upon better
promises, then the former.

Secondly, That those that endeavored to reduce men from the Doctrine of the
Gospel, to the observation of the Law, are by the Apostles, Acts 15.10. charged
with tempting God, by putting a yoke upon the necks of the Disciples, which
they were not able to bear. And to the Galathians which were perverted by those
false teachers, Paul in Gal. 3.1, 3. thus writes: O foolish Galathians, who
has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth? Are ye so foolish that
having begun in the Spirit, are ye made perfect by the Law? which plainly
argues, that the Doctrine of the Gospel which they preached was no such yoke,
because that then they themselves in preaching the Gospel, and turning men from
Moses to Christ, should have bin liable to the same reproof which they laid
upon others: And as foolish should the Galathians have been, in hearkening to
them preaching the Gospel: as they were in hearkening to the false Apostles
preaching the Law. For of two yoaks alike intolerable, wisdom directs a man
to choose the one as soon as the other, and not to prefer the one before the
other; and therefore unless that we will suppose the Apostles to be guilty of
tempting God in the same nature, wherein they accuse and censure others, (and
thereby to make themselves inexcusable, both before God and men, Romans 2.1.) we
must needs conclude that the yoke or precepts of the Gospel, which they
endeavored to impose upon men, were not intolerable or grievous, 1 John 5.3.
Like unto those of the Law, but easy and light, Mat. 11.30. and so
consequently, that righteousness, life and salvation impossible by the former,
is possible, and may be attained by the later.

3. That Paul in the 2 Cor. 3.7, 9. speaking of the Law, calls it the
Ministration of death and of condemnation. And contrariwise speaking of the
Gospel, or New Testament, he calls it the ministration of righteousness, and
in verse the 6, says, That the first kills, but the later gives life: Now
forasmuch as the Law in it is own nature, is neither the ministration of death
nor condemnation, being holy, just and good, promising life, and would
assuredly bring us to the possession thereof, could we but observe what it
requires, or attain unto that original innocence and purity in which we were
created; therefore it is so called only, in respect that in the necessary
consequence thereof (by reason of our inability to fulfill the same) it
becomes such unto us. And therefore if that the conditions of the new
Covenant were no more performable then those of the Law: the Gospel could not
be called, the ministration of righteousness and life any more then the Law:
because it is the savor of death unto death, unto all those that disobey it as
well as the Law, John 3.19. Hebr. 10.28, 29. and conferreth neither
righteousness nor life unto any that observe it not, any more then the Law;
therefore whereas it is called, the ministration of righteousness and life, in
opposition to the Law; it must needs be understood in this respect, That
righteousness, life and Salvation, impossible by the Law, may be obtained by
it.

4. The same Apostle likewise discoursing of the two Covenants, in the ninth
and tenth chapters of the Romans, and having in the 32, verse of the 9.
chapter, after a large discourse concerning the same, concluded righteousness
not to be attainable by the Law: in the 8, verse of the 10. chapter, he
declares, That the righteousness that is by the Gospel, is nigh unto us (even
in our mouths and in our hearts) then which nothing can be more near unto us.
And in Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14. whereunto he has allusion, to prevent all
objections concerning this thing, Moses thus speaks: The commandment that I
command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off: It
is not in Heaven that thou should say, who shall go up for us to Heaven, and
bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it. Neither is it beyond the Sea,
that thou should say, who shall go over the Sea for us and bring it unto us,
that we may hear it and do it? But the word is nigh unto thee, in thy mouth
and in thy heart, that thou may do it; then which, what words can possibly
be used more emphatically to set forth to our understandings that
righteousness which was impossible by the Law, is not only possible, but easy
to be obtained by the Gospel; it is not hidden from us, nor far off, but near
unto us, in our mouths, and in our hearts, that we may do it. Far from their
opinion that affirm, That God must bow the Heavens and come down into our
Souls, and infuse into them supernatural light and faith, before that we can
either understand or do any thing requisite to our Salvation.

5. But to put this point out of all dispute. Whereas the Scriptures do inform
us, that according to the Law of works, There is none righteous; none that
does good, no, not one, Romans 3.10, 12. and yet notwithstanding do also inform
us, That Abel, Heb. 11.4. Noah, Genesis 7.1. Abimelech, Genesis 20.4. Lot. 2 Pet. 2,
8. and Zechariah, Luke 1.6. were all of them righteous men. That Jacob Mat.
1.19. Simeon, Luke 2.25. Cornelius, were just men, Acts 10.1, 22. That Job,
chap. 1.18. Asa, 1 Chronicles. 15.17. and others, were upright and perfect men,
Phil. 3.15. That Ahimaas the son of Zadock, 2 Samuel 18.27. and Barnabas the son
of consolation, were both of them good men, Acts 11.24. It must therefore
necessarily follow, That what was impossible by the Law or covenant of works,
is possible by the Gospel, or covenant of Grace: and that righteousness,
justice, goodness, and eternal Salvation, which could not be obtained by the
former, has, and may be obtained by the later.

And yet notwithstanding, although that the Covenant of Grace (or the Gospel)
does require to Salvation, the performance of all such good works, which are
within our power to perform; yet ought it, and that eminently to be esteemed
by us a Covenant of Grace: and that for these respects.

First, In regard of the time, (state, and condition, wherein all mankind
were) when this Covenant was vouchsafed unto them. That is to say, When all
mankind by reason of Adams transgression, were brought under the guilt of
condemnation, and everlasting oblivion, having no eye to pity them, Ezekiel. 16.5,
6. nor ability to deliver themselves from peace (but must of necessity have
perished therein for ever, 1 Cor. 15.16, 17, 18.) That then God the Father of
all pity and compassion, commended his love unto them, Romans 15.8. and forth of
his infinite goodness, was graciously pleased by the death of his only
begotten Son, to pay the price of their redemption, to ransom them from that
estate, 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. and to say unto them, return from
corruption, ye perishing sons of men, and live, and in relation thereunto, to
grant this Covenant of life and Salvation unto them.

2. That because in this Covenant God requires of us less than his due, and
no more then what in our fallen estate we are sufficiently enabled to perform
and render unto him; we owed unto him perfect innocence, being in creation made
perfect by him, Eccl. 7.29. he asks of us but integrity consistent with
nocency and imperfection so considered) as plainly appears by that which is
spoken concerning David, 1 Kings 9.4. Asa, 1 Kings 15.14. Simeon, Luke 2.25.
Cornelius, Acts 10.22. and diverse others, declared to be perfect, just, and
upright men, (notwithstanding all their frailties, sensurable by the covenant
of works) and are by God approved and accepted, in reference to his covenant of
Grace.

3. In regard that although we have our lives of Grace, and that he asks of
us so little in comparison of what we are indebted unto him, he is so
bountiful, as to grant us a reward of all our works, Hebr. 11.6. ye such an
exceeding great reward, that our light afflictions which are but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

That he should grant us any reward at all for any service done unto him, (if
we consider that it was nothing but his own which we gave unto him, that we
received it of him, and that we our selves likewise are his, and that by a
double debt) it must needs according to the humble confession of David, be
acknowledged great bounty in him, 1 Chro. 29.13, 14, 15, 16. but that he should
so far regard our bounden affection, as to reward us for our very meanest
works, even for a cup of cold water given in his name; and to grant us so
great a reward for so small a work: as a Prophets reward (doubtless one of the
greatest) for but receiving a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, Mat. 10.41.
must needs be acknowledged transcendent Grace, love that passes all knowledge.

The 6. Text is Jerem. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. the words whereof are as follows:
Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Not according to the covenant
that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand, to
bring them out of the Land of Egypt; which covenant they brake, although that I
was a husband unto them. But this shall be the covenant that I will make with
the house of Israel: After those days says the Lord, I will put my Law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, etc.

From whence it is ordinarily objected, That God has covenanted necessarily
and unavoidably to instruct some men in the knowledge of himself, and by
putting his Laws into their hearts, to work in them repentance, faith, etc.
The which objection, as it supposes some men to be more accepted and beloved
of God, in the estate of unbelief then others; has been often before
disproved; yet in regard that it has so seeming a countenance of truth put
upon it by this Scripture, with some others speaking in the same language, I
shall further answer thereunto, desiring,

First, That it may be considered, that seeing there are but two Covenants
known at any time to be given by God unto men, the one of works, the other of
Grace: all mankind must be concluded, either to be under the first, or under
the later of them.

1. But under the first they are not, because that God finding fault therewith
has repealed it, caused it to wax old, and to vanish away, Heb. 8.7-13.

2. Secondly, Has redeemed all men from the curse and penalty thereof, death,
Gal. 3.13.

3. Thirdly, Has prohibited all men from seeking righteousness thereby, Acts
15.10. Romans 10.3. And therefore all men must be concluded to be under the
second. And not for these reasons only; But also,

4. Fourthly, Because that the duties of the second Covenant (viz.) Repentance,
etc. is required of all, Act. 17.30. And

5. Fifthly, That Salvation the end thereof is thereupon promised unto all,
whence those that perish are charged with neglecting Salvation, Heb. 2.3.

6. And lastly, Because that the second death, Rev. 2.11. or condemnation
inflicted by Christ at the last day, is none other then the penalty of the
breach of the second Covenant. This is the condemnation of the world (says S.
John) Chap. 3.19. That light is come into the world, and men love darkness
rather then light, because their deeds are evil: Which later reason receives
confirmation from hence, That Christ by a most lively emblem in the Parable of
the Talents, has declared unto us, That God at that day will require no more
of any man, but according to the Talents of Grace delivered unto them by
himself, the Mediator of the new Covenant, and will then condemn none, but for
not well using what they had, so received of him, whereupon it does necessarily
follow, That all men being under the new Covenant, whatsoever Grace necessary
to Salvation, is therein by God promised unto any (he being faithful that has
promised, and the Covenant confirmed unto all mankind by the blood of Jesus
Christ) the same must needs be acknowledged to be granted unto all. And then
forasmuch as we see, that all men have not the Law and Fear of God written in
them (otherwise then was showed before concerning the Gentiles, Romans 2.14, 15.)
nor their stony hearts taken out of their flesh, etc. we must not therefore
imagine, that God has covenanted absolutely to do these things for any men.

But there are two things in this Text, which through want of due consideration
mis-lead many men from the right understanding thereof.

First, Because it is said, That this Covenant which God promises to make with
the Jews in the last days, should not be like unto the Covenant that he made
with their fathers, when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt (the which
Covenant they brake, etc.) From whence it is conceived, That as the first
Covenant could not by any be kept, so the later cannot by any that are
comprehended therein be broken.

For the clearing of this mistake, I desire that it may be observed,

That if by these two Covenants here spoken of, we must understand the Law and
the Gospel, Works and Grace (which is much questioned by some, who conceive
them to be particular Covenants, proper and peculiar to the Jews only, and so
nothing at all to the point in hand) that they were neither of them unmade,
until the time that God brought the Israelites out of the Land of Egypt. And
therefore much less, until the days of the Prophet Jeremy, as this Text
seems to import.

That the first Covenant was given unto our first parents in Paradise,
appears from hence, That the curse thereof entered into the world by Adam,
and reigned over all men before the Law was given at mount Sinai, Romans 5.14.
For where the curse of the Law is inflicted, there the breach of the Law must
needs be imputed. And seeing (as the Apostle teaches, Romans 5.13. that sin is
not imputed, where there is no Law given, therefore the Law must needs be
acknowledged to be given unto Adam, and in him to all mankind, before the
punishment thereof, death, through his disobedience did enter into the world,
and reign therein. And like as the Law was given unto Adam, before he incurred
the punishment thereof. So the Gospel or second Covenant must needs be granted
immediately to succeed upon his transgression of the first: because that
otherwise the curse of the Law, should forthwith, according as it was
threatened, Genesis 2.17.) have seized upon him to have destroyed him, and in him
all mankind then in his loins sinning in him, the truth whereof is confirmed
unto us from hence.

1. That the end of Gods patience and forbearance toward sinners, is none
other then their Repentance and Salvation, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou (says the
Apostle speaking to the Gentiles) the riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
Repentance. Again, 2 Pet. 3.9. Peter tells those that scoffed at Gods
forbearance toward them in their wickedness (contrary as they supposed to his
threats denounced against them) That God was not slack concerning his Promise,
as they counted slacknesse, but long-suffering, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance. And Paul, in Act. 17.26, 27.
plainly informs us, That the end why God made of one blood (that is to say of
Adam) all Nations of men to dwell upon the face of the earth, was, That they
should seek the Lord: Now forasmuch as seeking of the Lord, Repentance and the
obtaining of Salvation does necessarily presuppose the granting and exhibiting
of the new Covenant: these ends being otherwise impossible to be attained, it
must needs follow, That as God is declared to spare and forbear Adam, and all
men, to the end they might repent, etc. that in reference to these ends he
vouchsafed unto them the Covenant of his Grace, whereby they might be enabled
to attain thereunto.

2. Besides, If that God should have spared our first parents, and granted unto
them the procreation of seed, and not in order to the Grace of the new
Covenant, Redemption from death, the curse of the Law, and Salvation in the
world to come, through Repentance, then there should have been no proportion
betwixt the sin of mankind in Adam, and the punishment thereof, because
sinning but in potentia, they should be punished in actu, which inequality of
proceeding is by God in Ezekiel. 18. disclaimed; so that if he had not prepared
for mankind another life after death, and vouchsafed means to make them happy
therein, they should never personally have suffered death, but such as was
their sin; such should have been their punishment.

3. Moreover, If that the Covenant of Grace had not been from the beginning,
then Salvation should not have been from the beginning, seeing that it is of
Grace only, and not of works, Ephesians. 2.8. Whereas therefore the Scriptures
enformeth us, That remission of sins, acceptance with God, and consequently
Salvation was preached unto Cain, Genesis 4.6, 7. And that Abel, the third man on
earth, obtained the same, Heb. 11.4. it must needs be granted, That the
Covenant of Grace was vouchsafed unto men from the beginning, even from the
very time that they stood in any need thereof.

These two Covenants of Works and Grace then being made and given so long
before the time, implied by the Prophet Jeremy his words, cannot possibly be
understood to import the time wherein either the first was, or the later should
be made with mankind, but the time wherein the first was, and the later
should be more clearly made known and demonstrated both unto the Jews and unto
others, then at any time from the beginning of the world they had been. In
which respect it is that Christ (speaking unto his Disciples) says, Blessed
are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear; for verily I say
unto you, That many Prophets and righteous men, have desired to see these
things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear these things which you
hear, and have not heard them, Mat. 13.16, 17. And hence are the words of the
Apostle, in Ephesians. 3.8, 9, 10, 11, Unto me who am less then the least of all
Saints, is this Grace given, that I should preach amongst the Gentiles, the
unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all men see, what is the fellowship
of the mystery which from the beginning of the world has been hid in God, who
created all things by Jesus Christ, to the intent that now unto the
principalities and powers in heavenly places, might be known by the Church the
manifold wisdom of God, according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in
Christ Jesus our Lord. And hereunto also is the words of the same Apostle, in
Romans 16.25, 26. to be applied.

Which considered, the emphasis contained in the words of the Prophets (before
rehearsed) are to be understood only, as if the Lord should have said, I
exhibited unto your fathers the Covenant of works, when he brought them out of
the Land of Egypt, not to the intent that they should seek righteousness and
life by it, Gal. 3.7-18, Romans 10.3. but to show them their impurity and
weakness, Gal. 3.19. Romans 7.7. Gal. 3.22. And that they should seek Salvation
only through the promise preached unto Abraham their father four hundred years
before the Law was given, Gal. 3.17. The which Covenant they brake, though that
I was a husband unto them. But the Covenant of my Grace preached unto you by
all the Prophets since the world began, Luke 1.70. Act. 43.26.22, 23. and which
in the later days I will more clearly demonstrate unto your children by the
Ministry of my Son, is not like unto that Covenant, being established upon
better promises, whereby I shall so abundantly commend my love unto them. That
although possibly they may despise the same, and turn my Grace therein
manifested unto them into wantonness, yet surely (or in all reason) they will
not, but will reverence my Son, when they see him, receive my word from him
into their hearts, and become obedient unto me.

For God having made men rational (in reference whereunto only he treats
with them, by arguments different from all other his creatures) and naturally
disposed to their own happiness, whenever more clearly then ordinary, he
opens unto them a way thereunto, and uses Arguments extraordinary to endear
them unto him for his goodness toward them therein (in the Scriptures) he
often takes it for granted, That then more especially they will be induced to
the love and perpetual Obedience of him, as is showed in Isa. 63.7, 8, 9. where
from the consideration of the goodness that he had vouchsafed to the house of
Israel, the mercies and multitude of loving kindenesses that he had bestowed
upon them, in saving them by the Angel of his presence, redeeming them in his
love and pity, carrying them through the wilderness, and in all their
afflictions being afflicted with them, etc. he concludes them to be his
people, in such sort that they would never deal untruly with him, because that
(although possibly they might, as in verse. 10. it, appears they were, yet)
rationally they could not be unthankful unto him, nor disobedient against him
after such extraordinary mercies received from him. From whence also it is that
S. Paul styles those men that refused and opposed the Gospel of Salvation,
when it was preached unto them unreasonable men, 2 These. 3.2. degenerated from
men into brute beasts, 1 Cor. 15.32. because that reason cannot oppose it self.
And therefore seeing that it teaches and directs all men endued therewith,
to seek their own happiness and felicity, as it must needs prohibit them the
rejection thereof, and the abuse of the means leading thereunto: So on the
contrary, it must needs engage them to sincerity of love, and hearty affection
toward God, by how much the more he discovers himself in Love, Mercy and
Goodness toward them in that nature.

And hereupon it is, that God considering how abundantly the riches of his
grace, Fatherly affection, and bowels of compassion toward all men, should by
the Ministry of Jesus Christ at his appearance be revealed, and by signs and
wonders, confirmed beyond all contradiction (to the Jews especially, to whom
most immediately he was sent, Joh. 1.11. Mat. 15.24.) more than at any time
from the beginning of the world it had been (insomuch that hearing and
beholding the same, and not rejecting reason and humanity, and judging
themselves unworthy of everlasting life, they could not possibly but rejoice
therein, be humbled for their former disobedience against so merciful a God,
receive with thankfulness his holy instructions, delivered unto them, and ever
afterward become obedient unto him, he concludes therefore that they would be
converted, and united unto him for ever; although that through savage and
brutish folly (unto which men may possibly degenerate, Isa. 46.6, 7, 8.) they
both might, and did reject, and despise his unspeakable goodness toward them.
All which is most clearly and plainly demonstrated by the words of Christ
himself, in Mat. 21. from the 33. to the 39. Mark 10. from the first to the
ninth. And Luke 20. from the 9. to the 15.

Hear a Parable (says Christ speaking to the Jews, to whom the promise in Ier.
31. has the most especial relation) There was a certain householder which
planted a Vineyard, and hedged it round about, and dug a wine press in it,
and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far
country; and when the time of fruit drew near, he sent his servants, that he
might receive from the husbandmen the fruit of the vineyard, etc. But the
husbandman took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned
another. Again he sent other servants more then the first, and they did unto
them likewise, 2 Chronicles. 38.15, 16. Acts 7.51, 52. Luke 9.49, 50.

Whereupon (to the end, that he might to the admiration of all men and Angels,
express his patience, goodness, and hearty affection to the Salvation of the
very worst of men) the Lord of the Vineyard (says Luke) said unto himself,
What shall I do? I will send my beloved Son, my only and well-beloved Son
( Mark 12.6.) saying, THEY WILL, (note) Reverence my Son, when they see him,
Mar. 12.6. Mat. 21.37. (But what follows?) when the husbandmen saw his Son,
they reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the heir, come let us kill him,
that the inheritance may be ours: and they cast him out of the vineyard, and
killed him.

Secondly, The mistake concerning the sense of this Scripture, is grounded upon
these words (viz.) I will put my laws into their minds, and write them in
their hearts, etc. From whence it is conceived, that God has promised
unavoidably, to beget the Love, Fear, and Obedience of himself, in some
particular persons, not in others.

1. For the clearing whereof, it is to be remembered, that the reason why God
promised to write his laws in the hearts of the Israelites in the later days,
rather then in the former, was, because that in the later days (by the
Ministry of his Son) he would more abundantly demonstrate his love and
goodness unto them, then formerly he had done by the Ministry of any of his
servants; The which although it did most powerfully tend to imprint his Love
and Fear in them, and to persuade them to deny all ungodlines and worldly
lusts, and to serve him in righteousness and true holiness all their days, Lu.
1.74, 75. yet forasmuch as that means did not inevitably effect the same in
them, for if it had, then they should all of them been converted thereby:
therefore it cannot from hence be rightly inferred from this text, That God
has promised effectually to beget the love and fear of himself in any one man
more then another.

2. It is also to be considered, That when God (in the Scriptures) says, that
he will do this or that, it does not always imply, an absolute and peremptory
resolution in him, necessarily to enforce and bring the same to pass, but to
administer such means, whereby he knows, that men either by a direct or
indirect use thereof, will, or may be induced to the doing of that which he
says, he will do.

In the later respect it is that he speaks, when he says, I will harden
Pharaohs heart: because that considering him to be a proud, covetous tyrant, he
knew that he would take occasion of obstinacy against him by reason of his
mercy toward the oppressed Israelites (notwithstanding all his signs and
wonders showed unto him, powerfully tending to humble him to the very earth
before him) and refuse to let them depart out of his Land, as he was commanded.

And in the former respect, are the words of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.4. to be
understood; when he says, That God would have all men to be saved. And so
likewise are the words of Christ, in John 12.32. to be taken, where he says,
And I, if I were lifted up from the earth, I WILL DRAW all men after me;
because that by his Death and Resurrection he should further manifest himself
to all men to be the Savior of the world: For as when he affords unto men
the means of repentance, he is said thereby to purge them from their
filthiness, though that they be not actually purged thereby (as was showed
before in Ezekiel. 24.13.) So (according to these Scriptures) when he dispenses
means extraordinary, tending to lead men to Conversion and Salvation, Then
more especially it is said, That he will put his Laws into their hearts, will
draw them to Christ, and will have them to be saved.

Thirdly, It is to be considered, That like as God faith, That he will write
his Laws in men's hearts, circumcise their hearts, make them new hearts and new
spirits, Ier. 31.33. Deuteronomy. 30.16. Ier. 36.26. Even so he also requires men to
write his Laws in their hearts, Prove. 7.3. Circumcise their hearts, Ier. 4.4.
and make to themselves new hearts and new spirits, Ezekiel. 19.31. Now as the
Evangelical precepts are not to be expounded against the promises, so neither
are the promises thereof to be expounded against the precepts; and if
considered together, they are to be understood, as if God should say, I will
afford means unto you for these ends, do you improve them thereunto.

If it be said, that these precepts serve only to express unto men, that which
God promises to work in them.

It is answered first, That this is a very foreign exposition, and will
neither be warranted by Scripture or sound reason: God being never known to
require of men that which he himself promises to do for them, and most
irrational to conceive, that he should not rather express his goodness
toward men, in requiring them to wait upon him for the things that he
purposes to bestow upon them, then to give them precepts for the doing
thereof, thereby to divert their hopes and expectation, as from the promises,
and to set them on work to beat the air, or to make brick without straw.

But secondly, seeing it is manifest, that these precepts are unto all men, and
as manifest that all men have not the things enjoined therein effected in them,
it cannot in any wise be supposed, that the intent of God in them should be to
express what he himself would work in men, but to inform us that his promises
to put his Laws in men's minds to write them in their hearts, to make them new
hearts, etc. consists only in affording unto them means serving for those
ends, which they themselves are enjoined to improve for the effecting thereof.

4. Lastly, It is to be observed, That those very persons the Israelites to
whom this promise has the most principal relation, unto whom the Apostle most
directly applies the same, in the 10 Chapter to the Hebrews, are
notwithstanding by him evidently declared to be under a possibility of sinning
wilfully against the knowledge of the truth, of trampling the Son of God
under their feet, and counting his blood the blood of this Covenant wherewith
they were sanctified an unholy thing, and of doing despite unto the spirit of
Grace, and thereby of incurring to themselves the sorest punishment, judgment
and fiery indignation, which possibly could not be, if that God in this
Covenant had absolutely promised, or undertaken to put his laws in their
hearts, and write them in their minds, etc. as it is supposed, or any
otherwise then by administering unto them means for those ends, which possibly
might be neglected and contemned by them. But because that this Scripture
serves so clearly to discover the intent and nature of this Covenant, it shall
be rehearsed verbatim.

Heb. 10.16. This is the Covenant that I will make with them after those days,
says the Lord: I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will
I write them: And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Now
where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin. Having
therefore, brethren, boldness or liberty, to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus, By a new and living way which he has consecrated for us,
through the vail, that is to say, his flesh: And having an high Priest over the
house of God: Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love; and to good
works: Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of
some is: but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye see the day
approaching. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, But a certain
fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour
the adversaries. He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy under two or
three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood
of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done
despite unto the Spirit of Grace?

Now forasmuch as where God has absolutely promised to do all for men which
is any ways necessary to be done, to bring them to an end; there remains not
any thing to be done by them for that purpose: and that not only all danger,
but the very least supposition of miscarriage, or possibility of failing
thereof, is thereby wholly taken away: so neither can there reasonably be any
thing required of them thereunto, or any danger of falling be justly suggested
unto them; (the power and truth of God being thereby directly impeached of
impotency and falsehood) and therefore seeing that the Apostle (who in all such
things which depends altogether for their accomplishment, upon the faith and
omnipotency of God alone, as the resurrection of the dead, and the reward of
Faith, with Christ in the world to come instructs men (according to the
example of Abraham, Romans 4.) not to stagger at the promise of God through
unbelief, but against hope to believe in hope, to be strong in faith, giving
glory to God, being fully persuaded that whatsoever (in that nature) he has
promised, he is able, and will bring it to pass, and that neither death nor
life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able
to prevent or hinder the same) does notwithstanding this covenant (or promise)
of God made unto the Hebrews (to put his Laws in their hearts, and write them
in their minds, etc.) so earnestly exhort them to draw near unto God, in
purity of heart, conscience, and conversation verse, 22, to hold fast the
profession of their faith without wavering, verse 23, and for that end not to
forsake the assembling themselves together: but to exhort, and provoke one
another unto love, and to good works, verse. 24, 25. To look diligently that
no man fail (or fall from the Grace) of God, chap. 12.15. And least there be in
any of them a heart of unbelief (hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin) in
departing from the living God, chap. 2.12, 13.

And all this from the ground and consideration of the danger of sinning
wilfully against the truth, verse 26, and falling into the hands of God by
trampling his Son under their feet, and counting his blood (the blood of the
Covenant given unto them, rehearsed in verse 16, 17.) whereby they were
sanctified an unholy thing, and doing despite unto the Spirit, verse 29, 30.
(which witnessed and confirmed him unto them to be the Son of God, and that the
principles of this Doctrine, (viz.) repentance from dead works, etc. chapter
1. and chapter 6.1. with chapter 2.3, 4. were of God,) must of necessity argue
unto us, That neither he nor yet the Hebrews themselves, did understand this
Covenant (as now ordinarily it is taken) or as in this Objection it is urged:
For if they had then, doubtless he would not (having no reason for the same)
have exhorted and cautioned them in this manner, but contrariwise would have
encouraged them, wholly to have rested themselves upon the faith and power of
God, engaged unto them to do for them, and work in them whatsoever was
necessary to their Salvation, and to prevent all such things that might any
ways possibly hinder them thereof, nor would they themselves ever have
regarded any thing, that he should have spoken unto them to the contrary, any
more then if he should have exhorted them after death, to raise themselves from
thence, upon the danger of perishing for ever and ever in the Grave. Which
shall serve for answer to this Objection.

The Conclusion.
THe consideration of this discourse, may serve. First, as a means to remove
out of all men's minds, all prejudicial and evil thoughts, as concerning the
decrees, and precepts of Almighty God: It having been showed, That in his
Election he respects not the persons of any, nor prefereth one man before
another therein: but extends and vouchsafes the same freely and
indifferently to every one who does not voluntarily, knowingly, and of
malicious wickedness debar themselves thereof: his decree of Reprobation being
grounded only upon the known, wilful, and stubborn disobedience against his
Commandments, and means of Grace used and vouchsafed for their repentance, and
reformation, Ierem. 6.30. with the 28, 29. And his Commandments having been
showed not to be grievous, but easy and light, for every man to observe and
practice.

2. It may serve to admonish every man to take heed and beware of all kind of
disobedience against God, and that they do not approve or allow themselves in
any or the least thing which they know to be displeasing unto him, either forth
of a conceit of their Election, or of an opinion of impossibility of falling
away totally, and finally, forth of his love and favor, seeing it appears
that he only chooses unto himself the man that is godly, the rich in faith.
And that he will not justify the righteous, in the day that he turns away
from his unrighteousnes, to commit iniquity, nor necessarily prevent him
therein: nor will know the works of iniquity in the day of Account.

3. It may also administer sound comfort and consolation to all simple hearted,
sincere and godly affected persons, against all their scruples, fears, doubts,
and jealousies, as concerning their ignorances, weaknesses, and infirmities,
wherewith their minds are ordinarily perplexed; It having been showed that God
will never lay any of these things to their charge, or any whit the less
esteem of them, by reason thereof: but does and will always behold and judge
of them (through the riches of his grace in Jesus Christ) according to the
integrity, purpose of heart, and sincerity of affection, which he observes in
them toward his name.

4. And lastly, The consideration hereof, does also abundantly serve to beget
in all men an unfeigned love, and obedience toward God. I will love the Lord
(says David) because he has heard my voice, etc. Psalm. 116.1. And being but
advanced, from the sheepfold to an earthly Crown, and receiving a promise for
the continuance thereof to his house, has his heart thereby exceedingly filled
with affection toward him; how much more then may the consideration of his
goodness (before expressed) in advancing us, not from a sheepfold, but from
death it self, the fold of Satan, Hebr. 2.14. Nor to a terrestial and
corruptible crown, but to a glorious estate of immortality (even when we were
his enemies, Romans 5.8, 10. and neither asked nor desired any such thing of him)
serve to kindle and inflame our hearts with an unfeigned love and sincere
affecton toward him; especially if we consider what an heavenly City, immortal
crown, and weight of Glory he has therein prepared to bestow upon us for an
inheritance and crown of reward, even for that love, service and obedience,
which of bounden duty we owe unto him. The consideration of this Grace, caused
S. John to love God, 1 John 4.19. with the 9, 10. chap. 3.16. And constrained
Paul to the obedience of him, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.

FINIS.
Postscript.
BEcause I would not be mistaken in my meaning, concerning that which I have
spoken in the favor of ignorance; I thought it necessary, more clearly to
discover; That my intention therein is not to patronize any man's voluntary and
wilful ignorance, (such as that mentioned by S. Peter in his 2 Epist. chap
3.4, 5. or that of the Jews discovered in John 9.9. to the end of the chapter,)
For, for men to refuse to know, because they would not obey, or wilfully to
oppose evident grounds of reason, and light appearing unto them, (whether forth
of a hatred against it, or a love to walk in darkness, John 3.19. And so in
effect to say unto God, Depart from us for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, Job 21.14.) can be no more excusable then stubborn rebellion, and
disobedience against the truth, clearly known and understood. But the ignorance
for which I plead excuse, is that only which befalls men, either through
imbecility in nature, or want of means. For as it cannot be required of an
idiot to understand reason, nor of a child to distinguish betwixt good and
evil, natural internity having hidden those things from their eyes; and no
talent given to them to enable them thereunto: So neither (by the like reason)
can the particular knowledge and faith of the Gospel (or any thing else
whatsoever) be required of those to whom the necessary means thereof is not
offered; Upon which ground Christ declares: That if he had not come and spoken
unto the Jews, and done amongst them such works which did evidently demonstrate
unto them the truth and excellency of his doctrine, and that he was the Messiah
promised to come; they had not had sin in rejecting either him, or it, John
15.22, 23. with the 10, 27. And therefore ignorance in this nature cannot be
concluded any greater sin then Uriah his carrying of the Letter to take away
his own life, 2 Samuel 11.14, 15. which will never be laid to his charge.


