To Mr. John Eliot, an Esquire at (or near) the doors of the right Honorable the
Parliament of England.
SIR,
I Dread to send to your lodging any more, lest you should libell again for the
good counsel sent you, in behalf of the State, and for the good of your self
(that you would confess your great offense.) Was not that the effect of the
letter, that came to your lodging? Your boldness is high, when you dare affirm
contradictions, that an invective letter, could be as well persuasive as
invective, and that railing Beech (as you libell him) should seek, by railing,
to indear his old enemy (Eliot) to get him the collop of an estate, now in
Huckesters hands, and in the same letter too? madness indeed! what? then, when
Mr. Eliots Ax of Array was scarce taken from the Root of this Beech? or rather,
when this Beech was but newly removed from Eliots Ax of Array? what, and then?
when Eliot had gotten for his Malignant Axe a Parliament Helt? and then, when
Eliots Ax had so mangled this Beech, as a Parliament Ax? And was this the
season that Beech did write to Eliot to spare the root to hold up this Beech:
or to procure a collop to strengthen his sides? dull season! more dull man to
chop such a season, such an instrument! But O! your boldness (sir) that durst
attempt to have people believe you any thing! Experience, arrest this man of
falsehood. Say, can a gnawing corosive, and a heart-easing Cordial (both) be
given in the same cup? or mixed at the same ministration? it cannot be, you that
have sense, be you witnesses for experience, against Mr. Eliot. Sir, what I now
send, I send to a DOOR, where others may judge as well as your self, of that
which is sent.

I find by your libells (though I see not your water) that your eyes be red,
and that their fiery distemper, has deceived you in the object of your seeing.
To Red eyes, things objected do seem Red, to green eyes, things seem green,
And by counterfeits, things that have never so true existency, are blazed
abroad to be counterfeits.

Sir, I have something else to do, then repeat your pitiful contradictions
in your late legend, only I demand where were your wits (though you had lost
your honesty) to tax me of Malignaney, and of favor to Revolters? Is it not
generally known to be false? even in that very Honorable Assembly where you
would fasten it? Did you never see a Treatise, entitled [More sulpher for
Basing, etc.] No? you had one. Nor yet the [plot from Edom, etc.] No? yes, I am
sure you had one. And did you not see that letter to Maj. Genesis BROWN, with
this inscription, [The most famous London's blowing up by Londoners] you will
say no, why then, here is one sent you, though the name of Benjamin be
subscribed, (for his dear nearness to Joseph) yet Beech was that Benjamin,
that did first ondite, then press it to serve the State, against revolting and
revolters, and against Mr. Eliots six declensions too, and against the man with
the dark Lanthorn too, in the last page of the ensuing ALARVM. And think sir,
whether YOU may not be the man with that LANTERN: and whether you did not
write in one of your letters (found, and copied) that you had such a Lantern,
and that you would carry it with you into Pembrooke shire, after your first
four years digging, And did you not do as you said?

Sir, you have no shift for your falsehood (now) but to engage your shrinked
reputation that you did behold (through a cranney) Beeches heart not to be
right, nor yet his aims good; what ever he had done or suffered. Seeing you
will be cast and gone, if you stand to prove him a friend to Revolters. It is
thought that the Honorable Speaker does yet remember some remarkable passages
at the Rowles, when Beech did persuade obedience to the Parliament in these
latter stirs, and did utter his well-wishings to the Army, as well against
Revolters in England, as Rebels in Ireland. I know Mr. Speaker does remember a
passage.

Sir, You might see that Beech has a CLEAR of witnesses. You do boast (but
you do in your brag, abase that sacred allusion) that you have a CLOUD OF
WITNESSES. Indeed it must be a cloud if any thing, it will never be a [cleer]
that you are honest, and well affected.

Sir, Clouds may be dispersed, Rees ap Rees is dead, that Pillory blade, that
executioner of Roundheads (when you were a Cabby) that Marshall to Gerrard,
that well affected man, since, said Mr. Eliot, that grand witness against
Malignants, in M. Eliots cloud, that Trusty officer for the State, in M.
Eliots agency: But the cloud is dispelled, and terrible examples of late have
been 'shewne to Knights of the Post. Sir, They will not dare now, as formerly,
swear that Chalk is Cheese, yet sir, such props must support your reputation,
and your Legends, and the credit of a broken press may serve as one witness
amongst some, or else believe it, sir, nothing in the world can do it. All that
is light, and all that is true, will discover your falsehood.

Sir, Querie this to your self, may there not be some divinity, in the
restlesnesse of this Beech? why does he haunt me so from Room to Room? from
my Lodgings to the Lobby? from Vault to Vault? privately, publickely, when all
be a sleep he is stirring, and sees me in the dark? does he not know me
better then the woman that did bear me? how else durst he contend with a
Gentleman of my height and reputation? Dare these drossie inferiors contend in
a hot furnace of my gold? And will Beech be a Soliciter for the State, and a
Minister too? Is it not odious and scandalous? And what gain does he get, but
broken shins? does he not see me to be the only Justice and Committeeman that
does remain in favor at the door, through all the turns of State? And does he
not perceive that I am provided for all changes? if there should be an hundred
more? why will he be that sturdy wave that will dash himself against the Rock
of my power? Have not ships of a thousand tuns, and all the mighty waves that
ever came upon me, been broken to pieces? Does not he know so much? And does he
not see what a brain and a brow I have? Nor yet how prosperously I drive on
still with that stock of credit, given me by secluded Members? And will he not
understand, how well I am provided to answer about the business of Debenters?
Would any but a Madman deal with me, if there were not some rarity in the
work? Truly sir, there is something that does act me beyond the bait of your
Collop. And this I know, that if the Parliament be safe, you must be secured,
and kept from their door.

Truly sir, it shall not trouble me, what ever wrong I sustain more, by your
false tongue, and libelling penman, so justice be safe, and sway the Scepter.
If FALSEHOOD might once be turned out of doors, if a poor man's tale might be
heard; and if knavery in Scarlet may receive such a Mark, that it never creep
into favor again, Mr. Eliot, believe it, Beeches mouth will be then stopped,
more then by an hundred of your thin (Maligned) Collops.

Sir, give him leave to delight his afflicted mind with a plain verse, because
he is often very melancholy, and you love to make him so. Pray do not speak ill
of it. And though (your friend) Prag, belches out verses envenomed: your
despised friend Beech, does not do so, pray do not say he does, when he does
not, but thus take him as he means, without any affectation of loftiness,
That's your strain.

When once I see this happy day,
More pleasing then the Flowers in May,
When choking weeds plunkt by the poor,
And Knaves be driven from COMMONS DOOR.
When Justice grows, and sweet distills,
The sense delights, and Right fulfills,
O welcome be that happy time:
Respiring sweet like Rose in prime,
Then Beeches mouth shall stopped be,
When Subjects have this liberty.
Your neglected Monitor, WILLIAM BEECH.


