A TESTIMONY OF THE Ministers in the Province of Essex, TO THE Truth of Jesus
Christ, AND TO The Solemn League and Covenant; AS ALSO Against the Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times, and the Toleration of them.

Sent up to the Ministers within the Province of London, Subscribers of the
First TESTIMONY.

May 3d. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Tho. Underhill at the Bible in
Woodstreet, M.DC.XLVIII.

TO OUR REVEREND AND dear Brethren in the Lord, and in his work, Ministers of
the Gospel, in the Province of London, Subscribers to the late Testimony to the
Truth of Jesus Christ; Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied.
Reverend and Dear Brethren,
1.THE hearty zeal we owe to the glory of our gracious God, so mightily working
for us, his unworthy Ministers and People in this land, by stopping that deluge
of Popery, Superstition, and Profaneness, ready of late years by a prevailing
Faction to have overwhelmed us.

2. The Conscience of that Sacred Bond of our solemn League and Covenant,
thereupon taken against Popery, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, and
Profaneness.

3. The sad observation of that unthankful requital made for such
transcendent mercies, by so many more violent evils ever since, not only to
break out into lawless liberty and licentiousness, but to contend for the
sufferance and exercise of many dangerous things in matters of Doctrine and
Worship.

4. The active vigilance of Satan's Emissaries for sowing the. Tares of
pernicious Errors, detestable Heresies, and horrid Blasphemies.

5. The remembrance of that day of Humiliation enjoined by Authority of
Parliament, and observed by us not long since, for suppressing the growth and
spreading of those abominations so far in this Land.

6. The fear of some dreadful Judgment, the rod of Gods anger against us an
hypocritical Nation, and a people of his wrath, in case Reformation answerable
to our Covenant solemnly sworn, and humiliation publicly professed, should
not accordingly be endeavored.

7. The desire of our souls not to be partakers of other men's sins, lest we
partake with them also in their plagues.

8. The hope we have in the Lord, who has put into the hearts of the
honorable Houses of Parliament, to acknowledge, That never any of Gods
servants, since the foundation of the world had more high and strong
engagements, heartily, and sincerely, to endeavor the complete establishment
of purity and unity in the Church of God, That the same gracious God will also
give them an heart to finish it.

9. The sense of our duty not only as Christians earnestly to contend for the
faith once delivered to the Saints, but also as Ministers to bear witness to
the truth, and stand up for the confirmation thereof against all gainsayers.

10. The exemplary public Testimony given by your selves (our faithful
Brethren) in your late Attestation to the Truth of Jesus Christ, and to our
solemn League and Covenant, are (amongst diverse considerations) no small
inducements to us the Ministers of the Gospel in the County of Essex, to give
you the right hand of fellowship, not only by preaching the truth against
reigning Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these corrupt times; but by
preserving and transmitting that Sacred Depositum, as much as in us lies unto
all posterity.

We therefore whose names are hereunto subscribed do hereby declare and
testify to your selves, and to all our Brethren, the Ministers and Members of
this and all the Churches of Christ,

1. That the Confession of Faith, Directorie for Worship, and Humble Advice for
Church Government, presented by the Reverend Assembly of Divines to the
Honorable Parliament, are (as we conceive) so agreeable to the Word, that we
cannot but exceedingly bless the Name of our God, for his presence with that
Assembly; Professing our hearty concurrence therein, and cheerful readiness
to submit thereto; resolving likewise to continue humble Suitors at the throne
of Grace, That our gracious God in his due time would stir up the Parliament
to establish the foresaid Confession of Faith, and Advice for Church Government
with their Civil Sanction, as they have already the Directory for Worship.

2. That we look upon our solemn League and Covenant as a most choice blessing
from God to these Churches and Kingdoms so happily united therein; Earnestly
entreating the Lord to give us grace, that we and all his people may continue
faithful therein; and not to charge upon us, but of his abundant mercy to
pardon, wherein our selves, or the Kingdom have any way therefrom hitherto
receded.

3. That however we judge it most agreeable to Christianity, That tender
Consciences of Dissenting Brethren be tenderly dealt withal, yet we dare not
carry in our bosoms such steely Consciences, and rockie hearts, as not to
mourn in our souls: That after those strong engagements, and such a solemn
day of public humiliation for suppressing those growing and spreading Errors
and Heresies, yet in stead thereof (under color of Liberty of Conscience) the
same still are boldly and publicly vented and maintained, as much, if not
more, then ever before, to the great dishonor of the great and dreadful name
of Almighty God, the subversion of his most holy Truth, the contempt of the
public Worship, Ordinances, and Ministry of Jesus Christ, the perdition of
unstable souls, the grief and scandal of friends to Religion, and the great
reproach of our Church and Kingdom; the which however some may perhaps count
wisdom to countenance and connive at, yet for our parts we do solemnlie and
sincerely profess as in the presence of Almighty God the Searcher and judge
of all hearts, That from our souls we do utterly detest and abhor, as all
former cursed doctrines of Popery, Arminianisme, and Socianisme: So likewise
all the damnable Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these present evil
times, whether of Anti-Scripturists, Familists, Antinomians, Anti-Trinitarians,
Arrians, Anabaptists, or whatsoever is found contrary to sound Doctrine, and
the power of Godliness.

In all humility beseeching the God of all grace, to direct, stablish,
strengthen, settle, and still to preserve us and all his faithful people, from
being led away with the Error of the wicked, to fall from our own
steadfastness; from our hearts fervently praying that the Lord Jesus may not
have a controversy with this Church and Kingdom for suffering any thing which
his soul abhors; withal ever desirous to bless his holy Name, for your pious
forwardness in faithful witness-bearing to the Truth of Christ, and
persuading our selves, that this your zeal will provoke others to the like
Attestation,

We commend you to God, and the word of his grace, and remain, Yoor unfeigned
loving Brethren and Fellow Laborers in the work of the Lord. John Bedle,
Minister of Bar^eston. William Sandford, Minister of Rooding alba. John Smith
Minister of Dunmow magna. Francis Hill Minister of Rooding alta. Henry Bates
Minister of Mashbery. Samuel Noel Minister of Canfield parva. Francis Bridge
Minister of Much Canfeild. Martin Alderson Minister of Dunmow Parva. Samuel
Newton Minister of Sanford Magna. Isaac Pennington Minister of Sanford Parva.
James Parkin Minister of Thacksted. Elisha Prat Minister of Lindsell. Anthony
Nicholas Minister of Willingale Spain. John Parkehurst Minister of
Southshoobery. Nicolas Beard Minister of Rechford. John Gibson Minister of
Alsingdon. Thomas Peck Minister of Prittlewell. John Argur Minister of Leigh.
Abraham Caley Minister of Rayleigh. Samuel Purcas Minister of Sut^^n. Thomas
Oresby Minister of Hackwell. Josiah Church Minister of South-Church. John Man
Minister of Rawxeth. James Norrice Minister of Canne^don. Christoper Scot
Minister of VV^^ring magna. Isaiah Sutliff Minister of Rottendon. Nathaneel
Ranew Minister of Felsted, John Harrison Minister of Waltham parva. William
Hales Pastor of Hallingbury magna. John Yardley Minister of Sheering. Edward
Spranger Pastor of Harlow. Jeremiah Dyke Pastor of P^^nedon magna. Thomas
Cramphorne Minister of Nettleswell. Henry Wilkinson Pastor of ^pping. John
Harper Pastor of Nasing. Thomas Denn Minister of Latton. John Wilson Minister
of Hallingbury parva. John Borradale Minister of Steeple Bumpsted. John Pannell
Minister of Stanborn. John Clark Minister of Tilbury. Raph Hillis Minister of
Redgwell. Peter Sainthill Minister of Ovington. John Gent Minister of
Birdbrook. Edmund Bruer Minister of Castle Hennigham. Robert Chadsley Minister
of Yeldham parva. Robert Fisher Minister of Belcham St Paul. Zach. Fitch
Minister of Twinsted. John Chamberlin Minister of Bulme. Henry Ham Minister of
Much Waltham. Atiel Rathband Minister of VVrittle. Israel Hewit Minister at
Malden. Samuel Smith Minister of Fryaring. James Willet Minister of Chisset
parva. Rowland Greenwood Minister of Whimbish. John More Minister of Clavering.
Hugh Glover Minister of Debden. William Prime Minister of Elmeden. Robert Abbot
Minister of Stansted Mountfitchet. George Wilson Minister of Elsenham. John
Wells Minister of Elford magna. Humfry Maddison Minister of Wansted. Samuel
Austin Minister of Rumford. John Bowyer Minister of Dag^nham. Philip Sanders
Minister of Magdalen Laver. John Lavender Minister of High Ongar. John VVheatly
Minister of Havering. John Wood Minister of Abbis Reading. Gamaliel Carre
Minister of Lambourne. Edmund Bruer Minister of Fifeild. John Siday Minister of
Belcham Roiding. Thomas King Minister of High Laver. George Bound Minister of
Kelvedon. Edward Benthall Minister of Stapleford Abbot. Thomas Horrock Minister
of Stapleford Tawney. Walter Wells Minister of Theyden Mount. Edward Wiston
Minister of Norton Mandevile. John Willis Minister of Ingolston. Nathaneel
Hewitson Minister of Woodham Mortimer. William Rogers Minister of Marget Ingo.
Daniel Duckfeild Minister of Childerditch. Edward Ford Minister of Great
Warley. Edward Green Minister of Shelley. ^ohn Wilson Preacher of the Gospel at
Baddow Parva. ^eorge Smith Minister of the Gospel at Dedham. ^^hn Hubbard
Minister of the Gospel in Boxted. ^^omas Lawson Minister of Doniland. ^^^^ph
^osselin Minister of the Gospel in Earles-Colne. ^^^uel Rogers Minister of Much
Tey. Nathaneel Bugg Minister of Much Horkesly. John Fenar Minister of Langham.
John White Minister of VVormingford. Timothy Rogers Pastor of Chapel. Richard
Pulley Minister of Fordham. Gamaliel Carre Minister of Aldeham. Thomas Brackley
Pastor of Colne Engayne. Samuel Bridge Minister of Great Burstad. Walter
Tailor Minister of Hutton. James More Minister of Layendon. Francis Scott
Minister of Fabben. Jonathan Hoyle Minister of Curringham. William How Minister
of Dronton. Samuel Smith Minister of Sanden. Christopher VVragge of Much Badow.
Edward Cliffe Minister of East Hornedon. Richard Cardinal Minister of West
Hornedon. Marmaduke James Minister of Vpminster. Daniel Lathum Minister of
Stifford. John Overed Minister of Topisfeild. Jeremy Benton Minister of
Finchingfeild. Robert Harmer, Ministers in Colchester. Alexander Piggot
Ministers in Colchester. Gabrel Wyersdale Minister of Lexden. Robert Tuller
Minister of James in Colchester. Francis Onge Minister of the Gospel. Henry
Steinmer Minister of Bradfeild Nathanael Ward Minister of Shenfeild. John
Powell Minister of the Gospel. John Ferrity Minister of Theydon German. Nicolas
Foskingham Minister of the Gospel. Nehemiah Dod Minister of Dodinghurst. James
Torye Minister of East Hanningfeild. Tho. Lathum Minister of the Gospel. Edward
Thomas Minister of Oaten Belcham. Thomas Deeresly Minister of VVakham St Paul.
John Sherman Rector of Bradwell juxtamare. Nehemiah Holmes Minister at
Southminster. Anthony Samons Minister of Burnham. Nath. Hewitson Minister of
VVoodham Mortimer. William Buckley Minister of Nayland. Edmund Sherman
Minister at Bradwell.

In matters that have passed the Assembly of Divines, it is not fit for us that
are members thereof to make any further Attestation; In all other branches of
this Testimony we do fully and cordially concur with our Brerhren,

Richard Cleyton Minister at Easton magna. Matthew Newcomen Minister of the
Gospel at Dedham.




FINIS.

