King Charle's TRIAL JUSTIFIED: OR, Eight Objections against the same fully
answered and cleared, by Scripture, Law, History and Reason. Being the sum of a
Charge given at the last Sessions held at Trewroe in the County of Cornwall,
April 4. 1649.

By Colonel Robert Bennet.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for R. A. 1649.

The sum of the Charge at the Sessions held at Trewroe April 3. 1649. for the
County of Cornwall.
GEentlemen, By the good providence of God we are once more met upon this
employment of Justice, the conservative of our civil peace; wherein the
goodness of our God is the more observable, that even while the Sword (which
had wont to silence the Law) has been called to act in most parts of the
Kingdom, our Judicatures nevertheless have had their freedom to hear and
redress the peoples complaints, Deus nobis haec ^tia fecit; this is no other
then the finger, yea the right hand of the Almighty amonst us. It is fallen
unto the lot of a very insufficient person to give the Charge this day,
especially considering the late transmutations in the Nation, which in no
reason may be slipped over in silence at such a time as this. I know they have
given occasion to the raising of many regretfull Objections in the minds of the
people, the which to remove, I conceive it a proper work for this occasion.

Object. 1. Say some, The King is dead, and by what Authority do thou these
things, and who gave thee this Authority?

Resp. We act as Justices by Commission, and Authority from the Legislative
power of the Kingdom, the Commons in England, vertually the same Authority
gives us our Office that gave all the Kings of England their Office and Trust,
which appears by that Interrogatory to the people in the old form of their
Coronations, Will you have this man to reign over you? Which Solemnity the Law
intends should be at a general Convention of the whole Kingdom, and inflicts
a penalty upon every man of estate that shall be then absent; and the practice
of the Kingdom was suitable to the Law, the greatest number of Kings, since
the Conquest, having no other color to the Crown, but the Parliament and
peoples Authority. We sit as Justices by the same Authority, which was to choose
the Laws and Customs, by which the Kings of England were bound by Oath to
govern the Kingdom: The same Authority by which all the Courts of England
stand, and their Officers uphold the justice of the Commonwealth, even from
that authority under God we derive our present power, which gives a legal
existence to all the just powers Civil or Military, which ever were or now are
in the Nation. And although this and other services had wont to be in the Kings
Name, it will appear to have been but for matter of form, and that the life and
power was in and from the people, because the people brought that power into a
Law, the Law trusted the King with it, to convey it to particular persons, the
people limited the trust they gave the King in the Law, he might not dispose it
as he pleased himself, he might not Commission an Alien, or a Papist: and
therefore the people are the original of all true power, and that conduit Pipe
of Authority (the King) being cut off, the trust returns to the first givers
(the people,) from whom our authority as out of the very fountain issues.

Object. 2. But the King is dead, not by a natural, but a violent stroke: How
comes that to pass?

Resp. The King indeed is fallen by the stroke of Justice, which smote him
openly for his Crimes, and the blood he had shed in the face of Heaven; and I
confess when persons of highest trust among the people are brought to the Axe,
it presents us a doleful case: Nevertheless when fury does not hurry them,
but Justice lays hold upon them in the way of God, we have all cause to sing,
Gloria Dee in excelsis, in terris pax, inter homines benevolentia.

Object. 3. But is not the Person of the King privileged? does not the
Scripture say, He that touches him shall not be innocent?

Resp. The King must not be touched by the secret, or open violence of men upon
any pretense, when he performs his office: Nay, he may not be touched for his
offenses upon men's irregular passions; but the King and every son of Adam, may
and must be touched by the Ordinance of the Almighty set up against evil
doers, even by the impartial hand of Justice, which is Innocence it self. I
confess that King that sits upon his Throne, and scatters the wicked with
his eyes. That King that faithfully judges the poor, his Throne shall be
established for ever, he is the privileged King that must not be touched. But
such a one was not the person fallen, but a mighty hunter of his poor people
before the Lord; and if so, The holy God who respects not persons has given
us in his Book precept and instance beyond all exception, that in such case no
mortal humane flesh has a privilege from the stroke of Justice to the loss
of life. As therefore the Objector has appealed unto Scripture, unto Scripture
shall thou go, Genesis 9.4.5.6. verses. God forbids all eating of Blood because it
was the life of the Creature, in the fourth verse: The reason of this
prohibition appears in the entrance to the fifth verse, your blood of your
lives will I require, he will surely make inquisition for the blood of man; and
then the Lord expresses himself in the manner in a universal proposition,
which (says Deodat.) lays impartial hold on great as well as on petty
offenders. At the hand of every man's Brother will I require the life of a man,
which I understand in the active, as well as in the passive sense, viz. that
every brother do bring, as well as be brought to Justice for bloodshed: And
that God requires this at the peril of the neglecter (though a brother) as
well as declare it to the terror of the spiller of blood (though a brother)
and then at the sixth verse we have a plain irrepealable Law in the cause; He
that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; with such a reason
annexed, as admits no exception amongst the sons of Adam, for in the Image of
God made he Man, so that two universal Propositions arise out of these words.
First, Every murderer is to be put to death. Secondly, Every man that will be
guiltless of bloodshed, must endeavor to bring the Murderer to Justice. And
in further evidence to the truth hereof, let us consider, what a likeness here
unto have all Gods expressions upon this occasion. More precisely in the 35. of
Numbers, a Chapter treating only of this subject of bloodshed, there we see the
first universal Proposition frequently repeated in terminis, The murderer
shall surely be put to death, verses 17.18.19.30.31. And no less plainly have
we the second universal Proposition in verses 31.33.34. expressly declaring
that bloodshed defiles the Land, that the Land cannot be cleansed, but by the
blood of him that seed it. And that therefore they should execute the
Murderer, that they might not be defiled with blood. There shall take no
satisfaction for the life of a murderer. The murderer shall surely be put to
death. So we see it is plain, every man that will be guiltless of bloodshed
must endeavor to bring the murderer to justice. And therefore if the King be
descended of the sons of Adam, and if he have unjustly spilt the blood of his
people, the Scriptures are plain that he has no privilege, and that unless
the people endeavor that the hand of Authority touch him for it, the blood he
has spilt has defiled them all, and they cannot be innocent. His Throne can
give him no privilege in this case of blood, God would not endure that his
Throne should exempt from Justice: the Sanctuary was his Throne amongst men,
yet God commands the murderer to be taken thence and executed, Exodus 21.14. And
wise Solomon understood it so, when he commanded Benhaiah to execute blood
guilty Joab having the horns of the Altar in his hand: and if God would have
the blood guilty person plucked from his own most sacred Throne, yea executed in
it, (which in other causes was an insufferable profanation) it cannot
displease him to pluck a Murderer to Justice from the Thrones of men: and as
the Scriptures clear the Thesis, so their instances make good the practice,
that Kings are responsible to God and to men too, for their bloodshed and
misgovernment: that they have no such privilege of Impunity for their Prsons
as their Parasites have flattered them to believe, which King Agag found to be
true, notwithstanding his Plea that he acted, Loco and tempore belli, and had
Quarter given him, 1 Samuel 15.33. the Kings of Israel and Judah give us many
presidents of the same: the cause of Jehu upon Jehoram being very opposite, God
giving testimony by a blessing upon his posterity, 2 Kin. 8.30. and although
the persons that acted in chief in such causes, for their indirect intentions
and other prevarications, often drew upon themselves the wrath of God, and
altered the nature of the work in their own persons; yet did not that at all
cleave to it in the Abstractum of executing Justice upon the capital Offender,
which all along we find approved as well as commanded of God. And if I may be
permitted to travel amongst the Nations of the world, what people has not
avowed their right herein? Let the Queen-Regent of the Western world, Imperial
Rome (as she gave law to all the rest) speak for all. How often did it change
the form of the Supreme Authority for the corruptions of those that were
entrusted with it. Remarkable is the Sentence of the Senate upon the Emperor
Nero, who for his misgovernment and baseness was adjudged to be whipped to
death, says my Author, In consensu Senatus praecipuorum Ducum, and exercituum
just Decretum est ut Tyrannus telleretur. Although he escaped execution by
being his own Executioner a day too soon.

Object. 4. But was not David guilty of the death of Uriah, and yet he did not
suffer for it? Nay, did not David execute the Amalekite that slew wicked King
Saul, because he stretched forth his hand against the Lords Anointed,
notwithstanding the Amalekite pleaded, that Saul's escape was past hope, and
that what he did was to put the King out of the anguish and pain he was in?

Resp. First, for the case of David in the death of Vriah, although this Answer
were sufficient to that Argument, to say, that it is absurd, and illogicall,
because it concludes from a particular to a universal, and from a matter of
fact to a matter of right Negative: and another sufficient Answer to this
Argument may be, that the death of Vriah being secretly contrived to be done
upon an assault by the hand of the Enemy, where there were others in the party,
and Vriah might have a possibility to come off, that therefore no humane
Judicature (which is to proceed secundum allegata and probata) could find the
matter of fact; yet I rest not in these replies, but for satisfaction to this
doubt I answer, That it was not David's Regal Authority that did exempt him
from Justice in this case, but it was the indulgence of the Almighty upon his
true repentance: and the Text is plain for it, 2 Samuel 12. at the fifth Ver.
David unawres gives a sentence of death upon himself to Nathan, and at verse
13. there is David's repentance, I have sinned against the Lord, then follows
the Lords indulgence, the Lord has put away thy sin, and that is not all, thou
shall not die; there is David's full discharge from the hand of Justice for the
case of the Amalckite: what a senseless argument more is this, to conclude
from David's execution of Justice upon a wretch, for a bloody murder upon a
King when he was in the most undoubted discharge of his duty, unto the
exempting of a tyrant from Justice for his misdeeds? who did ever justify such
a wilful murder upon any man though never so wicked!

Object. 5. Quis est tam magnus pro tanto munere hoc? Is not the King Supreme
who can try him, seeing, Supremo non datur Superius?

Resp. There is great odds between Supreme in power to give, and Supreme in
power given, he that is only Supreme in power given, is not so high but that
there are greater then he, and such is the King, of whom it was true, that he
was Major singulis, but Minor universis, and long since this Nation knew the
Kings Superior, Scilicet Curiam suam, says old Fleta; the people in
Parliament who often heretofore did and now again may try their Kings as well
as other Officers.

Object. 6. But what say we to that clause in the third Article of the
Covenant, which respects the preservation of the Kings person and Authority.
The Article runs thus. We shall with the same reality and constancy in our
several vocations endeavor with our lives and estates mutually to preserve
and defend the rights and privileges of Parliaments, and the Liberties of the
Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and Authority,
IN THE PRESERVATION AND DEFENSE of the true Religion and Liberties of the
Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our Loyalty,
and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power
and greatness.

Resp. The plain purpose and scope of this clause in the Article concerning the
King, was to testify the tender affections we had to him, and must (to our
comfort) remain a Monument thereof to all Generations; as also that we
endeavored (if it had been possible) to win the King to us, before he had
run himself and the Kingdom into more mischief: and the better to prevall
herein, we gave him, which may more, this Solemn assurance in the Covenant,
that we meant to give him the greatest share in the preservation of Religion
and the Liberties of the Kingdom, that we should exalt his Throne, and make him
greater (if it were possible) in the affections of his people at home, and more
scared of his enemies abroad, then any of his Ancestors: But the King in whose
power alone it remained, by joining with us to put us into a condition to act
what we did intend, rejects the Tender, Declares and makes war against us.
What color is there then to press it now upon us? the plain and Grummaticall
sense of the Article being, that is covenanteth for some things absolutely and
singly, viz. to Endeavor, etc. the preservation of the Privileges of
Parliament, the Liberties of the Kingdom and true Religion; for other things it
covenanteth under a restrained, limited and conditional sense, viz. to preserve
the Kings person and Authority; the express words are IN THE PRESERVATION of
Religion and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and no otherwise, nor farther
(...) so. And (...) both sides always interpreted this Article; That the King
and his party understood it thus, besides many other arguments drawn from their
violent practices against it, appears very plainly in all their Pamphlets
against the Covenant, many of which I have seen, the chiefest of that party
concluding from this Article, that unless the King (...) with the Parliament
(to use their own words) turn Roundhead, the Covenant provided not at all for
him: Very much to this purposespeaketh a Treatise against the Covenant printed
at Bristol about five years since, and another set forth by the University of
Oxford, approved by general consent in a full Convocation, June 1. 1647. Nay
some of that side, of no small judgment, have maintained (and well enough they
might) as to the Kings interest which they endeavored to set up) that it had
been far better the King had not been mentioned as all in the Covenant in
that limited sense. That the Parliament does so understand the Article,
appears, that immediately after the Covenant had been taken, they did more
vigorously prosecute, and require others to prosecute the war, even when the
King was upon the place, without any respect to his person and authority, and
after gave Commission absolutely without limitation or restraint in that case.
And moreover, the Parliments using of the Kings name in their public
authorities, has still been interpreted in opposition of his person, because
his person was in opposition to his duty, which was to protect the people and
the Courts of Justice, not to make war against them; and so and no otherwise
they have still interpreted themselves to the people in the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and all other engagements of like nature, as binding the people
to the public Liberties in opposition to the Kings person now in arms against
them. And we have all along so understood them, and not otherwise; that if at
any time the preservation of the Kings authority and person stood in
competition with Religion and the public Liberties; we have been instructed
that the Covenant and Oaths aforesaid bound us to prefer the latter: Unto
all which, if we add the war, mischief and bloodshed of three Kingdoms by
the King maintained to the last extremity, it will appear, that neither the
Covenant and Oaths aforesaid, nor any heart truly conscious of the glory of
God can afford a plea sufficient to exempt the King from Justice; And sure, it
is the horrible unrighteousness of our natures to think that God likes well
the execution of inferior offenders, and the sparing of the Capital, in one
and the same matter.

Object. But there were no Lords consenting to this Trial of the King.

Resp. You cannot say so; it is true, the majority dissented; but what of that?
Has the Negative of the Lords House been judged a sufficient Bar to the
proceedings of the Commons? The matter was otherwise about seven years since,
when Master Pim was sent to the House of Lords to tell them, that if they
refused to join with the Commons in settling the Militia, the Commons would do
it of their own authority, and the Lords should have no share therein; and the
matter was otherwise when about five years a worthy Gentleman of this County,
now upon the Bench, being unjustly imprisoned by that House, was discharged
with damages by the Commons to his immortal honor.

I am sure if the King cannot justly claim a Negative against the People,
because he is sworn to Govern by the Laws which the People shall choose; the
Lords who never had the Peoples choice, but sit by Patent from the King, cannot
claim a Privilege against the People, which the King that gave the Patent had
not in himself. I honor the persons of the Nobles of England and their
lawful Privileges, and I am persuaded that the truly noble amongst them will
not keep up such Privileges as are not consistent with the Fundamental
Privileges of the Free borne English Nation the mother of us all; and for the
rest I am apt to say with the Philosopher, Nulla mihi inter malos and Tyrannos
Nobilitas.

Object. But the Commons House was not free; They had a Treaty with the King,
How came that to be broken off? Did not the Army interpose, and take many
Members, and Imprison them coming to the House?

Resp. First, It Is somewhat worth your notice, That the Treaty expired before
the Army acted, otherwise then by way of humble Message; nevertheless (if the
Council of the Almighty had been so) I could have wished that there had never
been a color for this Argument of a force upon the Parliament, which has been
over and over the Plea of every side; I could wish there had been no color for
it when the Scottish Army was kept so long in the Kingdom at their first
entrance, and after satisfaction given them; nor when the tumults came first to
Westminster; or when the Seamen came first against White Hall with Ordnance in
Liters; nor upon the frequent insurrection, and insolent Petitions in and about
London upon all emergencies; nor upon this last occasion mentioned in the
Objection: But I perceive God had a purpose to stain all creature glory, by
suffering men to run into folly so far, that sometimes by force they must be
pulled out of the fire they had kindled upon themselves and others. The answer
which the Parliament party gave their adversaties upon this Argument, was, that
they cordially endeavored the public good, and the redressing of the soul
abuses in the former government, that the soones of Zerviah were too hard for
them; that there was an intended, yea a visible mischief acting against the
honest party by a Malignant party; that their own actings which had any
appearance of force, had an equitable justice in them, were defensive, because
they were either for the prevention, or for the present encounter of such
eville as were ready to overrun all. And that designs of that mischievous
nature securely prevented, they did resolve to abandon all force, and to live
only upon rule of Law. And when indeed and bona fide the case is such, I do
not think but force, which is as much the Ordinance of God, as freedom, has
then its rightful use and exercise, viz. to set at liberty that justice and
truth which corrupt men hold captive, under a pretense of Privilege, and that
the equity of man's intentions and actings in such extremities, will justify
before God and man, rather then the letter applied to uphold a mischief, and
this case must needs be frequent in Imperfect humans Constitutions, unless
rules seasonably make remedy upon complaint; and this was apparently the case
between the King and Parliament in sundry particulars; and let the judicious
say (having read the Armies Remonstrance) if this became not now again truly
as much the case of the Kingdom as then: And yet besides all this, the Army
will plead that when they did interpose an act, after multiplied addresses made
to the Parliament and themselves, they did it for the removal, rather then the
laying on of a force upon the Parliament, the Houses enjoying an unquestionable
freedom when the King rejected the four Bills presented to him in order to a
Personal Treaty, and consequently when they passed the Votes of Non-Addresses
which followed thereupon, which Votes stood good many Months; but a party in
Scotland liked not this course, their great design being to keep and maintain
themselves an interest in this Commonwealth; and under the abused names of
Treaty, Covenant, and Church Government, they close with the Cavaliers; in
falls a round party that had appeared for the Parliament by Land, Batten and
Jorden by Sea, the Lord Willoughby of Parhath formerly made Speaker of the
house of Lords pro tempore, and the multitude of the City, and revolted
Shipping united all together, quickly found a means to kindle such a flame in
the bowels of the Kingdom, that nothing but the hand of God remained of power
to quench it again; imperious petitions daily storm the Parliament, speaking
concurrently with all the rest the same language for a Cessation and personal
Treaty.

Where was the freedom of the Parliament in the midst of all these tumults?
and now many faithful Members being abroad to quench this horrid flame, and
others over whelmed with this new faction, the rest got an opportunity to
revoke the Votes of Non-Addresses so solemnly and deliberately passed, and to
carry the House for a Personal Treaty upon the worst and most dishonorable
terms that had ever ever yes fear the Sun on the part of the Parliament. All
the Parliaments friends abroad, Presbyterians and others, stand amazed at the
matter; the Kings party in City and Country triumph and browbeat their
Conquerors; Pamphlets printed to vent much scorn and menacies upon the
Parliaments friends; at length we all petition against this defusive Treaty,
the petition's rejected; then all honest parties of the Kingdom close, and as
the last visible remedy, solicit the Army to interpose, by this time
returning from one of the wonders of this generation (besides other pettier
matters) the dissipation of the three potent Armies, in the North, West and
South. The Army in behalf of the Kingdom at length humbly remonstrates to the
Parliament against the Treaty, or at least that they would be more cautious
what they did in it; for want of audience the Army is feign to declare against
it; but they were now sunk into so deep a Lethe, they were sensible of nothing,
although God himself in most men's judgments, declared against the Treaty: in
that after so many additions of time to lengthen it out, and after the utmost
industry used to shuffle up in end, the time expires, and all parties are
forced to break off without any thing done, and to sum up the fruit of all
this expensive tedious Treaty in a Vote, that the Kings Concessions were not
satisfactory; truth is he had granted nothing at all to the satifaction of the
Kingdom; and yet the strong factions in and about the Parliament within four
days, and nothing more done or obtained, carry the House again into a Vote,
that the Concessions were a ground to proceed upon to settle the peace of the
Kingdom, all which tossng, turning, and over-turning in so bad a business, was
no other in my eye then the effect of a force upon the freedom of the Houses
first mentioned. And then, and not till then, to prevent a worse mischief, the
Army appears Vim vi repellere, to settle the Parliament in the freedom which
it had before the Scottish Confederacy, and the repeal of the Votes of the
Non-Addresses; and for their seizing the persons of the Members, I confess it
is my opinion that they that had a hand in, or gave countenance to so dangerous
a Treason, are not fit to be trusted with the Liberties of England. Desperate
is the safety of that Common wealth, where the persons trusted with the supreme
Authority challenge a privilege of impunity when they transgress.

Object. 8. They that are apt to object that this doctrine exposes persons in
Authority to the daily violencies of the instable multitude:

Resp. Did they Christianly consider from whence the safety of Rulers arises,
they would blush to make that objection; God is the alone giver of safety, and
well-governing is the good Rulers best preservation; If the Heathen Poet could
say, Integer vita scelerisque purus non eget Mauri jaoulis vec arcu; I would
not have Professors of Christian Religion more faithless then the Gentiles;
the uprightness of the upright shall deliver him; and let men make their Tower
never so strong, unrighteousness will make them desolate. To conclude,
although the King be dead, although he be fallen by the hand of Justice,
notwithstanding his pretense of personal privilege from Scripture, or from
his Supreme Authority, notwithstanding the clause in the Covenant, and the
non-concurrence of the House of Lords, or pretended force of the Army upon some
Members, or any other objection, our Authority as Justices of the Peace,
appears to me unquestionable and sure. And what I have spoken upon this
subject, I desire may not be understood to aggravate, or keep up differences
amongst men; I have laid aside many pertinent things because I would not
offend; and I profess seriously in a conscientious desire of the peace and
good agreement of all men, that desire peace, I have been thus large to clear
the foundation of the freedom and authority of the Commons of England, that we
might all build our peace together upon this sure Cornerstone under God. You
see I have not favored any particular interest above other in all my Discourse,
I have spoken under no other name but as an English man, and a promoter of
common justice without respect of persons; it is your Privilege to enjoy it, as
old as England; your unsettled minds hinder the enjoyment of it, and lengthens
out your troubles and burdens, to the grief of those that labor for you, in
this, and other Seats of authority; this is the worst I intend, public peace
upon a foundation of equal Justice; and I specially commend it for the present
service to the Grand Inquest; because in order thereunto by you the first part
is to be acted: I shall not fall into a particular enumeration of offenses, and
Statutes made against them, as the manner is; it is common to you at every
Assizes and Session of the Peace; and I am confident you need not a repetition
(at present) thereof. Thus much only be pleased in the general to hear in that
kind; Let not blood, oppression and fraud escape your severest inquiry; respect
no man's person that comes in judgment before you, present all wilful and
profane Blasphemers of the Name and Majesty of God; let vagrant Rogues,
Idelers, and the common Nurseries of all baseness and mischief [Alehouses]
feel the justice of the Law. And while you are together, bethink your selves
of something of your own, for the better securing of the County against
invasion and insurrection: of something for the advance of your own Manufactures
and Commodities; for the bettering of the condition of the poor (that, that
shame of men Beggars and begging may cease amongst us) and whatever else may
give an advancement to righteousness and peace, and we on the Bench shall
join with you, and the God of Righteousness and peace direct us all. Amen.

FINIS.
To the Religious and Honorable Sir Hardrest Waller Knight, Commander in Chief
of all the Western Forces and Garrisons.
Honorable and Honored Sir,
BEsides the task which your trust has put upon me amongst the Forces in
field, a Garrison within this County, and besider the business of my own
particular command, I have also all along (...) a share in the Civil
administrations; the last singly considered (I confess) had been enough to be
laid upon such a one as I am, who pleads my excuse with you, if there appear
not that exactness (...) business which is desirable; I am full of zeal to
have all things amongst (...) under a Contentfull as well as a secure
management; and therefore I was inclinable (being moved unto (...)) to give the
Charge (...) the last Sessions of the peace, where, as I had an opportunity, so
(...) it my duty to satisfy the Country concerning the late and present
proceedings of the Parliament, which have been miserably abused by (...)
specious objections raised to trouble and interrupt the settlement of the
Commonwealth, the (...) material of them, have been long since answered, and
therefore what I did in that Province, is little other than a Repetition of old
Parliament language, and that phrase of (...). I have industriously kept my
self unto in all my Replies to these Objections: And herewith I present the
whole to your view; the (...) I confess has some small difference from what
was spoken, the Liberty. I used in expression, carrying me into were variety
then would beseem the paper; and in one or two passages, the (...) gathering
up what escaped the present expression. I assure you, else, it is one and the
something in word and writing. I see not any (...)upon it as worthy the sending
to you. That you may be persuaded the sooner to accept of my good will, and
overlook my faults in your own business lest in my trust, when this Paper
shall mind you of there employments which must be sometimes attended, is the
(...) design driven as by, Sir,

Your affectionate Servant, ROB. BENNET.
Cornwall April 23, 1649.

