A Glance at the Glories Of SACRED FRIENDSHIP. By E. B. Esquire
THE ADDRESS.
WHere 's Friendships Residence? To what unknown
New Planet-World is That rare Phoenix flown?
Great, and Good GOD! Who did so low descend,
As to become, even to Thy Foes, a FRIEND,
My Genius so inspire, that what I sing,
Glory to THEE, Good Will to Men may bring!
So may these Lines the Depths of Friendship sound,
As Love, being sunk, may rise more practiced, more renowned.
The World 's a Lott'ry, which does comprehend
A thousand Blanks for One choice Prize -- A FRIEND.
THE POEM.
I.
FRIENDSHIP! thy sacred Feet never tread the Path
Of vap'ring Gallants, or the Sons of Wrath:
Nor sitt'st Thou throned in Beauties wanton Eyes;
Such short-lived Page'antry as Fondlings prize:
(Thy inner Glory, Virtues brighter Grace,
Shines in the Souls, not in the Bodies Face:)
Nor on Thy nobler Score may be allowed
Til' Inconstant, Envious, Covetous, or Proud;
Nor the Suspicious: for, when such rude Swine
Root up Thy thriving Fence, who will trust them with Loves Vine?
II.
SHould Friendship ask, or grant, or act what 's Ill,
It would (like Saturn in Conjunction) still
Sad Influence send: If Guile might plead Loves Rites,
It were The COVENANT then of Hypocrites.
No; but It Is Way (like Innocence) should be
The Via Lactea of Sincerity.
'T is so divine, as not to be expressed
With what the Brain produces, but the Breast:
'T is such an Eminence of Mind, as tends
To Inexpressibles, even All that 's Good of Friends.
III.
IT is the Marriage of Affections, so
Of Fortunes, Interests, and Counsels too.
It is Loves golden Chain, and does imply
Delight, Respect, Care, Prudence, Constancy.
It is Loves Unison, where Two agree
In well-tuned Minds, Angel-like Harmony.
It is infused by Heaven, by Virtue fed,
Preserved by Merit, by sweet Nature spread.
It is begun with Judgment, does persever
With Grace, and shall conclude with Glory; so, with Never.
IV.
DOwn from on High It Is Radiations beam.
'T is the Realitie of Jacobs Dream:
The Scale of Intellectual Heaven, which has,
For two chief Luminaries, Truth and Faith:
Whose Orb is blessed with each benigner Star:
Humility and Worth it is Gemini are.
As Spheres in Spheres, so harmonize, so move
Hearts on (those Poles of Friendship) Peace and Love.
To whose sweet Consort other Musick's flat.
Think such a Thought as none but Friends can think; 't is That.
V.
GReat Power of Friendship! with what active Fire
Inflam'st Thou first, then crown'st each high Desire?
Were 't not for Thee, thick Darkness would be hurled,
As a black Veil, over the broad-fac'd World:
For, if eclipsed were Thy gracious Light,
Though thousand Suns did shine, it still were Night.
As fragrant Fumes from Coals of Incense rise;
So, by ascending, Thou perfum'st Allies;
That Thou may freely to thy Friends dispense
Thy Magazins of Wealth, Art, Nature, Excellence.
VI.
IN These Olympicks 't is the maine Contest,
Who shall ore-come by loving Most, and Best.
Thou, when Deaths Harbinger accosts thy Friend,
Thy Bodies and Souls Faculties do lend.
Thus Turtles are, by Friendships Union,
Although in Bodies two, in Love but one.
Thus holy Fire, like That on Altars, should
Perpetually be cherisht, to uphold
The sacred Flames of Friendship; which regards
More to deserve, and give, than to receive Rewards.
VII.
Reciprocal Beneficence yet makes
Loves Helix, and a cheerful Giver takes
With GOD and Men: Obligements give Extent
To growing Zeal, and banish Complement.
When from the warmer, or the temperate Zone,
Bad Times may drive a Friend to the frozen One;
Then, one reviving Smile of Friendships Shine
Makes that Ice Water, and that Water Wine.
Such spritely Flavor of a sparkling Mind
Can sooner cease to be, than it can be unkind.
VIII.
HOw rarely Brethren to This Height ascend!
More, than in Brother, is implied in Friend:
Fraternity but in Cognation lies
Of Bodies; Friendship has sublimer Ties:
Which, by their innate Energie, bring forth
Seed, Buds, and Fruit of Soul-inriching Worth:
As free from all Antipodes of Love,
As is the Lamb from Guile, from Gall the Dove.
Thus can the Bosom of a Friend afford
A fruitful Paradise, without a flaming Sword.
IX.
SEcurely placed, on High, to view below
How the cross Thunders of a Batail go;
Or, from a Promontory, to behold
Storm-lab'ring Ships, by Neptunes Trident rolled,
May please rough Minds: Such bitter-sweets are toys,
Balanced with wel-fixt Amicitiall Joys.
Brave Jonathan was Master in Loves Art,
(By Ovids wanton Muse profaned) each Part
He Princely taught, who prized before his own
The Welfare of his Friend; That Friend before a Throne.
X.
PHoenix of Princes! Thou did Friendship keep
Inviolate, when the King his Wrath did steep
In gall against Thee, and the fatal Stars
Signed thy Friends Rise in Peace, thy Fall in Wars.
Thy Second-self Thee 'bove Himself did raise:
His Tears proclaimed Thy Love, his Tongue Thy Praise.
Twin-Souls! Who, like two glorious Cones of Light,
Rose up, and pointed in One, high, and bright.
O blessed Conjunction This, where Spirits blend,
And Each is breathed into his Other-Self, his Friend!
XI.
BEst Pair! what Union, what Communion, still,
With Eminence of Worth, and Strength of Will,
Were in the Center of Endearments met,
To make your Faith more firm, your Fame more great?
Like Needles touched by the Magnetic Stone,
Both jointly moved at the Remove of One.
Such Love-Sweets, raised on Virtues Interest,
Were Ante-past to Heavens Eternal Feast.
An Height, like This, no State of Mortals knows:
The Worlds Stage, than such Friends, more Kings, more Emperors shows.
XII.
PSalms, flow, when GRACE tunes Natures Harp, which has
Intrinsic Quintessence, in-Heav'n'd by Faith.
Angels bless GOD, because not only He
Crowns Them with Glory to Eternity;
But, being the Source of Goodness, to Their KING
They Halleluiah, Halleluiahs sing!
His Greatness, Wisdom, Power, their Wonders be;
His GRATIOUSNESS wings Loves Activitie:
Their Wills to Each Above are clear, and even:
Love 's the Resplendency of Friendships Region, Heaven.
XIII.
FRiendship, the Sun in our Horizon, flies
Still through the Zodiac of the Good, and Wise;
Who have espoused their Eagle-Thoughts to high
Engagements, and above what is mortal fly:
Who, when Aurora rides curled, brightly dressed,
Perfumed from her Star Chamber in the East,
Spreading her Beams, her Glories, round the Air;
Their Souls then, twining Flames, court Heaven in Prayer.
O, may We thus unload each burdened Soul
Of every Grief, and break our Minds to keep them whole!
XIV.
SArza the Liver opens, Steel the Spleen,
Sulphur the Lungs, Castoreum's Virtue's seen
So on the Brain; but no Receipt we find,
Like a true Friend, for an obstructed Mind.
Crush into One all Sweets, receiving Birth
From the exhaustless teeming Womb of Earth:
Which done, extract, and often distill from thence
It 's most refined Spirit, and Quintessence;
Which turn to Nectar: -- All 's but Wormwoods juice,
Compared with what Soul-feeding Friendships Fruits produce.
XV.
THen, could I, with That Belgic Flood, drink Towns;
Make the Earth tremble, rend Imperial Crowns
From their just Owners Heads; proclaim bold Wars
With half the World, and tumble Emperors
Down to the State of Slaves; -- Yet I, and This
Were more outdone by one rare SAINT, that is
Still faithful to his Soul, his Friend, his Time,
(A highly humble State, low and sublime)
Who cheerfully can share a Cross with me,
And swell the Womb of each new-breeding jubilee.
XVI.
IN Virtues glorious Chariot Friendship rides,
With all the shining Graces by her Sides:
Who, though exalted in This high-wing'd Race,
Gives to the lowest Consort highest Place.
Thus, her attractive Power by secret Cause,
Heaven down to Earth, Earth up to Heaven draws.
This proves It Sweets Elixir; loftiest Pitch
Nature can mount to; 't is the Shrine in which
Blessings are treasured; That which Angels strive
To amplify; Joys Haven; Heaven in Perspective!
XVII.
THen, were I Monarch of more Worlds than er'e
This World had Men; and to possess Them, were
Men in each World, for Number, more than all
The Sins committed since the first Man's Fall;
Yet, if in These I should not find a Friend,
Surmounting all those Worlds, more in the End
Would be my Grief, than His, who triumphed over
This World, and wept, because there were no more.
For, none is at the End of 's Actions blessed,
But He, whose End speaks not the Greatest, but the Best.
XVIII.
OR, were I such an Alchymist, as could,
With one rare Stone, convert all Stones to Gold:
My first Essay might be on Egypts Spires,
Which now, though Piles of Stone, the World admires;
And, then, what Arguses, to view That Prize
Must plow the Seas with Cargazones of Eyes?
Next, all the Rocks around the spacious Shore
My Midas Sovereign Touch should turn to Ore.
Yet, even the shadow of a real Friend,
As Heaven does Earth, would all their Gallantry transcend.
XIX.
MIght I dispose of All in Natures Hand,
And cause the whole Worlds atoms to disband;
And should those Atoms swell, and swell, till all
Were Tenariffs of Diamonds, and so tall
That their stupendous rising Brows might even
The Regions pass, pierce ^kyes, ascend to Heaven:
Yet, Those amazing Splendors dim would prove
To' a Friends unparalled Soul-beaming Love.
Under the Heavens there 's not a Name (but HIS
Whose Fiat was His Act) keeps up the Rate with This.
XX.
PRoud Pyramids may reel, huge Mountains roll
From their old Seats; Earths Center, yea the whole
Expansed Frame of Nature may forsake
It 's Form, and into it 's first Chaos shake:
(At the Worlds Household-stuff-removing Day
Rivers shall stand, and Mountains sneak away.)
Nor Winter-Thunders, nor Sky-Prodigies
May scare Him who on Friendships Height relies:
For, fixed in Loves Celestial Orb, my FRIEND
A Constellation is of Virtues, to
THE END.
L'ENVOY.
WHere 's He that can express the Spheres swift Turn?
Or paint the Phoenix in her flaming Urn?
By That rare Masters Hand may be designed
Your furnished Head, free Heart, unpattern'd Mind;
Who, being so richly good, so wisely dear
Of precious Time, make^ May of all the Year.
Blessed in The Glories of your Friendship, thus,
I have The BEST of FRIENDS, You have
BENEVOLUS.
Here, as in Globes, is All from Pole to Pole,
A Sum of Friendships Universe -- YOUR SOUL.


READERS,
Exspect (be 't friendly, or unfriendly viewed) FRIENDSHIPS ANTIPODES,
INGRATITUDE.

De SACRA AMICITIA.
AD AMICITIAE Culmen anhelaturo, necesse est ut per Electionem, Probationem,
Admissionem, and Rerum humanarum divinarumque cum summa Benevolentia
Consensionem ascendat. Morum enim Studiorumque reciproca Similitudo arctissimo
inter Bonos consolidat AMICITIAM Caemento. Ratio nimirum Affectui desponsata,
Amorem ex Ratione illibatum generat; and, Affectionis Sale conditum, perpetuo
conservat. Quatuor etiamad Hoc in AMICO (Fidelitas, Intentio, Discretio,
Patientia) postulantur. Fidelitas, ut AMICI Tutelae, fortissimo quasi
Propugnaculo, seipsum and sua committat. Intentio, ut nihil ex AMICITIA, nisi
Pietatis Proventus, and Errolumentum mutuum, deducatur. Discretio, quid AMICO
sit dandum, quid ab Eo expetendum, novisse; ut nil quod indecens sit
postuletur, quod dedeceat tribuatur: quando sympathetice dolendum, gaudendum,
admonendum, erige^dum, nec Tempus nec Modum nescire. Patientia denique, ut
placide admonitus, Monenti non morose repugnet. Ethoc Regimine praecedat in
Front, tanquam Ductrix, AMICITIA; pone sequatur, prout Pedissequa, Vtilitas.
He^oica enim Men's sinceram, sine faeculento recularum in infimitate parvitatis
constitutarum Lucro, AMICITIAM profit^tur, and Seculi hujus Mores increpat, ubi
Adulatio -- in Quaestu pro Meretrice sedet. In Electione prudens, in Dilectione
stab^lis, Sustinet, Abstinet: Necessitatibus Amici occurrit, and incommune
Bonum, seipsum, Lychni more, consumendo intabe^cit: Nihil in Voce fictum, in
Vultu fucosum, in Vita factiosum praetendit. AMICITIA, hoc pacto ordinata,
felicissime coalescit; quia inter Bonos oritur, inter Meliores prog^editur,
inter Perfectos perficitur; Quam Prudentia dirigit, Iustitia regit, Fortitudo
custodit, Temperantia moderatur: intentionis quippe habet Puritatem, Rationis
Magisterium, and Temperantiae Fraenum. Prae sancto hoc AFFECTU nihl sub Sole,
mellitissimum licet, appetendum; nihil utilius quaerendum; difficilius
inveniendum; charius conservandum. Omnium enim Charismatum est Centrum, omnium
Encyclopaedia Gratiarum: Vitia Radiis fulgentissimis confodit, delectat Domi,
juvat foris, Adversa temperat, Prospera componit. In laetis itaque and
tristibus, amaris and jucundis, aequum se praebet, pari aspiciens oculo
Pauperem and Divitem, Fortem and Debilem; nam nihil in Amico quod extra ejus
est Animum int^etur. Tali in AMICITIA Humilitas and Suavitas, Sublimitas and
Felicitas in Secula triumphant: Et quanta quidem Felicit^s est CONSORTEM
habere, quocum, ac si cum Teipso, ratiocineris; and Cui Cordis arcaniora
committes; and Cui confiteri non timeas, si quid deliqueris; and Cui revelare
non erubescas, si quid profeceris; ad Quem, velut ad Asylum, confugias; and
quem in dubiis, tanquam Oraculum, consu^as! Obsecro vos, qui estis Amici, per
DEUM IMMORTALEM, quicquamne felicius, quam ita unire Animum Alterius, ut ex
Duobus Cor efficiatur unum; ut nec Simultas timeatur, nec Suspicio simuletur,
nec Adulatio Veritati praeferatur?

Summarum summa est consummatissima summum

Semper amare BONUM-summa est AMICITIA, summa BEATITUDO. Hoc a CHRISTO
inchoatur, per CHRISTUM conservatur, in CHRISTUM consummatur; Hoc deorsum est
Paucorum, sursum est Omnium, ubi OMNES SANCTI. A sacra igitur Amicitia, qua
Amicus complectitur Amicum, ad supremum AMOREM, quo Anima beata amplectitur
JESUM, conscendentes, Aeternum BEATITUDINIS Praemium, CHRISTI Gratia,
obtineamus! Qui possidet DEUM, possidetur ab EO. Simus ergo Nos facti DEI
Possessio, and efficietur Nobis Possessio DEUS.

AMICO.
BEnevoli Conjunctio Animi arctissima est Cognatio. -- Elegi Te, e Millibus
Vnum, Pro Vitae Consorte meae -- Cujus in Sermon Affabilitas, in Moribus
Suavitas, in Vultu Serenitas, in Consiliis Communio, in Studiis Conformatio, in
Spiritualibus est Consensio. AMICITIA enim me Tibi (Disciplinis omnibus
instituto, imbuto, ornato, consummato) similem, etsi non invenerit, efficiat.
Quam capax in Te emicat Ingenium, quam sagax Iudicium, quam tenax Memoria, quam
ardens Veritatis Studium, quam indefefla Sedulitas, quam singularis Modestia
cum PIETATE exornata! Haec Omnia in Te and admiror, and pie aemulor.
Praevenisti me, mi AMICE, Ornamentis; Praeveniam Te Officiis. Verum non Magna
loquamur, sed Vivamus; -- Spectemur Agendo. Cunctatio absit, Assiduitas adsit;
AMICITIA enim est Constantiae Virtus. Inter Nos dehinc idem sit velle, idem
nolle; nihil velle quod dedeceat, nihil nolle quod expediat. De AMICI
Felicitate potius quam de propria laetemur, and aegrius CONSORTIS quam propriam
feramus Injuriam. Breviter; quicquid est Amoris, Honoris, Opis, vel Opum,
ALTERUTRI impertiamus.

Pectoris ob Meritum Ratio quem suadet amandum, Hunc nec Morositas inquietet,
nec Instabilitas dividat, nec Garrulitas a debita Gravitate dissolvat, nec
Simultas sacram AMICITIAM confringat. Eia age, mi ANGELECUSTOS, (Job 33.23.)
extricemus Nos ab Involucris Mundi, and a Coelesti Satellitio circumvallati,
and Spiritualibus Deliciis adimpleti, sereniorem Tranquillitatis Senectam
placidissimo Secessu peragamus. Animae eteni^ sapientiores fiunt quiescendo.

SIc praeliantes Aequore turbido
Ventos, reducto Montis in angulo,
Miratur, and gaudet Procella
Terribili procul esse PASTOR.
SIc Coelum penetret Fides ab Ara
Nostri Pectoris. Huc ades, fer Aram,
Thus, Ignem, Fidei, Spei, Favoris.
SIc me semper ames, Sic Te patiaris amari;
Sic Charis una beet, Sic Domus una Duos!
Secessus, Animae Templum.
TV mihi Thema, Quies Animae, sanctusque Recessus;
Rores dum saturant me, DEUS alme, tui.
Vera Quies, Paucos nosti, notissima Paucis:
Dum fugio Plures, Te peto, vera Quies.
Carmina Secessum? Potius Devotio quaerit:
Sic quadrant Modulis Pectora sancta suis.
Turbat Apollineas clamosa Molestia Musas;
Christicolae Modulos sed magis illa gravat.
Sit procul Vrbs, prope Vota mihi; mihi reddar; and intus
Plena Fide perstet Men's mea, plena DEO!
Hoc Nemus est Templum, patuli Laquearia Rami;
Fit sacrae Truncus quisque Columna Domus:
Pervia Sylva patens est Porta, Cacumina Pinnae;
Baptismi Pignus Rivulus omnis habet:
Dat Mensam Collis sacram mihi Cespite tectus;
Pectoris Ara Fides, Zelus Amorque Focus.
Si quis Baptistes in Eremo praedicet, Ecce
Pulpita, in arborea Sede locata, patent.
Hic licet elata dare Verba precantia Voce;
Et sine Test, Deo nec nisi Test, loqui.
Ipsa monent tremulas quatientia Flamina frondes,
Per nos fundendas Cord tremente Preces.
Antevolansque cavo Suspiria nostra Susurro,
Dum gemit Aura levis, Tu geme, Cultor, ait.
Voce DEUM celebro? Concordes sponte Choristae,
Sunt Praecentores, dum modulantur, Aves.
Amen subjicio? dat Amen, quasi Clericus, Echo.
Sylva placet, Luxus perfidiose, Vale.
CUlmen Potestatis est Tempestas Mentis: Splendorem habet Titulo, Cruciatum
Animo; desuntque Inopiae multa, Avaritiae omnia. Ne petas igitur, devota Anima,
esse qualis in Anglia Dux Buckingamiae, in Aula Caesarea Princeps ab Eggenberg,
in Hispania Comes D'Olivares, and in Imperio Ottomanico Mustapha Bassa fuere;
nec tibi magis arrideant cerussatae Lauds, and calamistrata Encomia, quam
sincerae and sacrosanctae Amoris Anhelationes. Seculi delectatiunculas devita,
and Coelorum Jubilo recreaberis. Delicatula nimis es, si velis gaudere cum
Mundo, and postea regnare cum CHRISTO: Amarescat Mundus, ut dulcescat DEUS.
Quamdiu est in te Aegypti Farina, Manna coeleste non gustabis. Gustat DEUM, cui
Libido Seculi Nauseam parit. Exinanitio nostra Plenitudinis Coeli capaces
reddit. Si vis frui Sole, verte dorsum Umbrae. Nec amaris a Mundo, nisi a
CHRISTO repulsa; nec a CHRISTO, nisi a Mundo spreta. Dejicit se de Culmine
Majestatis qui a DEO ad Consolatiunculas Creaturulae confugit. O quam contempta
recula est homo, nisi supra humana se erexerit! Beatum nil facit Hominem, nisi
Qui fecit Hominem; minimum enim DEI omnis Orbis Magnitudine est magnificentius.
Paucis; nec tibi ignominiosum sit pati quod passus est CHRISTUS, nec gloriosum
facere quod fecit Judas. Morere Mundo, ut vivas DEO. Quicunque cum DEO habet
Amicitiam, Felicitatis tenet Fastigium. Haec unica Laus, hic Apex Sapientiae
est, ea viventem appetere, quae morienti forent appetenda. Mortis ergo
Meditationi, and AETERNITATIS Contemplationi Lucernulae nostrae Oleum
impendamus.

Sit DEO Gloria!
LONDON, Printed by R. D. for Humphrey Mosely, at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. Anno 1657.


