Good and true Intelligence FROM READING

BEING A true Relation of two late Fights between the Parliaments Forces and
the Malignants:

The one near Wallingford, where the Parliaments Forces under the command of
Serjeant-Major Holford slew three hundred of the Malignants, whereof two
Captains were slain, and took 600. arms, one piece of Ordnance, four
Ensigns, and 80. prisoners, two Captains, and seven Lievtenants and Serjeant^.

The other near a town called Slow, with all the proceedings of his
Excellencies Army about Reading, from the 18. of May to the 24.

Sent in a Letter from Lieutenant Bennet under the command of Serjeant-Major
Helford, (in the Regiment of the Right Honorable the Lord Gray) to his brother
in London.

LONDON, Printed for P H. SMITH. 1643.

True Jntelligence from Reading.
Loving Brother,
MY kind love remembered unto you, wishing your welfare. I was sorry I could
have no longer time with you when I was at London, to declare unto you my
resolution to adventure my self with others in defense of the cause undertaken
by the Parliament, not only in my estate, but person, knowing no cause
undertaken can be more acceptable to God, then the defense of his true
religion, and nothing is more available to the advancement of peace and
tranquillity then the preservation of the Privileges of Parliament, lives and
liberties of the freeborn Subjects of this kingdom, I have well informed my
conscience of the justness of the cause undertaken by the Parliament, and the
illegality and impiety that is daily practiced in the contrary party, and shall
count my life a good sacrifice, if it be offered up for the defense of that
cause for which they have now taken up arms: I adventure my self, not for hopes
of preferment, or lucre of gain to be obtained by the same, for my own estate
you know is sufficient for my maintenance, and I could employ my self and it
in another way for my particular profit, but my only aim is to advance the
public to the uttermost of my power: my Brother Jonathan came with me to
Reading the same evening I parted from you, and having made my intentions
known, I was accepted of by Serjeant-Major Holford, who is under the command of
the Lord Gray, and had the place of a Lieutenant assigned unto me under Captain
Audley. You desired me to write you the weekly proceedings of the Army, which I
shall gladly do to pleasure you: you shall receive from me a letter (God
willing) on Monday next of what shall occur in that time and afterward
weekly. I could wish you would com^ your self, and I will endeavor to procure
you a place. Pray brother remember my kind love to my friends in Essex when you
write thither, and send them the news you have from me, which shall be certain
and true.

Thursday the 18. of May about two of the clock in the afternoon, we received
information in the army that part of P. Ruperts Forces about two thousand horse
and foot intended to assault some of our soldiers that quartered about
Wallingford, upon which Warrants were sent out in the Lord Generals name for
the forces in those parts to gather themselves into a body for their own
defense; and that in respect his Excellency had not substitute a General, or
left Instructions at his return to London for the leading forth of the Army in
the whole body from Reading against the Malignants, but only granted out
Warrants for the raising of the Country if violence should be offered by the
opposite Army, and to defend themselves if they should see cause, by which
means the Country delinquents had good opportunity to have recourse to the
Kings Army, and as many as would join their persons with it might, and they
that would not, might contribute of their estates as themselves pleased, and if
his Excellency had not returned speedily, great damage would have fallen on
the well-affected. These beginnings in his Lordships absence made the
Commanders of the several Regiments in the Army take consideration what was
fit to be done to prevent future mischief, at length the Lord Gray sent the
said Serjeant-Major Holford with two Troops of horse and 100. Dragoons to
Wallingford, where was 800. horse and foot of the Parliaments Forces quartered,
to aid and assist them against the Malignants.

Friday Captain Audley under whom I serve went from Reading with about 100.
Dragoons and 200. foot, accompanied with Captain Spurling, into the country
adjacen, upon report of a mischief done by treachery at a town called Slow,
riding through the town, the same having many ill-affected persons therein, and
are secretly for the Malignants, as two Captains, viz. Captain Welsh and an
other marched through the town with their companies, the said Captains were
shot out of a house, and slain in the street as they rode, I was an
eyewitness of the same being at their burying: our Captain upon this accident
marched to that town too, to prevent future accidents of mishap, and in our
march we were met by two troops of horse of the Malignants, who presently
discharged upon us, and we again answered them, with whom we bickered about
half an hour, and then they thought it better to run away then stay. We took
about 20. prisoners and their horses, a Color, and one Cap. Snag, whom we sent
with a guard to Reading, about 30. more of them were slain and mortally
wounded: we lost two men and a Dragoon, but none hurt; then we came to Slow,
and took an oath of them for their fidelity to the service of the King and
Parliament, settling the town in peace, and disarming all the malignants that
were discovered therein, and those that refused to take the said oath, were
committed to safe custody till opportunity served to proceed against them: of
the persons which we disarmed we took 150. arms, and about the estimate of 6.
barrels of powder in private houses, kept for the service of the King, and to
act private trecheries against any persons of eminency that are for the
Parliament, and should pass through the town.

We have it reported for certain, that a great skirmish was fought this morning
near Wallingford between the Parliaments forces and the Malignants, to which
bickering Serjeant-Major Holford came with his Company; the fight continued
about two hours very hot; we had the news during the fight, and I was
resolved to have gone to it, but before we could come at them, we received
information that the skirmish was ended, and that the Parliaments Forces had
chased the Malignants, and a friend of mine who was in the fight assured me by
a letter for certain, that the Parliaments Forces took at least 600 arms, one
piece of ordnance, and slew above 300 of them, took 4. colors and 80
prisoners, of them that were slain was Colonel Higgs, Captain Washington,
Captain Rosse, and Captain Young, Captain Midleston and seven Lievtenants and
Sergeants taken prisoners: the Malignants Forces of this Army consisted of
about 2000 horse and Foot, and the Parliaments forces consisted of 600. horse
and foot, and not above ten of our side slain, and about 15 slightly wounded.

Saturday information was brought to the encouragement of our Army of the
valiant deeds of Sir William Waller, and that he is in great hopes of subduing
the Welchmen, and reducing them into obedience to the King and Parliament.

It is rumoured by some in the Army, that upon the return of his Excellency
some Forces shall go against P. Ruperts forces in Northamtonshire, to relievs
that County, but others conceive that His Excellency with his whole Army will be
for Oxford, and that with all speed.

It is also reported that the Earl Rivers is come to the King out of the North
part of the Kingdom, being driven from thence by the parliaments Forces, and
that the said Earl narrowly escaped in the private habit of a common soldier
from being apprehended by the Parliaments soldiers within twenty miles of
Oxford, he coming only alone into Oxford this morning, the Kings decreaseth,
and it is credibly informed they daily shrink away from the service: hereafter
I shall send you the proceedings weekly, and if any things with tongue or pen
in a right and honest way may do you good, it shall not in me be wanting. I
would have sent you a token of my love, but not knowing how the same may be
safely delivered, I forbear till I hear from you that you receive the letters
I send you; Thus having no other news of consequence to write to you at this
time, praying for your health, with my love commended to my sister, and your
little one. And so I rest,

From Reading May 21, 1643. Your loving Brother, ISAAC BENNET.


