Witchcraft Proven, Arreign'd, and Condemned in its Professors, Professions
and Marks, by diverse pungent, and convincing Arguments, excerpted forth of the
most Authentic Authors, Divine and humane, Ancient and Modern.

By a Lover of the Truth.

Deuteronomy. 18.9. -- When thou art come into the land, which the Lord thy God gives
thee, thou shall not learn to do after these Abominations.

Verse. 10. There shall not be found among you any, one that makes his Son or
his Daughter to pass through, the (...) or that uses Divination, or an
Observer of times, (...) an Enchanter, or a Witch.

Verse. 11. Or a Charmer, or a Consulter with Familiar Spirits, or a Wizard, or
a Necromancer.

Exodus 22.18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live.

GLASGOW, Printed by Robert Sanders, One of His Majesty's Printers. Anno Dom.
1697.

WITCHCRAFT Proven, Arreign'd, and Condemned in its professors, Profession,
and Marks, by diverse pungent, and convincing Arguments, excerpted forth of the
most Authentic Authors, Divine and Humane, Ancient and Modern.
THat there be Spirits, the Word of God, the light of Nature, the truth of
History, and daily experience, do clearly demonstrat, and that jointly? as with
one breath, so that they must needs be wretchedly infatuat, and senselesly
benumbed, who suffer themselves (against so evident testimony) to be led aside
to the contrair Opinion: Yet such bewitched miscreants and miserable Catives
there are, and in all Ages there has been (call them De^ests or Atheists as you
list) who have made bold to impugn so notour a Truth, either out of a curious
affectation in crosing the common sentiment to be reputed singular, or else
from an Judicial blindness and case-hardness of Spirit, in being given over to
a Reprobat sense (by gain-standing the Truth) to receive a lie, whose case is
more to be pitied than imitated, and their blinded Judgment more to be spurned
at, and to be rejected with scorn, than kindly and amicably to be embraced.

For if there be no Spirits, then (not to speak of a multitude of vile
absurdities, and gross horrid Blasphemies, that would natively follow thereupon)
there is no Eternal Death, Life, nor Resurrection to be expected, nor any
Local place of Punishment for the Damned to be Tormented in, by the
instruments of His Wrath, in the execution of Justice upon unrepenting Sinners,
nor any Heavenly Joy and Solace to be expected by the truly Godly after this
Life; which were manifestly to Raze two of the most Glorious and Divine
Attributes of God both at once. For 1st, How can the glory of His rich mercy
appear to the Elect, but by a declaration of the Glory of His severe and
deserved Justice toward the Reprobat. 2ly, For what end is conviction of Sin
both in the good and bad, if it be not to Reclaim the one in undeserved Mercy
for Obtemperating, and to Reprobat the other in deserved Justice, for declining
and not harkening unto the Heavenly, and Divine Call. 3ly, Whence pray are
these inward frights, and terrors of a troubled Conscience, bred in the
stoutest Atheist, either upon their departure forth of the World: or while they
be going forward in a full Bensile and carier of all imaginary wickedness, and
be in health and soundness both in Body and Mind, that a quick stop and
discharge is put thereto, by a sudden roaring of an allarmed and awakned
Conscience; whereby sometime sooner, sometime later, an inrood has been made
upon the Kingdom of Darkness, by an immediate, supreme, and irresistible Divine
power, to the recovery and reclaiming of not a few, to the praise and glorious
manifestation of the ineffable riches of his grace toward the poor lost Sons
of Adam; witness hereunto the joint testimony of the Elect of God through all
ages of the World, the Heavenly Quier of Angels, and the glorious company of
the triumphant Saints.

Hence then it appears, by undeniable evidence, and by a perpetual chain of
Divine Providence (whatever the grossly profane brag in the contrair) that what
vain thoughts soever the Sons of men may idly entertain in the heat of lust,
and youth, anent the falsehood and vanity of such doting and fanciefull opinions
(as they in their joylie and merry fits be pleased to term them) they shall
sooner, or later, feel the testimony of their Conscience as a witness within
them, constraining them seriously to comply with the truth of what they
formerly mocked at in the days of their vanity; when at the last hour they
shall be either trysted with inexpressible fears, Terrors, and Agonies, of a
troubled mind for their past life, by way of conviction and condemnation; or
with unconceivable joy, peace, and composour of Conscience, upon a sealed
pardon and absolution, to their eternal and unspeakable satisfaction and
solace both here and hereafter.

So that by a genuin confession and universal consent of the better sort of all
Men, of all conditions, and in all ages, ye^ and of all religions; how
different soever in opinion other ways the former opinion of the Subsistence of
Spirits has been generally received for an undoubted Truth, specially by
Divine Penitents; upon whom the Grace of God has mightily prevailed, with an
irresistible, and Supreme Divine power: Now if there be Spirits, there must
needs be some good, set apart for the service of the truly Elect, and some Bad
who b^ Ministers of Justice for execution of Divine vengeance upon all the
ungodly Reprobat of whose service, converse, and familiarity among ye Sons of
men in obedience to their respective charges there is so full and clear mention
made as well in Sacred as profane Story, as that I Hope none will be so
impudent to deny much less to gainsay so notour a Truth, to Wit, that there be
Familiar Spirits, and that Men and Women make League and Compact, and
intimately converse with them Joannes and Jambres, Pharao and Balaam, Manasseh
and King Saul, with the Endor Witch be pregnant instances hereo^ from Divine
Story; and Zeroaster, Michael Scot, Faustus, Major Weir, St. Giels of Britain
High Constable to Charles the Seventh King of France, Bladud Son of Lud King of
England, our own Mc Both and Natholicus Kings of Scotland with Liodo^ that
famous Sicilian Wizard, and innumerable others beside be recorded for
confirmation of the Truth hereof, in Humane Story.

Nor has there been wanting some in all Ages, who by the special grace and
goodness of God to them, upon their giving over, and falling off, from such
detestable, and Devilish practices, has remitted to Posterity, the manner of
entering into that cursed Profession, with the Ceremonies thereto belonging:
Namely, how the Wizards, and Witches, warned by an Officer give their Personal
suit and Presence in one Shape or other, at time and place, to attend the
pleasure of their Lord, which is mostly in the nightime, nor is any place so
piacular or sacred, but that the Devil and his Creatures (by permission) may
meet therein, nay even the very Churches themselves, where he makes bold to
mount the Pulpit, black candles with a blew Low, burning all the while, both
about the Pulpit, and Binch, and in several other parts and quarters
throughout, and in all places wherever they meet, He gives his Hellish advice
to his miserable Catives, and they confess to him what horrible villainy they
have perpetrat since their last meeting, receiving his praise and applause
accordingly, the most profligat and notorious wretches be always by him had in
the highest esteem, and when they be thus met, they be often richly feasted
(though but in show) with meat, drink, and music of the best, or with whatever
else may ravish and captivat the senses, the Incubusses also serve to satisfy
the lust of the Witches, and the Succubusses the lust of the Wizzards: at their
meeting and departing they pay their accustomed reverence to Lucifer, and
perform all worship to him, and by anointing themselves with certain ointment,
compounded at the command of the Devil, they are carried in Spirit through the
Air, hither or thither, by one mean, or other: and when any be to be entered,
they be recomended, and presented by the Society, whereupon giving their right
hand to Satan, and renouncing the Christian Faith, and Sacraments, and upon
transferring the Dominion of themselves, Soul and Body to him for ever, with a
promise to worship Him as their Lord, they are sworn and solemnly admitted, and
then have given them on Hellish imp or more, for their Titular and Guardian, [by
way of Spirit Familiar] to direct and guide them throughout all the passages of
their time, whereby they perform afterward all their lewd and wicked deeds.

Now since from what is said, it manifestly appears that their be wicked
Spirits, and that there be who are in Covenant and League with them, such as
the Judicial Astrologer, Monethly-Prognosticator, Sooth-sayer, Magician,
Sorcerer, Necromancer, Charmer, and Wizard, all comprised in the prohibition
under the name WITCH, Exodus 22.18.
it will not be a miss to tell you what every one of the said Professors of
Witchcraft be, wherein they differ and agree one with another, of these in
order. And,

First, An Astrologer, is either taken in a good sense, for such as contemplate
the Stars and Face of Heaven, that they may therein view the incomparable
Glory, Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Providence of God, discovered and shining
forth in them, Romans 1.18, -- 22. Psalm. 8.1, 3: 19.1. -- 3. and Psalm. 104.
which formerly was, and still ought to be the practice of the truly Godly in
all times according to the Precept, Isa. 40.26.
and the end of their creation, Genesis 1.14.
in this first sense it may more fitly be termed Astronomy than Astrology But
when it is taken in an evil sense for such as gaze upon and view the face of
Heaven, that they may read and divine by the Position of the Stars, the Fates,
or Fortunes of States, and Persons in relation to Life, Death, Felicity,
Adversity, and the like, as to their circumstantial events in good or evil; it
is called Astrology Judicial, and for the causes forementioned, not without
pregnant and sufficient ground, deservedly condemned: hence as the Hebrews
affirm the Radix, Term, or Thema, comes from an Arabic word signifying to
decide, which seems to point at such as take upon them to determine things of
future Contingencie, by the view of the Sky, as says Isaiah, Isa. 43.12.
upon which account they were held in venerable esteem, and were highly
respected by the Babylonians, Chaldeans, and other Nations, Dan. 1.20. -- 2.2.
-- 4.7. -- 5.7. -- 2.10.
as also with the ungodly Jews, Isaiah 47.11. And therefore where mention is
made of them, they be ordinarily joined with Star-gazers,
Monethly-Prognosticators, Magicians, Sorcerers, Chaldeans, Soothsayers and
Wisemen, as in Isaiah and Daniel, in the forecited places appear.

Secondly, the Monethly-Prognosticators whereof mention is made by Isaiah Isa.
47.13.
were such as did instruct give notice, or make known before hand the several
aspects of the Sun, Moon, and other Planets amongst themselves, with their
influences, revolutions, and common effects, naturally following thereupon, as
to the various Occurrences that were to fall out throughout each month of the
year: which is much in kind to the Astronomy or Astrology in the better part,
mentioned in the preceding: and in so far only is to be disproven, as it dipps
into Astrology Judicial, whereof formerly.

Thirdly, Soothsayers, or according to the old Scots Dialect, Truth-tellers,
were such as observed the Clouds, Planets, and the flying of Birds, whereby
they pretended to foretell all future Events in all humane actions, as to good
and bad Luck; which at first took place in the East, and from thence was
communicate to other Nations Isa. 2.6.
hence in the Original the word is derived from HAANAN a Cloud, for that by the
chattering or flight of Birds in the Air they pretended to know things to come:
others fetch the word from HAAJIN an eye making them to agree, and to be the
same with the Astrologer Judicial foresaid, which without all natural and
divine ^ound or reason, pretended to know seasonable and opportune ^^mes, for
the doing of matters, by viewing the Sky, Signs, Planets, and other Stars Isa.
47.13.
: some again there be, who derive it from the former word HAANAN, a Cloud, for
that by enchantments, and such like wicked Arts they deceived the sight, making
the Spectators otherways look upon things then in truth they were, and in this
they were in kind to the Magician, whereof afterward, such were Joannes and
Jambres, who by their lieing wonders which they wickedly brought to pass by
their Enchantments sought thereby to belie the true miracles wrought by the
hand of Moses, at the command of the Lord Exodus 7.8, 9, 10, 11.
the greatness of whose Crime is palpable from the severity of the Judgment
mentioned in the Law, Levit. 20.6.
which is to be duly execute in full and deserved punishment upon them without
all pity or compassion.

Fourthly, Magicians, Such were in high esteem among the Nations Dan. 2.2 --
5.7, 8. Exodus 7.8, 9, 10 chapter
and pretended to be well seen, and to have great skill in the nature of
things, even of the highest Import and Concern: and seems to have been the same
with the Diviner, whom they used to consult in all weighty Cases, as did the
Philistines 1 Samuel 6.2.
and the King of Babylon Ezekiel. 21.21.
which was an abomination to the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.23.
because perpetrat by unlawful and wicked means 1 Samuel 28.8
as by Sand, Iron, Stones, etc. Some by lying on the ground, and some by a
walking-staff: Hence says Hoseah Hos. 4.12.
My People ask Counsel at their Stocks, and their Staff declares unto them:
Such ordinarily professed skill in telling secrets, and future events, by
observation of Stars (wherein they agreed with the Judicial Astrologer) and by
the unlawful use of such like superstitious circumventing means of fraud and
deceit, Satan either suggested to them, that which was desired to be known, or
otherwise by crafty and ambiguous answers concealed his ignorance of that he
could not reveal as by these following Oracles appear. Aio te Aeaecide, Romanos
vincere posse,
Craesus Chalim penetrans magnum pervertet opum vim.
The word Cha^tummin rendered Magician is not properly Hebrew, but Chaldaic,
though in use with them Dan. 2.10.
and is commonly rendered both by the Greeks and Latins Genethliacon or
Interpriter (as says Aben-ezra) from their taking on them to divine from the
Nativity hour the good or bad luck of the Enquirer, by the Greeks they were
properly called Sophi, and by the Persians Magi wisemen, whence they seem to
fetch their name.

Fifthly, The Sorcerer, whereof there were two sorts, 1. Such as either deluded
the outward senses, by Legerdemeen; or 2ly, such as by their wicked art did
great hurt, hence the punishment was diverse; whosoever did ill by his wicked art,
or witchcraft, was by the Jews Law to be stoned to death, but the Deceiver or
Deluder was only to be scourged: the original word Cashaph, or foreseer, in the
Hebrew signifies changing or turning, hence the Greek word Bascaino, and the
Latin word Fascino, to bewitch: with the Persians they be termed Magi, wise,
and for the affinity of the name held vulgarly to be somewhat in kind to the
Magician, whereof in the preceding: nor were they any whit in less esteem as
the signification of the word Magos, wise, seems to import, which at first was
taken in a good sense (as the word Tyrannus with the Latins and the word Knave
with our Progenitors which two words were in old time taken for a King and a
servant, but now bear a quite different signification as is obvious enough to
all) even so, for that the Egyptians and Chaldeans give themselves to the
study and Practice of Devilish arts, the word Magos began in time, to be taken
in an evil and malignant sense, of this sort were the Sorcerers of Egypt,
mentioned by Paul 2 Timothy 3.8.
of whom we have spoken formerly.

Sixthly, The Necromancer was he that sought unto the dead, and enquired at
them 1 Samuel 28.11, 15.
expressly forbidden in the Law of the Lord Deuteronomy. 18.11.
such raised in appearance (by the help of a Familiar Spirit) the Dead, and
asked Counsel at them, as did the Witch of Endor for King Saul in distress? Of
the Necromancer it is said, that he made himself hungry, and slept among the
dead, or else that he put on proper Clothes, and burned Incense, that he might
have fellowship with, and advice from the dead; the party consulter (it seems)
behoved likeways to fast, as may be gathered from the first of Sam. 28.22. to
the end.

Seventhly, A Charmer, Enchanter, or Conjurer, comes from the Hebrew word
CHOBER, which signifies conjoyning or consociating, in Chaldee they be called
RATIM, of mutering, or mumbling, the Greek word is Emphaidon, charming or
enchanting, he speaks Words of a strange Tongue, and without sense, firmly
believing that such words are profitable to cure, prevent, or remove sickness,
and to cause to prosper; thus sometime they repeat verses out of the Bible and
to yt effect make the Bible medicine to the Body, which is the medicine and
food of the Soul Prove. 3.22.
such kind of Cattle with Fortune-readers, and such wicked and unhallowed Stuff
frequently abound amongst us, so that I need not tell you what they are, would
to God we had not so frequent occasions and access of knowing them.

Eighthly, A Wizard mentioned in Deuteronomy. 18.11. Was one who took upon him to
foretell things to come, without any so^ide ground of reason or divine
Revelation; he differed from the Astronomer, and Judicial Astrologer, and
Sooth-sayer, in that they fetched their knowledge from external causes, but he
from a secret impulse of the Devil, all of them agreeing in this, that their
pretended skill was without any solid Foundation though generally they were much
set by, and looked upon as famous in their generation and men of renown, for
that they made show of great skill and cunning in disclosing hidden things, and
foretelling future events: and be (when mentioned,) usually ^oyned with such as
have Familiar Spirits; as well in Legal prohibitions Lev. 19.31. -- 20.27.
as in Historical relations 1 Samuel 28.3, 9. 2 Kings 21.6. -- 23.24. 2 Chronicles.
33.6.
and in the Prophecy Isa. 8.19. Such professors as those forementioned, eight
were by a general Name called Chaldeans from their mother Land wherein they at
first were hatched, the Hebrew word JIDGNONI, whence the Wizard has his name,
signifies knowledge or cunning, whereunto accords the Greek word GNOSTES a
knowing one, or Prognosticator, hence the Gnostics of old had their name, who
laid claim to a greater knowledge than in Truth they had, and that without all
warrant Divine or Humane: But in the Chaldean Tongue he has his name of
remembrance, from the word ZECURU because he revealed things worthy to be
remembered, (as they verily thought who were by them deceived,) hence in the Jew
traditions, he is described to be one, who put in his mouth the bone of a Bird,
called JADVANG, and burned incense, and did other works until he fell down as
with shames or modesty, and spoke things that were afterward to come to pass.

Thus did the Devil by his said Agents, or Instruments, so craftily carry, and
demean himself, in the discovery of secrets by them, that it was verily
believed by the greatest Kings, and Potentats, that there could be nothing so
dark, and abscond, that they could not reveal, Dan. 2.2, 5. So that they were
to them as the Prophets of old were to the Israel of God, the time of that
ignorance God winking at; but why they should be trysted now (in the Meridian
Sun-shin of Gospel Ordinances,) with the same faith, and belief, (God now
calling all men every where to repent, and turn from their former evil way, to
walk in newness of Life, and to conform themselves to the example of His Son,
whom he has sent into the World, to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John.
3.8.) is (without all controversy) justly astonishing, and surprising.

Having thus far run through part of my task, in describing the chief
professors of Witchcraft, and in showing you wherein they agree with, and
dissent one from another, some placing their skill in one thing, some in
another, some being acted with a Spirit of Divination, and some being taken up
with contemplation of the heavenly Orbs, of which they pretended to read all
future events, and to tell, and disclose all secrets whatsoever.

It next rests that we show unto you, what a Witch is, and what be the several
Parts and Species of Witchcraft, wherein we shall observe the same order as
heretofore. First, Describing and defining what a Witch is, both from
Scripture, and ye Original; as also, what horrid guilt they underly who are
guilty of the same, and then discourse to you what be the several Parts, and
Species thereof: as also, we shall show you what may probably be the reasons,
why Satan so far unmaskes himself at this present, as to present to the
tormented (by a sort of corporeal representation) the persons of their
tormentors, in their various habits, gesturs, and actions, and in their present
Posturs they are in for the time; so that the tormented shall be able to give
an account of what they hear, see, and suffer by them, for the time; who, and
what they are who ^rouble them, and how and by what means they be tormented by
them, and yet all bystanders whatsomever, neither do hear, see, nor feel any
thing, though the tormented be able to prove and confirm what they say by the
surest tokens imaginable, as by pulling to them in open Air, part of their
tormentors garments (none either seeing persons nor vestments but the tormented
only,) which how soon they lay hold on they from thence forth become visible,
so that all know them to belong to such and such persons, who knew the said
Suspected persons to use such habits formerly: and last of all, I shall give
some vive and shrewd Marks, and some unquestionable tokens, as they be recorded
in the most approven Authors, how and by what means, a Witch (in League, and
Covenant with the Devil) may be decerned to be so, that the innocent may not be
condemned with the nocent, but that Judgment may trot in an even path, and an
easy way be opened for their discovery, either by Confession, Conviction, or
Probation, to the Praise, and Glory of God. Thus when I have answered promise,
by performance, I shall sum up all with a short Conclusion, and so end.

A Witch in Scripture-account is one who lives in the daily Practice, and
habitual exercise of Devilish Arts, whereof mention is made in Exodus 22.18.
Lev. 19.26. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12. and a pregnant instance thereof we find
recorded 2 King. 21. compared with 2 Chr. 33.
anent Manasseh King of Judah, who sold himself to do wickedly in the sight of
the Lord, and for a long time lived in the Practice of Devilish Arts, condemned
Lev. 20.6, 27. 1 Chr. 10.13.
which thing they also do, who are guilty of such horrid impiety: hence then it
appears, in what a woeful estate they are in, who thus live in continual
commerce with the Devil, in manifest opposition against God, and his Word,
whose Sin fast ripens unto Judgment, witness Pharao, Saul and Manasseh; nor is
the momentany pleasure here, ever able to counterballance the loss hereafter,
the Devil seldom gratifies the man but with the destruction of the Soul, hence
is it that the truly Godly never trace these stops, for that they be ranked
among the works of the flesh Gal. 5.20.
and all such be severely threatened by God, that he will judge them, and be a
swift witness against them, Mal. 3.5.
whoever they be that be guilty of the same, either in professing skill, or
using and practicing directly or indirectly, any of the parts and Species
thereof, whither it be in going to any such for advice, or encouraging them in
their Sin by harbor, supply, or any other countenancing of them, whereby they
may be encouraged in their sin; the Hebrew word Mecashephah, rendered commonly
by us a Witch, signifies properly to deceive, as it were by Legerdemeen as did
the Sorcerers of Egypt in their lieing wonders (whereof formerly) by locking
the outward senses, and changing the appearances of things: in Greek it is
rendered Pharmacopeia, Gal. 5.20. that is to say poisoning, or as our
translators turn it bewitching; for that all poisoning is comprehended under
murder, as a consequent of the same, by the Latins it is called Fascino, to
deceive, hence you see the harmony of all three, with the reason, for that such
Catives as they, not only deceive, poison, and murder others, but themselves
also, in that they be captivat by the Devil at his pleasure, and reserved (as
Satan and his angels be) to the Judgment of the great day for their reward, and
then shall all such know to their cost what it is to league and make compact
with the Devil.

The word Mecashephah mentioned before is of the foeminin gender, either for
that the woman was by Satan first deceived, or for that that Sex is more
readily circumvented, or else for that mo^ of them than of men be thus
deceived, although there be not wanting men Witches as well as women Witches Lev.
20.27.
whose Sin is as heinous, and their Judgment as grievous as is the Judgment
and sin of the other: so that whoever they be without respect of Sex or
quality, who are guilty of this great sin any manner of way whatsomever, most
needs be in a woeful and lamentable estate, the black catalogue and roll whereof
(that none may pretend ignorance,) be pleased to view as they follow in the
several Species thereof, having spoken formerly of the Professors hereof.

First, Hydromancie, which is a divination by water. 2ly, Aeromancy, by Air.
3ly, Pyromancy, by fire. 4ly, Geomancie, by earth. 5ly, Capniomancy, by smoke.
6ly, Alectriomancy, by the crowing of Cocks. 7ly, Psychomancy, or Necromancie,
that consult the Dead. 8ly, Alphytomancy, that divine by the inspection of
wheat-flowr. 9ly, Ictuomancie, by fish. 10ly, Libanomancie, by Incense. 11ly,
Cheiromancy, by the hands. 12ly, Phisiognomy, by the face or countenance. 13ly,
Gastriomancy, which is a divination by giving answers forth of the belly, by a
familiar spirit, such a one was that Pythonissa, mentioned by Paul Act. 16.16.
who was acted by the spirit of Python, or Divination, throw ye Instinct of ye
Devil, so called from Pythius Apollo, the original word Ob, signifies a bottle,
Job 32.19.
and is applied to such as being inspired with a Familiar Spirit spoke with
hollow voices forth of their belly, the manner whereof the Prophet Isaiah
shows to be with a hollow, slow voice Isa. 29.4.
which Maimonie in his Treatise of Idolatry, cap. 6. sect. 1. Explaineth thus,
that he yt had this Familiar Spirit, or Spirit of Python, stood and burned
Incense, and holding a rod of Mirtle-tree in his hand, waved it, and spoke
certain words in secret until he that enquired did hear one speak unto him,
and answer him, touching that which he enquired, with words from under the
Earth, and with a slow voice: Or else he took a dead man's skull, and burned
Incense thereto, and used enchanting and charming words, till he heard a low
and slow voice which was Saul's sin 2 Samuel 28.7. -- 15.
for the which the Lord slew him 1 Chr. 10.13.
and has threatened to cut of all from among his People, who do enquire of any
such Lev. 20.6.
14ly, There is a Species of Divination practiced by the King of Babylon, which
seems to have been in use among the Heathen mentioned by Ezekiel Ezekiel. 21.
verse. 21.
which was done by inspection of Beasts intrals. 15ly, there is a kind of
Witchraft by enchanting spells, or charms, whereby Men, Women, Children, and
Beasts, be in their persons, or Goods, hurt or poisoned Act. 8.9, 10. -- 19.13.
Eccl. 10.11.
. 16ly, Juggling, when by the Devils conveyance, and a deception of the outward
senses, diverse strange and wonderful things are done, not really, but by
slight, and in appearance, or external show only Exodus 7.8, 9, 10.
. 17ly, there is an usual way of fortelling things to come by Horoscop, very
much in practice now adays, (especially in Padua, and in diverse other places
both in Italy and Germany) whereby they foretell, (by erecting a Sheam of the
Heavens, with respect to the Nativity of the Enquirer,) all Events whatsomever,
in relation to the question demanded, at the least they give out that so they
can do: all which Species of Divination and Witchcraft, with all that has, or
any manner of way may relate thereto is expressly forbidden in the Law of the
Lord Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12.
which is summarily comprised, Exodus 22.18.

As to the reasons, why Satan so far unmasks himself at this time, by so
palpable and legible discovery of such as be in League and Covenant with
himself; We shall shortly sum them up as follows, 1st, It may flow from the
multitude of Witches, that may possibly be abounding amongst us, and Satan's
being willing to have such cut off in time, least by a preached Gospel, some be
gained. 2ly, It may flow from some whited Professors of the truth, being
engaged in his service, and his spite to the Gospel, that the immaculate truth
might be scandalized through them. 3ly, We say, that the show of the
Tormentors, to the tormented, in bodily sort, may be one of Satan's Stratagems,
whereby he may be afterward enabled, the better to cut off the innocent with
the nocent, it being easy for him who is the arch Deceiver and Master-peice of
all craft, to make the innocent Lambs of God appear in show among his own
Wolves: although with this remarkable difference, that all the powers of
darkness, be no way able to make such palpable discovery herein, by the
tormenteds laying hold on their garments, as they readily do on the others:
which verifies that of the Psalmist, He that keeps Israel, neither slumbers
nor sleeps. For the presence of the one is merely Fantastical, and the other
more real, and while as they be not seen to all bystanders out to the
tormented only, you must know that it is a easy thing for Satan to open the
eyes of one, and restrain the sight of another.

Now that we may draw to a close, we shall in the next place give you some vive
and shrewd marks, or some evident and probable tokens, whereby a Witch, or such
as have made express League and Compact with the Devil, may be decerned from
all others.

The first whereof, is the insensible or dead nip of a blea color somewhat
hard, and withal insensible, which for that it is known to many, I shall not
insist much on it, only give me leave to say, that what way so ever, whither by
accident, or otherways, such insensible marks be in the body, yet no such mark
as theirs every circumstance considered, is to be found with any others but
themselves, neither can ignorance how they come by it, or their getting of it
when infant from their nurce, plead any excuse, it being no way probable that a
Witch can have any such power from the Devil.

The Second mark is, that such can by no means be drowned, though tied hand and
foot together, and thrown into a River; perhaps either for that they be
destinat for another Element, or else for that they having renunced Baptism, the
external Sacramental sign whereof is water, they be rejected and spurned
against by this Element, by a Divine Destination and a secret fence and Arreist
of a supreme overruling Providence, which contrair to a common Course of
Nature, has put a stop to that light and fluide Body of Water, whereby it by
no means can receive into it the Body of a Witch, though in its self gravanimous
and heavy.

The Third Mark is, that there can nothing befall them in time, (how heavy and
afflicting soever) no not though the torture it self were made use of,) draw
from them the least tear, though to that end they often distort, throw, and
wring their faces, making as though they were weeping, which is the more
remarkable, especially in Women, for that such ordinarily carry a bowl of
tears in their head, which in Crocadell form they can let fall, upon very
slight and momentuous occasion: God by special Providence denying them tears,
the ordinary consequent and external sign of Repentance, to whom he has denied
the internal Grace, although it cannot be denied but that the wicked may seek a
blessing, as did the profane Esau with tears, hence you see upon what account
tears be denied to Witches although not to other Reprobates, for though these be in
some sense at an agreement with Satan, Sin, and Hell, yet is their Covenant and
League not so express, as is the League and Covenant of the other.

The Fourth Mark is, the Balsilisk, or Serpentine sight, wherewith they be
endued to kill, poison, and destroy, what, and whenever they please, were it
not that a Divine overruling providence does often restrain and curb them,
which sight is in them above all other men and women in the world most
remarkable, for while as in the Aple of the Eye there is to be seen in all and
every one, the Image of a man (commonly called the babe in the eye) with the
head up and the feet down; the quite contrair is to be seen in them, to wit,
the feet up, and the head down; God as it were hereby making open show to the
World, that He who keeps His own as the Apple of the eye, takes no such
thought for ye Slaves of Satan, but suffers the Devil whose Image they bear
thus (by inversion) as an external Sign) to portray his Image in them, upon
which account a Witch whither Man or Woman will not look on fixedly or
steadfastly in the face, namely, if they be adverting.

In the original Hebrew this Image in the Eye is called ISHON, the little man,
or the black of the Eye Or else it is called Bath or Babath the Apple of the
Eye, or the Daughter of the Eye ^oth which be made mention of by the Psalmist
David, Psalm 17.8.
while as in other places one only of the said words be used as ISHON the
little Man of Black of the Eye Deuteronomy. 32.10. Prove. 7.2.
Babath or Bath the Apple of the Eye, or the Daughter Lam. 2.18. Zech, 2.8.
the Black being the only Organ of fight, and the Apple of the Eye the Daughter
as it were of that Organ for Bath or Babath signifies a Daughter, as said is,
and it serves for a munition and defense to ISHON the little Man or Black of
the Eye, the true Organ of sight; from hence is it that the Comparison is drawn
of Gods defending and keeping his People as the Black or Apple of the Eye,
while as of Satan's imps he has no such care, as said is.

The Fifth Mark is, that a Witch will by no means be persuaded to repeat, the
heads of the Christian Religion, as they be summarly comprehended in the
Decalogue, Lords Prayer, and Belief, but with severa minckings, eikings, or
inversions, which is certainly ^orth the marking; nor can their Ignorance, or
Bashfulness, plead any excuse, for whether it be before a multitude, or a fewer
number, they will neither of themselves, nor by following another, by any means
be engaged to repeat the Words in Form and Order as they are.

The Sixth Mark is, That if you put any great or gross Salt in the Pipe of a
Kye, and put all into the Fire, upon hearing the ^tackling, and seeing the
bluish low thereof, which is like that of Brimstone, instantly they shall let
go their Urine; but whither this flows from an inward passion and stupifaction
of mind, that upon hearing the crackling, and seeing the Bluish Low foresaid
they be brought to remember the horrible noise and Sulphurious burning that is
abiding them in Hell, at the Judgment of the great Day, when Soul and Body
shall be joined together in one, and for ever and ever made liable to the Wrath
of the Everliving God, or on what other account as yet I know not, however as I
am duly informed the mark is no less true than strange.

Seventhly, There are not wanting some who be bold to averr, that a Witch may
be known from a peculiar sent or smell, which is to be found in them, beside
all other People in the World, and which neither flows from the nestiness of
Clothes, Vermin, or the like, but a contradistinct smell from any such thing,
which may seem the more probable for that the five Senses being the Doors of
the Soul whereby what is within is ordinarily disclosed, and the Devil being in
full Possession of their Soul, must needs emitte his own sent even that of the
Pit.

Now from what is said, it plainly appears, how watchful and circumspect we
ought to be, that we be not carried about with every wind of Doctrine, either
to gainstand the Truth, or receive a lie, in this so guileful and perverse an
Age, wherein notwithstanding of the manifold opportunities of Grace, Sin has
the ascendent over us, hence Impiety and Transgression of all kind, does flow
down as a mighty stream, to the great Scandal of our holy Profession, few
giving themselves to the Exercise and Practice of Godliness, or bringing forth
the Fruits thereof in newness of Life: Hence is it that Satan so mightily
prevails amongst us, and still is like to do, except we set our selves against
his Wiles, and wicked Devices, by an Holy and tender Walk, in all Humility and
Godly Fear, putting on the Spiritual Armor, whereby we shall be enabled to
quench all the fiery Darts of the Devil.

For this end let us beg from the Hand of our God, who is a liberal Giver,
quickening and supporting Grace, in time of need, and to learn from the fall of
others, that our standing is not in our selves, but in the free mercy and
supporting Grace of God, who by a continual watching Eye of Providence,
preserves us every moment, which is the only cause, why we are not consumed
long ere now, unto whom let us in all Humility recommend our selves for
Direction and Protection, that we may be safe and secure, while we be
travellours of hope, passing through this vale of misery toward our end in
eternal Felicity, where we shall be ever with the Lord, World without end, Amen.

FINIS.

