AN Epistle to FRIENDS, Concerning the Education of Children.
NEXT the Care of our own Souls, a right Education of our Children is greatest,
for he can scarce be said to be a Happy Father, whose Child is Unhappy: And
also the great Master of Heaven and Earth, who has given us the Charge over
them, to Nurse and Educate, will require them at our hands: For if such
Inanimate Things, as Corn, Wine and Flax, shall be accounted for, much more our
Offspring. Yet it is to be feared, if there is not more Care, and a better
Method than has been hitherto taken, in many of our Childrens Education, too
many of them will leave the Service, and lose the Blessing of Upholding the
Profession of Truth in succeeding Ages to the Families of Strangers, whilst the
Posterity of the present Professors of it, may have little Share in it.

Heavy and Sore was the Judgment, upon that honorable old Man Eli, for his
Neglect of his Children, (though he reproved them,) their Sins being his and
their Ruin, and the Loss of the Priesthood.

Reproof stands for little, without other good Management (and with it Children
trained young, will need little Correction or Reproof either) and that lies
much in a constant useful Employment, joined with good Instruction; a good
Instructor being like to a good Seeds-man; but how Poor will the Crop be, if
the Husbandman does not manage his Ground, first by Plowing and stirring it,
to prevent Weeds growing.

The Mind is always at work, bringing forth something, and a right managing of
that in our Children, is the chief of our Charge concerning them; and their
Thoughts are of four sorts, 1st, either Innocent, as when Infants; or 2dly,
Useful, when their Hands are usefully employed; or 3dly, Foolish or Wicked,
When Idle; or 4thly, Religious. Idleness is the Devil's great Opportunity,
especially added to ill Company.

Infants are capable of little but feeding, bigger Children of some Knowledge
of Good and Evil, yet of being kept as Innocent from the Evil as in their
Sucking-days, by their Thoughts being entertained upon the Subject their hands
are employed in, when not upon the Instruction their Tutors shall give them
(suitable to their Age) and so forward til l they come to a stronger Judgment;
How readily then will they receive the Council of God, when their Regular and
Innocent Education has given their Spirits the Nature of the good Ground,
(neither Highway nor Stony?) And a Child thus bred, will not readily depart
from it when he is Old.

But few private Persons have the Conveniences, Leisure and Capacity, of
giving their Children an Exact Education at Home; such as have Instructions
usually wanting suitable Employment, and such as have Employment often wanting
Instructions; so that the Subject is indispensably the Churches Care, and worth
their Modelling.

Now as a further Preface to what may be said for an Industrious Education of
Children, I recommend to your Consideration my Printed Proposals for Raising a
College of Industry.

John Bellers.

Dear Friends,
WE having Perused and Considered a Discourse, lately Published by our Friend
John Bellers, for the better Education of Youth, and Ampler Provision for the
Poor; the Care of whom Friends were Particularly Exhorted to by the last Yearly
Meeting; we Recommend the said Book to your Consideration; as, believing it may
be of Use for those good Ends, if one House or College, for a beginning, were
set on foot, with a joint Stock, by the Friends of Estates through the Nation.

William Penn Charles Marshall Leonard Fell John Vaughton Francis Stamper Elias
Osborne Joshua Middleton Oliver Sansom Thomas Gillpin Richard Asheby John
Boulton Richard Watson Robert Barclay Nathaniel Owen Clement Plumsted William
Robinson Josiah Garton Peregrine Musgrave John Harwood Thomas Ellwood William
Crouch John Edge Richard Vickris. James Wass Cornelius Mason Nathaniel Marks
Henry Gouldney Richard Dymond Francis Plumsteed Robert Ruddle Thomas Dell. Abel
Wilkinson Thomas Mincks Edward Wright John Tomkins John Knight Reuben Linskile
John Freame Benjamin Ewer Robert Fairman John Hodgskins John Light John Bawne
Richard Cook John Haddon.


London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street, 1697.


