THE DECLARATION OF Commissary General BEHR, Against diverse slanders and lies
spread abroad against him.
WHereas by some malicious and ill disposed persons several slanders and
calumnies have been by Letters and otherwise spread abroad against me and my
reputation, in sundry particulars:

First, that J have said, that in case the Parliament and his Excellency the
Earl of Essex should be at variance, J would fight for the Earl against the
Parliament.

Secondly, that J have detracted, by ill Language, from the Honor and
reputation of the Scottish Nation in general; and in particular, from the
Honor of his Excellency the Lord General Lesley.

Thirdly, that J have laid base aspersions upon the whole Nation of the
English.

Fourthly, that J have behaved my self so Poultron-like, as that in the head
of a Brigade J have suffered my self to be baffled, without offering that just
defense appertaining to the reputation of a Soldier.

By the Law of God and nature, and by the particular obligation of Military
duty I am forced unto some Apology for my self, albeit it troubles me to
speak for mine own private, when I must be doing for the public. But I will
say but little.

When I first entered into this service, and ever since, I have had no end but
unto which I and the rest of the Army were directed by the State for the
defense of Religion and Liberty, against the common Enemy: it being impossible
that such a mischievous thought should rise in my heart, as what to do in a
falling out betwixt the Parliament and the Earl, while the common design of
the State is so honorably and faithfully carried on by his Excellency.

Neither am I guilty to my self of so much barbarity in manners, and
perverseness in judgment, as to slander the glory of the Scottish Nation,
purchased by them in so many valorous and Noble actions, and attested by the
common report and esteem of Europe. And in particular of General Lesley,
whose constancy, valor, and fidelity, has been so highly honored by the
King of Sweden, and of whose actions so good a memory is left in my native
Country of Germany, I having had the honor not only to be a fellow-souldier
and Commander in that Army, but a spectator also, and a witness of his
achievements.

Nor can I discover in my self that height of impudency, as to dare defame the
English Nation, which carries throughout the World so high a luster of Glory
and Renown, especially in this time and occasion, while by this Noble Nation I
have the honor done me to be employed in so important a charge, for the
defense of the State.

To the last calumny I can say nothing, but must refer my behavior unto the
report of those Gentlemen and Soldiers, who upon our march to and from
Gloucester were in the Brigade.

But of all these calumnies and lies in general I am bound to say, that they
are invented, forged, and vented by men ill affected to the common good, who
for sinister ends endeavor to sow division, and to rend in sunder the happy
union of the two Nations: of which raveling some beginnings are already
discovered in diverse Commanders who have laid down their Commissions in his
Excellencies Army, upon no other ground, but that it stands not with their
honor to serve where the robber of their Nations honor is tolerated.

I protest before the Almighty God, and all men of Honor, that in these
particulars, and in any other that may have reference to these, I am
maliciously and undeservedly circumvented, basely slandered, and falsely
belyed. And if any one shall be so forward as to take upon him the maintenance
of any of these, I hereby offer my self ready to give him all the satisfaction
which with life and honor a Soldier and Gentleman is bound to do.

HANS BEHR.
May 1. 1644.

