THE DEVIL'S AN ASS: OR, The Policy of Hell made plain to the dwellers on
Earth. Being A SERIOUS Reflection upon the late Inhumane Rebellious WAR.

Wherein is Laid Open the Folly as well as wickedness of that horrid sin of
Rebellion.

By T. B.

London, Printed 1660.

Gentlemen, having heard of a seditious Libell, now lately cast abroad, I could
not but remember the evil consequence of such things formerly, and therefore
cast in my, Mite to the Loyal Treasury, which, if prosperous by your
acceptance, I shall be encouraged to proceed.

THE DEVIL'S An ASS.
HA my beloved, are you thereabouts with your bears? I thought the Devil had
been a cunninger knave, than to think to play over an old Game, when the World
is so sensible of that piece of Roguery. What! Mazarin and the Scot, with an
infinite swarm of I know not what tatterdemallian vermin, and confused rabble
of whining Sectaries! and fierce John -- too, with his reverend beak, must be
goosified once more, to save forsooth (when indeed their Aims were to destroy)
our Capitol. O rare Rogues! is there yet such impudent folly to be found in
this so lately Chastised Nation? Can the Devil besot these wretches so, as
that they should be insensible of so stupendous a Providence, as the restoring
of our Sovereign, Laws, and Liberties together; nay this Miraculous cure being
wrought, when the Nation gasped as it were for it is last breath, and that
without the least Force, might convince, (if possible) the Devil himself of
folly, in endeavoring to cross so clear a Providence; and all men not
absolutely bewitched, and besotted with Scismaticall, and Rebellious Incantions
of Atheism, Irreligion, and plain fighting against God himself, who shall
not, not only rest satisfied, but rejoice in this happy recovery of our Church
and State, from Anarchy, Rebellion, and Confusion, to a probable way of Unity,
Peace, Concord, and consequently all possible happiness. But I shall in great
earnest endeavor to show the World by what means, honest, poor, ignorant
people have been drawn in, and ensnared by the Devil and his Agents, to their
own destruction; and as God is more wise, and more Powerful than he, how that
proverb has been verified upon the infernal Father of Sectaries, and
Heretics, Give him rope enough, and he will hang himself. By the permission
of the Almighty, and for our Trial, that Grand Master of Politics has played
the highest game within these twenty years in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
that ever the World heard of; for he has domineered Generally, and
particularly over good and bad: over the Estates, Persons, and sometimes lives
of the former, in the hearts, heads, and minds of the latter: How many
miserable Jobs have we seen, who, not only lost their children, cattle, and
all outward comforts, but even wanted the liberty of a dunghill, and potsheard
to scratch their sores, and were not permitted so much as the air, only because
they breathed Loyalty, and fidelity.

But this was not his highest project. The World knows it were impossible for
the Devil to deceive any considerable part of men in his own likeness, or that
any man should be in love with Hell torments, under their true notion and
appearance. But the course he ever took to ensnare and catch men, was to sugar
over his baits, to put on the garb of Sanctity, and extraordinary zeal, when he
would persuade to Heresy, and ever-fought against the Church with, and
endeavored to turn her own Weapons of Sanctity and patient suffering, against
her own breast. But yet could never before bring the World in love with sin,
yea the greatest of sins, Rebellion, murder, Rapine, usurpation, and what not
unheard of inhumanities till these late times, which to demonstrate fully,
would require an indefatigable pen, and large volume, the subject is so large;
however, I will say what I can within the narrow compass of a sheet: and first
to the means he used to bring this about.

1. It is to be understood, the Devil can work only by natural means,
having attained no supernatural excellency, what ever ignorant people suppose,
and are fooled into the belief of by that Father of lies. Now for the
particulars, he who knows any thing, cannot be ignorant that there were some
abuses in the Court of our late King of blessed memory as there ever were, are,
and must be in all Courts and Concourses of people and power under Heaven, this
weakest imaginable, did that spirit of darkness, joining with the fittest
opportunities, make the strongest, pretense to raise the emulous ambition and
avarice of those he made his instruments to color all the detestable,
impudent, lying pasquills and satyricall libels those Engines of Hell then cast
out against our Court, Church and State. I need not insist upon the depraved
nature of man, how credulous of any evil, nor of the common experience of the
dire execution of those paper-shot, but only remind those at the stern, to be
careful to crush such scorpions in the shell, since it is plain, the same brood
is now hatching.

The Ratsbane of Rebellion being thus laid in every corner of the Nation, yet
wanted the full operation upon the spirits of the vulgar, till those afterward
called Non-conformists, persons some way disappointed in their expected
preferments, by the merits of better men, and thereby incensed, became
inveterate inveighers against all Authority, and by the stygian waters of their
pestiferous Lecture-Sermons so intoxicated the deluded people, that they who
before lived in the enjoyments of peace, plenty and contentment in their
stations, begin to think themselves above their Neighbors in Sanctity, and
preach the promise that the Saints should inherit the Earth, and thought it
grievous to be top't by their Lords, and the Prerogatives of the King and Peers.

3. When these Kirk Dragons had performed their parts with wonderful
dexterity, then Lucifer draws out his state Engineers, who now by the
encouragement of a confused cry of rabble, dispute, first privately, then
publicly, the privileges of the people against the Prerogatives of the King,
deny first one, and then all: and all this was honied over with the Title of
The Free born People of England, which indeed proved so taking, that the
Parliament generally began to think it a fine thing to be equal to, or above
their Sovereign, and in fine, from one degree of infatuation to another were
come to that, they raised Arms against his late Majesty, and having run on so
far in rebellion, as to the cutting off many of the gallantest Persons in the
Nation, and exhausting the Treasury and Kingdom indeed, by their rebellious
War, the more active had no way left, but to maintain those wickednesses,
they had perpetrated by attempting higher, and so proceeded to the murder of
their only too patient and good King. Then were they cock-sure, enjoyed the
Nation by Conquest, and none were endured, but who could with hellish impudence
slander and vilify the sacred Person as well as Relations of our gracious
Sovereign, concluding their Empire was as lasting as their spirits unlimited:
but when these Vermin came to drink freely of the waters of prosperity, their
Poison workt so highly, they became obnoxious to all the World, and this bait
of the Devil grew as useless, as odious, and at last Lucifer and his
Instruments were forced to quit their Dominion to God and his Anointed, to
which God be praise and glory, for ever and ever.

Thus you see by a familiar instance the methods of iniquity, the means of the
most accursed machinations of Hell, and the designs of that first of Rebels the
Devil, to bring all men into his own condition, as it is reported, to be
natural to those who are infected with the Plague, to reduce all men as far as
they are able into their own miserable condition. Now that you may see the
folly as well as misery of rebellion, let us trace it from the very first rise.
Was not the Devil himself whom Rebels themselves wonder at for that
Masterpiece of sin, the first President of Rebellion and Apostasy? Did not he
lead the game to all the World? And who will not tremble to think of becoming a
Proselyte to the Prince of torment? Consider the policy of your grand Master,
who because he could not be content to continue a loyal subject in Heaven it
self, is become a tormented Devil in the lowest Hell? And (to be short) you
who snarl, libel, etc. against our gracious Sovereign, consider whether your
case be any thing different from that proud rebellious Angel, who slighted the
Incarnate as you do the Anointed of God: but that, as his Creation, so his
capacity, and consequently his sin and punishment, are and will be higher. But
still his folly and yours, who in your capacities, might equally enjoy
happiness, as is has already in part, will more manifestly if you proceed,
appear to be more than bestiall: which God forbid:

FINIS.

