JESUS CHRIST THE MYSTICAL OR GOSPEL SUN, Sometimes seemingly eclipsed, yet
never going down from his PEOPLE: OR ECLIPSES Spiritualized.

Opened in a SERMON at Paul's before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, etc. March 28. 1652. The day before the late SOLAR ECLIPSE.

BY FULK BELLERS, Master of Arts, and Preacher of the Gospel in the City of
LONDON.

London, Printed by T. Maxey for John Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLII.

To the Right Honorable JOHN KENDRICK, LORD MAYOR, and The Right Worshipful,
the Aldermen and Sheriffs of the Honorable City of LONDON.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
HAd there been any real danger in firmamentary Eclipses, our God doubtless
would have left it upon record in the Scripture: Since we are sure, Amos 3.7.
See also Jer. 18.7, 8.
the Lord God will do nothing, (viz. in a way of judgment) but he first
reveals his secret (intendment) to his servants, the Prophets. Now how silent
the word is in this, I leave it to the judgment of all, that are any way versed
in the Book of God. That which startleth many at the beholding of them, is that
which scared diverse heretofore, viz. either

1. The Rarity of them: Solis exortus, cursus, occasus nemo admiratur,
propterea quod quotidie fiunt: at eclipses Solis mirantur, quia raro accidunt;
and Solis eclipses magis mirantur, quam Lunae, quoniam hae crebriores sunt.
Auctor ad Herennium, lib. 3o. mihi, p. 38. G.
No man wondreth at the rising, the quick-moving, the setting of the Sun,
because these things are observed daily: But Solar Eclipses, (because they come
seldom) are wondered at even far more then Lunar, (which are more frequent) as
was well observed by that heathen long ago.

2. Men's unacquaintednesse with the natural causes of them; As we find in
those Indians in Jamaica, who refusing to furnish Columbus, that Genoese, (the
first discoverer of the new American world) with provisions, seeing the people
idolatrously devoted unto the Moon, and foreseeing her eclipse, (by his
Ephemerides) Purchas's pilgrimage 8. book, cap. 2. page 731. mihi
he told the Islanders that if they did not bring him in provision, the divine
anger would consume them, a sign whereof they should see in the darkened face
of the Moon within two days. The Indians being ignorant of the cause, were so
terrified at the beholding of this eclipse, that they came to beg pardon of
him, and bring him in provision in abundance, whereby Columbus (making use of
their ignorance,) Henric. Salmuth Comment. in Panciroll. lib. 2. tit. 1. de
orb novo.
supplied his own necessities, and engaged the people much unto him.

3. Those remainders and dregs of superstition and idolatry, that are to be
found in all. This is the cause why many heathens of old did look upon the In
hoc unum omnium prope populorum sententiae primum convenerant; ut -- superna
corpora, Solemn, Lunam, reliquaque astra, Deos appellaverint, and esse
crediderint. Natalis Comes, Mytholog. lib. 1. page 10.
Sun as their God, and the Moon as their Goddess; therefore seeing either of
them to be robbed, or bereaved of light, they were exceedingly Putabant solemn
and lunam eclipsin patientia moe^ore affici, tanquam reges ira commotos, and
indignatione; ideoque ab hujusmodi signis metuebant, and reges suos placare
sacrificiis studebant, etc. Pet. a Figuerio.
amazed. The remainders of this superstition and idolatry we may observe in
those Apostates, who Ezekiel. 8.16.
worshipped the Sun toward the east, and 2 Kin. 23.5.
burned incense to Baal, to the Sun, and to the Moon, to the Planets, and all
the Host of heaven; yea, the very dregs of these are to be found in the souls
of all, because Prove. 27.19.
as face in the water, (or in the glass) answers unto face, so does the heart
of man unto man. Their idolatries and superstitions acquaint all, what seeds
are to be found in their souls.

4. The want of that principle of grace, and that filial fear of the Lord, that
should be in men. Were this fear present, it would eat up all carnal fear
touching eclipses, as it did of earthquakes, thundrings, and lightnings, in the
primitive Christians. Or as Exodus 7.2.
Aaron's rod did swallow up the rods of the wise men, sorcerers, magicians,
inchanters, in the presence of Pharaoh; Pondering upon this, that it is as
natural for the Sun, or Moon to be eclipsed in their seasons, as daily to rise
and set in the world. But especially considering that positive injunction, Jer.
10.2. Ita ut ex astris coelique fideribus pendeatis, atque ex illis ventura
divenetis, ita ut signa illa coelestia terrori vobis sint; atque formidini
quemadmodum ipsis sint Gentibus, etc. Tossarii Peraphr. in loc.
Learn ye not the way of the heathen, neither be dismayed at the signs of
heaven, and that upon this account, because the heathen are dismayed at them. A
text fully against allcarnall fears touching eclipses; yea, against judicial
Astrology it self, by the vote of Hic locus insignis est contra Astrologos,
impostores omnium maximos. Oecolampad.
Oecolampadius, Bullinger, Paraeus, Vatablus, Pellicanus, Calvin, yea of a
Lapide also, who do abundantly justify the last learned English Annotations
upon that place, which are worthy the perusal of all.

But however there be little danger in firmamentary, yet there are many
discomforts in spiritual Eclipses: And this made me, upon a sudden call to
preach before your Honor, (observing many to be amused with perplexing fears)
to compare spiritual with firmamentary eclipses, and to demonstrate, that
there is no cause of dreading any of the pretended direful operations of the
later, when the causes of the former are removed out of the way. How far the
ensuing discourse was then looked upon as a word in season, I need not now
relate. It now comes abroad upon importunity, and all that I shall add, is my
earnest desire, that the blessing of the Lord may go along with it; that all
those clouds of sin between us, and our God, may be dispelled, and that Jesus
Christ, the true mystical Sun, may still go on to shine into our souls. And
that his blessing may be with you all, in your Persons, Relations, Families,
and in your Government, that this renowned City may flourish in Religion,
Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity, which shall be the daily prayer of

May the 12. 1652. The most unworthy Servant of Christ in the Ministry of his
Gospel, FULK BELLERS.

JESUS CHRIST the Mystical SUN.
ISAIAH 60.20. Thy Sun shall no more go down.


THe Text that I have read (Right Honorable) may seem a Paradox to many: and
that upon a double account. viz. to hear of a Sun,

1. Monopolized, to some sort of people; when as the ordinary Sun shines both
upon the just, and unjust; yet this is confined unto the elect of God, in that
possessive affix, (...)
thy.

2. That will not set, nor go down from the Horizon where it is: whereas the
Sun in the firmament, rises and sets every day: But however, it may seem
improbable to flesh and blood, and to the remainders of carnal reason, that
are to be found within us. And albeit, it may wrap every one into admiration,
to hear of such a Sun, so confined; and that knows no way to go down: yet to a
man with a spiritual eye, it seems neither impossible, nor yet improbable;
because the mouth of truth, that cannot lie, has spoken it.

There are indeed in Scripture many Paradoxes to men that have only the
glimering light of nature within them; as that 1 Matthew. 1.
A virgin should bring forth a Son. 2 2 Timothy 1.10.
That Christ's death should be a means to bring life and immortality to light by
the Gospel. 3 Heb. 11.3.
That all things that are now made, should be made out of things that did not
appear, i. e. out of a flat mere nothing, 4. That our bodies when they shall be
mouldred into dust, shall yet be reunited to our souls in the day of the
second appearing of Jesus Christ: 5. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28.
That God should call into the state of grace, not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble: But make choice of the foolish, weak,
despised, yea, base ones of the world, when he passes by the Grandees of the
earth; to make (I say) them heirs of heaven: And among others I may reckon up
my Text, which is indeed (...), but not (...); beyond the opinion of many, but
not beyond the common truth of God, nor beyond the reason of a renewed
Christian: And in these passages (especially in this) that seem so repugnant,
yea absurd many times to a carnal judgment, we are always to put into the
scale (that we may poize down reason, and advance faith)

1 The Power of our God, which is not as the power of man: Man's power is but a
limited, finite kind of power; His ell or measure is too short to measure the
infinite, incomprehensible omnipotence of our God; He that was able to make the
Sun to go back in Isai. 38.8.
Hezekiah's time, in a way of retrograde motion, ten degrees: And he that was
able to make the Sun to stand still in the midst of heaven, so that it hasted
not to go down about a whole day, in Jos. 10.12, 13.
Joshuah's time: is equally able to make this Sun (whereof he now speaks) not
to go down at all unto his people.

2 The Truth and will of God manifested in his promises: Has he spoken it, and
shall he not do it? Has he said it, and shall he not bring it to pass? We may
rest satisfied in this, that the mouth of the Lord has uttered, that Thy Sun
shall no more go down.

3 The Subject whereof all these Paradoxes speak, which is here the term Sun,
not natural, but supernatural.

Now that I may briefly lead you to the full meaning of these words, You may
observe the dependence of these upon those foregoing, to stand thus: The whole
former part of this Chapter is taken up in discovering the happy estate of the
Church of Christ, under the time of the Gospel, in regard of all her spiritual
enjoyments; whereof two are peculiarly enumerated or reckoned up; To which we
shall reduce the rest: viz.

1 The Promulgation of the everlasting Gospel, whereby when darkness covers
the earth, and gross darkness all the unregenerate people on it; The Lord will
then arise with light, and bring in unexpected glory unto them: And this shall
be a means to bring in abundance out of improbable places; such as were Ver. 2.
Midian, Epha, Ver. 6.
Sheba, Ver. 7.9.
Kedar and Tarshish: yea from unlikely persons; viz. Ver. 3.13, 16.
Kings, and earthly Potentates, shadowed out unto us by the trees of Lebanon.
Where by the way, we might observe.

Doct. That where Satan has places under his own command, God there is able
not only to cull, but to call out a people for himself, and bring them in as
Doves flocking to their windows, flying with speed as the clouds: And all to
come near at his appointment.

2 The collation or the bestowing of greater mercies spiritual, then on men in
former times, upon point of 1 Gifts Ver. 17.
; For brass I will bring gold, for iron silver, and for wood brass, and for
stones iron: i. e. I will confer surpassing gifts upon them, that shall as far
surpass what they have received formerly, as iron does ordinary stones, or as
silver does iron, or as gold brass. 2 Governors Ver. 17.
: I will make thy officers peace, and thy exactours righteousness: which was
verified in the first fruits, in Ezra and Nehemiah, and other good Governors
times: But the full harvest is reserved for Gospel seasons, as is plain to all;
wherein Magistrates are promised to be stirred up, that should be peaceable
procurers of their peoples welfare: And I am sure it is a badge of a man's
belonging unto Babylon, not Jerusalem, to be an oppressor of the people of
God. 3 Privileges. 1 Violence shall not be heard in thee: Which words are not
a promise of absolute immunity from the cross; But a comparative comfort; that
however the Church may meet with many pressures, yet it shall never totally be
overwhelmed: God will preserve and protect it, maugre all the violent attempts
against it; Violence may be attempted, yet violence shall never be heard in thy
land to prevail finally over my people in it. 2 The breaking in of light
amongst them; so that they should need neither Sun, nor Moon; whereby is
imported, not that the Saints should be deprived of those common mercies,
attending upon their wel-being in this world.



But because they should not now any longer fix their happiness in the
enjoyment of these, or any earthly, low, worldly object, but should be mounted
up above, and collocate all their happiness in the enjoyment of God; and hence
here is promised a better mercy: That the Lord shall be to thee an everlasting
light, and thy God shall be thy glory: and this is amplified in the words of
the Text, to show the perpetuity of this light unto them, Thy Sun shall no more
go down.

The words are an absolute promise, held forth in a Categoricall negative
Proposition; which if I should go about to resolve logically into the subject
(thy Sun,) the predicate (going down,) the Copula or the bond whereby they are
knit together (shall not,) the modality (any more,) I should edify but little:
I shall therefore strive Theologically, (i. e, plainly) to divide these words,
and then you may observe these two things.

1 The parties to whom this Privilege does belong, implicitly held forth unto
us in that possessive particle thy.

2 The Privilege belonging to these persons: viz. That this Sun shall no more
go down unto them.

Something here needs unfolding.

Q. 1 What is meant by this Sun? Q. 2 What by the going down of the Sun? Q. 3
Who are meant by the persons involved in the affix, thy? Q. 4 What by going
down any more? Q. 5. When is the whole of this promise to be verified? I shall
satisfy these succinctly.


2 A metaphorical Sun, not the creature sun, but the Creator Sun, twice styled
Jehovah, is here only aimed at, even Jesus Christ, who is the mystical Mal.
4.2. Alsted. Paratitla. Calv. Deus erit Sol tuus. Quod Propheta loquatur de
Christo, certissimum est, etc Heshusius. Bre^tius in locum. Christus est lux
aeterna fidelium. Bullinger.
Sun of righteousness.

I know some understand by Sun 1 The streams of the grace of God, and his
favor in the comfortable influences and offers of it. 2 But others look to the
fountain of all this favor, viz. Jesus Christ. And therefore most do
unanimously expound it of him: And he it is that is appointed by his Father, to
rise in a spiritual way to his people, and never to set more upon them.


Verbum (...) i.e. venit, Cum de Sole dicitur, Hebraice idem quodoccidereest:
ut Genesis 26. quia ingressus erat Sol. Tunc enim videtur ingredi Terras vel
Oceanum, ut loquuntur Poetae. Forerius in locum.
going down of the Sun in the proper notion of it, is nothing else but the
departing of it out of our Horizon. And here the going down of Jesus Christ (if
possible) should be his final departure away from his people: Christ will
never so set; but however he may be eclipsed, yet he will still continue in
their Hemisphere, i. e. He will abide with them for ever.

(thy) are expressed in the verse after the Text; Thy people shall be all
righteous, by profession at least, and by separation at the last; when it shall
be wholly purged, and only the righteous shall dwell in it. Jesus Christ has
been about this purging work, even from the days of his coming into the flesh;
yea some way, from the beginning of the world, in separating the tares from the
corn, Matthew. 3.12.
the chafe from the wheat; and he still goes on to purge his floor, and will go
on to the day of harvest. To those that have righteousness imputed or imparted,
this promise does actually belong, while they are here: of which more anon.

By going down any more: There might indeed seemingly be the going down of
Christ, when he went into the lower parts of the earth. But that was merely in
regard of his humanity; For Heb. 9.28.
Christ was once only offered to bear the sins of many. He went down once and
no more, not a second time. But in regard of his Deity; by his Spirit once
arising in our souls, he will never any more go down to us.

Isa. 61.3.
trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he may be glorified;
where they have the spiritual Luke 17.21.
kingdom of Christ begun within them. But For the perfect consummation of it,
that is reserved for heaven hereafter; yet the first fruits we do enjoy here.
Saints, they have in the Church Militant this promise begun to them, only the
full complement of it is reserved for them in the Church triumphant.
It is now to the beginnings of Christ here, that I shall labor in my ensuing
discourse, to apply this promise, which being thus expounded, does resolve it
self into these two Observations. 1 Doct. That Jesus Christ is the same to
Believers, as the Sun is to the world. 2 Doct. Quamvis obnubiletur, etc.
Oeculampadius.
That however Jesus Christ, the supercelestiall Sun, may be eclipsed, or
beclouded, yet he will never go down from his people.


Thy Sun shall no more go down; i. e. however it may have a curtain drawn
between thee and him, as the firmamentary Sun has by clouds, or by the Moon in
its eclipse, yet go down, i.e. depart, he will not. Now for the profitable
prosecution of these observations, I shall follow this method:

1 I shall demonstrate the grounds why Christ is shadowed out under this notion
of the Sun.

2 I shall clear Christ to be the same to believers, as the Sun is to the
world. Both these in reference to the former proposition. And then,

3 That however this mystical Sun may sometimes be eclipsed, yet he will never
go down from his people.

4 I shall give the improvement of all.

For the first. There are few that haesitate about the application of this
metaphorical title to Jesus Christ, that are not utterly unacquainted with the
word of God; because we read, that Psalm. 84.11.
Jehovah. the Lord God is a Sun to his people, the giver both of grace, and
glory to them. And the Prophet Mal. 4.2.
Malachi is very plain, that he is the Sun of righteousness, that does arise
with healing in his wings; Placaei Disputat. p. 175.
this Sun being twice styled Jehovah in this Chapter. If any doubt be, it is
touching the accommodation of this to Jesus Christ. And for the resolving of
that, I shall lay down these two things, viz. that he may be justly so styled in
a way of 1 Opposition, 2 Allusion.


1 If you look upon him in a way of opposition to 1 Leviticall shadows, or
ceremonies, which yet were typical prefigurations of him: Christ was as the
Sun, in respect of those candles, torches, stars, or lesser lights at most. He
did as far surpass them in regard of splendour, as the firmamentary Sun, does
the sign of the Sun painted upon any Table. They are indeed but dull Heb.
10.1. Colos. 2.17.
shadows of him, that was the glory to come. 2 That innate or natural
darkness, that is to be found in all men by nature. For by nature (...). Ephesians.
5.8.
we were not only dark, but darkness; not in the concrete, but in the
abstract, which carries abundance of emphasis in it. And when Jesus Christ
comes, he fills us with light, as the Sun does the body of the hemisphere,
overrun with darkness. And thus he becomes John 1.9.
the light of every one that comes into this world; viz. that is spiritually
illuminated by him. Thus we see he is as the Sun, in respect of umbrages, and
as the Sun, to dispel all that intrinsecall darkness to be found within us.


2 By way of allusion. Allusions may be many; but those that are natural, and
obvious to all, (because I do desire to profit all) I shall make use of. He is
as the Sun,

1 By way of beauty or excellency. The Sun is deservedly looked upon, as the
Lord of all elementary virtues, the fountain of all aeriall light. By some as
the heart of heaven. For as the heart is in the body natural, so is the Sun in
the firmamentary body. Some look upon it, as the sparkling eye of heaven, that
carries beauty in it; yea some of the Philosophers fancied, that in the sun
was the soul of the world, which filling that fiery globe (which we ordinarily
see) thence diffuseth his rays, as so many spirits, whereby he distributeth
life, sense, and motion to all sublunary creatures. It must needs be granted by
all, that it is the most glorious, beautiful, and the fairest among all the
stars.

Which how far it may be accommodated to Jesus Christ, I shall briefly make out
unto you. Psalm. 45.2. (...) Est verbum geminatum, augendae significationis
gratia. Rivet.
Jesus Christ is said to be fairer then the children of men. Personal beauty
is a great ornament, when seconded with moral virtues, how much more when with
divine graces? as in Genesis 39.6.
Joseph and 1 Samuel 16.13.
David. But when attended with the Colos. 1.19.
fullness of grace, which was to be found in Christ alone, what abundance of
luster must it needs add unto him? What that outward form, or feature of Jesus
Christ was, is utterly unknown, though that Jesuit durst take upon him to
describe it. God, I conceive, has dealt by that, as by the body of Moses,
hiding of it, lest any finding it, Vavasor. de forma Christi.
should idolize or adore it, in a distinct way from his Deity. But though we
neither know the outward form, or feature of Jesus Christ; yet the Scripture
holds him forth as very fair and beautiful, as altogether lovely to the eye
of faith. Cant. 5.16. (...)
Not only beautiful in one part, but in all parts; and two things that the
word makes out to us, do abundantly demonstrate it.

1 That Jesus Christ was without (...) Heb. 9.14.
spot, (...), 1 Pet. 1.19.
blemish, or deformity. Christ he was without any blemish in respect of sin.
Deformities in body, always speak the presence of some sin in the soul Jesus
Christ was in all things like to us, yet without sin. For such an high Priest
became us, that was holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners.
Jesus Christ he was 1 Holy. (...),
He had holiness to the Lord engraven upon his heart, Exodus 28.36.
as the high Priest had it upon his holy crown of pure gold, like to the
engravings of a signet. 2 Harmless or innocent. (...).
Devoid of all natural pravity or sinfulness, unto which both Priest and
People were obnoxious in the Levitical Law. 3 Undefiled, unpolluted; (...).
not contaminated with any sin. 2 Cor. 5 21.
He knew no sin, by his own commission, though he felt much for it by
imputation. 4 Separated from sinners. He was obnoxious, (...).
as to no sin, so to no guilt of sin in and of himself. Separated he was from
sinners, as the high Priest when he entered into the holy of holies, was from
the common people, which causes him to challenge the Jews, John 8.46.
Which of you convinces me of sin?


2. He was the brightness of his Fathers glory, (...). Heb. 1.3.
or that resplendent luster or effulgency arising from the light of his Father.
He was not only the reflection of the Father, as of the Sun in the Rainbow in
a watery cloud; or as the Sun in the water or glass, at the rebound only. But
as the Son is many times the reflection of the Father, being his own lively
Picture and Image; as having all these glorious excellencies of wisdom,
knowledge, purity, that are to be found in his Father. Hence it is that we are
said [feelingly] to 2 Cor. 4.6.
know the glory of God in the face of Christ. Because in Christ we may see all
those glorious excellencies that are to be found in the Father, when as the
veil that is upon our minds by nature, is done away. Now if Jesus Christ were
sinlesse, and the glittering refulgency of his Fathers glory, he must needs
surpass the Sun in beauty, when it shines in its fullest strength.

2 In regard of the seat and influences of it, Psalm. 19.5.
God has placed a Tabernacle for the Sun in the heavens: There it keeps it is
residence. And hence Astronomers (clapping him into circles) allot unto him
various Orbs; As the Eccentrique wherein the body of it remains; and a couple
of orbs, the (...).
one to carry the part that is remoter from the earth, and (...).
another to carry the lowest part of it. And a late Copernicus.
Astronomer has found out one more, Eccentrum Eccentri; but all in heaven.
Jesus Christ we know, not only as God, but as man, is now in heaven; and Acts
3.21.
the Heavens must contain his bodily presence till times of the restitution of
all things: Rev 3.21.
And that he is set down in his Fathers Throne, on the highest Seat of all
glory and excellency. Sol agit in inferiora, motu, lumine, and influentiis.
By however, the Sun's residence be in heaven, yet his light and influences are
here below on earth.

And he may be said to dwell among us in regard of his rays and beams: Jesus
Christ, we know dwells in the highest Heavens, but by his rays and beams of
grace, Isai. 57.15.
he dwells with them that are of a contrite heart, to revive the spirit of the
humble, Rev. 2.1.
and the heart of the contrite ones. By them he walks in the midst of the
golden candlesticks; and as the Sun does daily visit the earth with his
influences, so does Jesus Christ, the day spring from on high, visit his Saints
with the imbreathings and revivings of his graces and comforts.

3 In regard of his magnitude and greatness: The Sun, of all the Planets, is
deservedly looked upon as the greatest, both Quantitate molis and virtutis.
in bulk and virtue. The greatness of it Astronomers did heretofore gather
especially by Alsted. in Cyclopaed. lib. 11. cap. 4. de (...) Solis Reg. 2.
eclipses: And they make it out by demonstrations, that it is 166 times bigger
then the earth: How much greater then is the Creator of the Sun, then that
firmamentary sun it self. We know, that by the Word (i. e. Jesus Christ) John
1.3.
all things, (even the Sun it self) were made. We find the Prophet crying
out, Isai. 53.8.
Who may declare his generation! And I may say, Who can declare his greatness!
no creature (I am sure) is able to demonstrate it, Psalm. 145.3.
because there is no end of his greatness, it is unsearchable. The heavens do
contain the firmamentary sun, but the Heaven of heavens cannot contain this
mystical Sun in regard of his Deity.

4. His Form and Oneness.

1 The form of the Sun is of an orbicular round figure, a Pierius lib. 39 de
Cireulo.
clear emblem of eternity; for in a circle there is neither beginning nor
ending. We read of Heb. 7.3.
Melchisedek, that he was without beginning of days, or end of life, viz. as
recorded in the history of Moses: And in that he was a lively type of Jesus
Christ, who as God, is the first and the last, God blessed for ever.

2. For Oneness. We know that there are many stars, Sol quod solus esset, solus
luceret, and reliquis stellis lucem impcrtiret. Cicer. 2. de Natura deorum.
but one Sun that gives light to the world. There are many Saints that receive
of Christ's light continually, as the stars from the body of the Sun. In Arabia
there is (as they say) to be found but one Phoenix; And in the body certainly
there is but one heart: In the firmament but one Sun, and in the Church but 1 Timothy 2.5.
one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

5. In regard of motion. The Sun, we know, is very quick; and that in twenty
four hours it does encircle the whole world. David represents him Psalm. 19.5,
6.
to run, like a giant, the race that is set before him: that is,

1 Very swiftly, infinitely faster then a man of the largest sieze, or the
longest breath. David's illustration, though some way expressive, does fall
short of the Sun in the quickness of its motion. A bird upon the wing, an arrow
shot out of the bow, cannot possibly reach the sun upon point of speed. How
many thousand miles does he run within an hour? Bellarmin. de Ascens. mentis in
Deum gradu 7o, mihi, page 146.
It was a curious observation of that Cardinal, when he had the full prospect
of the body of the Sun, ready to go down, to try a conclusion of the quickness
of the motion of it, took the Psalms into hand: Before (says he) that I had
twice read the 51 Psalm, the whole sun was set. Whereby he does conclude, that
the sun runs in the eighth part of an hour 7000 miles: Though the Cardinals
compute (as well as his doctrine in matters Polemicall, or of controversy)
does very much fall short of truth; yet his experiment in this, gives some
proof of the quickness of the sun's motion: For the quickness of Christ's
motion; how quickly did he come from heaven to earth, when he did assume our
nature, and veiled himself under our humanity? How quickly comes he to the
relief of his Church in distress? And is he not as quick as the lightning
upon point of motion, when he comes to enlighten the world with his truth?

2 Indefatigably, unweariedly: How constant was Jesus Christ in doing the will
of his Father, and to finish the work, that he sent him about: How does he
profess, that it was his meat to do it. Never was there any hungry man
laboring so constantly for, or delighting in his appointed food, as Jesus
Christ did constantly in doing the will of his Father.

6. It Is obedience to the Command of God. There is an obedientiall power,
whereby the firmamentary Sun stands at Gods appointment; that made it to
stand still in Joshuah's time: and to run back upon the dial of Ahaz, for a
sign to Hezekiah. And how was it with Jesus Christ? what an obedientiall
yiedling was there of himself to the will of his Father? He declares unto all,
that he came upon this errand, that he might fulfill his Fathers will, and
finish the work that he had sent him to do; and that he did do all things that
pleased him always: When he finds it in the volume of the book to be written
of him, that he should do his will, Psalm. 40.7, 8.
How does his heart echo? Lo, I come, I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea,
thy Law is within my heart. And when he was to complete the great work of our
Redemption by his agony, his bloody sweat, and final passion; How does he
discover a will melted into the will of his Father, when resigningly he gives
up himself in the midst of all that soul-anguish that was upon him, which
extorted, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. Yet mark how
willingly he does surrender up himself to his Father; Yet not my will, but
thine by done.

So that in these six respects the firmamentary Sun is a lively emblem of that
super-celestiall Sun Jesus Christ. viz. both in regard of 1 Beauty and
excellency. 2 Seat and influences. 3 Magnitude or greatness. 4 Form, and
one-nesse. 5 Motion, and 6 Obedience.


No wonder therefore that this name is accommodated to him in Scripture.

And yet to make it out a little fuller: Do but consider with me the next thing
that we are to speak to for the clearing of the first point, viz.

2 That Christ is the same to believers, as the Sun is to the world. Thence it
is that he is held forth to us by this notion in this place, and the places
forecited; that I will not trouble you with the repetition of: Only for the
demonstration of it, consider with me, what benefit the world, receives by the
Sun, the like shall we find believers to receive from Christ. Now among other
things that the world receives from the firmamentary sun, I shall insist on
these six: viz. 1 Light. 2 Life. 3 Heat. 4 Fruitfulness. 5 Comfort. 6 Purity.


All which Saints receive from Jesus Christ, and therefore to every
individual, the promise may be repeated; Thy Sun shall no-more go down.

1. The firmamentary Sun is very operative to produce light, and dispell
darkness. It is seated as it were in the center, navell, or heart of heaven,
that it might impart its light to the stars that are above and below it, yea,
and unto all the earth besides. How quickly does it in his approaches near unto
our Horizon, much more at his coming up into it, drive out darkness out of the
air; and ferret it out of our houses; It is the Steward of light. Now as
aeriall light flows from the sun, so all spiritual light flows from Jesus
Christ. It is he that fills

1 Gospel Ordinances with light, and Psalm. 19.8.
makes his word to be an enlightening word to the [mentall] eyes of his people.

2 He it is that fills the souls of his elect with light, not only with the
light of natural reason, wherewithal John 1.9.
He fills all that come into this world: But with the light of grace; He that
did command light to shine out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6.
It Is he that shines into our souls: He sets up a light there, viz. the light
of saving knowledge, and justifying faith; yea, and the John 8.12.
light of life too in the beginnings or it. The Sun natural is as the Father
of light natural, and the Sun spiritual of light spiritual. Wherefore he
says, Ephesians. 5.14.
A wake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light. Isai. 60.2. Placaei disp. 17. Page 179.
A passage cited out of this Chapter of Isaiah; The Lord shall rise upon thee,
and his glory shall be seen upon thee. The Apostle changes only the title
Jehovah into Christ.

2 It produces heat. Hence the Psalmist tells us, that Psalm. 195.
there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. It is the heat of the sun that
warms the seeds, and roots of flowers, and many herbs in spring, that are in
the womb of the earth, and draws them out by his shinings: It Is his heat that
does produce Minerals within, as well as vegetables upon the surface of the
earth: Now what the Sun is in the Kingdom of nature, that is Christ in the
Kingdom of grace: It is he that by his word warmes the hearts within, of his
people.

1 Sometimes making them to yield: As the hard Adamant by soking of it in the
warm blood of a Goat; which (as some say) is rendered thereby apt to be worked
upon; so the hard heart of a sinner steeped in the warm blood of Christ, Zach.
12.10.
falls presently relenting that it may be wrought upon.

2 Sometimes to melt as wax before the fire: As David found by experience,
Psalm. 22.14.
My heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels. It is this that
turns an heart of stone into an heart of flesh: according to that Ezekiel. 36.26.
covenantpromise, I will take from them an heart of stone, and I will give unto
them an heart of flesh: A melting heart by reason of fear, is a great
judgment, as we see in the Exodus 15.15. Josh. 2.11.
Canaanites, and Isai. 19.1.
Egyptians. But to have an heart melted by reason of sin, seen through the
glass of the Gospel, and the piercings of Jesus Christ, is a transcendent
mercy; As we see in 2 Kin. 22.19.
Josiah: Of whom we read, that his heart was tender, and therefore penitentially
he humbles himself before the Lord. It is the heat under the Limbeck, that
makes the water drop out of the head of the Limbeck: and it is the inward heat
which we find from Jesus Christ, that makes many times tears trickle down our
eyes, because men keep not God's laws. It was this that made David wash his
bed, and water his couch with tears.

3 Sometimes it inflames them, and sets their hearts a burning within them;
That warmth that Christ put into his word did so far transcendently warm
Jeremiah's heart, that he professes, Jer. 20.9.
his word was in my heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones; and I was
weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. Fire will out. It was that which
made the hearts of those Disciples so hot within them, that they brake out; Did
not our hearts burn within us, Luke 24.32.
while he spoke unto us by the way, and opened unto us the Scriptures? It is
Christ that fills us so with the fire of love, that all the waters of
affliction cannot quench it.

3 Sometimes it causes life. How does it draw out that plasticall or formative
power, which is to be found in seeds, making them to sprout while they are
under the clod, and thereby enquickning them? How does it, as it were, every
Spring call back roots and trees, out of their swoone or seeming deadness, in
which they lay all Winter long? The Sun by his beams carries down life unto
them; yea, to us also in some respect: It is the sun that concurreth as an
universal cause to the generation of man, Sol and homo generant hominem.
and to his supporting in the estate of nature: Did not the Sun so qualify the
air with it is beams, it would be utterly unfit to generate or maintain the
vital spirits in us: We owe indeed the life of nature, some way to the sun in
nature: But sure I am, we owe the life of grace totally unto Jesus Christ, this
spiritual Sun; Jesus Christ is our Col. 34.
life, as well as our light; It is he that is a 1 Cor. 15.45.
quickening Spirit. As no creature can possibly live without the benefit of the
sun; so neither can any Christian live the life of grace without Jesus Christ.

4 It makes the earth very fruitful, it is the sun that makes the trees to
sprout, and the grass to spring, corn to grow, and (in a word) that crowns
the earth with fruitfulness. Our God gives Acts 14.17.
fruitful seasons in their season, filling our hearts with food and gladness;
chiefly, though not only by the Suns means; whereby he does renew the face of
the earth, and brings precious things out of it. And is there any thing that
makes a Christian more Philip. 1.11.
fruitful in the fruits of righteousness then Jesus Christ? Without Christ,
it is certain, we can do nothing, Philip. 2.13.
till he works in us both the will and the deed of his own good pleasure. But
when his blessing comes to our souls, the command of Christ is operative as in
the creation, when he said, Genesis 1.22.
Be fruitful: And it is he that by commanding, makes us to be Col. 1.10.
fruitful in every good work; and does increase the fruits of righteousness
in us: As all our wel-springs are in Christ, so all our fruitfulness is from
him.

5 It brings comfort: How does the sight of the Sun in the open air cheer and
revive the heart of a man newly drawn out of a dungeon; or that has been a
long time confined to his bed of sickness? How Eccles. 11.7.
pleasant then is it to behold the light of the Sun? Its light, and warmth, and
all its influences are refreshing unto us. It is not the promises, though never
so cordial, that can bring in comfort to our souls, unless they do receive a
command from Jesus Christ for this end and purpose: It is he that comfort
them that are cast down. It is he that is the Luke 2.25.
consolation of Israel: and he comes furnished with a commission from his
Father, and was anointed by the Spirit, to bind up the broken heart, to
proclaim liberty to the captives, Isa. 61.1, 2.
the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord, and to comfort all that mourn. It is he that gives commission
to his Ambassadors to go about comforting work; Comfort ye, Isa. 40.1, 2.
comfort ye my people, (says the Lord;) speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem,
and preach, saying, Her warfare is accomplished, and her iniquities are
pardoned, etc. We may say of all other comforters, (if this Sun be absent) as
Job of his friends, Miserable comforters are ye all. But if Christ be present,
and all worldly comforts be absent, we may then say as Jacob, I have enough; I
have all. He is able to make our hearts to be brimfull and run over, by the
comforting influence of his own Spirit, Mr To. Glover.
as he did the heart of that Martyr, being full of comfort upon the sight of
the stake. He is come (Augustine) he is come, he is come.

6 It brings purity and healing. We see by ordinary experience, how the Sun
will as it were purge and heal the air, that was infected with pestilentiall
breathings; and how it clarifieth it, that was overrun with fogs and mists
(things that are unwholsom to the body of man.) And is there any thing that
will so purge the heart, as Jesus Christ will? When he is as Refiners fire, and
Fullers Soap; when he sits to purify the hearts of the house of Levi, whom
he does intend to make spiritual Priests unto his Father. How does he cry to
his Spirit, as Hezekiah in another case, 2 Chronicles. 29.5.
have out the filthiness out of the holy place. When once he begins to
sprinkle clean Covenant-water upon us, Ezekiel. 36.26.
from all our filthiness he will cleanse us. Isa. 1.25.
It is he that is able to purge away all our dross, and take away all our tin,
and to purify us to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Tit.
2.14.
When this Sun of righteousness does arise, Mal. 4.2.
he does arise with healing in his wings. Whereby he regenerateth us, and
renews us after the Image of God, and begins here the cure of our
corruptions, though the perfecting of the cure be reserved for heaven.

Thus we see, the mystical Sun, Jesus Christ, to be the same to believers, as
the Sun in the firmament to the world, upon point of benefit; giving to them, 1
Light. 2 Heat. 3 Life. 4 Fruitfulness. 5 Comfort. 6 Healing.


Thy Sun shall no more go down.

viz. Has Christ,

1 Come in with enlightening influence to my soul? There was a time, when I
sat in the region of the valley of the shadow of death, when I was in another
Egypt for darkness; but light is now risen unto me, and I am removed into
another Goshen; Col. 1.13.
He has brought me out of the kingdom of darkness, and translated me into
the kingdom of his dear Son. He has communicated of those treasures of
wisdom and knowledge unto me; Col. 2.3.
whereby though he have not made me politickly, craftily, cunningly, worldly
wise, in the things of this life, to overreach or circumvent others, or to
enrich my self by indirect ways; yet he has made me savingly wise, or wise
unto salvation. He has discovered himself in the face of Jesus Christ unto me.
Yea, he has shown me my self in the glass of his Word, how miserable I was
by nature; how happy by my interest in Jesus Christ. And all this light fills
me with love to Jesus Christ, and makes me more humble in mine own eyes,
because the little that I know, is not the thousand part of what I know not. He
has made me, with Mary, thus wise, as to choose the better part, that one
thing necessary; and with Moses, deliberately to choose to suffer afflictions
with the people of God, rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.
And with David, to take his word to be a lamp to my feet, Psalm. 119.
and a light to my paths. I can now say experimentally, Whereas I was born
blind, now I see.

2 Warmed my heart with divinest love, which like the fire of the Sanctuary, is
always burning within me, breaking forth in flames of piety toward God in
Christ, and of humanity, courtesy, kindness toward men, especially toward
Saints? Exodus 2.
Do I find it to be as the fire in the bush, that consumed it not, though it
continued burning? Yea, that all the waters of affliction or persecution
cannotslack, much less extinguish my love unto Jesus Christ? He has so shed
abroad his love in my soul, Acts 21 13.
that makes me willing to do and dye for Christ. Now how your pulses beat this
way as Christians, let conscience judge And for you (Right Hon.) that are
entrusted with the government of this great city, there is expected from you,
not only warmth of love, but a peculiar fire of zeal to promote the glory of
God, Psalm. 69.9.
as you see in David, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. When observing
the Ordinances to be contemned, the Name of God blasphemed, Sabbaths profaned,
Religion trampled under feet; zeal then inforceth him, yea even consumes him,
for the promoting of the glory of God. You that are the Magistrates in this
renowned City, consult your own consciences in this particular.

3 Come in with life? 'Twas my condition when I was in my natural estate, as
it was with Lazarus some way, when buried. I did once lie in the grave of my
sins, as he in the grave of the earth. Has Christ enlivened and enquickned me
to newness of life? Can I say truly as Paul, I live, yet not I, Gal. 2.20.
but Christ lives in me; and the life that I now live, I live by the faith of
the Son of God, that has given himself for me? Does this life from Christ make
me lively in all duties for Christ; that so I may serve God in my generation,
either in a way of Magistracy, Ministry, or in a private orb or station?

4 Made me any way fruitful? Does the spring of grace come as fast forward in
my soul, as the spring of nature now on the earth? does he make me fruitful,
as a good

1 Magistrate: Exodus 18.21.
to bring forth the fruits of the fear of my God, of truth, righteousness, of
courage and judgment; causing me to hate covetuousnesse, and reject bribes,
Exodus 23.8.
which do blind the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous? Has he
begot in me desires to see the sanctifying of the Lords sabbath; to countenance
Religion; and to be a terror to them that do evil, and an encourager of them
that do well?

2 Minister. Has he begot in me unfeigned desires to propagate the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and faithfully to feed the flock, over which the Lord has set
me; rightly dividing the word unto them, without respect of persons; and that
by my life and conversation, I may be a pattern to the flock, in Faith,
Doctrine, and Purity; lest otherwise I should prove like one of the Carpenters
that built Noah's Ark, who building it for another safety, were themselves
drowned?

3 Private Christian. Ephesians. 6.4.
Laboring as a Father to train up my children in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord; As a Husband, 1 Pet. 3.7
to dwell with my yoke fellow as a man of knowledge; and as a Master, Col. 4.1.
to do that which is equal and just for my servants, having care for their
souls, whose bodies labor daily for me. And above all, watching over mine own
ways, and walking with my God continually, bringing forth all those Gospel
fruits, Gal. 5.22
even the fruits of the Spirit, as love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, Gal. 5.23. Non est lex, nempe damnatoria.
Paraeus.
meekness, temperance, against which there is no law, viz. to condemn them.

5 Brought in solid Gospel-comforts and reviving influences to my soul? when my
spirit has been overwhelmed, then the comforts of my God have rejoiced my
heart. Have we found, 2 Cor. 5.
that as our sufferings have abounded for Christ, so our consolation also has
abounded by Christ? Have we found, the hotter the day, the greater the dew at
night; the hotter the time of trouble, the greater the dews of refreshing from
our God? Ask what experience this way, and let conscience give answer.

6 Has Christ arisen with healing in his wings to thy soul or no; healing thee
of thy pride, passions, infidelity, impenitency, worldliness, hardness of
heart, prejudice? In a word, has he given a deaths-wound to all thy
corruptions? and does he begin to purify and cleanse thy heart by faith every
day more and more? Acts 15.9.
If conscience, rightly principled, can but assure thee, that thou have
received Gospe-light, heat, life, comfort, healing, and art rendered Gospelly
fruitful in all the fruits of renewed obedience; thou may assure thy self,
that the truth of this promise will be made good unto thee, that thy Sun shall
never go down any more. Which leads me now to the second Observation.

Doct. 2. That however Jesus Christ, this true mystical Sun, may sometimes be
eclipsed from, yet he will never go down any more to his people.

It cannot be denied, but that Jesus Christ, this Sun, may be eclipsed in
respect of us. Astronomers tell us, that eclipses do properly belong to the
Moon, because that only totally may be deprived of light, viz. when it comes
into the shadow of the earth; which yet never ascends so high as any other
Planet, to eclipse it wholly. I shall yet make use of this non-scripturall
term, in respect of the notion of it, for want of a better.

Eclipses are nothing but the occultation, or hiding of any Star from our
aspect; caused either by interposition of the Moon between us and the Sun, as
in Solar; and of the earth between the Sun and the Moon, in all Lunar Eclipses.
There may many things intervene between us and Jesus Christ, that may hinder
his beams from flowing in upon us: In defectu, Sol ipse nihil patitur, sed
noster fraudatur aspectus, Macrob.
Now Christ may seem to be offuscated, in respect, 1 Of himself, when his
glory, power, or truth are eclipsed. 2 Of us, when as our graces and comforts
are beclouded.


1 In respect of himself, Christ may seem to suffer an eclipse in reference
to his own.

1 Glory: thus, when he came abroad into the world at the first, John 11.11.
He came to his own, but his own received him not; and that mainely upon this
account, because his glory was veiled and hidden from them: Isai. 53.2.
They could see no beauty in him, why they should desire him. The Prophet
gives there the sense of the people: They looked upon him, as a poor,
despised, mere man, and that had nothing of worth in him. Indeed, to believers,
Christ is always precious; 1 Pet. 2.7.
they have an eye open to see his glory, and admire his excellency. As a
Painter may have an eye open to see the worth of a piece, that another may
lightly esteem; not because there is not excellency in it, but because an
injudicious man in that art wants eyes for to discern it. Jesus Cant. 5.10.16
Christ is to believers altogether lovely, the standard bearer among ten
thousands. Yet it must be confessed, the glory of Christ was mightily eclipsed,
when his Deity was veiled under the frail fabric of man's humanity.

2 Power; when he seemingly suffered,

1 Himself to be over-powred on earth; to be apprehended, buffeted, scourged,
and crucified; to see him that was the Creator of nature, to suffer death by
his sinful creatures; this was that which brought that Luke 24.21.
disciples faith to a low ebb; when he thus spoke, We hoped that it had been
he that should have redeemed Israel, viz. by his power. He looked for a
temporal savior from the Roman yoke. But seeing the Power of Christ to be
eclipsed, he scarce knoweh what to say or hope for.

2 When Christ suffers his own people to be as they were in David's time.

1 Driven back, or Psalm. 44.10.
routed in the day of their encounter with their enemies, being smitten with
Panick fear, and not able to stand under it. 2ly, Pillaged and plundered, given
up to the will and lust of their enemies. 3ly, Scattered up and down among the
heathen; driven out of their own habitations: made a reproaah to their
neighbors, Psalm. 44.13, 14.
a proverb and a hissing to all that are about them: Yea 4ly, Romans 8.36.
All the day long to be killed, and appointed as sheep for the slaughter. When
Saints are massacred, and persecutours no more troubled, then butchers at the
killing of sheep: Jesus Christ in all these seems to be under an Eclipse, in
regard of his own power, at least in our apprehension; which makes the Church
to cry out, Psalm. 44.23, 24.
Awake, thou that sleep, O Lord, arise, wherefore do thou cast us off for
ever? wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction, and
oppression? Psalm. 142.4.
When we look upon the right hand, and there is none to save; and on the left
hand, and there is none to deliver, and refuge fails from our souls. The
power of Jesus Christ seems to be in the eclipse in respect of his people,
when he rescueth not in tentations, and in outward troubles he does not deliver
them.
3 Truth: The truth of Christ may be much obnubilated, Rev. 8.12.
Thus Christ sometimes suffered the third part of the Sun to be smitten, and the
third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars; so that a third part
of them were darkened; because the sun of Gospel Truth shined not, but was
hidden; and the Moon representing the Church, and the stars representing the
Ministers in it, were smitten, and lost much of their light. Rev. 9.2.
When Antichrist opens the bottomless pit, and there arises a smoke out of
the pit, like the smoke of a great furnace, it causes an Eclipse of the Sun of
truth, by reason of errors, superstitions, idols, and thereby an inundation of
sin: Truth was hereby obscured, yea, a total eclipse by an inundation of
errors, and by a general apostasy; As in that Apostolical Church, Rev. 6.12.
When the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair: When men's inventions were
mingled with the doctrine and merit of Jesus Christ, what a total eclipse did
the truth of Jesus Christ then meet withal?

2 In regard of us; Christ may seemingly be eclipsed.

1 When his graces are partially beclouded in us; as there is no star in the
firmament, but is capable of an eclipse, so there is no grace in the soul but
may be much darkened. A man's knowledge and faith may not only be in the wain,
but in the eclipse; so that though he have Christ in the promise, he shall not
be able to discern him: no more then those Luke 24.16.
disciples going to Emaus; when their eyes were held that they should not see
his person, i.e. know it. A strange detention! When it is with us, as it was
with Mary, with her blubbered eyes; who mistaketh Christ for the Gardener. Or
as it was John 20.25.
with Hagar, that had a fountain of water before her, Genesis 21.19.
yet could not see it till God was pleased to open her eyes. Christ may hide
himself from our hearts, that knowledge or faith shall not be able to reach
him. And as it is with knowledge and faith, so it is with hope too; as we see
in those disciples forementioned, going to Emaus, We hoped that it was he that
should have redeemea Israel: and as it was with the Church in Jeremiah's time,
We have looked, (i.e. we hoped) for good, but no good came, and for a time of
healing, but behold trouble; and despondingly men are ready to say, Jor. 8.20,
15.
The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved. Saints hopes
may be ready, in regard of temporals, to give up the ghost, as it was sometimes
with Paul, who professed that all Acts 27.20.
hopes that we should be^ saved were now taken away. And the like I might
instance in all other graces. But I must hasten.

2 In regard of comforts, which may be totally eclipsed, Job 13.24.
When God does either hide his face; whereof Job does bitterly complain,
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? thou writest
bitter things against me, and make me possess the iniquities of my youth.
This was that which drained so many tears from the Church Psalm. 44.24 and 88.14
in David's time, and from David with the Church; Wherefore hidest thou thy
face, etc? And in Isaiah's time, Thou art a God that hidest thy self. Bitter
it was to 2 Samuel 14.32.
Absalom to be deprived of the sight of the face of David, so that he would
rather put himself upon the visible hazard of death, then to be any longer
without it: But infinitely more bitter it is to a Saint to be deprived of the
face and favor of God. This draws out those mournful complaints, Psalm. 13.1.
and 89.46.
How long will thou hide thy face from me? for ever? But however this be true,
that there may be partial eclipses of many graces, and total eclipses of many
comforts: Yet this Sun being once up in the Horizon of our souls, will never
any more go down from us; What else is the meaning of those promises, that I
shall only use to confirm this truth withal? This in the text is so plain,
that whoever runs may read it, that once being risen in our hearts, he will
never set any more unto us: And he that will not take Gods word in one place,
will take it in no place. To which I might add (if necessary) Matthew. 28.20
Behold, I am with you always, to the end of the world. A promise not only
extensive to the Apostles, for special presence; or Ministers, the faithful
Dispensers of his word, their successors; but to all of them that were to
believe by their Ministry: And that promise, Heb. 13.5.
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: A promise first past to Genesis 28.15.
Jacob, then to Josh. 1.5.
Joshuah; but yet for the people of 1 Samuel 12.22
Isreal's sake, which were a lively figure of Christians. And therefore by the
Apostle it is extended to all believers: q. d. It cannot be that I should leave
thee, or desert thee: Well I may sometimes be beclouded and eclipsed from thee,
yet I will never leave thee totally. This is the basis of the Apostles
confidence; Philip. 1.6.
He that has begun a good work in you, will perform it. When he lays the
foundations of the buildings of grace, he does not desert his work, but he will
stand by it, and carry it on, and that for ever. Hence it is, that Christ, when
he takes possession of the soul, he comes to John 14.23. 1 Cor. 3.16.6.19.
abide in the soul: And abiding (we know) implies continuance of residence. He
dwells here as in his house, habitation, or temple. 'Twas a promise of his to
abide in Psalm. 68.16.
Mount Sion for ever; that was for that periodicall ever of Christ's coming in
the flesh. But John 14.23.
Christ promises absolutely to abide for ever with his people by his spirit.
He will be always with us by his word, whereby he has made himself known in
a covenant-way, and by his spirit to regenerate and sanctify us to eternal
life, by his special presence and power, preserving and securing us in all the
collisions, combustions, confusions that are in the world. God engaging
himself, Isai. 46.4.
That as he has borne us from the belly, and carried us from the womb; so even
to our old age, and hoary hairs, he will carry us. Psalm. 73.24.
And he will guide us by his counsel, till he do receive us to glory.

As the hills stand about Jerusalem, so the Lord stands about his people from
this time forth even for ever. Now we know that God is not as man that he
should lie, Number. 23.19.
and as the Son of man that he should repent. Has he said it, and shall he not
do it? Has he spoken it, and shall he not bring it to pass? These and many
other promises that lie scattered up and down throughout the Book of God, are
far more unalterable then the Laws of the Medes and Persians; upon which we
may safely rest for our eternal security; that Christ will not go down from us,
in regard of his special presence. And for the presence of all his graces, that
are absolutely necessary unto salvation; However they may come into an eclipse,
Isa. 53.10, 11.
yet Christ will never finally take them from us; because the gifts and the
calling of God are without repentance. Psalm. 125.2.
That gift of God, whereby he has set us apart in his own counsel is
unalterable and unchangeable; as being bottomed upon his eternal grace, love
and mercy. Numb. 13.19.
Heaven and earth may change, but our God never changes upon point of
affection toward his people. Besides, the purchase of Jesus Christ, whereby he
has bought us to be to himself a peculiar people, that stands still in force,
and shall never be made void, being founded upon that unalterable Isa. 53.10, 11
transaction with his Father in the behalf of us. But I must wave the
enlarging of all these.

Now for the improvement of all: These points may be improved.

discovery: of which before, page 17.

comfort, to every one of you, to whom this sun has arisen, and the day star
has appeared in your hearts. To you I mean, that can make it out by former
discoveries, even to as many as Hos. 3.5.
fear his name, fearing him and his goodness, or because he has been good and
gracious unto you: Thou that fear to offend or provoke him (as a dutiful
child) a loving Father, because he has been bountiful to thee, which makes
thee to cry out, being solicited to sin, as Joseph did, Genesis 39.9.
How shall I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God? If Christ this
true mystical Sun, be arisen in thine heart, he will never set in regard of
those radical graces, at least, conferred upon thee.



Christ may be present, though his comforts be absent. The Sun is in the
firmament, though he be eclipsed. Comforts are ecilpsed upon a double ground.

1. Sometimes in a Prerogative way, when Christ does withdraw himself from
comforting of us; and this eclipse is not much unlike that at the passion of
Jesus Christ, an eclipse not natural, but Aquin. 3a q. 44.2. 2da.
miraculous: Whither you respect,

1. The durance; for three whole hours, which no natural eclipse does last;
because of the greatness of the Sun, and the smaleness of the Moon, and the
quickness of her motion.

2. The time; Aug. lib. 3. de civ. Dei, cap. 15
in the full of the Moon; because it was then the Jewish Passover; and Solar
eclipses are always confined to the Melancthon. in John 19. milli page 867.
part tertii.
new of the Moon naturally; which made that Dionysius Areopagita.
Philosopher to cry out, that either nature, or the God of nature did suffer,
at the sight of that eclipse: Though I cannot approve of his observing of the
Moons getting between us, and the Sun.

3. The universality; It was general, not only in Judea, but in all the world,
as is Gerbard.
probably conjectured. Whereas no Solar eclipse can be universal in all the
world, though it may be total in one part.

The Eclipse at the suffering of Jesus Christ, was by the inhibition of the
beams of it by the God of nature, who, Aquinas in Catana.
as he can withhold the fire from burning, the water from drowning; so the Sun
from shining for a time. Videtur mihi clarissimum mundi lumen retraxisse radios
suos, ne aut pendentem videret Dominum, and impii blasphemantes, luce sua
fruerentur. Hieronym. lib. 4o. in Matthaeum.
He puts out seemingly the eye of the world, as being unwilling to behold the
wickedness then committing. Dionys. Arecpag.
Some have fancied, that God fetched back the Moon at the passion of Christ, in
a retrograde way; as he did do the Sun upon the dial of Ahaz: but that seems
improbable; for then that eclipse had been natural, in respect of the Sun, not
supernatural. I rather look upon it as an eclipse in a way of mere prerogative,
or Melancthon.
miracle; and so Christ may withhold all his own rays and beams of comfort,
that none shall look down upon us; for the exercise of the graces which he has
already conferred upon us.

2. Sometimes eclipses spring from natural causes; as the interposition of the
body of the earth; when the Sun and Moon stand diametrally oposite, and the
shade of the earth is darted up to her: this causes the Lunar eclipse. And so
when the dense body of the Moon interposeth it self between us and the Sun, it
causes a Solar eclipse. These are the natural causes of them. And so it is in
regard of our spiritual eclipses, when as the condensated clouds of our sins
ascend over our heads, and stand as the Moon between us and Christ, presently
we come into an eclipse, in regard of our comfort. Your iniquities (as the
Prophet says) (...)
separate between you and your God, and your sins (...) Isai. 59.2.
hide away his face from you. The Prophet seems to make use of eclipticall
expressions: for so it is that our sins make our God to Lam. 4.44.
hide himself under a cloud, that our prayers cannot come at him. See
therefore the cause of the eclipse of thy comforts, it may be some sin will be
found, that does interpose it self between thee, and the Sun of all thy
comforts.

If thou find sin in the wind, remove it away by repentance, that thy
comforts may flow down again upon thee.





1. Very dreadful in themselves, when total, though our God would not have
his people dismayed at them; Jerem. 10.2.
Learn ye not the way of the heathen, neither be ye dismayed at the signs of
heaven, for the heathen are dismayed at them. If God does eclipse our comforts,
he would not have us to sorrow, as men without hope; he bids us to have
patience, and tells us, though heaviness comes at night, yet joy will come
in the morning. Yet

2 They are seldom prodigious. I have read indeed that Solar eclipses have had
sometimes judgments seemingly to bring up the rear of them; and hence some
have not stuck to father them upon the eclipses: Groundlesly, as

1 Famine, as that foretold by Acts 11.
Agabus, is pretended by some to be ushered in with an horrible eclipse, if we
believe Historians, Dion.
which famine continued for five years, and the prices of all things came to be
increased eight times more then ordinarily.

2 Captivity; Alsted. Chron. page 54.
as that into Babylon: And some deem the ruin of the Jews was portended by
that horrid, miraculous eclipse at the death of Jesus Christ.

3 Pestilence; as that great eclipse in the first Peloponessian war; when as
the whole body of the Sun was almost darkened, so that many stars by day were
seen of diverse, and which is reputed by some to have ushered in that grievous
Attique plague, (whereof scarce the like) whereby Athens was almost quite
destroyed; Thucid. lib. 2. page 117. 127. etc.
and that great pestilence, which did miserably afflict all Germany and France,
in the year, 1093.

4 Earthquakes: As that horrid Eclipse in anno mundi, 3733. When the earth was
shook 57 times in one year, after such a prodigious defect of the Sun, And that
in Gordian's time, Julius Capitolinus in vita Gordiani tertit. page 161.
anno Christi, 237. wherein many cities were ruined, and many men lost their
lives, when day was turned into night, and men could not see any thing without
candlelight.

5 Persecutions: as that stirred up by Antiochus Epiphanes, and that by
Antichrist against John Husse, and Jerome. of Prague, when the Papists did
confirm that hellish doctrine, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics.
Alsted. Chron. page 61.
And when the darkness was so horrid, that the birds fell down dead upon the
ground.

6 Yea abundance of errors and blasphemies: as Arianisme in Constantius's
time, abounding after that eclipse; and that sad controversy about
image worship, between the Eastern and Western Churches, was fained by some to
have been ushered in by an eclipse of the Sun. Eginhard. in vita Caroli magni.
Apparuit per septem dies macula nigri coloris, etc.
And all that darkning of Gospel light, under all those successive Popes,
seemed to some ushered in by that great eclipse, preceding the death of Charles
the Great; after which, the Sun seemingly wore a black patch seven days
successively, if we may credit it.

7 Wars; which sometimes have proved very bloody; as that of Darius, when
routed by Miltiades, and after by Alexander, where he lost 90000 of his men in
one pitched battle; and that of Xerxes in two remarkable battles also.

It cannot be denied but these have been the forerunners sometimes, yet we
cannot justly style them the causes of these great judgments. But

1 When such like judgments at any time befall us Christians, they are more to
be imputed to the conjunction of our sins, then to the conjunction of the
Planets. And one discriminating difference of Christians from heathens, is to
look to the procuring cause of all; viz. sin: rather then to these supposed
discoveries of the wrath of God.

2. I observe upon a just compute, Nam experientia testatur, visis eclipsibus,
saepe fertilissimos, saluberrimos and exoptatissimos subsequutos fuisse annos.
Al^ted. Encyclopaed. Vranoscop. par. 2. cap. 12. Reg. 10.
bottomed upon the experience of a learned man, sometimes after eclipses, there
have the most fruitful, healthful, and most desirable times followed. And yet
I take not upon me to determine what is in the womb of providence.

3 The world has had as grievous famines, captivities, pestilences,
earthquakes, persecutions, errors, wars without them, as ever it had with
them; how then can they truly be fathered on them?

4 I have read, that Hannibal had the beginning of his victories ushered in by
one eclipse, and his total and final ruin by another: so that nothing
certain can be concluded.

5 The face of the heavens was never the same exactly ten days, no not two
days together since the Creation; and how can there be any Cum experientia sit
saepe expertorum, and caedem constellationes and revolutiones, nunquam bis
revertuntur, nedum saepius, (ut oportuit) si certe inde regulae colligendae
essent, ^icus Mirandula: contra Astrologos.
experimental knowledge by this?

6 Most of the former judgments, cannot with the least color of probability,
be imputed to those eclipses: For that famine whereof Agabus prophesied, began
before the eclipse, though it continued after. And the captivity of Judah did
betide them seven years after that eclipse which which was foretold by Thales
Misesius. And the ruin of the Jews (if at all) was portended not by a
natural, but a miraculous eclipse, as formerly I made out: for their ruin
befell them above five and thirty years after the horrid eclipse in Christ's
time, which is far beyond the modern account of our star-gazers, Lilly. Annus
Tenebrosus.
who confine the operating of any Solar eclipse to so many years as the hours
are, in which it is eclipsed; which cannot naturally exceed three at most. And
for wars; how many eclipses did betide c this Land, from the year one thousand
five hundred and sixty, unto the year one thousand six hundred and twenty? and
yet how few were our wars in those times?

7 To intaile any of those former judgments upon eclipses, is merely
heathenish; or to look upon them as any way ominous, or prodigious; Jerem. 10.2.
It being only the way of the heathen, and therefore not to be appoved of by
any Christian: As when that Cleombrotus.
General saw the (...). Herodor. lib. 9. page 516.
Sun eclipsed, being at sacrifice, he presently draws off all his forces, and
would engage himself no further. The like might be instanced in many others.
But so the doubt formerly urged.

2 However things may succeed after natural and firmamentary eclipses, cannot
be determined by man; yet we have cause to look upon the malignity ( Suppositio
nihil ponit.
if there be any) of all eclipses to be from the malignity of our sins, when
any bad consequences follow: if that the passion of the Microcosme succeeds
the passion of the Macro-cosme; not because of the malignant aspect of the
stars, but because of the malignant nature of our iniquities. This I must needs
assert, that as after the darkest night, follows commonly the clearest day;
so after the eclipsings of Gods countenance for a moment, commonly follow the
influences of greatest mercies. Saints (I am sure) have found it so by
experience, after all these hidings of God. Psalm. 30.5.
It is for a moment that his wrath continues, but with everlasting mercies
that he does frequently break in upon his people. Eclipses Solar do never
exceed three hours, and the eclipses of the countenance of Jesus Christ, do
seldom continue so long in the total darkness of them, but some promises, as
so many stars, will appear unto them.



Psalm. 37.24.
that though thou fall (by infirmities) thou shall not utterly be cast down;
Vide Mollerum.
For the Lord will uphold thee with his hand; which may be expounded not only
of falling into afflictions, but infirmities.



Alsted. Encyclo. lib. 11. Vranoscop. par. 2. cap. 12. reg. 4.
there have been as many eclipses in former ages, as in these later times:
though they never were recorded, or so much observed. And Saints doubtless in
former times did some of them meet with the same, even as thou meetest withal
this day. It is an observation by some, that the same eclipses do never return
again, and that because the face of the heavens alters daily. Coeli motus
inter se sunt incommensurabiles. Nec unquam Phenomenon, eodem prorsus modo
recurrere possunt. Alst. lib. and cap. quo supra. reg. 7.
Which however it may hold true in naturals, yet it holds not true in
spirituals; because we know the same afflictions that we meet withal, our
brethren that have been in the world, have met withal. 1 Pet. 5.9.
Nothing has happened to thee, but has happened to others thy fellow members
before thee. The same Sun eclipsed in one way to some in one time, has been
eclipsed often in regard of other places. How often are men in India and Africa
robbed of the light of the Sun by eclipses, when we our selves in England do
enjoy the full benefit of it? And on the contrary. Thou art not therefore able
to judge what others have met withal.



viz. that there may be five, or thereabout, and not above six; Alsted.
Encyclopaed. lib 11. Vranoscop. part 2. reg. 6.
And they observe also that there is no year that has not some eclipses,
albeit they do not appear to us. Spiritual eclipses may return often, and yet
no oftener then they have to others before us. But for thee, that art subject
to these spiritual eclipses; I would offer these few things by way of
direction, and so conclude.



1. See what it is that does interpose it self between thee and Jesus Christ.
In all probability, some sin or other. When Joseph's brethren had sold him, God
at the last draws a cloud between him and them, eclipseth his favor,
startling their consciences, and then they conclude, We are verily guilty
concerning our brother, Genesis 41.11.
in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not
hear: therefore is this distress come upon us. Or, as Reuben says plainly
unto them, Therefore, Genesis 41.22.
behold also his blood is required. When conscience is awakened, then will the
cloud appear more thick unto thee.

2. Take notice of the magnitude of thy sin by the greatness of thy eclipse.
They are the eclipses of the Sun and Moon, that show both their greatness,
and the greatness of the earth also: When David was under the eclipse, how
does he then bewail the magnitude of his sin, as the procuring cause of it. My
sin is ever before me. And, Against thee, Psalm. 51.3, 4, 5.
thee only have I sinned thus hainously. And he runs back to Original sin,
to see if that had not contributed something to that grand eclipse that was
upon him: Behold, Psalm. 51.6.
I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. Men
knowing, that it is the greatness of the plaster, that may show the
greatness of the wound: and the greatness of the eclipsings of God's favor
may show thee the greatness of the sin, that is upon thee.

3. Let the Sight of thy Sin, and it is magnitude, drive thee unto repentance,
which is the readiest way to bring thee out of thine eclipsed estate, and
condition: Job 42.6.
When Job was brought penitentially to abhor himself in dust and ashes, how
quickly did he find the flowings down of love upon him? And was it not so
with David? How quickly did he hear of joy and gladness, so that the bones
that God had broken do begin to rejoice, after such time as he seriously
repented.

4. Give thy self wholly to prayer. Prayer will not draw the firmamentary Sun
out of the eclipse one moment the sooner; no more then the Romans beating of
brass pans, and lifting up their lighted torches toward the Moon, Plutarch.
in Aemilio.
would draw her any whit the speedier out of the eclipse: Yet it may draw this
super-coelestiall Sun much sooner out of it. When it came to that, Lord, in
trouble they have visited thee, they have poured out a prayer while thy
chastisement was upon them, Jonah 2.2. and 4.4.
how quickly then does this mystical Sun shine in upon them? And then they
conclude, Thy dead men shall live, etc. Isai. 50.10.
When Jonah was in the belly of the Whale, he looks unto the Lord, and his
prayer comes to his holy Temple. How quickly then does mercy come in to him?
The penitent soul that goes to God in the name of Jesus Christ, with a Be
not far from me, for trouble is near, or upon me, may confidently expect,
that comfort will not be long in coming.

5. Wait still on God. Sweet is the counsel of God himself, and exceeding
cordial, Who is among you that fears the Lord, -- that walks in darkness
(i. e. Isai 30.18, 19.
that has his Sun eclipsed,) and has no light; Let him trust in the Name of
the Lord, and stay upon his God: Parallel is that declaration, Our God waits
to be gracious unto his. A grand condescension, for the Creator to wait upon
the creature! And he will be gracious to thee, when he hears thy cry. He can
cause light to rise out of most obscure darkness. Psalm. 112.4. Genesis 15.17.
When the Sun went down in Abraham's time, we read expressly once, there was a
great darkness, and a smoking furnace; and yet then God came in with a
burning lamp among the pieces, i. e. emblematically, his people: God has
limited our eclipses, not only firmamentary, but spiritual; not only for
hours, but for moments: And he waits still to be gracious to them that humbly
wait upon him their God.

6. Keep out of the ecliptic line, when once thou art come out of it:
Providentiall motions bring on Solar and Lunar Eclipses: but selfe-sinfull
motions bring on our spiritual Eclipses. If after thou are eluctated out of
one, thou fallest into another again; Conscience will twit thee, Jer. 2.17.
Have not thou procured this to thy self? But if thou carefully wait upon God,
and keep thy self from sin; thou shall always find this text to be verified,
That Christ this Sun of Righteousness will never go down to thee: He will
never remove out of the Horizon of thy soul: Though in a prerogative way he
may eclipse himself, yet thou shall find that thy Sun will not any more go
down from thee.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 23. line 1. for Apostolical, read Apostatical. p. 30. l. 32. for so, r.
to.


