THE BEAVTY OF GODLY GOVERNMENT IN A CHVRCH REFORMED: OR A Platform of
Government Consonant to the Word of Truth, and the purest reformed CHVRCHES.

Showing also, The great good that comes thereby, the great evils that it
freeth us from.

WITH The two maine Objections answered, which are Objected by some of the
Laity, and some of the Clergy.

Whereunto is added.

A short Parrallell between the Presbyterian and Prelatian Government.

Published for such as are not well acquainted with it.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1641.

THE BEAVTY OF CHRIST'S Government in a Church reformed.
In a Parish
HEre it must begin, according to the order in holy Writ; the first Churches
being Parochial: special care must be had, that parishes have in them the
ordinances of Christ.

That there be an able Pastor, set over the people in every Congregation, for
teaching and ruling them.

That there be with him assistants in governing, called Elders, with us
Churchwardens, which are in their room.

These must be men of the best quality among them, men of understanding, lovers
of Religion, and of a godly, honest, and peaceable conversation.

They are to be chosen with the peoples consent, and admitted solemnly with
prayer, in the face of the whole Congregation, and an exhortation faithfully to
discharge their duties, which they must promise to perform, God assisting them.

The number to be more or fewer, as the parish is greater or lesser.

The meeting of these to be weekly, if it may be, at a set time and place; for
convenience, in the Church, after divine service is ended in the afternoon, or
in the weekday when there is a sermon.

The end thereof.
To look to all the parishioners concerning their religion and exercise
thereof, publicly and privately, to see to their honest behavior, and
peaceable demeanor one toward another, at home and abroad.

To receive complaints against any delinquents, and to proceed against them to
admonition, to suspension from the holy Communion, according to the quality of
the offense, and as the offender shall deserve without partiality. To
excommunicate any is very rare, and not without the wise advice of the
Presbytery.

Lastly, the manner of proceeding, to be after the rule of Gods word, and
according to the godly Ecclesiastical Laws prescribed them to follow,
agreeable to the Word.

To this meeting come the Overseers of the poor, called Deacons: They are to
be chosen as the Elders are, men of honesty, faithful and godly.

Their office is to take care of the poor, faithfully to distribute the
collections, and wisely, according to every ones necessity. To visit the sick,
and to be able to examine them in the grounds of Religion, instructing the
ignorant, and comforting them that want consolation; as elsewhere they do.

Motives to embrace this Parochial government, which Episcopal government
keeps us from.
From the good which comes thereby. 1. Hereby Religion and virtue with much
care, put in practice: peace and unity also will be preferred. 2 Hereby will
religious persons, religious meetings, and pious exercises be had in esteem,
and the virtuous regarded; who will be watchful one over another, being knit
together in an holy communion, much with us wanting. 3 Hereby will the vicious,
the profane and scandalous be suppressed; sin will not be suffered to
reign, nor be so rife as with us it is. 4 Hereby, through weekly meeting to
suppress vice, and to maintain virtue, the Pastors themselves, the Elders and
Deacons shall become better acquainted with the ways of virtue, and grow more
in hatred with vice: know also better the rule of ordering of Christ's people,
wisely and religiously, whereby his glory may more shine among them, and they
made happy instruments thereof.
II. From the great evils which we are freed from: but Episcopacy keeps us
under. 1 Hereby shall all be freed from the heavy yoke, and authority of
their Ecclesiastical Courts, and their corruptions, which God and men of all
sorts cry out against. 2 From the great expenses of money, in journying
sometimes many miles, in lying there at cost, and disbursing the charges
imposed, and called for by the Court; besides often appearing, long delays,
and loss of much time. 3 From the wicked and enforcing oath ex officio; and
from the many thousands of oaths which Churchwardens take; and from the oath
of purgation enforced upon many to clear themselves of a suspected crime: in
taking of which oaths, many forswear themselves, and procure the Lords curse
against them, and the whole Land.

To these Motives, add: 1 That such a government in a Parochial Church of
Christ, is approved by our neighbor Kingdom with good success, to the honor
of Christ, and the peoples reformation. 2 That in the Apostles days were first
founded parochial Churches, and in them the Elders and Deacons ordained, and
all Christ's ordinances exercised in them; and therefore to be admitted of us. 3
That the robbing of parochial Congregations of these holy ordinances, is the
very ground of their spiritual misery; from which, if they seek not to be
freed, they are most unhappy, and can never attain to that spiritual
condition which is so heartily wished for, and desired, for their souls safety.


Objections answered.
Some of the Laity please to say, that this is to make every Minister a pope
in his parish.

Answer. That a Pastor is to be obeyed of his people, will not be denied, for
the word commands it, Heb. 13.7.17. But to Lord it over Gods heritage he may
not, 1 Pet. 5.3. Nor does this make him a Pope in his Parish, for the Elders
are joined with him in governmet, so as without them he can do nothing; he
is also subject to the Presbytery, and must be kept within his limits,
prescribed him.

Some of the Clergy object, and say that these Elders do overtop their
Ministers and make them their vassalls.
Answer. I. One of these objections must be false, if not both, for they oppose
one another. 2. Such Minister as thus object may be satisfied by the practice
of the Elders, among whom this government is exercised. Do they ever hear any
of the faithful Ministers make such a complaint against their Elders? 3. These
Elders are but Assistants to their pastor and only second them, not going
before them in the session, the Pastor is moderator in the whole action
beginning with prayer and so ends it; when he speaks to them, they show him
very reverend respect. Yea the greatest Noblemen in the land, in
Church-meetings, do not over-sway the meanest and poorest Minister, for if he
do he shall be called to an account before the general assembly, where if
he appear in any ill cause, he will be made more ashamed, then before any
judicature in the kingdom. 4. Why should any be offended at those Elders, and
so conceit amiss against them, when we bear the commanding power of lay
Chancellors, lay Commissaries, with their Registers, who rule masterly over us,
making us to be unconscionably slavish executioners of their often unjust
commands. Lastly, consider that from hence just appeals may be made to the
Presbytery.


II. In every division or circuit suitable to our Deanery.
That there be a classical meeting called elsewhere a Presbytery. This
consists of all the Ministers of Parishes within the Deanery, or such a circuit
thereof as may conveniently meet, to which are sent by consent out of every
Parish one of their Elders. This meeting is to be once a fortnight. In this
from among the Pastors must the gravest, the wisest, the best esteemed for life
and godliness be chosen moderator, for the time of the sitting and meeting.
He is to begin with prayer and end so after a Psalm and a Sermon; here
Ministers are to show their gifts, and how they profit, and go on in the
Ministry. And such as intend the Ministry are here to be tried, and if fit, to
be ordained, if a place be void: these look into parochial Sessions, within
their circuit, that Pastors, Elders, and people behave themselves as they
ought: Here the power of jurisdiction is used, the doctrine and lives of
Ministers are enquired into, and according as they find, they encourage the
faithful dispensers against others, they proceed to admonition, suspension,
and deprivation, as they shall see just cause so to do. All other sorts of
persons of what quality soever, which shall be disobedient to their own
Pastors and Elders, proceeding in their parochial meetings lawfully, are with
great authority censured.

By this we see how the parochial government is upheld, and yet kept within
bounds, Christ's Doctrine and worship kept pure, good Ministers honored, and
the rest eitheir reformed, or cast out.

III. In every County or shire.
In this must be a Synod, called elsewhere Provincial.

It consists of the whole Presbyteries within that Shire, or Province, with one
Elder from every Parish, men of rank and quality, Gentlemen, Knights and
Barons, for such in some places are Elders. The meeting to be every half
year, as our Archdeacons visitations be.

Here being assembled, they begin with praying and preaching, the Sermon
being made by the former Moderatour; which ended, a new Moderatour is then
chosen, or the same again confirmed.

These meet not to call for Synodals, or paschall rents, nor to gather
procurations, nor to swear Churchwardens, to make presentiments, for these
assemblies sit not for to gather moneys; but this Synod meets to make enquiry
by the records of every Presbytery into the governing of all the Presbyteries,
and all the Churches under them, and to rectify what is amiss therein.

To supply what is wanting, and to censure any for faults, crimes and offenses
committed.

All matters with great diligence, and speed, are here so to be expedited, as
the time may not be long, nor the staying to become chargeable and
burdensome, but that the Pastors and Elders may return home in good time,
before the Lords day.

Can we be so happy as to enjoy such Synods, we shall be rid of the vain and
very chargeable visitations of Archdeacons, where Ministers and people
wastefully lay out yearly some thousands of pounds throughout the whole land.

IV. In one whole nation.
This is the general assembly of the nation, or national meeting.

It consists of Pastors and Elders from every Presbytery, to which have come
sometime the Kings Majesty, or a Commissioner for him; as also likewise the
religious and learned Nobles of the land.

This meeting is elsewhere once a year, but with us it may fitly be every
Parliament time, now appointed to be every third year.

The first day of this assembly is a day of solemn humiliation to prepare them
to so great and holy a work, at the end whereof a Minister is chosen by the
voices of all to be President and Moderator in that assembly: who prays at
every sitting down, and when they rise up for a blessing of God upon them.

The power of this is very great; it upholdeth the authority of the other
assemblies, makes laws Ecclesiastical agreeing to holy Scripture, for the
wel-ordering of all the Churches in spiritual matters, but never intermedleth
in matters civil belonging to the Magistrates, either in judging, or
inflicting pecuniary, or corporal punishment.

Its now among us a great question, Whether is better, the Presbyterian
government in Scotland, or the Prelatian government in England, for the
Churches spiritual welfare?
To judge aright herein, these considerations are propounded to the wisdom of
the wise and religious, who would lay a side all partiality in this cause of
God: 1 Whether of them has the best proof, either for the whole, or for the
part, from holy Scripture: and so Gods approbation? 2 Which is agreeing most to
all the reformed Churches, with which we agree in Doctrine, and separation from
the Church of Rome? 3 Whether of these is most like the government of the
Church of Rome, under the Pope, that Antichrist; and aptest to let in, and
fittest to keep out the Ceremonies, the superstition, and the idolatry of that
whore of Rome? 4 Whether of them does tend more to godliness then greatness?
5 Whether of them is the most profitable to advance the powerful practice of
religion and virtue, and the suppression of vice, that God may receive glory?


For the better evidencing hereof, let them be compared in these few things
together.

The Presbyterian. The Prelatian. I. This has for the teaching Elders, very
certain testimony from Scripture, Tit. 1.5. and strong probability for ruling
Elders, 1 Timothy 5.17 Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. And therefore being allowed of
God, is fittest to advance the power of godliness. This has no probability,
much less any certainty of Scripture for Archbishops, Diocesan Bishops,
Deanors, Archdeacons; for their lay Chauncellours, lay Commissaries: and
therefore being altogether of man, is not so fit, as we find by experience, to
advance the power of godliness. II. This sets up in every parish a Session,
for the religious ordering thereof. This depriveth wholly parochial assemblies
of such an help, for their spiritual good, subjecting them slavishly to their
most corrupt courts. III. The order of this is framed so, as the parts thereof
is subordinate one to another; as the Session to the Presbytery; this, to the
Provincial Synod, and this to the National, to further godliness. This is so
framed as an overtopping power of some, may sway over all as they list, without
any such subordination, to uphold only their greatness; as their practice
proclaim before the world. IV. This allows nothing in and about Gods public
worship, but what is warrantable by Scripture. This brings in, and approves
of many devises of men, corrupting Gods worship, without warrant of Scripture.
V. This ordains no Ministers for money, nor any but such as be apt to teach;
nor does it permit any, which are not such, and do perform their Ministry
faithfully. This ordains for money, and many unapt to teach, yea, and permits
thousands of dumb Ministers, which cannot teach, and lazy Ministers which
will not preach, but either seldom or never. VI. This allows no pluralists,
nor any Nonresidents, nor foul and scandalous Ministers. This allows many
hundreds of Pluralists and Nonresidents, and not a few of evil life;
unsufferable in Christ's Church. VII. This upholdeth preaching, countenanceth
diligent preachers, and encourages them. This takes not much care for
preaching, never calls any to account for negligent preaching: but some
Prelates suppress it, and are vexatious to many faithful Ministers. VIII.
This suffers, without jealousy, the people to meet together, to talk and
confer about what they have heard, and to read good books, to sing Psalms,
and to pray together. This is so jealous, as people are restrained from such
meetings, being held Conventicles for which they are called to their courts and
censured. IX. This carefully prevents errors, and heresies, Papists, and
papistry, and whatsoever may be troublesome to the Church. This looks to
nothing but conformity to humane inventions, suffering false doctrines to be
broached, Arminianisme, Socinianism, Popery, and popishly affected to increase,
so they conform men to their ceremonies.

If all these considerations (to which more may beadded) be seriously pondered,
it may easily be judged whether government is the more pleasing to God, and
more profitable to his people for spiritual life and salvation.

FINIS.

