LOGOI APOLOGTIKOI

FOUR APOLOGICALL TRACTS EXHIBITED To the Supreme, Self-made Authority, now
erected in, under the Commons name of ENGLAND.

Wherein is proved, That their unparalled Acts in beheading the most
Christian King, nulling the Regal Office, disclaiming the known Heir,
CHARLES the II. and declaring it Treason to refell their Errors,

Are diametrically opposite to the Scriptures, the greatest Opprobrie to
Christianity that ever was in the world; and, without true Repentance, will
either make England not Christian, or no English Nation.

ROMANS 3. 16. (...) By T. B. a Conscientious and Orthodox Divine.

Utilitas Proximo, gloria Deo. Printed in the Year, 1649.

To the high and mighty Combination at WESTMINSTER, who style themselves the
Supreme Authority of this NATION.
Most Supreme Sirs,
IT is neither presumption, nor despair to vent the truth. To conceal it may
be one, or the other. Wherein your Acts contrary the Scriptures, I hope 'twill
be no treason to tell you, that,

These Tracts are for orderly conversation; against deviation thence; and
presenting principles of belief, meet with Heresies upon every turn.

The Apostles method is followed, and the Jewels put into your ears, are
orient. Nor is the Author so plundered, but, if you please to accept, he can
promise better. Yet not to prove, as your Acts do, unparalleled.

For the reward your Supremacy confers on them, that cast into the Royal
Treasury, His return is theirs, whose obedience before Tyrants was passive.

'Twas the lot of righteous blood doing well, to suffer ill. Nor does he, who
desires to follow his Master unto the durable happiness, expect other.

He, that is zealous, for the Lords ^^ke, to do your Supremacy this faithful
service, will, by the grace of God, be

No Changeling, T. B.
MAY, 30. 1649.
(...). FOUR APOLOGICAL TRACTS EXHIBITED To the Supreme, Self-made Authority,
now erected in, under the Commons Name of, ENGLAND.
1 PET. 2. 13. (...). Submit ye therefore to every humane ordinance of man for
the Lords sake.
TRACT. I.
THe method of the Apostle is, a thesi ad hypothesin, from the general to the
special: Having set forth a Christian life in profession, and manners; he
exhorts unto a proficiency therein.

As if evil were not laid aside unless we grow in goodness to salvation.

It Is requisite also that the strength proceeding from the reasonable milk of
the Word, should appear unto evil doers.

Unto them; that they, by our works convicted, may glorify God in the day of
visitation.

That Is the sum of what is before. Now he descends unto particulars: whereof
obedience to Superiors is the first. And first, because first to God, in the
first Table, and in the second, to the King first.

The proposition is, that ye be subject to every order of Magistrates, whether
precellent, or missive.

Your selves are the subject, ye: submission is the predicate, submit: all
power the object, unto every humane ordinance. This is all, and to this all are
persuaded with an illative, therefore; For the Lords sake, therefore submit ye
to every humane ordinance.

(...) Therefore

The illative, (...) therefore, from the former verse goes unto (...) in this:
and proclaims the Lords honor in every part of the Text. The subject,
predicate, object, all must be united in, and for the Lord.

As if we could not be true Christians, and not obedient; nor truly obedient,
and not unto every humane ordinance; nor all this, and not, (...), for the
Lords sake.

The Lords cause then in hand tells us why St Paul Romans 13. 1. Tit. 3. 1. and St
Peter here are so vehement in the commendation of this duty.

For the Lords sake it is, that his dignity be not detracted. At stake it was,
and misprision, great as ever; might well bring forth jealousies, and fears:
Especially, the enemies of the Gospel being conscious that Religion is a
surpassing pretense in Rebellion.

On this principle the Jews, and Gentiles, had a sinister opinion of the
Evangelicall Law: They supposed that, against the rule of God and Nature, it
gave liberty of non-subjection unto Princes.

Of this Christ was tempted by the Herodians, Mat. 22. 17. The Apostles after,
and many of the Disciples being Galil^ans were suspected much by the Romans.

For in the days of the tribute the seditious whereof Judas Galilaens was
head, made to the infamy of that Country such unnatural Schism. Acts 5. 37.

He held obedience slavery, and therefore the Jews and others, branded the
Galileans with disloyalty.

Yea, the Primitive Christians were, as they accounted Emperors, as Emperors,
the enemies of Christ, by raging tyrants curiously tormented, and persecuted
violently.

The very ground of those bloody times was the jealousy of an inconsistence
between obedience, and Christianity.

It Is the report of Justin Martyr, Clemens, Allexandrinus, S. Augustine, Just.
Apol. 2. Clem. strom. 4. Aug. in Psalm. 118. Ser. 31.
and the Fathers generally aver the truth.

S. Chrysostom, animadverting this, termed their doctrine reprehensible, that
under pretext of Religion drew inferiors, contrary to the obedienciall Law,
from superiors.

His reason is to the purpose: For thereby occasion is given Chrysostom. in Tit. 2.
9. Ser. 4.
unto Infidels, adversum nos aperire or a, Imguasque ralaxare, to open their
mouths, and loose their tongues against us.

Christ therefore, and his Apostles labored to disposses the Jews and Gentiles
of this humor.

He would have Tribute paid to whom its due, Mat. 22. 21. and they prayers made
for Kings, and all that be in authority, Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 2. 1, Ser. 6.
1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Neque tunc: Reges Deum colebant, nor did those Kings then
worship God.

The Christians after never minced this. Whose zeal was servent, they
continued constant thereto.

Tertullian unto Scapula, the President of Africa, writes thus: Tertul. ad
Scap. chap. 2.
Colimus Imperatorem sic, quomodo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit, ut bominem
a Deo secundum, etc. We worship the Emperor so, as is both lawful for us, and
expedient for him, as man the second from, and less then God only.

And S. Augustine asks, in quo Christiani non sunt terrenis Regibus obsecuti?
Wherein Christians are not obsequious unto Aug. in Psalm. 118. Ser. 31.
temporal Kings?

They yielded the honor of reverence to their persons, of obedience to their
Laws, of patience to their punishments, of maintenance to their estates, and of
fidelity to their Crowns. Quod debitum non reddiderunt? What was due, that they
rendered not?

Never was the doctrine of the peoples arming against their Prince cried up
ti^^ late years by Jesuits, An^baptists, Puritans, Libertines, Novilists, I
know not what to call them, Devoute Athiests.

And never till within this half year, and no where, save in England, was
Antichristianisme at such height, as to make justice murder the King, enact
the Kingly office null, and the upholders thereof Traitors.

It Is high time then to stir with tongue, pen, etc. even for you also ye
learned, and holy Assembly of Divines high time. Who value Relgion, and have
any courage for the truth fear not to die the sword with your blood, and turn
the edge thereof with your bones.

Cause there is, and who observe that, (...), therefore looks backward, and
forward, may find it just enough.

First, in the former verse: The Gentiles are convicted by our good works: this
work therefore, as first in the Law, should be well done, that they may
glorify God in the day of visitation.

Secondly, in this verse: The Lord is the Author of such ordinance, and not the
people. Obedience therefore ought Romans 13. 1.
to be paid for the Lords sake, according to his will, not their rule.

Thirdly, in the next verse; Magistrates are ordained for the punishment of the
bad, but to reward the good. For thepunishment therefore of evil doers, and the
praise of them that do well, let the higher powers be handled reverently.

Bring these together: He is a dishonor to God, a scandal to his profession,
and an offense to the very Ethnicks, that professing the Gospel by his works
dissolves the Law, which Christ came to fulfill.

Non ex verbis dogmata, verum ex ipsis rebus and vita Gentiles judicare
consueverunt. For it was not the Gentiles custom to judge In Tit. 2. 9. Sermon.
4.
our tenets by words, in deeds, and life it was, so Saint Chrysostom.

And do not the Jews, Turks, Heathens, and all sorts of Christians, that are
not in order with the prime abetters of Antichristian Democratie, object our
gross breach of nature.

And well may; For if Christ be Lord of Lord, and King of Kings, 1 Timothy 6. 15.
they that in the name of the people deposed, beheaded their most Christian
King, that assume the Supreme Authority as the peoples Representatives,
proclaim the right Heir to the Kingdom, CHARLES the Second, and all that
adhere to Him Traitors, do so much as in them lies to overthrow the dominion
of Jesus.

Wisdom says, by me Kings reign. Prove. 8. 15. Jesuited Anabaptists,
Franchified consistorians, and Scotized zelots will have the people constitute
their King. Lucifer would be exalted above God, and these are high to dethrone
Christ.

Take heed: Christ is a stone, and rock of offense. Who fall foul on him, on
them falling he grindes to powder.



Non been convenient. Yet grant that King Charles the First of blessed memory
had been a Tyrant, an Infidel too, were not we by the law of God, of Nature,
and Nations bound to acknowledge Him, as King, Gods Vicegerent, and our dread
Sovereign?

But He next under Christ was the greatest defender in the world of the true
Catholic faith, His conversation every way answerable to His profession, and
His wisdom sufficient to be in all causes, Ecclesiastical, and Civil, Supreme
Moderatour.

In both fortunes the same still. In His life, and death He so well trod the
steps of our Jesus Master, that His parallel, since Christ, will not be found
in the Chronicles of the Kings.

Who then fell from Him either in respect to His person, or in obedience to His
just Commands, cried up a Malignant party to the taking away of His life, and
still pursue their bloody design against His successor, and all faithful
Subjects, have denied the Lordship of our Savior, and without repentance
provoked Gods wrath to the ruin of their own souls. Romans 13. 2.

Can ye remember the Oath of Allegiance, of Supremacy, the Protestation, your
Covenant also to maintain His Majesty's Royal Person, and Dignity? And may ye
think it stands with Protestants to turn Priscillianists, or be forsworn under
a color of Religion?

Can ye make use of the Kings Coin with a quiet Conscience, and not learn of
our Savior, by the image there, to give Caesar his right? Can ye read Carolus
Det gratia, Charles by the grace of God King, etc. and yet thrust God from the
throne, and set up a supremacy, Gratia Populi, By the grace of the People?

Who has bewitched you that having eyes ye see not, nor hear with your ears,
nor perceive with your understanding?

The Lord enlighten your minds, and direct your judgments, conform your wills,
and mollify your hearts that ye fall not into a reprobate sense.

Bound therefore to obey God rather then man, I dare not assent to them that
raised, and maintained forces, which at Edge-bill, Brandford, Gloucester,
Newbury the first, Banbury, Listithyel, Where His Majesty was in Person.
Newbury the second, and Nazeby Fight, for the Lords sake endeavored to
destroy the Anointed of the Lord: which, when afterward His Majesty went
from Oxford unto them, kept Him almost three years Prisoner, then accused,
tried, condemned, and on the thirtieth of January 1648. beheaded Him: which
have now made an Act to deprive the late King's Heirs of the Crown, Voted
Regality useless, erected a Free State, styled the Commons the supreme
Authority of this Nation, and declared it Treason to thwart their proceedings
any way.

Stand amazed ye Heavens! and tremble O Earth! I am a Christian, and Orthodox,
no blind Zelot, nor Apostate. In arcanum little ne ingreditor anima mea: Into
their secret let not my soul come; my glory be not thou joined with their
assembly: For whose anger was vehement and furour cruel, Abraham pronounces
cursed. Genesis 49. 6, 7.

Yet I according to my vow shall ever be ready in their assistance, who having
Authority expect a blessing of God, and would not be upbraided with the
unfaithfulness of the Manichees, to hunt those Foxes, that pretending to
support, Cant. 2. 15.
undermine the Church.

The most zealous of them are Adamites, Catharists, Donatists, Libertines,
Anabaptists, Antinomians, Brownists, to whom Supremacy is Popery, and
Magistracy, under God and the King, Tyranny.

Had they not a noli me tangere on the lip, their discovery would be difficult.
For as S. Bernard says, boni videri. non esse; mali non videri, sed esse
volunt; they will seem and not be good; and not seem, and be evil. Oves
habitu, astu vulpes, aciu lupi; Bern. in cant. Ser. 66.
sheep in habit, in wiliness foxes, wolves in cruelty.

So cruel and prevalent, that if God prevent not, they will still uphold the
power they have purchased to equal the Crown and the Coulter: That they will,
or make England as waste as the Palatinate in Jermany.

My heart bleeds to mind whereto these men tend; and wherein our Religion
suffers by them.

Obedience unto Superiors was wont to Apologize before Tyrants for
Christianity: But obstinacy now in Rebellion, and preparation in tollerating
all manner of impieties to sustain it, indignam infidelibus calumniandi ansam
proebet; unworthily gives the Infidels cause to calumniate Christians, and
despite Chrysostom.
Christ our Lord.

Whereat the world must believe the professed Justitiaries aim, I am sure and
the event shows, that the resisting of Regal power, is not the way to
convert, or reform.

No such way in the Laws of the Kingdom, and in the Gospel no such. What Is
edified in Monarchy is demolished by Anarchy. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

For it is well known that peace subsists not without Authority, nor can the
essence of a Kingdom well be without peace.

Nay Religion seems lost, when the people are at a loose: Or how shall a Pagan
deem our profession right, when in a confusion of opinions too many contradict
the principles of Christianity.

So he that would be a good Christian, doubts what Christian to be.

For this cause, even that Religion may flourish in peace, I, by the divine
assistance, shall never forget my Allegiance: And when I can no way else fully,
fully I will express it unto the Lord in my prayers. Because I know that this
is good, and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.

Blessed Lord, restore the right Heir of this Crown to His Kingdom, and
proper Dignities. Turn the hearts of those which are against, unto Him, and
return Him in safety, and peace unto us. Be so propitious, that under Him we
may live a quiet, and Godly life to thy glory, and our comfort. In thy mercy
look upon us: blot all our sins out of thy remembrance, and from thy heavy
judgments good Lord deliver us.

I beseech you animadvert what summarily I shall represent in this Character.
And God grant, that seeing ye may have will to enjoy the truth.

True Christians, if through ignorance, or infirmities they chance to give a
scandal at home, or abroad, of purpose will never. Because thereby they may,
to the dishonor of the Lord, both thrust some from, that are in, and keep
others off, that would come to the truth. Whereof at the first planting they
were, and still are suspected, they be resolved to clear themselves before the
world from the least tincture of disobedience. And so constant thereto, that
the prime seminatours of this calumny, the Jews, and other enemies of the
Gospel, might be evicted by seeing such unchangable sincerity. For it being the
glory of God they aim at, it is their zeal to have the very Infidels glorify
him either here willingly by their conversion, or hereafter by acknowledging
his justice in their confusion. In this they are superior to their
adversaries, and conquer them, who would be their tormentours. Having good
counsel for an honest conversation, they want no faith to hold them to it. And
so close, that, who back-bite them as evil doers, may magnify God in the day
of visitation. Believers apprehend this, and having the knowledge will not be
without the practice.

Ye would of that kind be esteemed all. Let the Apostle. therefore have his
desire; follow his advice; put to silence the ignorance of folish men. For the
Gospel sake; because ye are Christians; for the Lords sake, whose Christians ye
are, submit ye.

TRACT. II.
Ye
IN the first verse of the former Chapter, this Epistle is directed to the
Elect, that dwell here, and there, as strangers.

Understand thereby the Church-militant. For (...) are those, that be in a
strange soil. And such we account the Saints on Earth. They have no continuing
City here, but seek one to come. Heb. 13. 14.

Whose conversations are in heaven be pilgrims in this world. So Jacob styled
himself, Genesis 47. 9. and so did David. Psalm. 119. 19.

(...) dispersion also suits well with the Church, that is not confined to any
certain place, but scattered over the face of the earth.

Whom Christ congregateth, such are the sons of God. Jobn 11. 52. Ab Orient
ad Occidentem, binc and inde colligendi, from the East unto the West, hence,
and thence gathered. The dispersed of Israel, Psalm. 147. 2. and Isa. 56. 8.
are, secundum spiritum, the household of the Lord.

They therefore that restrain, ye, to the Jews only, in my opinion, mistake
the Text.

For though St. Peu^ were the Apostle of the Jews, and did for the most part
(...) in J^d^^, yet it cannot be gainsay'd, that he in penning had regard of
the whole Church.

And if we observe the tenth verse of this Chapter, or the third of the fourth,
it is apparent that he includes the converts of the Gentiles.

I blame not their piety who here point out the Jews, But do ye what ye can;
all your sophistry shall never carry you off hence without Rebellion.

The sense being thus general it is evident, Ye, reaches so far as, (...),
every soul Romans 13. 1.

Every one exempteth none. Jew, and Gentile; Ecclesiastike, and Laike;
Whosoever ye are, or whatsoever ye would be, ye must be subject every one.

It Is certain our Savior, when he said givee to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, spoke as well of the high Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, Patriarch
Peter's, and the Selfe-made Representatives, as of the people, Jews, and Pagans.
Mat. 22. 21. Luke 20. 25.

We, for our parts, dedicated by Baptism; taught in the word, and fed at the
Eucharist, have offered our selves living sacrifices to the Lord. Whose
Covenanted we are, his observants we ought to be.

Satis praescriptum babemus, says Tertullian, we Christians Tertul. de Idol.
c. 15.
have it sufficiently prescribed, in omni nos obsequio esse oportere subditos,
that we in all obsequie ought to be subject unto Magistrates, both Princes, and
Powers.

Sive Apostolus, sive Evangelista, sive Propheta, sive qusquis Chrysostom. in Romans
13. Ser. 23. Aug. in Psalm. 118. Ser. 31. Bern. in Fp. 42.
tandem fueris: Whosoever thou art, whether Apostle, or Evangelist, or Prophet,
thou owe this subjection, so Saint Chrysostom. Saint Augustine, Saint
Bernard, etc. concur in this.

Whosever thou art implies Christian ever. If the Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, or any else were not freed from subjection, how dare ye, who call
your selves the Commons of England, render your selves the Su^^^^e Authority.
Does ambition, and covetousness m^^^ (...) presume? or are ye Apostates, or
Atheist^ ye?

Survey Antiquity, and your Independency will no where be found, nor your
Democraticall Presbytery. S. Paul appealed unto Caesar, Acts 25. 11. The
Martyrs, Confessors, and devout Bishops never pleaded immunity from superiors
against their persecutours.

Nor can the Bishop of Rome in his usurpation, nor ye, and your Sectaries in
yours, quit your selves of Antichristianisme.

Nor are ye, whatsoever is pretended, so far, as ye make the simple people
believe, from Popery herein.

What Bellarmine urges for his Holiness of Rome, ye Bellar. de Pontif. Romans
l. 5. c. 1.
argue for your selves. If directly ye may not, ye will indirectly be Supreme.

Your Proachers too aspire unto that height all. Temporalis potestas Spirituali
merito subjicitur, it is very meet, say they, the Temporal power should stoop
unto the Spiritual. Every one therefore contends to be so absolute within his
circuit, as the master in his family.

Good God: what a world of Supremacy shall we have? Knoxes pupils govern the
people, teach them to regulate the Nobles, and both make the King nothing.

Such doctrine as most adverse to the Scriptures, and Laws of the Kingdom,
whosoever vented, before these times, were found worthy to be rewarded at
Tyburne.

Ye, then excludes none. Not the Queen; She has no such privilege, no, nor
any, save the King, of the Royal Progeny, nor the Nobles, nor Favorites, nor
Delagates, much less those that are in office by them.

Who come not within the verge of Regality are exterminated the lists of
Christianity. Christ has no Kingdom if he be not King: nor are ye his, and
not under his polity.

No sound Christians then that countenanced the people, and the meanest of the
people too, with foul hands to touch the Lords Anointed. But with those
hands, who beheaded Him, and by their force dis-inherit His, a^^ the high
despisers of Christ the Lord.

For no man contemnes, potestatem humanum, the power of man, nisi qui prius
divinam contempsit, who has not first contemned the power of God.

Because the fear of God, and honor of the King, verse 17. are so united, as
not to be separated, and both prime in the two Tables of the Decalogue.
Disobedience to either makes all, that follows after, nothing.

That the Lord is dishonored when the King is rejected is plain. For the
conspiratours with Chorab were in conspiracy against Jehovah. Numbers 27. 3.
And the Israelites, that withstood Samuel, withstood the Lord. 1 Samuel 8. 7.

Nor that without a dire judgment. In the following verses they are slaves,
and plundered to the purpose. verse 11, 12, 13. Who resist Authority acquire to
themselves damnation, Romans 13. 2. Either temporal here, or eternal hereafter.
v. 4.

Indeed it is usual, and not unholsome for the hands sometimes to rub the head:
yet for the feet to spurn at it, is to throw the whole body down. That is
not so much natural, as this much against Nature.

Were there a parity betwixt every Member in the body of man, what decency, or
state would the^e be? That epitome of beauty now could be no other save a lump
of rudeness then.

Can we possibly suppose no superiors, no inferiors, and not imagine every
one in his humor, and that the humor of every one would bring all into
confusion? God is the God of order, and he will have us orderly, or not have us
his.

They are within the compass of Manicheisme that admit no Magistrates.
Bucananists they, that set up, and pull them down at pleasure. Brownists, that
like no subordination, save in female captives to themselves. Aerians that will
not submit unto Bishops. Papists that subject Kings to the Episcopal See of
Rome.

I am astonished, and see not how to decipher Commons and Supreme. To unite
them would reconcile contradictories. Humorists they, that loving superiority
take it not of God, nor by humane Ordinance. In an innate pride, expecting the
dependency of others, will be without dependency themselves.

Strange Monsters these, and the peace of our Church finds, and feels store of
them. Contumacious ye must be obeyed. For ye will; because ye will control:
and your provision shows ye had rather not be, or be no Christians, then be
denied.

Witness your unparalled Act of Regicide: your other of disclaiming His most
Sacred Majesty the King: and your other making it Treason to reprove your
errors.

What ye have done must be buried in silence, or the Speaker shall be sent
silenced into his grave.

God says, Cry aloud, spare not: lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my
people their transgression, Isa. 58. 1. Ye say, if thou speak, or stir, a
Traitor thou, and shall die the death.

God may destroy soul, and body; your Omnipotency cannot. Royalists therefore,
according to our Saviors counsel, fearing him, will never be afraid of you.

What Antiquity, and Authority ye, and your Teachers have, for your
undoing-doings, I see not: Unless ye will misconstrue St Gregory's saying of
Mauritius the Emperor in an Epistle to Theodore. Deus ei dominari, non solum
militibus, sed etiam Lib 3 Ep. 54.
sacerdotibus, concessit.

Which, without pointing, and not regarding the Fathers sense, may for you be
read thus.

God has not only made the Soldiers, but the Priests also to rule over him.

This is as good for you as any thing I can allow: and if this be heeded, it is
bad enough. For the truth is, St Gregory there tells, that God has given the
Emperor dominion, not only over the Soldiers, but over the Priests also.

If better proof be produced on your side, ye shall gain the victory, and we
will sustein the loss.

I am, that I am, by the grace of God, a knowing Christian, and therefore most
strictly tied to the order of Christ's Kingdom. For me to hand the bringing in a
contra-distinct member of Government, viz: Democracy to his Church, were
Apostasy from the same.

It cannot stand with the honor of the Lord to applaud the nullifying of his
Ordinance for the peoples sake. Your deposing, and beheading of Gods
Vicegerent; your arming against his right Heir, and pronouncing it Treason to
assist Him, is no authority for me to subscribe your Acts.

Lord! who have hitherto, for thy sake, been constant to thy express command,
enable us ever, I humbly beseech thee, to be zealous for, and firm to thy
truth. Let not any loss, either of goods, liberty, or life, fright us from
that obedience, wherein we are disciplined by thy Word. Thy Word may not be
lengthened, nor shortened may thy Word be. Whereto we are tied, hold us sure to
it. From the sin of taking from, or adding too, Good Lord deliver us.

True Christians do not lengthen, nor dare they shorten the Law. The fifth
Precept binds every one of what kind soever, Jew, or Gentile, unto obedience to
Superiors. They know, that who transgress here, never go home with their
submission. If others promise gain by shaking off this yoke, they answer, the
principal will be lost. For if he love not God, that hates his neighbor, how
can he obey God, that disobeyes his Ruler? On this ground what e're they be,
Princes, Lords, or Commons; Judges, or inferior Officers: Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, each one of every degree meet in one center of
Loyalty unto Caesar. Nor will any of them go a sinister way to get immunity:
nor think themselves in bondage, because they are in obedience. Nay to be
always in obedience, that they may never be in bondage, is their wisdom. The
Word is true, and they have faith therein: Who resist, receive damnation. Yet
not so much the fear of judgment, as the hatred of disloyalty ties them,
Before truth they see carried the perfection of virtue. Who fail in that look
not after this.

Show ye therefore, and every one, whereto ye tend. If unto peace, be sure to
keep the terms of peace. Let not ambition reign, nor covetonsnesse any longer.
Who is your head, for Christianities sake, comply with, in honor unto him.
Murmr not, hate not, envy not. For the Lords sake submit ye.

TRACT III.
(...), Submit.
THere is no difference in the translation of this word. The Vulgar, the
Syriak, Arias Montanus, Erasmus, Beza, etc. render it alike.

S^bditi, or, Subjecti estote: that is, acknowledge, honor, obey, and pay all
duties. All, not some, and not others.

I know not what we possess, wherein Princes hold not a propriety. Our
fortunes are expended, our lives laid down in their service. Who are next unto
God, next to him, and for his sake we ought to leave all in obedience unto them.

Nor all, Corpore tantum, outwardly only, but (...) still, according to the
will of the Lord, in, and for him. In, and for any other respect, is close
Rebellion. Ex animo then, with the mind, and inward affections. Omnis anima,
every soul must do it. Romans 13. 1. It Is the soul makes all right.

Non ad oculum, sed ex cord, the same Apostle requires it, not with
eye-service, but from the heart. And with a single heart, as unto Christ,
fearing God. With good will too, serving the Lord, and not men, Ephesians. 6. 6.
Colos. 3. 22.

Nor thus including the inward man do I seclude, any external acts: teach I
do, that without the internal, the outward payments are not perfect. They
proceed either from the fear of punishment, or from hypocrisy etc. not from
the love of justice.

How just then are ye, the Grandees of this time? Ye took O^thes, made Vows,
entered into Covenants to preserve the Honor of our late Kings Majesty; yet
gaining, under that pretense, an opportunity to make your selves high, and
mighty, most (...) ye but chered. Him, many of His Loyal Subjects also, and
politickly, violently, deadly pursue the sacred Relicts of that ever glorious,
and Blessed Martyr, St. CHARLES. God ye fear not, and yet, whom ye o^ey, you
would seem to ^^te the Devil.

I beseech you give me leave to distribute, absque (...) impartially the truth.

The whole man should go, and cheerfully, or this submission is not right. No,
not to our Enemies right.

The Christians ever thought so, or else the Church had not so increased by the
blood of the Martyrs.

Witness Tertullian, Magis damnati, quam absoluti gaudemus, Tertul. ad Se^p.
c. 1.
who, in the behalf of the Christians, declared to the persecuting powers,
that the whole man was so composed unto subjection, that they rejoiced more,
being condemned, then absolved.

St. Cyprian knew not, Quo praconi^ vocis exornare, with what Cypr. Epist. 9.
Eloquence to set forth their courageous minds, as he writes unto the Martyrs.
Tolerastis durissima^ qu^stionem, you have endured a hard task, even unto
Glory. Nor have ye yeeled unto torments, S^d vobis potius supplicia cesseruns,
but the torments rather yielded unto You.

And St. Augustines counsel is that we especially should August. de San: Ser.
47.
imitate God, and the blessed Martyrs in humility, and love toward our Enemies.

The reason of this St. Chrysostom renders thus.

Nunc vita abscondita est cum Christ^ in Deo; now our life is hid with Christ
in God: Our time of Honor is not Chrys^in Romans 13. Ser. 23.
now.

Or, if you will, because God does accept of this as the best. The best for us,
and for him the best. For in Obedience was our Salvation perfected; and through
it his glory appeared in the full.

What Christ has done for our sake, we may not deny for his. Unto full glory
then, our submission should be full. Full in all the faculties of the soul and
body. The whole person enjoined must perform it whole.

And so far ought this subjection to go, as there is commission to command.
Not to Civil Causes only in the Second Table, but to Religion also in the
First.

To both, that we may have a quiet Commonweal, and a conformable Church. For
the Church is, in Republi^^, in, within the Commonweal. If there be
perfidiousnesse in either, the hazard is common.

Nor in all causes absolutely: In all that are in analogy of the truth is our
submission commanded. When this rule is broken by any Overpower, we have no
autherity to obey.

Hic sane contemn potestatem timendo potestatem: In this case August. de verb.
Dom. in Mat. Ser. 6.
by fearing the power of God, fear not the power of Man, says Saint Augustine.

We see Degrees in Humane affairs. The Curator commands, and it is done; yet
the Proconsul has commanded the contrary. The power here is not aviled, a
greater is observed. Nor ought the inferior to be offended, because the
superior is preferred.

So if God prescribe one thing, and the Emperor another, what think ye? Is not
the Tribute paid whilst we are obsequious unto God?

Humane Ordinances have power in that our part, which pertaines to this life:
Of our faith unto life eternal no power. Duliam, Tribute, Reverence, Love,
etc. we give; Latriam, August. in Romans prop. 72.
or Religious Worship we do not, we may not unto them.

Be they Pagans, Heretics, etc. and we by natural, or voluntary obligation,
or otherwise, under them, this civil obedience is their due. To whom Christ
gave the example, in that we will follow him.

True, in Temporal matters; but in Ecclesiastical, what owe we? Who know not
the Truth, shall our Obedience commend their Errors.?



Daniel will go into the Lions Den, and the three Children endure the fiery
Furnace. Not that they wanted power to resist; for they were very high in
place, and had great commands. Da^. 2. 48, 49. and 6. 2. Their conscience of
obedience unto the King humbled them to such durance.

In what Records (I pray) find ye the Primitive Christians either brandishing
the Sword, or venting Obloquie against Superiors? Your practice in these times
cannot be derived thence.

Justin Martyr, in an Apology for the Christians, earnestly beseeches Just.
Mar. Apol. 2.
the Emperor, Autoninus Pi^s, Lucins Caesar, and the Senate of Rome to
under^ake their Cause, Tum quoad vitam, tum quoad D^ctrinam, as well for
Doctrine, as for Manners.

Athenagor^s in his Legation Petitions the like of M^reus Aurelins Antoninus,
and Lucius Aurelius Commodus. Just. Apol. pro Christ.


Tertullian held it fit, that the Ru^lers of the Roman Empire Tert. in Apol.
3^0. Gent. c. 1.
should publicly examine, Quid sit liquido in causa Christianor^^, what was
evident, and might stand with Conscience in the Christian Cause. Or else, that
the Truth should be permitted, Occult^ via ad aures pervenire, to come unto
their cares in the private way of close Letters.

And the Ancient Christian Church did implore, Auxilium Adriani Imperatoris,
the assistance of an Ethnike, Aarian the Emperor, against Samosate^u the
Heretic, who would not obey the Synod of Antioch.

'Twas otherwise with us: Our King CHARLES the First, of ever blessed Memory,
was the most zealous Defendour of the true Christian Faith: Our Petitions had
free passage unto Him: and His Grants were larger then Ye at first could
desire. Not in temporals only, but for a reformation in Ecclesiastical also.

'Twas otherwise with us, then it is now; and it might be now as it was, if ye
would, in a sense of this distracted Kingdom call home, and submit to Him, who
every way is His Fathers express, CHARLES the Second.

I know not wherein we may complain of them, unless their sincere Religion,
tender Conscience, care for the Glory of God, Peace of the Kingdom, Laws of
the Land, Rights of the Parliament, and Liberty of the Subject be grievous unto
us.

If any of these excellencies fly, it is the impetuous disobedience of the
Religious Atheists chaseth them away.

But suppose a Tyrant, an Apostate, etc. were over us, is there ^^ remedy?

Persuading, Jer. 22. 2. Dissuading, 2 Samuel 24. 3. Reprehending, 1 King. 18. 18.

Not thus much for every one; for the Fathers of the Church, and Nobles of the
Kingdom there is, 1 Samuel 24. 9.

For every one enough: mean or mighty may fly: 1 Samuel 19. 10. Yet this, and
the other three may miss the aim.

For neither did Zedekiah regard Jeremiah, 2 Chronicles. 36. 12. Nor David, Jo^b, 2 Samuel 24. 4. Nor Jeroboam the Prophet, 1 King 13. 33. Nor could Vrijah escape
Jehoiakim, Jerem. 26. 23.

Never-failing helps there be, and none debarred them. Preces and lachrymae,
Prayers and Repentance are the weapons of the Church.

The Old Israelites knew no other, Exodus 3. 7, 8, 9. nor other the Prophets,
Mic^. 7. 7. 9.

The Apostles, and Martyrs used these, as the only prevalent: Just. Mar. Apol.
2. Ter^. Apol. 37. Aug. Psalm. 124. Cyp. ad Dam. Ambros. cont. Au^ent. Greg.
Naz. Orat. in Iul. Bern. Epist. 21.
the Primitive Fathers cried them up, and no Orthodox Christians ever held the
Sword lawfully drawn against their Prince.

With Prayers and Tears we must, Aliter nec debeo, nec possu^^ resist^re, I may
no other way resist, said St. Ambrose.

It Is sin in, causes an evil reign over us. Expurge we that by contrition,
and, when our petitions are preferred, God will either turn such a Kings
heart, or take us from him, or him from us, or indue us with such patience,
that for his Glory, our Suffering shall be as nothing.

I do not utterly with the Martionits, Tertulli^nists, and Old Anabaptists
condemn all War, or use of the Sword. The use thereof, in the hands of the New
Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, against our lawful King I do.

Who denied the Authority of Magistrates in matters of Religion were
Donatist^^^ and those, that will have the Doctrine, and Discipline of the
Church determined by a Laike party, are B^o^^nists.

Who can take and leave, or regard superiority no longer then inferiors scorn
them, I reckon among the Helcesaits.

Who deny Marty^^ome for the Name of God are Basilidians, N^stickes; and who
commend Martyrdom, but will not undergo it, are Heracleonits, or cold
Protestants.

Who combined to maintain them against our late most gracious Sovereign, and
persist still against his lawful Successor, are with the evil one in
association against God.

Nor shall I cease to be so minded toward such men, till it be manifest that
God did ever prosper Rebellion, or in the end not not oriously punish Rebels.

Wherein I have been brought up, in that sound doctrine of Obedience, I, by the
help of God, am, for the Lords sa^e, resolved to die.

Blessed Savior! I confess that my sins in this inundation of
transgressions have swelled high. Yet I know that one drop of thy bloed is
sufficient to purge so many worlds of sinners, as there be sinners in the
world. Not despairing therefore of thy mercy, I pray, that where sin does so
abound, thy grace may superabound to thy glory. Humble me more and more, and
all thy people, by true repentance. Remit all that is past, and give us
assistance to be cautious for the future. From evil, and from everlasting
damnation, good Lord deliver us.

True Christians to the powers ordained of God acknowledge obedience due. Their
first Service paid unto him they fail not in performance of the next.
Outwardly, inwardly, their whole man is active in sincere Allegiance unto the
King. If his Supremacy, or any set up by him press commands contrary to the
divine precepts, observing these they will patiently endure the wrath of the
other. Reviling, Imprisonment, loss of Goods, of life too, whatever happen,
whose minds are humble, their shoulders will bear the burden. And stoutly
without weariness, without murmuring. They can kiss the rod, because it is
Gods, to their amendment, or for the trial of their faith; But dare not
entertain an evil thought, much less extend their hands against the Lords
Anointed. Be he cruel as Herod, or an Apostate like Julian, they disciplined
in the Kingdom of Christ, will never sink under his Cross. Submissive they,
and faithful still: Yet who are in fittest place, Fathers of the Church, and
Peers of the Kingdom, will exhort, dehort. rebuke, reverently, judiciously,
closely. If neither do prevail, they, and who cannot be so bold, may escape
by flying. These used produce not always their desired event: Other Arms
there are, Prayers and Tears, with them they conquer ever. Such be their
oppositions, and only such; because the lawful only. Who have gone beyond
these, are in Scripture made examples of ire.

Contend then against the evil the right way with Gods blessing: not with
violent hands for fear of condemnation. Who first rebelled, his reward was
hell. Hell ye would not; and will any of you rebel? Who dares not come near
the Devil in the one, abhors to be like him in the other. If therefore ye have
any regard of your souls, for the Lords sake submit ye to every humane
ordinance.

TRACT: IV.
(...) (...) T^ every humane ordinance.
THe Vulgar reads, Omni, and Erasmus, Cuivis human^ treaturae, to every humane
creature. On this Translation Beza has set prorsus absurd, as if they had
done it very absurdly. Observe that note for the present, that, when you meet
with it ne^t, you may know it the better.

The Syriack, Omnibus hominum siliis, to all the sons of men. Whereby is
intimated a sweet carriage in love and humility toward every one, superior,
equal, and inferior.

Beza and others, Cuivis bun^anae ordinationi, which we translate, To every
humane ordi^^^e. The words are full, and what o^th one holds would be seen.

Klio^s usually signifies a creature, Mar. 13. 19. Sometimes creation, Mar. 10.
6. Sometimes an order of men, or a Nation, Mar. 16. 15. Here that Civil
constitution, quares hominum conservantur, whereby men are preserved in the
quiet, and well managing of their affairs.

Who did, (...), build up, left not Mankind, more bell^ino, in confusion; but
orderly, as an edifice, disposed, and set forth in beauty.

The Original then implies, (...), order, and polity. Digestam, and ordinatam
vivendi rationem, a digested, and ordinate Government; So Calvin. Of Civil
Government the disposition, so the Greek Scholiast.

Nor is it (...), humane, quasi humanitus exc^gitata, as invented, and framed
by men, sed quod hominum propria, but as proper to them, is Beza's note.

Or h^mane, if you will, because applicativum person^ ad authoritatem, the
designation of the person to the ordinance is ordinarily by some humane act.

It Is here expressed, (...), for the Lord, that is, as Romans 13. (...), ^^der
God, from God, and of God. His, and no others; primarily, formally, and
immediately his.

Divine therefore in respect of the Donour induing, and Humane in regard of the
Subject endued.

This considered, the Hebraisme does appear. By the Abstract is denoted an
existent in the Concrete.

As, Romans 13. 1. Power is Man invested with Authority: So here, Humane
ordinanc^ involves Governor, Lord, King, etc. and this is clear at hand. For
the next words are. Whether it be to the King as supreme, or to them that are
set up by him. He is high^st, all the rest are from, and under him. Not of, and
by him, unlaw^^ll all.

One word more will make the sense complete, and reach our purpose home; and
that is (...). Subjection is unto all, good and bad, ver. 18. Et fidelibus, and
incredulis, under whom we are, both to Believers, and Infidels, so the Gloss.

Though God has bestowed felicity on the pious only; yet the Temporal
Kingdom he imparteth to good and evil, as himself wills, whom nothing injustly
pleases. To Marius, and Casar; to Augustus, and Nero; to Vespatian, and
Domitian; Constantino Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 5. c. 21.
Christiano, and Apostatae Juliano, to Constanti^^ the Christian, and the
Apostate Julian, so S. Augustine.

When either command, submission is ours. Christ, the Apostles, Martyrs, and
Fathers of the Church in their lives, doctrine and deaths, are our presidents.
We need not fear the service, who be so animated to the performance. But of
this before.

Sum up all: and who are under Caesar a Christian, or Caesar a Pagan, unto his
Authority tied they ought to bend.

They ought in all things, Qu^ pietati, and religioni ^ihil officiunt, which
twhart not piety, and Religion. For what holds in analogy with Faith and
Virtue, Non Casaris, sed dia^^li Chrysostom. Mat. 22. v. 21. Ser. 71.
est tributum, is not Cesars tribute, but the devils, said Saint Chrysostom.

The Royal Authority is not lessened by the vitiousnesse of the Person. It
incurs no blame, nor may the Subject so dignified be evil spoken of, Exodus 22.
18. Act. 23. 5. Not cursed, cert^inly, no, not in the thought, Eccles. 10. 20.
Saint Peter 2 Epist. 2. 10. and Saint Jude 8. 9. would not endure blasphemy
against the monsters of men, Caius Caligula, Domitius N^re.

O wilfully blind Zelots, who see, and not mind those Texts! Did ye not think
the Scriptures foolishness, the Preachers fools, Heaven a fancy, and Hell a
scar-crow, you would re-call, what possibly might be re-called. Would you not
make an Act to still their tongues, and hold their hands, whose Words, Pens,
and Swords have been, and still are, so virulent against His sacred Majesty,
that was, and His, that now is, by lawful succession, our King?

God permit the scales to fall from your eyes, that this evil of Christian
opprobrie may, in what it may, be suppressed, and the Regal dignity gloriously
re-advanced.

Believe S. Ambrose, Non contemnendum est quasi humanum Ambros. in^ Romans 1.
commentum, and believe the vengeance of God will manifest, that that which is
so divinely descended may not be contemned, as an humane figment, by the beasts
of the People, and they justified in their Supreme Commons.

Of all sins committed immediately against God, I find none more general,
and visibly punished then this mediate of Rebellion.

Bring (...) hith^r, and who will not, may be made submit. For three
trangressions of Moab, and for four God will not turn to it. Because it burnt
the bones of the King of Edome into lime, Am. 2. 1.

What then shall be done to England that murdered the most Saint-like King
that ever was since Christ was on Earth, and calls it an Act of Justice?

Nor does England stand charged with that alone: but with the trangressions of
Damascus, Am. 1. 3. of Azzah, ver. 6. of Tyrus, ver. 9. of Edom, ver. 11. of
Judah, chap. 2. 4. and of Israel also ver. 6.

Would the Lord be avenged on them, and shall he not on such a Nation as this?

Fire, Sword, Pestilence, Famine will devour, and the very earth swallowed up,
rather then Gods Ordinance shall be ever trampled under foot. Numb. 16. 31. 35.
Jerem. 27. 13.

But yo shake hands with the Rhemists. Humane creature, say you, for that
translation ye like best, is the temporal Magistra^^ elected by, and may be
rejected of the People. And justify your ^ssertion with Bellarmine from Deuteronomy.
17. 14, 15. where the people are said to set the King over them.

Constitues super te^ thou shall set ove^ thee: but understood Synecdochically.
Him, whom God has designed, and constituted King, shall thou obey.

And though it be said, 1 Samuel 12. 13. Behold the King whom ye have chosen: yet
the election of the people is no other then their obedientiall accepting of the
King. For the next clause ascribing the constitution with an Ecce to Jehovah;
and the ^y of the 9. in the first of Samuel, and the 1. of the 10. att^ib^ting
the appointment, and anointing unto him, show the whole work is the Lords.

God yields no more to the people, save their approving him in all subjection.
Nor is their approbation requisite, ad necessitatem, as simply necessary; It
may, ad pompam, add^ something to the solemnity, to the essential constitution
nothing.

The providing a King is from above, 1. Sam. 16. 1. So is the making a King. 1
King. 3. 7. and the King is called Gods King, Psalm. 18. 50. Yea, Kings are
Gods, all of them the Children of the most High, Psalm. 82. 6.

So high that no collective, no diffusive, no representative body may at
pleasure depose them. Who sets up, the same, and no other casts down, Psalm.
89. 39. 44.

The miracles wrought by the Rod, or Scepter of Moses declare Kings to be, as
the Heathen said, (...) of divine descent, (...), nursed by Jupiter, and,
(...), holding their crowns of God only. Nor have the Kings of England, in
their curing of the Evil by the touch, been without a visible demonstration of
their divine Constitution.

In brief, Pe^ me Reges r^gnant, says Wisdom, by me do Kings Reign, Prove.
8. 15. Christ by their persons; they by his power.

And Solomon had 'great reason to say so. For if the people could make a King,
it had not been King Solomon, but Adonij^^ the King. Because the faces of all
Israel were on him, that he should reign, 1 King. 2. 15.

Solomon there excludes all: Pope, Presbytery, States, People, Commons. None
share with Wisdom in the Creation of Kings, who shared not with the Word in
the Creation of things.

Irenaeus says, Cujus jussu nascuntur homines, hujus jussu and Reges Irenae.
adv. Haeres. l. 5. c. 20.
constituuntur, God, who ereated Men, constituted Kings.

Tertullian affirms the like, Jude potestas, unde and Spiritus, Tert. in Apol.
cont. Gent. c. 30 Athan. Se^. de beat. Virg.
whence the Soul is, Soveraigoty is thence.

St. Athan^sius holds us to it: Christ, receiving the throne of David,
Transtulit, and dedit sacris Christianorum Regibus, transferred, and gave it to
the sacred Kings of the Christians.

So does S. Augustine, Quia solus verus Deus, ipse dat regna urrena bonis and
malu, because God is the only true God, he gives earthly Kingdoms to good, and
bad. As if we might so well deny him to be the only true God, as rob him of
this prerogative.

'Twas usual for holy Bishops, writing unto Emperors, or Kings, to wish them
grace, health, happiness, In ^o, per quem regesregnant, in him, by whom Kings
Reign.

Were all the Fathers in the several Counsels adduced, no believing Christian
would ever bring humane Act, or humane Vote, or humane Power to justle the
sec^et, and sole disposing of God in the supremacy of a King.

All this while the Text is not wrested: no singular sense introduced. The
Object remains still humane, as executed by an humane instrument, and upon an
Object humane.

God has his due, Caesar his. The King is acknowledged, and from God the King.
Humane His person, His power Divine. Whose Anointed He is, I Will hold Him
sacred, as his. And if this be Treason, I shall live and die a Traitor; and so
will true Christians all.

Nor am I a Court-parasite herein. The (...), Popish Independents,
Presbyterian, and Parochian Sovereigns shall shall never justify me. I grant
the people no more then a capacity, and desire to be Governed. Passively in
submission they set up, but may create no power actively.

The Opinion of the Manichees, totally subverting the humane Ordinance of God,
I utterly renounce, as diametrically opposite to the truth. Not any State can
ever be well conditioned for peace and safety, where is no Union with an actual
Government, by and in one Supreme.

So do I the Romanists, Puritans, Bucananists, Brownists, that interpose the
people betwixt God and the King. As if they were the Kings Origin, and His
power lasted but ad placitum, whil^^ he pleases them, or they affect him.

As I keep no correspondence with those, I abhor Nich^laitan community, and
Anabaptisticall parity. Both destructive to the Order of the Church, and State
both.

And though these Humors swell high in this Kingdom, yet I am confident that
who invested the King, will not suffer his power to be always (...), in vain.
Not thriving unto the first properity, it may at last appear to the comfort of
the Loyal, and terror of the Rebels.

I find no ground for despair. The Spirit of God tells, that, according to the
curse of Jotham, after three years were expired, a fire from Abimelech devoured
Sichem, and a fire from Sichem devoured Abimelech. Judge. 9. So let them, who
ever make head, and will persist against my Lord the King, soon perish by the
Head they make, and their Head with, and by them.

Blessed S^viour, indue me, and every one, under this persecuti^n, with
sufficient grace to possess our souls in patience. Not leaving our works to
be done, let us leave thy work unto thy self. In the race th^^ have set
before us, uphold us running, as is prescribed, and we have that for example.
Whether we live or not, to see a peaceable Kingdom here, enable us to keep thy
peace initiated in us. Do thy will on us, whatever it be; and, that we may
enjoy eternal peace in thy Kingdom of glory, we beseech thee to hear us good
Lord.

True Christians, in obscure and equivocall phrases, observing the general
truth, permit not their Expositions to swerve thee from analogy thereof.
Knowing, obedience moral, and Princes, Gods derivatives, dare not strain a
Text to maintain a falling thence. If S. Peter call S. Paul's higher power
ordained of God an humane. Ordinance, they search for a reason of the
variation. Who are not of ability to reach that, will yet grant no
contradiction; because one is the Spirit, that inspired both. More peircing
eyes, looking far, and near, determine it Divinely given, and humanely
received. Apprehending God the Donor they conclude the Ordinance his. Yet what
he so bestows, as collated on man for the Government of men, makes his
Ordinance humane. The cumulative, or communicative power of the people is
usurpation: so is the reductive, and coercive. That neither of them may be
inferred hence is their thesis. Nor do they say that sovereignty is by
extraordinary revelation, no humane act intervening, immediately from God. The
designation of an individual person by lawful way manifested, election,
succession, conquest, etc. is not denied men. The conferring and joining of
power on, and to, the subject they hold primarily from God. He the constituent,
and no other. Nor this in one, and not another; in all, and every one. What S.
Paul, and S. Peter speak universally, they fear not to affirm of good and bad.
Whence it is that neither the infidelity, nor the tyranny of a King can force
them from their allegiance. Wherein the Heathen, as Darius, Cyrus, Artaxerxes,
command agreeable to the Law of God, they shall be, so we^l as Constantinus,
Valentinianus, Theodosius, by them obeyed. They stand to this, and doubt not.
For who will overthrow it must produce a new Bible. Persisting therein they are
bold, and zealous for the blessing. Because the Apostle accurseth him, who
preaches the contrary Doctrine.

Heed this every one: who have offended, betimes amend your fault. Though
vengeance comes with leaden feet, yet not without iron hands. The Lord will
tear, and tear the disobedient in pieces. For the Angels sake repent, that they
may rejoice; For the Saints sake repent, that their blood may not cry; For your
Souls sake repent, that they may not live in eternal death; For the Gospels
sake repent, that it may not be longer evil spoken of. If ye be of Christ's
Kingdom, appear as his Subjects. Submit ye to every humane Ordinance for the
Lords sake.

I have discharged my Conscience for the Lords sake; if I perish, I perish for
the Lords sake. (...).

