THE ROYAL PLEA; OR, A Defense of the KINGS SUPREMACY.

Wherein It is Evidenced and maintained by Argument, that to punish a King
Capitally, is absolutely against the word of God, and the established Laws of
the Land; and that to do so great a wickedness, will cast a great dishonor
upon our Nation, and the profession of Christianity.

By R.B. Bach. of Divinity.

Eccles. 8.4. Where the word of a King is, there is power; and who shall say
unto him, what do thou.

Printed in the Year 1649.

TWO Quaeres whither by the Law of God, and the Laws of the Land, a KING may be
questioned for his Life by his Subjects in case that he has acted something
against the foresaid established Laws.
TO the first I answer Negatively out of the Law of God, my first Argument is
deduced from the Test. of Chron. 15. verse 22. Touch not mine Anointed.

Which Text the Papists appropriate chiefly to the Pope and his Clergy, others
amongst us lead with more zeal and self lo e then knowledge, join issue with
the Papists, and denying it to be meant of Kings apply the same to themselves,
whom they suppose to be the only faithful and selected Saints.

But to ruin their mistake in the exposition of this Text, the chief boundary
which our Church has to fence the Crown and protect the Person of King from
all violent assaults, I shall with all humility and tender respect to weak
Consciences labor to prove the contrary, i. e. That the Text concerns chiefly
a King.

My first reason shall be this.

David calls Saul the Lords Anointed; 2 Samuel 1.14.
yet was Saul no Priest which overthrowes the assertion of the Papists, nor any
of the faithful which refutes the position of the others; But Saul was a King,
ergo, The Text relates primarily to the Person of a King.

This prohibition is the original maine Negative precept touching Princes and
their safety. For this Touch not, is as much as Destroy not, as David said to
Abishai 2 Samuel 26.9. Destroy him not (speaking of Saul) for who can stretch
forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless.

A King is said to be the Lords Anointed in that he is appointed and assigned
by God, and endewed with gifts to that end and purpose, to rule his people
according unto justice in the ways of piety and holiness, so that they
neither dishonor God by their Schisms, Heresies, and other profanations, nor
wrong their neighbors by unrighteous dealings.

I deny not but this word Anointed in the Text implies the Patriarchs Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, touching whom prima intention this charge was given that
they should not be touched. But I assert again, that they were Princes in
their generations (as the Rabbines on the Text do attest) yet as they affirm
who are our best expositors this term Anointed, as it began in the Patriarchs,
so it was continued to Kings who succeeded them in their government over diverse
countries. And when the Patriarchall rule expired, the Regal took place,
being both one and the same in effect, as appears by those two places, Genesis
23.6. Acts 2.29. In the former whereof we find that Abraham the Patriarch is
termed a Prince; so in the latter David the Prince is termed a Patriarch. Let
me speak boldly unto you of the Patriarch Abraham, etc. From this prohibition,
Touch not mine Anointed, we may draw this inference, That this Text falls
under the notion, and binds as a Law of Nature, being given for such who lived
in the old world long before the Law was given by Moses, being written in
Stone-tables.

It will follow then that they sin even against the law of nature who shall
touch a King the Lords Anointed by punishing him with Imprisonment or death.

Now that as in other things so in this term of Christi Domini the Lords
Anointed, Kings do succeed or come in the room of Patriarchs, we have first
our warrant from the Holy Ghost applying this term here afterward to Saul 1 Samuel 12.3.5. 2. Sam. 24.6. To David 2 Samuel 19.21. To Solomon 2 Chro. 6.42. To
Ezekias Abac. 3.1^. to Josias Lam. 4.^0. and to Cyrus Esa. 45. Secondly from
Counsels. The third General Council at Ephesus. The great Council of Toledo
the fourth. The great Western Council at Franckford. Thirdly from the consent
of Fathers, which is evidenced by that expression in that Council at
Franchford Beatus Hyeronimus and caeteri S. Scripturae tractutoris, etc. St.
Hierome and the rest of the writers on the Scriptures understand it not of any
others but of Kings. Nay even some of the Popish writers dissenting herein from
their fellow Heretics interpret this Text to be meant of Kings, so Caietan and
Genebrard upon the place,

The fumme of all is this, That this phrase mine Anointed, expressed in the
forecited Text, although it be there and in the 105. Psalm ascribed to the
Patriarchs, yet it is ever afterward without variation continually
appropriated to Kings, and to Kings only through all the Bible, and that no
less then three and thirty times.

These must not be touched. 1. Not with virulent Tounges. 2. Not with pestilent
pens, both which are the Devils weapons, they have their points and edges,
they pierce like a sword and cut like raysors. 3. Not with violent hands.


Again not only their Persons and Names, but also their States fall under this
prohibition, Nolite tangere, etc. Touch not mine Anointed. They that touch
their Crowns and dignities by casting down the one, and blasting the other,
and by denying them the free use of those Royal Prerogatives which have been
entitled to them by their Predecessors, and confirmed by the a tient Laws,
those I pronounce from the mouth of God his word, to offend against this
Negative precept, Touch not mine Anointed.

A second Argument is that of David Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I
sinned: etc. so the words are to be read according to the original (...), etc.
here is (...) put emphatically by way of exclusion to praeclude all humane and
inferior power which is in subjects from meddling with the sacred persons of
their Kings, by inflicting on them corporal or capital punishments, which is
against the Law of nature, as for the hand to strike the head: And to cut this
off to cure any distemper, either in it or the body, I suppose you will say is
a piece of madness: and so against the light of reason, which God has set up
in us to preserve our selves from ruin, which w^ll inevitably fall upon each
particular, when the whole Kingdom shall be destroyed: And when the head shall
be taken off (which God avert) the body and all the Members must needs perish,
and fall into sad obstructions: which that we may not feel, with the loss of
Peace, Religion's Nurse. I shall propose a third Argument.

A third Argument Results from the following words in the forecited Text,
Psalm. 51.4. Ut justificeris in sermonibus tuis, and purus sis quando Tu
judicas; That thou may be justified thy in saying, and pure when thou
judge. Hereby David (who was no more King then another, in that every King
now is (as he was) ordained by God himself, as appears by Prove. 8.15. Ps.
2.6.) intimates thus much unto us, that when God, in whose hands are the hearts
of Kings, to dispose and turn them as it seems best unto Him, and under whose
power Kings only are, to be punished by him alone for their offenses, when he
shall judge, that is, punish them, he shall do what is just and proper only
to him, but when Subjects shall take upon them to do this, they cannot be held
pure from the guilt of a great offense which the Holy Ghost plainly says is
worse then witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23.

A fourth Argument may be drawn from Prove. 30.31. where the Holy Ghost does (as
it were hedge in the Person of a King from being questioned for his life, when
he uses this choice and singular expression (...) Against whom there is no
rising up i.e. against whom none may justly, and none can with their own
persons safety, rise up either by taking up arms against him, or by calling
him as a Delinquent into question, etc.

A fifth Argument on which all Divines, both ancient and Modern do much
insist in, this case is that Text in Eccles. 8.4. Where the word of a King is
there is power, and who shall say unto him what do thou? The meaning of
which Text is, That Kings are under the Directive power of the laws, so as
they are bound in Conscience to Obey, so far as they are agreeable to the
Word, and cross not their Prerogatives, but not under the Corrective, as if
they might be punished, as other Subjects, when they have transgressed.

A sixth Argument is held forth unto us out of the Text in Timothy, 1 Timothy
2.1.2 verses, where the Apostle en oyns us to pray for Kings, 1.5. to pray to
God to keep them in the way of justice, and to pray to God to turn them into
that way again, if they have at any time gone out of it. This is the duty of
subjects, and this was ever the practice of the Primitive Christians, according
to that saying of Saint Ambrose, Preces and lachrymae sunt christianorum arma.
i. e. Christians when they are oppressed by their Rulers ought to guard
themselves with no arms, and oppose them no otherwise then with prayers and
tears: to this purpose read 1 Samuel 8.17, 18. They shall cry unto the Lord, etc.

A seventh Argument shall be, that in the thirteenth to the, Roman, verse. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers which Text is explained by S.
Peter, 1 Ep. 2.13. Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of man, whether it
be to the King as supreme. Now I appeal to every man's soul and conscience,
how they can be said to subject themselves to their King, who trample him (as
it were) under their feet, by laying his honor in the dust, and subjecting his
royal person to their own wills, and making him to stand as a Delinquent at a
bar of justice, which was never done by any King since or before the
Conquest, neither warrantable by Gods word, but rather quite opposite to it,
and to the practice of all nations, which either now are, or ever have been
before us, and wholly repugnant to the Statute and Common Laws of this Realm,
together with the Magna Charta, as the most knowing Lawyers have assured me,
both by word of mouth, and under their own hands.

We read in the 2 Chronicles. 25.3. That Amazias slew Zubad and Jehozabud his
servants, who slew Ioash his father, and their King, we find likewise v. 2.
this recorded of him, that Amazias did what was right in the sight of the Lord.
If he did that which was right in destroying them, surely they did wickedly in
destroying their Lord the King.

I shall conclude with that exhortation of David to Abishai, which was cited
before, Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
Anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9. And I shall solicit the Almighty
with my most earnest prayers, that every one whose heart is now imbittered
against the King may be so mollified and the edge of his purposes so blunted,
that he may put on David's resolution, when he had surprised King Saul in the
cave at Ergedi, and say as we read, 1 Samuel 24.6. The Lord forbid that J should
do this thing unto my Master the Lords Anointed, to stretch forth my hand
against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord.

And seeing that we have a David, and another Solomon for our King and
Governor let all good Subjects echo forth that acclamation which was founded
by those, 2 Kings 16.16,

God save the King,
Amen.
FINIS.

