VSVRA ACCOMMODATA, OR A READY WAY TO RECTIFY USVRY, IN A BRIEF DECLARATION
How That Evil which is so often found and justly complained to be sometimes
in Lending for Gain, may find a safe and certain REMEDY.

By I. BENBRIGGE. (...).

Felix imperium in quo subditi evadunt tum meliores, tum etiam ditiores. i. e.
Happy is that Government, wherein the People become both better and richer.
Danaeus in Aphorism. Polit. Civitates tunc intereunt cum boni nequeunt a malis
discerni. i. e. States do then decay when their good members cannot be
discerned from the evil. Antisthen: apud Diog. L^^rt. lib. 6. Published
according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Nathaniel Brooks at the Angel in Cornhill below
the Exchange. 1646.

TO The Religious and grave Senator WILLIAM HAY Esquire, Burgess in Parliament
for the ancient Town of Rye, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Worthy SIR,
THe noted Case of Usury is both Theological and Political: the evil
sometimes seen and felt therein, being an enemy both to God, rebelling against
his Laws; and to the Commonwealth, oppressing it^ feeble members; Hence we
see both Divines and Statesmen in Battell-array, and joining their Forces to
subdue that their Adversary in common: and as that Assassinate lays so about
him, as to fight always against God and man together, so to prevent his
marching forward, those his Assaylaents, to do better Execution on him, do on
both sides at once fall in, and break up his plundering Quarters. The Divine
acts the States-mans part sometimes besides his own, in ripping open the
close packt mischief he does to the Publicke-weale, and laboring its
Redress. The State-man at other times plays the Divine so well as the Lawyer,
anatomizing the engendring womb of his sinfulness against God, and directing
to the Remedy thereof; In thus doing they have greatly advanced each others
design, and yet neither has obtained his full desire: wherefore as for my
stepping in to help them both, their examples may be my warrant; so if I
acheive not mine enterprise, their success shall be my comfort. I have
therefore begun to publish mine endeavors in this way. Some old doting Momus,
or young one-eyed Zoilus will be quarrelling thereat, and bedaube me with some
foul aspersion or other (for never were there two Monsters (so they ought to
seem unto Christians) so much Personated as in this present ago) wherefore to
excuse my boldness (which by the Envious will be made a crime) Plutarch shall
plead, In his Precepts of policy
saying, In any Government whatsoever, a good Subject ought to strive, (as it
were) a Vie even with the Rulers, if they be Persons of good sort, and gracious
behavior, in diligence, care, and forecast for the benefit of the State, even
in going to them, to give notice and intelligence of whatsoever is meet to be
done, and putting into their hands to be executed that which he has with
mature deliberation rightly resolved upon, thereby giving them means to win
honor to themselves, and that by the benefit of the Commonwealth. My address
in partilar, is Sir unto you, (whose sincerity toward God our Heavenly Father,
and fidelity toward England our Earthly Mother is so well known) partly,
because you are a Burges in Parliament for Rye, a Town, to which I am most
indebted, for giving me my first entertainment in this world, as it did both
first and last unto my deceased Parents: who when they lived, as they highly
esteemed of you, so were they respected by you; But especially because of my
Obligement by your manifold and unmerited kindness to me; for which even an
heathen would hate to be unthankefull. It is my grief I can return no
livelier expressions of my grateful mind, yet am I not afraid to present
these, knowing your gracious disposition to be such, as, like God, you look at
the heart, (...).
more then at the hand of the giver. Wherefore not doubting of your right hands
acceptance of this small token of my good will, (though it answer to your worth
no more then it does to mine own desire) to my prayers as in general for an
Almighty Blessing on the Great Council, to continue its prosperous proceedings
unto the perfection of that great, because so good, work begun in Church and
State, so in particular, both for your present health, whereby you may be the
better enabled to serve your God and Country, and see your desires crowned
with accomplishment, before you go hence; and for your future happiness
crowning you with unspeakeable joys, when you shall leave this Vale of
Trouble, and enter into the holy Hill of Rest, there to rest from all your
labors for evermore. I only add the Name of

Your humble Servant John Benbrigge.
Ashburnham. May 6. 1646.
A Ready way to rectify USURY.
AS it is the hearty desire of every good man, so it is his duty, as far as
the circumference of his proper Sphere, the first Moover has set him in, to
put forth himself in a willing endeavor, that all evil in general, and so
in particular, the horrid mischief so commonly practiced in Usury, and as
deservedly condemned by the Learned on all sides, may safely be prevented:
Wherefore to express mine affection to the Publicke-Good, and to discharge my
duty thereunto, I humbly crave leave briefly to propound, what I do conceive
will greatly conduce to the speedy effect of so commendable a work.

The Suppression of all Usury, which some have projected as necessary
thereunto, as it cannot stand with Justice, some kinds thereof being most
equal; so in Civil Policy it is no less impossible in regard of the
Weale-Publicke: because thereby the Vital Spirits of the Body Politic would
be suffocated, at least so far obstructed from their most requisite course
through its particular members, as to endanger the whole into a lingering
consumption, which will end, though at length, in an undoubted ruin. For (as a
great Statesman has left behind him) It is impossible to conceive the number
of Inconveniences that will ensue if Borrowing be Cramped; L. Bacon in his
Essay of Usury.
Therefore to speak of abolishing Usury is idle; All estates have ever had it,
in one kind, or rule, or other, so as that opinion must be sent to Vtopia.

Neither can a State be safe, whilst the Current of Usury is suffered to
overflow, without any respect had to the different conditions of men therein:
For the fear of an eminent, and imminent danger, working upon the distracted
mind so misteth the understanding of a man stormed with extreme need, as it
easily misleads him into that mischievous mistake of a Necessity of his
Borrowing on Usury, even for preventions sake. And such is the covetousness of
many selfe-seeking lenders, as, in a case of present gain especially, they
will make no distinction of persons coming to borrow. Thus some run headlong
to their own undoing in borrowing, other help them forward by lending to them
on usury, and both follow their depraved wills without contradiction from the
Publicke-Magistrate: by some poenall notice taken of the mischiefs which
accrue by such their unlawful doings. Hence it is that the malignitie of this
corroding humor, is become so praedominant, as by some it is taken to be past
all cure.

It is confessed that diverse good and approved medicines both Theological and
Political, have been by the Skillfull administered to this running Plague Sore
of the Commonwealth, Iniquissimum est desperationes vocari, quoties remedium
medicina non invenit. Quintil. declam. 8.
and that they have not wrought the sound effect, which was expected; yet may
we not therefore utterly despair of remedy. Cuncta tentanda prius. So long as
life remains, Hope of cure may continue; and herein the rather, because there
is One Receipt, not yet tried, and yet easily to be procured for the healing of
this Malady.

The work especially intended for this purpose is, That those swelling
Streams of Lending and Borrowing may be reduced into their right Channels. For
if they were brought back thereto, and strictly kept therein, then the swifter
their course, the sooner, and more fully would they empty themselves into the
Maine Ocean of the Common-Good.

The most proper means probably conceived to produce this Work is The casting
up of a Bancke, which must be twofold, according to Borrowers, who are of two
sorts.

1. Some Borrowers, in their borrowing aim at no more then to stop the mouth
of their present and greedy want, which extremely craves maintenance for
themselves, their Families and Estates. These men finding little or no Relief
from the Hand of charity, conceive their only Refuge to be Usury; But these
poor Souls beguile themselves with this fanaticall apprehension which drives
them not into ((...)) a Sanctuary, but betrayeth them, so that they become
((...)) a prey to such ravenous creatures, as lie in wait to ensnare and
devour them and their Goods. Wherefore that these indigent persons perish not,
Sess. 22. cap. 8. Mons Pietatis est quaedam summa pecuniae aut rerum pecunia
aestimabilium, quae in pauperum refugium vel a divite uno, vel multis aut
Principe vel Repub. aut aliqua communitate reposita est. Cas. lib. 5. cap. 38.
nor their tottering Estates go to wrack on those merciless Rocks; for their
Rescue may be collected Mons pietatis, sive charitatis, A Bank of piety or
charity, as they of Trent f^^ly call it. That is, (as Tolet well describes it)
A certain sum of money, or things estimable by money, which is laid up for
the relief of the poor, either by one rich man, or by many, either by a
Prince, or Commonwealth, or some Company.

2. Other Borrowers there are, who by their borrowing intend only to get and
gain in their several ways of Trade and employment. For their supply as their
occasions shall require, may be erected (Mons negotiationis) a Bank of Trade,
as it may not unfitly be styled; that is, Such a sum of money as should
always be ready and able upon good Security to lend on Usury to such as in
their Trading shall have occasion to borrow.

Having thus weighed anchor, and launched forth into the depth of this Passage;
I hope it will not offend any if I adventure somewhat further, for the General
benefit to sound it so far, as the little line of my weak understanding will
reach to discover.

First, How it does appear that these Banks are lawful.

Secondly, How they may be collected and raised.

Thirdly, The Order and Manner of them to be constituted.

Fourthly, What Benefits will redound by their Use.

First, The lawfulness of these Banks; As they are two, so the ground of
their legality is twofold.

1. Charity erects one, which accordingly bears the name of its Founder, and
it is called (Mons Charitatis) the Bank of Charity. To oppose then the setting
up hereof, is plainly to withstand Charity, and in so doing a man both proves
himself to have no charity, and disproves before God and men, all the good he
either pretends to have or to do. Hence the best Casuists amongst the
Pontificia^^, not only allow, but also avow that Bank of this kind, which Leo
the tenth, in the Lateran Council held May the 4th 1515. did both confirm and
commend; and doubtless so much of his praise thereof as savours not of the
Romish Gust, will not prove distasteful unto any judgment that is sound. We
(says that Bishop) with the approbation of the Council declare and determine
that the Banks of Charity instituted by Commonwealths, neither do nor have
any color of evil in themselves, they yield none occasion of doing evil, and
can by no means be reproved: nay rather such lending ought to be praised,
approved and in no case conceived to be Vsurarious, yea that their Piety and
Pity should be preached or published to all People. Sess. 10.


2. The Bank of Trade is founded on Equity. He therefore who shall oppose the
making up hereof, seems no less unjust, then he uncharitable that resists the
former. The Equity of this Bank is evident from the Justice which appears to
be in requiring of gain for the Use of money lent as Merchandise; which yet if
any scruple at, I shall (so soon as my intervening employment will permit)
make as clear as the day (for so it seems to me) in a full resolution of his
doubts concerning such Lending For the present, as more proper to our business
in hand, we will for confirmation of this latter Bank, produce some Patterns
of Precedent examples herein.

This kind of Bank cannot be accounted a Novelty, since it is known to such
as have traveled either their own Studies, or other men's Countries, that
Foreign Nations have been long acquainted with Banks of this nature. Ubi
supra: Cap. 39.
That noted Casuist Tolet informs us of two, which though they differ somewhat
in name from this Bank desired, yet in regard of the Act of Usury, they are
one and the same with it; yea and that learned man, though a professed enemy to
all Usury, allows them both.

One he names Mons Fidei, a Bank of Trust: which Clement the seventh
instituted at Rome; In it Seven were given for the use of an Hundred per annum
for ever; because he that puts his money into this Bank, was never to take it
out again; so that the Annual Vse-money of Seven, were to him his Executors
and Assigns for ever, and might be bought and sold like as Annuites are with
us.

The other he styles, Mons Recuperationis, a Bank of Recovery. This Pius the
Fourth ordained, and herein Twelve were given for the use of an Hundred per
annum, so long as he lived, who put his money into the Bank; and when he died,
his money remained to the Bank, except he died within the first three years;
Besides, he that had this Pension of Twelve during his life, might sell the
same to another for his life, with this Proviso, That the Seller live forty
days after the Sale and Alienation.

To these many others may be brought in from the Hollanders and other Nations,
but Brevity only presents the Chamber of London. Whereinto men may put in
their moneys, for the Assurance whereof, and the payment of its Use (which is
Five in the Hundred per annum) they have the Security of the Chamber, which is
accounted the best this day in England.

Thus may the indifferent, yet Intelligent Reader, see how these Banks are
lawful.

2. The means of their Collection like themselves, are diverse.

1. The Bank of Charity may be raised,

1. By the Liberality and Bounty of charitable and able Persons. For mine own
part, I am confident, if this good work were once set on foot, that many
Well-disposed People, would readily bring materials, not only to lay a
Foundation for it, but also to rear the Walls, and finish it to its
Usefulness, by furnishing it with their moneys; contributing their use until
some occasion shall call for them to be employed in some necessary way of their
private and particular affairs. That little acquaintance I have with Antiquity
persuades me to this strong belief; For that gives us store of examples in
this kind: we need not bring forth Foreign acts, this Land has yielded as
charitable Persons as any other in the world, and in as great a plenty; it may
for a taste suffice to add one or two. John B^rnes Mercer Major of London 1371
in Anno Regui Edwardi tertii 450 gave a Chest with three locks and a thousand
Marks to be lent to young men upon sufficient pay, See Stow's Chronicle.
so that it passed not one hundred Marks. The gift of Sir Thomas White Major
of London in Queen Mary's first year 1553, was far greater, for he gave to
the City of Bristoll two thousand pounds of ready money: eight hundred pound
whereof was to be lent Gratis to sixteen poor young men Clothiers, etc. These
may serve to hint the probability of this means.

(...). 2 Timothy 2.1, 2.
2. But if charity in men should prove so cold, that they come not freely off in
this way, as may too justly be feared in these last and hard times, wherein
Self bears rule with so high a hand in most men, that their hearts are
adamantine toward others; then may it please the State to enact for a Law,
That they who do put one thousand pound into the Bank of Trade for Usury,
shall put one hundred into the Bank of Charity, gratis, there to remain so
long as the other does in the former Bank. And this would excellently suite
with

Epist. 383. a. Cas. lib. 5. cap. 44.
1. That Caution which Calvine, Amesius, and other Divines allowing some Usury,
do give unto the Usurers, viz. He which lends on Usury should not be so
addicted to his gain and profit that in the Interim he neglect or omit what he
is bound by mee^e necessity to do, either in lending freely to them in want,
or in giving (...) right according to his ability.

2. The proportion of one hundred to a thousand does agree with the different
number of these differing Borrowers; there being ten Borrowers to trade for
gain, to one Borrower for extreme necessity, as is most evident to any that
observe.

3. For another means to erect this charitable building, the Masters of
Assemblies, by the Public Magistrate may be required to exhort such in their
several Flocks as are able to set their helping hands thereto, by such
Arguments as their wiser judgments can produce.

4. When rich men die intestate, and without heirs in Law, whereby their goods
and estates come either in part or in whole to be disposed by the discretion of
the Judge in that Case provided, he may be enjoined by some Law for this cause
to be made, That he shall order such goods to be delivered into this Bank. So
should the poor become heirs to those rich men, whereby this Proverb of
Solomon would frequently be made good; Prove. 28.8.
He that increases his substance by biting Usury and unjust gain, shall
gather it for him that will pity the poor.

5. When any persons out of a charitable devotion are at any time minded to
give toward any Hospital, etc. that they may be persuaded to give and
bequeath the moneys they intended for that purpose, unto this Bank; because
the benefit they shall do the poor hereby will be greater being more
general, then can be in those other works.

But hereto Satan will brook his name; For this subtle Serpent is apt to
creep into such pious intents, by our natural pride possessing us with a
conceit of advancing our names, and perpetuating our memories by such
foundations called after our names, as Absolon did by his pillar: 2 Samuel 18.18.
which (as he will plead to them) cannot or will not be, if they put their
moneys into this Bank.

6. Lastly therefore to prevent this his wile.

1. Such men may be put in mind of our Saviors direction in matter of Alms,
this being no other if duly considered. His Rule is this; Take heed that you
give not your alms before men, Math. 6.1, 2, 3, 4.
to be seen of them, or else you shall have no reward of your Father which is
in heaven. Therefore when thou give thine alms, thou shall not make a
trumpet to be blown before thee, as the Hypocrites do in the Synagogues and
in the streets, to be praised of men: Verily I say unto you, they have their
reward. But when thou do thine alms, let not not thy right hand know what
thy left hand does: That thine alms may be in secret, and thy Father which
sees in secret be will reward thee openly.

2. But though no man ought to do any pious and charitable work in this (or
any other) kind to be praised of men, but to testify his obedience to Gods
Command in the love of his Neighbor, yet it is indeed no less then their due
to receive Commendations from the State by its grateful Comme^o^^ion of their
exemplary charity herein unto its more feeble and decrepite members. This is
the laudable custom of the Learned Universities, to their pious Founders and
bountiful Benefactors in particular. And if the Commonwealth shall think it
fitting to imitate their usual practice in registring the names of the
Contributors to this Bank in the Table, and to hang it forth in some
convenient place for a public view, yea and to keep yearly a Festival day,
wherein their names may be solemnly declared to all such Auditors as please to
come; As it will be an excellent Testimony of gratitude to them, so it may be a
prevailing Incitement unto others to imitate their practice. For it is a truth
of the Historian, Etiam sapientibus cupido gloriae novissime exnitur. Tacitus.
That the desire of Fame or Glory, is one of the last things which even wise
men can lay aside.

Thus may the Bank of Charity be raised.

2. The way of collecting that of Trade is otherwise, as the end thereof is
different from that of the former Bank.

Sum. Part. 2d. Tit. 1. c. 11.
Antonius relates how certain Banks wherein Usury was paid to the Creditors,
were raised at Florence, Venice, and Genoa, saying, When the City wants
money, it imposes a Tax or Scotupon the Citizens, which Scot has several
names in every City-where it is made; To the payment hereof whosoever was
unwilling, was compelled by the City, which yet allowed them five in the
hundred Per Annum for Use, until it was repayed. The taking of Usury in this
way has been much controverted among the Pontificians, as appears by the
Archbishops discourse thereof; yet he seems to allow it, as do also many
other of the Learned amongst them, as appears by the Quotations of Bernardinus
de Bustis, Rosar. Sermon. 27. part. 2. lit. Y.
in a defense thereof; yet cannot I see so much strength in their Arguments as
may force my weak judgment to join issue with them. For to lend either to
Prince or State, wherein we live, for Usury, when they are necessitated to
borrow, does seem to me, far more likely to be,

1. Unnatural; as for the child to refuse to lend unto his Parents in their
need, without some gain as a reward therefore.

2. Uncharitable, in not taking a tender notice of their necessity, which may
be, and sometimes is as great, and pressing, as any Private Persons whatsoever.

3. Unreasonable, because their borrowing is not so much for themselves, as for
the publicke-Weale, wherein our own Being, and Well-being are wrapped up, and
become partakers of the benefit which redounds by their borrowing. So that to
lend gratis to them, is but to contribute willingly to our own good; and to
lend them for increase, is to be hired to do our selves a good turn.

4. Cruel, for that lending to them on Usury, when they borrow to supply their
urgent need, in regard of the Common-good, does bite both Prince and State so
deep as to expose them to ruin by their impoverishment, Qui Venetorum opes
extollunt, vehementer falluntur; nam Aera^; publici magna est inopia; Argumento
sit, Triplicis Montis ratio quae Usuris quincuncibus publica vect^galia
exhaurit ut Gionatus Donatus confitetur. Method. Hist. Cap. 6.
as appears by the instance of the three Banks at Venice cited by Bodinus out
of Donatus.

5. Moreover this Bank of Trade to be instituted is not only for the Benefit
of the Commonwealth (^n statu conjuncto) as one Body, but also and principally
for the good thereof (in stat^ separato) as consisting of many members, which
do often want supply to enable them to officiate in their several Vocations
to their own and others profit.

6. Lastly therefore the best and readiest way to make up this Bank of Trade
in this Land, is for the Honorable Court of Parliament to make it a Law, that
every Person, who does lend and put out his money on Usury shall bring the same
into this Bank upon the penalty of the loss of the Principal: and that none
shall borrow on Usury to gain thereby but of this Bank, on some such
forfeiture as their wisdom shall think most fit; And thus may both these
Banks be made up.

3. The Order of their Institution, and Manner of their Government deserves
some more experienced understanding, then my shallow capacity to regulate it.
Yet that we may not seem wanting to our utmost ability in helping forward so
good and necessary a work, what my simplicity reaches unto herein, I shall
not blush to signify, thereby at least to give some hints unto such as are
more quick-fighted in such affairs, and can inventis facile addere, what they
shall find to be much more material to the useful framing of these buildings.

1. For the ordering of the Bank of charity, Ubi supra.
Tolet lays down these Laws or Rules.

1. That the sums delivered to those needy borrowers be lent but for some
short time, a year, or more, or less, as their necessary occasions shall be
found to require.

2. That they be not suffered to exceed their time limited for repayment, that
so there may be always sufficient to supply the wants of others that shall
fall into their rank.

3. That these poor and necessitated borrowers give some pledge answerable to
the sum they borrow, lest they become negligent (as it is their custom) in
returning what they borrow, and so the Bank in time come thereby to be
consumed.

4. That if the money borrowed be not repaid at the time assigned, the pledge
to be sold, and what is due to the Bank being reserved, the residue (if any
be) to be returned to the Owner thereof.

5. That these Borrowers do for the time they enjoy the money lent them,
return some small gain with the Principal toward the Expenses of the
Officers of the Bank.

Of these Rules, the four first I conceive may be allowed for good; though
indeed the third may admit with the Pledge any other security also: because
every such borrower may not happily have a fitting pledge, and yet may
otherwise be able to give sufficient security for the money he does want; But
this security must also have some forfeiture annexed to it, which Post moram,
(as the Civilians speak) may be a means to salve the Bank, if by their delay
and default any loss and detriment do betide it. This is no other then the
Vsura punitoria, which is on very good reason allowed by all men.

The last Order before specified, is that wherewith Cajetan Soto and others so
much quarrel; And truly I cannot but take their part, when as the said rule is
imposed on, and the gain exacted from such as borrow for mere necessities
sake, as in this Bank it is evident they do; Because it cannot be imagined
how these indigent borrowers, not gaining by the money borrowed, can return
any the least increase, without a sensible biting of their feeble estates.

The Reason which the said Tolet gives in defense of that his Rule, is the
Indemnity of the Bank, as he (after his most unholy Father) calls it; Because,
forsooth, the Bank must not so lend as to suffer loss.

But this his Reason holds not good herein.

Ubi supra
1. Because the moneys are put into this bank for a charitable use; Hence, I
conceive, they are called Alms, by the men of Trent. That charitable use is
the lending of them unto the poor and needy for some certain time; and this
their lending is no less then an Almes-giving; Now Alms must be given Gratis,
Charity must be without expectation of reward in the least degree, else it
loses both its name and nature, and degenerates into unjust Usury.

2. Neither Bank nor Bankers (as I may call the Contributors) can conceive
they suffer any less by their very act of lending to the poor freely in this
way; Prove. 19.17.
because what they even give this way is lent on Usury to the Lord, who at the
furthest will at the great day of Accounts repay them with increase. Now it i^
against equity to expect a double pay, one from God, and another from man, for
one and the same work, or to desire a Recumbence where no damage is to be
approved.

Ma^donate therefore endeavors to defend this Rule by another Device, saying,
Casuum summulae quaest. 9. art. 10.
The Poor in the City where such a Bank is instituted, are Masters both of
the moneys put into the Bank, and of their Use, so that the Officers of the
Bank are but their servants, and because it is fitting that Masters m^intaine
their servants, Ergo it is requisite these poor Borrowers provide for these
Officers, which they cannot do more commodiously then by returning some gain
according to the sum they borrow.

But this cunning fetch of that subtle Jesuit, will not serve his turn.

1. Because as there is Jus Proprietatis, and Jus Charitatis, so it is true,
The Poor are Lords of the Use which in charity is given them; But the
Contributors of that charitable use are Lords of their moneys, and reserve
^till their Propriety in them, and by their said Right have power to call for
the said moneys out of this Bank when their own affairs or pleasures shall
require them.

2. Though it be granted that the Poor are Lords of the Use of the said moneys
so long as they remain in this Bank, yet are they such poor Lords, as they
are not able to help themselves, much less to keep and maintain others.

3. The Officers of the Bank are more properly the servants of the
Contributors, whose moneys are distributed by them in this way of loan unto the
poor.

1. Because these Creditors did first let them at work, by putting in, their
moneys toward the making up of their entrusted Stock.

2. All the business of these Officers is about those Creditors moneys, as to
give them out upon pledge, or other security, and to look unto their
repaiment; The receiving and returning of the poor man's pledge, is not
properly for the poor m^ns ^ake, but for the r^ch man's moneys sake, that is ^o
secure it.

3. Lastly, because these officers will seem to be servants to these poor
people, by reason of their continual and ready attendance on them, when their
necessity drives them to the Ba^ke for succor. Therefore for a further and
clear answer thereto, it is said, there is Officium servitutis, and Officium
charitatis, A Service for hire, and a Service for love. They that do the
former are properly called servants, those that do the latter are in our
Dialect properly named Friends, who yet figuratively, and thence complementally
in these dissembling times, style th^mselves, Servants to such as they pretend
to serve in that kind The Scriptures indeed seem to favor that use, Gal.
5.13. (...).
(but not the common abuse) of the word Servants, enjoining all men in love to
serve one another. Put this Service of love must be free, else it is not for
love, but for lucre of the hire. Now the service of the Officers of this Bank
toward the Poor, is to be a service of love and charity, therefore it must
be done freely to them, without any expectation of reward from them.





2. Concerning the Bank of Trade, all the former five Rules may not only be
observed; but also the latter of them which r quires gain from its debtors,
may be so drawn up as to call for one in the hundred from the borrowers to
gain in tr^ding, more then the Bank shall pay to its Creditors; and from the
Redundancie of that One will flow sufficient means to maintain the Officers
of both Banks, yea and to raise a common Stock to the Bank it self for the
Commodity of the whole State in general.

To these Rules must be added some other, as

1. To k^epe these two Banks distinct, and thereby clear from all abuse in
pe^verting their proper course, it may please the L^w makers to inflict some
heavy penalty on such as shall any way by their craft and subtilty, corrupt
and disorder either of them; And indeed those who shall under a pretense of
feigned necessity abuse the charity of the Bank of Piety (that of the Two will
be most subject unto abuse) are far worse then those counterfeit Rogues, who
to deceive good persons of their charity, use to implaister themselves, and
make a halting before them, when as they have neither soreness, nor lamenesse
about them; For these Hypocritical borrowers do withal steal from the Poor
what is their due; Bankrupts they are indeed, and worse then those the Stature
orders, who yet are not thereby ordered according to their deserts.

2. To prevent corruption from creeping into the Officers of these Banks, they
must be enjoined to be accountable unto the Honorable Count of Parliament, as
to the great Master of these Banks, by whom as they are to be settled, so must
they be governed; For into that High and Wise Assembly, Partiality, and
indirect carriage of business cannot scru^ themselves, as they have done into
the Feoffees and Governors of other charitable and pious Foundations in this
Kingdom, wh^reby the true intent of their first Founders is exceedingly
hindered, and sometimes altogether overturned, and brought to nothing. As Master
John Barnes his chest (before spoken of) has stood in the Chamber of London,
empty a long time without money or pledges for it. The like might be instanced
in many other like Acts of charity, which has been no little di^couragement to
such Worthy minds, as have been willing to imitate these fair Copies set
before them.

3. To make these Banks more useful in their several ways, there would be
one in every County, and in that part thereof as shall be found most convenient
for lenders and borrowers on all their occasions to have recourse unto, with
little trouble of Travail, and less charge of expense.

More Rules I will not presume to mention; for if these do p^^ase those sage
Senators, in whose power it is to confirm what they find worthy of their
approbation, they can out of the depth of their wisdom draw both more and
better. Wherefore I proceed to intimate,

4. The benefit and commodious advantage which will arise unto the Body of the
Commonwealth, and its members by establishing these two Banks.

By the Bank of Charity.

1. The swift Torrent of unjust Usury which swallows up the low estates of
such poor borrowers as extreme necessity (in their conceit^) drives to take
upon Usury, would be altogether stopped, and quickly dried up; This very
particular has prevailed with some wise Princes, to take this course in part.
Aemilius Probus in his life translated by Sir Thomas North.
As Augustus Caesar in the year after Christ was born, to stay the violent
course of great Vsuries, put into the Exchange two millions and an half of
Gold, that is, Five and twenty hundred thousand Crowns, and suffered private
men to take of it for three years without Interest, putting in pawn into the
Exchequer Lands and Possession being twice as much worth as the Principal; The
like did Tiberius Caesar (as the Civilian of Naples tells us, happily out of
Tacitus) by putting a hundred million of Sesterces (which amount to about to
78125 sterling) in Bank, and lent it for three years space without
consideration or Interest, if the debtor could give security to the People of
Rome in Lands double the value of the debt: Genesis Dier. lib. 1. cap. 7. Annal.
lib. b. c. 4.
and the Emperors aim herein was to take away that Usury which had almost
squeezed the poor out of their estates. Now what an honor and comfort it
would be to this Kingdom, and indeed to any other, if it could say, defecit de
platei^ Vsura dolosa, who cannot divine?

2. By the Bank of charity many persons would be preserved from utter undoing,
and not a few Families of good note defended from ruin, Aemilius ibid.
both which else cannot but sin^e under the over-pressing burden of their
instant necessity; This moved Augustus to that his former charitable act, much
more should it work upon Christians, John. 13.35.
whose cognizance is charity.

2. The Bank of Trade will be very fruitful; For,

1. Therein may provident and careful Parents put their moneys to raise and be
portions for their younger children; Honest and trusty Gu^^di^ns hereby might
rid themselves of much care and h^^ard in laying up their Pupills Stocks for
their advantage and maintenance. The widow and other helpless persons might
herein secure their money, estates, from the flattery of deceitful borrowers.

2. The Bank of Trade will at all times yield present assistance to all such
as in their lawful way of Trade and gain shall have occasional defects in
their employments by want of ready money, so that hereby Trading would flow in
a high stream to the enriching of the Land. For,

3. Monied men would be induced to bring forth so well for the Public Use of
the Land, as for their private benefit, what now lies dead by them. Many who
dare not now lend for fear of the evident hazard they see others daily incur
by lending, will doubtless cast away that fear, because they shall see their
moneys so safe, yea sa^er to them with their Use in the Bank then in their
own chests and Closets.

4. The moneys of this Land thus brought forth into employment there would be
little or no need of Forraigners Stocks, which for want of the former are
become at this day the very Market-money of this Kingdom.

5. The Security of this Bank being infallible, the hazard in lending will be
much abated, if not totally taken away, whereupon the price of money lent on
Use may be justly somewhat lessened, to the Improvement of Land so much desired
by Landed men.

6. By this means that Hell-invented practice of Bankrupts would be altogether
prevented, to the safety of many a credulous Creditor. For how come those
V^pers to creep so deep into the Bowels of men's estates, but by the covetous
folly of lenders who strive to put out their moneys in a secret and hidden way
that their estates may not be known, and so they may escape, or at least be
eased in their Scots and Taxes? Hence it is that though one of these serpentine
borrowers have many Creditors, yet they are altogether ignorant of one another,
whereby they conceive him (who puts the best side outmost, if he has any good)
to have an estate far better then he truly has, of his own, and thereupon
they doubt not of their moneys until they find them lost without all doubt.

7. From the yearly increase of the one redounding to the Bank out of the
Usury of every hundred pound, will quickly grow so great a stock for the Use
of the Commonwealth at all times, as it shall never be brought to such
straites again for the raising of moneys on sudden and importune occasi^ns, as
of late it was, and daily is. This will agree with this Political Aphorism of
Danaeus; Besides the ordinary treasury which is ordained for the discharge of
ordinary public expenses, there must be reserved in every Republicke, another
by it self, and that with all honesty, for the removeall and repaine of
extraordinary losses and calamities. Thus had the Athenians a thousand talents
laid up for extraordinary occasions. Ex Thucyd. 8.
And this would quickly appear to be unto this Kingdom,

Ornata erit civitas si opes publicas, agros vel vectigalia habea^. Dan. ex
Aristot. Pol. l. 1. cap. 10. Maximus in Rep. Nodus and inopia rei pecuniariae.
M. Cic. Epist. ad Brut. 2. Epist. 18.
1. An Ornam nt to beautify it in the fight of all that have their eyes upon
it. It is the Glory of a City or Kingdom to have Public Riches, Lands or
Revenues.

2. A Munimen^ and Rampire of defense; For hereby shall this Land become
formidable unto all other Nations, when they shall see, and certainly know
that money, which is Nervus belli, is so plentifully provided for, against all
such occasions. The greatest difficulty in a Commonwealth being (then
especially) the want of money,

3. An easement unto the Subject from all over great Taxes, which usually
press men into discontent, which does frequently hinder many good and
necessary designs for the Common-good in times of Peace, but especially in
wars, wherein delay usually makes danger remediless. Hereupon it is
determined as a Rule in State affairs, Bella sustinent magis opes superfluae,
quam violentae collati ones. Dan. ex Thu. cid. lib. 3.
that Wars are maintained better by a superfluous store of Riches, then by
constrained contributions. Let our present experience of the premises be called
to speak hereto.

8. Lastly, By this Bank it will be easy for the State soon to find out,
who are the most able and sufficient members thereof. What an advantage this
may be unto the Commonwealth Wealth when times require best service, as our
present do, I leave to be considered by the Great Council of the Land, whom
it does indeed concern to know.







There is no one thing whereby more wrong is continually offered and done, then
is by men^ concealing of their estates from such as should know them.

This, I expect their gaping mouths will cry down for a Paradox; and I am
confident Men's Havingnesse, which makes them so unwilling to reveal their
estates will be the only Remora to this good work: Wherefore that I may let
them blood in the right vein, and for their Saving-Health prick them to the
heart with Saint Peter's Lance (a plain discovery of their heinous crimes
herein) I must entreat ((...)) that liberty of speech in telling them the
naked truth concerning their eternal Souls in this particular, which they
willingly suffer both the Physician and Lawyer to take in matters which
concern only their mortal bodies and temporal estates.

Every Christian has a threefold Center he must move unto; His God, Neighbor,
and himself. Accordingly, there are three motions he must move in: Piety,
Equity and Sobriety. In Sobriety toward himself, Equity, toward his
Neighbors, and in Piety toward his God. All which are directly opposite to,
and cannot stand with the wilful concealment of our Wealth; Wherefore he
that shall so do declares to the world that he crosses the Rule of grace, in
living not soberly, Tit. 2.12. 1 Cor. 4.7.
nor righteously, nor godly in this present world. For

1. Our duty to God in regard of those estates he has given us (for what have
we, which we have not received? and whence receive we our estates, but from his
blessing which makes rich? prove. 10.22.
) is twofold. 1. Thankfulness. 2. Faithfulness.

1. Thankfuln^sse to God, River-like, returns unto the Ocean of his glory,
those streams of blessings, which flowed from the Fountain of his goodness.
It is a free rendering to him the Glory of his goodness in bestowing our
estates upon us. And this Return is not to be done only with the heart, and
privately in our closets, Heb. 13.15. Hos. 14.2. Psalm. 107.22. Psalm. 40.10.
but the tongue must echo it in a more public way. Hence it is called the
fruit and calves of the lips. King David's rule herein is, Let them offer the
sacrifices of praise, and declare his works with rejoicing. His practice was
according; I have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth from the great
Congregation. The Lord would have his mercy known both for the Glory of his
Name, and to draw on other men to a faithful dependence on him, Psalm. 78.4, 5,
6, 7, 8.
which the Psalmist elsewhere does at large express. He therefore who hides
any mercy of God to him from the knowledge of his brethren, is no less then an
unthankefull person; yea and when he is legally called to manifest Gods
goodness to him, or when he would seem to do it willingly and of his own
accord, by an opening of his estate to the eyes of all the world, to conceal
any great part thereof, his ingratitude thereby, becomes great-bellied, for
Twins are hatched in its ingendring womb.

1. The firstborn is a Lie. For he that in this way conceales his estate, or
any part thereof, belies God, bearing the world in hand that the Lord has not
been so bountiful to him as indeed he has. This dissembling and double kind
of dealing, was the sin of Ananias; For the Apostle said unto him, Why has
Satan filled thine heart to belly the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.3.
and to keep away part of the price of thy possession? This is a breach both
of the third and ninth Commandment.

(...).
2. Its second brat is as deformed, it is Injustice it self. Unthankfulness
does open wrong. It detains from benefactors their due; It keeps back from our
Lord that Rent we owe him for these our Copie-holds. Thus it offends the eight
precept. One would think this enough to convince them of sin, who wilfully
conceal their estates, when they ought to bring them forth; But this has not
discovered the depth of its sinfulness as it directly strikes at God; For

2 There is another duty owing to him for our estates, which Divines call
Faithfulness: which brancheth it self into a Trust on him, a Truth to him.

1. The great Lord of all is bountiful in giving unto us, Isai. 51.3.
because he would have us confide in him, and wait on him, But the
close-keeping of his liberality to us in our estates, declares us distrustful
of him, that we dare not rest our selves on his Providence in committing our
ways to him, but we lean more upon our own care and closeness, as if an
open thankfulness to him, would prove dangerous and lossefull to us.

2. And if we do not trust God, we can never be true to him. Experience tells
us, that such as suspect, and will not trust others; are seldom or never true
themselves: Our faithfulness in doing for God, springs from our faith in him,
as ready and able to do for us. Wherefore since the vailing of our wealth is
by the foul hands of Infidelity, it cannot but produce a most treacherous
perfidiousnesse in their use he gave them for. We are but his Expenditours; 1
Cor. 4.7.
and Stewards ought to be faithful in their layings out, but faithful we
cannot be if we hide the Talent our Master gives us to trade with in a Napkin
of Leasing, not employing it so, that he may receive his own with Usury. He
that shall thus do, is brother to him, who instead of an hundred, wrote down
fifty. Luke 16.6.8.
What account will such a man give, at the Reckoning day with the world? Will
not Christ say then, Cast this unprofitable servant into utter darkness,
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth? Matthew. 25.30. Acts 5.5.
Ananias was soon called to an account, and punished for his falsehood in this
way. Me thinks if a man did seriously consider with himself, how often, and
how much he has wronged God by his concealing of his estate, in belying him to
his face, and stealing from him the Diamond in his Crown, His Glory; in being
distrustful of him, as if he were not trust-worthy, and faithless to him, as
if he were a kind of Infidel, this very fight of the evil in so doing,
should scare him from doing so again.

And yet you see not all the mischief that is packed up in this kind of men
dealings. For as it sins against God, so,

2. Secondly, It is against our Neighbor: The duty we owe him requires an open
declaration of our Substance. His due from us is Righteousness; that is, (Jus
distributivum) d^stributive Justice, which (Suum cuique dat) gives every man
that which is his. But he that wraps up his estate in secrecy, keeps from men
what he in conscience (if he have any) is obliged to give them; yea, and this
defrauding of them is his mere intention in that his false dealing: That I may
rip up the very Entrails of this iniquity, it is expedient to show the
multitudes that suffer hereby; They are ranged into Superiors, Equals, and
Inferiors.

1. Our Superiors are either Civil, or Ecclesiastic.

1. Our Civil Superiors are the Head and Body of the Commonwealth.

First, The Head, the Kings Majesty with his deputed and subordinate
Magistrates, are greatly injured by men's concealing of their estates.
Maintenance we owe the Public Magistrate, as a Part of that Honor which the
fifth Commandment requires of us as his due. Romans 13.7.
Hence the Apostle, Tribute to whom you owe Tribute, Custom to whom you owe
Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. But the Question will be,
What Portion of Tribute each man must pay the Magistrate as his due? The answer
is, That each man's tribute to the Public Magistrate must be proportioned
only by his estate, so that as his estate is greater or lesser, his Tax
rises and falls. Thus it has been anciently, (as I shall show hereafter)
and ought to be still; wherefore he that minceth his estate, does diminish the
Magistrates Right, and in so doing commits direct Theevery.

Secondly, The Body of the State in general, suffers much with its Head
herein. For it is not replenished wi^h that Strength and Store of Ammunition,
which it ought and would be, if all m^ns estates were known. The wisdom of
the State does order every man's burden in all Public Taxes to be according to
his strength; Hence some men to be favored in their Load feign themselves
much weaker then they are. A traitorous generation, and enemies to the State.

Secondly, Our Ecclesiastical Superiors are also double, The Church, and
Churchmen.

Matthew. 12.4.21.13. Isai 37.1.
1. The Church, that is called Gods House, the Building wherein his Public
Worship is given him, receives much damage by men's concealing of their estates:
For hereby it comes to pass, that it is not so well repaired and maintained as
it ought. Happily this argument may seem ridiculous to those fanatique persons
who have thrown Gods House out of doors. But it will not be so much slighted
by them who have their wits about them, and their hearts at their right hands;
These are the men I speak to, for as they hate superstition, so they love
decency, Hag. 1.4.
and count it a Piaculum to live in seiled houses of their own, whilst the
Lords house lies wast.

2. The Churchman, the Minister, who breaks to his flock the Bread of
Eternal life, is cozened of his due maintenance. True, the Laws give him
Tithes, the tenth of the Increase: But no Parish can endure, by their good
wills, to pay it truly, and duly, in kind. Wherefore the Minister for
quietness sake, usually compounds with them: and the Composition most commonly
is by their rents; which to beguile him in, it is too common for Landlords and
Tenants to combine to curtaile, yea and by swearing, or solemn protesting to
avouch the Prices of their Houses and Lands, that is, The sums of their Rents
less then they are: or to use some other indirect way of underhand dealing
herein; as if it were no sin to deceive a Minister. Justly may God plague
them with such, as will proportion their work according to their wages: but he
is merciful.

Thus are our Superiors wronged.

2. Our Equals are no less damnified by this deceitful covering of men's
wealth from others sight: For hereby he that is yoked with us in a Scot is
forced to bear more of it, then he should; and so we cross Saint Paul's
meaning, Gal. 6.2.
though we seem to fulfill hi^ charge in forcing our burdens on one another
back. A Scot is then equally made when every man is taxed according to his
estate: If any be cased by their falsehood in belying their estates, others must
pinch for it. Mark Tully in his charge against Verres says. The Tax was made
after such a manner when you were Praetor as thereby the Commonweal of no
City could be governed; For the estates of rich men were extenuated, and mean
men's extended, so that in requiring Tribute such a burden was laid on the
Common People, that if the men should be silent, yet even the matter it self
would abandon such a Tax. And to say the truth, even in these our times it is
apparent like the Sun at Noone, that the middle sort of Persons, whose
estates are of no greater latitude then the Zenith of every man's knowledge, do
bear away the greatest part of public burdens, and so are most heavily and
unjustly oppressed; and the reason is, because of men's concealing their
estates. Hence comes that heart-burning and envy amongst Neighbors, which
seems to have set them on fire from hell: such is their malice at one another,
in vieing at each others estates, when they come together at making of Scots
and Taxes, and the reviling speeches with Unchristian Behavior that passes
between them. This fire would be put out, if men would out with their estates
themselves.

3. Lastly, Our Inferiors are sufferers also hereby; Those I mean, who are
not scotted or taxed, such as have no Estates to maintain themselves, Deuteronomy.
15.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
much less others. Their relief is a duty strictly enjoined by our God. The
measure of that relief they must have from us, as it respects us, must be
according to our State-ability: this God and charity requires. But covetous
self-love hinders our obedience: wherefore the civil Magistrate (whose laws
most men regard more then Gods) was necessitated (for the fulfilling of the
Lords injunction hereof) to bring in Taxes and Scots for the support of the
poor, thereby to compel men to do that which their very Religion cannot
obtain of them. These Scots and Taxes, Justice requires should be equally laid
upon every man, that is, they should be proportioned to every man's estate:
which cannot be because men do strive what they can to suppress the true
Notion of their Abilities; and not paying according to the true worth of their
estate, it necessary follows that the Poor are wronged by them, in not having
their due from them. Solomon advises such Nabals to the contrary, saying,
Withold not the Good from the Owners thereof, Prove. 3.27.
though there be power in thy hand to do it. And thus men's undervaluing of
their estates appears to be unrighteousness in a high degree; And yet have
you seen but two parts of its wickedness: The third and last follows. For

3. Finally, such kind of close dealing of worldly selfe-wisedome cannot stand
with that sobriety we should have in and toward our selves. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6, 7,
8. Romans 12.3. Luke 21.34.
We should live soberly in this present world; Now christian sobriety is a
virtue moderating not only our desires of meat and drink, but also all
esteem of our selves, and our cares for these outward things. It restraines
the Lust of the eye, as well as the Lust of the flesh and the Pride of life;
But I appeal to every conscience of these greedy Hungarians (if they have any)
whether their wilful and obstina^e denying of their wealth do not come from
their covetous affection thereto, and inordinate love thereof? I dare avow it
does, and that in so doing their souls appear to be drunken, and overcharged
with the cares of this life. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
Hence it is that they err from the Faith, and fall into such Temptations and
snares, as will pierce them through with sorrows, which are to be prevented
only by a Godly sorrow never to be repented of: and to bring them thereunto,
Let them in time consider what they have done, in a serious review of the sad
premises, which will convince them that in this one act they have committed
many sins; the least of which they can never excuse so well, but it will
overthrow them at the Bar of Gods Judicial Tribunal. In the mean time,
they must admit of this for truth, That they love not themselves, nor their
Neighbor, no not their God, and therefore are not the same, they would seem
to be, True Christians.

But to make our flight somewhat lower, Civil Policy also does require men to
be know their estates; Christianity is our upper sphere, wherein whilst we
move, Phil. 3.20. Genesis 5.22.
we have our conversation in heaven, and walk with God. The lower Sphere
subordinate thereto, is civil Policy, wherein whilst we rightly move, we live
with Gods Vicegerents, as good Subjects, and sound members of the Body
Politic, which cannot subsist without the influence thereof. Wherefore as I
have endeavored to make men show themselves good Christians, so now my aim is
to persuade them to be good Commonwealths men in this particular: And so to
do, I will briefly make i^ good to them, that, The Publication of men's estates
has been practiced, commanded, and commended by such, who have diligently
sought the Prosperity of those Cities and Kingdoms they lived in.

1. For the Practice of it: The Custom and Practice of the greatest Empire of
the Romans may suffice to prove the revealing of men's estates absolutely
necessary to make a Kingdom become great and flourishing; For the very first
step unto the superlative degree Rome climbed up unto, was no other then the
exact view and perfect valuation of the estate of every Roman from the highest
to the lowest: as is clear by these ensuing Authorities.

Decad. 1. lib. 1.
T. Livius says; After Servius Tullius (the sixth King of the Romans) had
vanquished the Hetrurians, he returned to Rome, and then went about an
exceeding great work, or means of Peace, Vide Penart. in 2 Samuel: 24.
That as Numa was Author of the excellent Laws, so after ages did report
Servius the Founder of all distinction in the City and Orders, wherein appeared
any degree of dignity or fortune. For he ordained the Valuation of every man's
Goods, A thing most profitable to an Empire that should become so great:
Thereby all Officers of War and Peace, came not to be done man by man, as
before, but according to the quality (or rather the quantity) of their estates.
Then did he distribute them into Companies and Bands; And this Order comely
both in peace and war, he did prescribe according to their valuation. Of
those that had the greatest estates he made eighty Centuries, forty of the
elder, and forty of the younger. To the Seniors (of whom the Senate has its
name) he committed the Custody of the City, etc.

Romans Antiq. lib. 4.
Dyonysius Halicarn: relates that, besides the many other things Servius
Tullius did constitute, he commanded all the Romans to give in their Names, and
to prize their Goods by the value of money, and to add a lawful Oath, whereby
they should swear that all their Goods were truly valued to their full worth,
and withal to set down the Names of their Parents, their age, their wives and
childrens names, the Name of their City, or Village of the Country, where they
dwelt being also added. And he did inflict this punishment on him, who was not
valued or prized: He should be despoiled of all his goods, whipped, and sold
for a slave. This Law endured a long time amongst the Romans, but when the
Valuation was finished, and the Books wherein the Names of all Persons were
written, being received, whereby both their number, and the greatness of their
Fortunes was known, he did introduce the wisest Ordinance that ever was, and
the most profitable to the Roman State, as experience has taught. This was
the good Order he instituted, he took out of the whole number one part whose
estates were greatest, etc.

This Act was afterward imitated by T. Largius the First Dictator: Dion.
Halicarn. lib. 5.
for according to Servius Tullius his most excellent Ordinance, he commanded
all the Romans according to their Tribes to confess openly the value of their
estates, adding thereto the Names of their wives and children, with their own
and their childrens ages; And in a little time all were valued, because of the
greatness of the Punishment: for they who obeyed not were to loose their
Goods, and be turned out of the City, etc.

Again when M. Geganius Macerinus, Idem lib. 11. ad sine^.
and T. Quintius Capitolinus were Consuls, they informed the Senate, that
whereas many things had been neglected by reason of the continual expeditions
of the Consuls, amongst them, That Ordinance which of all other was most
necessary, viz. The Valuation of Estates, whereby was known both the number of
them, who were of a military age, and the greatness of their fortunes, by the
quantity whereof, every one should contribute to the necessity of Warlike
occasions, there having been no Valuation in 17 years, etc.

Moreover we read in sacred Writ, Luke 2.1, 2.
that there came a Commandment from Caesar Augustus ((...)) Vt describeratur
totus Orbis; That the Habitable world (under the Command of the Roman
Emperor) should be described as Beza renders it; Erasmus, Vt censeretur, and
so Vatablus, whom our English Translators se^^ to follow, by saying, That all
the world should be taxed.

If any object, The Emperor sinned in this his Command, as David did in
numbering of his People, alleging the Authority of Stella who indeed aggravates
this Act of the Roman, In locum.
as a greater sin, then that of the Israelite.

The truth is, Some learned men do doubt whether this Description of Augustus
were made for to impose Tribute, or only to know the number of the People
subject to the Roman Empire in those most flourishing times, Dubitant
non-nulli eruditi an illa descriptio sit facta ad imponenda tributa, quae est
recepta sententia; an vero ad cognoscendum florentissimis illis temporibus
numerum subditorum Imperii Romani, sicut David populum suum numer avit. 2 Samuel
24. Dan. Tossanus in locum.
as David did cause his People to be numbered; yet the former being the most
received opinion, and grounded on the Ancient Custom, and common practice of
the City of Rome, it may be said with Albertus M: Though David sinned in
numbering the People, because he did it in pride; yet Augustus off^nded not,
because he described the world out of a good intent toward his people. His
purpose being thereby to know how much he could be enabled toward the
Government of the Commonwealth, (Per Consicapitem) by Pole Money: which the
Pontifician writers reckon to be the Roman Penny for every head. But to
proceed:

In locum.
We have another hint of this practice of the Romans in Act. 5.37. where Paul's
learned Doctor says, Judas of Galileo rose up in the days of the Taxing, and
drew away much people after him. In which words we only take notice now of the
occasion which that seditious person made use of, to stir up his Accomplices
unto a mutunie; and Vid. Joan. Brentium. in locum.
that was the Description or Taxing of the Jewish Nation, which did infringe
their Liberty and Freedom, and brought them under the yoke of the Roman
Empire. To evidence this, may serve the Observation of Chemni^^us on the like
passage of slavery put on them by an Egyptian King: For thus says he, In the
third Book of the Maccabees, these words (...), are sometimes repeated
concerning Ptolemaeus Philopater, who commanded that all the Jews should be
brought into a servile condition by making a description of theme and the story
adds that many of them did boldly endeavor to free themselves from giving in
their Names. In this place is mentioned (...), which the Jews did oppose with
the hazard of their lives and estates; Because the intent thereof was, that ^he
Jews might not be a peculiar Nation, and keep their own Laws and
Government, but should be reckoned by this public Token, amongst the Subjects
of the Egyptian Kingdom.

Chemnitius a little after those words says moreover, it is worth our notice,
that after Archelaus, that is, almost in that very year, Harmon in locum.
when Christ being twelve years old, did teach first in the Temple, another
description of the Jews was made, (...) Josephus reports; And that under
Vespasian, a little before their destruction a third description was made of
them. Joseph. de Bello Iud. l. 7. c. 26.


And about four years after, that Jerusalem was utterly overthrown,
Vespasian and his Son Titus were chosen Censors; Of which Pliny makes
mention, Accedunt exempla recentissimi Census quem intra quadriennium
Imperatores Vespasiani, Pater filiusque Censores egerunt, etc. Not. hist. l. 7.
c. 49.
to certify us of the extraordinary length of life and number of years, many
persons were found to have enjoyed.

As for after times, It may suffice to add the Testimony of that Profound
Scholar, Isaac Casaubon, Exercit. ad Appar. Baron. Number. 93.
who affirms, The Custom of Describing or Taxing, was always kept, not only
in the Government of Old Rome, but also in that of the New, being now and then
acted as their affairs required. For witness hereof, he brings Gregory
Nazianzens speech to He^enius, in his ninth Oration to Julian, who with
Hellenius was sent into Capadocia to equalize, and level their Taxes and
Tributes imposed on the People of that Countre^.

But to leave foreign examples, it seems expedient to look home, and see
whether this practice has ever been i^ this Kingdom. To put this out of
doubt, I shall need to bring no more instances, then that of William the
Conqueror, who in his se^ling of this Kingdom to Him, and His, seems to have
shown as much wisdom, as he had done valor in winning it by his Sword. For
Master Speed informs us, Chron. lib. ^. 2. Sect. 40.
that the said famous Conqueror, caused an exact Survey to be taken of the
whole Kingdom, yea and of every particular Part and Commod^ty thereof: so that
there was not a Hide of Land, Lake, water or wast, but he knew the Valuation
the Owners and Possessors, together with the Rents and profits thereof, as also
of all Cities, Towns, Villages, H^mlets, Monasteries, and Religious Houses;
causing also all the People in England to be numbered, their names to be taken,
with notice, what every one might dispend by the year. Their substance, their
money, and bondmen recorded. How many yokes of Oxen and Plough lands were in
the Realm, and what services they owed, who held of him in Fee. All which was
certified upon the O^^bes of Commissioners. This done, he exacted fix
shillings to be paid him for every Hide of Land, which a mounted to an huge
sum of money. This Book thus made of every several Survey was commonly
called the Roll of Wi^^hester, as being there at first kept; But for the
Generality and inevitable Censure thereof is by Authors named Liber
Judiciarius; by the English, it is called Doomesday-Booke, kept to this day in
the Kings Exchequer at Westminster.

By these premises appears ((...)) That this valuing of men's estates has
been a common practice in Kingdoms.

Before we leave it, I shall briefly add the (...) thereof.

1. The ((...)) manner of doing it among the Romans will clearly show it
self, in a discovery of 1. The quality of the persons employed. 2. Their
office and work therein. 3. The Ceremony used therefore. 4. The Time, when and
how often it was practiced.


1. The Qualitity of the Persons employed about this work. The Romans always
chose two men of the best Rank and Repute amongst them to do it, Demum eo
dignitatis venit Censurae status ut nisi clari illustresque post triumphos and
consulatus illam expererent. Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dir. l 3. c. 13. In vita M
Catonis De legibus lib. 6. De legibus lib. 3. ad initium. Ubi supra. Fenestella
de Magist. Romans cap. 17.
and called them the Censors. None but famous and illustrious persons were wont
to obseeke that Office of Censorship, and that, after their Consulships and
Triumphs, as if it were one step of honor above them. It was indeed the
chiefest office among the Romans, and therefore fit only for the best men.
Plutarch tells us, M. Cato ten years after his Consulship su^d to be Censor,
which was in Rome the greatest office of dignity that any Citizen of Rome could
attain unto, and as a man may say, the Place of all Glory and Honor of their
Commonwealth. Plato therefore did appoint that his Thirty seven, the chiefest
men and of highest rank in his Commonwealth, should have the Custody of the
Laws, and the keeping of the Talles, wherein were registered the names and
sums which every man set down of his estate.

2. The Office of the two Censors (which we find Emperors themselves to
accept of) did in time grow to a very great height; for thereto was added
Censures of manners, and many other particulars do at large appear by the
Roman Law concerning it, recited by M. Cicero; and also by the report of
Plutarch, Fenestella, Alexander ab Alexandro and other classical Authors. But
at the first it was far less, and branched it self only into two parts
according to the two most usual significations of the word Census. For

1. The word Census signifies (Quicquid fortunarum quis habet) whatsoever a man
has, his whole estate, and all that he is worth. Sive apud Romans script^res
Census interdum signicat ipsa bona; ut Homo tenuis Census, and apud Satyricum,
Misera est magni custodia census. Casaub. exercit. 16. Baronit Annal. Number. 10.
Vide Annal. Beza in Matthew. 17.24. and 22.17. and Mark 12.14. Har^. Ubi supra.
Postea etc. Exercit. 16. Ubi supra. Beza in Annot. in Matthew. 22.17. F^llerius
in Praxi Censuali 2 Varronis. lib. 4. de ling. lat. Cas. lib. 5. c. 41.
Casaubon. Exercit. Annal. Baron. Number. 10. and Exercit. ad Apparat. Numb. 93.
For the first work of the Censors was to value every man's estate, and to
inventary both his Lands and Goods. The greek word (...) signifies to take or
make an account, and (...) imports that which commonly is called an Inventary,
etc. A^ Chem^nitus out of Budaeus; and Casanbon out of the Glossator says,
(...), that is, (...); The Description, was an Estimate of a man's substance;
And in times past it was one part of the Censors office, habere and ordinare
Census; But when the Censors were taken away, there were certain men sent into
the Provinces, and they were called Censitors, who measured all men's Lands, and
set them down in their Books of Valuation; Hence also the word Census is used
to signify a Valuation, or estimation of all men's abilities, as well in Rents
of Lands, as Moveable Goods; And from this practice, To let derives the
signification of Census first named, saying, Observe that in times past, the
Rents and Goods of Inhabitants were valued by the Emperor, that there might be
made a just estimation of them; And such an Estimation is called Census: and
from thence the word was enlarged in signification so that the estate which was
prized, was called Census.

2. The other signification of Census is a Cesse, Tax or Tribute, that is laid
upon men's lands, goods, and estates. So it is translated in Matthew. 22.17. and
Mark 12.14. For when the Censors had valued men's substance, then by their
esteem thereof, they regulated and ordered every man's Scot and Tax; Therefore
the Graecians called the Censitors (...) and the Latins Peraquatores. For they
corrected the Books of Valuation, and divided amongst the Citizens equally the
Burden of the Tribute according to every man's estate; Thus Juli^nus and
Hellenius were sent into Cappadocia, to take a survey of men's estates, and
amongst them to level, and even the charge of the Tributes: which was
heretofore the office of the Censors, and since of the Censitors, and from
hence this word Census came to mean a Tax, Cesse, Scot, or Tribute.

3. The Ceremony they used about this Office, was to enter thereon in a
religious (or rather superstitious) way; For they did offer up certain
sacrifices, as a Sow, a Sheep, and one Bull, as Pomponius Laetus, or three
Bulls, as P. Martyr says. In 2 Samuel 2^
And another ceremonious observation they had herein, that when (one of the
Censors happened to dye, they might not choose one in his room, but it was
ordered, that the Survivour should a^dicate and renounce the office, that so
two Censors might be new chosen: Fenestella ubi supra.
which arose upon this occasion; because the Frenchmen did take Rome in that
year, wherein one Censor died, and another was put into his place. But these
Pagan and heathenish rites vanished away even at the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness, and yet the office it self endured long after, as Casa^bon
affirms, thereby acquitting Censorinus from the unjust censure of Baronius.

4. Lastly, The time that it was at first usually pract sed in, and by the Law
should have continued, was every five year. If the Reader will compare the end
of the fifth Book o^ Dionys. Halica^n: Exercit: ad Apparat. Annal. Baron. Number.
93.
where T. Largius observed it, with the end of his sixth book, where it is
again executed, and number the years between, he shall find them to be five.
Calvisus in his Chronology recounting the times hereof, makes it clear to the
observer. Hence the latin word Lustrum signifies the space of five years, and
the Romans reckoned their times thereby, as the Greeks did by their Olympiads;
M. Cicero in lib. 3. de Legibus, ad initium.
yet it seems this time of five years was altered; For it is reported by
Fenestella that Mamercus Aemilius when he was Dictator, did decree it should be
every year, or every year and half, as Alexander ab Alexandro: B^^man. de
Origin. ling. lat. in Luo.
Because the Censors by the length of their office, were grown proud and
insolent. And it further appears that the Censors did not every five years
describe, or value, and ^^^e men's estates; For besides the complaint of the two
Consuls in Dion. Halicar. before recited; P. Mart. Vbi supra.
Censorinus says, Servius Tullius did ordain that every fifth year a
Valuation of the Citizens being taken, Vbi supra.
Lustrum conderetur: but so did not they which came after; Vbi supra.
For whereas there are little less then six hundred and fifty years between
that which Servius did observe, and that of Vespasian and Titus, yet there were
no more then seventy five Lustra; Apud Calvis. Chronol. in Anno Christi. 74.
and afterward they left the same quite off. This last clause is that which
Baronius carped at, and Casaubon cleared from his mistake. And so much briefly
for the ((...)) manner of the Romans doing this work. Come we to

2. The ((...)) Reasons why they did thus practice. The grounds whereon, and
ends whereunto they moved herein: they seem to be especially to be these.

1. The expiating and purging of the people: P. Mart. in 2 Samuel 2.4.
Hence the Verb Lustro used by good Authors to express the work of the
Censors, signifies not only to view, and compass about, but also to purge by
sacrifice: what their sacrifices were, has been intimated; and herein it is a
probable conjecture of the Learned, that they did imitate the Israelites, who
were enjoined by the Lord their God at every Description, to bring an offering
for the expiating of their Souls; Exodus 30.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

2. To know the number of the People, for the raising of Soldiers, when
occasion required an Army.

3. To find out the ability and wealth of every particular person, and so of
every Province, Kingdom, Nation, and the whole Empire in general; which was
necessary for them to understand.

1. That they might the better distinguish of their people, Census discrimen
habendum ut inde dignitatis ^acio inter cive^ haberi quoque possit, item and
onerum publicorum. Danaeus in sylv^. Aphoris. Po^^t. Controvers. 9. In loc.
com. Jurid. collect. ex Operibus Senecae. Vide Alex ab Alex li. 4. c. 11. Vbi
supra. Id. Ibid. Budaeus apud Chemnit. Vbi supra.
and particular persons, and accordingly order them into their several ranks
and degrees. This use Servius Tullius made of it, and so did all the following
Censors, as appears by Seneca, Gothofredus, and others.

2. That they might equally tax every man: for according to each man's Estate
was his Tribute, Cesse, or Scot proportioned, as has been hinted already.

3. That hereby they might have some guess at the commings in of the State,
its Revenues, whereby they might regulate their expenses, both in times of
war and peace.

4. Lastly, hereby was intended, an acknowledgement of subjection from the
Persons and People so described, valued, or ^^^ed. Their confession of their
Names and Estates, to be thereby scotted and cessed, to pay Tributes and
Subsidies, was a Profession of their submission to the Commander. And so we
have done with the Practice of the valuing and prizing of men's estates.

2. The next thing concerning the same to be enquired after is, the original
thereof, which being opened, the command thereof by prudent Governors will
plainly appear. I find Plato in his Commonwealth to take this Order, De
legibus lib. 6. 12.
saying, After this manner Public Contributions shall be dispensed; First,
for the benefit of many shall be had a Valuation, or an Estimate of every man's
whole estate, etc. The Names of all persons, and Sums of their estates he
commanded to be enrowled; And if any man failed in the Manifesto of his
substance, the punishment he did enjoyne for him, was, that the Remainder or
Overplus concealed should be made common, and distributed amongst the people,
and the delinquent to become infamous, as one that despised the Laws for lucre
sake, and who would, might accuse him, etc. Thus runs that Philosophers Law
concerning this particular in hand; But he was not the first that trod out this
way: For before he was borne, threescore and six years, or there abouts did
Solon govern Athens, (Anno ante Christum 592.) by whom amongst other Laws,
this was also made a Law, that every man should every year declare unto the
public Magistrate, Et imprimis haec lex commendatur quam tulit, ut quisque
quotannis indicaret Magistratui magnitudinem facultatum suarum, and artificil
genus unde sibi honest victum pararet. Carrion. Chron. lib. 2. In the life of
Solon.
the quantity of his wealth, and his kind of Trade, whereby ^e did honestly get
his living. And Plutarch says, Solon being desirous to have the chief Offices
of the City, to remain in rich men's hands, as already they did, and yet to
mingle the Authority of Government in such sort, as the meaner people might
bear a little sway, which they never could before, he made an Estimate of the
goods of every private Citizen: and those he found yearly worth five hundred
bushells of corn, and other liquid fruits and upwards, he called
Pentacos^omedimnes, as to say, Five hundred bushel men of Revenues. And those
that had three hundred bushells a year, and were able to keep a Horse of
service, he put in the second degree, and called them Knights. They that might
dispend but two hundred bushells a year, were put in the third place, and
called Zeugites; Yokemen or Farmers. All other under these, were called Thetes,
that is, Laborers, who are set at work by other men. These latter, he did not
admit to bear any office in the City, neither were they taken as free
Citizens, saving they had Votes in Elections and Assemblies of the City, and in
Judgments, where the People wholly judged. It may easily be conceived that
Servius Tullius who came to be King of the Romans, about seventeene years at
the most, after Solon took on him the Rule of Athens, did imitate him herein;
Ab eo (Solone) Civilis Romanorum J^ris, cujus etiam hodie passim usus est,
origo demanavit Carrion Chron. lib. 2. Textor in officina de Romans Regibus.
Descriptionem Civitatis a majoribus nostris sapientissime constitutam; etc. pro
P. S^xtio. Vbi supra. Vbi supra. Vbi supra. Quintum fomentum Equalitas. h^ c,
ut justa and uniformis contributio sit, nec per bonam malamve gratiam, hunc
subleves, illum premas. Huic autem aequalitati ratio unica; Census. Res
saluberrima magno fururo imperio, quem nesciri aut negligi hodie non mirer?
etc. Civil. Doctrinae lib. 4 c. 11.
for the Romans derived their Laws from Solons, as the learned have observed;
as Solon received the grounds of his own, from other Nations, and especially
the Egyptians, amongst whom he sojourned in his Travels.

3. Finally for the commendation of this Act of Civil Policy, it may safely be
affirmed that as many Authors making men ion thereof, do highly praise it, so
as yet I have found not one which does in the least measure impeach the same:
The high esteem those two noted Historians, Livy and Dion: Halicarnasseus had
thereof, may appear by their words already recited; And M. Cicero who
doubtless understood the mysteries of State Affairs, so well as any of his
rank ever did, does say, Our Ancestors did most wisely constitute the
Description of the City; Plutarch also extolls that Act of Solon, as of most
excellent use, as his law thereof is praised by Ph. Melancthon. P. Martyr
says, It was very commodious; Besides the Excellency thereof appears by the
dignity of the Persons that only were chosen to that office, as has been
shown: But of late writers in this particular, Lypsius may be instar omnium,
who most fully commends the use and practice hereof unto all Princes and
Magistrates, in this manner. The fifth means to mitigate and abate the hatred
and discontent which uses to arise in the hearts of Subjects against their
Princes and Governors, by reason of Taxes, and such like public burdens
imposed on them, is Equality; that is, A just and uniforme contribution, the
same thing being not made greater or lesser to any man, either for love or
hatred: To which equality there is but one way, The valuing of every man's
estate; a thing most profitable to make any Dominion great. Shall I wonder that
it is unknown or neglected in these times? Truly I may, seeing there are such
evident and obvious examples thereof, (For what Commonwealth has in times
past been meanly good without it?) and that it is withal of such manifest
use. Plato said rightly, It is very profitable that every man bring forth his
estate to be rated or v^lued; because hereby alone it would come to pass, that
all degrees of Patrimony, Dignity, Age, Arts and Offices would be enrol^ed,
whereby would appear, how able all Cities and Countries were to leavie both
soldiers and money. Lastly, Hereby Tribute might yearly be paid in an equal
proportion. Wherefore if thou O Prince, or Governor be wise, recall this
practice, both for thine Own and the Public Good; and Censors being chosen,
let all the People, with their Ages, Offspring, Families and Estates be
registered. To these Censo^s must all power be given of making the Estimate of
their Estates, and Sum of their Tax.

But by whom shall they be chosen? If you will hear me, to take away hatred
and suspicions from that office which of it self is displeasing, let the
people design them, that they may with the greatest care elect such as they
will put most confidence in concerning their estates. How many must be chosen?
Let there be two or three in every City. How often must this Description, or
V^luation be? They differ herein, for in some Cities, it is every year, and in
other greater Cities never but in the third or fifth year: But I conceive it
would be more safe, and better to be every year, because of men's remoovings
from place to place, their deaths, increase and decrease in estate. Thus far
Lypsius, with whom I cannot but consent, and yet with these cautions.

1. That these Censors, whether two or three in a City or P^rish, be in this
Kingdom chosen, not by the vulgar people, but by the Honorable Parliament,
who as they are the Wisedoe of this Nation, so they are the Representative Body
of the same.

2. That these Censors have Power to give an Oath to every man who is to be
described, valued, or prized, to draw from him a true confession of his whole
estate, as Servius Tullius did unto the Romans.

3. That such persons as notwithstanding their Oath (for as some have, so
others will prefer money before faith and truth) shall like Ananias conceal
any part of their wealth, do by some law for that end to be made, forfeit the
particulars concealed, unto the King and State, and they themselves be
proceeded against in Law as guilty of Perjury.

4. That the Censors themselves be sworn to execute their office without
partiality: and if they wilfully swerve from their oath and equity, then that
they be fined, or other ways punished, as the State shall think most fit.

5. That this Description be once every year.

6. Lastly, That these Censors be ordained in every Parish, or at the least in
every Hundred, to lessen their trouble that they may the more exactly manage
their office, which will be accompanied with many encumbrances and
difficulties, especially at the first setting it on foot, by reason of that
natural averseness, which is generally in men from all good that is public;
and from this particular most of all, because at the first sight it will seem
to cross their Having disposition; But the truth is, if it were thoroughly and
seriously considered without all prejudice, Censorum qui in singulorum Censum
mores, and vitam libere and sincere tamen inquirant, potestas in quavis Repub.
been instituta est necessaria. Danaeus. Resp. optima est in qua omnes
magistratus and cives conferunt omnia sua ad Reip. salutem vel commodum. Id. e.
Plut. de Civil. Administr.
(which blinds many tim^s the clearest eyes of the sharpest understandings) it
would appear to be not only useful, but also necessary to the well-being of
the Republicke; For that Commonwealth is in a very good condition, in which
all Persons, Magistrates and People do confer all that they have to the
Benefit of the State. Now the health of the body in general is made up of the
prosperity of each particular member; wherefore every person should even for
his own good bring forth his estate for the public use of the Kingdom; much
more should he be willing to pay, and part with the Tax cessed on his State,
never grudging and repining thereat, especially if equally made. Doubtless if
every man would work himself to come off freely in these matters, not only
the body in general would be saved, but each particular member also preserved,
yea and the quantity of most men's taxes be lessened to their great content; But
when men shall be so purblinde as not to see the good they do themselves, when
they in any way accommodate the State, and thereupon do prefer their own
private welfare before the Public, they run the highest way to ruin both.
For proof hereof many notable instances sad experience can produce; But that
shameful loss of Constantinople is witness enough. See Master Knowles his
history of the Turks in the life of Mahomet the Great.
When Mahomet the Great besieged that City, the Poor Emperor many times with
tears in vain requested but to have borrowed money of his covetous Subjects,
to have been employed in the defense of the City, but they would still swear,
that they had it not, as men grown poor for want of Trade, which in few days
after their enemies found in such abundance that they wondered at their wealth,
and derided their folly, that possessing so much, they would bestow so little
in defense of themselves and their Country. To speak of the hidden treasure,
money, plate, jewels, and other riches there found, passes credit. The Turks
themselves wondered thereat, and were therewith so enriched, that it is a
Proverb amongst them at this day, if any of them grow suddenly rich, to say, He
has been at the sacking of Constantinople. Whereof if some reasonable part had
in time bin bestowed upon defense of the city, the Turkish King had not so
easily taken it. But every man was careful how to increase his own private
wealth, few or none regarding the Public State, until in fine every man with
his private abundance, Eccles. 5.12.
was wrapped up together in the self same common misery; And indeed this is no
wonder to a Christian who knows that sometimes riches are reserved by their
Owners to their own hurt and evil both in this life, and that to come; but
hereof I say no more than the old said saw, Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula
cautum.

Wherefore to conclude, As the readiest way to suppress unjust Usury, is to
raise Banks of Charity, and Trade, and as to the perfecting of those Banks,
the open discovery of every man's estate is necessary, so it appears to be an
undoubted position, That the Person who would approve himself a true
Christian, and a good Commonwealths man, must confess, reveal, and lay open
his whole estate, whenever he shall be duly called thereunto.

FINIS.

