A POETIC DESCANT UPON A Private Musick-Meeting.
MUSE! Rise, and plume thy Feet, and let us convers
This Mor'n together: Let Us rehers
Last Evening's Sweets; and run one Heat in ful-speed Verse.
Prank not thy Self in Metaphors; but pound
Thy ranging Tropes, that they may sound
Nothing but what our Paradise did then surround.
Throned first Parthenian-heav'n-bred Beauties were,
Near Crystal casements Eastern Sphere;
Who, like to VENUS, sparkled, yet more chaste then fair.
Amongst which, one radiant Star so largely shone,
She seemed a CONSTELLATION;
Her Front 'bove Lilie-white, Cheek 'bove Rose-red, full blown.
Yet be not Planet-struck, like some that gaze
Too eagerly on Beautie's blaze;
There Is none like Thine, Dear MUSE! theirs are but Meteor-raies.
Suitors to Idols offer idle Suits,
Which hold their Presence more recruit's
Their broken Hopes, then Viols, Pedals, Organs, Lutes.
But, whist! The Masculine sweet Planets met,
Their Instruments in tune have set,
And now begin to ransack Musick's Cabinet.
SOL! Thou pure Fountain of this Streaming Nois!
Patron of Sweetness! Soul of Joies!
How were we ravished with thy Viol's warbling Voice!
Thy Nectar-dropping Joints so played their part,
They forced the Fibers of our heart
To dance: Thy Bow's swift-lightning made the Leero start.
Thou did even saw the grumbling Catlines still,
And tortured'st the Base, until
His roaring Diapasons did the whole Room fill.
LUNA the Pedal richly did adorn;
If 'twixt the Cedar and the Thorn
There Is ought harmonious, 'twas from this sweet Fir Tree born.
As Philomel, Night's-Minstrel, jugg's her tides
Of rolling Melody; She ride's
On Surges down to the Deep; and, when She list's, up glide's.
JOVE Cataracts of Liquid Gold did power,
More precious then his Danae's Shower:
From Pedal-drops to Organ-deluge swelled the Stour.
MARS twang'd a Violin (his fierce Drums for fight
Turned to brisk Almans) with what spr'ite
His Treble shrill'd forth Marches, which He strained to the hight!
His active Bow, armed with a Warlike Tone,
Ralli'd his Troops of Strings, as one,
Which Vollies gave in the chase of swift Division.
So the Pelean Youth was vanquished still
By his renowned Musician's Skill,
Which could disarm, and arm the Conqueror at will.
Last, MERCURY with ravishing Strains fell on,
Whose Violin seemed the Chymick-stone,
For every melting Touch was pure Projection.
Chair'd midst the Spheres of Musick's Heaven, I hear,
I gaze; charmed all to Eye and Ear;
Both which, with Objects too intens, even martyred were.
The Excess of Fairs, distilled through Sweets, did woo
My wavering Soul, mazed what to do,
Or to quit Eyes for Ears, or Ears for Eyes forgo.
Giddie in the change which Sex to crown with Prais;
Time swore He never was with Lays
More sweetly spent; nor Beauty ever beamed such Rays.
'Twixt these Extremes mine Eyes and Ears did straie,
And sure it was no time to pray,
The DEITIES themselves then being All at Play.
The ful-throng'd Room it is Ruin quite defie's:
Nor Fairs, nor Airs are ponderous; Skies
Do scorn to shrink, though pil'd with Stars and Harmonies.
Form, Beauty, Sweetness, All did here conspire,
Combined in one Celestial Quire,
To charm the Enthusiastic Soul with Enthean Fire:
These buoy up care-sunk Thoughts; Their Power endue's
A Castril brain with Eagle-Muse:
When SAINTS would highest soar, They MUSIC Pineons use.
Music! thy Medicines can our Griefs allaie,
And re-inspire our lumpish Claie:
MUSE! Thou transcend'st; Thou without Instruments can play.
Blandulis longum Vale CANTILENIS. E. BENEVOLUS. (...).
November:

