THE CONFESSION, Obstinacy, and Ignorance, of Father BELL, a Romish Priest.

Wherein is declared, the manner of his Trial, Condemnation, and Execution, on
Monday December. 11. 1643.

Together with the names of those that suffered for stealling the Ambassadors
plate; And the names and facts of others who were executed at Tiburne the same
day.

depiction of the execution of Father Bell

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bates, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Old Bailey. 1643.

The Confession, Obstinacy, and and Ignorance of Father BELL a Romish Priest.
Executed at Tyburne December. 11. 1643.
THe Priests and Jesuits under the supremacy of the Pope and Church of Rome, as
they have been the fomenters, contrivers, and nourishers of almost all the
debates, conspiracies, and massacres committed in diverse foreign Nations
(which have afforded them entertainment) in all ages since their first
original and institution; as is apparent by the parricide of Henry the third
King of France, and other Princes (who professed even the same Religion)
inhumanely massacred by them, which would be too tedious particularly in this
place to mention: So to come nearer both to our own times and Nation (for we
shall also omit their maine plots, and contrivances of the death of our late
most illustrious and religious Queen Elizabeth) they were the prime
Instruments of raising the late unparallelled and bloody Rebellion in Ireland,
and the causes of the murdering of above an hundred thousand innocent
Protestants there, and finding that all their plots and machinations would
prove unsuccessefull to advance their own Religion in these three Kingdoms,
unless they kindled the like flames and combustions in England also, finding
much favor from persons in authority in this Kingdom, who suffered them to
go unpunished (although contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom,
they have so brought about their stratagems, as to cause a civil and
unnatural war also in this Kingdom, notwithstanding which designs of their
so apparent to the whole world; it is beyond admiration to think that any of
that viperous brood should be so audacious and still to continue in this
Kingdom. And this may serve to satisfy the world what just cause there is to
proceed against them in Justice for their Delinquency therein. But that which I
intend more particularly to inform you of at this time, is, concerning the
Trial, Condemnation, and Execution of one Father Bell, who being taken by
those who were enabled by the State for that purpose, and laid in Newgate, and
from thence was brought to the Sessions House the last week, where being
indicted upon the Statute, and putting himself upon God and his Country, the
Witnesses proving him to have been a Priest beyond the Seas, and that they had
known him (being an English man borne) say Mass in England, and to seduce
diverse of His Majesty's subjects: Upon which Indictment the Jury sound him
guilty, and the Court proceeded to sentence, which was to this effect: That he
should go from thence to the place from whence he came ( viz. Newgate) and
from thence on a Hurdle to the place of Execution, and there to be hanged by
the neck, cut down alive and quartered, and his Quarters to be set upon the
several gates of the City. According to which sentence he was drawn on a
Hurdle on Monday December. 11. to Tyburne the place of Execution, where being
come, he spoke as follows:

I Stand here to die, and declare unto you all the cause of my coming hither,
nothing being brought or proved against me, but was only condemned for being a
Briest of the Catholic Church; had I been a Heathen Priest, or a Priest after
the Leviticall Order, then I should not so much have wondered at it to h^ve been
put to death in a Christian Land: but that a Catholic Priest should be put to
death by those t^t, pretend to be Christians, and to follow Christ ^ ^is
Gospel, this is that, sensible men will wonder at. But those that have their
judgments blinded, that see nothing, they may proceed to the like they have
done before; and so they do now to me. They pretend Laws, but those Laws as
they were ill made, so they have be^ne worse kept. Now I profess before you
all, and testify here with m^ life, and blood, before God and Jesus Christ his
Son that is to judge, that I die a true number of the Catholic Church.
Being interrupted by one, who said, (...) the Roman Chuch* ^^ies the. If you
(...), with all my heart I distinguish it from any Protestant Church
her^tickes, or Conventicles, and I call it the Roman Church. My parents lived
and died in that Religion, and I for my part have been brought up in the same
faith; and were I to live ^^y longer here* I would profess it to my dying day.
though I were to die a thousand deaths or to suffer never so great Torments.
And this I testify before God and Jesus Christ.

The Sheriff hearing him continue thus obstinate, and speaking against our
Laws and Religion, spoke to him in this manner, viz. Mr. Bell, To go on to
traduce our Laws, and seduce the people, we will not hear you any longer: me
thinks you should think upon death, and desire God to open your eyes that you
may see your blindness. You were not only condemned for being a Priest, but
it was proved against you, and you confessed it, that you were an Englishman
borne, and that you went over to take Orders, and you returned back hither
again; now the Letter of the Law is thus, That an English man borne, going
over to take Orders, and returning back again, the Law interprets that he
comes to seduce the Kings subjects:

There was not one word spoke of seducing.

Mr. Bridges spoke, This is not a time to dispute, Mr. Bell; pray apply your
self to God, and humble your self before him.

Mr. Bell spoke, Here are many people, but I suppose that they are as the
Kingdom is seduced; and if a man labor to reduce them, I think it is good
service. The people are deluded, because they have a piece of the Catholic
Religion; they believe the Incarnation of Christ, and the Resurrection and
Passion of Christ; but what is this? therefore I declare the truth to the
people, that I may further their souls.

Then the people in detestation of his speeches, and of his ways, cried out,
help your self.

Then he spoke again, They that speak false doctrine, do not desire to hear
others; but I tell you, that the Protestant Religion has no divine faith.

Then the Sheriff spoke, Do not scandalize our Protestant faith.

Well, I do heartily forgive all men that had a hand in my death, and I desire
to be forgiven; for I most willingly die in the Catholic faith.

Mr. Bridges spoke, Mr. Bell pray apply your self to God.

I have declared my mind already.

The greater is your infatuation, God has not been pleased to open your eyes;
and as your punishment hereafter is secret, so your judgment here is just; you
know what your own Author Cajetan speaks, Interpaenas Dei mirabilis.

Then he sake again, If I cannot reduce, I do not desire to be seduced.

I am sorry for it: the Lord gives mercy to whom he will, and whom he will, he
hardens.

Then the Minister of Newgate spoke to him, and urged him to repent.

He still obstinately answered, Repent; what should I repent for? I have a good
cause.

Then the Sheriff spoke, Mr. Bell, unless you will speak to the glory of God,
and edification of your soul, speak no more. And so, as in blindness he
lived, obstinately in blindness he ended his days.

Also there was one Captain Towers, that pretended a Warrant for the scarching
of malignants houses, and under that pretense plundered the Countess of
Nottinghams house, and many other houses: and for this (and very justly) was
condemned to die; and being brought to the place of execution, unexpectedly
declared himself to be a Roman Catholic; for being asked by the Minister of
Newgate, whether he died a Roman Catholic? answered:

Yes, I die a Roman Catholic, do what you will with me, I will stand to it.

I, but says the Minister, mind some thing else, you are now come to suffer
death.

Then he peremptorily answered, Well, he and I shall be in bliss ere long. I
come to declare nothing to the world but the faith that I die in, namely the
Catholic Faith: Pray God forgive them that accused me, and I desire to be
forgiven.

And so as Father Bell died, he died very obstinately, living and dying in
blindness and darkness; what was in their minds, whither they should go, and
where they are, God knower; we are not to judge, but to leave this their
Confession, Obstinacy, and Ignorance for all judicious Readers to ponder on it.

Also Tillet and Freeman were hanged for robbing of the Lord Ambassador of his
plate, to the value of 6000. li.

And one Butler for Burglary, breaking open a house in Chick-lane.

Another for robbing of Grayes Inn.

And Man^^^ ^^^ch for murdering of her child.

Printed according to Order.

The true Pourtraiture of the Worthy, Religious, and truly Wise, JOHN PYM
Esquire, Burgess for Tavistocke, now deceased, December. 8. 1643.
portrait of John Pym

Behold this prop to Truth, pillor of pure Religion.
Whose aim, and pains, was to purge our Zion.
In all our straites he was to us a firm friend.
For all our good his dearest strength did spend.

