MARLEBOROVVES MISERIES, OR, ENGLAND turned IRELAND, BY The Lord Digbey, and
Daniel Oneale.

READ and IVDGE, This Being A Most Exact and a true Relation OF THE

Besieging Pillaging, and Plundering Burning part of the said Town.

Written by T.B. W.B. O.B. J.H. who were not only Spectators, but also
Sufferers in that most unchristian action.

Dedicated to all ENGLAND, and directed to the City of LONDON, to show the
abuse of the Subjects, Liberty, and Privileges of their own goods.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Printed by one that Prints the
Truth. 164^.

A True and Exact Relation of all the passages at Marleborough from the first
to the last.
ON Friday, November 25. The lord Digby came against the Town^ with his
Regiment of Horse about 400. in number: And having come to the Towns end, sent
a message by one Master Vincent Goddard, to demand admission into the Town,
but this being denied, he went away, to declare the Towns answer; presently
some of our Soldiers went forth, and let fly at them, and hereupon immediately
they all fled with the loss of some men: So the Town fearing a second
assanlt, they fell to fortify the Town in the best manner they could; And for
their better assistance, they sent to the Earl of Essex, for some Commanders
(having none of our own that stood to us) who sent Two Scotch men unto us, (a
Sergeant Major, and a Captain) who used great diligence in the directing and
giving order for the Fortifications. Then upon the third of December being
Saturday, the Cavaleeres came again to the Town, and hovered with their Horse
about the hills near the Town, but kept themselves out of the breath of the
Town Mus^^^s; by this Occasion, Master John Franklin, the Parliament man, and
the Scotch Commanders, thought it convenient to keep the men in that came to
our Market (it being our market day) and their Horses for the Towns defense.

Then Sunday the fourth of December, the Lord Grandison with his Regiment of
Horse, and Collonell Gray, with his Regiment of ^ragon^ers; came again to the
Town, and showed themselves in sight of the Town, and marched round the East
and South part of the Town, and stayed on the hill a little time, while some
of our Musquetteers fall^ed forth, and got as ^eer them as they could, and shot
at them, whereupon they presently, fled, and so we saw them (...) more for that
day; and then they retreated to a place called Ogbourne, some mile and a half
from the Town, where they stayed that night, only some few came in the midst
of the night, and shot two Muskets against the place where our watch stood,
and disturbed our Sentinels, which caused them to let fly at them at a
venture, and killed those two men that shot, as was confessed by some of their
own party the next day; A Gaundet, a cap, and bloody handkerchiefe was taken
up the next day by some of our men: but this business made a great Alarm in
the Town at that season of the night.

Then upon Monday morning, being the fifth of December, they appeared on the
Northside of the Town, (namely Grandis^n and Collonell Gray) with their
Troops, but as yet they assaulted us not, for they waited for their foot
Regiments, and the rest of the Dragoneers to ^ome to them, and their Ordinance,
which were not as yet come, but yet this kept us in continual Alarmes for
these two days and nights; but between eleven and twelve a clock their Foot
came, at which time they drew nearer to the Town, and began to assault us,
they let ^^ye one volley of shot at us, of their small shot; but (our Town
standing in a Valley, between two hills) it never came near us, all this while
we kept our selves within (...) works, expecting to see their body to come in
the sight of us, and their Horse to draw yet nearer, but they came not on: But
at length Collonell Blake with his Regiment of Foot, creeping behind the
^^dges, and in some ditches thereabout, after they had (as conveniently as they
could come to do it) planted their great Guns against us, having now
approached within Musket shot, discharged at us, and we again answered them
with a brave peale of our Muskets. Then my Lo^^, Rivers his Regiment of Foot,
and Collonell Gray his Dragoneers, with one Culvering, and one Demi-Canon, gave
us another sudden assault in two other places at once, to which our Musketeers
gave them such a brave answer, that they did great Execution among them. So
that we could see many of their men tople down like trees new cut off; So that
there they made them retreat again almost out of our sights for the time.
This assault was made on the North-East part of the Town. And at the same time
Sir William Peniman, and Sir James his Brother, with their Regiment of Foot,
and Collonell Vshers Dragoneers gave an assault on the North-West side of the
Town; but these so hid themselves behind hedges, and lying flat in the
ditches, that we heard little from their Muskets, but only their great Guns
played apace from this place, but did no harm at all to the Town, either to
the houses, or to any man, woman, or child in the Town, for many shots went
over the Town, and those that went low enough to hit, went through some houses
without any other hurt, by Gods mercy, and yet at this place also we did
execution among them, as we could well perceive: though there were but 24. men
to main^taine this fight against this whole Regiment. In this manner we
maintained the fight against them for the space of three hours without any
Intermission, and also, which is most remarkable of all (by the providence of
God) without the loss of one man amongst us: At length our enemies, seeing
they prevailed not, shot Grenades at an old thatched Barn, that stood on the
outside of the Town next them, and fired it: So that a few of our Muskets
that were set thereabout to maintain that part of the Town (seeing the fire)
quitted the place and went away.

By and by the enemy fired another place with a Granadoe also, as is supposed,
and this was a dwelling house behind our men, where our chiefest strength was
placed. So that the enemy seeing the fire, gave a great shout in token of their
joy: And presently came on some of them very desperately: and brake in at that
place which was first forsaken by our Soldiers, which place leads into the
very midst of the Town through one of our great Innes: thus these having
gotten footing in the Town and more following them, they cried out, A Town, a
Town for King Charles, etc. Thus they ran through the street with their drawn
Swords, cutting and slashing those men they met with, whether Soldiers or not,
and so made on toward our other Soldiers, who were y^^ ^^fending in the
works, they came upon them at their backs, and these now seeing the fire
increase more and more, and the enemy come desperately upon them before and
behind, they began to take themselves to flight, and every man to shift for
themselves, (for all our Pikemen and Halbert men, had given over and gone to
hide themselves a great while before) some throwing their Arms down in the
streets, some into the River, and some into houses, desiring to get out of the
Town, they were taken Prisoners in all parts, which way soever they went: for
the Lord Digby with his Regiment of Horse, and Sir Daniel Oneale had beset the
Town with Horsemen, from the East to the West, on the South side. And the Lord
Grandison, and the Lord Wentworth with their troops had beset it from West to
East, on the North side: and their Scouts so kept the West and East passages,
that those that escaped got away with a great deal of hazard and difficulty,
and yet a great many men got clear away and never came into their hands, and
many that they had in their hands also escaped away from them.

But thus they having gotten the town at their cruel mercy: Lamentable is it
to relate their Carriage and behavior in it, for at their entering, when no
defense was left us, when they had no opposition or resistance against them,
either by word or action, they set fire in two other places of the town, with
their hands, of set purpose and malice; though there had been too much fire
already kindled by them: and then at the same time, raging and consuming house
after house, without any stop or hinderance, or any man to help to quench the
flames, but if any men apppeared to such end, they took them prisoners; thus
we had four great fires at one time flaming, in four several places, a
fearful and a very sad spectacle to behold: and at the same time, their
Soldiers breaking up of Shops, and houses, and taking away all sorts of goods,
(...) and carried away all kinds of (...) all (...) of shoes, and boots;
Stockings, ^^^s, and woollen and (...) all ^^^ts, Sheets, Beds, and bolster
casses, cutting up the casses, and (...) streets to be trampled on by ho^^es
and men, also searching m^n and (...) money, and threatening them with Pistolls
and Swords, to shoot, or run them through, if that they would not give them
money; by which means compelling many men to (...) them to the very places
where they had hid their money in the ground, or in other such pl^^^s, (...) at
men or women, calling them Roundhead Rogues, and Roundhead Who^^s, (...) take
up Arms against your King: you fight against the King, you Rogues you (...) to
^e hanged, every man, and to be killed, both man, woman, and child, and your
^owne to be burnt to ashes; but that you have a merciful King, etc. Whereas
God only knows, we took up a^mes and fought only for the King, and to
preserve his Honor, his dignity, and his Laws, against the violation thereof
by such Thieves, Rebels, and Traitors, as they are, and also to defend our
houses from burning and breaking up, and our goods from robbing and stealing;
and the Liberty of our persons from violent oppression, and unjust and cruel
Restr^^^^, and our wives and children from being turned to beg their bread; If
this be to take up Arms or (...) fight against our King; we must then confess
we never knew what obedience Subjects owe, o^ are to perform to their Prince,
nor what kind of Protection a Prince ought to give to his Subjects, if he
protect them not in the property of their goods and houses, and in the liberty
of their persons from ruin and spoil by cruel foes: but indeed we have heard
that this same pre^ence the Rebels in Ireland had all this last year, that
they were for the King, and by the Kings Authority they did all that they did
in Ireland, and so consequently all the Kings good Subjects that either
resisted them in their cursed rebellion; or defended themselves in their own
Right, they must take up Arms against the King and fight against him; But was
not this pretense a fearful indignity and slander to his Majesty, and of
(...) declared by himself; So ^eeds must this pretense of these English
Rebels, (the Cavaleeres ^^^ane) be an intolerable indignity and most insolent
calumny and slander unto the Kings Majesty, however they would be ^ccounted and
called the Kings Army, and the Kings Friends, etc. and likewise the Kings
Gentlemen, but they are thieves.

Yet I dare affirm that we (whom they accuse for fighting against the King)
will be ready and willing at all times and occasions that shall be offered, to
adventure our selves and all we have; for the honor and dignity of the King,
where millions of such as these durst not show their faces, nor yet appear in
the sight of any danger: And we will make this option, that this present (...)
and difference were to be determined by us and them, one hundred of us, to
three hundred of them, we dare to meet them in open field; but we have
digressed besides our purpose, being to make a particular relation of the
cruelty and carriage of these men, in the plundering of our Town; This may not
be forgotten, that one of their company, who seemed to be one that had some
command among them, came into the house of an Gentleman of our Town, Master W.
B. by name, he uttered these horrible speeches, in a most insolent and
insulting manner.

God dam me, ram me, sink me, nine mile into hell,
If ever in Marleborough do any Roundhead dwell.
The Lord Digby also, or the Lord Grandison, we know not well whether, at
another time coming into the same man's house (being a wealthy man, but (...)
who had many children) and tells the man of the house, that he did and would
fine him to pay 500 pound, which should be made ready and paid within four
days; The good Gentleman makes him answer that he could not pay one hundred
pound, for his house had been thoroughly plundered of all he had, and besides
that he had eighteen children to maintain, and nothing left to (...) This
(...) children, (...).

Another among them would give a (...) to teach or tell him a new oath, (...)
never either heard or (...) and well he might have offered to give a greater
^^in the^ that; (...) such variety of ^^ange and ^n heard of oaths, and such
frequency of (...) heard, as (...) ^ay when (...) say, nor (...) other object
to give occasion for any word or speech, yet oaths (...) from their (...)
thick as hail falls, that except hell were broken ^^^se, and the (...) of the
(...) sent among us, we could not hear, nor see more intolerable wickednesses;
Nay, in their plundering, they had no regard to rich or poor, to Roundheads
(as they call them) and those that were of the like disposition as themselves,
for they (...) poor men, th^^ live on the Alms of the Town, that beg the
very bread they (...), and the very Alms house they searched, and ^^^^d, and
the very houses that were burning and consuming by the fire that themselves had
kindled, were not spared from robbing them of the very goods they preserved
from the fury of the ^^ames.

Besides this, the spoil they did among men's goods was as much as their loss
which they (...) away: as in letting out whole Hogs-heads of Oil, and vessels
full of Strong-water, Vinegar, Aquavitae, Treackle, and Spice, and Fruit, and
all this thrown about the shops, sellers, and houses: besides the taking away
and burning of Books, for they took all the greatest Books the Booke-sellers
had in their shops, and all the smaller Books they burnt, (witness John
Hamond by name) for in one of our Booke-sellers houses they maintained a great
fire for five hours together, with nothing but Books and Papers, insomuch
that they had like to have set fire of his house with the greatness of the
flame, for they burned the mantle of the chimney. And in five or six other
places more, adventured the houses by fire also, as the Mayor of the town his
house, and in a man's shop that sels Oil, Pitch, Ro^in, Hemp, Flax, and Tar,
and such ready things to take fire, they had kindled a fire, and so went forth
and left it purposely to burn, but by the care of a neighbor (the man being
not at home) prevented, through the will of God. And at a Woollen Drapers shop,
under his penthouse making a great fire ^^er his shop-windowes, and some two or
three other honest men's houses, which I will not stand to relate the manner
thereof, and yet none of these men's houses took fire.

But to relate all their rage and cruelty were almost endless, for they brake
up the Towne-house, and there they brake the Chests and Coffers, that the
Records and Court-bookes and Deeds and Leases of the Towns land were in, and
carried them away; they likewise brake off the Seals, and rent the writings in
pieces, as also they did to other men's writings: And the towns Grand Charte^
they also carried away, besides two hundred pounds worth of Cheese that was
there laid in for the market, which they carried away every peny-worth: So that
we had thought that Jack S^^^^ and Wat Tylers days had been come again, and
their accomplices had broken in upon us; for they brake up our Prisons and set
Prisoners at liberty that were in on Execution, and delivered them, besides the
spoiling all books of Law Records and monuments. And thinking yet they could
never do mischief enough they brake glass windows, cut and slash men's Table
boards, stools, and Chayres with their swords, besides the frights they put
many women and children to, by setting the points of their swords to their
breasts, and threatening them to run them through, if they did not give them
money, etc. And all the Horses and Carts, that were in the town both good and
bad they took away, many of which were Country men's horses which had been
s^aid here the Saturday before, and on these they carried away our goods; thus
that very thing which was intended for our good proved to our hurt in the
event, and also to the Countries loss.

Thus have I related some of their cruelties, though but the least part
thereof, now also will I speak of their usage of the poor prisoners they
took. So soon as they took any they stripped him of his clothes, especially
the upper garments, and then they demand their money of them, and so search
their pockets and take it from them, so if they had a good hat on their heads,
then one or other of the meaner sort of them, he would change hats with them,
and so they have a poor old hat put on their heads: and after they had brought
a great many together, they compelled them to go into the Town again, just
before their Troops, and so put them all together into a Stable amongst
horses, and tied their arms with cords one to another, not permitting Wives or
Friends to come to them to yield them supply of money or victuals, but with
much difficulty, and in the same manner they led them away the next day being
Tuesday toward Oxford, compelling them to go all on foot in the dirty ways
two by two, as they were bound, because they should go just before the mouth
of their Ordnance, not suffering them to go the cleanest way.

And when they came to Oxford, they were put into a Tower of the Castle a great
height, where they are not allowed any fire or candle, or straw to lie on, but
the bare boards and p^ankes of the room, nor any more allowance then one penny
and farthing a day, which is a penny in bread, and a farthing kan of Beer,
which is half beer half water, by which means many are very ill and
diseased, and some have the Bloody Flux; and all that be returned home, they
look very pitifully with suffering such hard ^^ips, and all men that come
away, they make them pay some forty, some fifty, some three or four or five
pound, but at the least one and twenty shillings six pence as fees, and compel
them to take an Oath, the tenor of which we cannot yet learn; But for Master
Franklin, the Scotch Commandes, and one Master Brown, are something better
provided for, though not much, we do fear; for men cannot come to their
presence but with much difficulty, and if any do, not a word must be spoken
to Master Franklin out of the Keepers hearing: And this is our prisoners
condition at this time.

Now for their number, they carried from Marleborough between a 100. and 120.
but of these but forty Marleborough men, some of which were poor silly
Prentise boys, some others day-labourers and poor simple men of very mean
condition, who neither ever had or handled Arms in their lives, and one among
the rest that we think was scarce ever worth five shillings, who sat
trembling and quaking for fear, poor man, all the time of the fight: And we
verily think would be ready to sink down at the very ^ight of a drawn
sword; others they took away prisoners whose houses and goods were consumed by
fire, and never in Arms neither.

The rest were Country men, and many of them only men that came to the Market,
some others that came along at their heels, when they had got the Towns, who
came purposely to pilfer and rifle for goods also, some of which we know, but
for the town prisoners we can name them, As,

Master John Franklin, Master Robert Brown, Master Thomas Hunt, The two Scotch
Commanders and their two men whose names we know not, John Baylyson, Robert and
William Briant: two Brothers, William Tarrant, Joseph Blisset, Lewis Crapon,
and just 32. more, which we need not name particularly, nor these neither.

But for the number of houses burnt, there was 53. dwelling houses, within
which houses did inhabit just 53. several Families, and the number of persons
in them just 105. persons left harbourlesse without house or goods, besides
seven Barnes all full of Corn, except one which had Hay in it, and also
Stables, Woodpiles, and outhouses that were not taken notice of, nor cast in
this number.

And by this occasion of burning these men's houses and the necessity our other
poor were brought unto, the Country about us sending in their benevolence
toward the relief of the ^^^re among us, there was relieved thereby 600.
Families, and near upon 2000. persons numbe^^^n these Families that had need
of relief.

^he general loss of our Town amounted to 50000. li. in goods, money, and
wares, at the (...) as it is conceived, not accounting the worth of these
houses that they burned: what with (...) spoil they made in men's goods, and in
that they carried away, it could rise to little less (...) the aforesaid sum.

One thing I have omitted concerning their taking prisoners, that is, that they
carried into ^^^ord 190. or full 200. prisoners to make their number great as
they thought; but as I said be^^^, they carried scarce 120. out of
Marleborough: and of them not making matter who they ^^ke: so as they pass
through the Country they take up men they cared not whom to make (...) ^his
number, and compelled them to go along with them prisoners, some from the
plough (...) fields, some from their doors as they came to look forth upon
them as they passed by: (...) they pull out of their houses in the Villages
where they dwelt, pretending they were ^^und heads, or that they had borne
Arms at Marleborough, or else done something or other (...) which they must
go away prisoners. And in all the Villages taking away horses or goods (...)
whatsoever liked them, and wheresoever they quartered, not paying one penny for
horse^^ at or man's meat which they spent, setting their horses into men's Barnes
of Corn, and ma^^^g litter of some, and their horses eating the rest. So in
Marleborough they would make ^^bles of a Linnendrapers and other Tradesmens
shops, or in the Parlours and place of men's ^^ellings, fatching away their Ma^^
and Oats and Hay by force, to give their horse, yea, and (...) sell too for
little or nothing if they found any Cheapmen: sometimes selling that for two
^^llings six pence, which is worth twenty shillings. As to instance in Bibles,
they would take (...), either new or old, and sell them for six pence or
twelve pence a piece.

And for the number of these that came against us was about 7000 horse and
foot, all hungry ^^^ping Thieves: their chief Commanders were these,
Commissary Wilm^^, the Lord Grandison, (...) Lord Viscoun^ Crambai^ne, the Lord
George Digby (a prime beast) the Lord Wentworth, Sir ^illiam Peniman, Sir James
Peniman, (his brother and Lieutenant Colonel) Colonel Gray, ^olonell Blake,
Colonel Washington, Colonel Usher, Captain Leg, and Oneale, etc. and some
^^ve out that Count Mauri^e was there, but we knew not this certainly: ^ome
other Comman^^rs there might be among them who came not to our knowledge.

The number of their slain and wounded men they kept from our sight and
knowledge as ^uch as they could, but they had slain as is conceived above 200
men, many they b^^ied the next ^^^y in the Town, and many they buried in
several places in the fields about the Town, many of which graves we have
since found and seen their dead men in them: some they threw into a ve^^ deep
Well three furlongs from the Town, and many they carried away in Carts, some
say ^^ure or five loads, and cast in a River in their way: but their own
confession in this is the ^^st testimony, for they say that 27. Commanders
fell, and three Cannoneeres were slain, and a ^^eat many men more they lost:
so that it is conceived by the most, that 200. men at the least ^^ere slain,
besides a great many that were wounded; of which wounded men they all or most
^^art died of their wounds, for some were left behind in the Town, and some
carried 3. 4. or 5. ^^^iles toward Oxford, and there left; whose wounds seemed
to be but light to them that saw ^^^em, and yet they proved mortal to them
all, and thereof since they are dead. And yet there (...) as neither man, woman
or child killed on our side in all this fight, only two Contrymen ^^^ere killed
very cowardly as they were running forth of the Town when they made no
resi^^nce: and one of these did report at a Gentleman's house within two miles
of the Town, that (...) was going to Marleborough and would receive their pay,
but intended not to fight for them.

And one remarkable thing we may not omit, that a certain Townesman who was a
Servant (...) the Lord Seymer, who was shot in the thigh at their first entering
into the the Town, who was a friend of theirs, came out of a house where the
Lady (...) was to desire quarter for (...) but they being in a rage, regarding
not his words, cried out, Shoot him, shoot him Rog^^ whereupon he clapping the
door together against them, they shot through the door and wounded him, who
yet lies very ill, not knowing whether he shall recover or no.

Now this same party a little before the first coming of the Lord Digby
against the town, having been in Wales with his Master or with the Lord
Marquess of Hartford, and with the Kings Army also, he ^^tered this speech,
that there was a fearful black cloud coming upon this town; and also when
the town was almost taken, he was heard to say, that now the King had begun
his harvest.

And of all other men, women or children of the town not so much as ^hot.

They had some six or seven great Guns, and a great many shots with them; for
we have found 18. or 20. great Bullets that have been taken up in the town in
several places, besides many that were shot over and so never found. The
weight of these Bullets we have seen were some 22 pound, some 18. pound, some
15. pound weight, and some we saw of 2. pound, shot as it s^eme^ from some
Drake: but of all these sorts we have seen and can show them; And for the
special mercies of God to us in the midst of so great calamities, is not to be
forgotten by us: For of all those houses or barnes that were burned, not one of
the owners that stood in this noble cause, and of many that did show themselves
actors therein, or setters forward thereof, though some ventures and attempts
w^^^ made in their houses by fire, yet they had their houses preserved.

Another is, that a few, even a very handful of men should with such undaunted
courage and resolution stand to defend a town against such a great company,
and yet not lose a man; for all the men that we had that did fight in all this
time, were but 140. men at the utmost: for one Band of men we had under the
command of one Captain Digges, who were in a convenient place both to defend
the town, and to offend the enemy, yet he suffered them not to shoot one shot,
but as we have heard, sent by a secret message that he would stand Neuter: And
many others there were who played the cowards (besides these) when danger
appreached: and the re^^ (...) our men were set to guard at such parts of the
Town where we had no assault at all given.

Another mercy, that in all these great shots against our houses, not ten
shillings in harm^^ done thereby: and many others more we could observe: as one
in their departure from us, and not Wintering here, as it seems they had
intended, if they had not heard of the approach of some of the Lord Generals
Forces, who were coming for our relief, and also in regard they had so much
plundered the Town, they thought here would not be support for them.

Thus we have made a rude but true relation, out of which you may collect what
you please, and omit what you think not convenient to be Printed: And so we
leave you.

All of them your Friends. T.B. W.B. O.B. J.H.

Reader, the reason why this come no sooner in Print, was, the first Copy was
intercepted by the Cavaleeris.

FINIS.

