THE Behavior, Confession, And EXECUTION, of the Four Prisoners at TYBURN,
William Blower, for High Treason; Robert Francis for the Murder of Tho.
Dangerfield, Henry Anthony, and John Morgan for two several Burglarys and
Fellonies.
On Friday the 24 of this Instant July, 1685.
With many remarkable Passages and Transactious, during the Series of their
lives, taken from their own Mouths, after their Condemnation.
ONe main Reason which Induces us to publish this Melancholy Account of the
untimely ends of such as have forfeited their Lives to offend Justice, by
breaking the known Laws, is to deter others from such rash and lawless
Enterprises, as must inevitably end in their Ruin and disgrace; with which,
frequent Examples furnish the word, of which, after many precedent, take the
following.

William Blower Surgeon, of the Parish of St. Allhallows Barkin, being Tried
upon an Indictment of High Treason, for Cliping, Fileing, and Defacing the
Lawful and Current Coin of this Kingdom, and upon proof that Clipings, and
Cliping-Instruments were found in his house found Guilty and received Sentence
of Death on the 18th of July; when returning to, Newgate he betook himself to
his retirement, and for a time was much dejected and discontented in Sighs and
Groans, deploring his sad misfortune, but being comforted by the wholesome
Advice of such Reverend Divines, as in Christian Charity came to fit and
prepare him for another World; laying aside all thoughts of any long
continuance in this; and looking upon himself as a dying man, he betook himself
to Prayer and Meditation, confessing the depravity of his Nature, and
acknowledging himself to be a Sinner in a high degree: they earnestly pressed
him to lay open the secrets of his Heart before the great God of Heaven; and
with all Humility and Prostration to humble himself, and implore Mercy and
Forgiveness, through the Merits of our Blessed Savior who laid down his Life
for Sinners; laying before him the Penitence of David, the Patience of Job, the
humble and submissive Expressions of the Prodigal in his return; the Expression
of the Penitent Jailer, and the dying words of the Thief upon the Cross; the
sorrow of Mary Magdalen, and diverse Recorded in Sacred writ, for true
Penitents, and unfeigned Converts, assuring him that God, in the Name and for
the sake of his beloved Son, our ever Blessed Savior, is at all times willing
to accept of those that repent, and turn from the evil of their ways, and that
he will in no wise rejeect the humble, and those that are of a broken and
contrite Spirit, admonishing him to try and examine himself, for the good and
welfare of his Immortal Soul, of more value than the whole World, and
therefore ought to be highly prised above what he could think or imagine, not
regarding what became of his Body, so that inestimable Jewel arrived safe at
the Heavenly Canaan, and that a bare belief that Christ shed his precious Blood
to save him was not sufficient, but that he must wholly cast himself upon him;
counting himself altogether unworthy of any favor at the hands of the
Almighty, whom he many ways highly offended, but in and through the Merits of
his Blessed Son, who shed his precious Blood to atone for the sins of mankind.

After these, and many the like pious Expressions, a worthy Divine proceeded to
ask him how it fared with him, and how he found himself, as to his State in
another World, requiring him to give him an Account what assurance or hope he
had, etc. to which, with much meekness and humility he replied, that at first,
viz. Immediately after his Condemnation, he found great struggling within
himself, and labored under strange Temptations, his heart not being pliable as
it ought, but that he had earnestly labored to overcome them, and reduce
himself to a calm and pliable temper, fit to take the Impressions of saving
Grace, but could not soon prevail; yet after much serious and fervent Prayer to
Almighty God, to strengthen and enable him to resist and overcome the Tempter;
he found the Tempest or struggling in her Soul allayed, and succeeded by a
sedate calmness, which ever since continued to his great comfort; acknowledging
that he had been a great sinner, and that for his perseverance in many known
sins, God had suffered him to fall under this affliction: Then being asked by
the Reverend Divine, whether he used not Prayer and reading the Holy Scripture,
he answered that the hurry of Business had of late made him somewhat remiss in
those Holy Dutys, but that he was exceeding sorry for his neglect, beging
pardon of God for such his neglect. After these and diverse other sacred
admonitions, they prayed with him, beseeching the Almighty to give him a true
sense of his sins, and a heart sincerely to repent: That he would pardon his
former Transgressions, and have mercy upon his precious and immortal Soul. When
after some other necessary Exhortations and an Application of what had been
urged, he left him in a calm temper of mind, altogether unshaken by fear of
approaching Death, but rather expressing a kind of a joy, or a lacritie that
God had made him sensible of his latter end, and given him knowledge of the
certain Number of his days.

Robert Francis, of the Parish of St. Andrews Holbourn Indicted the same
Sessions as the former; upon his Trial was found Guilty of wilful Murder, for
giving Thomas Dangerfield a Wound in the Eye, with a little stick on the 4th.
of July, of which Wound he dyed in Newgate, on the 5th of the same Month, for
which, receiving Sentence of Death on the 18th. and being returned to the
Press-yard he began seriously to consider what he had done, becoming more
Melancholy than ever, and as muh as stood with convenience, retired from
company, seriously reflecting upon his latter end, saying, what he had done was
rashly, and altogether without any premeditated Malice, that he was
unfortunately coming along and pressed into the Croude out of curiosity to see
the Prisoner, of whom he had little or no knowledge only by report, and that an
unhappy word passing, he pushed at him with his Cane, not imagining it would
have proved of fatal consequence; saying, that he had lived in credit and
reputation, not being given to quarrel, nor transported with passion to a
degree of mischiefeing any person before this unhappy Accident, hoping the God
of Mercys would pardon his sins: As for Death, although it should be his
misfortune to fall untimely, yet he would cheerfully submit to what the Laws
inflicted on him, giving much heed to such as admonished him to be mindful of
his future state, often reading and meditating both before and after he had
notice a Warrant was signed for his Execution, expressing a calm temper and
quiet of mind, speaking cheerfully to such as daily come to visit him, desiring
them not to be troubled or concerned at his mirfortune, since it was befallen
him and could not now be remedied; and that he was sensibly sorry for what he
had done, notwithstanding the deceased was a person of Evil Fame, saying, that
he hoped it would be a warnging to others, thereby to hinder them from such
rash and unadvised Action; and so continued as one extremely sensible of his
latter end.

Henry Anthony, being found Guilty as the former, for breaking open the house
of one Mr. Trevor in the Parish of St. Catherines, on the 23d. of June last,
and stealing three Gold-Rings, a Silk-Hood, and other things of value; himself
being taken in the Fact. After his return to Newgate, promiseing himself a
Security of Life, as is imagined by those that visited him, he appeared not to
be so sensible of his latter end as a person in his condition ought;
notwithstanding to such questions as were proposed by diverse visitants, he
cheerfully answered saying, he had been well educated and carefully brought up,
but being of a rambling Nature, as soon as he was capable he betook himself to
the Seas enterprizing diverse Voyages to Spain, France, and Italy, making good
returns, suitable to his Station, but being out of employ as to Maritim affairs
and his money growing short, he betook himself to evil courses, being rather
persuaded thereto, than any way prompted by his Natural Inclinations, adding,
that he had considerable Relations, but was willing to conceal their Names,
etc. least his disgraceful end should any ways reflect upon their Reputation,
confessing he had been guilty of many Capital Sins, and would not be reclaimed
neither by severity nor civil persuasion, but following his own headstrong
resolution he by haunting such Houses as were frequented by bad Company, he was
drawn in to portake with them in their unlawful Enterprises, one Sin calling on
another, so that in the end he was hardened in Iniquity scoffing at and
dispiseing good Admonitions, which if he had seriously regarded would have
prevented the mischief that was befallen him, but seeing time was past he must
make the best on it, and bear it as patiently as he could hoping God would give
him strength to go through it: and that although he had offended him in a high
Nature, he would in his last Extremity give him Comfort and have pity on his
Soul, and that it might go well with him in the other World. He desired the
Prayers of all good Christians whilst he was yet Alive, being in the End very
attentive to those that gave him good advice relateing to his Immortal State:
But could hardly be induced to pray for himself.

John Morgan, Tried the same Sessions as the former and found Guilty, for
breaking open the House of one Mr. Filkins of the Parish of St. Leonard
Shoreditch, on the 30th. of June last, and stealing two Cloth Coats, a pair of
Breeches, a Crape Gown and other things the goods of the said Filkins, upon his
being returned to Newgate, confessed himself to be an notorious Sinner, and
that after his providential Escaping many dangers, God had suffered him at last
to fall into the Snare: Being asked whether he was drawn in to committ this
Robery by the Alurments of bad Company: he said he never kept any Company that
was so bad as himself, he having been an unhappy proficient in most Vices,
which had in a manner hardened his Heart and obliterated the fear of Death due
to his many Crimes, yet he was not left altogether without hope, for he was
sensible God was a merciful God, though he had but small reason to expect it at
his hands, whom he had so highly dishonored in the Series of his Life, which
was now come in a manner to a Period, and he believed this had befallen him to
give him a sight and sense of his Sins. For the Almighty had as he had (...)
often been informed wondrous ways to bring preverse Wretches home to himself,
and humble them for their past Failings, as for the fear of Death he said it
little troubled him, for he knew he must Die, and to be so cut off was but to
go out of the World a little sooner than ordinary though he could have been
content it had been otherwise.

This being the material substances of what they were Condemned, for the manner
of their Behavior and Discourse etc. In Newgate the six days after Sentance
[viz.] on Friday the 24th. of this instant July, about 10 in the Morning were
brought out of the Goal and delivered to the Sherifs Officers, who in the usual
manner conveyed them to Tyburn the place of Execution, viz. Blower on a Sledg,
Francis in a Coach and the other 2 in a Cart, where being prayed with part of
Psalm Sung and the other usual Offices performed, the Cart drew away and left
them to the mercy of their Creator.

As for the other Nine who received Sentence with them viz. William
Vanderhurst, George Attwell, Samuel Anderton, Thomas Wexl, Nathaniel Page, John
Smith, John Henly, John Somerset and Mary Hancock, they are Reprived.

This may be Printed,

R. L. S.
July the 24th. 1685.
FINIS.
LONDON; Printed by E. Mallet in Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge,


