A TRVE AND FVLL RELATION OF The late Sea Fight, betwixt a Squadron of Ships
belonging to the Parliament of England, and the Queen of Swethlands Fleet,
upon the Coast of England, near Portsmouth, upon Satturday, May 1, 1647.

Also, the manner how Vice Admiral Batten, with the St. Andrew, Garland,
Convertine, and Mary-Rose, met with them toward the Coast of France, May the
3. and brought five of the Queen of Swethlands chief Ships into the Downs.
Likewise the Instructions of the said Queen to the Commanders in chief of this
Fleet, together with their Commissions, and their Design.

depiction of a battle at sea

London, Printed for E. Golding, May 10. 1647.

A FULL RELATJON OF A late Sea Fight, betwixt the Parliaments Ships, and the
Queen of Sweathlands, upon the Coast of England, near Portsmouth, May 1.
SIR,
On the 2. of this instant month, being the Lords day, our Commander in chief
of the Sea Forces, received a packet from a small Frigate, that came from the
Rear-Admirall, who had been in fight th day before with five of the Queen of
Swethlands ships, and eleven sail of Merchants ships, which they conveyed,
being all laden with falt from Tubey in Portingale.

The reason of the fight was, the Swedish ships Wore flags, viz. Admiral,
Vice Admiral, and Rear-Admiral, which they refused to take in, or to low their
top-sales (although commanded by cap. Owen, capt. of the Parliaments
Reare-Admirall so to do.) Whereupon the said capt. Owen gave them a broad side,
insomuch that diverse shot past between them, and great execution done upon the
Switzers, scouring their upper decks with small shot several times, captain
Owen lost not above 8. men, besides some few wounded, the fight continued six
hours, til night began to aproach, where the Swedish Fleet took their
opportunity, and got away. But so soon as Vice Admiral Batteu heard of it, he
set sail with the St, Andrew, Garland, Convertine, and Mary-Rose, and stood
over for the Coast of France in the night; and in the morning about 8. of the
clock, being the 3. of May, near Bulloign, he came up with the Admiral of the
Swedes ship, whose names was Martin Tysin, the ship was called the Leopard, and
had 32 Guns; the Vice Admiral Daniell Johnson, a lusty stout ship, called the
Angel Raphael, and had 24 Guns; the Rear-admirall the Neptune, Moris Cook
Captain, with 1^ guns; the other two ships, of 22 guns a piece, one being
called the Anne-Free; the other, the Neptune.

The Captains of all these sheps, he commanded aboard, and asked them, what
they had done with his Rear-Admiral; they at first denied rhat they saw him,
but he pressing it so hard upon them at length confessed, that they had been
in fight with him, and that the reason was, because they would not take in
their flags, being so commanded by their Queen, and had instructions to thar
purpose, which he caused them to send for, and took Copies of them, which
appeared to be true, in a high manner.

And they further told our Commander Vice Admiral Batten, that they would
rather dye in honor, then to go home and be hanged, for disobeying their
commissions; a brave resolution, and I could wish it were imprinted in the
hearts of all our commanders: they further told him, that if their flaggs were
then abroad, they would die before they made one shot at him, though he shot
never so many at them, yet would not take them in, and indeed were very
respective to him. But they did much blame the Rear Admiral, for that all the
shot he made was at their Vice Admiral, and Rear-admirall, and not at their
Admiral, whom he ought first to have commanded; the others being subordinate to
his commands; and although he was 4. or 5. hours by the Admirals side, never
shot Gun at him, but sent his Boat 3 times aboard. Our Vice Admiral demanded of
them, where the Rear-admirall left them, they told him off Beachy, which to him
did seem strange, that he should begin a quarrel, and not follow them, till
he came near where the Vice Admiral was, having sent a Frigot to him, to give
him intelligence, and might undoubtedly expect his relief.

All Monday was spent in taking of Examinations, and Copies of Commissions; the
Swedish Commanders being detained aboard by our Vice Admiral as prisoners, but
used with great civilitie.

At length a Gouncell of War was called by our Commander in chief with his
Captains, the result whereof was, that the Swedes Vice Admiral, who had been
the man which was most active, was with his ship to be carried into the Downs,
till the pleasure of the Parliament be further known, which was done
acrordingly, and the next day we arrived in the Downs, being the 4. instant;
the rest of the Swedes in regard of theit shortness of Victual, and having
charge of the Convoy, were left to their own dispose, and this was performed
without shooting so much as a Musket; but truly, if the Queen of Swethland
leave not out that peremptory command in her instructions, not to strike to any
of our Commanders, enjoined to keep the Sovereignty of the Seas, and to expect
homage from all, even to sinking, or burning, this must in time, breed ill
blood between the two Kingdoms, which might be wished miaht be prevented, by a
Letter from our Parliament to the Queen of Swethland. Thus have I stiven you a
perfect Relation of the whole proceedings. Sir, I have not else at present, but
to let you know, I am

Your most humble servant, and Kinsman, R. B.
Dated at Sea, off Dover, the 4. of May, 1647.
FINIS.

