A SPEECH DELIVERED In the Commons House of Parliament,

BY That judicious, and worthy Gentleman, THOMAS BEAMOUNT Esquire:

AT The presenting of the Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders,
of the County of LEICESTER,

On Wednesday the 6. of November, 1644.

ALSO A true Copy of the Petition it self, subscribed with above 2000. Hands.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. November. 9. 1644.

The Speech of THOMAS BEAMOUNT Esquire, to the House of Commons, at the
presenting of Leichestershire Petition.
SIR,
THe deep expressions the whole Kingdom has received of grace and clemency
from this honorable House, has encouraged us in our great sufferings, to make
our retreat hither, our Country being almost environed with destroying
Enemies, and our selves continually exposed to loss and danger, these our
miseries (as we humbly apprehend) taking birth especially from two Causes.

One is, our want of a chief Commander. For, whilst the Enemy is spoiling our
Country, the Officers of our Forces, being under no particular Authority, are
so long in disputing who shall go out for our defense, that before they
appear, the Enemy has done the mischief, and is retired.

The other is, our Countries disacquaintance with most of those which sit in
the Commitee, which in some averts, in many lessens a free and lively adhering
to them.

For the common people, of which our strength most consists, do only trust, and
expect an active care from such, whose residence with them has begot
affection, and estates amongst them, gives them an apprehension that they are
involved in the same danger with them. Our present Committee receive nothing
but what they forcibly extort from the Country, wherein they make an
unprofitable purchase: for, though they get some money, they lose many hearts;
whereas if men that have estates and are well known in their Country were
joined with them, the people would generally come in, and offer up all they
have for the advancement of the public good.

For, we have men, horses, and money left, good materials to repair our
decayed Country, if this honorable Parliament (the great Architectors of the
Commonwealth) will please to depute us good Under-builders to prevent a ruin.

In these clouds of trouble that darken our whole Nation, this Parliament is
our only Sun, that diffuseth light to the several Committees of every County;
and they, like Stars, should impart their borrowed shine to us: but if they be
unknown Stars, they do not direct, but distract the Pilot in his passage.

In these our miseries, as we have many sharers, so (if it had been thought
necessary) there had been many more presenters of them to you: but we, in the
name of all, do humbly invocate a gracious and speedy redress, the unhappy
distance of our Country prohibiting our frequent addresses to this honored
place; where having briefly unbosomed our grievances, we humbly leave them to
the wisdom and consideration of this honorable Parliament.

To the honorable House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT, The humble
Petition of the Gentlemen, Freeholders, and best-affected of Leicestershire,
Shows,
THat whereas by the gracious care and wisdom of this honorable House, in
appointing Gentlemen of Judgments and Estates of this County to sit in a
Committee for regulating, and equal disposing of all affairs in it; and by
sending unto us the right honorable the Lord GRAY of Grooby (who first rescued
us out of the hands of Malignants, made the town of Leicester (then ready to be
seized on by them) a Garrison, and gave encouragement and life to the actions
of all the well-affected) with chief Command of all the Military Forces of
this County, the Officers of the Army, being under the power of one, were kept
from emulation and dissension, and the hearts of the County so inclined, that
they were quickly able to resist, and almost to suppress the Enemy: But we are
now (by leaving the best men of the County out of the Committee, in a late
Ordinance for the MILITIA) fallen under the Government of such, whose defects
of number, acquaintance amongst us, and interests in the County, cannot afford
us any probable hopes of preservation, nor the Commonwealth any considerable
assistance; and in the unhappy absence of the Lord GRAY, most of our horses and
Arms are fold, our Soldiers dispersed, and their headless Officers in
continual differences for pre-eminence, whilst the Enemies are so much
strengthened and increased, that the well-affected are daily exposed to the
loss of liberty, their goods to plunder, and their Rents sequestered and seized
on by the adverse party that till of late had never the boldness or power to
attempt it. In this sad condition we have (under God) no refuge but to this
honorable House, the effects and influence of whose great prudence and care,
the Commonwealth in general, and our Country in particular, have so largely
and frequently tasted.

We do again therefore supplicate this honorable and great Council, in ease
of our great sufferings, to send again speedily to us the Lord GRAY, invested
with power over the Forces of this County, that under his command the now
disheveled Soldiers being unanimously collected, we may be again able to give
lymits to the now unbounded Enemy, and to command those Gentlemen that are
appointed to sit in the Committee and do not appear, to repair to the Country
and to serve in it, and to add such Gentlemen of known integrity and interest
in the Country, as may so generally draw the affections of this County that we
may the sooner be wholly freed both of these great miseries and their Authors.

And we shall have always cause to pray for the contingance of happy success
to this just, and honorable Parliament.

FINIS.

