An exact Relation of The defeat given to a party of the enemies horse near
CAMBDEN.

Wherein were taken of the enemies 1 Collonell, 1 Lieutenant Colonel. 2
Captains, 3 Lieutenants, 2 Cornets, and colors, 2 Colors more, whole bearers
fled, 80 Horse, 100 Prisoners, Diverse slain,


By Sergeant Major BEER.

Also a true Relation of some loss at the shege at Newarke.

And a Sermon preached to certain drunken Cavaliers at Priscall, the Text being
MALT.

Whereunto is added a Declaration of a Cashierd Soldier.

Printed for Andrew Coe, according to Order, 1644.

NEVVARKE, March, 18. 1643.
WE hear of a strange accident which chanced at Nuwark, Which however it has
befaln us, I thought good to acquaint you with, lest the same passing through
malignant hands, should increase above what it is, a thing to too common with
that party.

Three Companies of our men lying under the walls of Nuwarke, whether the Enemy
had any notice, or only surmised what after proved true; or whether it fell out
by accident, I cannot tell; but it seems the enemy issued out of the Town, and
our men which were placed on that side of the Town where the Enemy brak forth,
had put out their matches; so that whereas they had good Arms, Musket, Sword,
and every thing complete: neither was their any want of powder, yet the enemy
came upon them just at a pinch, when their matches were all out, so that they
could not do any execution, so that the enemy suppressed three Colors, and
two hundred men, some of them they put to the sword, others they use very
cruelly; but the est will be the more careful. And how ever the Lord is
pleased to let us lose some times; (for no soldier can ex^ect a continual
conquering in Military actions) yet the Lord appears in abundance of good to
us: We have of late had many victories, and however the Enemy may rejoice and
take courage at this, and make a great matter of it, and perhap^ advance it to
a great height, yet let them know that the time will come wherein those misled
souls they have traduced will curse those Papists, Prelates, Priests, Friars
and the rest that have misled them, and therefore we must wait Gods time, whose
deliverance is most glorious in his own time.

Neither has the Enemy much cause to brag, for the siege continues still, and
they are as much straightned as they were before, and as far from hopes of
relief.

Besides we have this day news of as considerable a victory obtained by
Sergeant Major Beer, near Cambden in Glocestershire, in the edge of
Warwickshire.

Sergeant Major Beer, seeing what danger he must oppose, the Ammunition
designed for Gloucester by reason of so strong a party of the Enemies in the
way, did carefully retreat with it to Warwick back again, but not to lie still
when he had done. The valiant Major would first venture himself for the
public: before he ventured the public Ammunition, he drew out a party of
the forces designed for the Convoy, and fell upon the enemies Quatters near
Cambden, the enemy in short time gave ground, our forces pursued, till at last
the Enemy fled: diverse of them throwing away their Arms for haste.

Sergeant Major Beer took from the enemy 1 Collonell, 1 Lieutenant Colonel.
Captains, 3 Lieuteuants, 2 Cornets with their Colors, 2 Colors besides, the
bearers being fled, 80 Horse, 100 Prisoners, Besides diverse that were slain,


Concerning the sending of the Ammunition again toward Gloucester I can say
nothing, but no doubt God will direct them to it, when it will be best for us,
to his glory and our good. In the mean time it is better to lie safe at
Warwick, than to expose it to a hazard, I thought good to acquaint you with
these short passages of news, coming so conveniently to my hand.

CErtain Townsmen of Priscall, hearing of a merry meeting at a certain
Alehouse, met in the fields a certain Preacher, who had lately made a hitter
Sermon against Drunkards, and amongst other opprobrious words, he called them
Malt-worms, wherefore they agreed to take him, and by violence compeld him to
preach a Sermon, and his Text should be MALT, the Preacher thinking better to
yield than to contend with them in their cause, began his Sermon as follows.

The Text MALT.
THere is no preaching without devision, and this text cannot well be divided
into words, because it is but one word, nor into many syllables, because it is
but one syllable: It must therefore be divided into Letters, and those are
found to be four, that is to say MALT: which letters represent four
interpretations, which Schoolmen do use this M Moral, A Allegorical, L
Literal, T Typographicall.

1 Part. M The Moral interpretation is M much, A Aledrinking, L Loses, T Time.

But first to teach you boisterous men some good Manners, at least in procuring
your attention to this Sermon: M Masters A All, L Listen, T to the Text.

2 Part. A An Allegory is when one thing is spoken and an other thing meant;
the thing spoken is Malt, the thing meant, is Oil of the Malt, commonly called
Ale, which to you Drunkards is so precious, that you account it M Mear, A All,
L Liberty, T Treasure.

3 Part. L The literal sense is as it has been often heretofore said, and it
is true according to the Letter, that M much, A Ale, L Little, T Thrift.

Last Part. T The Typographicall sense employeth some what that now is, or that
follows after, either in this world or in the world to come, the thing that
now is, is the effect that the Oil of Malt produces and works in some of
you: M Murder, A Adultery, in all: L loose living: And in many T Treason. And
that which hereafter follows both in this world and in the world to come: is
M Misery: A Anguish: L Lamentation: T Trouble.

Conclusion. I should come to a conclusion, and to persuade you boisterous men
to amend, so that you escape the danger whereinto many of you are like to fall:
but I have no hope to prevail, because I plainly see, and my Text as plainly
tells me, that it is M to A, that is a thousand pounds to a pot of Ale you will
never mend, because all Drunkards are L Lewd, T Thieves.

But for the discharge of my duty, first toward God, and secondly, toward you
my neighbors, I say once again, concluding with my Text, M. mend, A. all, L.
leave, T. tippling. Otherwise, M. masters, A. all, L. look for, T. terror and
torment.

A cashiered Soldier.
HAve I spent all my days in bloody wars,
Been carbonade'd out, been scorcht with scars,
Been scorcht with fire, been blown up like a fly,
Like sulphire mines, into the lofty sky.
Have I out braved the Cannons boarded death,
Been bullet branded, graspe and gasp for breath.
Have J marched over hills? danced through the dirt
Without either hose or shoos, or band or shirt.
When others slept, have I watched night by night?
Dischargd from sleep, each minute expecting fight.
Have J done this, past thousand dangers more,
Made conquest over a world, a world of woe,
And shall I now turn begar, run and trot,
And creep and crave to every peasant sot,
No, by this hand and sword, J scorn it I,
He is unfit to live that fears to die:
To beg is base, as base as pick a purse,
To cheat more base of all, theft that is worse,
Nor beg, nor cheat will J, J scorn the same,
But while I live maintain a soldiers name.
I Will purse it I, the highway is my hope,
His hearts not great that fears a little rope.
Published according to Order.


