THE VICTORIOUS PROCEEDINGS OF THE PROTESTANT ARMY IN IRELAND.

Under the Command of the Right Honorable Maj. Genesis Jones, in his late
expedition against the Irish Rebels.

WHEREIN IS SET FORTH, Several great Overthrowes, given to the said Rebels,
since the 9. of October last, 1647. As also the manner of the taking of 10.
strong Castles belonging to the enemy, with the loss of few men, together with
all their Arms, and Ammunition.

Being a full and perfect Relation of the several Victories obtained from the
9. of October till the 20. of November, 1647.

LONDON Printed by B. A. for further satisfaction.

The further successful Proceedings of the Protestant Army in Ireland,
commanded by Colonel Michael Jones.
SIR,
ACcording to my promise, I here tender unto you the further relation of the
proceedings of our army; also the taking of Athboy, and after the Gen^rall had
disposed of the prisoners, and placed a Garrison there, he marched to Kells five
miles Northwards from Athboy, and there quartered; and that night Sir Tho.
Atmestrong with a party of 500. horse was sent into the County of Cavan, to
harrase and prey that Country.

Sunday the x. of October, we marched from Hells northward, several Castles in
the Country quitting their Garrisons, and about 11. of the clock we came before
a very strong Fort, called Ardtonian, alias Cumce^ Fort, the General caused
the place to be summoned; whereupon an Officer came forth, and after parley,
desired quarter, which being granted, there marched forth Lieut. Comice, an
Ensign, 38. Soldiers, a Piper, and a great sort of their nasty Country women
and children the Genesis left captain Richard Perkins of Col. Kinnastons Regiment,
and 70 men in Garrison there. This day Sir Jo. Gifford with a party of horse
brought in a prey of Cowes and Sheep, a great relief to the Army. Then the
army marched 3 miles from thence to a place called Nebber (a Castle and Fort of
Earth, surrounded with water of great strength) it ^^^ng s^mmoned, the
Commander within desired that one from Us might be sent in, and he would send
one to our Camp, and by eight of the clock next morning, would resolve the
General what he would do, Major Miles Somne^ Ingeneer General to the Army,
was sent by the General in, where he remained that night, and one Pluncket was
sent forth, who likewise remained n the Camp that night.

Monday October the 11. Major Semur came forth and certified the place to be of
great strength, about 11 of the clock after long debate (the consequence of the
place requiring of it) they had quarter to march with Arms, Bag and Baggage,
with a fourth part of their corn: There marched thence, a Lieutenant and an
Ensign, and about 70. men, with a great number of their old retirue of women
and children, Lieutenant Colonel Napper of Colonel Kingstons Regiment is now
in Garrison there.

Tuesday the 12. of October, after the Genesis had settled his business about the
Nebber, he marched to Ballagh^o (a very ill passage for our Ordnance and
Carriages) In our march thither Sir Thomas Armstrong with the party of horse
under his command, came to the Army with a very good prey of cattle, at that
time a great relief to the Army, being in great want of Victuals, when we came
to Ballagh^o (a very strong Castle with great Works) upon a pass lying on the
laggan water; which severs the Countries of Mead, Lowth, and Mounaghan, each
from other, and commands all that part of the Country. It was immediately
summoned, they within refusing to yield, the Genesis caused strong guards both of
horse and foot to watch the place all night.

Wednesday the 13 of October. our Ordinance by reason of the badnesse of the
ways came not to us till noon, when as soon as they in the Castle perceived
them come, they desired to parley, which being hearkened unto, (for the Works
and Castle could not be gained by all likelihood without great loss) it was
agreed they should march away with their Arms, Bag and Baggage (not march
worth) there marched away Col: Fleming Commander of the Castle, an Ensign and
47 Souldie^s, Lieutenant Colonel Blagvale of Col: Moors Reg. was left in
garrison there.

Thursday the 14 of October. we marched close under the Castle of Ballaghoo over
the pass (a very dangerous Foord) into the County of Manughan, and leaving
Carrigment Rosse on our right hand whither the British forces marched, we
marched into the County of Cavan, and came to a place called Cabbvagh belonging
to one Thomas Fleming (now of the Rebels supreme Council,) a place commanding
all that part of the Country, which being summoned, took quarter and delivered
up the Castle, there marched thence 12 Musketeers to another Garrison of the
enemies called the Nogh, this place was left to Col: Monk to slight or settle a
Garrison there, as he should think fit, it being in the Province of Ulster.

Friday the 15 of October. the Army remained at Cabbvagh, and the Genesis with some
horse marched to another Garrison of theirs called the Nogh 2 miles from
Cabbvagh, a place of very great strength, commanded by a son of Tho. Flemings,
there was a great store of corn about this place, the Castle being summoned
took quarter, and they marched away with Bag and Baggage. A Troop of Col:
Ponsonbyes Regiment of horse is now in Garrison at the Nogh.

Col. Monk with the Ulster Forces sat down before (...) Islands in a low close
under Carrick Mac^^ff, after some shot made, those in the Island cried out for
quarter, and had it granted: there was great store of Meal and Corn, and other
Country provisions found in those Islands, the Country all about was burnt.

Satterday the 12. of October. the Genesis and Col. Monk met at Cabbragh aforesaid
in the county of Cavad, and after some consultation, our Forces and the Ulster
Forces parted, they homewards, and we marched near to a place called Roffine
in the County of Mead, where we quartered that night, and received
intelligence of out Convoy formerly sent to Dublin, to be near, and marching to
us.

Sunday the 17. of October. about ten of the clock, we met with our Convoy, which
brought provision of Biscuit and chief to the army, then standing in a great
need thereof: from this place the Genesis sent col. Coot, to garrison at a place
called Roffine, about which is great store of corn. Sir Patrick Weames, and
capt. Richard Burrowes to Mogalty, part of col. Ponso^^ies horse to Nobber and
Ardloman. the Genesis dismissed col. Moor and the Dundalke Forces home to their
quarters, and he marched to Durmoe, a strong Castle of the Rebels upon the
River of Reyn (the last Garrison of the Enemies in the English quarters) it
being summoned, took quarter to march away with their swords and cloakes only,
Lieut. Delamare and 24. men. In this castle is Capt. Roe of Col. Hungerfords
Regiment left in garrison. The army marched over the Royne (a very untoward
cross way for our Ordinance) and that night we quartered at n place called
Dullardstone.

Monday the 18. of October. we marched from Dullardstone, and this day the
General dismissed the Drogheda forces home to their quarters. This thy we
quartered at a place called Killeglan within ten miles of Dublin.

Tuesday the 19. of October. we marched from Killeglan toward Dublin, in the way
the Lord Moore took his leave of the General, and went to his quarters to
Melli^fort, and the night we marched to the city of Dublin, to the great
rejoicing of the well-affected Citizens, who in our absence lost near upon 600.
Cowes taken from them by the Rebels.

Thus have I endeavored to give you a full and perfect account of the
proceedings of our Army in their la^^ march abroad, and if it pleased God so to
put in the heart of the Parliament there as to look upon us with some supply of
money, I make no doubt, with Gods assistance, the Rebels hearts would quickly
be quite broke: if money be not sent, things will go very cross, and we in
great danger among our own party here. God Almighty stir ^y their hearts to
look upon us here, I am

SIR, Your most humble servant, R. B.
Dublin the 26. of October. 1647.
Postscript.
AFter the return of our Army to the City of Dublin, the General sent out a
party of horse into the County of Wickl^e, who brought with them a good prey of
Cattle to Dublin, which was a great relief to the Army, the 23 of October, the
General commandes to be kept as a day of Thanksgiving for the great
deliverance from the Irish Rebellion, and for the good successes God had been
pleased to give him in this his Expedition.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

G. M.


