A Bright STAR, Leading to, and Centering in, Christ our perfection. Or a
Manuell, entitled by the Author thereof, The third part of the Rule of
Perfection. Wherein such profound Mysteries are revealed, such mysterious
imperfections discovered, with their perfect cures prescribed, as have not been
by any before published in the English Tongue: faithfully translated for the
common good

For he that is entered into his rest, he also has ceased from his own
works as God did from his. Heb. 4. 10. London, printed by M. S. and are to be
sold by Henry Overton in Pope's Head Alley. 1646.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
AS in the world all men are not of an equal height and stature of body, but
some taller, some shorter; some weaker, some str^nger: so neither are all of
one just and even pr^portion in spiritual light and str^ng^h of faith in the
kingdom of Christ, some are dwarfs of Zacheus his pitch, some again of Readiness
port, taller by the head and shoulders then his brethren; so, the Kingdom of
Christ; some are babes, some are children, some are young men, some are
Fathers, every one according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

Therefore that the bruised reed may ^ot be broken, nor the smoking flax
quen^hed till judgment be brought forth to ^ictorie, there m^st not new wine
be put unto old bottles, nor new cloth patcht to ^ld garments, neither yet
must either be ^eglected, but both carefully preserved by ^e suting of each to
other; for that purpose the scribe instructed unto the kingdom of heaven has
in his treasury things new an ^old; not only old, nor only new, but old and
new, able to fit each size, and to suit to each capacity; not only beating one
base, nor harping blindly on one string, nor ever puzling about the first
rudiments, an^ foundations of the Doctrines of Christ, stinting the progress
of them to perfection by tying them to one form, and keeping them to one
lesson, being either unable or unskilful to top up the work, and to bring
Israel not only out of Egypt over the red sea through the barren Desert and
serpentbiting wilderness over Jordan into Canaan, but there to give them a
Sabbath of rest and cessation from all their troubles, going on from strength
to strength, from faith to faith, from light to light, sorting his
dispensatio^s to the suitable capacitie^ of all sorts, that none may go empty
away driving gently the tender little ones and the females great with young,
bearing also an^ suckling the insant helpless babes in the warm bosom of the
spirit of tender lov^ giving milk to babes and strong meat t^ men able to
digest the same, their wits being exercised to discern both between go^ and
evil.

The waters issuing from under the threhold of the Temple at the first thousand
^aces measuring were but to the anckles, ^hallow for children, at the second
casting of the line it was to the knee, thence to the chin, and at the last
unpassable; showing the varieties of sweetest delights and soul-solacing
comforts adapted and squared forth for every degree, stooping to the meanest
capacity, yet not there leaving them where it finds them, but training and
trading them along till it has brought them to the profound depths where the
vessels of greatest capacity may flote as the arc on the top of the Deep.

I having therefore observed the ever to be bewailed non-proficiency of many
ingenuous spirits, who through the policy of others, and the too too much
modesty and timerity of themselves, have precluded the way of progress to the
top and pitch of rest and perfection against themselves, as being altogether
unattainable, and have shortened ^he cut with a Non datur ultra, and are become
such who are ever learning, but ^ever come to the knowledge of the truth:
^otwithstanding that no less true then old ^aying, Not to go forward is to
go backe^ard* P^ore souls after many years tra^ell being found in the same
place, going the same pace without fruit, as if they had reached the highest at
the first, and that there were not yet more excellent things, heighths,
lengths, breadths, depths of sweetnesses and fulnesses beyond measure in the
Abyss of the Divine Vision.

That therefore the brightest Sun might not be clouded, and the cleerest glory
veiled from the eyes of poor suitors; I have been induced to attempt the
publishing of this most excellent and spiritual piece of incomparable price to
the use and view of the more common and vulgar people in their own Mother
tongue, not doubting but the light breaking forth, it shall find
entertainment, and lead and cause to grow up as calves in the stall.

It Is true, the argument is perfection, high, hard, and indeed almost unheard
of amongst us, though the Apostles practice in himself, Phil. 3. 14. and 15.
and precept unto the Hebrews cap. 6. 1. all things ^end to perfection, groan
after perfection* are at rest in perfection, and are restless till perfection.

And truly the method is so orderly, the arguments so convincing, and the
experience thereof so insensibly penetrating the secrets and inwards, that I
doubt not but upon the due and serious consideration hereof, many shall fall
down and say, Surely the Lord is in it, or as Jacob, Surely the Lord is and
was in this, though I knew it not; but I must admonish thee that this is the
third and last part of The rule of Perfection, and therefore begins where
they end; this is as the uppermost step in Jacobs Ladder, this end reaches
into the heavens, as the other has it is foot fastened on the earth, this is
the top of our ascent to God, the other the lowest of his descent to us.

The first is called the exterior will consisting in all practices and
exercises of the outward man in full latitude to the law of God.

The second is called the interior will con^aining of, and consisting in
contemplation and sweetest meditation of the innerman, whereby the soul has
delitious touches and tastes, amorous embraces and twinings of arms with her
love, yet is this but the act and image of the soul being so far below and
short of God and his real possession, as the image is short of God, and
imagination short of fruition.

The third is called essential will, which is ever practiced in the life
supereminent where not man but God acts, lives, and is, and all other beings as
false are annihilated by him, then, and there alone is God all in all.

This first, second, and third part may ^e compared to the outward, inward and
inmost Temple; all might enter the first court, so must all enter the first
part, the practical obedience of the outward man; none but the Priests might
enter the inner, so none but those that are made Priests and Kings to God can
enter the second part, which is the interior will practiced in spiritual and
Divine meditations. Into the third none entered but the High Priest Jesus
Christ, so none can enter into this life supereminent but those who are
anointed with the unction of God, having Christ formed in them, and having
such a high Priest have boldness of access to the things within the veil.

Now, as none could enter the Holy of holi^^^ ^^^ping over the first and second
Temple, b^t must pace, trace, and pass step by step from one end to the other
of the outward (...) in^ar^ Temple, before they could app^^ach the inmost: so
none can make escape into this third Will, but he who has made due progress
foot by foot through the obedience of the exterior will, and contemplation of
the interior, except it be by rapture. And as at the last the veil of the
Temple was rent in twain which was the partition wall, that so all might see
the Arc, Mercy-seate, etc. and nothing be hid from their eyes: so, although
whilst we are in the outer, we are not in the inner, whilst we are in the
inner, we are not in the inmost Temple or will of God: yet they lead so one
to the other, that they leave not until they come to the inmost of all. And as
the three Courts were but one Temple distinguished into Courts, so these three
are but one will distinguished into outer, inner, and intimate. It Is possible,
Reader, thou should expect something in commendation of this Treatise, but it
is of age to speak for it self, and is licensed by the most learned and
judicious. Again, wisdom is justified of her children: Truth needs no
praise of men: thou must remember the Author was a man, and Elias the man is
subject to infirmities, his heavenly treasure is in an earthly vessel, thou
should do well to try the spirits, and from within to approve or reprove. To
me I confess he speaks divinely, and on this s^bject second to none; but mine
eyes are not thine: its in Gods light alone that thou and I shall see light.
Only Reader let me leave this with thee, this Treatise, search it and discover
it, such subtle, secret, thin, spiritual, and almost indiscernible
imperfections, with cures unto each of them applied, that what thou have most
of all admired as most excellent, endeavored after as most worthy, and rested
in as most happy, that I say he shall in the strength of God strip thee of and
shame thee with.

Remember also that the perfection he here drives at, is an uncreated
perfection not to be sought for or found in the acts, thoughts, mind or will
of man, acting, doing and being something, though never so heavenly: for these
shall never be found the best perfections, having their imperfections: but this
is a passive perfection, wherein we ceasing to be of our selves, God only now
is being, doing and working, drawing forth his beauty in us, and putting his
glory on us, that man might have wherein to glory, not in himself, but in the
Lord: and this shall be done to him whom the Lord will honor.

I intend it for experienced Christians who shall be able to set to their seal
tha^ God is true. And thus not doubting the good success hereof amongst the
children of light, the taught of God, who run and read the hidden and deep
things of God, I recommend both it and thee to the word of God and his grace in
the face of the Lord Jesus Christ, being thine assured in the unity of the
spirit, and bond of love.

Giles Randall.

The Contents.
Chapter the first. THe Essential will of God is God. Page 1 Nothing is in
God, that is not God. p. 3 The difference betwixt the interior and the
Essential will p. 10
Chapter the second. NO means to the vision of God, but God Page 11 Highest
contemplations are strongly to be borne down p. 12 The Will of God is only
received, when we are passive p. 13 The will of God is then only comprehended,
when it comprehends us p. 14 Man's mean too mean to rise to God. p. 15
Chapter the third. ADivine mean without all mean to the vision of God p. 17.
and 18
Chapter the fourth. THe subtillest imperfections are in the simplest
contemplations p. 23. etc. Three maine imperfections, hindrances to this
vision p. 28. 29 Three points of perfection contrary to the three former
imperfections p. 30
Chapter the fifth. SAcred desires are not to be destroyed, but perfected in
God p. 30. 31. 32. When, where, and how good desires are to cease p. 34 The
change of desires contains 3 things. First, a clear manifestarion of the
things desired page 36. etc. Secondly, a full satisfaction of the desires with
the things manifested p. 40. etc. Thirdly, the desires being full rest, and
desire no more p. 44. etc.
Chapter the sixth. NO joy comparable to the joy of Union with God p. 48, etc.
May by his own actions wanders from God p. 51. 52 Purgation of the soul the
work of God. p. 54. etc.
Chapter the Seventh. NO distance twixt God, and the mind illuminate p. 60
Light and Law the continuance of Union. p. 64. etc.
Chapter the Eighth. NOthing is but God, and his Will. p. 69. etc. God is all,
in the creature nothing. p. 72. The creature is nothing but a mere dependence
p. 76. etc. The creature a something nothing. p. 78.
Chap. the ninth. ALl things good in their own being. p. 80 Sin, not man the
fount of Error. p. 83 Sin, not being is to be destroyed p. 85
Chap. the tenth. TWelve close, and unheard of Imperfections disclosed, and
their cures discovered: from page 88. to page 102.
Chap. the Eleventh. THe presence of all things nothing'd by a twofold
annihilation p. 106 Wherein Active, and Passive Annihilation do consist p. 108
Passive annihilation tends to fruitive love, and Active to practick p. 111
Chapter the Twelfth. LIght and remembrance chiefly considerable in
Annihilation p. 114 A full description of light. p. 115 A full description of
remembrance. p. 120
Chap. the thirteenth. TEn hidden imperfections, and Impediments to Active
Annihilation unvailed, from page 122. to page 131. The cure of them all. p.
131. to 134
Chapter the fourteenth. THe proper times and places for the practices of
Active and Passive Annihilation: from page 135. to 137. Exterior, Interior, and
intimate workings are good, and not to be forsaken in their proper place p.
137. to 141 Passive Annihilation, and fruitive love, not to be forsaken for
the Active, and practick page 141. to page 146 Men's best works enemies to true
rest. p. 146 Distinctions between true and false rest. p. 148. to. p. 152
Chap. the Fifteenth. OUtward working mysteriously changed page 152. to 156 No
true Annihilation in willing Imperfection page 159 Impure working falls short
of perfections. page 160. to 167
Chap. Sixteenth. Christ's passion always to be eyed, and not neglected for
the glory of the Godhead page 167. to 179
Chap. Seventeenth. THe Godhead, and Manhood to be seen together and in the
Passive. p. 179. to 189
Chap. Eighteenth. CHrist and his Passion to be practiced in us p. 189. to 200
It is better to feel then imagine Christ crucified p. 200. to 210
Chap. Nineteenth. CHrist most abased, most to be embraced p. 210. to p. 220
Chap. Twentieth. THe Godhead is known in God-man alone p. 220 to 224 God
humaniz'd is the divine mystery. page 224. to 228 The flesh clothed Godhead
is suited to our capacity p. 228. to 229 The sign of the Godhead draws not
from the manhood p. 230. to 238 The fullness of the Godhead in the suffering
of the manhood p. 238. to 241 If God were as verily found, as man upon the
cross, and both known to make but one person, we should aspire no higher,
then the cross of Christ page 241. to the end.

THE THIRD PART of the Rule of PERFECTION; Of the Essential Will of God
practiced in the Life Supereminent.
CHAP. I. That the Essential Will of God differs nothing from God. The
difference betwixt it and the Interior Will.
NOw having finished what we had to say of the two first parts, Exterior and
Interior, comprising the Lives Active and Contemplative, we come to the third
part pertaining to the Essential Will and containing the Supereminent Life.

This Essential Will is all Spirit and Life, clear, abstract and pure of it
self; denuded and unclothed of all forms of all Creatures bodily or
spiritual, subject to time, or Eternal. Nor is it apprehended by any sense,
Judgment or Reason of Man, but it transcends all humane conceit and capacity,
inasmuch as it is nothing distinct from God himself; and i^ neither a thing
separated from God, nor a thing conjoined or united with him, but precisely Go^
himself and his own true Being*

For, whereas this Will is in God; it follows that it is God because in God is
nothing which i^ not God.

For, if in God were found an^ thing which were not God, then were there some
imperfection in him; since (without exception) all things are imperfect which
are any ways distinct from him. But, such a difference betwixt his Being and
his Will, would leave him very unperfect: for, then he could not be a simple
Being and pure Act, which all the Fathers affirm he is: but must admit
Composition attended with many Defects. For, so he should have somewhat in one
part, which in another he wanted, nor could he have all in every part. He
should possess some perfection in one part, whereof he were destitute in
another. And so could he not be infinite in all kind of perfection. Yea, he
were bereaved of his divine Nature, if his Will were separated from his Being;
because he should then be concluded finite in both: For, where his Will begun,
there should his Being end, and there should his Will end where his Being
begun: Both because he should be concluded finite; If finite, limited; if
limited, created; if created, a creature, but not a Creator and God: And
again, because if he were limited, he must needs be limited by somewhat. But
if any have limited him, then is there some greater then he: And consequently,
he cannot be called God, then whom a greater is found.

Furthermore, if his Will could be separated from his Being, by whom shall we
imagine such separation to be made? Not by the Creature; for it could not: Not
by the Creator, for he would not. The Creature could not; for, there was no
such: God would not, because in each part of him he loved himself alike. If
you say they were separated from the Beginning; you make two Gods from the
Beginning. If by and by after the Beginning, that crosses Reason, and cannot
be: since the Alone-God inasmuch as he is one, he cannot be separated; no more
then being one, inasmuch as he is One, he cannot be divided. And if we may
behold the very creatures, as Fire and Water, whose nature is no more than a
beam or spark of the perfection of this Divine Nature, so to maintain
themselves in their Unity and Entireness, as not only not to separate
themselves, but also being separated, to reunite and incorporate; How much more
then must we grant that perfection of Unity to that Nature which natures all
these? But, let us grant that this Nature can be separated, and that it has
indeed so come to pass; neither of them can be God: because neither of them
is infinite: for as much as Infinite admits no second.

But to what purpose do I allege so many reasons to prove so palpable and
known a Truth, as that Gods Will is God himself: when the general Consent of
all the Fathers witnesses the same? whereupon says Saint Hilary, God, who is
Light, subsists not o^ Compounds: Nor, who is strength, is held together of
weak parts; Nor, who is Light, is made up of obscure pieces; Nor who is
Spirit, is framed of unequalls: All that is in him, is One: So that his Will which
is in him is himself, and is his Being or Essence. For whatsoever he has, is
every way the same that he is. Also, the Master of the Sentences. The
simplicity and purity of this Being is such, That there is not any thing in it,
which is not it: but he that has, and that which is had, are the same. Again,
the other says, God is not of Compounds as Man, so that in him that which is
had should be one thing, and he that has it another. But, all is Life and
Nature, viz. perfect and Infinite, and not composed of parts different, but it
self living through the whole. And Boethius upon the same says, This is truly
One, in whom can be no number, nor other thing in it, but that which is it,
neither any thing subject to it. Saint Augustine also says: In the Substance
of God, there is not another thing which is not Substance, as if there
Substance were one thing, and accident another; but whatsoever can there be
understood, is Substance. But, these things may easily be said and leeved; but
without a pure heart they can never be seen. And in aanother place. So is had
in the Nature of every one of the three, that he which has is that which he
has as an unchangeable and simple Substance. Whereupon Isidorus says: God is
simple, whether in not losing what he has, or because he has not one thing
which is not he, and another which is in him. All which Authorities do largely
prove that the Will of God is God himself. Even the same simple and sole Being
with him.

Wherefore, first of all I admonish the Reader in his seeking and contemplating
of this Essential Will, not to have recourse to any Images, forms, or
figures, how subtle or spritely soever. But contrariwise, leaving them all, as
unworthy of this Will, and altogether opposite thereto; let him behold the same
as in it self it is, even the Being of God far transcending all created
things, and also himself. Again, I desire that this point be carefully
observed, because the perverse habit of our understanding which cannot behold
the same without some form, makes this error familiar.

Note also, that the two precedent Wills are to be drawn and reduced to this
whereof we now treat; And all our actions, outward and inward, bodily and
spiritual, to be perfected in this Will. 1. viz. To wit or that is to say, In
the unity of the Divine Being, without any backsliding at all. And if this word
[Will] seem to stumble any man, by raising some Image, or bringing to mind
some other Object, then may he at his pleasure let it fall, and hold fast the
word [Being] or [God,] though indeed not so much matter need be made of the
word, as for the simplification of the mind, which in these three words, Will,
Being, God, discerns one and the same thing.

Now, betwixt the Interior and Essential Will ^s this difference. The one
goes before, the other follows. The one is the mean, the other the end. The
one interior, the other intimate: the one unitive, the other transformative.
The one almost essential, the other altogether. The one has certain Images,
yet very subtle: the other is pure, naked, and without all forms. In the one
the soul yet moves somewhat, in the other she is at perfect Rest. In the one
she is active, in the other passive, as receiving the influence and intimate
operation of her Bridegroom. And as the Interior arises from the Exterior,
so the Essential arises out of the Interior.

CHAP. II. That this Essentiall-Will may not be come to, by any mean of Man:
with Reasons assuring the same.
HAving now understood the Nature, perfection, and height of this Will, it
follows that we prescribe a mean to attain thereto. A mean I say, without
mean. For, it is impossible that any act, meditation, thinking, aspiring or
working can be of sufficient force thereto. No discourse, exercise nor Rule,
nor any mean to be here enterposed betwixt God and the Soul: But even this
only End without any mean to draw us to it, and raise us to the blessed
vision and contemplation thereof. And this accords with St. Bon. who says,
that here the highest speculation of all others, as that of the Trinity by St.
Dyon. is to be left: Not, that the same is not good and excellent, but because
there is another more supreme apprehension in the mind of Man, by which only
the highest spirit is most wonderfully arrived in the Eye of the understanding
must be strongly borne down, because in this Contemplation 'twill always
apprehend that which the affection tends to: whence it is that the greatest
stay in our Rising is the strong-cleaving of the understanding to the Desire,
the which must nethelesse be strongly borne down, because it conceits either
phantastically, circumscriptibly or in some limited manner. And still as much
as in this Rising the understanding mixes it self with the desire; so much
impurity is there. And again, as far as the eye of the understanding is
blindfolded (which will not be done without hard practice and labor:) so much
is the eye of the desire in her reach mounted more freely and eminently without
compare. And now, the desire is to forsake all consideration and love of
sensibles, also the beholding of all Intelligibles, and rise up pure without
admixttion of the understanding to that satisfyer of her longing whom in her
extent she knows, that she may be the more intimately united to him. For,
since this being is plainly supernatural, it falls not within the bounds of
sense or understanding, surpassing man's capacity it cannot be comprehended.
It Is not laid hold on but without us; but, when we bend to any yearnings or
acts whatsoever, we remain within our selves. It Is not received but when Man
suffers: But the Soul producing acts is agent. This being is above us, but our
own acts below us. And therefore says St. Bon. we are here to desist from
all natural incurvation and perception. All thinking in operation how spritely
soever it be, is less then we. But this being is greater.

The double look is quickly gone;
The single eye stands fixed in one.
He therefore that stoops to the Creature, I mean to any Mean, act, or
operation perceives not the Creator. That this being may be received, it only
must be minded; but intellectual discourses glide us away. It Is then only
comprehended when it comprehends and possesses us, which befalls not so long as
we are entangled in our own thinkings, acts and workings. It Is most simple,
therefore unconceivable to any other but a thoroughly refined understanding. No
searching knowledge is able to transform; This is the office of Love only. So
often as the senses or understanding are distracted about any working, the
soul is also posted to the same object, and must needs consequently be
writhen and bended below her self, and cannot therefore fly above her self.

And thus it is evident that in this matter, no help of any Mean of Man is to be
sought: Nor is it once to be thought that this Being may be approached by any
Reason or discourse of the Understanding: but contrariwise, such discourses and
acts are to be utterly abandoned, and all working of the Understanding, to be
strongly held below, as Dion to Timothy: See (says he) that in rising to
mystical Visions, viz. The Divine Being, thou forsake thy wits by a strong
contrition and all workings of thy understanding, and all knowables and
invisibles; and arise as unknowingly as may be possible to the Vision of him
which transcends all substance and knowledge.

I therefore conclude: That since all aspirings, meditations and discourses are
here of no use, and since the wit, judgment, and reason of Man must fall
before the Divine Glory; And since all acts and workings of the Understanding
are to be forsaken; I conclude I say, that no humane or active Mean may be
found to attain thereto. This Being can no otherwise be comprehended then as
it gives it self to be comprehended: Nor otherwise understood then as it opens
it self to be understood: Nor be seen in any other manner then as it gives it
self to be seen: No^ be tasted, known, possessed, but as it gives it self
to be tasted, known, and possessed. It suffers it self to be comprehended,
when, how, and by whom it pleases. It offers it self to be understood, tasted
and enjoyed, when, how, and by whom it lusts. But our intellectual powers
are unusefull and good for nothing.

CHAP. 3. Of the first Mean. A Mean to be found without a Mean: Passive, not
Active, nor consisting in Acts of the Mind. And the same twofold.
ALthough as we have showed no mean of Man is of sufficient power to attain
the Vision of this Being; yet a divine Mean may be found able to compass the
same: And though not Active or Actual, wherein Man may do somewhat; yet
passive or essential, wherein Man doing nothing, suffers. By reason of which
resting from action I call it a Mean without Mean; For, as thereby it is
granted us to attain our highest felicity, and therefore it may be rightly
termed a Mean; So, inasmuch as all workings of the Mind are therein to be
forsaken, it is without Mean, since all Mean requires such workings. Or rather
you may call it a divine (and not humane) Mean* because there the Spirit of
God does all, the humane nothing. God only does; the soul only suffers: And so
she is immediately unite^ to God without any Mean (as sa^ the Fathers.) The
Head of our Spirit is that Understanding which i^ the Saints is immediately
united t^ God. That ri^^ng which is calle^ [by unknowing] is no other the^ an
immediate motion through flames of Love, without all glass^ of the Creature,
without forethinking; also without motion of the Understanding, that the desire
alone may touch; and the searching knowledge in the Actual exercise, know
nothing thereof.

Now to close all in a word: This Mean shall be no other, then even the
Continuation of the same Will by constant pursuing it without stay, and by
persevering in the tract or course thereof, already known and tasted in the
Interior Will, till it bring us into the Essential. And so, (as we have
promised) it shall appear how this sole point of the Divine Will contains the
whole spiritual life from the very first Rudiments of the Active to the spire
of the Contemplative and supereminent, without any need to turn aside from it,
to forsake or inchange it, forasmuch as in it self alone, it stands for the
true Beginning, most perfect end, and happy Mean.

And this Continuation may be had two ways. 1. By the naked Influence, sweet
operation, and most intimate Inaction of this alone Will, by the which it
annihilates all the acts of the soul, simfiplifying and supping her up in it
self. The other Mean stays not upon this working alone, but also superads
some curious sleights on our part; Not that the same be exercised in Acts of
the Mind; for, so far is it from that, that quit^ contrary, they wait to hold
dow^ all workings and to keep her naked: Of which Means the first i^ more
proper and agreeing only (or at least chiefly) with thos^ who have beeen
trained up in thi^ work. The other lies more open* not looking on these only,
but extending it self also to others wh^ have not walked in this way, bu^ in
some other, and yet have no^ reached this eminent degree and blessed end; The
one pertaines to those that have relisht this Interior Will and the Lure
thereof; The other suites no less with these then with those others who never
had any experiment of the same. The one is theirs, on whom the air of fervor
and devotion blows; The other is for those also who have only an intellectual
Devotion. The one is not always so certain: the other perpetually secure. In
the one this Will by sugared influences and familiar Allurements adornes the
soul: In the other, the Bridegroom seems at first to stand aloof and let
her adorn her self. In the one is found a certain sensible Devotion flowing
from the knowing powers: But in the other (especially in the Beginning) she
mounts above al, both wit and understanding; And there is God seen, and by
naked love held and enjoyed. Though for all this, in conclusion these two ways
fall into one, lead to the same end, and are tasted in the same manner.

Let every one therefore take to himself which of these 2 Means he finds
allotted him; and not entangle himself in both at once: of which the second is
perfecter in the Act Annihilation.

CHAP. IIII. The first Point. Four principal points of the first Mean, with
a Declaration of the first.
THe first Mean contains four points, by which the tract of this Will is
followed, and being insisted in is prosperously finish^ and spent in the
Essential. The first whereof is a secret blush at the Imperfection of her
Eyesight. The second, a flowing of the burning desires into God. The third, a
perfect Denudation of the Spirit. The fourth, an everlasting presentnesse and
instant full vision of this object and most blessed end.

For the first, most certainly, there is no conte^plation so elevate, but may
yet be raised higher: no thought so abstract, but may yet be more abstracted:
No light so multiplied, but may yet grow lightsomer: No pull so violent, but
there is yet further to go: No conversion so simple, but it may yet be more
simplified: Nor lastly any union so close, but may yet be made closer. Yet,
that it can be so and yet is not so, is to be imputed to us and our defect,
not unto God who desires no other thing, nor can but infinitely desire to
communicate himself.

All our Contemplation then has some cloud; All our Abstractions, some
concrete Image; All our light, intermixed darkness* All our Attractions, some
Retraction; All our conversions, some turning away; All our Unions, some
partition [how perfect soever they be,] and that through our own defect. But
because the fine^ our Imperfections be, the more they pass undiscerned and
uncorrected: Therefore, these failing^ being most secret and impalpable* are
seldom or never discovered much less smoothed with the la^ file.

Where is to be noted, that the purer and more illuminate the Mind is, the
more curious and invisible are also her deceptious; for else she would
discern and know them. But in this supereminent lif^ the Mind is far away
most refine^ and highly illuminate: It follows therefore that her deceptions
be also secret and hidden. Ergo, they be strongly deluded, who in this life
weigh their spots and blemishes in the same, and no tickler balance then in
the other Lives: Not minding that in what measure the mind grows in purity, in
the same measure also Nature more closely seeks her self. And although these
Imperfections seem small, yet bring they no small disadvantage: since herein
Contemplation the smallest print of Knowing, the least working of the Wits,
Image how abstract soever (the Passion excepted) and the shortest distraction
that can possibly be conceived, do stop the high flight, and the enlarging or
out-spreading of the Mind: Yea even the smallest Immortification, Affection,
or search of Nature, clogs the most high spritely rising. Wherefore they err
very much who in this Life do swallow and pass by lightly all these
Imperfections as if still they were conversant in the Active Life, not
employing their talent, light and clearness of spirit faithfully to the
rooting out of all other defects, but conniving and closely flattering
themselves, deny the same to be any blemishes, and so arrogate to themselves
too much liberty, and tickle and pamper their Sensual Nature, using that great
grace and purity o^ Mind to turn in for seeking o^ comfort, but not to the
perfect denial of themselves, sticking alwa^ in their Imperfections, and
playing fast and loose, now standing for the spirit, and by and by for the
flesh, longing to taste spiritual an^ sensual Joys both at once, an^
coveting to pass all into spir^ without contristation of the fles^ Sometimes
also in praying, it suffices them to be deceived under a false show of good
thinking, that they trow and know that manner of Action to be holy and
commended in Spiritual Life, as Aspirings and other Gestures of that kind
yielding a Sensible Comfort. And therefore since it seems to do them so much
good, they forsake not the use thereof, though in their hearts they well know
that those same be great Impediments in this Life, as also all the other
defects and failings which usually we meet: with in our Comtemplation and
Union, from which they be never quite freed, how subtly soever the same have
winded in and hid themselves.

That therefore we may return to our purpose, the soul how highly soever
enlightened and seated in lofty contemplation, yet straight discovers here some
wanderings and imperfections exceeding secret; which blown away, she follows
her Bridegroomes Lure with a stronger Mount and swifter Motion, pursuing the
thread of the Divine Will before drawn into practice in the first and second
part more essentially. And these imperfections be three.

The first is a too much boy ling of the desires and fervours in the Soul,
which savours too much of Action, and disturbs the sweet peace and quiet Rest
of her Bridegroom in her, and crosses his sole, full, and perfect working and
absolute sovereignty over her, where-through she neither lets her self be
perfectly illuminate, nor rises to the rosy kisses and chaste embraces of her
Lover, but remains as it were writhen down into her self.

The second is a certain hidden thin, and unknown Image of the Divine Will
which the Soul retains, vailing her from seeing it essentially.

The third is that she does not instantly behold her Bridegroom as really
present, and more-present then her self, and more within her then her self,
and more she then her self; but as one resiant in Paradise, or some
other-where more remote from her then she from her self: whence it was that
neither so lively faith, nor so firm hope, nor so ardent Love, nor so
ravishing entercourses past between them as otherwise should befall. Yet, look
I not that she should perfectly discern all these failings till she have
reached the following degrees, because they can hardly be perceived till they
be corrected by the Divine Spirit. And these three Imperfections do directly
oppose the three following points and perfections, handled in the three next
Chapters. And therefore we will treat of them al together, that the one may
remedy the other.

The Second Point. CHAP. 5. Of the too much Boiling of the Desires, and of the
flowing of the same Desires into God. Where is showed a simple and essential
rise of the Mind.
It Is not my purpose by this too much boiling of the Desires, to reprove those
sacred Desires which in God are found in his Being, or so far forth as they be
ordered aright, but so far as they are ill ordered, or have some complement
annexed, which hinders their fulness and perfect consummation, Deification, free
entry, spentnesse and dying in God. This hinderance is no other but the too
much boiling of them. 1. Active. Active I say (excluding the passive) which is
ever still, without noise, without Acts, profound and godlike:) But the Active
on the other side, impatient, unconstant, superficial, too much smelling of
Man, and of the nature and operation of Man. And this twofold species of the
Desires may fitly be resembled to two waters, whereof the one is muddy, bubling
and full of murmur; yet but shallow: the other clear, smooth, and still, yet
extreme deep. Therefore this boiling of the Desires (though good in the
Beginginning) is here to be rejected. Not that good desires are to be refused,
but their Imperfections: Not that we should forsake them, but perfect them, nor
yet lose them, but refine and fulfill them in God. For, as seed is not lost
because cast in his place, but changed and multiplied, as we see in a grain of
corn, that it perishes not though thrown into the ground, but is changed and
increased: So, neither do good Desires perish when they be terminated in God,
but are purified, multiplied, and perfected. And as the grain of corn, unless
it first corrupt and dye, brings not forth Increase; So neither do good
Desires ever take their effects. i. Union and Transformation, unless they
first be exhausted, or fall sound asleep in God. Whence is that saying of our
Savior: Except a grain of corn falling into the earth, dye, it brings no
fruit; But if it dye, it brings much fruit. As also at first the graiue is
needful, so in the end it must needs corrupt, that wheat may grow up.

It Is thus with good Desires and their Annihillation, that they may obtain
their Union with God. But as in this corruption, the grain is improperly said
to be corrupted, but rather to be altered or changed into Corn; So also we
say improperly that these good Desires are nothing; but rather changed and
transformed into Union. Howbeit, as the grain is never at length returned the
same, but remains for ever transformed or altered into Corn as into his
effect and last end and perfection: So neither are these good Desires ever
after to be begun again, but to persevere transformed into Union as into their
effect and crown of compleatnesse. Lastly, as the grain is not to be cast in
every earth, nor at al times, but very carefully, both commodiousnesse of place
and opportunity of season is to be observed; In like manner, good desires are
not every where to be annihilated, but in God alone: Nor yet in every exercise,
but only in that of the Union: Nor yet suddenly in the beginning, but in the
time allotted for that purpose, which is even after the Exercise of the Active
Life well drawn into practice is accomplished. Where plainly appears how much
they are blinded that think they must always be doing and never rest from such
fervent Acts and Yearnings; And much more they that in such manner of working
imagine the true Union to be placed, and condemn the contrary for faulty, and
stillness for nothing worth; which is flat contrary to the doctrine of
Dionysius before cited Chap. 2. who also says in another place, That our
Intellectual workings must be cut off, that we may send in our selves so much
as may be into the Superessentiall Shine. But the Soul shall cure this failing
and impediment in her Journey and found Union, by emptying of her fervours into
God; Not that she must work any thing, but only suffer such working.

The Emptying here of the burning Desires into God, is the exchanging of the
practicke Love with the fruitive; or a final rest and full satisfaction of the
desires in God, where the Desire is swallowed up, and passes into possession.
This word emptying intimates two things. 1. Death and Life: or Loss and Gain:
Because inasmuch as the Desire flows out of the Soul, it is extinct and dies;
but inasmuch as it is ended in God, it receives more Increase, and lives more
then ever before. Therefore I listed not use the word Annihilation, as if they
were made nothing in God; But I said Emptying of the Desires into God, because
they are preserved in him. Nor did I call it a preservation of the Desires, but
an Emptying; Intimating thereby that they are not afterward felt in the soul,
for that they be sublime, and also because of the lively and sweet working of
God in the soul, who thus transformes the Desire into the thing desired.

Also, this change contains three things. A clear Manifestation of the thing
desired; A full satisfaction of the Desires, and a Rest of the same.

For the first; this Manifestation of the thing desired, which is God, comes
not all at once, but successively and as it were by steps according to the
Increase of our Love. For, first God abides in the Soul, but she knows him
not. Then he declares himself to her; but obscurely: Then more clearly, and as
it were in full Noonday; All which steps are expressed by the Spouse in the
Canticles. For, first it is plain by these words, I sought him, but found him
not: where we may see two things: One, that God was in her; the other, She
knew him not. Whereof the first is apparent in the words [I sought;] since it is
well known, and Augustine affirms she sought him no where without herself,
neither could she. The other, That she knew not that he was in her, is clear
in the words following; I found him not.

The second step of this Manifestation is when God declares himself to be in
the soul; yet obscurely, and more by certain effects such as fervent desires
and holy inspirations, then by any essential knowledge. The which appears in
these words of the Bride, I caught him, Nor will I let him go. For in saying I
caught him, she shows she doubted not but she had him: Yet in adding [Till I
bring] etc. she intimates that possession was not sure enough; insinuating
that her Desires were not yet filled with the Beholding end enjoying of him;
but that should be when she had brought him into her Mothers house. And this
is when the Bridegroom does not only present himself as a Lord, but even as a
very Bridegroom; not only by whispering Inspirations, but also by secret
Touches; trayning the Soul not as a Tutor by Rules, but as an affianc't Lover
by amorous allurements. Yet, since this Enjoyance and Vision of her Dearest,
has not yet reached the top of her extent, she ceases not to cry to him; Who
shall give me thee my brother, sucking the Duggs of my Mother, that I may find
thee abroad and kiss thee?

The which at length she attains to in the third step of this Manifestation,
much cleerer and excellenter then the former, and which is then ascended when
as the Bridegroom draws so near his Bride that she sees his very shadow,
even his God-like Image, whereunder she curiously surveyes him, keeps company
with, and muses on him, choosing there to set up her Rest, saying, I sat under
the shadow of him whom I loved. There she hears him, There she adores him,
There she entertains his familiar parleyes, amorous discourses, and sugared
expressions; There she receives the promises of Life, the token of contract
and full assurance of solemnizing of the Wedding; There she imbosoms and
kisses him; There she gets the Jewels, Chains, and Wedding Garments.

And lastly, there she is enabled to stand the Essential and spritely
entercourses of her Bridegroom, under whose shadow she sits till the day
dawn, and the shadows decline. Yea even till the Wedding day and Essential
Vision, when that veil or shadow whereunder she saw him, shall vanish and
pass away. For which Wedding and happy Vision day she waits with deep
sighs, hanging on him with undeniable Importunity: Show me thou whom my soul
loves where thou lie in the Noonday: o my Joy! o Center of my Heart! where
and how I shall find thee o my God, naked without veil, without Image, shadow,
or obscurity.

Which lowly desire, her inflamed Lover not able to withstand, strips himself
before her according to her wishes, letting her see him in a manner not only
unutterable, but also incomprehensible.

And this makes up the fourth step which again is so much eminenter then all
the rest, that not only they that have never proved cannot conceive it but even
others that sometimes have tasted it, are not able to comprehend the Luster
thereof, since it transcends all Imagination, working of the Understanding,
wit, reason and judgment of Man, because it is done without Man. For, as the
Bridegroom humbles himself below himself: So, his Bride rebounds herself
above herself, mutually meeting to celebrate the Marriage. In this step she
sings, I turned to my Beloved, and he to me, that she might declare their
Actual Union and their Mutual enjoyance of each other in Spirit and Truth.
And again in another expression thereof she says, My Beloved shall lodge
be^weene wy Breasts.

Next after this full Manifestation, follows a full Satisfaction o^ the Desires
by necessary consequence. The more this Manifestation is increased, the more is
the desire filled; So that when the Manifestation is in her full cleernesse
then is the desire completely satisfied. First, in that vehement longing and
desire God was, though h^ showed himself but obscurely. The more that Desire
blazed, the mo^ did God discover himself therein as well because of his great
Ligh^ Glory and familiarity, as of the souls larger Capacity: So th^^ when at
length the Desire is streamed up to her highest pitch, Go^ also opens himself
in full perfection. Whereupon, the soul beholding him in her self as in a
manifest Vision, has whatsoever she c^^ long for, and her desire is full^
contented: As we see a Vessel o^ Sponge that drencht in the Sea are filled to
the Brim, which when they be full, are able to hold no more; so the Desire being
fulfilled and satisfied, can wish for no more. For, since it is true that
nothing can let in more then it can contain, according to that of the
Philosopher: All that is received, is received according to the measure of the
Receiver; It follows that neither can the Desire stretch it self to wish for
any more when it is full. For, as the receipt of a Vessel is the measure of his
hollownesse; So the Capablenesse of the Desire is her Contention in desiring.
And as that hollownesse once filled, the Vessel is full; So this Appetite
being satisfied, the Desire can hold no more. But surely this Appetite is
satisfied by the Manifestation of God in the Soul; and consequently, the
Desire is filled, all particular Acts being brought to a fu^ point, and all
working ended i^ the end. Whence necessarily aris^ the third point, that is,
the dyin^ of the same Desires, acts and wo^kings, because the desire being fu^
vanishes; and the acts and working having reached the Mark do cea^ to be.
For, as the grain, when once it has brought forth corn^ appears no more; so
these Desire^ Acts and workings having too^ their effect, i. Fruition of Go^
do cease any further to be. Bu^ as the Grain though the form p^rish, yet
continues in substance; ^ also the Desires, though in form^ they be no more,
yet live for e^ in Being. And as the Grain ^ the end it may produce the effe^
must of necessity lose the forn^ so must the Desires. And again, the substance
of the grain perish^ not, but lives in the effects a^ continues alive,; the
same befalls also in these Desires. For, even as the grain is changed into
corn, so the Desire is transformed into the thing desired. And though the
Desires and Acts be no longer, but vanish: yet their being is preserved in God.
For, as Ice through the form perishes, yet the substance remains in water into
which it is melted; So though the Desires and Acts vanish as touching their
forms, yet their being for ever perseveres in God, into whom they dissolve.

And these three be the points whereby a change is made of the Desire into the
thing desired, and of the Act, into the object it wrought upon, i. The
Manifestation of the thing desired; the satisfaction of the desires, and a Rest
of the same Desires, etc. which points do necessarily follow each other by
course.

Blessed Soul, that in her self proves this Manifestation, this Satisfaction,
and this Rest! Blesse^ Soul that sees her Bridegroom s^ clearly in her self,
and is so absolutely contented with him, an^ lets all her longings and
particular Acts flow into him! But, far away most blessed Soul that in thi^
Manifestation sees where and ho^ he rests at Noonday, even in Hea^ of Love and
superabundance o^ brightness! In such a Satisfaction she sees her self rapt
up and enjoyed by her Bridegroom, wh^ so seizes upon her, that thenceforth
all her Mights are exposed to receive him, are hallowed to him, and are wasted
in clipping and embracing him, till being with chil^ to him, she extolls the
condition of a Spouse ready to be delivered of her first borne, even as having
conceived Jesus, as himself says, Whosoever does the will of my Father, which
is in heaven, the same is my Mother, etc.

In such a Rest of Desiring she is dived in the Infinite abyss of the deity of
her so much longed for, and beloved Bridegroom. She wants no comlines after
such Manifestation; no sweetness after such Satisfaction; Nothing can stay her
from Union after such a Rest. By this Manifestation she sees her self behold,
her God uncloathed; by this Satisfaction she receives him into her self, and
by this Rest, she meets him naked.

In these is all Beauty set before the Brides eyes, stounding her with
amazement. All sweetness is infused into her Bowels, overflowing her with
admirable deliciousness. All secrets are disclosed to her, fixing her in
astonishment. Nothing above this Vision, nothing more joyous then this
sweetness; Nothing more arct then thi^ embracement; then to behold the Kingly
nakedness of the Divine B^ing. What can possible be so lovel^ as when the soul
unites her self t^ God, opening him a Resting pla^ between her Breasts? what
work is of so high excellency and dign^ty as his sole delightful and rav^shing
touches within her, she onl^ suffering his Inaction? o what u^ expressible
glory shines in this Vi^on, where clearly appears the fa^ of God tru-lovingly
smiling upon the soul? o what Joys does she taste, when all veil blown away
they both chain themselves mutually in linckt embracements? wh^ endless
sweetness flows down into all her faculties, when her Lovers left hand
supports her head his Right hand embracing her when he infuses himself into
he^ and by lively and divine touche^ poures himself into her inmost bowels.
None there is that can know such beauty, or conceive such sweetness or imagine
so high rapture, but he that at some time has had taste thereof in himself.
Nor yet he at any other time but when he actually proves the same.

CHAP. VI. The Third Point. Of the perfect uncloathing of the Spirit.
UNcloathing of the Spirit is a a certain Divine working, purifying the Soul,
and stripping her of all forms and Images of all things as well created as
uncreated, and enabling her so naked and simplified to contemplate without
help of forms. First, I call it a Divine working, to include all humane,
since no humane working can uncloath her, because no working of Man, nor acts
of his understanding can possibly be without all form and Image: For first,
necessarily they be formed and clothed with some Image before they be
produced. All things also work according to the condition of their own
Nature: But all humane working is imaginative ergo, works by Images, and
consequently can never effect this uncloathing and clearness from Forms. For,
as one contrar^ cannot produce another; (for instance sake) Darkness, Light,
and^ So, can neither imaginary working produce that which is fr^ from Images,
and without a^ form. Yea, so far is it from thi^ that he that thus strives
most, sha^ find himself furthest off. For as one treading on soft earth t^
make it smooth, makes the same more uneven with the prints of his footing: So,
he that by his own Act takes in hand to smooth, polish, and uncloath his soul
from all Images, shall by the signs of his his own acts add more to those he
has already. And, as water, the more stirring it is, the further it is from
calm and rest: So, the more a soul is stirred with her own Action, the
further is the distance from abstraction. Andas water, the more stirring it is,
to the end it may become calm and smooth, must cease from motion: So, the
soul, that she may be made naked and bare, must rest from her own working.
But this standing still or resting from Action cannot be accomplished by the
soul alone with fruit and in God. For, it is the work of the Holy Ghost, to
raise and suspend the mights of the soul, that they may cease from all
natural operation, and as it were dye in God.

Where many souls are grossly deluded, which without the raising and pull of
the holy Ghost resting from all working, do re^ indeed in a kind of
abstraction but pure natural and in their ow^ spirit; yet thinking the same
supernatural, taking that false Re^ to be union with God, etc.

Further, I add, purifying the soul, and enabling her so nake^ and
simplified, to contemplate without help of forms. Which word^ contain two
effects of this uncloathing, Purgation and Illumination. Purgation, because it
strip^ the soul naked of all Images, an^ illumination, because it enable^ her
to discern spiritual things without help of any Image. Y^ (as we shall see
hereafter) the object of the Humanity and passion* of our sweet Savior Jesus
is never to be forsaken; which how it may stand with the same Annihilation and
uncloathing, we shall show hereafter.

Moreover, this uncloathing, by the first effect of Purgation, besides all
other impurities does principally cleanse the soul from one, and that a most
hidden Image of the will of God, which she always retained, being the second
blemish of contemplation, mentioned cap. 4. which Image was so impalpable and
spritely, that the soul in the Inner will could never discover the same: but
stood always persuaded, that she saw this will in his own Being, without any
form or veil at all. Yea, nor could she ever perceive that Image, till she
was cleansed thereof, there being no imperfect thing imputed to him for
imperfect, that knows nothing more perfect. But the soul there knew no better,
because this Image was the highest and pures^ that ever she saw. Whence it was
that she could never know the same for imperfect, though now she sees it to be
so when she is purged of it. If any ask, How then can she wind her self out
thereof, if she cannot know it? Answer, That must be done by fervor of Love,
which is Gods own work, and not the souls, an^ which consists more in
suffering then in doing. This working o^ the love of God is so inward mighty
and powerful, that it work more livingly in the soul, then ever she felt
before. And this pull i^ so violent, that it ravishes her more then ever
without her self. Thi^ fire of Love is unquen chable, tha^ it consumes all her
impurities. And lastly, so strict is this Union, that she is all exhausted in
God, in whom all her Imperfections be drowned, lost, and brought to nothing.
And by the same work she gets a new Light, and a far other Capacity then ever
she had trial of, and is thereby enabled to work extatically and
supernaturally, without and above her self, and all her natural and humane
Understanding, wherein stands the second effect of this uncloathing,
Illumination: For, here she is made drunk and giddified with such abundance of
Light, that she is covered therewith as with a garment, transformed into it,
and made one with the Light it self. For, since in this most strict union, God
the fountain and Wellspring of this universal inaccessible Light is more
profound, inward, and nigh to the soul then she to her self, and that in
this Lovely union no secret of the Bridegroom useful for her to know is kept
from her. It follows, that this mystery full of all joy and ravishment is
revealed to her, that her Bridegroom, the Eternal God is found within her.
Him she beholds in her self, after her hearts desire, without veil or Image,
seeing him as at full noonday, how he rests within her, as in his own
Tabernacle, exercising a sweet and familiar operation within her. And whilst
she sees, tastes, and proves how he is nearer to her then her self; and how
she is more he then she is her self; and that she possesses him not as
something, nor as her self, but more then all things, and more then her self.
According to this Light she so demeanes her self, that all her Joy, Life,
Will, Love and Sight are much rather in him then in her self; and that because
she knows him far more excellent and worthy then her self, and has found
him more delicious and sweet then her self. And lastly, sees him more fair
and glorious then her self. And again, having learned by proof that he is all
things, and her self nothing, and that in him is all beauty, goodness, and
pleasure, in her self nothing but bitterness of evil: In him alone she
stays, in him she dwells, in him she lives, and nothing at all in her self.
Whence it follows that she is all in God, all to God, all for God, and all
God; but nothing in her self, nothing to her self, nothing for her self, and
nothing her self: She all is conversant in the Divine Will, Spirit, Light, and
Power; but nothing in her own Spirit, Will, Light, and own or natural
working. In that Power, in that Spirit, in that Light with an unmovable eye
she beholds this Essential Will, or Divine Being, as it is said, In thy
Light shall we see Light: Here she discovers hidden and unsearchable secrets:
Here lies her way open to Light, unaccessible: Here she unfolds unutterable
Mysteries: Here she viewes wonders: Here she swims in endless joys. For,
being united with God, none of these mysteries, secrets and wonders can be
kept from her. For, since God has showed her himself, how shall he hide any
needful secret from her? And now having found within her self, the fountain
of all sweetness, and the Wellspring of all Pleasures, Delights, and Joys,
how shall she but be drowned in the Sea of this spiritual Deliciousness? and
ingulft in the whirling torrent of this Celestial Bliss? Or how shall the
abstrusest secrets of God be shut before her, to whom he has bared and laid
open his Bosom? Or how shall his Mysteries be sealed up from her, to whom he
has revealed himself face to face? Who indeed is a secret God.

CHAP. VII. The fourth Point. Of the nearenesse or ever instant Vision and
presence of the happy-making end.
THe fourth and last step of this Mean follows next after this Uncloathing of
the Spirit. i. The Propinquity or near Assistance of this Being, which is no
other thing but the continual presence or habit of Union passing between God
and the soul; where-through the soul being clothed with God, and God with
the soul, do live mutually in themselves, without any withdrawing,
backsliding or interspace. For, he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God
in him. Where the soul follows her Bridegroom so light and swift, so strong
and eager, and runs after him with such earnestnes, thirst, and
unsatiablenesse, clinging to him with a full Inclination of love and bond
unloosable, that they be as the body and the shadow, she following the Lamo
whithersoever he goes, whose savor, sweetness, and loveliness have so
enamoured, ravished, and invincibly stole her away, that in the depth of her
heart she conceives a horror of herself, utterly abandoning all her own
thoughts of her self, and all sense of sweetness from her self, that she may
suck in the sweetness of this substance, that she may eternally cast her self
thereinto, and lose her self there, never to be found again, resting even
there, and that for the naked love of the same Being. Whence it is that she
deadly hates all whatsoever brings therewith the least feeling of delight in her
self, or casts in so much as a thought of her self, or that says she is one,
and her Bridegroom another; In whom she so exposes her self to be dissolved,
wasted, and annihilated, together with all created things, that in comparison
thereof she disdaines to live. Here she opens her self, and entertaines this
Being, not as a vessel receives what it holds, but as the Moon does the shine
of the Sun. Here she throws abroad her white and Lilly arms, to fold and
close-inchaine her Lover, but much closer is she embraced and inchained by
him. Here she enlarges all the circumference of her Mind to draw in this
Infinite, but on the other side she feels her self most ravishingly swallowed
up in it. Nor can she find what to do to rebound the assault and conquest of
this Love, but only yield over her self for ever in a naked, harmless, and
everlasting conversion and fast cleaving to God, in whom she abide^ so
unmovable, that as the Apostle says she puts him on. For, by this solid look
she beholds only him; by this simple Conversion she loses all Creatures; and
by the unchangeablenesse thereof she utterly forgets them all. It follow^
therefore that all her forces ar^ bent upon him alone, that she understands,
loves, and echoes him alone, and so is absolutely clothed with him, and
transformed into him. For, as on her part the soul with all her powers lies
open to God, so also on his part God with all his Joys everlastingly infuses
himself into her; And the more innocently she turns to him, the more
overflowingly he poures himself into her. And on the other side the more
overflowingly he infuses himself into her, the more inflamedly she turns to
him: so that by an unexpressible intercourse of reciprocal Love, they mutually
cut and intwine themselves, for ever passing away the possession of themselves
to each other. Hence then, and from this Virgin-like and constant turning to
God proceeds this habit of Union or continual presence of the divine Being.

Now, between this step, and that of Uncloathing of the Spirit, is this
Difference. In uncloathing we obtain only a bare Union, bu^ in this we find
the custom and ducation of the same.

The causes of this Step of Continuation are Light and Love. For, here she not
only discernes God in her, but also that nothing else ^ in her, so that she
has pierced s^ deep into the profundity of he^ own nothing, and known the
same so thoroughly that she plainly sees all other things also vanish away,
which because they seem'^ to be somewhat, overclouded he^ with Outer Darkness:
whereunto also is annexed an assurance of the same knowledge, and a practice
which is habitualiz'd by Love, so inflamed and alluring, rapturou^ and
liquefactive, that giddye^ therewith, swinckt and dissolve^ into God, she sees
all other things pass away, consumed and return to nothing. Whence it is that
she sees nothing hut God. And because the causes themselves are habitual,
their effect is so too. For, this Annihilation in this step is so customary in
the Soul, that seeing all brought to nothing, she remains in thought
suspended in a vast emptiness, or nothing, in such wise that she can neither
see any thing, nor contain any thing; no, not her self, when she is rightly
therein. Which huge Vacuity or Emptiness may rightly bo resembled to a fair
sky clear without cloud, and is a certain God-like Light.

In this Light is also found Love (not distinct) so coelestially warming,
inflaming, and burning the soul, and that so secretly, simply, and inwardly,
that it raises no motion to buckle this calm in the Soul, but rather she is
so secretly led, and so sweetly comprehended, that she dissolves and vanishes
still more and more, to the further increase of this Calm and stillness.

This wildernized solitariness o^ this Nothing, is that whereof the
Bridegroom speaks; I will lead her into the Desert, and there I wi^ speak
to her heart. And because the Infiniteness of this Nothing i^ now grown
familiar and habitu^ to her, having now by proof pierc^ to the ground thereof,
and likewise their Love which dissolves an^ transforms her into him; Hence ^ is
that their effect is also contin^al, i. an ever-present disposednes^ to this
Union, or a continual a^sistance and near Vision of the Being. And thus is
this last vail^ Contemplation blown awa^ which was that the soul did n^
straightway behold her Bridegroom as really present, and nearer to her then
her self, more within her then her self, and more she then her self, but as
one sitting in heaven or some other place further from her then her self. For,
all this Imperfection is here done away, the soul in this step seeing
clearly, and tasting by her own Experience how infinitely more inward her
Beloved is, then she to her self. And by this step of continual and customary
Union, she ever converses with him without doubt or wavering: so as this Soul
lives eternally in the Light for ever with her caelestiall Spouse. Nor can
Darkness, Death or Devil ever hurt or come near her, but the Devil shall
vanish from her presence, Death shall dye before her face. And the Darkness of
Utter-works shall be no darkness with thee: And the Night of the Active Life
shall be as light as the day (of the Contemplative Life:) As is her Darkness,
so is her Light. And this is the true Active and Contemplative Life in one, not
separated (as many think) but conjoined, and at the same time, this kind of
Active Life being also Contemplative, he^ Outer works inward, her bodily,
Spiritual, and her temporal eternal. Thus both making one.

Of the Second Mean. CHAP. VIII. That this mean is no other but the Divine
Will, manifested in Annihilation, which consists in two points, Knowledge and
Practice. Of the first Point.
THe second Mean is more remote from Sense then the other, and more
Supernatural naked and perfect: For, whereas the other works so nakedly and
above Nature, only (or at least chiefly) when the soul is taken up without her
self by force of the Actual pull of the Divine Will; this works also, when
that pull is not much actual, but only virtuall. The other Mean is spritely
naked and above Nature when the soul is elevated and uncloathed. This
continues also naked and supernatural when one is employed in Outer actions,
tangled in forms, and cumbred with business, changing the outward into
inward, bodily into spiritual, and natural into supernatural by help of this
Mean. Though indeed the other rightly conceived and duly practiced,
accomplishes the same thing, but not in open view, as shall be seen.

But here I pray that this Mean be well understood. For it pertains oneIy to
those that be thoroughly enlightened, and are able to stand it.

Now, this Mean shall be no other but the Beginning and the ending: Even this
Divine will which is never to be left. And this point shall be so cleared by the
other Point of Annihilation which opposes it, that so contraries set against
each other may appear more clearly. That therefore w^ may be united to this
Essential Will, we must always see it: And that we may always see it, we mu^ see
nothing but it: And that we^ may see nothing but it, we mu^ know nothing but
it; and after this Knowledge frame our Life.

Here therefore are required two Points. 1. That we be assured tha^ nothing is
but this will. 2. Tha^ we draw this Knowledge into practice. And all the
strength of this second Mean shall stand in these two Points, the which in and
by this will shall be perfected and accomplished, without ever departing a
hairs breadth from the same.

For the first point. This Will shall show and confirm to us that nothing is
but it: And that it shall do easily, if we consider the nature thereof. For,
since it is God himself, it follows that nothing is but it: And that it shall
do easily and plainly if we consider the nature of it. It is God himself,
Ergo, Nothing is but it. And that this Will is God himself, is manifested in
the first Chapter. But, that nothing is but it alone, remains now to be
proved. The which thing is so known and unquestionable, that both Reason,
Philosophy, general consent of all the Fathers, as also the holy Scriptures,
and examples abundantly witness the same.

For, first, Reason says it is impossible we can be any other the^ Nothing,
compared to the Divine Being that depends upon none. For, God is Infinite; But
if we were somewhat, he could not be Infinite. For, there should his Being be
bounded where ours begun.

Again, Being and Good are Convertibles. If Man therefore be, then is Man
Good: But, Man is not Good; for none is Goo^ but God only: Ergo, Man is not.

The Philosophers also stumble^ into this Truth; Diverse of the^ affirming,
that there is but on only true Being.

The Consent of the Fathers agrees fully here-with. For, a^ says that reverend
St. Jerome. Go^ only is; with whose Being, ou^ compared is not.

The holy Scriptures give their general voice. For, when Mose^ ask of God
what he should tell Pharaoh of him that sent him; God returns him this answer.
Say, says he, [I am] sent me. And in the song of Moses: See now, I only am.
Also in the Gospel. I am he that testify of my self. I am; Be not afraid.
And in another place. I am that I am. In all which Testimonies the word I am
has a strong intendment and energy. Paul also, after he had discourst of the
Majesty of the Son of God, says; he made himself of no reputation, taking
upon him the shape of a servant, and being made into the likeness of man, was
found in form as a man. But, if the Son of God in taking on the humane Nature
made himself of no worth, and descended to be nothing, it follows that man
is nothing.

Examples and Types hereof are showed us in the apprehending of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Where he had no sooner uttered [I am,] but all his enemies fell back
to the ground; to teach us that when the Divine Being rouses it self, all
other Beings fall down, are nothing, and be no more.

Where five things are remarkable in that Backfal. First, That they could not
go forwards. Intimating that when God claims his Prerogative of Infinite
Being, our Being hurried and puffed up with pride can stir no further.
Secondly, they were not only not able to go forwards, but were compelled to
fall backwards: declaring to us that when once we know the Truth, our being
can not only no more press forwards, but must also of necessity fall
backwards: Declaring to us that when once we know the Truth: For, they fell
not on their face, but backwards, as falsehood not only comes not to Truth, but
also flies and gives back from it, as wax from the face of the Fire. Thirdly,
they not only fell backwards, but they fell to the ground: showing that the
divine Being, not only forces our proud Being to shrink back, but to fall
down to the very ground, i. into Not being, and All to nothing. Fourthly, Note
that they were enemies, as are also all they that through insolence, will
arrogate to themselves any thing of the divine Being. Fifthly, they were not
only enemies, but they strove to apprehend, bind, and manacle him, to deprive
him of his power and strength, and then calling all the world to witness him
not to be God, to murder him with a bloody death. All which Treasons are
spiritually committed by those that ascribe any being to themselves in presence
of the Divine Being. If any now demand, What then is the Creature? I answer,
it is no more but a mere dependence upon God. If again you ask, What is this
dependence? I answer, It Is such as cannot well be expressed in words: yet by a
similitude we may come to some Notion thereof. So then is the Creature to God,
as the Beam to the Sun, or heat to the Fire. For, as the Beam and heat do so
absolutely owe themselves to their productive Causes, as that without their
perpetual sustentation and communicating, they cannot subsist: Even, in like
manner, so omnimodous is the creatures depending on God, that without his
continual preservation they cannot endure. And as the Beam and Heat are wholly
to have relation to their Causes, the Beam to the Sun, the Heat to the Fire,
according to that Maxim. All being, such by participation is to have relation
to Being, such by essence: So, are the Creatures to be fully reduced to the
Creator. And consequently, as whatsoever is in the Beam and Heat so
considered, is no other then Sun and Fire it self: so is there nothing in
the Creature which is not the Creator himself. And therefore as the Sun is no
sooner hid, but the Beams cease to be; So, if God hide himself, and withdraw
his hand from the Creatures, they suddenly return to their Nothing. But, as
the Beam and Heat though they contain nothing which is not Sun and Fire; yet
looked upon essentially as they are in themselves, they are not Sun and Fire,
but only a certain dependent or a spark of those: Right so the Creature,
though all it consists of, is God: yet considered in the own proper Nature, it
is not God. If you say; that since the Creature depends upon God, it is
consequently somewhat: I answer, that it is; and yet is nothing, just as the
Beam and Heat. For, as if one look on the Beam without the Sun, or the
Heat, or the Heat, not seeing the fire, they be; But, if he look on the Sun
it self, and the fire it self, he finds no Beam nor Heat any more, but
whatsoever is there then is Sun and fire: So, if you imagine the Creature
without an eye on the Creator, it is; but if you behold the Creator, then the
Creature ceases to be. And as the Sun draws bac^ to himself all his Beams as
certain Rays sent out from him, recalls them to their fount, (his spacious
light) sucks them up, an^ nothings them: Even so the Creator ascribes and ownes
the Creature to himself, as to the Center and Head, and in his Infinity
annihilates and nothings the same. Lo there! how the Creature Imaged in it
self is somewhat: but in the boundlesnesse of God, and his Infinite, is
nothing: in respect whereof it ceases to be. Because therefore we here seek
God, and to approach his Infinite Being, the creature is not to be stuck at as
any thing: but as lost in this boundless Ocean. And thus you see how God is
All things, and that Nothing is but he; which makes sure the first point,
Theory. Now to the second point, Practice.

CHAP. IX. The Practice of Annihilation. The second Point. Man is the fount of
all Error. Of the too much estimation of the Being of the Creatures, not
occasioned so much through their own Being, as by the darkness of the mind
of Man. Which dispelled, sin is abolish't: and that such Annihilation cannot
be Active but Passive.
HAving now found by the first Point, that nothing is but this Essential Will,
and that it is all things: It follows that by the second point we practice
the same; i. live in this Annihilation of the Creatures, and Contemplation of
this All: For, between the Knowledge and the practice of it, there is great
Difference. And indeed so much, that many have the one, but few practice the
other. For many will say that nothing is but God: yet scarce a Man to be found
will practice what he says. Now, I find no Mean to this end but the same
Will without the least departure therefrom. Whosoever therefore will remove all
impediments, and banish whatsoever can step in betwixt God and him; whosoever
desires everlastingly to abide in the highest Contemplation of all others: And
lastly, who so desires to cleave constantly to God, and closely to claspe the
Celestial Bridegroom: Let him first of all lay this strong foundation, and
rest upon the unmoveablenesse, soundness, and infallible Truth thereof, That
nothing is but God. And then let him follow the practice thereof, losing
himself in this Infinite and dweling therein, beholding it with a fixed eye,
and that by the Death and Annihilation of himself, as that which is his only
enemy, the root whereon all other lets do grow, the wellhead whence they run
abroad, and the fount whereout they issue. For, Things themselves are such as
in the Truth, and on the things part they be; nor more no^ less; Nor bear
they themselves i^ any other sort but as God create^ them; So that if any of
them intrude their Being, and incroac^ upon the Being of God, and advance
themselves in his place, they do not the same of their own accord, but
through us. And therefore they ought not to perish, o^ be annihilated by us;
nor can they if we would: But only our selves whereof we have the governance.

Again, Because our selves, i. o^ body and soul, are of the same order that
the rest be, carrying such a Being of themselves, (nor less nor greater) as
God has framed them: it follows that the errou^ of their too (...)
forwardness, as also the error of other Creatures, derives not the Original
from them so far forth as they be such: but the Anticipation of their Being as
well as of the Being of all Creatures, upon the Being of God, proceeds of sin,
darkness and ignorance. And these three, neither know how to annihilate
themselves, because deprived of all Light, nor can because endowed with no
power: nor will, because void of all Love: But, rather they daily increase more
and more: As also the man in whom they have set up their Standard, neither
knows, because clouded with darkness; nor can, because feebled with
infirmity; nor will, because hardened with malice. There remains therefore
only this Will (which is God himself) to accomplish this work of
Annihilation. He is the ligh^ that knows the Power that can, the Love that
will destroy this sin, this darkness, and this ignorance, which being conquered
to nothing, whatsoever middle walls they have reared betwixt God and us,
arising from them, as from the old root, by consequent must needs fall to
nothing.

Now that this same may be wrought in us by this Essential will; a certain
disposednesse thereto is required on our part, not remote, as is that of the
Active life, wherein we did good, and rejected evil, in the object of the
exterior will, because God so wills; but a mere disposednesse, such as is
required in this life, wherein we do the same in the object of the Essential
Will, because God is, or that GOD may be, live and reign in us, as reason
requires. For, thereby it appears, that this disposednesse ought to tend to
the total Annihilation of our selves, that this All alone may be. And that we
may proceed to this Annihilation, our passions, selfe-lusts, and the imperfect
acts of our spirit are to be reduced to nothing, and stilled by and in the
unmovable contemplation of this all, who by his Infinity and real presence
extinguishes them all: (For, neither the Body, nor soul, nor any other
Creature is to be destroyed or made nothing, (the same being utterly unlawful)
but Sin, darkness, and ignorance:) for so long as the soul is turned from
the Creature, and cleaves close to her Bridegroom in this Being, Temptation,
or Passion, and all imperfect motions of the Spirit, are littled, lose their
footing and vanish on the one part; and on the other part, the infinite
goodness of God does so reveal it self to her, so seize, enlive, allure, and
so wondrously unite her to himself, that she rests drowned in the bottomless
Ocean of this Infinite Being. But to let pass these grosser and more palpable
passions, affections, and temptations, as sufficiently known and pertaining to
the Active life: we will here address our discourse to those imperfect. Acts,
and inward ill-ordered motions of the Spirit, which in our inward house and
contemplation be so secret, tickle and fine, that they be scarce discernible;
and so the damage which the soul sustaines by them is the greater, because
not discovering them, she seeks no remedy. We will therefore discover some of
them with their Imperfections, with their remedies after this Rule.

CHAP. X. Of the Impediments of this Annihilation; And of the most secret and
close Imperfections of Contemplation.
THe first secret and unknown Imperfection of this Life Supereminent, is
contesting or wrestling against superfluous Cogitations and Distractions; The
Reason is, because by such Contesting, those thoughts are glewed stronger and
faster in the Mind: For, in as much as the Will which pursues any thing with
Love or Hatred, awakes the Understanding to comprehend it, and the Memory to
record it; It follows, that the more eagerly the Will is animated and
bestirres it self against such Thoughts, the more the Understanding conceives
them, renewes them in the Memory, and imprints them in the Mind. It Is not
therefore the right way to fret or wrestle against such Thoughts and
Distractions. Another reason is, because the more a man so contests, the more
Motions and Acts are begot in the soul, and so she is further and further from
this Death and Annihilation, after this our Rule, because the more one acts,
the more he is.

The Cure of this Imperfection is the Contrary; i. a despising of such Thoughts
and Distractions, by annihilating himself in this Abyss of Light and Life.
Wherein himself falling to nothing, those thoughts also do consequently
vanish. All that Infinite which annihilates the Man, drownes also his
Distractions: Nor need he care whether he feel or not feel such Thoughts,
but even abide stable and fixed in his Nothing, and resign the Battle to his
All, i. to this Essential Will his God. And this way of proceeding (I say not
of fighting) is to be continued against all kind of Temptations in this Life
Supereminent.

Another Imperfection is to tie the Mind to some particular exercise, counting
it needful to end such or such a thing, before it suffer it self to be raised
higher. The reason is, because thereby he makes that bond bring both him and
that exercise in subjection thereto. And thus he lets go his freedom, so
that he cannot lay down himself all into the hands of the Bridegroom, nor
follow his Lure, no^ nakedly uncloath himself: which yet he must do, if he
will attain^ to see and fully receive him into his Soul. And lastly, in this
Scopriation, there is somewhat res^sting Annihilation, without which
Transformation can never be obtained.

It behooves therefore to stand f^^ from such particularity of exerc^ses, that
(without Let) that Infini^ All may draw, suck up, and ann^hilate, and thus
transform us into himself.

Here also we exclude as impe^fect, the retaining of any forms Images how Jim
soever, either the Divine Will, Deity, Power Wisdom, goodness, yea of t^
Unity, Trinity, or Divine Being or yet of this Essential Will: Because al such
Images how God-li^ soever they appear, yet they be not God himself, who
admits no form or Image however qualified. Whence says Bon. there is no
thinking things of the Creatures, nor of Angels, nor of the Trinity, because
this Wisdom has her ascent in the flame of Desire, and not by foregoing
Meditation. But here we always except the Image of the sacred Passion of Jesus
Christ, which I would might everlastingly be placed before the eyes of the
soul, and that as the Crown of all perfection. Where, in this Image,
Uncloathednesse; In this Body, Spirit: In this Man, God; at one simple sight
(not severed as in the Vulgar way) gives himself to be seen. A thing
incomprehensible to our Reason, as also his Incarnation. And to believe the
same God who is purely supernatural, to be also corporeal; Immortal,
mortal: And that the one may be duly practiced, the other must be duly
pierced, and that the one may b^ thoroughly pierced, the other mu^ be duly
practiced.

I except also those Images which are lively Mirrours, wherein w^ behold his
Passion. As, our own^ Sufferings, Sorrows, or Mortifications, which are to be
brough^ into Union with his Passion, so agonizing with sweet Jesus, an^ that
with ardent devotion, nev^ forsaking the same.

Hither therefore is to be hastened Mortification of all other Images as well
hidden as visible, that the soul naked, may behold her Bridegroom also naked;
the which is only compassed by mean of this AnnihiIation and Death. For, if
Man be somewhat, he has also some Image: Also he that lives, acts; bu^ no
action is without an Image And this Annihilation we cannot do but only
suffer; for if a Man would work therein, or do something, he should find
himself the further from God, the more he scufled therein. For, the more he
works, the more he is. And the more he is, and lives, the further is he from
Death and Nothing. Ergo, here nothing is to be done; but all we can do is to
do nothing, to refrain our selves from action, and to let him that lives,
make us dye in him, and he that is, let us see in him our own Not-being.

A fourth Imperfection is to desire a sensible Union, wherein many be faulty,
and that unwittingly, because they discern it not: For, though they seek it
not openly, yet secretly they do: which they shall know by this sign: They
can never rest till they have got some feeling of the Union.

Whence it is, that they live a^wayes in languishment of spirit nor can
possibly reach to pure a^ supernatural contemplation, ^^ as it were hide-bound
within t^ straits of Nature, and impriso^^ within the walls of feeling, the
cannot go out of themselves ^ supernaturals, nor see how G^ is absolutely
Spirit and Life. A^ though the Mind now and the attempt some generous egresse,
y^ Sense resists, not able to endure ^ be pulled from the pap of Sens^^
Comfort. But, as a Beast alway^ bellows to the Pasture, and neig^ after the
provant, never resting ^ through Importunity it dra^ down the Spirit soaring
aloft.

The Remedy whereof is to e^change each sensibility with Lo^ naked and
sequestered from all a^quaintance with Sense; the whi^ Love is strong, durable,
and ev^ the same: Assuredly knowing that God is not sensible, nor can be
comprehended by the Senses, but purely Spirit. For, he that duly considers
these things shall easily see how far he is from sound judgment that would join
himself by sense (which we have common with brutes) to him whose Nature is
Infinitely purer then the purest Angels. Which found to be true, he shall
willingly and freely suffer this Spirit and Life to kill and annihilate our
Feeling and Death.

Another Imperfection, is to seek for any assurance and experimental knowledge
of this Union. And this differs not much from the former, yet somewhat more
secret. For here some Man persuades himself, and so protests that he seeks
not, nor wishes for sensible Comfort, but only a spirirituall Union with God,
although indeed he seeks the other also: And that shall he find^ by this sign:
that he cannot b^ contented, but even doubts himself to be separated from God,
until h^ have attained some particular Illumination, or experimental Knowledge
of his Union with God Wherein he fails many waye^ For, first, he rests not
upon Go^ with strong enough Faith, but rather doubts of him. 2. He love^ him
with a Sensitive, and not wit^ a naked Love. Thirdly, he build^ upon the sand,
and trusts to hi^ own feeling, staying himself thereon, as on his strong prop^
Lastly, this causes that a Man ca^ never depart out of his own Lan^ and out of
himself, nor lay dow^ himself all into the hands of God*

To prevent this Imperfection* Here is not any experimental assurance to be
sought for. i. No Ligh^ which may be perceived by our feeling, but only to
rest united to God by lively Faith and naked Love; The which shall most
infallibly be accomplished when we suffer this Infinite Being to reduce us to
Nothing. For, then shall we be no more our selves, and consequently shall have
no confidence in our selves, but seeing God to b^ all and every where, we shall
be most intimately united to him.

A sixth Imperfection in this Life Supereminent is, to lift up the Mind,
desiring to find God in another place, and in a higher manner then in our
selves. For, it is a blindness in the soul not to know that she is already
there where she desires to be, even in God, and God in her: Whereas the soul
cleared of this obscurity, sees her self to be, and live in God more then in
her self, and that she is more his then her own. Ergo, such an act of
lifting up the Mind the Soul is to cease from, and resting in her own
Nothing, and constant in this All, continually to behold and embrace the same
as with a Desire already obtained.

Here is also a secret deceit to be avoided, a risi^g from a most abstract
Image, appearing when the Soul having lost all Images of all things seen,
heard, and known, assaies to behold God as huge, and of a vast circumference
as that o^ the sky, etc. opening and extending the Mind to such a bigness
yea rejoices when she attaines t^ behold him: Without which manner of seeing
him, she thinks he eyesight of no worth, and strive in that manner to behold
his Infinity, forgetting that object to be ^ form and Image rather carved ou^
by the soul ^er self, then so bei^^ of it self, which is not the absolute
Truth, nor God: And though in the Interior Will, this Image was good, and not
to be despised; yet here, God is to be seen more essentially, and that by
himself, and the final Annihilation of our selves. Let not therefore the
devout reader forget in these Imperfections as well past as following, of what
thing and manner of Life we speak, i. of Contemplation in the Life Supereminent.

An eighth Adversary to the perfection of this Life is, to seek God otherwise
then by simple Remembrance. For, such a seeking presupposes absence; since none
seeks what he knows he has already. And this Contemplation presupposes the
presence of God. Yet this Imperfection arises from want of Faith: whilst we
believe not that we have not what we seek. Nor does this Imperfection only
proceed from some darkness, but it also produces others, causing that not to
be found which is sought. All things have their time (says the Wise man:) A
time to seek, a time to find, a time to sow, a time to reap. And, as he that
always sowes and plowes can never reap; so he that should always seek God by
practick Life, shall never enjoy him by fruitive For, if the Causes be ill
directed, they not only take not their effects, but do also produce the
Contrary. As, always to sow, not only stays Corn from coming up, but also
begets barrenness. The same befalls in this seeking of God.

To remedy this Imperfection; God is here to be found and enjoyed by loss and
Annihilation of our selves in simple Remembrance of him.

And the ninth Imperfection is, here to long for God as one absent, and that
for reasons not unlike the former. For, what is in prayer and desire, is not
also in possession. But, here God gives himself to be possessed, and is not
therefore to be desired as absent, but en^oyed as present. This Desire also
has Act, hindering complete Annihilation.

A tenth Imperfection is, to be carried to God with an Imaginary Thinking: both,
because that should not be, and also because it cannot be. It should not be;
for such an Act with stands Annihilation. It cannot be, because God is wholly
Supernatural, etc. but our thinking is Natural. God is greater and above us:
Our Thinking less, and below us. God therefore is to be beheld, but not to be
thought on Imaginarily.

There is also an Imperfection in easting a Look as it were upon God, somewhat
more then a simple Remembrance of him, as if he were in some other place, and
not in the Soul, and the Soul in him, as a fish in the Sea, or a bird in the
Fire. And therefore the souls Look ought to be as suffering, she ever remaining
in her Nothing, i. It should be extracted by this Divine Glory, not from her
self. For, as the Sun darts his rays into any transparent Body, as water,
glass, or crystal, from thence provoking toward himself a certain reflex
Light. So, God who descends his Beams and sight into the soul, does also
rebound from her a mu^uall aspect toward himself. But as that reflected Light
is not the waters, but the Suns which piercing and inlustring the same, is
flashed toward the Sun himself; So, the Light of this Eyesight is not the
souls but Gods: And being Spirit, Life and Light, it through-breakes the
soul, sublimes her, and so is reflected on God, fixing the soul therewith,
which is thus made one with God, as himself says. The Word which goes out of
my mouth shall not return empty to me, but whatsoever I will, it shall
a^complish and prosper in them to whom I send it. For, as in a Bodily sight an
object sends forth the form or species to the eye, which being instantly
reflected upon the eyesight or seeing-power so touched, closes therewith, and
knitting it self thereto, flies with it to the object it self, from which the
form was sent forth, and so the sight of the same object is drawn out; So is
it in spiritual sight, wherein God shoots out his Godlike Light and his Will
into the soul, which re-shining to God, the soul which so tasted their divine
touch, oned therewith, flies away with the same.

And lastly, none of the least Imperfections is a too busy observance of these
and such other Imperfections, which now possesses the soul, and makes her
Active, because they either are, or at least contain some Action.

Wherefore in checking them, it is faulty to be too much entangled, but only to
do it quick with a twinkle of the eye, swift as Lightning.

All these Imperfections therefore contend against Annihilation. Not that so
many points do draw any Multiplicity upon this Exercise: For, how many soever
the Imperfections be, yet are they all done away by one only point and
perfection. For, as they all spring from one head [To be] so are they al
vanished by the contrary [Not to be] For, as all Imperfections assemble where
Man is somewhat; so do al perfections flourish where he ends to be: For, then
God only lives and reigns.

And if to any these seem no Imperfections, it is because they lie too close.
If any think them small, it is because the great disadvantage they bring, is
unknown. And lastly, if any take them for perfections, it is even because they
consider not what exercise we have in hand, which is Contemplation in the Life
Supereminent: where (says Bon.) all Intellectual workings are esteemed blots
and hindrances; For, as it is high, so it requires rules answerable to that
height. Wherefore the Rules of the Active or Illuminate Life, or Meditations
therein do not suite therewith, for they be too low, as on the other side, the
Rules of this, pertain not to that, because they be too high.

CHAP. XI. Of a twofold kind of Annihilation* Their difference. And how they
make to a twofold Love.
BEcause this last Chapter shows Annihilation only by ceasing from all acts,
vanishing of Images, doing nothing, and rest from all Motion in God: And
forasmuch as nathlesse it is required that some times such Acts and workings
must be used, such Images admitted, and that we must have such Motions in
renewing of workings, in Meditation, in studies, preaching, practice of the
passion, etc. it therefore stands us upon, to point out a way to annihilate
such acts, as also to show the practice thereof. For, though we have showed,
that those Acts as well as all other things, are nothing, and though a Man have
the knowledge of this nothing and of their Annihilation, yet may he want the
practice. Wherefore both these points are equally necessary in this matter, (as
we said before) that God alone may be seen always, who is the end of this
Annihilation.

But now to practice this thing duly: First, I admonish the Reader to pluck up
his spirits here, that they may work more supernaturally, and (I say not,
further from sense then before, but) flat contrary thereto. For, where before
he annihilated them when they were absent, here he must also annihilate them
present.

Which to do, and that this Annihilation may be clear and apparent, we will
here distinguish it into. Active and Passive. Passive is, when the man
himself, and all other things are cast asleep, vainly, und be made nothing. I
call it passive, because it is only suffered: The Imperfections whereof we
have blown away in the former Chapter.

The Active Annihilation is when the Man himself, and all other things are
annihilated not only sufferingly, as in the Passive, but doingly, I mean by
Light in the Understanding, as well natural, as supernatural: wherein he sees
and most infallibly knows that all those things are nothing, and rests upon
this knowledge in despite of feeling. The one of these Annihilations lives
when all Image and feeling of the Creatures is gone. The other continues also
firm and sure, even whilst they remain, after sense, and yet by means of this
light are seen to be nothing. The one consists in Knowledge, drawn from
Experience, when a man sees himself brought to nothing, as it is said, I am
brought to nothing. The other consists in Knowledge true indeed, yet not
seeming so after sense, but after understanding. Of these two the Active is
more perfect for two reasons; Strength and Duration. For strength, because
together with it self, it nothings all other things: Not only when it sails
with the actual blast and breath of this Will or Divine Being; but even then
also when the soul feels drought and barrenness; annihilating all things
felt, as well as those which be gone and vanished. The which point requires
careful Attention. For, thus it annihilates as well all things that remain
after feeling, as also that same which annihilates them, i. the own
Understanding and Knowledge, with all manner of working thereof. Not enduring
that any thing whatsoever, Image nor feeling remain, but only God. For
strength also, because neither a multitude of outward affairs, nor abundance
of inward or intellectual workings can hinder this Annihilation, or distract
the man himself. For strength again; Because it is not only far distant from
sense, but flat contrary thereto; So that it annihilates things not only when
the mind in abstractions rides above them; but even then when it is conversant
among them, looking on them as if it looked not: whence necessarily arises
Duration, which is the second perfection of Active Annihilation. And both these
perfections are not so perfectly found in the Passive Annihilation, which
stays always the Actual Lure of God. There be many that both know and
practice the Passive, but few the Active. And so, they no sooner fasten on any
work bodily or spiritual, but they easily sink, fall down, and become
divided, and so live always in languishing and unsatisfiednesse of spirit.

These two Annihilations make to a twofold Love, fruitive, and practick,
whereon stands the whole spiritual Life. The Passive tends to the Fruitive
Love, the Active to the Practick. For in as much as these two Loves are never
perfect, till in the Practick love we can enjoy God even as in the Fruitive;
It Is therefore expedient that this Active Annihilation mediate to annihilate
the Acts of this Practick Love, which otherwise might hinder that enjoying, and
raise so many middle walls between God and the soul. As therefore the Passive
Annihilation nothings all things by deading all our feeling of them, and
transchanging them into enjoying Love: So, the Active annihilates them also
still remaining, (though in sense we feel them) transforming them into
fruitive Love: So that the Love, which without this Active Annihilation were
merely Practick, may thus become fruitive. And so by this Active Annihilation
we shall continually enjoy God, whether we work and produce Acts or no. But,
as the same falls not under sense, but is only spiritual and supernatural:
So the enjoyance to which it leads us is not perceived in our feeling, but in
spirit, and transcends nature.

CHAP. XII. That this Active Annihilation consists in equalling the Passive.
The practice of it in Light and Remembrance.
THE Perfection of this Active Annihilation consists in equalling the Passive,
in a Death of all things, and in a Passive Annihilation, after the spirit,
though not after feeling. And the sign showing it to be absolutely perfect, is
when it annihilates the things which we perceive by sense as verily as if we
perceived them not: And even in the face of all these sensibles brings as
Invincible faith, peace, and union with God, as among those things which are
already lost and nothing. For, thus a man seeing, sees not, when he holds not
the same Forms in Meditation and Debatement. And so he lives in a perpetual
Death, and dies in an eternal Life, buried in Triumph of Conquest, like that
valiant Champion Eleazar, entombed in the glory of his victory, when crushed
with the fall of the Beast he ended his days. For, this Beast which he slew
is the whole sinsible world, which when we kill and bring to nothing, we also
slay and annihilate our selves; and so are buried (as it were thereunder) and
our Life is hid with Christ in God.

The sum of the practice of this Annihilation consists in two things, Light
and Remembrance. The use of the Light is general: The use of Remembrance is to
raise us again, when we forget and grow distracted.

For the first: This Light is no other but a pure, simple, naked, and habitual
Faith, which Reason helps, Experience ratifies and confirms. Nor falls it
under sense, nor has any acquaintance therewith; yea it resists the same: But
it resides in the Crown of the soul, and beholds God without any Mean. I
say, it is pure; excluding all help of the senses, so as all in vain should any
prop or assurance be groped for from them which are utterly to be renounced.
First, because the help of that Devotion, which is had from the senses,
endures not: but this Faith is lasting. Secondly, because when sensible
Devotion is had, it is not certain, but variable. But this Faith is con^ant.
Nor is it sufficient to renounce the senses, unless we also annihilate them,
because they be erroneous and lying, persuading ^s to believe that things ar^:
Con^^ariwise, this faith is lightsome, and points us to walk in the spirit.

Secondly, I call it simple, to cut of all multiplicity of Reasoning, as a
thing repugnant to the purity of this Faith. First, because it makes it humane,
where it should be Divine. Secondly, because it moves us to produce Acts, and
consequently to be but causes, not Annihilations. Thirdly, because it Clouds,
and fumes up Exhalations between GOD and the soul.

Thirdly, I call it habitual: under which word is much comprised, and very
remarkable; which is, that it ought to be continual without ceasing or
interruption, that so we may ever behold this Infinite of Nothing and All:
which though it seem hard to do, yet, that it may be done, two Reasons shall
confirm. One is, that as an Angel, though he be upon earth, yet for the
home^inesse* he has to his place is said to be in heaven: So this Light and
Faith, though sometimes they do not actually see this Nothing, and this All,
yet through the disposednesse wherein they accustom to behold them, they
always persevere in the sight of them. And as an Angel in the twinkle of an
eye, mounts from earth to heaven: So, this Light and Faith in an Atom's time,
reach the actual contemplation of God, and this nothing. And as an Angel so
returned is counted to have been in heaven, as it were from the beginning; and
so is verified that Say of our Savior, Their Angels do always behold the face
of my heavenly Father. So also this Light, when it actually sees that Mystery,
even when they forget and seem to be distracted.

Fourthly, I add [which Reason helps.] i. the first point before mentioned,
which is Knowledge grounded on Reason, Philosophy, the Fathers, and holy
Scripture^ and Examples. All which arguments are drawn to this word Reason,
whereby this Faith is assisted. And this contradicts not what we said before,
that this Faith excludes all Reasoning: for I spoke this concerning the second
point touching the practice of Annihilation, the which must be free from all
multiplicity of Discourses. But, here I speak of the first point Knowledge,
which is strengthened by reason and discourse.

I add, which [experience ratifies and confirmes] i. when the soul dived and
drowned in this Infinite, sees her self brought to nothing. For, thus her
Light and Faith are much increased; so that it shall afterward be very easy
for her to believe this Annihilation, and by this light to dive her self
deeper and deeper therein.

Sixthly, I say, it comes not under sense: The reason is; because as the
understanding is not subjacent nor tied to any Organ, so neither is this Light,
which pertaines to the understanding: whence it follows that it falls not
under sense, because no Might of the soul can feel without its own Organ.

Seventhly, I affirm, that this Faith and Light resist sense; For, they
directly fight against it. What Sense affirms, they deny: Sense says such or
such a thing is; which Faith and Light (in respect of Gods presence) say, is
not.

Eighthly, I place this Faith in the Crown of the Soul, because that place is
furthest from the Senses, and nearest to God: and it is the very top of the
Soul.

Ninthly, I say: It beholds God without Mean: because it is not hindered by
sense or Sensible things, but stands free and clear from them all.

Touching the second point: this Remembrance is a certain Inspiration,
Illumination, Touching, or Out-breake of Divine Light, which strikes the Soul,
and quicker then Lightning smites, rowses, and shows her where she is, even
lost in this All, and in the Arms of her Dear. And thus by the furtherance of
this Remembrance the soul mounts her self when she seems distracted from the
Actual sight and Remembrance of God.

But note well that I call it a Remembrance, and not Inturning for two Reasons.

First, because turning in, stirs Action, such as this Remembrance has
scarce any, by reason of the exceeding purity, nakedness, and simplicity.

Secondly, because such In-turning presupposes Out-turning and Distraction,
which befalls not in this Remembrance, because it nothings all Distraction
whatsoever.

Again, I call it Remembrance, because it consists in an act of the soul so
much as in the divine working upon her, not proceeding from her, but from God.

Thirdly, because it changes not the state of the soul, making her nearer to
the Divine Being, nor the Divine Being nearer to her; but only lets her see
where, in what degree, and state she is, even in this All: Always presupposed
that she neglect not her duty in this practice.

Fourthly, because it is swift, and passes quicker then Act.

Fifthly, because the soul has it before she can think: Nor can she look so
suddenly as she has it again; And that because of the habit of Light, and
Faith wherewith she is endowed.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Imperfections or Impediments of Active Annihilation.
THE practice of this Annihilation will appear more clearly by opposing
thereto the failings and impediments thereof. And therefore we will here
discuss the same.

And first, it is an imperfection to doubt of the Real presence of God, or to
believe the same doubtingly, or with a languishing and sleepy faith.

Secondly, not to live by this faith, i. to stick at things as if they were
something, not waking to behold this luster and glory of the Bridegroom, and
everlastingly to embrace him, who is not only known to be present, but of all
things only present; before whom they all vanish and cease to be esteemed for
any thing.

Thirdly, to believe the Senses, and let them rule over the Light, Reason and
Faith. To listen to them, since they be lying, and bring in death, whose
windows they be. Nor, by them can there be any way to Life, inasmuch as this
Life far transcends them. Lastly, since it is they we here fight with to bring
them to nothing, therefore in their own cause they can be no Judges, but must
dye and be nothing'd.

Fourthly, to shun any necessary Work, outward or inward, for fear of
Distraction. For therein appears the error, Darkness and failing of such
Annihilation in accounting that work to be somewhat, where indeed it is
nothing. And surely to him that takes it for somewhat, it is somewhat indeed,
and therefore not a little to be feared. But, if his Anihilation were perfect,
the work were nothing, nor worth his fear. Yea, he that so abandons a
necessary work, sustaines double disadvantage, and incurres a double
blindness. First, on the things, which to him is turned into Darkness: And
secondly, on the Fears part, which with the stroke raises obscurity. Wherein
they fail exceedingly, who desired to do any thing, repine and excuse
themselves, deluded under a painted cloak of giving themselves to the Spirit.
And so they run away from that which they say they seek, i. from God, who is
in that work, and draw on themselves a triple darkness and stumbling block.
1. Work. 2. Act. 3. Their own will and Disobedience.

Fifthly, to adjourne a simple Conversion to God; which often befalls those who
having any outward work, or any Meditation in hand, think they cannot come to
God till the work be done, which manner of doing contains two failings: One,
that in this work they were not first united and annihilated: the other, that
they thought it impossible while the work lasted. In both they fail, and fly
back from this Annihilation, wherein if they persisted constantly, it would
dissolve al things alike, and eternally hold a most happy union.

Herein also appears Sensuality, closely hunting for comfort by a sensible
Union, which it seems it cannot reach till the work be done.

A 6th. Imperfect. and that a close one, is to turn our selves in, as it were,
from a place without to a place within; as if God were present or more in one
place then in another; which directly opposes this Annihilation. For,
Annihilation holds us within by the presentnes of God in all steads, and by an
abolishment of all those things which might never so little turn out or
distract us. Also this turning in, works against kindly Course, flying from
those things which should fly from us and vanish, even All things. For, whilst
the soul turns her self in, she flies from things without growing somewhat
afraid of them: And the more she fears, the thicker they run in her mind;
Besides, she entertaines them into Gods place, whose prerogative reaching to be
everywher, so that at his presence all things should melt, she contrariwise
allows them so much place, that they rather exclude God. Besides, this Turning
in is not free from sense; Nor can it rest or believe it self enough turned
in, till first it taste some certainty thereof.

Lastly, this Inturning is such an Imperfection, that he that uses it is ever
anew to begin. For, he that withdraws himself from things as often as any work
is to be done, he sinks again into them; then grows distracted, and so is to
begin again.

Inturning therefore I say is to be rejected, because Out-turning is never to
be admitted, but to live constantly in the Infinite of this Divine Being, and
the Nothingnesse of all things. And if a man find himself fallen without, let
him recover himself by Annihilation, not by Inturning.

A seventh Imperfection is to put a Difference between perceiving and not
perceiving, i. when by the benefit of some particular Light, one proves this
All and this Nothing: Yet, being thus enlightened, he is not to assent more or
less to this Truth, then when he seems deprived of the same Light. Where it
happs that diverse Men led by some especial pull profoundly into God, do
believe with a strong Faith that God is All, and the Creature Nothing: because
they see it so: But, being a little forsaken, and left without taste, they
glide away into another Conceit, and at length to gross error, in making God
sometimes greater, sometimes more present then at other times. Yea, they value
the Creature sometimes more, sometimes less; only because they judge not by
light of Faith, but by opinion of their senses.

An 8th. Imperfection is, to take this Remembrance only as our own Act or
proper Motion. For thus in some measure it should be a Let to true
Contemplation. But it is even to be entered primely as the work and Motion of
God, that though some little thereof seem to be on our part, yet that little
may be nothing'd by Active Annihilation, that nothing may rise betwixt God and
the soul at all.

A ninth Imperfection is, not to be contented with this Simple Remembrance. The
reason is, because whatsoever is done either by searching, desiring, or
self-turning inwards, does all tend to Being and Multiplication, not to not
being and simplification. Where many fail, always almost pursuing further,
whilst they labor to repel those things which before they should have known
to be nothing. Sometimes also in seeking God, whom also we should believe to
be nearer us, and more we then our selves. And the more they work and search
thus, the less they find because of the great Multiplicity and commotion of
the Soul. And contrariwise the less they work and search in this manner,
biding content with this simple and naked Remembrance, the more they shall see
God, because of the great simplicity and calmnesse of the Soul.

To conclude: The last Imperfection is, not to persevere everlastingly and
without stop in the practice of this Exercise of All and Nothing. Yet this
failing is ordinary with many, who at every encountering Act, work, and motion
do cut and knap off the thread of this habitual Annihilation. And so
following sense, and not naked Faith, they cannot see this All in the Creator,
and Nothing in the Creatures. The cure of all these Imperfections is plain:
which is to walk perpetually in this Annihilation, Light, and Remembrance: as
we showed before.

Now, the cloze and conclusion of these 2 Annihilations is, that by the
passive, the soul mounted and taken up to God with all her Mights, abides in
high abstraction uncloathed of all Images, in rest of spirit, and ceasing from
acts: In the Active she stands also fixed, (though not after Sense) in the very
face of all those Acts and Images remaining. Both these Annihilations are to
be practiced by simple Remembrance.

And that soul which duly fans away all these imperfections, opposing the two
Annihilations, shall never be denied a blessed arrival in God (presupposing the
Common goodness ever at hand.) As on the other side, with these Imperfections
she can never come there.

Doubtless there be many, who for want of discovering and correcting them,
stick many years at the threshold without entrance. Therefore let not him
that desires the true way to Contemplation, grow light-minded, or count them
for small matters; for they cannot be small, that hinder so great a good.

It Is true I confess, that sometimes the pull of the holy Ghost may be so
ravishing, that it may mount the soul to God, without punctual avoydance of
all these Imperfections. But that grace is extraordinary, and not to be lingered
upon, that we should neglect to gird up our selves with all our mights thereto.

Here note also, that as in the Interior Will we are not to fly back to the
Exterior, but to accomplish all our works according to the Nature of the
Interior Will: So, neither should he that has won the Tower of this
Supereminent Will, go forth any more ^o either of the other, but dwell here
for ever, by drawing, doing them here, spiritualizing, and even spending them
to nothing through ^his Annihilation, as we have showed in this part. But in
saying that he should not return to the exterior Will, I give no counsel to
despise outward works: for of this error have I warned the Reader elsewhere.
But I will that in doing them, they be spiritualized and annihiled.

CHAP. XIIII. That the practice of these two Annilations is not to be
disorderly confounded as touching Time and Place: but eac^ to be assigned his
own Time and Place. What time and Place suits the one, and what the other. Of 3
kinds of working. Of the true and false rest, with the differences and signs
whereby to know them.
THese two Annihilations have each of them his proper Time and Place, which are
not to be confounded together. Now that we may see what place is meet for the
one, and what for the other; these 2 Annihilations make to a twofold Love. The
Passive to an enjoying Love, i. to a naked beholding Union and enjoyance of
God. The Active to a practicke Love, i. to our Outgoing, Lively and faithful
working, whether bodily or spiritual.

So, then the proper place of the Passive Annihilation is when we lie
prostrate to the Fruitive Love. Because the Passive reduces all Motions and
workings to nothing, avants all forms and Images, and so leads us to the
fruition of God.

The Place for the active Annihil. is when we are to follow the Practick Love:
For, by this Annihil. as by a certain transcendence of the Mind, all our works,
acts, and operations as well of the body as soul, are nothing'd: so going out
without going out, working without working, Being without Being, living and yet
dead, we transform the practick Love into the fruitive, and change the Active
Life into the Contemplative; Enjoy God by Faith in working and Action, as fully
as in rest and ease; which is the Top and spire of Perfection.

And these are the proper places of the two Annihilations. They err therefore
that disorder them, and alter their right courses; using indeed a Passive
Annihilatio^ and savoring Acts and Operations, (as some do) when they should
faithfully work in the Practicke Love. And practicing the Passive
Annihilation, producing Acts (as many do) when they should suppress them, and
enjoy God by Fruitive Love. The first run upon a false rest: the other, a
hurtful Activenesse. Some through a too much Retiredness hide their Talent:
Others through superfluousnesse of working fall short of God. But, that these
two extremes may be combined, and both the Mistakes amended, it remains that
we now show the times agreeing to these two Annihilations, the not knowing
whereof, brings the two foresaid Errors.

There be three sorts of Active love, or working: Exterior, Interior, and
Intimate; Exterior, employed in bodily labors; Interior in discourses and
studies; Intimate, in renewing of workings and prayer.

For the first. Though bodily works they be only, yet are they not to be
neglected, when obedience, engagement, love, or discretion ^alls and requires
them. In which thing, we are to stick close to the rule of the exterior Will.
And if that Rule require them not, it shall be no wisdom to forsake the
Fruitive Love to go to do them. For, though the Active Annihilation reduces
all to Nothing: yet, such ^ Liberty is not expedient, as runs ^s wittingly upon
Impertinencies. He that loves danger shall perish therei^; And he that linkes
hard ties not ^rong: Yea, he that willingly sets himself aworke about
needless things, cannot duly practice this Annihilation. But if on the other
side he refuse to do such works after the same Rule, he incurres a dull
rest, the more to be feared because veiled with a false vizard of Contemplation
concerning the Interior working, as Studies, discourse, or giving ones self
to the Spirit. The limits of necessity are not to be transgrest, and
superfluities warily to be avoided; the which are never free from Passions,
Affections and Negligence, wherein if we be not watchful, no small
Immortification and vexation arises in the soul, which increase and swel there
the more, the less we account them such; being daubed over with a vain
Tincture of perfection: Whereout of necessity arises an inordinate and
dangerous liberty of Mind, pouring it self forth into all kind of phantasticke
thoughts, and losing the bridle to fleshly Imaginations and ridiculous
discourses, whereout of necessity arises an inordinate and dangerous liberty of
Mind pouring it self forth into all kind of phantasticke thoughts, whereby all
Passions have their free entry. Pride, Self-conceit, Ambition, Suspicion, Rash
Judgment, Contempt of our Neighbors, the false Joy, Sadness, Fear, Anger,
Envy, and of Miseries what not? which nathelesse a Dullness and unsensiblenesse
of the evil makes to be little troubled at; all prick of Conscience being
blunted; whereto great heed is to be taken. But if it appear by this Rule
that the Will of God requires his Industry in Studies, Discourse, etc. and yet
he hangs back therefrom; it is a sluggish faint-heartednesse, though veiled
under pretext of of piety, or addicting himself to the Spirit.

Touching the Intimate working as renewing of our practice in contemplation,
etc. It Is only then to be produced when by reason of Gods working withdrawn,
and our own waxing faint, or because of feeble and sluggish Nature the Mind
is sunk as it were yawning, and grows heavy, and lets fall from her memory this
Blessed-making object. Yet, so long as by the Pull and Inworking of the
Bridegroom, or by strength or rowsing of the Mind, or even by patient cleaving
to God, or by simple Remembrance, she can persevere in Union with God in the
Fruitive Love; It Is not best to forsake the Passive Annihilation, and the
Fruitive Love that depends thereon, to take in hand by acts to practice the
Active Annihilation: provided that by simple Remembrance she stand to her part.
For there it is that the soul is so transported, enlarged, enlightened, and
united to God: there she tastes the chaste embraces, sweet entercourses, and
divine kisses; there she sees her self sublimed, ennobled, and glorified with
Angels at the celestial Table. There she relishes the fruits of her
Mortification, the treasures of her Repentance, and the Comforts of all her
Selfe-denyalls, and of those weapons she found out to make war upon her self,
for attaining the Kingdom of Heaven, which is to be got by violence. Let her
not therefore (I say) forsake this Passive AnnihilatIon, and the Fruitive Love
descending therefrom; No, though she feel not those comforts but find this
Fruitive Love so bare to her feeling, that she lose all her own feeling and
assurance of comfort, which is the satisfaction of Nature. And this is the true
Rest, wherein both her faithfulness is tried, and the soul is seated in a
true poverty of Spirit, patience, and essential Resignation of her self.
There whatsoever of Man remains in the soul is done away. There the Death
ended, and the conquest achieved. There is the ghost given up between the
hands of God, and lastly there is the Man transformed whole into God: For, by
this constancy and Death, God lives and reigns in him, and in him accomplishes
all his works. By this Rest and ceasing from Acts, is pure abstraction and
Uncloathing of Spirit attained too, wherein the Soul is spung'd of all errors
and impurities, and practices all virtues and perfections, (though essentially
and without multiplicity.) For, here is used a marvailous defense and
watchfulnes of heart, which not only can endure no consent or delight, but even
not the least feeling or thought of Sin, they being open enemies to this Rest
and Annihilation: so that here all Passions are appeased, Affections mortified,
and Motions restrained. Here love is ordered, Desire bridled, Joy tempered,
Hate killed, Sadness mitigated, Vain hope extinct, Despair rejected, Fear put to
flight, Presumption abased, Wrath pa^ified; and shortly to stay, here, all
Inordinatenesse of the Soul is rectified and reformed. But if even the least
passion, affection, or Inordinatenesse get head, there is then no perfect rest,
no Passive Annihilation till they be conquered. If we seek Virtues: How
profound humility is it thus to nothing our selves? How invincible Patience
thus to wait? How strong constancy thus to persevere? How lovely
Long-suffering to attend God so long with so fixed and faithful an eye? How
chaste Virginity to present our selves thus simple* Lastly, what Faith livelier,
wha^ hope surer, what Love more arden^ then is found in this Annihilatio^ and
Rest? Though indeed all these Virtues sucked up as it were in the Infinite of
Divinity; are there practiced more essentially as in their Fount and wel-spring
then actually. They err therefore, who being forsaken of a perceivable or
experimental Union, turn their bach straightway upon this Annihilation,
Death, and expyration, leaping back to themselves, and rebetaking them to
their own act^* refuse to endure this Rest, Emptiness and poverty of Spirit,
this will of God, and All-spritely intercourse, Supercelestiall or Essential
Illumination, though indeed the true and Divine Wisdom and naked seeing of
God, is only attained in this Annihilation, Rest, Expiration and Death: So that
in this their flying back and returning to themselves they do no other but
far estrange themselves from all pure and empyreall knowledge, and from al union
and transformation into God, and so bide always ^raitned within themselves and
their own bowels, and in the fet^ers of the old Man, as we have clearly
showed: But they that be otherwise minded, that they may the better pamper
nature and their own feeling, are pleased to let themselves be deluded under a
false ^ew of virtue, saying that in this Annihilation they ought to co^perate
with God and not to rest, when indeed the more they rest thus, the more they
work, and less, the less they rest; though unexperienc't ones can hardly
believe it. For, this way of working is spiritual and Godlike, and far from
feeling and common working of Man, which can never unite the soul to God
immediately. But, let them say what they please; If they would thoroughly search
the depth of their mind, they should find that no other thing but self-love,
unfaithfulnes, faintheartednesse, selfe-seeking and impatience of spirit, calls
them back from this Annihilation, how much soever nature bulwarks her self
under a fair pretense of Virtue Some there be, who in this Annihilation have
many years hung ^^ the door of persecution without assaying to enter: because
when by ceasing from their own Ac^^ and by Annihilation of themselves they
should have anchored in God, they returned back into their own Country by
renewing their own Acts and humane workings, who nevertheless being showed
their failing, have easily found passage through this gate. But though the
greatest part of Spiritualls incline to this extreme, yet it may be, ^^d some
there are that lean the other way to a rest too much; taking ^^^reames for
means, and the false ^est for the true. We will therefore ^^ke each of the^
known from other.

The false Rest, is Rest taken in ^^ture, not in God: wherein nei^^er in
Nature, nor yet in God ^y operation is exercised. And ^us it may be known
from the ^^e and good rest. The false is ^deede a Rest, but not Annihila^on,
and it nourishes in it self ^ch self Love. The good Rest is absolute
Annihilation perfecting the whole man. The false is turned from God and
reflected upon it self; The true is turned from it self, and reflected upon
God. The false seeks consolation and solace; the true, content with God alone,
lets go all other things. The false is busied about an Imaginary death and
Annihilation; the true about a Real one. The false eanes more then too much
upon the old Man and selfewill: the true counts it self altogether vile. The
false sets down it self as the end wherein to rest: the true is taken as a
mean to come to God. The false makes the soul dull, dark and ignorant in
virtues; the true inriches her with the contrary ornaments. The false-loosens
and benumnes the conscience, clumpsing and making it heedlesse of gross
imperfections ^ the true, sharpes it and makes it sensible of the least
blemish. The false presents sadness and impatience when duties of obedience or
love are to be undergone: the true teaches Resignation and Joy. The false
having little sound Mortification, takes pains more in hiding then in subduing
imperfections (witness their life that follow it, sitting down without the
true Rest,) the true rejoices in true Mortificatio^, he^rtily rooting out all
imperfections. Lastly, the false puffes up with Ambition, and suggests a high
conceit of it self; the true holds low with humility, bringing in
Selfe-contempt. And to conclude, the one without any cleaving to or Remembrance
of God makes the highest end the own ease, never intending to produce any
inward act, how much soever it sees it self sunk, fallen asleep, and
degenerate into pure nature. The other is never without some cleaving to God
and Remembrance of him, but is ever armed with some though very spiritual, and
always disposed to rear it self again, whenever it feels it self
sliding or slipped into pure nature, through heaviness of the Mights and
drowsines of the faculties of the soul. And these be the differences between
these two Rests, and the signs whereby they may be known. And above the rest,
the last is the chief, being a most remarkable difference and plain, and
sufficing by it self without more.

Nevertheless, if here a little forgetfulness of God creep on us through
frailty; yet are we not therefore to waver and cast all away as a false rest;
but only for so much, not for all. i. for that space of time wherein we
persevered forgetful of God, but for no longer. And by diligent watch to
redeem the time, and not by heavy faint-heartednesse to give over all. No,
nor can that be the false rest, if that heaviness proceed of frailty and
against the Will. For the false rest is voluntary.

Lo there! the three kinds of working, Exterior, Interior, and Intimate,
the extremes and the means. The inordinate working which is the
false-liberty; The Idle-ease which makes the false rest: And that which comes
in due time, wherein consists the holy Activenesse according to the course and
exercise of the Active Annihilation as abovesaid. And when the time requires
not that we go forth to such action and practice of Love, by the Active
Annihilation, then is it right that we bide rooted and grounded in Union and
enjoying love by the Passive Annihilation. And thus you see the proper times of
these two Annihilations as before you saw the places.

CHAP. XV. The manner of passing forwards in the three kinds of Working;
Exterior, Interior, and Intimate: Where is showed the drawing of the Active and
Contemplative Life to the Supereminent. And the Practice of the two former
Wills in the third.
HAving now showed the Time and Place of working; it remains that we declare
the manner.

And first, for the Exterior and Interior working, whose Time and Place
(though they be the same in this Essential as in the Exterior Will, after the
Rule of things Commanded, Forbidden, and Indifferent; whether bodily or
spiritual; which Law is never to be abrogated under any cloak of Perfection
whatsoever;) yet in the manner of working they differ as far as the
Supereminent Life excels the Active: For he that is a Worker in this third, is
also to accomplish the Duties of the first, and yet not to descend nor give
back thereto.

Wherefore in the practick Love and outward workings, as in bodily Works, as
also in the inward Love or Working, as to labor for virtues, to meditate, to
repel vices and temptations, to quench passions and affections; none of these
are to be done as in the Exterior Will, by setting before our selves this
Essential Will and divine Being, or because God is, or that God may be.
Assuredly knowing that thus a dwelling is prepared for God who will thus shine
in the soul: where contrariwise, by our Self-will and Darkness we should
neither enjoy God, nor behold this Being. So that when we do any outward Good
works either by embracing Virtue, or rejecting Sin and Passions; we do it not
here by directing any Intention, but by knowing most surely, simply and
plainly, that so God will be. Where, in working contrary, not God should be,
but we our selves, so far forth as in us lay, nor for us: No, nor yet as
touching God himself, so far sorth as we could withstand it. And thus through
our Sin and Self-will, and by preventing God, we should set up our selves,
and so advance our own Sin and Passion for a God and an Idol.

But, take heed that I say not, in doing these or these things, God will be
there; i. in those things, or then and at such a time; but simply and
indefinitely, God will be. For, the word Being or God abstracts from [here] and
[now,] so that thee is not only in such a Good work, but every where, as that
Soul most plainly proves, that sees her self by this Practice swing'd along
in a strange Maze without herself in this Being, and rapt therewith as in a
Dissolution of all things thereinto; Nor knows she whether she touch the ground.

Neither say I: The Soul should then see God; but simply [see him] i^ not as
beginning from thence forwards, but as being from the beginning, or rather
without all beginning. For, in him she sees eternity without beginning and end.
Besides since all Active Life as exercise of Virtues, and contention against
Vices; as also the Contemplative Life, are drawn to this Essential: and since
consequently the practice of them consists in these two points; we are here no
less to take heart never to slide away from this All and this Nothing, then
we were in the other two lives to persevere in the Divine Will and
Selfe-denyall: Resting ever assured, that as often as we lose the Divine Being,
and find our selves as somewhat; so often we stray from the Divine Will and
Perfection, and follow our own will and evil. We should therefore always
hold fast this All and this Nothing, but chiefly when we practice any thing
which is of Virtue and perfection, or avoid any thing tending to error and
Imperfection.

Nor are our Affections and Passions to be pampered under cloak of Active
Annihilation by conceiting a false hope of making them nothing thereby. For,
that cannot be done, because the very Affection it self, the Passion, and
false being is the absence of the true* Being: So that To be willingly
imperfect, and also to be annihilated, do no less contradict each other, then
to be and not to be, both at once. For, to be subject to passions, is that
being which diametrally ^hwarts Annihilation and Not-being. Such Annihilation
therefore is counterfeite and good for Nothing, but to excuse excuses in sins.
Yet this I mean only of those Passions and Temptations whereto free consent is
given: For, otherwise those Passions and Temptations whereto our Reason
renounces to give consent, (though we feel them stick never so strong in the
Soul;) yet are they to be nothingd by mean of the Active Annihilation. And so
we need confess nothing in them but this All, as in the first part we
acknowledged nothing but the will of God. Where note, that if a Man really and
truly bear down all passions and imperfections by his own nothing and the
Divine All; he shall at length return victorious in a final and triumphant
Conquest of them all, and become so thoroughly stablisht, fortified and
enthroned i^ this practice that he shall taste infinite more pleasure from this
mortification of himself, then he ever before tasted in slavery to his own
will and lust. For, to him that attaines hither, all the pain, contradiction
and sorrow which he suffered in fighting against his own will and desire, is
suddenly changed into Joy and Bliss, whilst in stead of himself he en^oyes
not any grace or virtue, but God himself, for whose alone sake he thus denies
himself. And thus it is clear what manner of working is to be observed in
the Outer and Inner Operation. i. That they are not to be produced in the
Exterior Will, or according thereunto; but through and in the Essential Will
which is God himself. Not, that Outward works are to be despised on neglected,
but done after a perfect manner, bodily turned into spiritual, and the Active
Life drawn up to the Contemplative, and the Exterior and Interior Wills to
the Essential. And this shall suffice for the place, time, and ^anner of
working.

For the second Interior Will ^^d working therein, I know no need here to
speak thereof, both because it is but as an effect of the ^^st, and also
because it is contained as perfectly in these two, as a ^^ane within two
extremes.

Now, having seen the way of practick Love, or working outward and inward; we
come to the Intimate working, the use whereof uses to befall in Prayer, when
the Soul as we have said finds her self foiled and forgetful of God. But now
how pure, how simple and spritely this working ought to be, and how little
acquaintance it should have with our Senses, is manifest from the very name and
epithet of Intimate. For, since hare Intimatenesse, Purity, and Spirituality
are but one and the same thing, it follows that inasmuch as nothing is more
inward then that which is intimate, that nothing is more pure or spiritual.
And therefore there is such exceeding purity and spritelinesse required in this
working, lest it should disturb the soul from the Union and Fruitive Love sink
her too near to Nature, and writhe her too much into her self, but
contrariwise, rather immediately fix her in Union, and seat her in the Divine
Being far distanc'd from her self, and transcending Nature: Many fail in this
Rule of Intimate Acts; some more, some less.

For, some there be that make no end of producing fervent acts and natural
workings, running thereby so much further from the true union and essential
Contemplation, as they think by doing to ^ome nearer: And so much the more
sticking in themselves and their own Nature, as they think they live in God
and his Being. for, such workings are neither ^ntimate nor pure, but exterior
and unclean.

And these fail not only in the ^urity and profoundnesse of wor^ing, but also
in the Time. For, they always act, leaving no room for Fruitive Love.

Others work with no less violence and tempest of Natural Motions then these
do; but not so often: but only when they feel the heaviness and drowsinesse of
Nature: and these err in the Intimate working of this Life, though they hold
the due time.

Lastly, some there are that produce Acts so half sleeping, (indeed much finer
Acts then those others) yet not pure enough for that Intimate purity here
required: But sti^ they breath their own Motions ^^ Natural strength and
Langour ^^ satisfy Nature.

But, in this place I take the mo^^ pure intimate and perfect working to be
that which stands in a sole* simple, and pure Remembrance o^ God, and is
produced by pure an^ naked faith, whereof Chap. 12. because that alone is the
true Mean twixt the said Extremes of false Rest and hurtful Activity, and is
the sole Intimate working which immediately sets the soul in Union and
enjoying Love, and wastes her into the Divine Being. For, this Remembrance
opposes it self against that false Rest, Drowsinesse and Heaviness of Nature,
ever ^owsing the Soul, and making her attentive to her All. On the other side,
it opposes the hurtful Activenesse, because it works not so much by Natural
Motion as by pure ^aith, which is supernatural, and an infused virtue; nor so
much by Man, as by this Being and this All, who with his glory, inspiration,
and Light smiting and allarming ^er up, trumpets upon her walls I am here.

The Imperfections whereby we ^y fail in this pure Remembrance are declared
Chap. 12. which may be all drawn to these 2. heads, to Add and to Diminish.
For, to diminish, i. to be less employed then in a sole, pure and simple
Remembrance, is to slide into one of the Extremes, the False Rest. For, no Man
can do less but he that is laid dull and half asleep.

To add also, i. to join other Selfe-Acts whereby to come nigher to God then
we think we can do by this Naked Faith and Remembrance, is to fall into the
other extreme of Hurtful working.

For, he that thus betakes himself again to his own Acts, goes as far back
as he that being unaccustomed to work nakedly and supernaturally by true and
pure faith, and not finding there his old staff of feeling, grows
male-contented with this pure and naked Remembrance, and falls to redouble hi^
own manifold Acts, and so withdraws this Being the further from him, by
seeking it after so uncouth a manner.

Yet, if at first, for the little practice a Man has had in the production of
such pure working, any act hap to break out more then a simple Remembrance,
the same may be nothing'd by Active Annihilation. And the same direction
belongs also to them in whom this Remembrance seems to imitate Acts. And
contrariwise, he that finds his pulse too slow, let him recover by this
simple Remembrance, when his Soul is so falling and drowsy. Which Remembrance
though I may say, it is rather to be received as the work of God then as ours;
yet that hinders not but we may have it for seeking, since this Divine Being
and Light is ever present, and stands at the Door and knockes. And because
also that Naked Faith whereby we behold the same, bides always in the soul,
and is habitual.

And thus, the Intimate working is plain. For as in the foregoing chapter, the
due time and place are showed where and when the three kinds of working in the
practick Love are to be exercised; So, here is declared the manner they are to
be done in. And thus it is clear how the two former Lives are drawn to and
practiced in this third without shrinking a Jot from the practice thereof down
to the other. For, as the Philosopher is not to begin again, and undergo the
Schools and rules of Grammar: So he that has won the Tower of this
Supereminent Will is not to sink or slide to the two fore-past Lives. Not,
that he should neglect outward Works, ^ut fulfill them perfectly in this ^hird
Life and Will, transforming ^odily into ghostly, and the A^tive Life into the
Contemplative, ^d that not without due respect ^o the Time, Place, and manner
as before.

CHAP. XVI. That the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ is perpetually to be
practiced, and always to be had and seen before the eyes of the soul.
AS for the Practice of the Passion according to the condi^ion of this
Exercise, it is always ^o be held before our eyes as one and the same with this
All associate to the Flesh and Nature of Man. Where note well that I say, (one
and the same.) For, so shall the Contemplation thereof yield a^undance of fruit
as shall appear.

But, because many conceit that this Practice and Contemplation of the Passion
suites only with young pupills, and such as converse only in the Active Life,
but not in the Supereminent, supposing it most excellent to adhere to the
Deity by perfect Union:

It Is therefore a matter of high Consequence in our present purpose, to say
somewhat thereof. And though the Brevity whereto I confine my self in this
Manual do scarce permit the thread of our discourse to be spun longer, yet in
as much as the Passion is so unevitable that it makes an Essential part of this
Rule; I may not pass it in silence, the rather because the Devotion of many,
and the wavering of some about the resolution hereof, requires thus much.

And for the first point, to secure them that the Passion ought always to be had
before our eyes, it is plain by that of Exodus. And look that thou make it like
the Pattern showed thee in the Mount: Which (say the Fathers) is meant of the
Passion of Christ. And, how ardently God desires to commend the Contemplation
thereof to us, appears;

First, by the word [Looke] which awakes us to a solid and profound Insight and
consideration: inasmuch as infinite secrets be there enclosed, which be hidden
from the outer-eye, and which re^aine invisible without a good, ^xt, watchful,
long, and through-lighted sight, not in the Active and Illuminate Life, but
even in the Contemplative, which also will ^carcely prove quick^ and cl^ere
e^ough to comprehend them, but ^ven twinkle ^or weakness in be ^olding and
conceiving the same.

Besides, since GOD is there, (though in form of Man) it is most just and godly
that every where we give him profound adoration and honor. For, what soul can
endure when she sees God upon earth, to slight his acquaintance there, and
fling away to abstraction? Or with what face or piety can she turn her back on
him, hanging on the Cross, to hunt for pleasures, he remaining in pains?

Vrias wisely considering that the Ark of God dwelt in Tents, utterly refused
comfort, saying; The Ark of God, and Israel, and Judah rest in Tents, and my
Lord Joab, and the servants of my Lord encamp in the open field: and shall I go
into my house to eat and drink and lie with my Wife? How much more ought we to
forsake comfort (so far as it depends on us and our seeking) yea and from God
double rewarded) to bear a part with the Living Ark of God, wherein God
himself is enclosed; yea which is God himself?

When King David out-worne with woes, clumbe gasping to the Top of the Mount of
Olives barefoote; the Princes yielded themselves his consorts; How then can ^e
do less to the Immortal God ^ur King, then they to their Mor^ll Man?

Also, these words, Make it after ^^e pattern, express that Ingage^ent we
stand in of bearing the Passion of Christ always before our ^yes. For, as a
Painter about to ^rame an Image to the life accor^ing to the Type, is tied
always to ^old the same before his eyes; So ^s it with us in the Passion, which
^s our Pattern and Prototype. Every Christian is a Painter. His ^ands and
fingers are the Pencill: His colors many virtues and good works. Himself is
the Image he is to draw, where color must be laid upon color, and virtue
added to virtue; They shall go from strength to strength until the Image be
brought to perfection. Which the better to accomplish, this Pattern is always
to be had before his eyes. And Painter-wise to fix his eye on the Prototype at
every draught of the Pencill of Virtue, Well-doing, or suffering, not moving a
jot without a sight of the same, lest the Image should rebound unlike. And
because our whole Life is spent in painting, and inducing new glories to this
Image, it follows that this pattern is never to be abandoned to death.

Jacob stuck twi-straked rods before the eyes of his sheep, and so made
them bring forth Lambs like variously speckled. And our heavenly Jacob and
good shepherd sets before the eyes of our souls the varieties of the Virtues
of his Passion, that we may produce the like.

Again, this Pattern was showed in the Mount: whence you may gather the
wondrous height of this Mystery, as also how much their Judgment is besotted,
who suggest they have won the top thereof in the Active and Illuminate Life:
as if either the top of this Mount were not passing high, or as if in this
Mystery consisted not the most sublime Contemplation.

Our Lord commanded that both the posts of the Children of Isreal's houses
should be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb; showing that he would have us
so ever mindful of the blood and Passion of that Lamb which takes away the
Sins of the World, that we could neither enter our Inner house by
Contemplation, nor go out by Action, but we should have this blood and Passion
before our eyes. Which command is also resembled in that which he gave to the
children of Israel, whom he enjoined to write his Laws upon the gates of their
houses that they might always remember them.

The letter T. representing the Cross, imprinted on the foreheads of mourners
in Jerusalem, signifies also the same Remembrance which God would have us bear
of his Passion: as when he commanded the Children of Israel to carry his Law
before their eyes, he would that they should never forget the same.

The Scarlet thread hung up in Rahabs window, teaches us that it is Gods will we
should hang up his Cross and bloody Passion in the Window of our Inner house
(our understanding) that so we may always muse on, and behold the same.

And surely, he that well weighs with himself the Magnificence of that
supreme Majesty, and how unsearchable a secret it is that such royalty and
omnipotency should suffer so bitter sorrows, and that to no other end but to be
an example to us; he shall easily grant that the whole space of our Life is
most excellently spent in beholding this Mystery.

When God spoke to Jeremiah, he gave him this charge: Go down into the Potters
house, and there thou shall hear my words; Now, who shall we say this Potter
is, but the Son of God that frames those earthen vessels, Men? And which
should be his Mansion House or Worke-house but his Manhood; where, by the
power of his Passion, he repaires and renews the Instruments marred and broken?
If therefore we wait that God should speak to, and direct us in the ways of
the highest Perfection and Contemplation, then are we not to prye up to his
Deity alone, but to meek our selves to his Manhood and Passion: For there he
has promised to speak to us. There, (says he) thou shall hear my words.

When Naomi counseled Ruth what she had to do to compass the Marriage of her
rich Cousin Booz, she willed her to mark the place where he used to sleep,
and having uncovered his feet by heaving up the utmost rindge of the Coverlet
whereunder he reposed himself, there to lay her self down, and so she should
come to know of him what she should do. This Naomi teaching Ruth deciphers
Wisdom which informs the Soul. Rich Booz personates Jesus Christ, who is
rich in all, and who is next of kin to the soul as to her whose Nature he has
assumed. The place where he sleeps is the Cross. The Covering, his Manhood.
The utmost and lowest rindge of the Covering toward the feet, is his Passion,
full of Ignominies which he suffered toward the end and last of his Life. And
this is that utmost border which we are to detect and turn up by Contemplation,
where the Royal Kinglinesse of the Divine Majesty will be found. And there is
the Soul to cast her self down as another Mary Magdalen at the feet of
Jesus, where he will show her what is to be done, that she may present her self
worthy to be his Spouse.

Our Lord wills us being called to the Wedding, to choose to our selves the
lowest room: Sit down (says he) in the lowest seat. And after, he that
invited thee will say, Come up higher.

This Marriage is that of the Lamb, whereof it is said, Blessed are they that
are called to the Supper of the Lamb. When therefore we are invited thither by
Contemplation, we are to take the lowest place of least respect, which is that
of his Passion, so shall we appear worthy to hear that word Come up higher.

But too too little humility resides in that soul, which slighting our Lords
Passion, will press up to his Godhead alone. And surely she does her self no
little disadvantage thereby: For, in time of tribulation, adversity, and
affliction, she is found supportlesse, and so fluttering in the air, is tossed
to and fro by the tempests violence.

Paul seems to write nothing but the Passion; in Preaching to extol no other
thing but the Passion: in the Passion alone to seek matter of rejoicing, to
glory only in the Cross, and to be all-transformed into this Divine Passion:
yea acknowledges himself to know no more but Jesus Christ and him crucified.

CHAP. XVII. That God and Man is to be beheld in the Passion (the Godhead and
Manhood seen together with a single eye) as one, not as two.
ANd here the Manhood is not to be beheld alone, but also the Godhead
therewith, wherein many fail, looking either on the Manhood alone, or sometimes
on it, and sometimes on the Godhead, as on two diverse objects. And so it comes
that some begin to falter, thinking it to be in manner no other Mystery, but
only in beholding the Manhood to fancy a Man tortured with cruel torments
upon a Cross; and after, to find the Godhead, forsaking the same object, they
press up to some other, whereby to behold the Godhead; not believing they can
be raised to both at once, the which indeed pertaines to the highest practice.
For, to see God and Man in one simple sight, is not unlike to that knowledge
whereby God and Man is seen to make one, and the same person.

This Contemplation of God and Man seems prefigured in that brazen Serpent,
whose alone sight cured the beholders of their bitings by other serpents. A
miracle indeed that God should give such power of healing to the look of a
Serpent: Nor doubt I but he would insinuate to us thereby the admirable virtue
enclosed in that celestial Serpent which is Jesus Christ crucified, as he
calls himself, inasmuch as when we rightly behold the Manhood crucified, we
instantly behold his Godhead which is God himself, the small cure of all evil.

For, how can we continue sensible of sorrow or cross, when we see God
himself bearing the same Cross? Blessed are the pure in heart says our Lord,
because they shall see God: The which diverse holy men affirm to be wholly in
the next life, and partly in this. If therefore we see God on the Cross, we
are entered on part of our Bliss in this Life, and consequently cannot feel the
pangs of the Cross.

'Twas a thing unheard of, and which with many transcended all belief, that
out of a hard rock at the second smite of the Rod, such plenty of water
streamed out. This Rock is Christ Jesus, (But the Rock was Christ) whose
Passion, though it appear so stony, that at the first sight it yields no more
but all harsh, hard, and full of afflictions; yet if you smite the same twice
by Contemplation of the Godhead and Manhood, you shall find an overflowing
Inundation of waters of Comfort, a torrent of Joy, and a swift gushing river
flowing from the face of God.

Ezekiel saw a Book written without and within, intimating to us thereby, that
Jesus Christ the Book of Life is written within and without, both sides
containing the same perfections: O ravishing Book! O Miracle! O prodigy! O new
and unusual thing, transcending and passing all Reason, and far surmounting
the territories of Man's capacity, that all the Attributes of God proper to his
Divine Majesty, should be described in our mortal flesh: That all the
internal perfections of God should be depainted in Man, and to know that
person as perfect as God, yea to be God himself! O book (I say) beyond
admiration even to astonishment, wherein the eternal omnipotency is described
in external impotency; Immortality in Mortality; Spirit in Body; Glory in
Ignominy; Freedom in Bondage, and God in Man. A book where without is written
and displayed to the eyes of all men whatsoever the Eternal Father from
everlasting either said or thought. A book showing us the Cross a Tribunal,
the Passion a Throne, and Death the Triumph of Je: Christ. A book-wherof one
says, O wondrous power of the Cross! O unspeakable glory of the Passion,
wherein is both the Throne of our Lord, the judgment of the World, and conquest
of Christ crucified. This is the book wherein all contrary propositions are
reconciled, and without distinction made all one; where the outer thing is
truly known the inner; bodily, spiritual; weakness strength, Sorrow, Joy;
Contempt, Majesty; Shame, Glory; Littleness, Greatness; Poverty, Richness;
Bondage, Freedom; and Torments, Delights. But, out alas for pity; who believes
all this? Or who is it that with a simple heart gives credit to these things?
where is wisdom found? or what place is left for understanding? Here is
Wisdom and Patience of the Saints, even in seeing and practicing those things
which belong to the Passion: And here God pr^^^d them at the waters of
contrad^ction: which waters of Life they ex^ract out of that Celestial and flinty
rock whilst they smite it with the rod of Christian Discipline. Who is wis^,
and he will keep these things.

It may truly be said that (...) book and passion is no other but the gate of
Heaven, and the house of God. And though in this Pas^ion he made darkness his
Pavili^n; nevertheless, as is his darke^esse, so also his light.

Jacobs Ladder though the one and touched heaven and the other ^rth, yet both
made but one Lad^er: even so, the person of Jesus Christ which lived on earth
by his Manhood and endured those tor^ents in his Passion, was no other ^hen
that selfsame second person ^n the Trinity, living ever glorious in the
Heavens.

Moses saw God in the midst of the thorny bush, signifying to us that God
himself is found in his painful and thorn-crowned Passion, and not to be
sought without the same.

No marvel then if Saint Paul, the Doctor of the Gentiles and trumpet of truth
al over the world exhausted all his wisdom from no other fount but out of the
Abyss of this wisdom and knowledge, as himself acknowledges, saying; I
desire to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ crucified. Which yet, was so
far from vailing him from high Revelations, that as himself witnesses, he
was rapt to the third Heaven. Whence it is cleerer then the Noonday Light,
that in the crucified Manhood, he also saw the boundless depth of the Godhead.

But the Center of all this Difficulty consists in the right sending forth of
this Simple sight, whereby God and Man is seen (neither omitted.) For, in
failing of either, we incur a like loss: The depth of the Mystery being
founded in both one, and not in each apart. For, first, to behold God
Omnipotent, and then a miserable and forlorn Man, which he became by his
Incarnation; This works somewhat in the soul by way of Consideration: But to
see both one (as we have said) and to behold it with a single eye, and naked
aspect, that strikes the soul with amazement, and bereaves her of all her
forces. And this is that simple and perfect Contemplation which our Lord
extolls with so many praises in his Spouse in the Cantic. Thy eyes ^re Doves
eyes. i. simple ones. And again when he says: If thy eye be ^^ngle, thy
whole body shall be Light.

And all the Impediment of this Contemplation arises from no other but a
Contradiction seeming to darken the reason of Man, that so it is disabled to
behold in one simple sight, God and Man; Body and Spirit. For, to behold the
Manhood which is corporeal, an Image must be let in. To behold the Godhead,
no Form, but pure Denudation. So then, to see both one, seems as if you would
say, Receive a form and no form. And this to many is a stumbling stone.

But, now to unty this Knot: we are to transcend all Reason, and fly to Faith,
which seeing him Man, stands invincible, that he is God without all form and
Image whatsoever. And though Imagination inject the form Man, yet Faith
(disdaining all sense) considers no form, fastening her eye on God. So that,
though an Idea of Jesus Christ crucified present it self to us, yet the Ocean
of Faith drownes and annihilates the same.

CHAP. XVIII. That this Passion is to be practiced and beheld as it is in our
selves, rather then that which is considered at Jerusalem, or in some Place
remote from us.
IT being now concluded that the soul in beholding the Passion, knows God and
Man in one and the same Person; another doubt assailes her, and that no small
one, whether it is more excellent to behold him as crucified under that form
which uses to be given him as suffering at Jerusalem, or under that Actual
sorrow, bitterness, and affliction, which every one tastes in himself. Wherein
I had rather play the part of a Scholar then a Master. Yet, under correction,
for so much as I could ever gather by proof out of the little practice which
yet I have had herein (though both the ways be excellent, yet) the latter
appears to me much worthier then the former; yet, not for all men, but only
those that are found capable thereof. And that for the reasons I shall produce,
where first I will show that this practice is orthodox with Holy Writ and
Theology.

Know then that our sufferings are espoused to those of our Savior Christ, and
made one and the same with his Passion: And that for many causes and respects.

First, by Union of will and spirit. He that cleaves to God is one spirit:
whence it comes that our sufferings are common. For, in that degree our spirit
has Com^union with the Spirit of God, God again by fervor of Love, and ^y
Compassion, answerably bears ^ur sorrows. Wherefore he says ^o Saul: Why
persecutest thou me? ^e said not my friends or servants, ^ut me, i. whose
members they ^e. For, I am the Vine, and ye the ^ranches. And as the same
radical ^oysture is common to Boale and ^ranches; so is the feeling of
sor^owes and sufferings to Christ and Christians. Which though indeed ^hey are
to be understood, and that Christ in his own person does not ^uffer them, yet
it is he that suffers. For, though it is to be conceived that he suffers in his
members, yet ^e suffers (as himself testifies,) because his members make a
part of himself. Our sufferings therefore (not as ours, but as Jesus Christ's)
may be honored with profound Reverence, (a strange saying) yea, so they ought
to be by those that discern him in them as in his own Passion. For, if he be
so worthily honored with so much devotion in his Image upon the Cross, why
may he not be adored in the lively Cross of sorrows in our selves? And if in
those the honor be not given to the Cross, but to himself, Much more is it
there, where not by Representation alone, but also by grace and the same
sufferings he is present.

Paul accounted his own sufferings the sufferings of Christ, when he said: I
fill up what is wanting of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh, for his Body
which is the Church. And Chrysostom upon this place says; He was not ashamed
to call them his sufferings.

It Is the use of those that be perfect to see God in all things. How much more
then in sorrows, which set before us his Passion, where he is particularly
present, saying, I ^m with him in Tribulation? For, though the crucified
Manhood be not really there as is the Godhead it self, yet is it to be beheld
as in ^ Looking-glass, and united to ^he soul by union of grace and love
after her example that said, A ^undle of Myrrh, my beloved shall ^dge between
my breasts. This belo^ed is Christ, a bundle of bitter ^yrrhe, his passion
compact of ma^y afflictions, as a bundle is of ma^y stalks. And because Christ
is ^n some sort always in his Passion, ^he soul lul'd him as a Bridegroom
^etween her Breasts, when she em^rac't him in the same Passion. ^ow it is plain
that she had not in ^er self that passion and sorrows which he suffered in
himself long ^ter; Ergo they were hers which she reputed her Beloveds, being
conjoined and promiscuous with his through Love, as the pains of any Member
with those of the head it self.

Besides, God is nearer to us then our selves. Nor can we see or discern him so
near, but he is still infinitely nearer; nor so intimate to us and our
substance, but he is still more intimate. For, it is he (say the Fathers) that
gives himself to thy mind more intimate, then thy own most intimate. And so
may he be beheld and adored, and that with most profound devotion, if he be
there discerned: And whosoever refuses is worse then an Ethnic.

It Is said before, that we are commanded to make all after the pattern showed
in the Mount, which is Jesus Christ crucified on Mount Calvary. And of what
wood is this Image or form to be ^ade, but of our selves? And where ^re we to
bear it engraven, but in ^ur selves, after the example of him that said: I am
crucified with Christ; and who exhorted; Be ye followers ^ me as I am of
Christ? When ther^re we be made his lively Image, ^ho can say that the same (as
it is ^ch) is not to be beheld and re^erenced?

Moreover, the same Truth is ^nfirmed by all places of Scrip^re, where God is
said to be in us; ^ow ye not that your members are ^ Temple of the holy Ghost,
which is ^ you, and ye are not your own. ^^ ye are the Temple of the living
God ^ God says; For I will dwell and ^lk in them: We will come and make ^
abode with him. He that dwel^h in Love dwells in God, and ^od in him; For in
him we live, ^ve, and have our Being.

Nor can it be objected that this is only meant of the Godhead, since this
Godhead belongs to Christ, and is one and the same person with his Manhood. So
that when I see Christ alonely in the one, I both may and ought to behold him
in both together: because they can never be severd. What he once put on, he
never laid off. For, as, while he conversed on earth, his Manhood alone was
seen, and yet his Godhead was therein considered; So, now discerning his
Godhead, we cannot in Mind separate, nor ought we to forget his Manhood, which
even now lives in the Heavens: but to bring it into the Object of
Contemplation, together with his Godhead, tha^ we may sound this unspeakabl^
Mystery of his Incarnation. Which object of his Manhood, though i^ be neither
essentially nor Sacramentally present, nathlesse by Union of grace, Bond of
Love, Diapason of Will, Conjunction of the Members with the Head, and relation
of the Image of our sufferings to the pattern, he is some way present by an
admirable presence. This Paul desires we should understand, and is fervently
zealous to confirm the same Truth, saying, I live; yet not I, but Christ
lives in me. Seek ye a proof of Christ speaking in me? Bearing about in
our body the Dying of the Lord Jesus. Till Christ he formed in you Let this
mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus. I am crucified with Christ.
Because we are his members of his Flesh and of his Bones. Ye are the body of
Christ, and members in particular. Know ye not that your Members are the Temple
of the holy Ghost which is in you? So many of you as are baptized have put on
Christ. Christ Jesus is in you unless ye be reprobates. And many other
places, whereby he shows his earnest Desire to teach Christians this Wisdom,
and particularly in this last sentence, where he seems to enforce that he will
have us believe it, proposing this necessity of having Christ in us, or else of
being reprobated from him.

I could here bring authorities of many Fathers if the Brevity of this Manual
would permit: Since then Christ Jesus is in us, and where he is he is to be
adored, it follows that he is to be adored in our selves, and thereupon a holy
Father says, It Is more excellent to behold him crucified in our selves then at
Jerusalem. And one holy Saint considered the Passion of Christ our Lord in his
members, so much, that he was no less pained when he saw any other afflicted,
then if he had seen Christ himself in the same plight.

Yea, our sufferings not only may be beheld as the sorrows of Jesus Christ,
but sometimes they cannot be beheld otherwise. I mean, when through fervor of
Love our sorrows be so commixt and united to the sorrows of sweet Jesus, that
we may see him alike in both; neither can ours be separated from his, there can
be but one only Christ in both made one (ours expiring in his.) Nor otherwise
in the one then in the other can honor be given to him, since wheresoever he
is seen and discerned, all adoration and glory is due to him in the sorrows
themselves.

Having concluded then that it is true that we may behold Christ Jesus in our
selves, it rests that we show why the same is more worthy then to imagine and
behold him suffering at Jerusalem.

That real suffering which we taste in our selves, presents a far more
spritely Image of the Passion of Jesus Christ, then that which hovers in
Imagination alone. And that which we feel inwardly, then that which is
speculated outwardly. As our own headache or pain of any other member, gives
us a far more lively feeling of the like affliction in any of our friends, then
if we fancied the same from here-say alone. Just so, my own experience of the
torments of Christ in my self, makes me abundantly more sensible of them,
then if I saw them only by apparition in my fantasy. Whereof one says: By
suffering, a man learns to co-suffer with him that suffers.

If in our sorrows we behold the Passion without, us that seems to beget
Multiplicity, the Soul straining from her own pains to the pains of Christ,
but beholding the Passion of Christ in ourselves, we see but one only simple
object of the pains of both.

And thus this whole practice is drawn into our interior: And we have the work
within us, the Which is an high step. To see the Passion in our sorrows, the
Conflict is excellent. But to behold the same in ourselves presupposes absolute
victory. Again, the end for which we behold the Passion is, to be conformed
thereto. But thus, by seeing the Passion in our sorrows, we are conformed
thereto by a joyful and free willing acceptance of the same in the Union and
Contemplation of the sufferings of Christ. Ergo, by beholding the Passion in
our sorrows we reach the end of the Contemplation of the Passion. Besides,
many cannot, but very hardly and without continuance, behold the Passion of
Christ in Imagination: But, none need miss the same by feeling in his own
sorrows. For, many are destitute of apprehensive Imagining: but none wants the
lively sense of his own afflictions.

Again, if being round set with straits, we fly to the Passion of Christ
without us; we shall seem to turn our back plainly on sorrows, and to shrink
from pains so far as we can, pressing to him more to seek our own Comfort
then for any true Love to him. But, when we see him in our pains within our
selves, we easily embrace the bitterness as his, and cheerfully pursue the
Cuttingnesse of affliction, as that which nails us with him on the Cross.

The Union made by those suffering which are in us, is so much the closer, the
more we taste the Gall: And the truer and perfecter, the more truly those
pains be in that Union, and not in memory alone.

If in our Pains we consider the Passion, the more we suffer, the closer we
shall be united to God. But if we behold it without us, the Tempest of
affliction may break that Union with him. And therefore it is most excellent,
says the same Saint, to behold him in his Passion within our selves.

Confirmed therefore on holy Scriptures produced, let us bide solidly fixed in
our own pains as in the Torments of Jesus Christ, rejecting all looseness,
wavering, and all questions arising, to inquire whether the Passion of Christ
be truly in them or no. Such as for the most part a Soul shallow illuminate
uses to frame. The which practice he may easily stand unshaken in, that is
truly faithful to the Cross; who with all his heart embraces Tribulation,
never languishing for comfort. For, in so doing, the presence of Jesus Christ
by grace shall never be doubted of, because he will there nakedly unvail
himself.

Nor ought any man to give himself to this practice till first he be wain'd
from the Dug of consolation, and tempered to endure the edge of bitterness.
Nor want there some that would wish to suffer with Christ on the Cross, but
led with Intention that those stones should be made bread: and the Gall
suddenly changed into Honey, dreaming all the while that they follow the
Cross, which with all their might they avoid. Which makes them as far from
discerning Jesus Christ, as there is difference betwixt to quake at the Cross
and to honor it: or to loath it as a Serpent, and to welcome it as a desired
good. Above all, it is chiefly remarkable that to find Christ in his Passion in
us, we must see nothing but dolours and afflictions. For, he that should seek,
yea or entertain sensible Comfort, should open a free passage to Illusions.

Let therefore all our pains and tribulations be welcomed, not as crosses,
but as Jesus Christ. Let him be considered and beheld as crucified in us. Let
all our sorrows, afflictions, and evils whatsoever of body or of soul, be
cast into the burning furnace and flames of the Torments of Jesus, where they
may be all consummate and united to his sorrows. So may we truly say with the
Apostle, I am crucified with Christ. And follow his exhortation, Let this mind
be in you which was also in Christ Jesus. Nor let any turn it to presumption
thus to know and behold God in our pains: But rather let him see how that the
Inventory of al virtues is infolded therein, which Truth it self accompanies
and confirms.

And first, a perfect Selfe-denyall here shows it self, which not only
constraines a Man setting aside all selfe-seeking to bear patiently
afflictions, reproaches, and bitternesses, but also to welcome them joyfully,
and to accept them as high favors. There appears also in that soul an
invincible Faithfulness toward her Celestial Bridegroom, inasmuch as she
acknowledges him not only in himself, but also in his Creature, embracing him
in the thicket of thorny afflictions, in Littleness looking up to Greatness,
and adoring him in reproaches and forlornnesse. And now I say, what a wondrous
resignation is found in this practice where the Cup is thus received? What
Unconquerednesse, where it is thus supt off? What a patience in this Endurance?
What undismaidnesse in thus casting her self among the Thorns? What a flame of
Love where thus she head-longs her self into the furnace of Tribulations? What
a strange constancy in thus refusing to go forth? Yea, annihilating her self
that God may be exalted in her heart, as it is said, Man shall go to a high
mind and God shall be exalted. And lastly, where, that Christ may live, the
soul chooses to dye, as they that said, We received the sentence of Death
within our selves.

Nor can Presumption take any place in us, because there we discern the Passion
of our Lord. For, before we can so discern him, we must be as far estranged
from our selves, as from all other things, by an absolute Selfe-denyall, and by
hearty embracing of bitterness and affliction. Nor, can we there think our
selves to be any thing because of the presence of God, whom we behold within us.

Notwithstanding, though I take this practice for the more perfect, yet since
diverse men have diverse devotions, I would not tie al sorts of Souls to this
way, especially those that stand not yet in high favor in the Godhead, though
otherwise they have grown up in spiritual Life. For, such cannot perfectly
discern how God is in their Afflictions.

There be also some events wherein it is requisite to behold the Passion of our
Lord in himself, as when no occasion presents it self of beholding his Passion
in our selves, neither by affliction, bitterness, nor any contradiction. For,
though an Illuminate Man can hardly want occasion to practice it in himself,
sometimes by acceptance of bitterness, sometimes by refusing of pleasure,
bodily or spiritual: yet sometimes it happens that either no such is
presented, or else it is so little, and almost of no moment, that it beats
scarce any or no impression in the Soul, so that the Passion of Jesus Christ
cannot be discerned in her.

Also in making a long prayer. For, then such floods of Divine influences
stream into the Soul, that all sense of affliction, contradiction and
bitterness is spent, and no impressio^ of them left in the Soul: So that she
cannot see the Passion in her self.

Lastly, the Passion of Christ cannot be seen in our selves when the soul is
so sublimely raised, and finds the Passion so perfectly in her self, that she
cannot but behold that Passion which Christ suffers in her and that which he
suffered in himself to be but only one. For then she sees his pains
sometimes in himself, sometimes in her self without difference. Eftsoons also
almost all the stations of the Passion at once without multiplicity, (a matter
of high moment) yet nothing let by variety of the forms; because she sees
God alone in them all.

CHAP. XIX. What this Image ought to be, and how it is to be beheld.
NOw come we to see what a one this Image ought to be whereunder we behold
the Passion. And first, I say, if it be the Image of the pains of Christ our
Lord himself, it need not be universal, (I mean of the whole Passion) but of
some particular part thereof, that so it may bide printed in the heart and
imagination, without which impression it falls from the memory, and so must
that contemplation which depends thereon. But, if that Image be of his pains
in us, then may it well be universal of all the dolours and afflictions,
inasmuch as the impression of our feeling makes us always remember them; yet
chiefly, we are to apply ourselves to the heaviest of them, for there will
Jesus show himself most, because we there find our selves least.

Besides, if we deal with the Passion of our Lord in himself, it must be
imaginary, but if we behold it as it is in ourselves, it is not then to be
imagined, but beheld just such as we really feel in our selves.

But whether of the two soever it be, we must neither add nor detract one jot
from the form thereof; but without the least alteration, to receive the same
exactly as it offers it self. Where many err, longing to change them both
into another more exquisite, sublime and godlike, despising as it were that
simple and naked form of Christ crucified that first presents it self to the
eye, as too base, earthly, corporeal, and having almost nothing divine or
excellent therein: where, flat contrary, the more vile and forlorn the image
or form is whereunder we behold the Almighty crucified; the more stupendous
will the mystery appear, and the soul be the higher raised; which is most
remarkable.

The same I say also of that form which is in our selves not by imagination,
but by tasting of sorrow, heaviness and bitterness, bodily or spiritual:
that it behooves us to rest therein content, neither altering it by our own
industry, nor languishing to have it changed into another form by infusion of
any sweetness or consolation. Where many deceive themselves, who tossed with
the waves of unfaithfulness and sensuality, seem to say to our Lord; If thou
be the Son of God, command that these stones of hard affliction be made
bread of comfort. In this hunting for comfort appears seansuality: in saying,
[If thou be the Son of God] unfaithfulness shows her self; as indeed it
befalls too often that the soul seeing such an image or bitterness, grows
entangled and doubts whether God be there or no; or whether she ought to
honor and behold him under such a form, and thereupon to free her self of
all doubting, she sinkes to take some proof thereof by tasting some
sweetness, and by changing those stones of Affliction into Bread of Comfort.
Or else seeing him upon the Cross through mean esteem and debasement imposed
upon us, hurried with Temptation of Infidelity; we say [If thou be the Son
of God] to whom (under what form soever appearing) adoration belongs. Come
down from the cross. Let me see this Manhood advanced upon so high a Cross
of Contempt, come down and assume some other shape more lightsome, glorious,
Majesticall, and becoming the Son of God; and then I will believe thee. Thus
for want of lively faith and desire to suffer, Unfaithfulness and sensuality
hang always after the Taste of some sweetness, requiring a change into some
more spritely and radiant form wherein to behold Jesus Christ. Which is the
very cause why they cannot discern him, and that they incur extreme
disadvantage in the Practice of the Passion.

To prevent which mischief, we must behold such contempt or anxiety absolutely
as we feel it, and just in the same measure; looking therein on Christ
crucified; or on the other manner just as we imagine him suffering on Mount
Calvary, and there confess him with a simplified and invincible faith.

Moreover, such form of Bitterness or Contempt is not only simply and
faithfully to be welcomed, but the very Cuttingnesse thereof to be grasped, by
him that will tread the steps of Christ crucified. I call that Cuttingnesse
which paineth and bireth sorest, arising from a Triple kind of Afflictions;
Temporal, Bodily, Spiritual. Every of which afflicts the Spirit through
bitterness and contradiction of Nature. And this inward bitterness I call the
Cuttingnesse of affliction, which we are principally to hold, embrace, and
pursue, as the Key which opens up the Closet-doore of the Treasures of Divine
Wisdom, and discloses the profound Mysteries of this Passion. Which
sharpness, if it be blunted by Consolation, is to be edged again by recording
those afflictions; which if we neglect by sinking to Consolation, the soul
shall never be through lighted by the Divine Wisdom. And here many souls
falter, at first indeed beholding Christ in their or his sorrows; but as soon
as ever he shows himself to them after their own Desire and as themselves
wish, they let themselves slide into a Contemplation of Christ alone without
the Cross, leaving his bitter sufferings behind them, and so they never come
to dive and sound the depth of this Mystery, nor to learn the admirable and
unknown Wisdom hid therein. For, this bitterness of Affliction is that
whereof it is said, Affliction gives Understanding. It Is the Gall re^toring the
sight philm'd with the ^urt of the world, and the Eye^alve to smeare the eyes
that they ^ay see cleerer.

And now the Soul seated in this ^ate, is to behold God in that for^er verity
as if she saw him in ^eaven without any difference. Nor ought she to lust to
see him o^herwise, but rather count her self ^appy (though too too unwor^y) of
admittance to see her God ^ such humility, and in that hu^ility to discern the
heigts of this Mystery. Above al, let her be wary she aspire not to a sensible
Union, but wholly betake her self to the Impregnable rock of lively Faith. Nor
let her raise her Mind higher then to the height of this Forsakennesse,
wherein if she valiantly abide confident and solid, she shall not fail to
find the most Highest: Nor let her seek or desire God, but securely believe
she has found him. Nor let her behave her self otherwise then as standing
before his Throne; Nor let her doubtinly waver, but stick to Truth; not
trusting Sense, but Faith: Nor, let her turn her self inward, but annihilate
her self before God. Nor let her produce any Intellectual Act, but only rest
satisfied with this simple sight and lively Remembrance of this great Al
crucified, as we have showed in the 10th. and 13th Chap. And let her yield her
self a mere patient, all prostrate to be handled after his Divine pleasure,
whether he please to draw her and show himself by some glisteringer ray of his
glory, or else let her continue as she is. And chiefly let her beware that she
behave not her self workingly toward him, but above all that she attempt not
one jot to alter that simple form wherein he appears to her; it being his work
to transform her through that form, and to fashion her after his good
pleasure. And note well that those desires of seeing God in another manner, is
the very and only cause that the Soul can never see him Wonderful as he is,
because those desires interrupt her Constancy and solid rest in that form,
debarring the profound Adoration and Honor due to him; yea, making void that
Faith whereby God is believed to be there. And lastly in the presence of Christ
we have need of Patience.

These then be the Imperfections which steal upon us in this Practice. All
which may easily be avoided if we waver not in the very foundation of Faith;
believing Christ crucified to be what he is. For, thus we shall see our
selves nothing, and him all, who will draw us to himself and nothing us; He
being that Rod of Aaron, which lifted up in the Wilderness of this World,
draws all to him.

CHAP. XX. The Passion not to be forsaken for Contemplation of the Godhead
alone, though the same should be offered us: that so we may be confirmed by
Jesus Christ.
ANd now the soul having won thus high, and established in the practice of the
Passion: Another doubt arises within her touching the Contemplation of the
same, i. whether she is to forsake it to rise to the Godhead alone.

And indeed, many there be who casting one glance at the Passion, long strait
to mount to the Godhead; Others disrespecting the Passion are, as they think,
directly transported to the Deity by a certain Transcendence of the Mind,
which for the most part I suspect rather Natural then Supernatural; and
Imaginary then real. I take it (under correction of better judgment) that
that Contemplation is most advantageous, high and perfect, which is had in the
Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and most acceptable to him, and not to be
forsaken for any other how high soever, though such were even offered to the
soul. Which to confirm, I will bring some reasons and authorities of Fathers
to prove the same.

1. That we are not to leave the Passion to behold the Godhead; but to behold
both together.

2. That we are not to forsake it though a gate seemed to be set open, and the
soul to be lured aloft.

3. That the Contemplation of the Passion is the most perfect and highest of
all others.

For the first point. We say, since our Life in this World is always both Active
and Contemplative, it needs a light for both. This Light is Christ Jesus. His
Godhead illuminates us in Contemplation. It is Manhood shows Action. And even
as he grows slenderly in Contemplation that sees not his Godhead to draw Light
therefro; so neither in Action moves he rightly that proposes not his Manhood
for direction. And as in the whole course of our Life, there is always somewhat
to be done, so this Manhood is always to be borne before our eyes.

Secondly, in Contemplation of the Passion, Fervor and lively flames stir up
to Conformity and operation; but abstract Contemplation of the Godhead alone,
produces no such effect.

Thirdly, in the one God is found in stability of strength and practice as well
outer as inner; In the other he is only found in the Inner; but as for the
outer, all grows cold, when need requires we go forth to operation;
especially when the same requires any length of time. In the one the soul,
when she should act is left naked, by sinking from her object whence she
borrowed her Light; but in the other, she is not so left, because she retains
the same object in Contemplation that she does in Action.

5. The one acquires us an Interior, but no exterior habit: The other
enriches us with both.

6. The Contemplation of the Passion contains those two ways leading to God;
Abnegation and Affection. But the Contemplation of the Godhead, kindles indeed
the Affection, but shows no such practice of Abnegation.

How shall any man be thought to love Jesus Christ, that turns his back upon
him hanging on the Cross, that so losing fight of him he may give himself to
Contemplation of the Godhead?

For the second point, we are not only to cleave fast to the Passion
willingly, and with all our might, and not to the Godhead alone: But also none
ought to let himself be drawn from it; No, though he had some Inclination,
and a door seemed to stand open: For, if upon every call which seems to lure
aloft, the Passion should be left, it would never be possible to search out and
discover the depth of this Mystery: which, as it is grounded not only in the
height of the Godhead, but also in the forsakennesse of the Manhood, so, that
it may be thoroughly sounded, both must be beheld, and not the Godhead alone.
For, as one climing a Tree, cannot consider the height of it, if he stare at
the Top only, never looking at the root^ So he that by Contemplation ascends
the high Tree of the My^^erie of the Incarnation, (...) possibly discern the
height (...) of if he aim only at the Godhe^^* overlooking the forsaken and
despised Manhood. And as those two be conjoined in the same person, so they are
to be beheld with one simple sight, and not appart

Where, in my judgment, many err very much, who finding some Light by
beholding the Passion; when by means thereof they should dive into the same
with a steadier eye, and search deeper to the Intimatest secrets of this
stupendous Mystery, there to find that supreme God clothed with Mortal
Flesh, beaten with stripes, boar'd with nails, and cruelly fastened to a
Cross, till the ravished Soul roared out, and were forced to go forth of her
self; they on the contrary straight forsake the Manhood, and imboldned by that
small glympse they have got, press to arise to his naked Godhead, whither
nathlesse they attain not, but leave it as fluttering in the air; Or if they
seem to approach it, the same is so little that the Soul soon faints, little
bettered thereby, wandering Light-mindedly, untempered to endure the fulgour of
Divine Light, but thence held off remains a Vagress, growing in no knowledge
either of the Godhead alone by abstraction, or of the Godhead and Manhood
together by the Passion.

In the Passion we find the glorious Godhead suited to our Capacity, which of
it self is a Light inaccessible. For, as he that would see the Sun, darts
not his eyes immediately upon his glistering rays, but taking a basin or some
other vessel of water, fits the same to his fight: So may we say of the
Godhead, which he that desires to see, must hehold it in the Manhood wherein
it is adapted to the sight of the Soul. And as he that will look full at the
Sun, rather dazles the quickness of his sight (witness they that will look on
him in his eclipse) so, those souls which overtopping the Manthood press to
adhere immediately o the Godhead, do no other but blind themselves. Nor let
them think that God inviteth them to his Naked Godhead when he imparts that
Light; But he gives that Light that they may the better behold his Passion, and
not that they should prye up to his naked Godhead: For, if the Manhood were so
slightly to be left to proceed to the Godhead alone, then were it granted and
concluded that the Passion is scarce at al to be minded: for, it requires some
Light: If then having received that Light, we must straight fly to the naked
Godhead, dismissing the Manhood; What then shall become of the knowledge of this
Mystery, and the Imitation of the pattern of our Life?

But, God by imparting such Light to us, is so far from inviting us to behold
his naked Godhead that contrariwise, he gives the Soul endeavoring the same,
a touch of her mistake, saying: Turn away thy eyes from me, for they have drove
me away. As if he should say, So long as thou lookedst on my Passion, thou
sawst me and enjoyedst me after thy hearts desire; both Manhood and Godhead at
once: But since thou withdrewest from thine eyes the glass of my Passion which
proportioned me to thy capablenesse, and have betook thee to behold my Godhead
alone, the luster of whose sight thy weak eves are not able to endure, I have
withdrawn my self from thy sight and fled far from thee. Turn then away thine
eyes from me and from my sole Godhead, and fasten them on my Passion; there
thou shall find me abundantly.

We are not therefore by help of such Light to soar aloft, though God impart
that Light unto us, unless the Attraction of the holy Ghost be so Majesticall
that it suspend all the powers of the Soul, as by repture or ecstasy. For,
then the soul (her weak forces spent) must let go her hold, and yield to the
Rapt.

The Angel having wrestled long and strong with Jacob, at length spying light,
said, Let me go, It Is morning. The Angel represents our Lord; Jacob the
Christian. Their wrestle, that lowly and lovesicke duel acted betwixt God and
his Spouse, who finding him in his Passion, cries out; I found him whom my
soul loves; God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten not
made, consubstantiall with the Father, by whom all things were made. And seeing
that great God thus clothed in our flesh, and therein tortured with Torments,
rapt in amazement, and drunk with his Love, fastening her eye on him in this
Agony, and now enflamed with Zeal and Love, she vows never to go thence,
but embracing him close, cries out; I caught him, nor will I let him go; And
again with Jacob; I will not let thee go. And now his Godhead and Manhood
making but one and the same person, she cannot see the one without the other.
Now, here begins the wrestle: The sight of his Godhead lures her aloft, the
sight of her Manhood holds him fast below. Both which she beholding with one
simple sight, is drawn at once both up and down. If she twine from his Manhood,
she is taken up by his Godhead: But, because she had rather see both then the
Godhead alone, and how he is both mortal and immortal, great and little, also
clearly discern his Love, Goodness, and other perfections and abstruse
Mysteries: And lastly because she desires and burns to suffer on the Cross
with her Bridegroom, she clings perpetually to his Manhood saying, I caught
him, nor will I let him go till, etc. On the other side, God who never
withdrawes from her the sight of his Godhead, consequently by the same mounts
her aloft, and sweet-speaking her by the Lure, (she fast to the Crucisix) he
said, Let me go, it is morning: Behold my Godhead, the Beginning of eternal
Life: But she welknowing his delight in her harmless Nay-say, and how much
inflaminger it is to bind then to loose him, answers; I will not let thee go
till thou have blessed me; that I may behold thee both reigning in Heaven, and
suffering upon the Cross, and as nakedly and perfectly love and adore thee in
the one as in the other. Then her Lord seeing her Invincible, and that he
cannot wind from her by the Lure of his Godhead because of her wondrous
fidelity and constancy to the Cross, he overflows her with his Blessing,
subscribing to all her requests in the Passion. And there he blessed her in the
same place, even of his bitter Passion. In the same place, because there
strength is hid^den under the weakness of the Passion. The Horns which
signify strength, are in his hand: For there he brake the powers, the Bow, the
shield, the sword and the battle of the World, the Flesh and the Devil.

And these Horns of the Altar are they from which Joab could not be forced to
depart; no, though King Solomon himself commanded, but chused rather to dye
there; Intimating that the Passion is never to be forsaken, but persisted in to
death, though some think that since God has vouchsafed them a glimmer of the
Light of his Godhead, he therefore calls them up, and to forsake the Passion.
For, this humility and lowly wrestling with Christ our Lord, joys him above
Measure, even when with all our heart we love the Contempt and lowness of the
Passion, although he seem to invite us higher. For, then he double requites
that Humility, in that Lowness revealing the height of his Godhead. And this
he meant when he counseled us being bidden to the Wedding, to choose the lowest
place: for then he calls us, and by the Light imparted doubles his Call
uncessantly, Come up. Not to draw to his Godhead alone by forsaking his
Passion, but that he may show us his Godhead there in the same place, whose
sight rayses the soul to the highest without distraction from the lowest.

Vrias refused the Banquet and Princely Junkets sent him from King David,
saying; The Ark of God, and Israel and Judah remain in Tents, and my Lord
Joab and the servants of my Lord abide in the open field, and shall I go into
my house to eat and drink? Insinuating mystically, that if in our
Contemplation of the Passion of the lively Ark of God, our King let fall some
dainties to us from his heavenly Table, we ought not so much to greedy on the
sweet meats of Consolation that we forget him on the Cross, and that divine
Arc, both remaining in so mean a Mansion, and so unworthily entreated; But
rather passing by the Comfort with him that said, My soul refused Consolation,
we are to lodge therewith, bewailing the Miseries of our sweetest Redeemer, and
tasting in Spirit his pains and sorrows.

This Practice Paul extols, who though he abounded with such plenty of Lights,
yet professed himself to know nothing else but Jesus Christ and him crucified.
And surely all his writings speak nothing but the Passion, and how himself
was transformed into it: By which may well be gathered that he never abandoned
it, but all his life nourisht, beheld, and embraced it.

For the third point I judge it easy to confirm that the Contemplation of the
Passion, wherein appears both the Divine and humane Nature of our Lord, is
perfecter then that wherein we behold his Godhead alone.

The sole Godhead gives light ^n Contemplation: but the Man^ood by example
instructs in Action. Wherefore, as to Contemplate and express, which is
Contem^lative and Active in one, is perfecter then Contemplation by it self: So
the Contemplation of both Godhead and Manhood in one (as is found in the
Passion,) contains more perfection then that of the Godhead alone, practiced
in Abstraction.

God is more wonderful without then within himself: For in himself, he is
only great, immortal, and impassible. But without himself he is both great and
little, immortal and mortal, impassible and passible. It Is a strange thing to
see a Man through excess of Love or some other passion carried without
himself. But to see the same in God through his Love to us, is much more to be
admired at, without Comparison. Yet, betwixt God and Man is this Dfference,
that when Man is without himself, he is not within himself: But God is both
at once, Alwithin and All without himself. His universal power, wisdom and
goodness being absolutely without himself in his Manhood, and within himself
in his Godhead. Besides, as it is a stranger thing that God shouldbe without then
within himself: So, it is more excellent to behold him without then within
himself.

But, as in the practice of the Passion, such a sweetness is hidden, as never
any Will naturally tasted; so the Contemplation of the same discovers such a
wisdom, as never any humane understanding comprehended. And as we can come no
other way to the knowledge of this taste, but only by experience; so neither is
there any possibility but by the same experience to imagine what a Wisdom it
is. And therefore as the one has such sweetness in it as the world cannot
believe; so the other inrolls such Mysteries and Divine secrets as Man can
never imagine. The one comes by that infinite goodness infused into the Will
through the practice and Union of the Cross: The other by that eternal
wisdom espoused to the Understanding by Contemplation of this Mystery. Daily
are new Joys of this goodness tasted: and endlessely new secrets of this
Wisdom disclosed: And both exhausted from this fount of the Passion. For, as
the world can never conceive how it is possible that a Man crowned with thorns
can expend so many delights, or how the fellowship of his sufferings can
inebriate the mind with such pleasures: so neither can it ever imagine how in
so vile and forlorn a Condition such a height of Mystery should be comprised.
And as such wondrous Joys and Mysteries are grounded in a solid staidness
upon this point, that that Man is God: So on the other side our Not-finding of
those delights and secrets, arises from our drowsy wavering in the same. And
herein stands all the Keeping-downe of our Mystical buildings, and all the
ruin of our spiritual growth, because in the Passion we duly consider not
God and Man in the same person. For, if there we as verily found God as Man,
and knew both to make but one only person, we should not aspire to any higher
or loftier Contemplation, because we should then understand that same to be
highness it self. And how can any deny the Manhood of our Lord Jesus Christ
to be the loftiest Contemplation of all others, when in the same he can see
nothing which is not God? It being a Sea vast and spacious, wherein every one
may set sail more or less according to his Vessels burden. So that all they
that fall short of the depths of the Godhead may justly blame themselves for
want of capacity and Light, but never impute the Jest defect to this sea of
the Passion boundless and infinite. And therefore we are to stick to the
same as to the ultimate end, not as to a thing low and vile, but as to God
himself high and glorious; For, as he that cleaves to this man, cleaves to God,
so he that embraces his Passion, enjoyes the highest good.

And surely, if in the Passion consisted not the most perfect and high
Contemplation, then would not that great St. Bon. have placed it in the latter,
as being higher then that of the Being of God and his Perfections, Attributes,
Trinity and other Mysteries of his Godhead, saying, that Christ is the perfect
Image of God naturally invisible, and that in this Contemplation we see the
Manhood so miraculously exalted, so uneffably united by seeing both in one, the
first and the last, the highest and the lowest, the Circumference and the
Center, A. and ^, the Caused and the Cause, the Creator and the Creature, i.
the Book written within and without.

Since then this Contemplation of the Passion is higher and perfecter then all
others; I cannot but doubt that many are some ways deluded, who aspire to the
nakedness and sole Contemplation of the Godhead, as to the more high and
perfect: And that many more deceived in the same manner, presume thither though
incapable, supposing that true abstraction, which yet is no more but a sleepy
demission of Nature. And they rest in their Manly spirit, where they should
rest in the Divine.

That therefore this holy Passion may be considered in this exercise, and drawn
into practice, we must always behold it jointly with the Godhead, and the
Godhead with it, by beholding always before our eyes God crucified. For, as in
the first part we do and suffer That Gods Will may be done; So, in this this
3d. we do and suffer That God may be, i. that he may live and reign in us.
And as in our practice, the Will of God is almost always conjoined with his
Passion, inasmuch as always things adverse to nature are to be accepted and
pleasing rejected in the Active Life; So in this, God is almost always conjoined
with his Cross, the same Rule of accepting and refusing being still to be
followed. And as in the Active Life this Divine Will, Passion or Cross and
Affliction are one and the same thing; So God and his Cross are here also one.
And as there we behold the Will of God and Affliction or Cross without
Multiplicity, so here we are also to see God and his Cross with one simple and
the same sight. But, to determine precisely and in particular when any one is
fit for this exercise, and when for each part thereof, that is indeed very
difficult, I say not impossible, because of the many interpossible events,
which may take away, lessen, or alter such fitness. For, first, it is
considerable whether it be long time or short since his Conversion. Secondly,
whether the manner of his Conversion be common and leaning on mere Reason, or
unusual and extraordinary. Thirdly, whether naturally he be of a constant
mind, or light, sudden and unsettled. Fourthly, whether hot or lukewarm.
Fifthly, whether simple or subtle. Sixthly, whether alone or under a Master.
And according to these Conditions and fitnesses he may enter upon these
exercises, and pass along from one part to another. No other special rule can
be assigned. Only in general: The first part offers it self to them that are
ready to exercise the Active Life. The second squares with those that are
prepared for the Contemplative. The third requires a spirit Anointed for the
Life Supereminent.

FINIS.

