Extraordinary NEWS FROM The Court of Spain: DECLARING The late Solemnities
that were performed in the highest way of magnificence, at the Reception of the
Young Queen, the Emperors Daughter; AS ALSO, Of Hamet Aga Mustafera, the Great
Turks Ambassador; together with the substance of his Ambassie, and the
Originalls of his Credentiall Letters: Some Passages also of the English
Ambassadors in that Court.

Sent in a large Letter to a Person of quality in this Kingdom from MADRID.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lowndes, at the sign of the Unicorn on Lud-gate
Hill. 1650.

Laus Deo.
Madrid, June 1. 1650. Noble Sir,
YOurs of the twentieth passed came safely to hand, and with more speed then
ordinary: I send you a thousand thanks for the variety of news you please to
impart, unto me therein, whereby I have obliged the best of our Nation in this
Country, for we may be said to have lived here in clouds of ignorance,
touching your doings in England, till your Letter gave us some light.

To correspond with you in the like kind, I return you what this Court affords
most remarkable, and of those things whereof I have been an ocular witness;
the oldest men living here say, they never saw such gallantries and pomp as
have been lately here at the entrance of the young Queen, who by special
dispensation was permitted to be married to this King, notwithstanding that her
Mother (the Empress) was his sister by whole blood, and should have been Queen
of England, if the Devil had not broken the match; I mean the Infanta Donna
Maria, who is going upon her 16. and he 46. both of a fair Austrian
complexion: Out of these late solemnities and pomp, you may infer what a
prudent and well governed Nation this is; for though this Kings Sword be so
long, that it reaches every where, and is perpetually out of the Scabbard,
although he have actual wars with the whole power of France, and in Italy,
although he have two of his own Kingdoms in Spain her self lately revolted
quite from him, I mean Catalonia and Portugal, and that they bait him on both
sides by daily incursions, yet here in the Court there is no appearance of any
war at all, but there is as much bravery, freedom, security and pleasure, as
if this King had no enemy at all; one can scarce see a thing called a man in
buff all the Town over: Here are at this time at least half a score
Ambassadors, and among others the grand Seignior seems to stoop to this King at
last, and seek his friendship, the substance of whose Embassy I send you
herewith, together with the stately entrance of the young Queen: but for your
better understanding, I will deduce her journey from the beginning.

After that the Royal Spouse, the Imperial Infanta Donna Maria de Austria,
had departed from the City of Vienna, in a most splendid equipage, being
accompanied with the King of Hungary, and a great number of Attendants, she
came to Trent, where there being magnificent preparations made for her
beforehand, and many triumphall new Gates and Theaters erected purposely to
honor her she rested some time: Thence she advanced her journey to Brescia,
where she was introduced and welcomed by the Republike of Venice in mighty
great state, and entertained all the while an S. Marks charge, the expense of
the hospitality, amounting to seventy thousand Ducats. From Brescia she
removed to the City of Milan, where, with the King of Hungary her brother, and
but thirty of her servants, she went in privately and unknown, by reason of a
great glut of rain which still increased; but when the weather grew fair, and
the heavens began to smile again, she made a very solemn entry, being attended
by two thousand five hundred persons at least: The Venetian State discharged
her expenses all the while for two hundred miles space, there being five and
twenty Wagons that were laden with all sorts of provisions, and six hundred
Cuirassiers in complete armor, with four hundred Horsemen besides, that
attended her all along; she bestowed upon the Lord Capello (General to the
Venetians) a huge gold chain imboss'd with rich Diamonds, estimated at four
thousand Crowns, and she gave forty gold chains more amongst other Officers.
Moreover, General Capello in the name of His Imperial Majesty was created by
the King of Hungary, Knight of the Roman Empire; she bestowed also on the
Venetian Magistrates four and twenty rich vests of cloth of silver, together
with huge gilt Cups, Basins and Ewers; she gave also a great Crystal Beaker
full of gold, and frosted about with curious workmanship, to the Town for a
lasting monument: she her self was presented also by the Archbishop with two
Crucifixes of Jasper, and other precious stones, with diverse Relikes of Saints,
and rare Medaills: There were Tiltings and Horse-fights, with artificial
fireworks appointed, whereupon the King of Hungary her brother, taking his
leave very tenderly of her, and with wonderful affection, returned back to
Germany again: A little after the Apostolical Nuncio presented her with the
Holy Rose, and many rare Relikes besides. From thence she directed her course
to Final, the people breaking out into a thousand good wishes for the
prosperity of her voyage, and her issue, all the way she went: But the
Genowayes Ambassador was not well entreated by the people, in regard he came
late, and without any present, for which he was publicly jeered at and
reviled, considering how infinitely that Republic is beholden to the King of
Spain, and that she has her well-being by him: Nor did the Queen her self look
upon him with any grace. From thence she set forward for Papia, where she was
brought in by the Bishop with a mighty deal of reverence, under a stately
canopy, in a rich chair of State, accompanied by Augustus Duke of Tursis, by
Sannettino Doria, by the Duke of Anello; by Marquis Spinola, and other
Generals, in a most magnificent equipage, and conducted to the palace of Don
Diego Alvardi. The next morning betimes she was saluted by the Cardinal
Doncheus, and four Napolitan Ambassadors, the great pieces of Artillery
thundering off every where: Then she embarked her self in a Fleet of galleys for
Spain, and arriving with wondrous speed at Denia in the Kingdom of Valentia,
she was welcomed ashore, and entertained with much splendour, and unutterable
joy and applauses.

But in the Court at Madrid it is incredible what endeavors were made, and
inventions devised to congratulate her coming, in raising up triumphant arches
with such art and wonderful artifice, that the like were never beheld (as
every one cried out) by humane eyes since the creation. The King stirred himself
notably, with Donna Maria his daughter, a Princess of about thirteen years of
age, to receive this new glorious Queen at the Escurial, which is esteemed the
eighth wonder of the world, it being a royal Palace, an University of it self,
and a Monastery containing twelve great Quadrangles, where the great Constable
of Castile, with all the Grandees, and a numberless multitude of people
attended her all along; and to do homage, or as it were pay their vows unto
her.

Afterward the nuptial knot being tied at Navalcarna, four leagues distant
from Madrid, the Royal Bride was accompanied with a gallant Retinue and
Attendants, (glittering with gold and silver) all on horseback, with a select
guard of young Noblemen Bachelors all along till she arrived at Court; all the
ancient Grandees coming in the rear in a solemn 'stately equipage, surrounded
with Laquays and Pages clad in shining Liveries; they wore massy chains and
gold hat-bands, being mounted, some upon Cordoua Ginets, others upon Napolitan
Coursers, who curveted all the way, being as it were sensible of joy: The Queen
her self had forty Laquays of all sorts, wearing new sorts of Mandillions,
covered all over with gold lace that the watchet velvet underneath could hardly
be seen: Her common Guard went in vestments of cloth of tissue with rare
embroyderies, so that the Sun could not behold a more glorious spectacle: For,
the Spaniard has this quality, that although his ordinary habit be plain
black, yet upon a Festival, or occasion of any Triumph, there is no nation
more gorgeous.

All along the streets, from the Retiro (the new house of pleasure) unto the
Palace, the Kings Court, which was above two miles, all the windows on both
sides of the streets, and all the balcones were hung either with rich Arras,
Turkey Tapestry, or bright colored Sattins and Taffata's, which waved up and
down, to the pleasure of the Spectator: specially the Plate-street, or
Silver-street, was so embellished with such various works of Argentry, vessels
of massy gold, with such crosses and crucifixes of precious stones, that every
shop seemed to be a Constellation, which made the Turkish Ambassador, who was
there present all the while, being transported with a kind of astonishment and
admiration, to burst out into interjections of wonder, and say, that in the
whole course of his life, he never saw such Majesty, and opulence, such
curiosities and magnificence. In the corners of the streets there stood eight
pyramides, four great, and four small, some round, some quadrangular, some
triangular; their tops very sharp and spiring up, which were supported by
triumphant arches, whereof four represented the four parts of the world, in
every one whereof the King of Spain has some Territories, which no Monarch yet
that ever was on earth could say, the workmanship of those pyramides, and
triumphall arches with diverse sorts of theaters besides, amounted, by a
computation that was made, to above 64000. ducats, which was all at the cost
of the Townsmen; who by a kind of loyal emulation, did strive who should
express his affections most to his King: The Poets, and wits of the Court had
many new ingenious fancies and devices up and down, in landskips and imagery
inventions, with new motto's appliable to the occasion. In the middle of the
high street was a vast Globe, as it were pendent in the air, wheeling about
with a continual rotation, which represented the Universe. There were also
erected four curious fountains, out of which issued as the Queen passed by such
fragrant odoriferous waters that did perfume the air round about for the time:
there were sundry sorts of dancers also that caper'd up and down the streets
with bells, and knackers, with sundry sorts of Antiques: before the royal
Palace there were diverse Theaters, where there were new Comedies acted by
women, (who were decked like Angels) as well as men. On both sides of the
young Queen were two huge Lions, and two Eagles, garding and conducting her all
along; and there were such musical voices in every corner of the streets, that
one would think the Angels had descended, and with such ravishing instruments,
that one would have thought Amphion or Orpheus to have been there. The King
came to the upper part of the stairs to receive his Queen, accompanied with the
Infanta his daughter, who went on the Queens left hand: the whole Town was all
night long as bright as if it had been noonday, by the luminaries which were
up and down, and rare inventions of fireworks, with new sorts of squibs, that
kept such a noise in the air, as if Jove had been darting his thunderbolds all
the while. There was a brave eloquent Oration made before the King, the close
whereof was, that his Catholic Majesty might have friendship with Germany,
Concord with France, reverence with Italy, felicity out of Afia, piety in
Africa, and commiseration toward America.

Their nuptial joys were advantaged by the presence of the Turkish Ambassador,
which then resided in the Catholic Court, and had received audience a little
before, which I shall with faith and punctuality deliver you herewith as
follows.

Hamet Aga Mustafera embarked for Spain at Naples, and arrivnig at Valentia, he
was received and entertained by the Count of Oropeta; thence he was accompanied
to Odonio three leagues distant from Madrid; where to refresh himself after his
journey, he bathed himself three times after the Turkish manner: He is a man of
a shrewd penetrating judgment, one who has studied men, and who understands
the Spanish tongue, though the Italian better.

Being brought to Madrid, he was admitted the next day following to his
audience at Court, which was performed with that solemnity and magnificence, as
the Majesty and grandeur of so great a Potentate, whose person he did represent
required. Being attended with a numerous gallant train, he was brought to the
royal Palace, where through fourteen several rooms sumptuously garnished, he
was brought to the Kings presence, which room was embellished with such gemms,
and sparkling precious stones, with other shining objects, that might upon a
sudden dazzle any beholders eyes. His Catholic Majesty was seated in a high
eminent Throne, where Charles the Roman Emperor in former Ages was said to be
crowned, he was incircled round about with his Grandees, with the principal
Officers of his Crown; and at the foot of the Throne stood his Secretaries,
with others of his eight Counsels; and the Judges were there in their robes,
in a grave decent posture: The Ambassador bowing himself three times, kneeled
on the third stair of the Throne, and pronounced his Oration; wherein he first
condol'd the decease of his former Queen, the daughter to France; then he
congratulated with expressions of a world of good wishes, his second Marriage
with the Imperial Infanta; and lastly he desired secret Audience for the rest
of his Embassiie: After that he receded downwards, and presented his
Credentiall Letters, (his Commission having been exhibited many days before)
the Letters were originally in Latin as follows verbatim.

Aly Solomon, DOminus Ottomannicae Familiae, Imperator ac Dominus Dominorum,
and Principis Orbis Terrarum, Defensor Legis per Prophetam nostrum Mahometem
latae, and nobis declaratae, etc.
Gloriosissimo omnium Christianorum Principum, Arbitro and Pacificatori Regum
Christianorum potentisisimo, and omnibus Virtutibus absolutissimo, Philippo
Regi. Sit foelix vitae exitus, and facta inter nos pace, salus:
Laus splendoris omnium vestrarum virtutum huc usaque advolavit: Domine, and
etiamsi Leges quas profitemar diversae sint, tamen impedimento esse non
valuerunt, quin gloriosum vestrum propositum non cognoverim, magnique
judicaverim. Absit, ut hostibus vestris, qui in magno numero sunt, adjutor
factus sim, quippe quorum actionibus me nunquam non subduxi, and expeditionibus
and exercitibus eorum quos in procinctu habent, remoram injeci, ut vos
victorias vobis dignas reportare potueritis. Ex mea part omnia peracturus sum,
quae Bassa meus Camerarius and amicus, vobiscum transiget, cui plenam fidem
adhibebitis.

Subsign'd, Dominus Mundi.


Englished thus:

Aly Solomon, LOrd of the Ottoman Family, Emperor and Lord of Lords, and of the
Princes of the earthly world, Defender of the Law instituted by our Prophet
Mahomet, and declared unto us, etc.
To the most glorious of all the Christian Princes, the most mighty Arbiter,
and Pacifier of all Christian Princes, and most absolute in all virtues, King
Philip. May the end of your life be happy, and peace being made between us,
health attend you:
The glory of the splendour of all your virtues has flown hither: My Lord, And
though the Laws we profess be different, yet they were not able to be an
impediment, but that I knew, and much esteemed your glorious purpose: Far be it
from me, that I should be an assistant to your enemies, who are many in number;
for I have withdrawn my self from their expeditions, and the Armies which they
have now afoot, and whereunto I have put a stop, that you might carry away
those victories that are worthy of you. For my part I shall perform all things
that my Bassa, Chamberlain and friend shall transact with you, to whom you
shall give full faith.

Subsign'd, The Lord of the World.


In his private instructions he proposed these things following: First, the
great Emperor will deliver to his royal Catholic Majesty the Holy Sepulcher,
and other sacred places in Jerusalem. Secondly, he is willing that a free
exercise of commerce may flourish in all maritine ports, and that Pirates be not
tolerated hereafter any where. Thirdly, he is willing that Don John of Austria,
whose election may be free to some Kingdom, may take to wife the Sultana, who
may embrace the Catholic Religion. Fourthly, that the use of slaves be quite
taken off for the future on both fides, and those that are now in quality of
Captifs may be freely released, and restored without ransom. Now there is
intelligence certainly sent, that the Sultana, who is the grand Turks sister,
and some five years since was taken by the Malteses, is converted to the
Catholic Faith.

To these advertisements, I shall add the presents which the Turkish
Ambassador brought the King of Spain, and were tendered with much solemnity.

First, there were four Lions with golden chains, and collars also embossed
with pure gold, whereon were engraven the Arms of his royal Majesty.
Secondly, there were twelve Cimiters with massy gold hilts, and scabbards tied
to gold chains, and curiously engraven on the hilts and chapes. Thirdly, there
were four chests filled with Turkey knifes, their hafts of massy gold, and
embroidered with pearl of much value. Fourthly, there were twelve Unicorns
horns, every one twelve yards long, inlaid with gold, and engraven with his
Catholic Majesty's Arms. Fifthly, there were four and twenty Turkey carpets
interwoven with gold and silk, on which were drawn those victories which his
Catholic Majesty had obtained since he was King. Sixthly, a Coach of Crystal
and gold figured in form of a triremiary gallie, hung with sails of silk in a
specious manner, wherein were drawn the triumphs and victories of his Majesty.
Seventhly, two smaller chests were filled with feathers of high price.
Eighthly, there was a great Crystal box imbroyder'd with pearl, which
contained forty fair Bezar stones. every one weighing fourteen ounces. Ninthly,
there was a coverlet for a bed, beautified with forty stars, whereon Caesar's
victories were described. Lastly, six horses white and black, with so many
turkish slaves.

Touching the reality of this Embassy, and what the success will be, we yet
suspend our judgment, for the transactions of things are carried so privately,
that they are kept from vulgar knowledge, as indeed all great affairs of State
should be.

Besides this Turkish Ambassador and diverse others, there are here two English
Ambassadors, one for the King of Scotland, as they term him here, and the other
from the States of England: The first is the Lord Cottington, who was once your
Lord high Treasurer of England, who has about twelve in his company, yet has
he a fair Palace, two Coaches attending him, and diet for himself and his
family, all upon this Kings charge, but he grows daily more and more out of
request, as all use to do in time when they live upon another man's charge. It Is
true, that they were here at first very sensible of your late Kings death, and
of the manner of it, and they resent it still as he was a King and Sovereign
Prince, but as he was an heretical King, as they termed him here, they were
rather glad of it, it being such a brand to the reformed Religion, and an
advantage to theirs; people do commonly use to deride an Englishman when they
meet him, saying, what is become of your great Defender of the Faith? what is
become of your Queen, the daughter of Henry the Great? had she been of the
house of Austria she should not have been left so long unrevenged: Our Infanta
Donna Maria had not been so busy, and you had prosper'd better by her, but you
would have none of her, and see what is become of you; Now, who can blame our
King to assist the Subjects of England, considering how often your Kings did
adhere to the Hollanders, his revolted Subjects, against him?

Your Parliaments Agent is but lately arrived, and he had all the respects and
formalities that a Sovereign Minister of State could expect, he had two
Audiences the three first days he came, one public, the other private, with
Don Luis de Haro the Favorite, who swaies most; And though this Agent be of a
complexion that the Spaniards do hate, for they paint Judas always with red
hair, yet there has not been the least affront or indignity offered him yet.
It Is thought generally here, that this Crown will make a league and confederate
with your State, provided they engage with him to recover the Kingdom of
Portugal; for Spain has been observed to prefer always her own interest
before any friendship. The news here is from Lisbon, that your Parliaments
Fleet by hovering upon those seas, and half blocking up the mouth of the River,
do much infest those coasts, and utterly destroy trading, so that King John is
thought to be in a sad condition, and cannot tell what Saint to pray unto. The
King of France his chiefest Confederate, and Protector in a manner, has
written lately peremptory letters unto him, that he should favor and adhere to
Prince Rupert, who as it is bruited here, is upon selling away his Ships unto
him.

They give Porto Longone here to be as good as retaken upon the Coasts of
Italy, and they promise themselves great successes against the French this
year, yet they complain against the Hollander, that he has broke the
Capitulations of peace in diverse things.

There was one attempting to translate your late Kings Book into Spanish, but
he was surpised, the copy suppressed, and the Translator hardly escaped the
Inquisition, because it contains some passages offensive to the Church of Rome;
and had it been published, it is thought it had run the same fate as King
James's Confessio Fidei did, which was publicly burnt by the Officer of the
Inquisition in times passed.

The English Roman Catholics here are in great hopes, that if there be a
league struck betwixt this King and your State, the Recusants in England and
Ireland will be better used.

There is a fresh report that the young Queen is already with child, though some
think that this report proceeds rather from hopes then truth; if it prove so,
and that she be delivered of a male, I believe a treaty will quickly be set on
foot to match the young Infanta, who is like to be a goodly Lady; till then,
she may happily prove a State Maid, before she be suffered to have a husband.

This is all that the Spanish Court affords for the present, at least it is all
that I dare trust under seal; by the next you shall hear further from me,
provided that you be punctual in the continuance of this monthly
correspondence; so I pray God guard you, and guide you in all your affairs and
purposes.

Your true friend to love and serve you, T. B.


