CHRIST ABOVE ALL EXALTED, AS IN JUSTIFICATION SO IN SANCTIFICATION.

Where in several Passages in Dr. CRISPS Sermons are Answered.

Delivered in a SERMON at RYE, in the County of Sussex:

By JOHN BENBRIGGE Minister of Gods Word at Ashburnham, in the same County:

1 COR. 1.30. But you are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us,
Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification and Redemption.

LONDON: Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold at his House in Brides
Churchyard 1645.

TO MY WORTHY AVNT Mistress SARAH NOWELL.
All Peace External, Amen. All Peace Eternal, Amen. All Peace Internal,
Amen.

Endeared Aunt:
WHOM I love not only in the Flesh, but also and especially in the Truth, and
not I only, but also all they that have known the truth, for the thuth's sake,
which dwells in us, and shall be with us for ever. 2 John 1, 2.


Peter's Watchword must never be forgotten, whilst our warfare lasts; Be
sober, 1 Pet. 5.8.
be vigilant (says he) and his reason is) Because your adversary the devil, as
a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour; and as the world
draws nearer to an end, so he mends his pace, and bestirs himself the more,
because his time grows shorter; Revel. 12.12. 1 Cor. 10.11. Ephesians. 5.15, 16. 17,
18.
wherefore we (on whom the ends of the world are come more near) ought to
walk more circumspectly, both in sobriety and watchfulness for new he makes
more use of his several turns and fetches then heretofore; that phrase of
walking or going about, implies he has many of them; and truly I think the
world never saw more of them in one age, then may be seen in ours: As an old
soldier has many stratagems to circumvent his enemy, and such as suit best
with time, place and power, he puts in execution to make way for an assault;
like politic stratagems and engines has the spiritual adversary of our
souls and salvation, to set upon us and undo us. The Apostle calls them
sometimes his devices, at other times his wiles: his devices are fine devices,
2 Cor. 2.11. 1 phes. 6.11.
spun out in a curious thread; his wiles are subtle for cunning; both are one,
though the letters of the words differ, yet their sense fully agrees; for his
wiles are fine devices, and his devices sultill wiles: This latter word, as it
is in the Original, (...).
duly considered, opens unto us the mystery of both, showing where in this his
fine cunning does chiefly lie, namely, in his marshalling of those his subtle
devices, that is, the method he uses and follows in acting them. For first,
he labors to prevent the planting of grace in the heart, and if he fail of
his project therein, then he in the next place, casts about to hinder the
growth of grace in heart and life: Repentance, faith and obedience are the
total of Christianity, beyond which we have nothing to do or profess; in
these three are summed up all the Prophets and Apostles, and the devil seeks as
much to hinder, as all they do to further them: to prevent the implanting of
grace, he seeks to keep them from repentance; which if he cannot do, then to
starve grace, that it may have no sustenance, he endeavors to overthrow their
faith and obedience; before a man (acted by saving grace) sets himself to
repent, all his work is to strengthen his faith, that is, to make him believe
he is in a goad and safe condition, though indeed he be nothing less, and this
is to keep him from repenting, and when he sees the man will repent (for the
grace of God constraines him thereto) then he wheels about, and to weaken his
faith, he sets in order before him all his sins, which before he hid from his
eyes, yea, he aggravates them as much as he can, both for manner and measure,
for quality, quantity and number, desirous to bring him to conceive them
greater then can be pardoned; but when he finds this his device frustrated by
the souls cleaving to, and laying hold on Gods free grace in Christ,
justifying and acquitting him from the guilt of all his sins; then his last
piece of policy is to kinder his sanctification, and to lay stumbling blocks in
his way of new obedience, that he may fall him into actual transgressions,
thereby to dishonor God, wound his own conscience, and dishearten others from
walking godly, righteously and soberly in this present world; many are the rubs
he lays in this souls course of Christianity, but none of the least are the
total casting away of the law, as unusefull, and not belonging to him; and the
unfruitfulnesse of duty to the doer thereof in any kind: These flones (with
their like) he had cast in the ways of Gods people heretofore, but by the
power of Christ's spirit in some of his worthies, they were removed, and have
lain hid, till of late, Satan finding an opportunity, has again tumbled them
in: And herein his cunning craftiness appears yet greater (to such as
seriously observe things with a spiritual eye) that he carries his matters so
slyly, as he gets some of his known enemies to countenance and defend them,
and so to help and fight for him; like as the Papists (taught indeed of him)
have carried on their fine devices so wilily, as to delude ma^y Protestants,
their known and sworn adversaries so far as to make them take part with him
against their own Christ, his Gospel and servants, their Brethren; is not
this Satan's Masterpiece, to bring Gods servants to fight against him, to make
good men with stand good works? Yet this is no new matter; for he got once into
Peter's mouth, and made him speak against Christ's doing that good work of our
salvation: Peter indeed spoke out of love to Christ, and he meant to save
Christ, as he thought; but the truth is, he spoke then he knew not what: In
like manner those good souls, who neglect sanctification to extol
justification, who reject the law, casting it behind their backs, as of no use,
to advance the Gospel, who heat down all duty of a true believer, as no way
beneficial to him to exalt Christ; I bear them record, that they have a zeal
of God, but not according to knowledge; they under stand no more what they say
then Peter did, when Christ said to him, get thee behind me Satan; for the Law
is as much Christ's as the Gospel, and Gods free grace in Christ, is as much
seen and magnified in our Sanctification as our Justification; he gave Christ
for both, and Christ dyed for both; they therefore that beat down the Law,
throw down Christ's Scepter, and lay his honor in the dust; does not our
present daily experience show what will become of a Kingdom, if the laws
thereof be taken away? and they which extol Gods only free grace in
justification, clip Gods Coin, our only riches; they set up but half a
Christ, and so by halving him, they whittle him to nothing; Paul knew this very
well; if his Epistles be seriously scanned, if the matter of them be sifted
well into the two maine parts thereof, justification and sanctification by
Christ Jesus, and each part weighed by it self, the greatest quantity of them
would be in sanctifications scale. True indeed, in his Epistle to the Romans
and Galatians, he is much on free grace in justification, against Jewish
confidence in Pharisaicall performances; but in those and in all his other
Epistles, he is as much and sometimes more insisting on Gods free grace in
sanctification, and exhorting thereunto, against that loosnesse and
carelessness of walking, which he saw in many Christians; truly to me his
greatest care seems to be for the maintenance of good works, both in himself
and others: In others, as appears by Titus 3.8. and many other places; in
himself, Romans 7. chapter (if there were no more testimonies) makes it evident; now
his example should herein be a leading rule to us Ministers his successors,
both for practice to our selves, and for doctrine unto others; wherefore having
(as you know) yielded to importunity to speak a word of exhortation to my
native Town, the holy spirit directed me to pitch on such a portion of
Scripture, as led me to the maintenance of sanctification, and setting forth
of the necessity of Gods free grace in Christ therefore, to be as great as in
matter of justification; a point directly crossing those misshapen opinions of
those new-fashioned Christians (for so they be to us) that are called
Antinomians; and therefore a point most fit for Rye, wherein many of that sect
were voted to be, by reason of those frequent, loud and bitter exclamations
against them, by name in the Pulpit, joined with as earnest and vehement
exhortations to take heed of them, and dehortations from their society, as most
dangerous infectious persons. I thought now with my self, being to come into
that place, it would be my duty to fight against the doctrine, as others had
done against the name of the Antinomians; and so I did, and I hope my labor
was not in vain to the Auditory, I am sure it is not in vain in the Lords
account, whose truth it was that I delivered, and I delivered it as his and
none of mine; and would not a man conceive this would have been very acceptable
to him who seems such a professed enemy to the Antinomians? but the contrary
appeared to the weakest of his Auditors: Whereupon who can but think that
either he mistook the persons he so called, or that he did not understand what
the Lord delivered by me: for mine own part, I must needs say, it seems to me
as clear as the Sun at noonday, that he has mistaken both them and me, and
so abused both, with that scandalous name of Antinomian; the Lord open his eyes
to see the great wrong he has done me and them hereby, that he may repent
thereof, and have his pardon sealed before he go hence: in the mean time, it
is more then probable, that he which durst snarle at the truth of Christ before
my face, will behind my back take more liberty to himself to let the reins
loose to his unruly tongue (a fit interpreter to his passionate mind) both to
bark louder and bite deeper, by altering the phrase and corrupting the sense of
my words; wherefore I thought it necessary in Christian wisdom, by way (if not
of prevention, yet) of answering to such envious and malicious dealing, to
communicate the notes of my discourse under mine own hand; and into whose hand
could I more fitly put them then into yours? not only in regard of the outward
relation, I have to you, but also because you have been accused falsely, as
far as I can conceive, to be one of them that are looked at as Antinomians;
so that mine intent in publishing this my labor under your name, is not so
much to manifest my due respects of you, as to let the credulous world (which
is ready to embrace any reports that may scandalize the servants of Christ) see
how it has been misinformed concerning you and such others, as with you, lie
at this present clouded with that black aspersion of Antinomianisme, for
instead of crying down the Law, Sanctification and Duty, I found you upon
diligent enquiry, both in opinion and practice, chief pillars thereof. The
Lord comfort your hearts more and more with his free grace, and stablish you in
every good word and work, 2 Thel. 2.17. 2 Cor. 7.1.
that you may thereby perfect holiness in his fear here, and hereafter be
perfected in happiness, Amen.

Your younger Brother in Christ, and affectionate Nephew in the Flesh, JOHN
BENBRIGGE.

CHRIST ABOVE ALL EXALTED.
PHILIPPIANS 3. 7. But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for
Christ.

8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ,

9. And be found in him: Not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
Law; but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is
of God by Faith.

10 That I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship
of his Sufferings, being made conformable unto his Death.


IN these words we have Saul compared with Paul; the great Apostle of the
Gentiles does herein compare himself with himself, seting forth to us both what
he was, and what he is; what he was when he was Saul, and what he is now he is
Paul; what he was before Conversion, what he is since his Calling; and this
description of himself then, and and now, is delineated by the difference of
his judgment now and then: For men are according to their judgments, and in
the sight of the Al seeing eye, as these change and alter, so do they to be
carnal or spiritual; the Apostle in 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. does distinguish of
other men (as he did of himself) by their judgment of things: A carnal man
judges carnally of all things, but a spiritual man spiritually. Thus carnal
Saul had a carnal opinion of things; he had an high esteem of his own
righteousness, which was by the Law, his Pharisaicall performances of duty,
and of his Jewish privileges; yea, these were his gain, he did not only
esteem of them, but also confide in them, he hoped to gain Heaven by them; but
as for Christ then, he was a poor Christ to him, worth nothing, yea worse then
nothing in his account then, and therefore he persecuted then this despised
Christ in his Members: But now he is spiritual Paul, he is quite of another
mind; for now he looks at his own righteousness, Pharisaicall works and
fleshly Prerogatives; yea, all things of this world as loss and dung, and poor
Christ is now most rich, and the true, yea, only gain, and therefore he had
lost to himself all things, that he might in their room get Christ: When
saving grace comes to a Saul, it enters in at the understanding first, that is,
the everlasting gate whereby the King of glory passes in to the City of the
heart; Psalm. 24 7. Mal. 4.2. Romans 13.12. 2 Pet. 1.9.19.
he therefore is called a Sun, and that is called light; because by their
light a man sees more into things, more of them then he did before they came
into him: He was before like a blindfolded man, that could see no more then a
seem of things, errors and false opinions so bemisted him, as he could not
discern aright of them: But when the day star arises in the dark place,
his mind, then as he has other eyes, so he sees things otherwise; he finds
that he was much mistaken in things when he called loss gain, and gain
loss; wherefore now he alters his Opinion, and accounts things as they are,
loss shall be loss, and gain, gain only to him. Is not this most apparent
in our Apostle? did not there fall off as thick as great scales from the eyes
of his soul, Acts 9.18.
as from them of his body, when Christ Jesus took possession of him? Yea
doubtless; and hence it was that he changed his opinion of all things; and by
declaring this alteration, he clearly tells us, he is not now the same man he
was; as much difference between him then, and him now, as is between a Saul and
a Paul, who are no more like one another then black and white; direct
opposites, as loss is to gain, and gain to loss.

A great change indeed; so great as himself thought would seem a Paradox to
the men of this world, his former Companions and brethren in affection; hence
it is (as may be conceived) that he repeats it over and again; he would have
them believe, it is certainly true there is such an alteration of and in him;
and to work it into them, comes upon them in a gradation, each step being a
preventive Answer to an Objection they might make.

For in the seventh Verse having shown them the things which he accounted
loss for Christ, the things that were gain to him, his performances and
privileges, mentioned in the fifth and sixth Verses: They might have Objected,
what, is this such a matter? they are but some things thy judgment is altered
of, in comparison of this Christ thou talkest of; to prevent their saying thus
to him, in the eighth Verse he says to them, Yea doubtless, I account all
things loss for Christ: To whom they might reply; Thou do say so Paul, but
thou will not do so; Yea, but I have done so already, is his return: Hereto
they might Object; It may be Paul thou have done so once, but thou will learn
more wit then to do so again: Nay, says he, for even now at this present
time I do so undervalue all things in comparison of Christ Jesus my Lord: I
but Paul, might they say, why do thou so prize Christ above all? He answers
them, that I may win Christ: And what good can Christ do thee when thou have
him? why desire thou Christ so much? He gives them and us two reasons of his
esteem and desire of Christ above all, in the two Verses following; in the
ninth Verse, his reason is, that he might be justified in God's sight; Psalm:
143.2. Romans 3.22.
for in his sight no flesh shall be justified in his own righteousness: He
would not therefore for a world that God should come to Judgment, and find him
in his own righteousness, and out of Christ and Christ's righteousness, which
is by Faith applied to us. And in the tenth Verse, his second motive to set up
and seek Christ above all, was his sanctification, and therefore he says, that
I may know him: Know him? might they say, what do thou not know Christ,
Paul? Why? we know Christ: I but my meaning is (says the Apostle) not such a
knowledge as yours is; alas, it is not an historical knowledge of him in mine
head that I would have, but an experimental knowledge of him in mine heart: I
can talk of Christ as wellas you, but I would feel Christ in me, and have Union
and Communion with him* which you want: I would find in my heart and life the
virtue of his Resurrection, and a fellowship of his Death and Sufferings. Now
what means he by the virtue of Christ's Resurrection, but that which Divines
call Vivification, that is, a quickening power therefrom to walk in newness of
life as he explaines himself, Romans 6.4. And what intends he by the fellowship
of Christ's Death and Sufferings, but that which we call Mortification, which
is a dying to sin, as is evident from Romans 6.5, 6, 7, 8. And what are
Vivification and Mortification, but those two parts of a Christian which make
up his Sanctification; for which Christ was as highly prized, and as earnestly
prized, and as carnestly desired by Paul, as for his Justification.

Thus have you briefly the scope and meaning of these four Verses read unto
you; we will pass by the dividing of them into their parts at this present,
because I have but a little time to speak in, and much precious matter to speak
of; the Observations that they naturally yield unto our consideration are these
five.

I. A man before Conversion does always confide in, and rest on his performances
of duty.

II. After conversion a man's judgment is altered concerning his own
righteousness.

III. Without Christ all things are but loss and dung.

IV. Christ alone is the true gain.

V. True saving grace (wherewith Paul was endued when he wrote these words of
our Text) teaches a poor soul to esteem of Christ above all things, not only
for Justification but also for Sanctification.

Of all these five I do conceive this last most useful for this Congregation
at this time, wherefore mine intent is (with Gods assistance) to confirm it
unto you, and afterward make some use of it; which whilst I do, if you love
Christ and prize him above all, you will yield me your patient attention.

The Philosophers often call man a little world in himself; but Christians
know he is not such an entire Commonwealth, as able to live of and by
himself; these say, if he depend on Christ for maintenance, he will soon
break and fall into so wretched a condition, as is far worse then a
non-being: Christ therefore in whom are all the hid treasures of God, must man
repair unto for supply of all his wants; but alas, he wants an heart to go to
him; he must be drawn by God the Father or else he will never come to Christ,
John 6.44. The l^gs of Free-wi^l which the Papists and Arminians stand so much
upon, will never be able to carry a soul so far as Christ; there must be an
inward principle of saving grace in the heart, to enable and direct us, or else
we shall never truly desire or eff^^^u^lly sind him to be ours. Indeed there
may be some gasping after Christ, by the means of some common hearsay;
N^tions of Christ in thesa knowing times; yea, a soul may so strongly desire
Christ, as to be willing to part with very much for him, and yet not truly
desire Christ, because he may all this while seek Christ, not out of a love to
Christ so much as to himself: A Merchant that hears there is such a rich
Commodity, such a precious Jewel to be had whereby he may greatly get, will
part with much of his gold and silver for it, yet cannot he be said to love
that Commodity and Jewel so much as himself, because he seeks it only for
his own gain and profit by it: Mat. 13.45, 46.
So a man that hears of that precious Pearl of great price, Christ Jesus, and
that there is much to be gotten by him, no less then salvation (which is a
sure enjoyment of all good, and a freedom from all evil) may be willing to
bid pretty fair for Christ, and lay down much for him, and yet not truly love
Christ for Christ's own sake; he desires but to serve himself of Christ, and
not that Christ should be served by him. Self-love will persuade men to prize
Christ highly for Justification, to get happiness by Christ, but only saving
grace teaches a soul to stt up Christ also above all for Saictification, to
get holiness, whereby he may serve Christ that has saved him.

The more clearly to prove this truth, and to help your memories to carry the
proof thereof away with you, we will take it asund^r into two parts, and show
you,

1. Why saving grace teaches a poor soul to prize the Lord Jesus above all
things.

2. Why saving grace makes the heart to esteem Christ above not only in
Justification, but also in Sanctification.

For the first there are three Reasons.

Romans 8.15. for then

1. The holy Spirit does discover to the soul its forlorn condition, in
regard of sin, and the punishment therefore; it makes him sensible of the
spiritual bondage under sinue and satan; it makes him see and feel how he
lies bound and fettered hand and foot with the Cart-ropes of his iniquities;
and withal the Spirit set before them the terrible countenance of an angry
God, and so fills the soul with stinging and deep piercing fears, that the
just Judge of Heaven and Earth will plague it according to its deserts, both in
the world and that to come; thus were Peter's Auditors pricked to the heart, and
as men afrighted with the strange and fearful sight of their sin and God's
wrath, they cried out, Men and brethren what shall we do? Acts 2.37. which
outcry of such souls is the greater, because this Spirit shows them withal,
the helplesnesse that is in themselves and the creature to remedy their present
misery; it makes them know the vanity and insufficiency of all that is in them,
or can come from them to work their deliverance: It blasteth all their hopes
from their own righteousness, which before smelt as sweet as a Rose in their
Nostrils, but now savours worse to them then the noisome dunghill: In brief,
the Spirit certifies them that all they have done, or whatever they can do
with the help of all the Creatures, cannot give them one lift out of their sad
condition; but here the good Spirit of God leaves not his children, for then
they would fall into that Gulf of despair whereinto Came, Judas and such like
have fallen, to their utter ruin.

2. The holy Spirit therefore having wounded the soul so deep as he pleases,
(for all are not broken in a like measure) he begins the cure thereof, by
setting Christ before the soul, and laying open to it that fullness of
supplies which is in him; that he can, yea only can help, that there is no
Savior but he, and withal lets him see that there is some hope of his having
Christ, yea that God has given him the rich and full Christ, that by believing
in him he might have everlasting life, and hereupon the soul begins to long
after Christ, all the affections of it run after Christ, prizing and seeking
Christ above all; now does the soul cry, Oh give me Christ, and take all! like
as a man ready to be drowned, would give all the world if he had it, to save
his life, and to find some safe footing; so a soul that is enlightened with the
eye salve of the holy Spirit, to see its sinking condition with a glimpse of
hope of getting Christ, will gladly part with all it has for this Pearl of
great price any virtue.

Adam first fell off from God, did not he prefer himself and his Wife before
God? does not the Lord plainly point out the cause of his peoples forsaking
him, to be an overweening conceit they had in the creature above him, though
that were indeed but a broken Cistern, and he a living Fountain, Jer. 2.11.
and 13. Now the way of our arising must be contrary to that of our falling, and
therefore the first step of our conversion to our God, is an overvaluing of
him, that is, such a high esteem of him, as all things with their fullness of
beauty, are not thought comparable with him in a degree, that is, even less
then the least: This is the work of that saving grace, Faith, 1 Pet. 2.7. As
the former was of that vice infidelity; as this carries the heart off from God
so this new byasses it, and turns it round about to him again; like as a
skillful Schoolmaster when a child is brought to him that has been ill
taught, is feign first to unteach him what he has ill learned, and afterward
to set him forth: So saving grace when it comes to teach the heart (first does
dedocere, then docere) first makes him unlearned what sin has taught him
false; and hence it is that such a soul comes to prize the Lord Jesus above
all things.



One (which is the first and root of all the rest) is Reconciliation with God,
Col. 1.21. Reconciliation is that gift of God's Free Grace in Christ, whereby
such as are strangers and enemies become acquainted with God, and so have
peace, joy and delight in him, and boldness to him, Romans 5.1, 2. and for the
ground of emnity between God and them (which was sin that made the separation
and alienation, Isa. 59.2. Col. 1.21.) is utterly taken away by Jesus Christ
his death, whereby he satisfied for sin, Ephesians. 2.16. So that now the poor
soul instead of terrifying frowns, and heartbreaking threats and menaces,
has cheerful smiles and cordial promises, good and comfortable words, Zach.
1.13. The Lord does shine in love so clearly and abundantly on the soul, that
it warmes him to the very heart, and makes him rejoice with joy unspeakable;
this benefit by Christ may seem little in the eyes of some persons, but as we
that have felt the bitterness of war and dissension amongst our selves, how
welcome would a Peace and Pacification be to us? what would we give for it if
it might be bought? we knew not the sweetness of Peace before, but our
fullness thereof had produced in us a very loathing of that Hony-combe; so that
soul which has always lived in peace by means of the strong man, Luke
11.21. does slight this benefit by Christ; but when that devils peace is
broken, and a poor soul is at civil war in and with it self, and with
sin, satan his instruments, yea, and with God also (who seems to take part
against it, and to wrestle with it too) O how sweet is this Peace and
Reconciliation with God by Christ! there is no soul can conceive the sweetness
of it (much less any tongue express it) but that soul which has tasted
thereof by saving grace, and for love of this (as I may so say) the soul does
prize Christ the more.

Another benefit is Life; for Christ is the very life of such a soul Col. 3.3,
4. for by him the soul that was dead in sins and trespasses is quickened,
Ephesians. 2.1. he has breathed his Spirit thereinto and made it a living soul,
Romans 8.10. The man that lies rotting in his sins is altogether ignorant of
the excellency of this new life by Christ; as a dead man in the grave is not
sensible of the sweetness of bodily life, the living man is he that prizeth
life as the best Jewel on earth, and will give skin for skin and all that he
has for life; so only that soul which is raised up from the dead to newness
of life, feels and finds the excellency and sweetness thereof, and therefore
he alone prizeth Christ above all in a respect hereof.

A third benefit is that Al-healing virtue that this soul finds in Christ; he
is at no time sick of any malady, but Christ applied, he finds, gives him
present ease; be he never so much wearied by laboring under any spiritual or
temporal burden, any terror, of spirit; a broken spirit, a sick body, a
sinking estate, a prision, any tempest of tribulation come, he finds Christ a
ready Haven of rest, where rides at the Anchor of Hope with such comfort, as he
has a pretty heaven on earth; what would not a man give for such (a Panacea) a
Sovereigne receipt (if such one could be found) as would cure all wounds,
sores, sicknesses, distempers, and lamenesses in the body? The man that should
have such a Medicine would think himself well provided for, he would not part
with it at any rates; and the soul that finds this al-curing virtue in Christ,
thinks no price sufficient for him; you cannot offer enough to him for his
Christ, for indeed he will not leave his Christ on any terms.

A fourth benesit by Christ is, the soul by having Christ has himself, and
is come to his right wits again: Adam seeking by unlawful means to get more
knowledge then he had, like men that over-study themselves, cracked his brains,
and lost that knowledge which he had before; and his Posterity to this day,
are, yea will be to the last day, a company of dictracted persons, foolish and
mad children, till Christ take them in hand, and by giving them himself, bring
them again to themselves: This is evident by that in Titus 3.3. where the
Apostle speaks of himself and such like, We our selves were sometimes ((...))
that is, out of our minds, that is, before we had Christ we were by-witted
persons; it is worth our observation, in this particular, to take notice of
what is said concerning the Prodigal at his return, (which signifies the
conversion of any sinner) in Luke 15.17. The words are (...), that is, coming,
or when he came into himself, he said, etc. Which plainly implies, the man was
before time quite out of himself, Psalm. 75.4.
and that he both said and did all as a mad man; and so madly do all men carry
themselves before they have Christ: And this aggravates their misery, that they
are not sensible of this their pitiful condition, neither will be persuaded
to believe it, but like as mad men, think others more mad then themselves; so
do men out of Christ think them that are in Christ to be mad, their ways,
words and behaviors are so strange and uncouth to them: 1 Pet. 4.4.
But such as are in Christ know them that are out of Christ to be mad indeed,
and they know it by their own experience, for they themselves were such at
that time; but now they are come to themselves by Christ's coming to them, and
for this great blessing they prize Christ above all.

But fifthly, the soul that has saving grace, finds by Christ it has not
only received it self, but it self with advantage; for by Christ he finds an
excellency put on himself and all his performances.

1. As the touch of the Philosophers stone is said to turn the thing touched
into pure gold; so more truly, one touch-of Christ to a poor soul does
metamorphose it, making it of great worth, which was before despised, as vile,
and base; now he becomes a man of some account indeed, both with God and good
men: He is one of Gods Jewels, Mal. 3.17. one of his chosen Generation, one of
his holy Nation and peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9. one that is both precious and
honorable in Gods sight, Isa, 43.4. and therefore one of his beloved ones;
briefly, the soul that was the poorest amongst Beggars, is by Christ made one
of the richest Kings, Revel. 1.6.

2. And besides this dignity to his person, Christ also dignifies all their
performances of duty, making them acceptable to God, for all the filth that
cleaves to their sacrifices and holy things he washes off, by rincing them in
his blood; all their prayers and other presents offered to God by them, Christ
perfumes with the odours of his Merits, and so represents them as sweet Incense
to his Father, Rev. 8.34. That soul which has put on Christ, finds him a
Garment not only to cover his nakedness, but also to beautify and adorn
him; and this makes the soul also to prize Christ above all, as a man is more
choice of his best Apparel.

Lastly, the soul that has saving grace finds this admirable commodity also
by Christ, that he gains by all his losses; he sees all other men lose by
their very gains; Paul in our Text affirms it in his own particular case, he
found now that he lost by all his supposed gains, and that he now did gain by
his supposed losses: Take a soul that has Christ, and he will say with David,
It was good for me that I was afflicted, Psalm: 119 71.
I got well by it; a prison will be as gainful to such a soul as it was to
Manasses, who thrived more in the prison at Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12, 13.
then in his Palace at Jerusalem; for in his adversity, he sought and found
his God he lost in his prosperity; such a soul will with the three children,
dance in a fiery furnace, Dan. 3.25.
it will do him so much good, all losses and crosses whatsoever, outward and
inward, spiritual and bodily, bring him in gain and enrich him, for all
things work to his good, Romans 8.28. and this not only all his life long, but
also at death, when other men lose most, then he gains most; when men out of
Christ dye and go hence, they do not only leave their goods (as they call
them) behind them, but also all that little goodness was in them, and so go
to that place where is nothing but sin and its punishment, misery; a great
loss indeed they suffer, when their frail Bark of the flesh shipwracks on
the merciless Rock of death; but such as have Christ, saving grace informs
them (and they believe it as Gods truth) that they shall lose nothing then but
what is worse then nothing, Heb. 12.1.
their sins and sinfulness which they would feign have parted with before,
but could not, it hung so fast to the flesh; but for that little goodness
which was in them, that shall be increased and perfected, yea and their goods,
they shall not lose, but exchange for better; for Parents, he shall have God
his heavenly Father, for brethren and sisters, Jesus Christ his eldest brother,
and the blessed Saints; for friends, the holy Angels; for faiding wealth, the
true riches; for momentany pleasures, the everlasting; for vain titles of
honor, immortal glory; yea, for sorrow joy, for labor rest, for mortality
immortality, and in one word, for his hell here, his Heaven for ever: Is not
this a happy change? yet this Christ brings to the soul, and thetfore you see
good reason it has to prize him above all; and thus you have the first part of
the truth made good to you: there is as much reason for

The second part thereof; why saving grace makes the soul prize Christ above
all in Justification and Sanctification.

Gal. 3.10. James 2.10. And

Secondly, the soul by saving grace being quickened with spiritual life, is
sensible of its own weakness and imperfection, whereby it is dis-inabled to
answer the law to its perfect commands, ever in its best performances; he finds
he cannot do what he would, much less what he should; and yet does much what
he both would not and should not: Hence it is, that in matter of Justification,
to obtain pardon he renounceth all his own righteousness as dung and filthy
rags, and would not be found in the same, but in Christ Jesus the righteous,
whose righteousness which is by faith ours, to our selves, he sees must (as it
only can) free him from guilt of sin before Gods Justice, and therefore he
prizeth Christ so much above all herein: But this particular has been so
clearly manifested of late by others, as I shall not need further to insist
thereon; come we therefore to the Reasons, why saving Grace makes the heart
prize Christ above all in sanctification. They are seven:

The first is, because saving grace discovers to the soul not only the guilt
of sin, but also the filth of sin; and as justification takes away the
guilt, so sanctification does away the filth of sin. And as for the taking
away of the guilt, the soul denies it self and its own right; so for the
doing away of the filth the soul abhorres it self in dust and ashes, as Job
42.6. So that saving grace works not only self-denial, but also a
self-loathing, as in Paul, Romans 7.24. he is even sick of himself; the
filthiness of sin that cleaves to him, makes him out of love with himself,
and not to endure himself with patience, and to sweeten him both to God and
himself he prizeth Christ above all; he finds now his own garments so spotted
with the flesh, as he would fain change them, and none in his account like to
Christ's white robes of holiness and righteousness; when a soul is sick of
sin (as all souls are when endued with saving grace) a bare pardon will not
serve their turn, that alone does not cure them; the Lord must heal their
transgressions also; now this is by sanctification, as the former is by
justification.

Another reason is, because saving grace works the heart to a desire and
longing after the image of God, that it may become like God, as our Savior
often calls us to be. Such a soul knows by Adams example, that it shall not get
into a state of innocence, till it obtain the image of God stamped on it: Now
this image of God consisted in holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24. and
both these are by the new man Christ Jesus, in whom we are created to the good
works of them, Ephesians. 2.10. for he is the image of the Father, Col. 1.15. and
therefore that the soul may be holy as his heavenly Father, 1 Pet. 1.16. and
righteous as he is righteous, Mat. 5. last. he prizeth Christ above all, as
being the treasury of all grace, from whom he must receive grace for grace,
John 1.16.

A third Reason is, from the discovery of heaven to the soul that has saving
grace: for hereby, as through a perspective Glass, he can look into heaven,
and there he finds nothing but happiness and holiness, as in hell there is
nothing but sin and misery. As no good can go to hell, so he sees no bad, no
sinful and unclean thing can get entrance into heaven, Revel. 21.27. saving
grace tells him (and he believes it) that without holiness he shall not see
Gods face in heaven, Heb. 12.14. and therefore he follows it with such
earnestness of desire and endeavor, and prizeth Christ, in whom all holiness
is stored up for us, above all things whatsoever.

Fourthly, saving grace takes a man's heart off from his own ends in all
things, and teaches him to seek Christ, not so much for selfe-ends, as Christ's
ends. When the Lord does convert a soul to him, and works saving grace in his
heart; as he gives him a new principle to work by, so he gives him new ends to
work for. Before conversion Self is all in all to a man; Self sets him at
work, and he works altogether by self principles and to self ends; God is
not in all his thoughts, Psa. 10.4. for indeed self is his God. But when God
comes to take his place again in the heart, and to be God to a soul, then he
becomes the utmost end of that soul also; so that as he will do nothing but by
him, commanding and strengthening, so he does all to him and for him; the soul
is now lifted up above it self, it soars aloft at greater matters then belong
to self: Selfematters are but as flies in his Eagle eye; he stoops not to
them, but as the ponderous flesh makes him; his alme is altogether at the glory
of God, magnifying Christ, forwarding the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, building
up his Church, and repairing the breaches thereof, etc. Like as good and true
Statesmen look not so much at their own profits as the common good, so the
true Christian aims at the public good of Christ, the advancing of his
Kingdom here, more then at their own advancement by him: He does not desire
Christ so much to be saved by him, as that Christ may be served by him. The
soul that prizeth Christ above al only for justification, seeks him for self
ends, that is, for happiness and salvation by him; and thus a soul does
before he has saving grace: But to desire him above all for sanctification, is
to prize and desire Christ for Christ's own ends, that we may be made holy by
him, and so become zealous of good works, Titus 2.14. and that we may serve
him all the days of our life in holiness and righteousness, Luke 1.7 4, 75.
And thus to desire Christ for Christ, saving grace teaches the soul, and to
do all for him; because such a soul makes Christ its Master, and self must be
his servant, so that self must now wait till his Master is served: Self may
attend at the door of the heart, but Christ as Master bears all the sway
there, and as he will, so the heart says he shall be served whosoever goes
unserved; and as for self, such a soul as is principled with saving grace,
looks at self as best served when his Master is most served: There is a sweet
and holy emulation betweet such a soul and Christ; that as Christ takes all
that is done to that soul as done to himself so that soul takes all done to
Christ as done to himself; and therefore is of opinion that he serves himself
best when he serves Christ most: Yea, he leaves self to Christ's disposal and
good will, knowing that he is a good, loving and free master indeed, that will
suffer his servant to want no good thing, Psalm. 84.11.

Fifthly, saving grace frames the heart to a conjugall affection of Christ, to
such a love of him as is between husband and wife, so that the soul loves the
person of Christ as well as his portion, yea and desires him more for his
persons sake, then for his portions sake; all the note of such a soul is that
with the Spouse in Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his; this heart is
enamoured with Christ, because of that exceeding beauty, of holiness in him;
he is to her the fairest of ten thousand: This soul loves not Christ so much
for that which comes by him, as for that she sees in him; when God married us
(as he says he has married us, Jer. 3.14.) his free grace had respect only to
our persons, and not for any portion of ours, whereby he might be enriched and
benefited: Hence we find a love of mankind (for so (...) signifies) ascribed to
him, Titus 3.4. Job 14.15.
which Job's words do well interpret to us, saying, Thou (O Lord) have a
desire to the work of thine hands: Wherein is hinted the reason of Gods
affection to us, not any worth in us, but his right to us; it is his free grace
which makes him own that his right, and the same free grace in the heart of a
man reflects on God the same work; that soul affects more Christ's person then
any or all the things that come by him: It is but a kind of whorish spirit to
love him only for what he has, and to get by him; that Spouse that loves her
Husband's person as she ought, will love him when he is poor as well as rich,
when sick as well, will cleave to him in his necessity, content to live in
prison with him, to go a begging and be banished with him: so where saving
grace is, the heart loves Christ's person so impotently, as she will cleave to
him in all his necessities; when naked and poor, she will love him as well as
when rich and bravely attired with outward pomp; if he go to prison she will
go too, rather then part with her best beloved she will go a begging with
him, into banishment with him, into the midst of fire any faggot, yea into hell
too rather then leave him; for she knows hell would be no hell to her if he
be with her, and that a heaven would be a hell if he be not in it, or she find
him not therein.

A sixth Reason why such a heart as has saving grace does prize Christ above
all in matter of Sanctification, is, because it knows and feels as great a
want of Gods free grace therein as in matter of Justification: For we are as
unable to sanctify our selves as to justify our selves; yea we can do more
to procure sanctification to our selves then to obtain justification;
wherefore as we find the good work of sanctification in us ascribed to the
Lord, both for the beginning and perfecting of it in Phil. 1.6. so we find it
attributed to his good pleasure, that is, his free grace, Phil. 2.13. and
indeed if we do seriously weigh things, Gods free grace seems to abound more
in the sanctification of a soul, then in his justification of it; for by
justification he does only acquit it of the guilt of sin committed, but by
sanctification he does not only purge it from the filth of sin committed,
(which equallizeth the guilt) but also strengthens the soul against sin not
committed; Sanctification does not only heal sin in us, but preserves us
from the infection thereof, and it is a greater mercy to be preserved from a
misery, then to be delivered out of it; wherefore such as pin Gods free grace
only to our justification, seem to me, without warrant from the Word, too much
to straight-lace the full Breasts of Gods free grace, from whence a poor soul
may such as much comfort for its sanctification as for its justification, and
that in regard of his daily failings, which show him his wants thereof, and
drive him to the Throne of Grace for a continual supply; now Christ is the
Storehouse of Gods free grace, what measure soever we have of it, it is
conveyed to us in and through him, not only that free grace of Justification,
but also our Sanctification; he is made both to us one as well as the other, 1
Cor. 1.30. and as he willingly laid down his life for to justify us, so he
did as willingly sanctify himself that we might be sanctified by him in truth,
John 17.19. which does plainly intimate that a soul can no more be sanctified
without Christ, then it can be justified without him; and this the soul that
has saving grace, does know very well, and therefore prizeth Christ above all
in sanctification as well as in justification.

Lastly, saving grace puts the soul wherein it is, upon getting an assurance
of its Justification; such a soul will not believe every report of the
deceitful heart, but will examine the truth of it: Before saving grace comes,
all that the heart says, is taken to be as true as the Gospel, and thence it
is that men before conversion dream of Heaven and happiness; and hell, they
are quite out of any fear of it: it is otherwise after conversion, and
therefore the converted soul will still be searching its evidence for Heaven,
and his chiefest work is to make: that sure to him: This is easily collected
from the Apostles Exhortations hereto, Work out your salvation (says he) that
is, Phil. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.10.
the assurance of it to your selves; and give al diligence think no pains too
much to make your calling and election sure; not in themselves for that they
are already, but sure to you, which as yet they are not, or at least not so
fully as they may and ought to be; But no assurance can we have of our
Justification but by our Sanctification; truly they that persuade men to go
first to Justificrtion to get assurance of God's free grace to them, do set
them to unwind that fathomelesse bottom at the wrong end, and so makes the
poor souls to coster matters together as they cannot clear their assurance
to themselves: You know that when you would unwind a bottom of thread, you
must begin at the last end that is outmost, next to you, and visible to your
sight; and by following that, you shall come to the first end, which at the
first lay hid from your eyes, and you could not come at; thus must you deal
with a bottom of God's free grace, in working out the assurance of your
salvation to your own souls; and to make it more perspicuous to your
understandings, I shall briefly unfold the whole mystery thereof: Free grace in
the work of salvation runs in three channels, the several effects thereof
(which are many) are reduceable to these three heads. First, The separation of
Gods people from the wicked. Secondly, the freeing of them from sin. And
thirdly, the infeofeing them to the inheritance: each of these are carried
about with many successive acts of free grace, but the first and the last are
in each particular most remarkable: In the separation of them from the wicked,
the first link of the chain is Election, the last is Vocation; in the freeing
of them from sin: The first is Justification, the last is Sanctification; and
concerning the Inheritance, the first is Adoption, and the last is
Glorification: Now of these six, three are in God, and three in us; the first
three are in God from all eternity, the last three are wrought in us, in time
after we have a being, and it is worth your diligence to observe how the first
and last three do sweetly answer to each other; for as by election we are
separated in Gods purpose from the wretched Mass of the Reprobates, so by
effectual vocation we are separated actually from the profane Mass of the
sinful world: And as by Justification we are freed from the guilt and
condemnation of sin, so by Sanctification from the fact and pollution of it;
and as by Adoption we are made heirs and sons, so by Glorification (begun
here and perfected hereafter) we are put into actual possession of our
glorious Inheritance: Thus have you a Breviate of that great work of our
salvation, and by it you may easily perceive where you must begin in the work
of assuring any of the three general heads; as would you assure your self of
the first general, whose first and last ends were Election and Vocation; would
you begin at Election? No, that end which is first to Godward must be last to
us, as that which is first to us is last to God in working; where God ends
there we must begin, and that is in this particular at our Vocation; and this
the Apostle plainly intimates in saying, Make your calling and election sure, 2
Pet. 1.10. Why puts he calling before election? why did he not say election and
calling, since election is far long before calling? The reason is, because
though election is first in being, yet it is last in existing and appearing to
be to us: Our Vocation appears first to us, though in order of being it is
indeed last; and therefore in seeking out our election, the Apostle implies we
should begin at our Vocation, and so from what we best know to proceed to that
we least know: So for the second General, the freedom from sin, whose first
and last links are Justification and Sanctification; shall we begin at
Justification? No, that end is the first end which is hid in God from our eyes,
till we have unreaved the bottom; we must begin at that end which is next us,
which is outmost and visible to us, and that is Sanctification; God's free
grace to us is assured only by his free grace in us: We cannot be assured of
the freedom from the guilt of sin, till we be find a freedom from the fact,
filthiness and power of sin; and the reason is, because whom he justifies he
sanctifies, and both by one and the same means, not at one and the same time;
for he justifies us to God from all eternity, and therefore is called the Lamb
that was slain from (that is, Revel. 13.8.
before) the beginning of the World; but we are sanctified by him in time after
we have a being; but the means which he imployes in both our Justification and
Sanctification are the same; for as we justified by his Active and Passive
Obedience, by his death and sufferings, by his resurrection, etc. so we are
sanctified by them; for the virtue of them (as Paul in our Text calls it) does
work in us, to the killing of sin in us, and quickening of us to new
Obedience: As Christ died for our Justification, so for our Sanctification.
Titus 2.14. Luke 1.75.
as they take away the guilt of sin, so they free us from the filth and
dominion of sin; so that you must know this for a truth, that you cannot be
assured of Christ's living to you in your Justification, until you can find
him living in you by Sanctification: Our Apostle knew so much, and therefore
when he would have the Corinthians to get assurance of their salvation by
Christ, he sends them home into themselves, saying, prove your selves, 2 Cor.
13.5.
examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, that is, in the estate of the
faithful, which we call Salvatione And how shall they know this? He tells them
by adding, for know you not that except Christ be in you, you are Reprobates,
that is, such as are excluded from that happiness: Now by Christ being in us
is meant our Sanctification, as (to speak strictly) our being in Christ looks
at, and chiefly implies our Justification; though indeed this phrase in Christ
is used sometimes in a large sense for both, but to draw this particular to a
close, the Apostle sends the Corinthians to their sanctification for a proof
justification; and till they can find Christ in them by his sanctifying them,
they cannot conclude any thing but that for all they know as yet they are
Reprobates; and hence it is that a good soul earnestly lahouring for assurance
(which is the very soul and life of a Christians comfort here) does so highly
prize Christ for sanctification; and thus you have the truth confirmed in both
parts: come we now to Application.

Mat. 25.10, 11. But this is a truth, that if we be in the state of salvation
(and so may assure our selves we shall be saved for ever) then there is saving
grace in us; and if we have saving grace in us, we prize Christ above all
things both for Justification and Sanctification: so then the point whereof we
are to examine our selves, is our prizing of Christ above all in the
particulars before mentioned; and for the cleerer discovery of the truth
therein, we will draw up the rules of our examination into two ranks,
answerable to the proof of the position delivered: As

First, whether we prize Christ above all.

Secondly, whether we prize Christ above all both in Justification and
Sanctification. First

Whether we prize Christ above all: If saving grace be in us, so will we esteem
of Christ as more worth then all; we have not time to instance in every
particular saving grace; we shall therefore at this time but mention one, which
is accounted as a Mother grace, and that is faith. Have we but that saving
grace, Christ will be a Pearl of great price in our eye; and you have a clear
proof thereof by the Testimony of Peter, who says, To you that believe he
(Christ) is precious, but to them that believe not he is a stone of offense, 1
Pet. 2.7. Now to believe, is to receive Christ, John 1.12. and by the rule of
contraries, not to believe is not to receive Cstrist; wherefore the Apostles
words hold forth to us, that Christ is precious only to such as have received
him; and to such as have not received him he is but as a peble stone, nay which
is worse, a rock of offense, whereon they strike in despite, and make an utter
shipwreck of their souls: So then, if we prize Christ, we have received him;
now the Question will be, whether we have received Christ or no; to determine
this case, we will only consider the manner of our receiving him; for that is
so remarkable as it will resolve this doubt if we can find it to have been in
us.

If you ask, what is the true manner of receiving Christ? I answer, that the
soul which receives Christ truly and savingly, takes him with a holy kind of
greediness; we receive him with so much earnestness of affection, as they
which took Heaven by violence, Mat. 11.12. as if we took Christ by force out of
the arms of his Father even when he freely holds him out to us; a kind of
behavior displeasing to men, but herein most acceptable to God: We are like
hunger-starven men, whose hot appetite does make them so earnest after
victuals, as when offered by a charitable hand, they do take them with such
earnestness, as they seem rather violently to snatch then civilly to receive
them; such a disposition God loves to see in us, and therefore has called such
persons blessed, and prommised them a full satisfaction, Matthew. 5.6. Yea, he
knows that till we be such, we will not truly receive him, and therefore he
calls only such to take him, Isa. 55.1. But least you should wonder at this, I
will briefly show you how it comes to pass: The Lord poures the healing Oil
of saving grace into none but broken Vessels, he brings down such as he intends
to exalt, and before he bestows his Christ on any soul, he will make that
soul know and feel his want of Christ: And why? because the sight of his want
of Christ will make him prize Christ, seek Christ, and to praise his free
grace for Christ given to him. Now to make a soul see his want of Christ, he
sets all his sins in order before him, Psalm. 50.21.
reckons with him to the utmost farthing, and so shows him how much he is
endebted to his justice, which calls for execution on him, to bind him here with
great manacles and fetters of temporal and spiritual plagues and judgments,
and so to lead him to the infernal prison of hell. He makes him see that he is
not able to answer one of a thousand, Job 9.3.
much less to clear his scores with him; and therefore he must get him a
Surety to discharge the debt for him, or else he must be committed to the
Jailer; and he finds no creature worth any thing near the matter to be able to
pay off for him the least farthing of his debt; so that the poor soul is
followed with fears and terrors, as it is even ready to give up all hope; but
then the Lord reveals Christ to the soul and his fullness of riches, whereby
he is able to discharge all his debts, and make him not only a free man, but
also a rich man; that Christ has sufficient to set him out of debt and to set
him up again, yea and to keep him from being a bankrupt with his God again; and
withal the Lord seems to whisper in the ear of the soul, that this rich
Christ may be his; he does not say aloud and openly at the first, I will give
thee my Christ for thy Surety, though he be fully and really minded so to do;
but Christ is offered more hiddenly at the first, by way of an overture (as we
say) and this glimpse of Christ sets the heart on longing for him, and his
desire of Christ makes him labor for Christ, and the more he seeks him, the
more he sees him and the abundancy in him, which still sharpens his affection
and quickens his endeavors: The more he feels Christ coming, the more he
hales and pulls at Christ; feign would he now have his fill of this full Christ,
and when once he lays hold on him by faith, with what greediness sucks he him
in? when a man that is so thirsty, as that he thinks his heart will cone for
dright, and he shall be choakt, does take the bottle, which what greediness
does he swallow down, as if he could never have enough? So does the soul take
down Christ that hunger and thirsts after him; it seems insatiable of Christ,
and that he can never have enough of Christ; and therefore he lays aside all
to get Christ. For the purpose consider the carriage of the Samaritane woman in
Joh^ 4. Christ who went about doing good, with his continual travail had
wearied his weak flesh (which was subject to the same infirmities that ours is
excepting sin) and therefore he sat down on the Well an^ was thirsty, yet
he was not so weary but he would be doing good, as opportunity was offered; and
therefore when the woman came (to whom he meant to give himself) to awaken her
and let her see her sins, he examines her, yea, and tells her of her
Adulteries, and of living waters which he had to give, yea, he reveals himself
to her, and then she presently left her water-pots: So when any soul receiv^s
Christ, all the affections thereof seem to run altogether as in one full
stream to him; Water-pots, outward and worldly employments must stand by a
while; the soul has no leizure as yet to mind them: As if all things then
were to the soul (as indeed they are) nothing in comparison of Christ; profit,
pleasure, credit, and such like worldly friends must stand aside now, the soul
has do leizure to talk with them for giving Christ entertainment: nothing will
go down with this soul but Christ; he takes up all his thoughts and
affections, he cannot but think of his Christ, all the talk he loves, is of and
with his Christ. In Deuteronomy. 24.5. the new married man was freed to stay at home
the first year from going forth to war, or bearing any public office, that
he might rejoice himself with his wife, knowing that all the Jewish ceremonies
were types; I have often considered what this ceremony might signify, and
truly I can find nothing that answers thereto more fitly then the freedom a
poor soul new married to Christ must and will have from all worldly
employments for to enjoy her Christ, and to solace herself with him; and if
the indigent flesh necessitate her to earthly affairs, she goes about them as
one deep in love, scarce minding the work he is about, his heart is elsewhere,
and he cannot follow his work, he must go see his Beloved: And in her absence
will sit down and think on her, if friends come, he will talk of her to them;
was it not just so with Paul? there was no sooner the match made between Christ
and him, but he was wholly taken up with Christ, he minded nothing but Christ,
breathed nothing but Christ, all his discourse was of Christ; How full of
Christ are all his Epistles? How much was he delighted even with the very name
of Christ Jesus, that in so few leaves he repeats it many hundred times? It was
sugar in his mouth, and he loved the sweet relish it had: Nothing so sweet to
him as Christ; nay, in comparison of him, all things else were more bitter then
wormwood to him; his very best and most gainful commodities (which were so
precious once to him) are now but loss and dung too; Christ is the only sweet
and profitable: Thus also Mary Magdalen when she knew Christ as her Christ,
with what aflection received she him? she loved him exceeding much; she
thought nothing too much for him, he shall have her box of precious Ointment;
she washes his feet with her tears which she wept for joy of him. The soul
that has Christ is even overjoyed (as I may say) when but come to touch his
very feet; so strong is her desires of him: So when the Merchant had found the
Pearl of great price, the strength of his affection thereto took him off from
all other things, and carried him with an earnestness thereto: So then the
soul that prizeth Christ, has received him with such greediness, as to think
he can never have enough of him, and therefore he can neither take too much
pains, nor be at too much cost for Christ; such a soul will run through thick
and thin for Christ, and leap over all hindrances to get more of him: and this
is the first sign of our prizing of Christ.

The second mark shall be the temper of our souls when we have lost the sight
and sense of Christ, after we have received him; for so it comes to pass very
often, that the soul seems to have lost his Christ; and, to say truth, Christ
has just cause many times to hide himself from a soul; as when the soul
begins to set loose from him, which the soul is apt to do after the heat of
its first love is over; like as hungry and thirsty men set light by victuals
when their hunger and thirst is killed and they filled; in such a case, Christ
does like a tender Parent that finds his child regardlesse of him, leaving him
to run after this and that flower in the field, will hide himself and put
his child in a fear that he has left him to himself, and he must shift for
himself, which he cannot do: So dealt the Lord with David in Psalm. 30.6, 7.
The Sun of God's favor was risen to a great hight, and shined so hot on him,
as it warmed him to his very heart, so that he grew frolic again, and dreamt
that this his merry world would last ever: He thought this Heaven would be
always clear to him without clouds; but his Sun set even at noonday to
him: His frolicknesse was but against a storm which was at hand, for in the
next words he adds, But thou did bids thy face: Again, we do often make
great clouds which do eclipse the Sun of righteousness to us, that we
neither see him, nor feel any heat and warmth from him: These clouds are our
iniquities, which make a separation between him and us, Isa. 59.2. Now in this
case when Christ has given us the slip, and on the sudden has conveyed
himself from us, let us consider how our souls behave themselves, and by
their behavior now, we may know whether they prize Christ as they ought: David
tells you he was troubled; think not (Beloved) that he was troubled but a
little, for he was fore troubled, as the word is translated in 1 Samuel 28.21. It
is a terrible trouble, as the Word indeed fully signifies; for then it is with
the soul, as it is with a man that has lost a Jewel wherein all his wealth
consisted; O how is the poor man troubled! how does terror and fear seize on
him, that he quivers and shakes again? how does he hunt up and down and seek
every corner for it? he turns all upside down, and cannot be quiet till he
has it, for he knows he is utterly undone if he find it not again: so the
soul that has lost her Christ, her Pearl, is exceedingly troubled, and does
not rest contented with any thing till she has found him again, she must
have Christ or else she is undone for ever: See this cleared by the example of
the Spouse in Cant. 5.4, 5. you may see her rejoicing in Christ; O how sweet is
he to her! but in the sixth Verse you find her at a loss; Her wel-beloved has
withdrawn himself and is gone from her; and mark (I pray you) how heavily she
takes it; Her heart went with him, she faints, she laments, she seeks him,
she calls him, she enquires after him, she goes to the Watchmen, the
Ministers of the Gospel, and to her Sisters, common Christians, to ask after
him, she cries him in the streets, Did you see my beloved O when you see him
tell him I am sick of love; so strong was her love to him, that she was sick
for him, and she never left seeking him till she found him, in chap. 6. ver.
7. where she embraces him again. Thus it is with every poor soul that has
once had Christ, and Union and Communion with him, when he does hide himself
therefrom; all the rattles and tinkling comforts of this world will not quiet
him; he must have his Christ, or else he cries, Undone, Undone: As Rachel said,
give me children or else I dye; so he cries, O if you love me give me Christ,
Christ, or else I dye, I dye eternally: If he meet not Christ in prayer, at a
Sermon, at a Sacrament, in an Ordinance, how does he hunt after his Christ? He
seeks not for Christ's, but for Christ himself, and therefore he could be
content to go a begging for Christ, if Christ were in the fiery furnace, yea
in hell, this soul that has once had him, will be content to go thither for
him; so much is he troubled for Christ, as he thinks himself in hell already
without him: Let us now (Beloved) look home, and see whether we have at any
time been thus troubled for our Christ; alas, have we not been much more
troubled and terrified with the loss of a kind Husband, a loving Wife, a good
child, a near and dear friend, then for the loss of Christ? Have we not been
more troubled at outward crosses, when the world has frowned on us, then when
our Christ has turned away his face from us? Have we not been more inquisitive
after our Gold and Silver, and took more pains to regaine the same, then ever
we did for a lost Christ? Thus if it have been with us, then Christ is not
precious in our eyes; for to such a soul as prizeth Christ truly, the loss of
Christ is more to him, then the loss of all Husbands, wives, children,
friends, gold, silver, and what else is in the world of any worth and value in
the eyes of men; and so you have a second mark to try your selves by.

A third Token of our prizing Christ above all, is taken from the affection of
such a soul to Christ, after she has lost him and sought him, but he will
not be found; for this you must know (Beloved) that when Christ is gone, he
will stay his own time; like as the Father which has hid himself from his
child, will stay so long as he sees good, though his child cry never so loud,
and call Father father never so often; so Christ when he has withdrawn
himself, will stay so long as he pleases, though the poor soul cry for him
and to him never so much: Now in this sad condition when Christ seems not to
love the poor soul in any the lest measure, when he will not accept of any of
her love tokens, but flings back prayers and performances, and will none of
them; that soul which prizeth Christ above all, loves Christ still for all
this; though Christ seem to forsake her, yet she will not forsake Christ; she
will not let her hold go of him; she will own Christ, though Christ will not
own her; she will tell Christ, I will love thee Christ, though thou will not
love me; I see worth in thee that thou should be beloved, though thou see
no worth in me; thou art the fairest of ten thousand, the most beautiful that
ever I laid mine eye on, I cannot but love thee, though I am so black and
deformed in thy sight, as thou will not love me; thou art a good Husband, and
blessed is that soul that gets thee for her Husband: Ah my Christ, make me
but as one of thy hired servants, if thou will not make me thy Spouse, or one
of thy children: Such a soul will say to Christ, tell me my Christ why thou
have thus withdrawn thy self from me, let me know mine offense which I have
committed against thee, and made thee thus to leave me; and if thou will have
me I will go to Hell to avenge my self on my self on my self for it: I take
it as a great favor that thou suffer me to board with thy children, though
thou will not own me as one of thine; it glads my heart to see the feast of
fat things, the banquet of thy Ordinances which thou providest for thy people,
though I taste not the sweetness of them, I will not rail on thee in Hell,
for thou art a good Christ, and I shall thank none but my foolish self for my
loss of thee; thus will the soul that prizeth Christ above all hold fast by
Christ still, and clasp him in her affections, though he seem to neglect her
altogether; this you may see evidently in David in such a condition; mark his
words in Psalm. 22.1, 2. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, and art so
far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? O my God I cry in the
day time but thou hear not, and in the night season I am not silent: wherein
you have David to his own sense in a lost condition, because he had lost his
God: and three things are observable in his words: First, the great anguish and
grief of his heart, which appears by the loudness of his complaint, and the
continuance thereof; He roares, he cries day and night for his God. Secondly,
and yet God seems to him to stop both his ears, he will not hear him, he
makes him no answer, but lets him go on roaring and crying for and after him:
And for all this in the third place mark how the good soul cleaves fast to
God; he will have God to be his God still, though God seems to reject him out
of the number of his people; and this is apparent by his calling God his God,
saying, My God, and that not once, but again and again, my God. Truly they
are the words of a saving faith that prizeth the Lord above all, and therefore
will by no tentation be beaten off from him; but where this high esteem of him
is not, there you shall find the quite contrary; as between two men that have
no great estimation of each other, if one slight the other, he shall be
slighted as much again; so when the soul prizeth not Christ, if he cast it
off, that is, bring it into judgment, crosses and losses, that soul will cast
off Christ and his service: All frowns drive this soul off from Christ; for
this soul loves Christ's more then Christ himself, and when Christ will let her
have no more of his Love Tokens he shall have no more of her love; then as they
said of David, who is the son of Jesse? so they of Christ, who is this Jesus?
is he not the Carpenters son? and with that wicked King, This evil comes
of the Lord, why should I wait for the Lord any longer? 2 Kin. 6.33. This
springs from that bitter root of undervaluing the Lord and overvaluing our
selves; but where there is a true esteem of God, there is this waiting and
seeking spirit, as in Micah 7.7. the Church of God says, I will look unto the
Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God (mark that) will hear
me: Beloved, let us ask our selves this question, in these dark times wherein
our Sun seems to be setting, for the wild beasts of all sorts, that prey on
God's servants and his truth, come apace out of their Dens, and we have fasted
and prayed many times, many and great cries have we made to our God for his
return, and yet he answers not; how is it now with our hearts? how stand they
affected toward God? does his absence cool our affection to him? does his
delay of answer dishearten us from calling to him? do we set loose from him,
because we see him setting loose from us? then we never loved nor prized him as
we ought: But if his going from us make us run after him, if the sense of his
loss quicken our love to him, and the less he seems to hear the louder we
cry, and never give over night nor day, then we do prize him above all; and so
you have the third rule of trial.

A fourth may be this; the soul that prizeth Christ sets him uppermost, as in
his thoughts so in his actions, he is the top-end of them all: He does all for
Christ; as all Rivers run unto the Ocean from whence they first came, so all
the actions of a Christ-prizing soul run wholly to Christ as they came from
him; all this souls note is, Christ must be obeyed, Christ must be pleased,
Christ must be honored; Jewels, Plate, and such like precious things are set
in some eminent and pespicuous place, that they may be seen; so he that prizeth
Christ, holds him forth in his words and deeds to be seen of all men; in a
word, this soul takes Christ for his Master, so that Christ is first and last
to him; first, as his Commander, and last as his End; he does all by his word
and to his glory; for indeed he knows Christ is the best Master; there is
never such another: He is the wisest, most able to direct; the strongest, most
able to protect, and the freest of all to his servants; if they ask any thing
of him, which is for their good, he denies them not; he gives the best wages
and the fairest livery too, for it is even the same cloth that himself wears
of, so that God his Father sees but little difference betwixt Master and
Servant.



(primum mobile) first mover, for he it is that gives the denomination to this
act, though many other things fall in with it by the way: If love of Christ be
the first Wheel that moves, then though other wheels may move together with
him, yet he is thy Master, thy head and Jewel; like as a jurney to London is
so called, because a desire to see that famous City, and an intent to go
thereunto, moved first to the setting forth thereon, though by the way a man
do many other businesses; so our actions may be truly said to be for Christ,
if our love of, and obedience to him first moved us thereunto, though by the
way we see and meet with many conveniences to our selves. My Beloved, the doing
of duty is compared to sowing of Corn, Eccl. 11.6. and Jer. 4.4. Gal. 6.8. The
sower sows the purest seed he can, to have pure Corn again, and yet the
purest will have husks if not other soil; so when a soul does duty, he would
do it as purely, as cleanly as he can, and yet thou find some husks
cleaving thereto, a husk of pride, ostentation, self-seeking, etc. In this case
you must sift your heart over, till you find out the first mover, thy first
intent and purpose in the same, and if Christ were that, then is he thy Master;
but if he were not first, but the second, then he is none of thy Master: Divide
the ends of thy action, and then see if thou would have done it, if there had
been none but Cstrist as thy end; many men in these days have done much in
show for Christ and his Cause; but that they may not delude their own souls,
let them examine what was that which first set them on work, whether it were
Christ, or any by-self-ends, as profit, crenit, etc. let them consider whether
they could go an end with the good work they have begun, if that profit,
credit, etc. fail therefrom: Beloved, this will tell us the truth concerning
our actions which we say are for Christ; to whom bring we forth? if to Christ,
then he is our Master; but if to our selves, all we do is void of goodness
and worth in his account, Hos. 10.1.

Fifthly, he that prizeth Christ above all, can and will part with all for him;
this may seem a riddle to a carnal heart, but the believing soul can both
read it and do it: That in Mat. 13.45, 46. makes it clear: Every may that
comes into the world is a Merchant for something or other; some trade for
profit, some for credit, others for pleasure; and truly these three take up the
imploymenss of all men before conversion, because they know of no better
commodities; but when a man is converted, his eyes are enlightened to see the
vanity and emptiness of them, and the excellency of Christ, and thereupon he
leaves off his old trade, and now trafiques only for Christ, and for him he
parts with all that cannot stand with him, or his having of him; his affections
are took off from all things here below, and set on things above; Christ is
all in all in his eye; and therefore if Christ will have his Husband, Wife,
Isaac, he shall; if Christ will have his Goods, his Liberty, yea, and life too,
he shall, and he will thank Christ also for accepting of them; he will rejoice
(with the Apostles in Acts 5.41.) that he was accounted worthy to suffer for
his Christ; so did the believing Hebrews take the spoiling of their goods (for
Christ) joyfully, Heb. 10.34. These are spoiling times, wherein happily some of
you here have suffered for Christ, and in the defense of his cause; how do you
take the plundering of your goods by sea, or by land for Christ's sake? do you
rejoice at it, or do you murmr and repine? is it a grief and a vexation to
you? then thou prizest thy goods above Christ, and have indeed no saving grace
in thee.

Sixthly, he that prizeth Christ aright, highly esteems all that does but smell
of Christ; if any thing look but toward Christ, as having the least relation to
him, such a soul will make exceeding much thereof: If any of you have a noble
friend that you highly reverence and esteem, you will bid welcome and give
free entertainment to the meanest of his followers; so if you prize Christ as
you ought, you will not shut out of doors and that belongs to him, but in it
shall come, and be bid heartily welcome for his Masters sake as well, yea more
then for its own; yet for its own sake too, because such a soul sees an
excellency in every thing that is Christ's and has a dependency on him; for as
when a servant is bound Apprentice, his Master then discovers to him the
mystery of his trade, the worth and price of every commodity he deals in; so
when a soul has given up it self to Christ, he teaches him the mystery of
godliness, his trade, and the worth of every spiritual commodity, so that
such a soul knows what a Sabbath is worth, what a Sacrament is worth, what a
good Sermon is worth, what a poor Saint is worth, etc.

I. As for the Sabbath that will be a delight to such a soul as prizeth
Christ, and it will be honorable in his sight because it is Christ's day, and
he loves it for Christ's sakes because it is a day of Christ's appearing to his
holy ones; like as you see amongst earthly Kings and Princes, they have their
set festival times wherein they show themselves to their people, bestowing
upon them great largesses, throwing among them plenty of gold and silver; so
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lord has his own appointed day, which is now
the first of the seven, which he has set apart therein to manifest himself to
his chosen ones, and bestow his grace on them in a more abundant measure, then
at other times, as is evident from Exodus 31.13. such a soul therefore as
prizeth Christ, prizeth the Sabbath highly, because he shall meet Christ then
according to his promise in his Ordinances: Truly Beloved, if any of you prize
not the day of the Lord, you do not prize the Lord of the day, neither have
you any saving grace in you.

II. The Word of Christ is very precious to such a soul, for it is to him the
lively picture of his Beloved; he is much in hearing and reading of it, because
of his love to Christ, who lies wrapped up therein; that he may confer with his
Christ, and behold the beauty of his Christ; when friends are parted, they love
to hear of one another, and their Letters are much set by for that purpose; so
the soul that accounts Christ his best friend, loves to hear of Christ now
in his absence, and therefore he reads his Love-letter to him, peruseth it
often, for so Christ has bid him to search the Scriptures, because they
testify of him; and as he loves to read Christ in his Word; so to hear Christ
preached out of his Word; and truly he prizeth Christ preached more then Christ
read, because there is usually more in the former then in the latter, more of
the life, and light, and quickening power of Christ; and what has most of
Christ, has most of this souls love, because he loves and prizeth Christ most
of all; is there any here that slights the reading or hearing of the Word of
Christ, that soul prizeth not Christ; Col. 3.16.
for such a soul as prizeth Christ, will delight therein, yea and to have it
dwell richly in him, he looks at it, as a rich Word, because his Pearl is
treasured up therein.

III. The Sacraments are precious to him; each Sacrament is to him a rich
Cabinet, because his Jewel Christ crucified is in it: A Diamond is rich in it
self, but when cut most precious; and so Christ most precious to a soul that
has saving grace, because cut, and indeed cut with the sense of his Fathers
wrath for his sake; truly he had been of little price to us if not so cut; and
therefore Paul says, 1 Cor. 2.2.
he was determined not to know any thing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified;
mark, and him crucified, as if therein lay the excellency of Christ to a poor
soul: Now his crucifying is lively represented in both Sacraments, and
therefore the soul that prizeth Christ, prizeth both; he loves the Sacrament
of Baptism, and to see it duly administered, because it recals to him the
benefit of shedding his blood, the washing away of his sins: The Sacrament of
his Supper he loves, because therein he feeds on his Christ, and finding his
daily want of sustainance from him, his desire is often to be at that
spiritual Feast, according to Christ's direction of often receiving it by the
hand of his Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11.26. And indeed Christ at his departure
hence, left this as a special token of his love to be remembered of us thereby,
Luke 22.19. which makes it the more precious to a soul that prizeth Christ
above all, such therefore as neglect and undervalue any of the Sacraments,
despise Christ the Author and giver of them.

IV. Lastly, the soul that prizeth Christ above all, prizeth the poorest man
or worman who is rich in Christ; and good reason, for God himself prizeth
such; does not James say, hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the
poor of this world, James 2.5.
rich in faith? etc. Now they that be rich in faith, are rich in Christ, for so
much faith so much Christ; the Apostle James reproves in the beginning of that
chapter, the preferring of rich worldlings before poor christians, which
shows you that saving grace prizeth the poorest soul that has Christ before
the greatest King and Emperor, for such a soul is heir to a greater
Kingdom; is a precious Stone the worse because not set in Gold? is Christ this
Jewel the less worse to thee because wrapped up in a leatherne Jacket, or a
threed-bare coat? Surely then thou judge of Christ by the outside, and
judge falsely of him, thou neither know no^ prizest him aright: Is there
any here that prize and prefer i^ their hearts and outward respects, the
great rich men of this world more then a poor soul rich in Christ? that soul
does not priz^ Christ as he ought; is there any here that delight more in the
society and company of such persons as are dressed up with gold Rings, silk
Gowns, more then in Christ attired in a russet coat? that soul prizeth not
Christ above all, neither has saving grace in his heart.

A seventh rule of trial of our prizing Christ above all is this a not-envying
the men of this world, their abundance of Gold and Silver, houses, lands,
honors, preferments, and such like knacks for to such a soul as prizeth
Christ above all, the world is crucified and dead, Gal. 6.14. And he looks at
the rich men as the heirs and executors thereof; and they indeed rejoice and
pride themselves much in their large Inventories, but a Christ-prizing soul
pitties their poor and miserable condition, which is coming on them, for when
death comes, he strips them of all; if their supposed riches take not their
leave of them before (which many times they do, by making themselves wings)
yet they can accompany them no farther then to the holes mouth, Prove. 23.5.
and then how naked are they in the sight of this soul? who says thus to
himself; Fret not at their prosperity for they shall soon be cut down like
the grass, Psalm. 37.1.
and wither as the green herb; they shall leave all behind them, but thou
shall carry thy treasure, or rather thy treasure and Treasurer Christ, Job 1.21.
shall carry thee hence to a better place, to a place of eternal happiness,
when they go down to the pit of endless misery.

Finally, the soul that prizeth above all, will still be laboring to win
others to Christ: Beloved, I pray mark the difference between a soul rich in
Christ, and a man rich in this world: The rich worldling he would be rich
alone, Eccles. 5.8. he would have all the world to himself alone if he could;
but he that is rich in Christ, would feign have others as rich as himself; our
Apostle's example makes it plain, saying to Agrippa; I would to God not only
thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost and altogether such
as I am, except these bonds, Acts 26.29. Mark the large extent of his desire
in this kind, in two particulars: First, he did wish all men this Christ of
his; and secondly, as large a measure of Christ as he had himself; every soul
that prizeth Christ is still motioning of him to others; he would make a match
between Christ and his Wife, and she between Christ and her Husband, and both
would feign hang this their Jewel on their children to adorn them in God's
fight: They labor to kindle in their friends a love of Christ, and therefore
in their company they are still praising of Christ, and setting forth his
excellencies; look you, say they, is not Christ a lovely Christ, the fairest of
ten thousand? you never saw such a beauty as his is; he is a loving Christ that
will not see thee want, he will be tender over thee in all thy sicknesses and
distresses, he will comfort thee at thy heart when none else can; he is a rich
Christ, get him for thy Spouse, and thou art provided for ever: Thus will such
a soul as prizeth Christ be wooing others to Christ; he would not go to
Heaven alone, for he knows it is not there as it is here; but there as the
more the merrier, so the beteer cheer too; and that he shall not have the
less, but the more, by bringing in others to be sharers with him in his
Christ; Christ multiplies to such a soul as thus divides him to others; and
therefore the soul that prizeth Christ, labors all he can to draw other unto
Christ; and beside, he knows it is an honor to Christ to have many servants
attending him, and this prevails exceedingly with the soul which does all to
the glory of Christ.

Thus having finished the trial of the first part of the Question in hand,
whether we prize Christ above all things, we come to exmine

The second part, whether we prize Christ above all both for Justification and
Sanctification.

First for Justification, and for this take these two Rules.

First, examine thine own heart, whether thou think thy person is accepted
in God's sight for thy performances, whether they prevail in thy account with
God, to prize thee more then others: Thus did the proud Pharisee conceive, and
therefore he was so bold as to thank God that he was not as this man, the poor
Publican; but a soul that prizeth Christ-above all, looks at all those
Pharisaicall Robes of legal righteousness in this point but as rags, yea as
filthy rags, and therefore he pulls them over his ears, and by no means would
be found of God in them; only Christ's righteousness is the Robe that he
would have to go in before God: He looks at the Lord Jesus as the only
Garment that can please God's sight, and therefore he labors every day to put
him on more and more; if therefore thou pridest thy self in, and deckest thy
self up with thine own righteousness, thou prizest not Christ at all for
Justification.

Secondly, ask thine own heart what opinion it has of thy good works, in
procuring thy pardon from God's Justice: if they be thy gain, then Christ is
loss to thee; if thou think, with the Papist, to merit and gain Heaven, or
the least part of Heaven by them, Christ is nothing worth to thee: I know the
Papists say, they exclude not Christ by including their works in matter of
Justification; but what they say not, that they do; for by their making of
works to be sharers with Christ, they do really exclude Christ, and so
themselves from Justification: If you cry up works in Justification, you cry
down Christ; the Apostle Paul in our Text prizing Christ above all for
Justification, beats down works to the ground; for indeed therein Christ must
be alone all in all, or else nothing at all; as all sound and learned
Protestants have and do continually maintain against the Popish Doctrine of
Merit; and therefore I shall not need to insist any further on this particular.

The second is more necessary for us who take that for granted among us, but
little think of this latter, which yet is as necessary to be known and learned
as the former, as has been proved: and whether we have learned to prize Christ
above all for Sanctification, if we deal truly with our own souls, we may
know by these Rules of examination.

First, see how thine heart stands affected with the dishonor of Christ; is
Christ's disgrace and loss more to thee then thine own? for what we desire
most, we shall grieve most for, if we fall short thereof; never was Christ more
dishonored by his own people then in these times, both in private and public;
in families, in churches and Kingdoms; feel therefore the pulse of thy soul,
in these diseased times, wherein the world seems to draw nigh apace unto its
end; Christ is dishonored in thy family, this church and Kingdom, and how
do thou take it? do thou not see his Gospel neglected, yea opposed? are
not his Sacraments even by such as go for his servants, cast behind their
backs, and laid aside as of no use? are not his Sabbaths profaned, his Name
blasphemed, his servants abused, and many more horrid indignities put on him?
and how take thou it to heart? It may be thou will say, it does much break
your heart to see things so much disordered; but be advised here, that you may
not be mistaken in your grief, see whether it be not more for thy self, then
for Christ's sake; now thou see the ship of the State cracked, and sinking to
a shipwreck, yea and Church too, by the many rents in it (if the Lord save not
both) it may well be thought that thou art deeply affected; but I pray weigh
the matter thoroughly in your own soul; is it not because thou art a passenger
therein, and thou have a venture in this Bark that is split, and thou know
if that sink thou can not escape, but thou and all that is thine must be
quite lost, and therefore thou set thy hand to help save the Bark, that
thou and thine may be saved therein? But if thou were out of the ship and
embarked in another Kingdom and church with all thy venture, would thou be
so much troubled for the loss of Christ's Vessel here? would it come so near
to thy heart then, to hear of all the dishonor that Christ suffers, by
broaching of Errors and Heresies, to the great impeachment of his truth, and
by the great dissension between his best servants? Then it is a sign thou
prizest Christ above all in Sanctification; for a soul that does so, seeks to
advance Christ's glory most of all, and that Christ may be more and more served
by him and all others.

Secondly, consider how thy heart stands affected toward sin: If thou seek
Christ above all for holiness thou will be at utter emnity with the greatest
enemy thereto, and that is sin; every sin, even thy bosome-sin, thy
darling-sin will become as odious to thee as the foulest Toad; neither will thou be at defiance only with outward actual sins, but also with those that
are more hidden and inward; the sins of thy nature; yea, and truly these will
be most offensive to thee, because they are as fountains of iniquity, and
roots of bitterness in thee; thus we find David more complaining of his
naughty and corrupt heart, then of his actual transgressions of murder,
adultery, drunkenness and idleness; and Paul cries out of the body of death
in him, Romans 7. a soul that seeks Christ for Sanctification, would dig up
sin by the roots, another man may top and lop lust in the branches thereof:
try therefore your selves by this rule.

Thirdly, examine your selves what entertainment the doctrine of walking
exactly and precisely finds with your hearts; truly if you seek Christ above
all for holiness, you will prize his strictest laws at the highest rate; if
Christ's Commandments be grievous to thee, and thou would cast off his
laws as bonds with them in Psalm. 2. thou have no esteem of Christ at all for
Sanctification. His Yoke is light and easy to such as seek Christ for
holiness.

Fourthly, he that prizeth Christ above all for Sanctification, does not only
prize his strictest commands, but also practice them; he loves to walk in the
strictest way his best Beloved has chalked out to him; bring therefore your
lives and conversations and lay them to that rule in Titus 2.12. do you deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts? do you live godly, righteously and soberly in
this present world? is this your endeavor to give both God and man his due,
and to keep your selves from being overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life? Then thou do seek Christ for
holiness; for such a souls desire is to walk altogether in the ways of
holiness, doing of duty in a newness of life is all its delight; and why?
because this is the readiest way to grow up in holiness, and to become more
and more like to Christ, whom he desires above all for this very purpose, that
he might be perfect in holiness.

Lastly, take a scantling of your Humiliations, Fastings and Prayers, and
thereby you may judge of your selves concerning your estimation of Christ for
holiness; we have fasted and prayed often, humbled our selves publicly and
privately many times, once a month at the least, for the space of three years
almost; but let us try wherefore we have been so often in humiliation, fasting
and prayer, what has been the first wheel that has moved therein: Have we
sought Christ for our Sanctification in all our Fastdayes? what bottom has
our sorrow stood upon? no other ground but the sense of God's wrath, a fear of
that great judgment of the sword, destruction here, and damnation hereafter?
truly if our humiliation has sprung from no other cause then this we have not
prized Christ above all for our Sanctification; for if holiness (whereby we
might serve God better then we do) were our aim, when we fast and pray and
humble our selves, our sins and corruptions, not our afflictions, move us
first thereto. Indeed judgments and corrections are instructions, they open
our eyes to see our errors, and then a love of holiness brings us on our
knees for our sins, to beg a pardon for them, and a cleansing of them; saving
grace teaches a soul to begin at the right end of his work; he that thinks to
take judgment away before his sin, and therefore fasteth and prays, he
begins at the wrong end of the business; he must take away the cause and then
the effect will follow of it self; dig up sin by the root, and that bitter
fruit of judgment which grows on its branches will wither and come to
nothing; to humble, fast and pray, and do such like duties for no other end
but out of a desire of peace, which we want, and to escape the plagues we have
deserved, is only to prize Christ above all for Justification, whereby we are
discharged and acquitted from the guilt of our offenses, and consequently from
the punishment due to us for the same; but to humble our selves out of sense of
our sins, the filthiness of them, their magnitude, multitude and power; and
we beg Christ that he may come and reign in the midst of his and our enemies
that are in us, that he would wash and cleanse us, wash our feet, hands, head
and all over, that we might do his service more decently and in order, as
becomes his servants, then we prize Christ for Sanctification: And truly it is
to be feared, that we have not humbled, fasted and prayed in this kind, because
the Lord has not heard and answered all this while, it seems more probable we
have sought the Lord only in the former way, for benefit by him, out of mere
self-love, and therefore we have been despised as self-seekers; the Lord has
seen we have brought forth all unto our selves, and therefore he has made all
return empty and vain to us: we shall never find Christ justifying us, till
we desire him sanctifying us: the Lord gives his Christ not only to save a
soul, but also that the soul may by Christ serve him; indeed the Lord may
give peace, plenty, and such like outward things he may heap on wicked men, but
there is no Christ in them, and therefore they more hurt then do good to them,
yea and the Word do with them more evil then good; but to a soul that has
saving grace, and prizeth Christ above all for holiness, the Lord give him
Christ in all his gifts and tokens, of what kind soever they be; whether of his
left or of his right hand, and therefore they all do him good, he is the
better and not the worse for them, yea and he makes a good use of them, to the
glory of God and benefit of others; wherefore (to turn this sign into a
motive) as we would obtain our desire, and see peace and truth settled amongst
us, and as we would have good and no hurt by them, when they come, let us
learn in all our Humiliations, Fastings, Prayers, and all duty to prize and
seek Christ above all for sanctification, that is, that we may not only lead a
quiet and a peaceable life, 1 Timothy 2.2, 3.
but also that we live in all godliness and honesty, for this indeed is good
and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

Let me conclude with a word of reproof of all such as do not prize Christ
above all for sanctification so well as for justification; these persons have
no saving grace in them, and no true love to Christ; they love happiness, but
care not for holiness; so they could be saved by Christ, let who will serve
Christ for them; they have all their desire, and so no more need of Christ: Ah,
let such poor souls take heed of their King; there is more need of Christ in
justification then sanctification: Truly Beloved, it is one of the devil's
masterpieces in these times, to take men off from sanctification to cry up
free grace only in justification; when as there is as great if not greater
free grace, and therefore a greater need of it in sanctification then in
justification, as has been shown: such therefore as seek not Christ above all
for holiness as well as happiness are justly to be blamed.

What blame then are they worthy of who desire Christ to be a cloak of their
unholinesse? believe me, a Church-Protestant is worse then a Church-Papist; do
you not see what bribers they are? see how they bribe their own consciences
and their brethrens eyes with an outside of Christ; mark you not how they be
at a see with prayer, hearing of Sermons, repetitions, etc. that they may keep
a bosome-sinne? Are there not many Protestants (I could wish there were none
here) that wear a glistering garment of profession uppermost, as if they had
put on that glorious Diadem the Lord Jesus? Put alas! that soul which has put
on Christ indeed is all glorious within; the fairest part of its beauty is in
the heart; this soul has a better inside then outside; there is no true
judgment can be given of him by his outward appearance; and the truth is, such
a man is most careful about his heart, to adorn that, to approve that to God:
But such as have not truly put on Christ, all their care is to trick and trim
up their outward man, their visible outside; they put the best side outmost:
How many under their brave coversluts, wear next to their hearts garments nasty
both for coursnesse and foulness; does not this man put on covetousness? that
man envy? another malice? a fourth hypocrisy? etc. do these serve Christ in
any of their performances? nothing less; they serve only themselves by him;
they do but make him their shooing-horne to pull on their self ends; so long
as Christ goes their way, he shall have their company, yea so long as the
chariot of self-love lasts, they will march as furiously for Christ, as Jehn
did for Jehovah, Baal shall down, and all his Priests too; but if self and
Christ come in competition, and so must part, then farewell Christ; these men's
way now lies quite contrary to Christ's; and let them go, they are not worthy
the society of a christian that thus slight and abuse Christ, whom Paul and
every poor soul that has saving grace does prize Christ above all both for
Justification and Sanctification.

FINIS.
I have perused this Sermon on Phil. 3.7, 8, etc. and finding it to be very
godly, judicious and profitable, I do allow it to be printed and published.

John Downame.


