To his Highness the Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
The humble petition of Capt. John Bernard now prisoner in Newgate, LONDON,
Showing!
THat Colonel Wenthrop being under some dangerous delusion and temptation,
has with others continued a Conspiracy to destroy your Petitioner ever since
December 1651. and did Justify three false witnesses the 13. of this instant
August in open Court: and whispered with the Magistrates upon the Bench, and so
surprised both Magistrates, and Jurors; that they would not suffer all the
persons who were in Col. Wenthrops family when the pretended Robbery was
committed to be sent for, and examined; nor would they suffer the three false
witnesses to be kept at a distance from each other, and examined a part,
whereby your innocent Petitioner has sentence of death pronounced upon him,
and has his just Rights and Privileges apparently taken from him by the
aforesaid proceedings, contrary to Law, which your Highness has bound your
self by oath to maintain and preserve.

In tender Consideration of the premises and for the reasons following, viz.

1. Colonel Wenthrop has made your Petitioner odious unto your Highness,
designedly to prevent your Highnesses promised hearing of him, and your
Petitioner face to face, upon a Christian-like charge presented by Doctor
Wells, against the said Colonel and others, for most apparent partiality and
injustice: before the pretended Robbery was committed.

2. Before sentence was passed, your Petitioner importuned the Court to suspend
the same at present, and to re-examine the said witnesses; your Petitioner
having found out the ground of their malice against him, and also four persons
of Col. Wenthrop's family, who were in the house the same night that the
Robbery, was said to be committed, whose Information upon oath wilfully clear
the truth for your Petititioners Vindication.

May it therefore please your Highness to grant your Petitioner a Reprieve, and
to call Colonel Wenthrop and the persons which were in his house the 15 of May
last before your Highness; and examine them against your Petitioner face to
face, that truth may be brought to light, and that your Petitioners innocent
blood may not be brought upon your Highnesses head, through want of your
Highnesses mainteining the Just Rights, and Privileges of your Petitioner
according to your Oath; your inferior Magistrates having greatly failed; and
your Petioner desires no mercy but the extremity of Justice from your Highness,
if in the spirit of meekness he does not make all this good before your
Highness.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. John Bernard.

To the right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, and the rest of the Bench, at the
Old Bailey: The Humble Petition of Capt. John Bernard,
SHFWETH!
THat Colonel Wenthrop, and many other great Officers of the Army, have
maliciously conspired to destroy your Petitioner ever since December, 1651. And
have damnified him already, far above 10000 l And upon your Petitioners Appeal
to his Highness, presented by one Doctor Wells, about 10 a Clock, on Friday
15. May last, (being the day before Col. Wenthrops Robbery was named,) His
Highness graciously promised to hear Col. Wenthrop, and any other accuser,
and your Petitioner face to face But the said Colonel has made your
Petitioner odious unto his Highness, and other good men, by accusing him
falsely, and producing false witnesses to take away your Petitioners Life
apparently, and designedly to prevent his Highnesses promised hearing.

Moreover, diverse of Col. Winthrops false witnesses did desperately swear
against one Bryan Harpur Gent. for the same pretended Robbery: and though Mr.
Harpur did presently clear his Innocence, and cloth the faces of Col.
Wenthrop, and his false witnesses with shame, so that he was constrained to get
Mr. Harpur discharged at the last sessions at Hicks's Hall. Yet he does still
keep the same false witnesses to swear against your Petitioner.

In tender Consideration of the premises: and that your Petitioner is utterly
ignorant of the Law, and of the proceeding in this Honorable Court:

May it therefore please your Honors to Plead your Petitioners cause: and
Order that Col. Wenthrops whole Family (who are Capable of an Oath, and were in
the House when the pretended Robbery was committed) may all appear before your
Honors, to give Testimony against your Petitioner, and that those witnesses
who are here present, may be kept a part out of the Court, and from each other,
and then be examined apart, for your better finding out of truth for your
Petitioners Vindication or Condemnation.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. Jo. Bernard.

To every Minister of the Gospel, and Officer and Soldier of the Army, and
Citizen of London or Westminster, and all other Men and Women who fear God, and
love righteousness.
I Do earnestly and humbly beseech you, and every one of you, as you will
answer it at the great day of Account, forthwith to pray fervently to the Lord,
that he would vindicate his truth from forged lies, and false testimony in this
case concerning my life, related in the enclosed Petitions: And then forthwith
move five or six of the chiefest Speakers out of the several Congregations you
belong unto, forthwith to go to Hampton Court unto the Protector, to procure me
a Reprieve, and an Order for his Highnesses speedy Examination of this horrid
intended murder of me under color of a Legal-trial which I had not, both
magistrates and Jurors being surprised, as a cloud of witnesses then present at
the trial; some of the Lifeguard, others of the City are ready to prove upon
his Highnesses hearing who is now the proper Judge thereof, and must preserve
or murder me; and you will be accessory to the murder, if you do not improve
your utmost Interest to have the truth brought to light, which is all that is
desired by

Your friend and servant in the Lord, under great affliction for righteousness
sake, John Bernard.
15 August 1657. Monday morning next is appointed the time when I must be
murdered, unless the Lord be seen in the Mount: Pray therefore with faith,
and act with patience while there is any time, and wait to see the salvation of
God, unto whom belong the issues from death.




