COL: BETHELS LETTER TO HIS EXCELLENCE THE Lord Fairfax, Concerning the
surrender of Scarbrough Castle, on Tuesday, December. 19. 1648.

Together, With a true Copy of the Articles for the Rendition thereof, and the
Result of the Council of War concerning the same.

LONDON, Printed for J. Playford at his shop in the Inner Temple. December. 25.
1648.

Colonel Bethels Letter to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax.
May it please your Excellency,
SInce I acquainted you with the Treaty concerning the surrender of this
Castle, (and before the receipt of yours) having received Information by very
honest and well-affected persons, Seamen of Scarbrough, and others, that
several Ships with men and provisions from the Prince were designed hither,
and expected every hour for the relief of this Castle; I called together the
Officers here, who unanimously agreed rather fully to conclude then to run
the hazard of the inconveniences that might ensue thereby to the poor
Country, considering we never had yet the happiness to have one Ship upon
these Coasts, neither any assurance thereof (though I have writ many times) and
indeed if God had not been more merciful by his providence in the winds then
any endeavor we have found by man, they had been relieved ere this; but the
wind being fair, and not hearing from your Excellency, and having
encouragement from Major General Lambert) we did conclude for the delivery of
the Castle according to several Articles which I have herewith sent you, and
are now marched in with Captain Lawsons Company; and though the terms may
seem better then your Excellency expected (yet in the present exigence it
could not be avoided.) The Governor is ashamed to stay in England, therefore
intends beyond Seas, and likewise most of the Officers: there is good store of
all sorts of provisions, especially of Rye, and Butter, and at least 50 barrels
of powder, and a great quantity of Match, it might very well have holden out
these three Months, had we any hopes or assurance of Shipping to have
prevented their relief, we should not have admitted such Conditions, which I
hope however will gain your Excellencies good Construction (I must needs
acknowledge your Excellencies high esteem of me in thinking me worthy of this
place;) Captain Lawson I conceive well of, but there would be at least a
Company or two more in it, which I only offer to your consideration, hoping
your Excellency will think of a certain establishment for it as for other
places of that concernment, for I hope to give your Excellency upon all
occasions a just and faithful account of what I am entrusted with; so I rest,

Scarborough December. 19, 1648. Your Excellencies most humble and faithful
Servant, Hugh Bethell.

By the Council of War.
Leaguer at Scarborough, December. 12. 1648.
Whereas certain Intelligence has been this day given to this Council, that
there is a Ship at Sea which came from Dunkirke ready to bring Men, Money, and
store of Provisions for the relief of the Castle, and (the wind being now
fair) will be here very speedily before we can receive Instructions from the
Lord General; besides, other Informations also given us, that some of the
Princes Ships are also at Sea, or ready to set to Sea, for their relief, we
having not any Ships here at present, nor any assurance of having any, to
hinder the designs of the Enemy by Sea: We therefore upon the aforementioned
grounds seriously considering, that if the Castle get relief it will be of
great prejudice to the whole Kingdom, have therefore thought fit hereby to
give full power unto Collonell Christopher Legard, Lieutenant Collonell William
Spencer, Lieutenant Collonell Barrington Bourcher, Captain Nicholas Conyers,
and Captain John Lawson, Commissioners on our part already nominated, to treat
and conclude with the Commissioners appointed by Collonell Matthew Bointon,
Concerning the surrender of this Castle, as well in reference to the giving such
Conditions to Collonell Bointon, and Captain Rowley, as to our said
Commissioners shall seem expedient, as to all other points and matters
concerning the Rendition of the said Castle. In testimony whereof we have
subscribed our names the day and year above written. Hugh Bethell,
ArthurStringer, Io: Bethell, Robert Legard, William Legard, Charles Brocket,
George Blacker, Walter Bethell, Thomas Johnson, Io: Attey, John Beer, Henry
Wilkinson, Francis Bacon, Thomas Weddell, Charles Legard, Hugh Savile, James
Best, Edward Todd, William Blacker.


Upon the grounds and reasons above mentioned, we having formerly entrusted and
authorized the Gentlemen above named, to treat and conclude as above said, We
do therefore now ratify and confirm all such Articles agreed and concluded
upon by the said Commissioners concerning the surrender of Scarborough Castle:

In testimony whereof we have subscribed our names the 18 day of December.
1648. Hugh Bethell, Arthur Stringer, Io: Bethell, Robert Legard, William
Legard, Charles Brocket, George Blacker, Walter Bethell, Thomas Johnson, Io:
Attey, John Beer, Henry Wilkinson, Francis Bacon, Thomas Weddell, Charles
Legard, Hugh Savile, James Best, Edward Todd, William Blacker.


Articles agreed and concluded upon December. 17. 1648. betwixt Col: Christopher
Legard, Lievt. Col: William Spencer, Lievt. Col: Barrington Bourcher, Capt.
Nicholas Conyers, and Capt. John Lawson, Commissioners on the behalf of Col:
Hugh Bethel, Commander in chief of the Parliament Forces now in Leaguer before
Scarborough Castle, and Col: Thomas Fairfax, Major Edward Gower, Major Thomas
Reston, Capt. Roger Newinson, and Capt: Timothy Wilkins, Commissioners for Col:
Matthew Boynton, Governor of that Castle on the behalf of His Majesty,
concerning the Rendition of the said Castle to the said Col: Hugh Bethell to
the use of the Parliament.
1. THat upon Tuesday next, being the nineteenth day of December instant, the
Castle of Scarbrough shall be surrendered to Col: Hugh Bethell, Commander in
chief, and to the use of the Parliament, with all the Arms, Ordnance, and
Ammunition, Provisions and other goods whatsoever, without embezelment, except
what is metioded in the ensuing Articles.

2. That the Governor, Officers, Gentlemen and Soldiers in the said Castle,
shall march out thereof upon the day and at the hour aforesaid, with their
wearing Apparel and Money, properly their own; their Colors flying, Drums
beating, Muskets laden, Bandeleers filled, Matches lighted, and Bullet in
mouth, to a Close called Scarbrough Common, and there to lay down their Arms,
except what is hereafter excepted.

3. That the Governor shall march with his Horse and Arms, offensive and
defensive, and three servants on horseback to attend him, with their swords, to
what place he shall appoint; every Field-Officer on horseback, with Sword and
Pistols, and two servants on horseback with their Swords, every Captain on
horseback with their Swords and Pistols, and one servant to attend them, all
other Commission-Officers and Gentlemen on Foot with one Pistol and Sword, all
other Officers and Soldiers with their Swords to their several habitations,
and there to remain without molestation, submitting to all Orders and
Ordinances of Parliament; And for any thing done in order to the providing for
or securing of the said Garrison to his Majesty's service, to be freed from
Arrests and other Molestations till the first of May next ensuing; and all
Officers and Soldiers included in these Articles, shall have liberty to go
about their occasions to any part of the Kingdom, except besieged places. And
in case any one of them shall desire to go beyond the Seas betwixt the time of
the surrender of this Garrison, until the first of May next ensuing, Passes
shall be granted to them to that purpose; also all such persons as are employed
about the affairs of this Garrison, and are not now in custody, shall have the
benefit of these Articles.

4. That free Quarter shall be granted to all included in these Articles in
their passages to their several habitations, they traveling eight miles a
day, and not staying above one night in a place, except on the Sabbath day: And
that all sick and wounded persons shall be provided for till they shall be
recovered, and then to have Passes to go to their several habitations.

5. That all Gentlewomen within the said Castle shall be suffered to pass out
with their wearing Apparel, Money and Necessaries: And the Horses and other
conveniences may be brought for their conveyance to such place as shall be
nominated: And that all such persons that shall desire it, shall have liberty
to hire or procure Horses for their Money, or from Friends; And the same Horses
to be brought on the day of the surrender to the backside of Saint Mary's
Church in Scarborough.

6. That all persons included within these Articles now under Sequestration,
shall have liberty to compound.

7. That all Prisoners now in custody in the Town of Scarborough, shall upon
this Agreement be set at liberty.

8. In case any Officer or Soldier shall do any thing contrary to this
Agreement, they shall be forthwith delivered up to punishment, and that the
said breach shall prejudice none but those that are guilty.

9. That a sufficient Convoy be appointed.

Tho: Fairfax. Tho: Reston. Edw: Gower. Roger Newinson. Timothy Wilkins.


FINIS.

