A SERMON OF THE EPIPHANY, Preached in the Queen Dowagers Chapel at
Somerset House, upon Twelfth Day, January the 6th. 1686.

By John Betham, Doctor of Sorbon, and Preacher in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Published by her Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner, at the Lamb in Holborn. 1687.

Ecce Magi ab orient venerunt Jerosolymam, dicentes: Ubi est, qui natus est
Rex Judaeorum? vidimus enim Stellam ejus in orient, and venimus Adorare eum.
MAT. 2. 1, 2. Behold, there came Wise Men from the East to Jerusalem, saying,
Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his Star in the
East, and are come to adore him.
WHEN the worlds Redeemer was born in Bethlem, a solemn Embassey was sent from
Heaven, to acquaint poor Shepherds, that the Messiah had then began his Reign.
About the same time, a Star was appointed to summon from remoter Countries,
three crowned Heads, to pay Adoration to this newborn King. In the Shepherds,
who were near at hand, he was discovered to the Jews, to whom he was first
sent, and amongst whom, he was to be born: In the wise Men, who came from
foreign parts, he was made known to the Gentiles, who were at a dreadful
distance from God and Heaven. Manifestatus est, Judaeis in pastorum
propinquitate gentibus Sermon. 3. de Epiph.
in magorum longinquitate, says St. Augustine. The Shepherds were invited to
this honor, because the meanest and poorest sort of men: the Wise men, because
as St. Augustine observes, Magicians (though in this differing from many other
Fathers, who say the word Magi signifies philosophers) but St. Augustine will
have them Magicians, and consequently enormous sinners. These passages were a
Preludium to the Doctrine our Savior afterward preached and practiced, in
choosing the meanest and most contemptible things in this world, and laboring
chiefly for the Salvation of sinners; to the end St. Augustine says, Ut nullus
magnus superbiret, nullus infirmus desperarer: That the Great Ones here on
earth, might not swell with pride; and that no sinner, how heinous soever,
should be dejected and cast into despair.

By this, our Savior proved himself the great Cornerstone, Lapis Angularis,
as the scripture Ephesians. 2. 14.
calls him, uniting to the same head, and in the same faith, the heretofore so
opposite people Jews and Gentiles, and with them raising one Spiritual
building, the Catholic Church composed of them both, fecit utraque unum. Here
the old feuds between Jews and Gentiles, that had so long divided the world,
were at last ended, and the Prophecy of Esaias made good; That 11; 22. 62. 25.
the time should come when the Lamb and Woolf should peaceably feed together in
the same Pasture; and the Lion and the Ox eat quietly in one Manger. Lupus and
Agnus pascentur simul, Leo and Bos comedent paleas: That is, the Jews and
Gentiles, heretofore as irreconcilable as ravenous Wolves with the innocent
Lambs, as hungry Lions with Sheep or Oxen, this day are reconciled at the
Manger of our new born Jesus, joyfully united in the same Faith of the true
Messiah there present, by which their souls were nourished and made able to
seek after eternal Glory. Here was verified to the latter, what the same
Prophet affirms: puer parvulus minabit eos; the mentioned savage and ravenous
creatures, shall forget their natural cruelty, their bloody antipathy, and
become so gentle, as to be joined together in the same yoke, with what they
used to devour; rendered so tame, that an infant-child shall lead them.

God's mercy never appeared so astonishing, as in this miraculous call of the
Gentiles to the true Faith; man's weakness never can prove more fatal, than by
abusing so signal a favor: Happy we Gentiles, who were called after so
admirable a manner; thrice unhappy Gentiles, if we abuse so infinite a blessing.
The prodigy of mercy that ever most astonished the world, was the calling us
Gentiles upon this happy day to the true Faith, as I shall prove in my first
part. The greatest misery man can fall under, is not to correspond with so
undeserved a Grace, as I shall show in my second Part. These two Points make
the division of my discourse, and the Subject of your favorable attention,
which I shall crave, after we have invoked the assistance of the Divine Spirit,
begging the Virgin Mother to join with us in so necessary a Petition. Ave Maria.

The Birth of our Great Messiah, and the miraculous discovery of it made to the
Jews, was a gracious effect of his ever to be adored mercy; yet we may in some
measure truly term it an act of Justice; because in this, we find fulfilled
several Divine promises, made by God in recompense of that signal faith, and
absolute obedience, so eminent in many of his Loyal servants. First to an
Abraham; Benedicentur in semine tuo omnes Gentes, quia obedisti voci meae. And
in thy seed all Nations shall be blessed, because thou have obeyed my Genesis 22. 18.
voice. And then likewise to Jacob, that the Royal Scepter shall not depart
from the Race of Juda, till the Messiah appeared, Non auferetur Sceptrum Genesis
49. 10.
de Juda, donec veniat qui mittendus est. And often to David in consideration
of his good Government, his Saintly life, his zeal in his Makers Service. By
these promises we find the Prophets raised to a pious impatience, for the
arrival of that happy moment; propter Sion non tacebo, and propter Jerusalem
non quiescam Esaias. 62. 1.
donec oriatur ut splendour Justitiae ejus. For Sion and Jerusalem I will never
rest till the bright Sun of Justice its Savior shall rise as a Fire, as a
burning Lamp. At other times they beg of the Heavens to shower him down; and
sometimes beseech him to break through them; so impatient were they for his
appearance: These zealous petitions, these languishing sighs after the Worlds
Redeemer, deserved some little consideration in the Court of Heaven, merited in
some manner, as Divines observe, the actual appearance of this Celestial
Comforter: Therefore God Almighty told them at last for their comfort, Propter
miseriam Psalm. 11. 5.
inopum, and gemitum pauperum, nunc exurgam, dicit Dominus: For the miseries of
my afflicted and disconsolate people, for the sighs of my poor servants who
have long languished to see and feel the effects of my saving Providence, I
will now come to their assistance.

Although they were often a rebellious Nation, they were the Children of an
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; Names sacred both in Earth and Heaven, for whose
sakes alone, God had spared them, in the worst of times: and therefore, when
Moses their Prophet and Governor, stood in need of a favorable audience, they
generally petitioned in the name of these great Men, to whom God had tied
himself by oath, as Moses minds him, after their Apostasy, in Exodus 32. 13.
adoring the Golden Calf, Quibus jurasti per temetipsum. Although it be true,
that they too too often failed, yet they and their Ancestors, were the only
people, that had brought down the worship of the True God from man's creation;
never wanting in the height of their disorders, some faithful servants of
Heaven, true worshippers of the only divinity; as appears by the answer made to
the Prophet Elias, when he 3. Reg. 19. 3.
thought piety at the lowest ebb: so among both living and dead, they never
wanted powerful advocates to plead their Cause, to interpose between the People
and their offended Maker. Some had failed, others had still faithfully served
him; some blasphemed his holy Name, others sung his praises day and night: when
there was one of the race of Jacob so weak, that Maccab. 1. 2.
he sacrificed to Idols, by the command of Antiochus, there was a Mattathias so
zealous, as to immolate the unfortunate wretch, upon the same Altar, and so
repaired the Insolence. When there was a Zimri so impious, as to defile himself
Numb. 25. 8.
with an unfortunate Midianite, there was a Phineas so replenished with the
zeal of the Lord, that he could not suffer the indignity, but sacrificed upon
the place, the two Criminals to the divine Justice. Perfodit ambos simul,
killed them both; and so by his zeal saved the race of Israel. Nay, at the very
time the Messiah appeared, although there was a monstrous Herod, then a Jew by
Profession, that thirsted after the Blood of this innocent Lamb; there was at
the same time an old Simeon, replenished with the holy Ghost, who expected with
impatience the happy moment, desiring to live for no other end, but that he
might only see this sweet Babe, and embrace him in his arms; after which
happens, he asked for his own dismission from this world. Nunc dimitte tuum
servum Domine: Begging his Luke. 2. 29.
Life might be closed with that Exstacy of Love, with which he was wrapped at
that charming passage. In fine, although few honored him, as Redeemer, when
first born; yet we find within the precincts of Judaea, a band of pious
Shepherds, a Prophetess Anna, a faithful Joseph and Mary, that gave him the
honor and adoration due to his Divine Majesty. From hence we may conclude,
that although the Jew's Call to believe in, and adore the true Messiah, was an
effect of God's infinite Bounty and Mercy, yet it was in some measure proper
and convenient.

After this, dear Christians, should I lay before you the sad condition of the
Gentiles, when our Savior came to redeem the world, as it is described by St.
Paul, 'twill appear the Romans 1.
most deplorable, that unfortunate man was ever condemned to, they knew the
eternal Power, the invisible Majesty, of an incomprehensible God, by the
creatures he had made; yet they were so senseless and stupid, Stulti facti sunt,
as to give the supreme worship due only to this adorable Divinity; to Birds,
Beasts, Crocodiles, and Serpents: and so preferred the last, and most despicable
of Creatures, before the All-Puissant and eternal Creator. Servierunt
Creaturae, Ver. 25.
potius quam Creatori. And therefore, St. Paul says, God justly delivered them
over to the Tyranny of the most ignominious of Passions, in Passiones
ignominiae; men and women 26
perverting the order of Nature, by the most infamous, and monstrous ways,
that human corruption could invent; most unhamanly revenging themselves upon
one another, and this as the chastisement, and just reward of their Idolatryes,
and other Crimes; Mercedem quam oportuit Erroris sui in temetipsis recipientes:
so ^7.
abandoned by their Maker, whom they had first forsaken, he delivered them over
to a reprobate sense, that they might act more like brute Beasts, than
reasonable Creatures; Ut faciant 28.
ea quae non convenient; defiled and infamous by all sorts of iniquity;
Avarice, Impurity, Pride, Sedition, Murder, Theft; envious malicious enemies to
mankind, and hateful to God, Detractores 30.
Deo odibiles; void of all Sense, of all Modesty, of all good Nature, of all
Fidelity, without Pity, without Mercy, Insipientes 31.
absque faedere, absque misericordia. Such monsters of Vice, that scarce any
thing above Hell, could be an Emblem of them, as appears by what St. Peter saw
in his vision, that told him, they Acts. 10.
were not excluded from the Gospel; they were then laid before him, as brute
Beasts, Serpents, savage Creatures, as the greek Text relates it. Nay, they
were so despicable to the Jewish Nation, that God Almighty, did not think any
thing could more mortify the Israelites, than to tell them, their Crimes had
lessened them so in the sight of God, that the very Gentiles should be preferred
before them. Provocabo eos in eo, qui Deuteronomy. 32. 21.
non est Populus: I will provoke them to jealousy, and envy, in seeing those
abandoned wretches, preferred before them, who were never treated as yet, but as
People designed for slaughter: In Gente stulta irritabo ill^s; I will provoke
them to rage and fury, in seeing such Sots and Idiots, become my favorites; a
People, with whom he had never vouchsafed to treat, to whom he had never made
the least promise of mercy: Promissionis spem non habentes. Ephesians. 2. 12.
The sacred History is filled with the formidable effects of his Justice; as
when the Israelites were commanded to murder whole Countyes, Man, Woman, and
Child, without any distinction of age, sex, or condition: whole Kingdoms,
massacred by one another; the Caldeans by the Persians, the Persians by the
Grecians, the Grecians by the Romans; and this for the space of some thousands
of years, without any account of particular Persons, for whose Salvation we
have ground to hope. Then if we proceed farther, and cast an eye over the vast
Continent of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, we shall find all these vastly
extended Countries, Infamous by all the abominations, that reprobate man could
invent; scarce a Creature so despicable in whole nature, as Crocodiles, and
Serpents, that by some or other was not treated as a God. The detestable
disorders of this nature, were not only found in some corner of the World, but
in all nations where the Sun gave light; except that poor spot of Ground called
Palestine: this not for a year or two, but for thousands of years, without
affording any servants of the true God, that might mediate for the rest;
verifying to the letter in whole Empires, what David said of the Jews, by
exaggeration: Non est qui faciat Psalm. 52. 4.
bonum non est usque ad unum. In innumerable Kingdoms, not one, that we can
name; and in the whole worlds of Gentiles, we have certainty of none's
salvation, but of one poor single Job, among so many millions, from the days of
Abraham, till the coming of the Messiah: as for all our unfortunate forefathers
near home, in Britany, France, Germany, and all Europe, we cannot name one nor
have any good reason to affirm, that Heaven had one true servant amongst them;
all Pagans, all Idolaters, all justly for their Crimes, hated by the Almighty,
and excluded from Heaven.

This is the real Description, and true Character of the Gentiles for so many
Ages. What must we then say of that Mercy, which takes such Monsters into
favor, instructs them in the true Faith, puts them in the certain Way, that
leads to Heaven: This is the highest instance of an infinite Mercy, that the
world ever admired; it seems the great Master-peice, by which he procures his
Mercy to be above all his Works: to indulge such as once faithfully served him,
though so unhappy as sometimes to run astray; to bless that Race, whose
Ancestors have been Loyal, to preserve a Country which never wanted some true
Servants of God, although many failed in their Duty, seems worthy a Divine
bounty; but to court such as had never been Loyal, to take whole Nations into
favor, whose forefathers to a man (for what appears to us) had been false and
treacherous, to pour his benedictions upon vast Kingdoms, that had never
produced (that we know of) one truly obedient Creature; this seems, according
to our comprehension, acting above the rules of Mercy.

That expression of St. Paul, That God's Romans 5. 20.
Grace never so overflowed, as when iniquity ran at the highth, was never so
verified to the letter as in the transactions of this day; Ubi abundavit
delictum superabundavit and gratia. A Physicians Skill never appears so
admirable, as in Curing a desperate Disease; God's mercy's never so Adorable,
as in pardoning where there seems not to have been the least inducement. The
Gentiles crimes and abominations, had cried out to Heaven for Vengeance; during
many Ages, they had infected the whole Universe, they had debauched whole
Nations, perverted the use of all Creatures, profaned all the Elements, stood
at defiance with God and Heaven, almost ever since the Creation; their
Understanding's buried in darkness and blindness, their Hearts hardened and
stupefied with sin and sensuality, their whole Nature's perverse and malicious
in the highest degree; Therefore, that Grace that must clear and illuminate
these clouded and dark Understandings, that must soften these obdurate and
stony Hearts, that must rectify these crooked and depraved Wills, that must
change the Nature of such habitually perverse Wretches, that must make them
hate what they loved and adored; honor and embrace what they hated and
abhorred; that Grace which works these miracles, is justly called a miraculous
and prodigious Grace; a superabundant Grace; Superabundavit and Gratia;
likewise that mercy that can forget so many thousands of years provocations of
his Majesty, that can remit so many milions of Blasphemies and Idolatries, with
which whole Lives have been profaned; whole Ages have been defiled; this mercy
that pardons such abominations, those Graces that Reform and Sanctify such
Perverse and Malicious Souls, and fix them wholly upon God and Heaven; such
Graces must surpass all the favors ever bestowed on man, since the mentioned
enormities exceed all the crimes ever committed against God: Ubi superabundavit
iniquitas, superabundavit and Gratia.

It was, dear Christians, upon this day we were made happy, by that
inconceavable Mercy, and prodigious Grace; when that propitious Star invited us
Gentiles to the Sacred Crib of our Newborn JESUS, where we were made partakers
of those saving truths, for want of which our unfortunate Ancestors were
miserably lost. It was in these three Kings, as St. Leo observes, that the
whole body of the Gentiles (notwithstanding their rebellions and enormities
Sermon. 3, de Epiph.
of so old a date) were honored and blessed with a gracious admittance, both
to believe in, and adore then present, the only true God and Author of all
things: Adorant in tribus magis, omnes populi, universitatis Authorem; and now
the knowledge of the true Messiah, the so-long-unknown way to Heaven, the
Adoration of the true God was no longer the prerogative of the race of Jacob, a
privilege of the Country of Judea, but a benediction extended to the whole
world: Non in Judaea tantum Deus, se in toto orb sit notus.

Now it was, that Abraham began to multiply his Race, by the numerous addition
of the Gentiles, called the sons of Promise; and we heretofore the undutiful
children, who in our Ancestors shamefully degenerated from so saintly a Parent;
enter this day upon the Possession of that glorious title, of the sons of
Abraham, by inheriting his Faith; Intret in Patriarcharum familiam Gentium
plenitudo, says St. Leo. The whole body of the Gentiles begin this day to be
incorporated in the holy family of the Patriarchs: Electi generis dignitatem,
fides omnibus facit esse communem. One Faith communicated to Jews and Gentiles,
has rendered the dignity of being the Chosen people of God common to them both.
Oh, inconceaveable Mercy! Oh ever to be adored Bounty! we, who as St. Paul
observes out of the Prophet Hosea, Romans 9. 25.
were never yet honored so far, as to be owned a people belonging to God,
regarded by Providence, are this day honored both with the Title, and
advantage, of being called and treated as his Chosen People; Vocabo non plebem
meam plebem meam. We, the Object of Heavens hatred for so many thousands of
years, called the detested people of God; this day changed the dreadful quality
of Enemy to God, into that of Friend and Favorite of Heaven, Vocabo -- non
dilectam, dilectam. We that seemed excluded from any share in his Mercies,
marked out, by his justice, for chastisement, and slaughter; without hopes of
Pity of Pardon, are this day the Object of his Love and Mercy; Vocabo -- non
misericordiam; consecutam, misericordiam consecutam. We, who, as the same
Apostle observes, had no title to claim any share in the Messiah; Eratis sine
Christo; never included in any Ephesians. 2. 12.
treaty or covenant made with God, Hospites testamentorum: So utterly abandoned
in all appearance, that he calls us people, for whom Providence seemed not
concerned: Sine Deo in hoc mundo; without a God in this world. After these
great and innumerable calamities, and scourges; after this fatal and long
Oblivion of God and Heaven; after so many Ages being destitute of all
efficacious means to Salvation; after those seeming irreconcilable feuds of so
ancient a date, that divided us from the people of God, we are now miraculously
united with his dearest Servants and Friends, in the same Faith, in the same
Hope, in the same Messiah; who is the common peacemaker between us both, ipse
enim est pax nostra; who Epkes. 2. 14.
has happily united us both, in one Church, in one Mystical Body; Qui fecit
utraque unum. The ancient separation, that kept us at such a distance both from
God's people, and his Kingdom; that dreadful wall, that hindered all
communication with God and his Servants, is this day broken down; Medium
parietem maceriae solvens: No more distinction of Jew and and Gentile; Mercies
are equally extended to them both; the so long hidden way to Heaven is now laid
open to all; Jew and Gentile have free access by CHRIST to the Eternal FATHER,
being directed by the same divine Spirit. Per ipsum habentes accessum Ver. 18.
ambo, in uno spiritu ad patrem. These illegitimate children, these sons of
bondage and slavery; these dogs, as our Savior himself styled them, shall be
now called as they are, says St. Paul, Vocabuntur filii Dei vivi; Fellow Romans
9. 26. Osee 1. 10. Ephesians. 2. 19.
Citizens with the Saints, and domestics in the same House of God. Nay, he
added, that we now are honored, in being part of that sacred Structure, in
which God himself pleases to reside, by his divine Spirit; Vos coaedificamini
in Ver. 22.
habitaculum Dei, in Spiritu. Those hearts that were defiled with all
Impurities, those Powers that were profaned with all Enormities, those Souls
that were possessed by the Father of Darkness, deformed, and hideous, as become
his habitation; are now more Beautiful than the rising Sun; so enriched with
all the ornaments of Grace and Virtue; so happily beautified and adorned, as to
be chosen for that agreeable Mansion where God himself resides. Vos
coaedificamini in habit aculum Dei. Did ever the divine Mercy work such wonders
as in making such Enemies worthy to be his bosom Friends? Such hideous
Monsters, Angels of Light; such sons of darkness, shining pillars in the
Heavenly Jerusalem? This, without dispute, dear Christians, is the most
eminent act of Bounty and Mercy, ever performed in the behalf of Man: But if
abused by our Ingratitude, will make us the most Unfortunate of Creatures; as I
shall prove in my Second Part.

Second Part.
GOd's Mercies never appeared more eminently above his other Works, than in the
Call of us Gentiles to the true Faith: yet we find his Justice to have left
whole Kingdoms which still miserably ly wast: How many Millions have never
heard of the true Messiah? how many Countries, that once received him, have
again fallen off, and are overrun with Infidelity? How many, that pretend to
follow him, obey only by halfes, admitting his Doctrine in part, and reject
what they please? In fine, dear Christians, how many here present, have the
grief to see their friends, kindred, and nearest relations, unfortunately
engaged in Schism and Error? whilst they themselves are so happy, as to be
partakers of the true Faith, which can only lead to eternal Bliss. If any here
ask, how it comes to pass, that some have been Called, others Abandoned, that
we are Christians, others Pagans; you partakers of the true Faith, others left
in Schisms and Heresies; you the happy object of his Mercy, another of his
Justice and Wrath; here humane reason is at a stand, and must with all humility
and submission cry out with the great Apostle: O altitudo divitiarum sapientiae
Romans 11. 33.
et scientiae Dei! O the profound abyss of the treasures, both of the Wisdom
and Knowledge of GOD! his Secrets are too deep for our fathom; his Aeconomy and
Conduct are above our reach, his Ways are incomprehensible, his Judgments
inscrutable; Incomprehensibilia sunt Judicia ejus, investigabiles viae ejus. To
whom has he ever opened his Secrets? Who has he ever made his Counselor?
Therefore St. Augustine, contemplating the inscrutability of this mystery, why
one was Called, another Left; declares frequently in his Works, he can give no
other answer to it, than what St. Paul has left us: O Altitudo! O the profound
Abyss! and for such as are not satisfied with this answer, he bids them consult
some more learned than Aug. Quaerant Augustino doctiorem: But he advises De
spu, and Lit. Cp. 33.
them to be careful they meet not with such as are too presumptuous: Sed caveat
ne inveniat presumptores. His Scholar St. Prosper, esteems it In Obec. 14.
Vincent.
a mystery lodged only in the divine Breast; far enough above the reach of
humane comprehension, and that none ought to attempt the knowledge. Nec
possibile comprehendere, nec licitum investigare. And therefore this knowledge
ought to satisfy every Christian; that no man is in the way of Salvation, that
is not called by God's mercy, and sustained by his bounty; and that no man
sins, but by his own perverse will; and no man perishes, but by his own sin and
malice; and this without further search or curiosity may and ought to satisfy
every Christian. Cum scire sufficeret, ab illo esse quod statur, and ab illo
non esse quod ruitur. It Is most certain, no man ever miscarried but by his own
fault; no man was ever saved, but by God's Grace. But if you will farther know,
why his Mercy draws one happy creature, out of the mass of perdition, and why
his Justice leaves another abandoned to a reprobate sense: O Altitudo! The
calling the first, was an inconceavable Mercy, the leaving the latter, an act
of irreproachable Justice.

Therefore, dear Brethren, how infinitely great is the obligation of all
Christians, who have been the Chosen Favorites out of millions! To whom God
has fully proved himself to be what St. Paul calls him, Pater misericordiarum;
the Father of mercies: such priviledg'd persons, may justly cry out with holy
David, Non fecit Psalm. 147. 20.
saliter omni nationi; all Countries and People, have not been treated with
that tenderness and mercy as you have been; for all which we can give no reason
on our side, that could deserve this preference; for if we consider the
inclinations of thousands of Infidels, they surpass us in the gifts of Nature;
more mild, more humble, more compassionate, more charitable, more just in their
dealings, than thousands of us Christians; and in all appearance, had they been
called to the true Religion and Worship, would have excelled us in Christian
Virtues. Yet by an inscrutable secret of God's Judgments, they are left in sin,
and infidelity, for everlasting reproach and contumely, Vas in contumeliam,
Romans 9. 21.
whilst you are preferred, without the least desert; chosen for everlasting
honor and glory: Vas in honorem. One is justly abandoned for his sins, another
is one of the elect who deserved as little: a Peter is called to Repentance, a
Judas dies in Despair: this made St. Paul invite all Gentiles to Romans 11. 22.
enter into the contemplation of this surprising mystery: Vide ergo bonitatem
et severitatem Dei: Behold the bounty and severity of God; his severity, to
those poor Creatures who were never called, who have sinned, and never rise
again: in eos quidem qui ceciderunt severitatem: and his bounty and inscrutable
mercy to you; In te autem bonitatem Dei: who have been called before millions
to the true Faith, and true Church. Happy we, if grateful and faithful in our
Masters service, si perm^nseris in bonitate: If you remain in that happy state,
his mercy has placed you in; if you conserve that faith, correspond with those
graces he has heaped upon you; otherwise you will be cut off from that divine
Olive, into which you were grafted, alioquin et tu excideris. As it is an
ineffable blessing to have been called to the true Faith, before thousands more
deserving than we; so the abusing so signal a grace, so infinite a favor, will
prove so fatal an ingratitude, a crime of so black a die, as to render us more
unworthy, more execrable in the sight of Heaven, than those unfortunate Pagans,
that never heard of God or Christ.

This will evidently appear by a familiar example: Had any person here two
Servants both Negligent and Undutiful, to an exorbitant degree; one for his
Fault, you justly turn out of your service, banish him your sight, leave him
without all hopes of ever being received into favor: The other, though equally
guilty, is by pure favor pardoned his past Faults, admitted into your Family,
made your favorite, trusted with your secrets, disposes and governs all things
under you, with more freedom and confidence than before he offended. Should
this Favorite prove so ungrateful a wretch, as to abuse your goodness, slight
your kindness, vilify your favors so far, as wilfully to relapse into all
those Faults for which your goodness once pardoned him, and to which he returns
again, without the least sense of gratitude, for your bounty toward him, in
preferring him before his fellow servants, who deserved no worse than he. Had
any here so unworthy a servant, would you not esteem this ingratitude,
infinitely more criminal, than all the other servants whom you pardoned not,
ever did against you; who although faulty, yet never abused your patience,
never insulted over your bounty, never despised your favors, after so gracious
a pardon, as this other was partaker of.

Our crime, dear Christians, is infinitely more enormous than such a servants;
if we abuse this ineffable Mercy with which we Gentiles were blessed on this day,
in being called to the faith of Christ. We were all unprofitable and criminal
servants, equally guilty in our first-parents, and afterward by our own wills,
infinitely perfidious, infinitely rebellious against our Divine Master; for
which enormities, millions of millions of unfortunate wretches were justly
abandoned, justly excluded from Faith and Heaven: when you, by an inscrutable
Mercy, have been called in your forefathers, to the true Faith: Had your
pardon granted, your crimes remitted; you made members of the True Church;
instructed in those Heavenly Mysteries; made partakers of those sanctifying
Sacraments, without which no Salvation; placed in the certain Way to Heaven,
fortified with Divine Graces, instructed by saintly Documents, encouraged by
most fatherly Promises, animated by the powerful Example of God made Man. It Is
true, that Christ came for all, did sufficiently for all, Dyed for all; yet
millions were so unfortunate, as for their sins, to be justly deprived of the
knowledge, use, and application of so infinite and soverain a remedy to their
unfortunate Souls; whilst you, dear Christians, who were equally undeserving,
equally stupid, equally blind, equally hardened by Vice, equally criminal,
should have your eyes and understandings opened, and illuminated by those
saving Truths our SAVIOR came to Teach; your hearts warmed, and your
affections inflamed, with his precious Blood, and bitter Passion: your sins
blotted out by the infinite value of that inestimable Ransom, sufficient to
Redeem an hundred Worlds. O Altitudo!

This makes us, dear Brethren, the most happy of Creatures, if our Lives are a
constant and grateful acknowledgment of so signal a Mercy and Favor; if we
concur, and correspond on our parts, with these surprising Graces: But on the
contrary, if we live so, that our behavior is not a constant expression of our
gratitude for so undeserved a preference, and blessing; if the Gentiles (as St.
Paul complained of the Converts of his days) are scandalized and tempted by
our behavior, To Blaspheme the Name of GOD. This will be the Crime of Crimes,
after so signal, so miraculous, so undeserved a preference of us before the
greatest part of Mankind; after this, to contemn him in our own persons, and
render him despicable to others, when we have been honored by him, in the
highest degree our nature was capable of. This contempt of the highest instance
of his Bounty and Mercy, this enormous sin of Ingratitude, is so hateful in the
sight of our infinite Benefactor, that he declares, nothing so insupportable,
as the unjust, and unworthy returns of such, as were once honored with his
Favor, and enriched by his Bounty: For as the Prophet David declares: Si
inimicus meus Psalm. 54. 13.
us maledixisset mihi, sustinuissem utique. If my enemy, whom I always treated
as such, keeping him at a just distance, if Turk or Pagan, to whom as yet I
have never opened the secrets of Heaven, and mysteries of Salvation; if they,
my always declared enemies, should blaspheme my Holy Name, maledixisset mihi;
The insolence, though great, might have been supposed sustinuissem utique: But
for you, Homo unanimis Verse 14.
dux meus and notus meus: You to whom I had united my self as one Heart and one
Soul; my dear and intimate Friends, lodged you in my own Sanctuary, fed you at
my own Table, with the sweet and delicious food of Angels: Qui simul mecum
dulces capiebas cibos: Placed you in my Catholic Church, made a perfect
reconciliation and union, between you and Heaven: In domo Dei ambulavimus cum
consensu; after I had chosen you before millions, preserved you before whole
nations, saved you from perdition, rescued you out of the Jaws of Hell: and
that after all these high expressions of love and mercy; these innumerable
titles that cry out for gratitude, and obedience; you should turn my bitter
enemies, and side against me.

What can the Divine Justice pronounce severe enough, against this barbarous
and monstrous ingratitude? The same prophet David tells us in the following
verse, God will not have patience to expect their natural death, but will hurry
them away without the least warning; give them no time to Repent, no time to
cry for Mercy; surprise them by a sudden and unprovided death: Descendant in
Infernum viventes: Ver. 16.
Let them sink alive into Hell. This contempt of God's favors and mercies,
this sin of ingratitude, turns his Love into Hatred, as the same prophet David
explicates at large in his 105th. Psalm. 105.
Psalm, where he numbers the Favors received by the Children of Israel; their
delivery out of Bondage; their passing the Red Sea; their preservation in the
Desert, with their ungrateful returns; their murmuring, their sedition, their
schism, their infidelity, their idolatry, their unhumane sacrifices: all which
abominations God had suffered for many centuries at the hand of the Gentiles,
that knew him not; but when his chosen, and beloved people, his darling Israel,
was so stupendiously ungrateful, as to villify all Favors received, and
provoke him with these abominations; his patience could not bear it, but his
Love was turned, as the prophet observes, not only into anger, but rage and
fury: Iratus est furore Dominus in Populum Ver. 38.
suum. Fury, as Philosophers observe, is not a common sort of anger, but a
rage, that is restless till it gluts its self, with blood and revenge: a rage,
that is not appeased but by massacre and slaughter; a rage, which the wise man
calls that kind of anger, that punishes without bounds, chastises without
pity, or mercy: Non libet misericordiam erumpens furor: A rage that is Prove.
27. 3.
accompanied, as Moses says, with a devouring fire: Ignis succensus est in
furore meo. A fire, that Deuteronomy. 32. 22.
searches every corner of those melancholy infernal Caves, and will burn, as
long as Hell shall last, and ardebit usque ad Inferni novissima.

This dreadful consequence of man's Ingratitude, this unhumane return for much
eminent favors, made St. Peter explicate himself at large upon this point,
that we might be sensible of such unworthy proceedings. Si refugientes
coinquinationes 2 Pet. 2. 20.
seculi, in cognitione Domini nostri, and salvatoris Jesu Christi. Whomsoever
have been so happy, as by the assistance of God's Grace, to fly from the
dangerous infection of this world, when blessed with the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus; His rursus implicati superantur: Yet shall be so
unfortunate, so ungrateful, as to plung themselves a second time in their once
renounced and forsaken disorders. What will be the consequence of such
relapses, but that their present condition, is much more deplorable than their
former; Facta est posteriora, deteriora prioribus. Wherefore the same Apostle
concludes, Melius enim erat illis non cognoscere Ver. 21.
vias Justitiae. They had better have remained in their ignorance and
blindness, in their abominations and idolatry, never to have been blessed with
the Faith of the true Messtas, the knowledge of the Law of God; never to have
known the paths that lead to Heaven; Quam postquam post agnitionem retrorsum
converti: then to be so miserable, as after such Divine Lights, to return again
to our ways of darkness. St. Paul in like manner told the Jews, who availed
themselves upon the account of Revelations which had been made to them, that
God had confided to them the secrets of his Worship, the prophesies of their
own, and the worlds future Happiness: But alas! what advantage would they reap
from these privileges, if their lives were not an exact observance of this
Law; if their lives were not squared to its Rules and Precepts? Si prevaricator
legis sis, says Romans 2. 25.
St. Paul, if you break its commands; Circumcisio tua praeputium factum est:
your having that pledge of Gods kindness put into your hands, his Divine Law;
your being marked out for his peculiar people, your circumcision, and all your
privileges, make you not less miserable than the poorest Pagan. Had not the
Israelites that Apostatized under Jeroboam, better never have known the Law of
the Lord of Israel, than to have turned his Honor to the Temples of Idols? Had
not Judas better have remained the worst of most obstinate Jews, than to have
heard the Law of Christ, and betray its Maker? Therefore our Savior told the
Pharisees, who were so zealous in gaining Proselytes, that if their Conversion
to the Jewish Law, were not accompanied with an absolute change of Manners, in
such as embraced that Worship: Facitis Mat. 23. 15.
eum filium Gehennae duplo quam vos. The poor convert was more miserable than
ever, sentenced a double damnation, for abusing so signal a Call.

But our Savior, in St. John's Gospel, comes yet more home to our present
point, when he told the Jews, to whom he preached, before whom he wrought so
many Miracles, to convince them he was the true Messiah; the only way to
Heaven, as he calls Himself: That all those advantages not rightly used, would
avail them nothing; but on the contrary, they had been more happy, never to
have heard of the true Messiah, or his Law: For as our Savior said, Si non
venissem, John. 15. 22.
and locutus fuissem, peccatum non haberent. If I had not appeared amongst you,
and preached my Gospel, you had not been so criminal: but now, since I have
opened your eyes, convinced you with Miracles, proved my Mission by your own
Law and Prophets, Excusationem non habent de peccato suo; They are left without
excuse. This dear Christians, will be applied to us, who have been called
before thousands; who in appearance deserved the grace better; since he has, as
you have heard, preferred you before your neighbors, friends, and nearest
relations: given you a full knowledge of your Crimes, provided you with
infallible Remedies against them, placed you in the certain way, if you will
walk in it, of obtaining everlasting bliss: Therefore such as correspond not
with these Graces, make not the right use of these Mercies, Excusationem and
non habent de peccato suo, will be destitute of all excuse and defense, that
might help to Save them. We cannot answer with Heathens and Infidels, that we
knew not the Law; for it has been preached unto us; that we were ignorant our
lives were so guilty and enormous; for our crimes have been clearly laid open
before us: we cannot complain we wanted means to heat our seared Consciences;
for most soverain Remedies have been put into our hands; we cannot complain we
knew not the worlds Messiah; for he has published his coming and appearance, by
innumerable Miracles, made known unto us: we cannot pretend the paths of Heaven
are still inaccessable; for they have been beaten, and made plain to any that
does not wilfully shut his eyes; you have been set in them with such certain
directions, that no-nothing but a wilful blindness could hinder you from
walking steadily to eternal Bliss: therefore if we run astray, its wholly our
own fault, we are deprived of all defense, struck dumb by a self-conviction,
Excusationem non habent de peccato suo, no excuse left to lessen our doom.

Let me therefore, dear Christians, conclude, earnestly beseeching you, as St.
Paul did the Ephesians, Obsecro ut digne ambuletis vocatione qua vocati Ephesians.
1. 1.
estis; to live as becomes men honored with so merciful a Call: A Call that
was the most undeserved, most signal, most astonishing Grace that sinful man
could ever receive from Heaven; and consequently our behavior ought to be the
most humble, the most grateful, most faithful and steady performance of all
Christian duties, that ever was seen in creatures: Let our daily Meditation be,
how upon this day, by an Omnipotent Mercy, after so many Thousand years
Rebellion, after the Crimes of so many Ages, the Contempt of GOD, the abuse and
profanation of all his Creatures, for which we seemed justly abandoned for
evermore to the slavery of Hell; we were happily snatched out of the Lions
Jaws, rescued, as St. Paul says, out of the hands of the power of Darkness:
Eripuit nos de Col. 1.. 13.
potestate tenebrarum. And happily translated, In Dei lumen and gloriam: To the
Light and Glory of GOD, made partakers of the light of his Divine Gospel, which
will, if followed, certainly direct you to the more bright and refulgent rays
of Eternal Glory. Remember hourly, as St. Leo says, Memento cujus capitis and
corporis sis membrum: Sermon. 1. de Nati.
To what Head you are this day United, and of what Body you are made happy
members: In a word, says he, Agnosce Christian dignitatem tuam. Own Christian
man, and contemplate thy new dignity. Et noli in veterem vilitatem degeneri
conversatione redire. For shame, degenerate not so far, disgrace not your
selves to that degree, as to return to those mean unworthy Base Ways, that
dishonored the Life of Man, before this happy Call and Conversion.

Let Us imitate the first fruits of us Gentiles, those generous and glorious
Kings: who were no sooner called to the Faith of Christ, but they were raised
above the charms of this world; neither the love of ease or their own homes,
not all the Pomps and Magnificence of Herod's Court, the greatest, according to
Joseph, that perhaps the world had seen; neither this nor the apprehensions of
most imminent dangers could stop them in the search after this Newborn King,
nor hinder their zeal from public adoration: Nor was this performed in a
slight manner, but by an entire casting of themselves and all they possessed at
his Royal Feet. This was fully done and signified, as St Ber. observes by Hom.
3. de Epiph.
the three Offerings they made; in the Gold they consecrated to his service,
all the treasure and earthly substance they possessed in this world. In the
Frankincense, which signifies Prayer, they testified an entire devoting
themselves to a spiritual life for the future; for Prayer is nothing else but
an ardent desire of God and Heaven. By Myrrh, which keeps things from
putrefaction, they dedicated themselves to penance and mortification, which as
St. Ber. observes, conserves from the corruption of sin: Ne diffluens in vitia
putrefiat; lest by the dissolution of sin, the soul may be tainted and perish:
These were emblems of their future behavior, during the rest of their lives;
they were careful never to return to their old ways, in which they had walked
before their conversion, but went home as the Scripture tells us, another way,
per aliam viam: lets follow them dear Christians, and never stop, till we
arrive as they did, at the Heavenly Jerusalem. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 7. for the innocent read Innocent. ibid. l. 12. f. latter r.
Letter. p. 5. l. 4. f. Justitiae r. Justus. ibid. l. 27. f. Prophet r.
Prophets. f. Governor r. Governors. p. 7. l. 12. f. happens r. happiness. p.
11. l. 6. f. tiil r. till. ibid. l. 22. f. procures r. proves p. 13. l. 16. f.
Majesty r. Justice. ibid. l. 27. f. superabundavit iniquitas r. Abundavit
delictum. p. 21. l. 2. f. saliter r. taliter. p. 26. l. 8. f. supposed r.
supported. ibid. l. 19. f. preserved r. preferred. p. 28. l. 6. f. libet r.
habet. ibid. l. 13. f. much r. such. l. ult. f. est r. sunt. p. 29. l. 9. dele
postquam.


