THE President of Presidents:
OR, AN ELEGY, On the Death of JOHN BRADSHAW.
WHat! he that blasted Tyranny with his breath,
Has he submitted now to Tyrant Death!
Could he the fate of Kingdoms doom? yet he
Not countermand prevailing Destiny.
Who could find Law against Law, condemn, and try,
The King-like Reason, God-like Majesty;
Should have gone on, methinks, seen gasping lie
The Queen of Reason too, Philosophy.
Nor should he have staid there, but by some new,
Strange Judic'ture have Censured Nature too.
But stay, Did (...) ^ot think himself to be
Above the reach (...) (...)il Mortality?
[Having bee^ (...) (...)v'd Senate die,
Himself beco(...) (...)us(...)he Property.
And Generati^^^ from Corruption now,
Another rising from their overthrow.
And that aspiring Pyramide to fall!
(The Father's greatness, the Son's funeral.)
And the forgotten Carcass, that had lain
Disanimated long, revive again.
Assuming (what was thought for ever gone)
Their Power, at their Resurrection.]
And rising with 'em, thought himself to be
Invested with their Immortality.
But, as a Flower on a Chymist's call
Raised, to attend on its own funeral.
Short was their Time, and soon expired their Reign,
Returning to their Chaos back again.
Which Bradshaw sadly viewing, sighed, that he
Must now submit to imperious Destiny.
For he, who kept their Seal, while he had breath,
Has yielded now to the Broad-Seal of Death.
But some may be so saucy as to pry
Into the Council of the Deity:
Think Justice is not hood-winked now, but blind;
Style Murder Law, and Cruelty most kind.
That Bradshaw, (England's Pilat) who durst own
The Act, of murdering his Sovereign;
Usurp the seat of Justice, doom to death,
Whom God himself had styled a god on earth:
That at one fatal Sentence, and one Blow,
Lay butchered Maj'stie, and three Kingdoms too.
Dressed in his sanguine Roabs, Law the pretense,
T'assasinate both Law and Innocence.
That, not the horror of his crimes, nor sense
Of sin, could wake his sleeping Conscience;
And on himself, like a foul o'recharg'd Gun,
Recoil, and be his own destruction.
Or was the Sword of Justice dull? had he
Bribed that too, to comply with Villainy?
Must he expire in his soft bed? no force!
Could not the Whitehall, where he died.
Place inspire him with Remorce?
Know, that his Crimes were such, transcended far
All Parallel, and must stand singular.
The wittiest Vengeance man could here invent,
Must fall far short of such a President.
There is no name to know him by. Nay, we
Ought to forget him, that Posterity,
Searching our Records, might no pattern find,
This to Re-act, but damn it to Mankind.
Should man attempt this Punishment, it were
To rob just Heaven of its Vengeance here.
Oblivion ought to swallow the intent,
And this Example find no President.
1659. July 2. T. B.


