THE Rebellion of NAPLES, OR THE TRAGEDY OF MASSENELLO.

Commonly so called: But Rightly TOMASO ANIELLO DI MALFA General of the
Neopolitans.

WRITTEN By a Gentleman who was an eye-witnes where this was really Acted upon
that bloody Stage, the streets of NAPLES.

Anno Domini MDC XL VII.

Nec labor, nec judicio, nec magnanimitate, nec intelligentia: sed jungantur
and tunc maxima obtineantur.

Printed at London for J. G. and G. B at Furnivals-Inne Gate in Holborne, MDC
II.

depiction of a man holding a baton and speaking, in front of imagery of a
battlefield. Acchiappato il peste viala rete The Fis is caught, the Net is
under foot,
Whilst Fool's cry Shall I, Shall I, these go to it.
The silly Fis, whilst left but the least water,
And can see through the Net, think it no matter
But Sacrifice to' the Net, where in they'v caught:
Burn Incence to the Drag, that thus has wrought
All their Destruction: Neither do they dread,
The Divine Vengeance that is over their head.
And never will think themselves meet Fish to fry,
Till great TOMASO, draws, the CY(...)


TO The Right Worshipful his Honored Kins-man, John Caesar of Hyde hall, in
the County of Hertford, Esquire.
Sir,
THere are many reasons wherefore I should dedicate this Tragedy to your self:
and let great Tomaso, fall at no other feet then yours: The one is, I attained
to the observation of all the particulars at your charge; and reason it is,
that I should tender to none other but your self, the fruits which grew upon
the fien that was grafted upon your stock. So that my writings, and Tomasoes
fall, are both tributes which belong to Caesar. The most famous Poets that ever
had a being, were never so well pleased with their greatest Patrons, as I am
with mine: they who had the best, had only Caesar's, to be Judges of their
Poems excellence: but I have Caesar not only to be my Judge, but a witness
also of the truth of what I write: nor can I fear the censure of any inferiors,
after that I have made my appeal to Caesar. Sir, there is another reason which
is occasioned by the remembrance of an Italian Proverb.

Respetto son le ballie di charetza, Respect is the nurser of friendship. Sir,
we have been Comrades together through diverse Countries, we have been
joynt-purchasers of many favors, and honors; and fellow sufferers of as many
miseries: we have waded hand in hand together, through the greatest dangers,
and (guided only by necessity) fording through deep and running rivers of
calamities we were carried down the stream into an ocean of perplexities, out
of which we were at last cast upon an Island, which upon our arrival we soon
found to be our own. Such Passages as these, as they could not be otherwise
then mutual obligations to one another of the highest nature, so they could be
no less then the highest motives to the greatest love. Now to foster up this
issue of travail, to a full proportion of respect, whereby this friendship
should be maintained, I thought good to preserve it from such an oblivion, as
these thin paper walls will give me leave, and to Dedicate both my self and it
to be always ready at your commands, who am,

Cosen, Your most faithful Servant, T. B.

To the Reader.
THough this Tragedy (for the existent part thereof, and setting the liberty
which Poets use to assume to themselves aside, as their birthright by the
laws of Poetry) be true, and real, and a work both begun and finished in a
strange Country, and by a stranger to these proceedings, yet I am persuaded
that there are some, who will not believe otherwise, but that I use Duck policy
in my writing, who hiding her head under the water, discovers her own nakedness.
Caput inter nubila condit. Says another, I warrant you this man drives at
notable and remarkable passages of State, if we could understand him. And
though Naples be the Scene, yet he plasters his bills upon the walls and gates
of London. Truly I know a pick-lock can do no harm to the door where there is
no key to any lock: and if there be any thing in my book which points at the
present condition of our affairs, I assure you the times are busy with me, and
not I with the times. Types must agree with their antitypes, like a pair of
Indentures, which being compared together seem one and the same, so if you take
the whole substance of this Tragedy and compare it with our transactions, you
will find that the same penknife never went between them, if there be any
thing therefore that contents you, fare well; But if ye cry rost-meate where
there is no dinner, you shall have knotted bulrushes for your Sallet.

Your Servant. T. B.

The names of the several Actors.
D. Di Arcas Vice Roy of Naples. Antonio Son to the Vice Roy. Cardinal
Filomerino Duke di Mattaloone. Vrsino Lord Chamberlain. Montalto Lord
Controller. Massenello the General. Genuino Secretary to Massenello. Lord
Treasurer, Father Antony the Hermit. Eletto di popolo. Peron Captain of the
Bandites. Don Peppe Brother to the Duke. Sig. Burlameo an Ingineir, etc.
The names of the Women Actors.
Mariamma Mother to the General. Agatha Wife to the General. Flora Eldest
daughter to the General by a former wife. Vrsula Youngest daughter by this
wife. Bonella an old woman flatterer.
Prologue.
COurt'ous spectators, you must know that he
Who is the writer of this Tragedy.
Was actor and spectator in it: who means,
Here to present it into Acts and Scaenes:
If you are pleased with truth, the storie's true,
And if with novelties, the subject's new,
If wonders do delight ye: on this Stage
Acted's the greatest wonder of our age.
Or if you are pleased with seasonable things,
Here Is fightings 'twixt the people and their Kings.
Or if sad melancholy has you sent
Hither for pastime, here is merriment.
And if truth, wonder, novelties, mirth, season
Do not content you, sirs, you have no reason.
THE REBELLION OF NAPLES.
ACTUS I.
SCENA I.
Enter Father Anthony, the Prophetic Eremite, all hairy, and a deaths head
under his arm; he falls asleep upon his staff, awakes and speaks. Fa: Ant. I
Shall not be able to get into any Cell: such another fit of drowsinesse fell
upon me, when I saw the Vision of the Sun, which the most Catholic King wears
for his Crest, run back so many degrees -- then was I -- as I am now -- ready
to drop down with heaviness: he that cannot hold up any longer, must needs lie
down.

He lies down, laying his head upon his deaths head, and sleeps, whilst the
Vision is appearing Music plays, and this Song, as a Chorus, is singing all
the while.
SONG.
This is the state of Kingly Glory,
Kings they are but transitory:
Beggars they ascend the Throne,
Vengeance light on every one.
They w'had all things at their beck,
Here they ride, and break their neck.
Rise, O King, and nere relent,
Here Is a Throne from Heaven sent;
With a Scepter, Crown and Ball;
Longest Liver must take all.
Abundant riches shall shower down:
Then go fetch another Crown.
Whilst this Song is in singing, there appears a Vision of little Boys: One
whereof, King-like, in Warlike state, ascends the Throne; after that, a
Company of Beggar-boyes pull down the King, throwing him to the ground,
snatching away his Crown, Globe and Scepter, who lies in a trance; the
Beggar-boyes all in clusters get up into, and upon the Throne: The Throne
breaks, it thunders and lightens, and they all run away. After that, melodious
music; the King rises up, stands dejectedly, whilst a Throne descends from
above, with a Crown, Globe and Scepter in it; he assaies the Crown, and settles
it upon his head; he takes the Globe and Scepter in his hands, and seats
himself in the Throne: It rains first wheat, and then gold upon his head; he
ascends up, and vanishes. Fa. Ant. rouses himself, and speaks Post tempestatem
tranquillitas, After a storm comes a calm; first, famine and fury; then, plenty
and riches. This was not revealed unto me, but for some use that I should make
thereof: What though Spain contemn my warnings, it may be Naples will not: if I
can do any good, then -- so: if not -- so, so.

Exit.
SCEN. II.
Enter Massenello and Genuino. Genesis I Have given you instructions; which if you
follow, the Town's ours.


Mass. Worthy Patron, this bulk and vessel of mine, shall strike, or hoize up
sail, or tack about, agreeable to the wind of your words; and steer
accordingly, and employ all her Oars, to further what you breathe. Provided
always, that what you advise, be still for the good of the Republique. O the
dear people of God, the too too much abused people, they shall never want my
pains and best endeavors to do them good.


Genesis About it then, Talk is but talk, it is money buys land; wit commands
money; discretion governs wit; expedition is the life of action, but delays
are dangerous.


Mass. About, say you? why I Will run or fly

To serve the Popolo, I Will live, I Will die.

Exit Mass.
Genesis So: if my Engine holds, I Will batter the lofty Tower, that so much threatens
depopulations; and level the high walls of Government, with the earth they stood
upon: The Axe is already laid to the root of that aspiring Tree, that used such
droppings on those under-succours, that they could neither rise, nor grow, and
spreads her flourishing leaves at such a breadth, that her head cannot perceive
the strokes she now receives, even at her root, till down she falls, that all
her Royal Branches lie like sprey upon the ground: I Have found a fit subject
for to work upon: the man is bold and resolute, active and quick of
apprehension; and prodegies run still along with his expressions: The several
opinions which the world conceives of the simplicity of this poor Fisherman,
shall serve for light and ayeriall corks, whilst the profound and weighty
principles, wherewith I have instructed him, shall serve for so many leads and
plummers to that net, that shall take whole draughts of Politicians; that shall
drive them from swimming in their deeps, and force them to such exigents, that
the most contemptible and mean hands, shall take them in their shallows: and
well ye have deserved it, ye ear-wigs to Kings; you that think the Sacred
Unction not sufficient to anoint your King, except it mingled with the peoples
tears.

It Is you that crown the Royal Temples with Thorns instead of Gold, and put
Reeds into their hands instead of Scepters: It is you that have brought the
people from feeding on the food that was ordained by God, to live on fruit
ordained by you: And yet not resting there, you have put Excise on that: And
worse then Catterpillars, who only were devourers of the fruit upon their
trees; ye'have crept into the poor man's basket, and eat a third part of every
apple out of the childrens hands: And when I withstood these impositions, as my
place and duty bound me, with all the pressing arguments of pity and
compassion: As if my words were charms, they stopped their ears, like Adders; and
I, for my piety and good advice, was sent to Spain, upon an honorable
Embassy, to carry Beleropho his Letters: which lodged me in the dungeon; so
that 500 leagues, and more, I was forced to carry mine own prison, and a
Letter, whose lines were all as strong as Irons. But now I Am here ready to act
the sweetest of all sins, revenge: Nor will I let it fall like rain upon them,
or distill my fury drop by drop, but I will pour my anger forth.

For all is now at stake; the Die is cast:

I'expect my chance; the Rubicon is past.

Exit Genesis
SCEN. III.
A noise within, crying, Down with the Excise, no Excise, no Excise, etc. Enter
Massenello, with the rabble rout, with canes in their hands. Omnes. One and
all, one and all, one and all, etc.


Mass. My Masters, now we are full-bodied, let us choose a Head, otherwise we
shall be subject to confusion; and no man knows what to do, or whom to obey.


Omnes. A Massenello, A Massenello, A Massenello, etc.

They hoyse him up upon men's shoulders, and proclaim, Tomaso Amello di Malfa,
General of the Neopolitanes.


Enter the Eletto di popolo. Eletto. What means this Tumult? Wherefore are these
stirs? For what is this insurrection? How occasioned is this commotion? My
Masters, if from the Excise, that is on fruit your discontents arise, I Will
undertake to ease all your grievances, satisfy all your desires: Let me
suffer, let my Wife and Children be sacrifices for the peoples good, if I
procure not this good unto the people: Let my house, and all within it, suffer
in the just flames of your high insensments, if I do not procure you all the
contentment that your hearts can wish: Only be satisfied for the present, till
satisfaction for the future may be had; which may be no less welcome unto you,
then peaceable unto all.


Mass. Don Eletto di popolo, In answer to your grave and learned speech; you
must know, that the horse now knows his own strength, and is beholding to you
for his understanding, and will not answer your switch and spur so readily as
he was wont: they will not take it at your hands, nor at your heels, as
heretofore; they will not be rid off their legs, nor out of wind, by every hot
spur; Apes must not think to ride fierce Mastiffs, and box them into
conformity, now the muzzle's off.

Sir, in a word, our pressures were intolerable; and when the Asse's back is
broke, it is time to take off the burden. Our resolution's this; We will not
have the lesser rule the greater strength, nor the fewer rule the multitude,
nor one rule all; and that is our resolution.


Eletto. Noble Sir --


Mass. Noble Fool: do thou think to catch Tomaso with thy courtly terms?


Omnes. He prates, he prates, we have had enough of this, prating, we will have
no more prating.

They use violence to him.
Mass. Andiamo.

Viva Massenello, vi^a, viva, Massenello

Using violence to the Eletto de popolo. Exeunt.
SCEN. IV.
Enter Viceroy of Naples, Lord Treasurer, Lord Chamberlain, Lord Controuler.
Attendants. Viceroy. MY Lord, I pray you let me peruse the Letter over again
-- must? the command is peremptory: I would to God, that when they send such
musty Letters out of Spain, for such large sums after sums of money, they would
be pleased to direct us ways how we must come by them.


Lord Treas. And't please your Majesty, the Excise that is laid on fruit,
brings money in apace, and the tax is sure and constant; and a sum of money
that will strike a great stroke into the sum that is demanded, may be advanced
out of that, if it so like your Majesty.


Viceroy. How great sums of money out of that? Poor people! how they shrink
under the burden we are sorc'd to lay upon them: And having laid Excise on all
things upon earth, on fire, in water, the people fly to see what immunities
there are in air, and seek for privileges in the tops of trees; and how they
may make free meals upon their fruit: but cruelty has cast up such a trench,
whose quick-sets are now grown so high, that they have now (even) enclosed the
common air.


Mont. Good your Majesty, be not pleased to aggravate too much the hardness
either of your own, or their condition; no Kingdom wherein the people in their
several degrees live more happily, then in this flourishing Kingdom of NAPLES,
and under your Government: Whereon it stands, like a Mountain, firm upon its
basis. Are not the Laws duly executed? Do not the Nobility live in a most
splendid and glorious equipage? The Gentry in a most illustrious and seemly
decorum? But as for this same Popolo, this profanum vulgus, this bellua
mortuorum capitum, these Bores, Pesants and Commons, Goodmen and Gaffers, their
backs were made for burdens, and their hands for labor: How will you make
your sauces, if you will not squeez your Oranges? Or Wine, if you will not
press the Grape? How shall the King of Spain's Soldiers eat bread, if you
will not tread the Corn out of the straw? Nature never intended, that the Ass
should be stall-fed: nor did you ever hear of such creatures pampered up, till
they were provender-prickt --


Vrsino. Come, come my Lord Controuler, this is not well to pick thanks from
some one or two, you draw upon your head the curses of a multitude; and to
please some one, you care not though you displease all: but we have too many
such now adays, it would be better if it were otherwise.


Mont. Lord Chamberlain, I envy not your Lordship's popularity, which I never
esteemed otherwise then a seather in a fool's cap.


Vrsino. My Lord, you said too much; if you do not understand your self, I do;
if you have forgotten in whose presence you are, I have not: However, this I
shall be bold to tell your Lordship, though it be in the Kings hearing, though
you have put the Ass upon the people, you shall not put the fool on me. Had we
always day, we had need of no other Favors, but the Suns: but seeing we have
as many nights, we stand in need of smaller lights; that favor does not
always last.

And against the favor sets, which light debars;
I Will think of being beholding to the stars.
Exit L. Chamberl.
Mont. Good night to your Lordship.


Viceroy. My Lord, you did not well: I do not like these janglings, they bode
mischief, they portend no good: my mind presages evil; and these quarrellings
are a bad Omen, and put me in mind of a scurvy dream I dreamed last night.
Methought I was in Spain, hunting the Tauro; and whilst I was ready for the
encounter, the furious beast made at me with more heads then had Briarius
hands; and methought looking how, and where to charge, standing near unto a
Poplar tree, the wind blew the falling leaves so thick into my face, that I
could neither see, nor breath; so that the furious beast bare me to the ground:
whereupon I awak't, and found my self in the jaws both of danger and dishonor.

Enter Vrsino puffing and blowing, with the Eletto di popolo.
Viceroy. The news, my Lord? Heaven defend us; their looks speak nothing but
distraction and horror: speak out, my Lord, what is the matter?


Vrs. I met with the Eletto di popolo; here, let him tell his own tale.


Eletto. O Sir, all the City is risen, commotions are in every part thereof,
and the insurrection grows higher and higher.


V. Roy. Now my dream is out: silence: go speedily, and from me, assure them of
all the satisfaction can be given them.


Eletto. I have done it already.


V. Roy. You did not do it from me?


Eletto. I have, my Liege.


V. Roy. Do it again.


Eletto. I have engaged my life, the lives of my Wife and Children, and all I
have, and they will not hear a word: they say, you have broken your promise
with them so often, that they will not believe a word you say, or what is said in
your behalf.


V. Roy. Away, make have, run, fly, tell them, swear, protest, call God to
witness, that I intend it, and that you know my intentions to be such, as will
give them satisfaction, not only in this, but in more then they desire.


Eletto. I Will go; but God bless me, for I fear Hel's broke loose.


Vrs. Now, my Lord, Sunshine: how goes the day by your Clock?


Mont. Marry I think it is almost upon the stroke of twelve.


Vrs. You shall hear it strike one by and by.


Mont. One and twenty, with all my heart, and we may but strike a fast as they.
Sir. what will you do? Will you, that I gather strength? and we will crush this
Cockatrice in the egg, and destroy the Monster, whilst the Dam is in her
labor: I Will be the Midwife that shall welcome it by piece meals into the world.


Vrs. The King is wiser, or I could wish he were.

Exit L. Chamb.
V. Roy. My Lord, It is not long since your Lordship told me, that the Kingdoms
Government stood firm, as does a Mountain, on its Balance; but now it can be
compared to no Mountain, except Vesuvias, whose flames do run a head, whose big
swollen breast vomits out sulphurs more prodigious then that: NAPLES was then
preserved from that eruption, by a contrary wind; and so it must be now too,
what you breath, or others may be pleased to think, as a present remedy, Nec
vult panthera domari, the people will not, like a Town-top, fall asleep with
scourging: I have seen an unruly horse, when all harsh means could not prevail,
stand still with stroking: I Will try that way; when I grant them all, they can
ask no more.


Mont. Sir, they will not be satisfied with all you grant, except you will
grant your self to be nothing.


V. Roy. I Will warrant you; I have sent unto them, and you shall hear they will
be satisfied: they are men, and men have reason, and reason will tell them when
they are well.


Mont. I tell you, Sir, they are men, and men of reason, yet injured men; and
there are Devils amongst those men; who laying hold upon the peoples former
discontents, sow such fears and jealousies in the hearts of the people, that
nothing shall satisfy, till they have brought their Devilish, and so long
hatched design, to some effect*

Enter L. Chamberlain.
Vrs. O Sir, the people are all mad, and both their madness and themselves
increase: they would not hear the Eletto di popolo, but offered violence to his
person: so that he is hardly escaped, if he be escaped at all, and they are all
marching toward the Palace.


V. Roy. Go, give command the Palace be well guarded: What a tempest is here
all upon the sudden?


Mont. O, are you advised of that now? pray God it be n't too late.

Exit L. Contr.
V. Roy. O thou Angel guardian! lead me by the hand, through this Wilderness
of wild beasts and mases, whose intricate, and so difficult windings, are never
to be found out, but by the highest providence, and your assistance, keep my
senses from distraction, and let no fear out my reason from its proper office.

Enter L. Contr.
Mont. O Sir, you are betrayed by your own Guard, who most cowardly and
traitorously, upon the approach of the rabble, have put out all their matches,
and turned the muzzles of their muskets downwards, and stood like so many
senseless statues, as if every soul had suffered an Eclypse, whilst the rout
entered the gates; and possessed themselves of the Palace.


V. Roy. Base mungrel curs: have they taught their musket-barrels to submit to
Canes? and have their chines of beef bred no better spirits in the blood within
their veins, then to give way to apple-feeders? Dumb dogs! could they neither
bark, nor bite?


Mont. Sir, it is no time to expostulate, but to save your self.


V. Roy. Save my self: from whom? From Apple-parings? From men whose veins are
filled with nothing but the juice of Plums? Shall the Scepter submit to a
company of Reeds? I, I, be gone, be gone; see how the wind blows chafe away:
though none stood to me, I should think my self as strongly armed as Jove, that
holds thunder enough in one hand, to frighten a world of men.


L. Contr. Sir, What do you mean? Your Friends have all left you, you are alone.


V. Roy. No, thou art here, my Friend Mon^^lto; they were never Friends of
mine; for Friends would never leave me thus. O adversity! thou touchstone of
men's hearts; I see thou art good for something; forsaken of all; power is
fallen to the ground, and no advice remains to help it up: experience, you are
come too late to tell me, that,

That Prince his Throne is staid up but in parts,

That i'n't supported by the peoples hearts.

Exit V. Roy.
Massenello, and the rout, rush in; Mont. draws, and hinders them from pursuing
the Viceroy. Mont. Stand: what would you have?


Mass. Silkworm: put up thy Sword: offer but to resist us in the least degree,
or to disobey us but in a tittle, and thou had as good eat thunder, or engage
lightning within thy bosom, instead of air: Where Is the Vice-King?


Mont. I do not know; or if I did, I would not tell you.

Massenello strikes at him, and he makes his way through them all.
Mass. Divide your selves, and search the King there, whilst we search here.

They go out at several doors, and the first party finds him, and drags him
upon the Stage. 1. Hold; let us bring him to the Mercato; and what we do, do
there in the sight of all the people.

2. Will it please your Majesty to give me leave to take you by the collar?

3. And I to take you by the locks?

4. Come along, Jackanapes with a Whim-wham.


Omnes. Viva il popolo, viva, viva, etc.

The Viceroy putting his hands into his pockets, takes out hands full of
chikeens, and throws them up into the air; the people fall a scrabling for the
gold, whilst the King escapes. Enter Massenello, and the other party.
Mass. What Is the matter?


Omnes. We have found him, we have found him, here he is.


Mass. Where? Where is he? Where is the Viceroy? What Is become of him? Have
you lost him? Who had him? No man speak? What Is that you were scuffling for?
Chikeens? How came they to be thrown amongst you?


Omnes. The King threw them.


Mass. Capitra! Was there ever known such fools, to grasp at shadows, and to
lose the substance thus? You all show your selves to be what you are, and not
men likely to go through with such a work. I hope you see your error now: and
that it may be so no more, seeing you have made me your General, I pronounce
it death, henceforth, for any man to keep or preserve any thing, that is the
estate of any Delinquent whatsoever, be they Chariots or Horses, Pearls or
precious Stones, Cloths of Gold or Silver, but let them all burn, and let
Delinquents Houses be fuel for Delinquents goods; that all the World may know,
we have not enterpris'd this business to enrich our selves, but to vindicate
the common liberty: Death and damnation be his lot, that dares transgress a
tittle of that which I command.


That all the World may know our equity,
Were he ten thousand Brothers, he should die.
Omnes. Viva, viva, viva, etc.

Exeunt omnes.
ACT. II.
SCEN. I.
Enter Duke di Mattaloon, and Captain of the Castle, at several doors. Duke
Mat. Where Is the Captain of the Castle?


Capt. Here.


Mat. Make have, and call the Soldiers together, man your Walls, draw up your
Bridges, load your Cannon, charge your Muskets, light your Matches, beat your
Drums, call to the Parade, Hel's broke loose, and the Devil leads the dance: O,
I fear me, the Vice*Roy has suffered already in this tumult.

Enter L. Contr.
L. Cont. No, he is safe as yet, though seized upon by the rudest hands, at a
dead lift: the Viceroy turned Conjurer, cast a golden apparition before their
eyes, and so escaped their clutches.


D. Mat. How Conjurer? What golden apparition? Prithee do not trifle with us
now: Where Is the King? What Is become of him?


L. Cont. He is safely housed in the next Convent, where, if you send
(presently) but the smallest guard, to prevent the worst; they knowing not what
is become of him, you may easily conduct him to this Castle.


Mat. Captain, make all the have you can, with what Guard is next at hand, and
guard the Viceroy hither.


Capt. It shall be done.

Enter Viceroy, in a Friars habit.
Vice Roy. QVem queritis adsum?


Mat. My Lord the King, welcome, as is Elizeum, to a new come soul: how escaped
your Majesty?


V. Roy. As a bird out of the snare, or as a brand out of the fire, engaged by
the hairs, both of my head and beard, hands laid hold upon my collar, and no
part of my body unseas'd on.


Mat. Strange outrage! and unheard of insolence! how got you loose?


V. Roy. I showered down gold upon their heads, which loosed their hands: so
that whilst they were scrambling for the money, I escaped to the next Convent,
and so hither: This is the habit of Father Anthony, that holy man, whom I found
there; having purposely left the Woods to forewarn me of this mischief, but
happened to come in the very action, followed me into the Convent, bad me be of
good comfort; told me, that all should have a happy ending; would not let me
stay for any convoy, but put his habit upon me, wherewith I passed
(unsuspected) through the thickest of them: This, I am sure, is well, and the
other course might not have been so fortunate.


Mat. Happy day, and a good presage of future happiness, and prosperous
success.

Enter Card: Filomarino.
Card: Sir, I am over-joyed to see you here, and alive: but I wish that I could
say, safe, and out of danger; for the place neither assures the one, nor makes
you safe from the other: I have been viewing the provisions and Ammunition of the
Castle, and I find neither Ammunition for a days fight, nor provision for a
months continuance.


V. Roy. Captain of the Castle: how do you answer this?


Capt. Sir, I can sooner give to your Majesty an answer, then a remedy. Sir,
besides my often solicitations of those whom it did concern; here are my Copies
of Petitions to your Majesty for both, after months upon months delays; here
are my assignments for so much bullet, powder, corn and beef, wine and oil;
here are the Copies of Orders to the contrary; so much of this and that for
Spain; so much provision and ammunition for the Galleys; so many quarters of
wheat to be sent to Genoa, to make money; sum totalis, nothing for me. Sir, if
any of all these things had grown within the Castle, I would have been
answerable for the want thereof: but since they do not, but must be otherwise
had, I doing my endeavor, and all would not do, I hope your Majesty will hold
me excused, and lay the blame on those who worthily deserve it.


V. Roy. O miserable state of Princes! When
They Are forced to see with th'eies of other men.

Card. This is no time to think of what is past, but how we may help our selves
out of the present plunge we are in: they are our Masters now, and there is no
wrestling without hands.


V. Roy. Lord Duke, you are a man in some favor with the people, and may
happily do good service at this time; it would be very acceptable, if you could
do any thing to appease this uproar.


Mad. Sir, I understand, that nothing will satisfy them now, but the
privileges granted unto them by the Emperor Ferdinand, and ratified by Carolo
quinto.


Card. You may make them believe privileges of lesser moment, to be the same;
and it is all one to them.


Mat. Lord Card: If I should demand the same privileges which they require,
interpretation might make me guilty of a crime as black as theirs: And if I
should go about to delude them with privileges, which are not the same, and
they find it out, I should run my self upon the fury of a multitude.


Card. My Masters, we have nothing left us now, but every man a head; which
that he may keep upon his shoulders, he must make use of his brains; for ought
that I can hear, they carry their business warily; their proceedings speak
order and method; contrivement go along with their design: Believe it, the
progress they have made already, discovers a head, above a vulgar capacity;
and the beast, as he goes along, shows, though many heads, yet one above the
rest, by whom all are directed: So that Monarchy it self is opposed by that of
its own nature; and we must play with them now at their own Weapons.


And where the Lyon's skin does fail,
We Will piece it with the Foxes tail.
My Lord Duke, you have a wild Brother, Don Peppe di Caraffa, who we hear is
very great with Peroon, Captain of the Bandittoes; so that by your means, he,
and all his Associates, may be drawn to our part, and every one of those is
worth a hundred door-keepers: And what do ye lack? Let us call them in: yet so,
as they first offer their service unto the people, and so possess themselves
of the heart of the City: then shall you go with these pretended privileges;
and if they take, the business is ended: if not, you have so many servants at
your elbow, ready to defend you, and to bring you off.

V. Roy Excellently well advised: we thank you for your good advice.


Mat. 'Twas spoke like a Cardinal, and they are the men now adays, who have
engrossed the exaltations of Kingdoms to themselves, and have appropriated
those renowned acts unto their own order.


Card: Let the Queen be taught to act her part too, and to go to Massenello's
Mother, Wife and Daughters, and collogue and cog with them.

To stoop to our necessities, is Wisdom sed:

For when the Sun courts Dunghils, there are Serpents bred.


V. Roy. Come, let us about it then, and leave no stone unturned, where under
may be found our looked for safety: truly they were much to blame,

Who put us thus to play the after game.

Exeunt.
SCEN. II.
Enter Massanello, Gen: Mariamma, Agatha, Flora and Vrsula. Genesis SIR, I must
tell you here, in the presence of your Mother, your Wife, and Daughters here
likewise, that you are much to be blamed; you have committed more goods and
monies-worth unto the fire, out of mere vainglory and ostentation, then would
have made you the wealthiest man in the whole Kingdom of NAPLES, and so
consequently the wisest, the greatest, the best, the noblest of all the
Neopolitans: for wherein is wisdom most exercised? Then, in the gaining of
that which has the unquestionable command of all things, and that is money: so
far I Am right. 2. For greatness: Who is great (I pray) but he that has the
world at will? And who is that? but he that has money at command. Now for
goodness: Vnde derivatur goodness? Goodness, quasi a nest of goods: get but
that, and ye are good enough. And Lastly, for Nobility: What is Nobility, but
ancient riches? Get good store of old gold, it is no matter whose it is, and
search for bags that have not seen the Sun this many a day, and then you have
ancient riches, and so consequently nobility. Sir, I beseech you to take the
advice of him by whose direction you have prospered hitherto: do not so vainly
reject and consume that, which is only able to preserve you from oblivion;
Palms and Laurels wither in the hands, and on the heads of those who wear them,
but riches imbalms a Worthies memory more precious then any statues of brass
or marble; and give him a more lasting fame then a memory that is preserved from
oblivion by thin paper-wals.

Were I in your condition, the first thing Iw'd do, should be to build my self
a house, for the honor of my name: then I would so feather my nest, that
Jupiters own Bird, who builds his nest in the Sun, should not think it a
disparagement to seek alliance with one of my Chikeens.


Mass. Genuino, thou have converted me, henceforth I will be covetous, high
minded, glorious and haughty: and hearken to what I shall say, in order to my
conversion. Genuino, the City is rich, we have the power in our hands, why
should we not have the riches? The Citizens begin to thrust their thumbs under
their girdles, and to make pauses at our demands, and some of them begin to
look asquint already upon our actions: Have thou not observed it, Genuino?
Genuino, thou have spoken wisely, money is all in all, and that is the thing we
aim at; money is the sinews of War, and the life-bloud to action: let us suck
this blood, and cut these sinews, lest they stand upon their terms with us: It
is requisite that so strong a body should be thus enfeebled, when we know not
how long they will take our part: let us but get a world of money, and we care
not for the World. Pecunia is the Queen Regent of the Worlds Empire, whose
divall jussements being so slenderly regarded, has been the only cause, why
none has hitherto attained to the Quintessentiall and fifth Monarchy. And
therefore Dame Nature was wisely provident, in hiding with her greatest care,
this thing Omnipotent, in the very bowels of the earth; like a careful Mother,
who hides her knives out of her childrens way, till they know how to use them:
But we are men, and know full well how to be our own carvers: Let us provide
our selves with these necessaries, and none shall live, but such as are
beholding to us for doles of meat, and shives of bread: Money will ransom
Kings, and make Crowns to pawn their Jewels: Therefore good Genuino, let us have
money enough, the City has it: we have the City, and why should we be without
it?


Genesis Softly, great Tomaso, you are too apt a Scholar; all that you have said
is truth, and must be executed: yet so, as that they may seem to enjoy what we
are Masters of: Let them be your Cash-keepers, and you shall command whatsoever
they have, as readily, as if they were your Servants: Now you have made your
self their Conqueror, you must not plunder the City, nor take all away at
once; for if you do not leave a nest-egge behind you, the hens will lay no
more: What Is theirs by providence, must be ours with prudence: We will make
them give, or we will use them, as the old Wives use their cakes, when they are
grown dry, put them under ground.


Mass. Genuino, thou say well; of all Nations, sools have the least wit; and
of all wise men, thou art one for my money.


Mariam. Sir, you were pleased to talk of alliance even now; I forgot to tell
you, that the Vice-Queen was here, and said, that her eldest Son should many
one of your Daughters, if you will be friends with him.


Mass. A pox consound her for an Hypocrite; she came to abuse us, to flout and
jeer us: a likely matter.


Genesis Not so, carry your business handsomely, and he shall be glad to seek it:
Where, in all the Royal Palace, is there a prettier Moppet then this same? A
wittier thing? I tell you, Sir, she is a Bedfellow for a Prince, and a
Companion for his betters.


Vrsula. What she? marry come up; a blister on the tongue that spoke it.


Agatha. What say you to this girl? She Is black, but lovely: If you can force
him to any, you may compel him to accept of this; if he may choose, he will choose
neither.


Mass. I may do so, but I may choose: if you shackle Princes, you must have
golden bonds, not rustie iron.

Come Genuino, we will go and advise about the premises, leave foolish Women to
themselves.

Ex. Mass. Genesis
Vrsula. Am I but rustie iron? I think my self to be as good metal as her
self: 'Twas a roguish speech.


Mariam. O Child, remember he is your Father.


Vrsula. My Father? What of that? Let him use me like a Child, I am no rusty
piece.


Agatha. As rusty as thou art, he shall thee, or none: let them consult out, as
they please, it is your fine face that is the cause of all this stir.


Flora. Mother, I never thought it fine; but as it is, God bestowed it, and I
hope you will not make Gods gifts my fault.


Agatha. Go, go, you're a prating baggage.


Flora. Good Mother, do not build your discontents upon imaginations so
improbable, and unlikely.


Agath. Improbable to thee, vile Wretch! but not to her.

Enter Massenello and Genuino.
Genesis I tell you, Sir, you must not do things rashly; take advice: Where have
you a King? But such a one is his right hand: Be advised, Sir, Gods themselves
did sit in Council.


Mass. I tell thee man, thou shall be my right hand, and my right foot, and my
right eye, and my right ear, and my right, right, right, any thing, if thou will be quiet: thou shall be my chief Secretary, and Counselor of State; you
shall be a Queen Mother, you a Queen; and thou, my little Chuck, the new
Infanta of Neapolis. I fear nothing, but that I shall want Children, and
Kindred, rather then honors and preferments to confer upon them.

Enter a Messenger in have.
Mess. Sir, they all expect you in the Mercato, nothing can be done until you
come.


Genesis You may be sure of that: Who dares act any thing without you? You are the
soul that gives life to the body politic, and the main Engine from whom the
wheel of fortune borrows its motion.


Mass. It Is well done of you, thus to let us understand our self.

Ex. Mass. Genesis
Mariam. I remember, when he was but a boy, many a time and often, when he came
home from fishing, he would commend the policy of the Herring, that could make
themselves Kings, by their multitudes, notwithstanding the greatness of the
Whale, and other Fishes: and when I was with Child with him, I dreamed that I
was delivered of a son, who as soon as ever he was born, could stand upon his
head.


Agatha. Mother, I can easily interpret that dream for you; the King is the
Head of the People, my Husband shall pull down the King, and bring him under
his foot, and so stand upon his Head.


Vrsula. It Is very likely to be true: a very pretty interr retation.


Flora. I, but Sister, this should have been done as soon as he was born: for
so my Grandmother dreamed.


Vrsula. Goodly, goodly: how you come in with your five eggs a penny, and four
of them rotten? The rising of the people was the big swollen belly, that
contained the bully lad, that should do such feats: and my Father is not two
days old, since he was so born.


Flora. I, but Sister, my Grandmother says, she dreamed how that my Father, as
soon as he was born, should stand upon his head; if he stood upon his head,
then his feet must be uppermost: how could he tread the King (then) under foot,
when he stood upon his head?


Vrsula. Why, that may very well be, too --


Flora. I, just as you took shipping to go for Turkey, so I lent you my horse,
and you went to Rome.


Agatha. Vile Baggage! she is always crossing her Sister, and chopping of
Logic with her; I Will chop you: Strikes her. Take that for your labor.

Exeunt Mar. Agatha, Vrsula. manet Flora.
Flora. How shall I do, to let my Mother in law, and my Sister know, I have no
such ambition, as they think in me, and have themselves? I would I could as
well clear their bosoms from those suspicions, as well as I can my own from
such vain hopes: they are all fired with that, which warms not me: My
Grandmother is high-minded; my Father higher; my Mother highest; my Sister
highest of all.

And since there is no degree in height for me, I Will stick unto my old humility.

Exit Flora. Enter Major, Aldermen, etc. at one door: Mass. at another: Genesis
and others.
Major. An't please your Excellence, here is a Catalogue of the Delinquents
names.


Mass. Have you taken examinations duly and truly? for I will do nothing but
justice, all those (let me see your pen) before whose name you find this mark.

He makes a dumb sign, with his finger sawing his throat. You understand me,
the words out; and see that there be Commissioners appointed to take an
Inventory of their goods, and be accomprable to us therefore.

Enter a Messenger, and speaks softly and hastily to Genuino.
Genesis Sir, The Bandits are come faithfully, and according unto promise: Peroon,
their Chieftain; and Don Peppe di Caraffa, Brother to the Duke of Mattal.
desire audience.


Mass. Bring them in, they are welcome:

Exit Genesis These are Blades indeed, that, if occasion serve, will show my
Gallants School-play.

Enter Genesis with Peroon, Don Peppe, and Bandits.
Peroon. To the thrice worthy, Tomaso Amello di Malfa, General of the
Neopolitans, are we come to offer our service.


Don. Pep. And our lives to be sacrificed in the defense of the most worthy
Tomaso, and the Popolo.


Mass. We accept your offer, and appoint your guard to our own person.

Peroon and Peppe make sour faces upon Massenello. Trumpets sound.

What noise is that? Go know the cause.

Exit Genesis I am not yet well acquainted with the language of Trumpers.

Enter Genesis
Genesis The Duke of Mattaloon desires audience and admittance to your Excellence.


Mass. Let him have his will, and we will have ours.

Aside. Enter Duke di Mattaloon, with Attendants.
Mat. Peace to this people, and happiness to Tomaso their General, as in the
body natural, so in the politic; there are causes which turn the best blood
into corruption; and against tumescency there are medicines to be used to keep
the swelling down, and to hinder the corrupt humors from gathering to a head:
if the effects may cease by taking away their causes, I have brought you cure:
behold all your desires are granted, here is what you ask.

He gives Massenello the pretended privileges.
Mass Peruse them Gen: they did well to send your grace with them: for as
nothing could have satisfied the people, but that which you have brought; so
nothing could have been more satisfactory, then that they should be brought by
you; a man whom the people always had a good opinion of.


Genesis Sir, hold, I pray, your commendations are too soon bestowed; these
Writings are all counterseit, and not the privileges of Carolo quinto; upon my
life they are.


Mass Hah? Counterseit? My Lord, you have forseited your honor, and your
honesty together; and what is more, our good opinion of you; and are indeed no
better then a Traitor to your Country.

The people shoulder the Duke up and down, and begin to be outrageous; the Duke
all the while applies himself to speaks. Peroon.
Mat. Sir -- Sir -- Sir -- Peroo -- Peppe -- can ye endure this insolence to be
done to my person?

Peroon gives fire at Mass: and his Carbine would not off.
Mass. If that will not off, this will.

He kills Pero with Sword.
Don. Pep. Guard the Duke, give the sign to the Castle for sallying out
speedily.

Ex. Don. Pep. with Mat. and Banditte.
Mass. And I Will regard ye, ye fine, politic, neat, facetious traitors: give the
word there: bid them all make ready: on my soul, Mat. they shall carry thee
marching over this full body of resolves; but I will intercept thy passage,
which shall be as difficult for thee or them to do, as to march over Vesuvias
head. Drums beat aloud and call, our men together; if we stand, we stand; and
if we fall, we fall.

Exit. A battle without, Drums and Trumpets sound the charge, Cannon and
Musket go off, as in hard fight: Bandits pass over the stage by ones, and by
couples, bleeding and led. Two Bandits drop down dead upon the Stage, one after
another, the first crying out, Ploudy Traitor! could I but die tearing thy
flesh with my teeth, I should die contentedly; but now, I Am fain to die only
with my mouth full of wishes. He dies The second, A Kingdom for another life to
lose, in ventring at Tomasoes head; but I must give out, I Have lost all. He dies
Then enters a brave Italian banditted Captain, having lost his arm, and speaks
these dying words, Though I was right and nobly born, yet I must die the death
of the Bastard Sea-Eagle, called, Halietus, who seizing sometimes on so big a
Fish, that not being able to heave it out of the water, is by it drowned under
the waves. I seized not on the Fish, but on the Fisherman himself: I had once
hold of him, but he was too heavy for me; I lost that arm, and now this life.
He dies Then enters a poor Spaniard Bandit, with a half pike in his hand, he
reels and staggers up and down, at last he drops, and speaks, I was born well,
I lived honorably, but I fell scurvily; I will see if I can rise up, that I
may fall better; it may be, some saw me fall, not commendably. He rises and
charges his pike, and says, This pike I won from a Neopolitan, and fall, thus,
with my own Trophie in my hand. He dies Then marches Matteloon hastily over the
Stage, bids, Call off my Brother, sound the retreat, all is well. Don Peppe
marches after him, but is shot through the back, as he was bringing up the
rear; falls, his men keep on; and Peppe rises up, upon Massenello's approach.
Enter Mass.
Mass. Where Is this Villain?


Don Pep. Hold dog, I am Don Peppe.


Mass. Thou art the man I looked for.

runs him through,
Don Pep Dogstar where under I was born! What? Did the fates ordain me to be no
better then a Sprat or Whiting, to be thus taken by a Fisherman? Yet high and
mighty Prince, Tomaso, you must cast your net into the Sea once more; the Fish
you looked for, is not caught:

And though I die, the fight this comfort gives, That by my blood and death, my
Brother lives

he dies
Mass. To give thee thy due, Peppo, thou were a brave Fellow, and it is pity
but that thou had been an honest man: In all my life I never heard of a
braver piece of service: And to deal plainly, I was ashamed of the odds, seeing
they have done their work: They fought like Devils, or like men weary of
living; they reached him into the Castle, as if it had been with a hand
stretched through a Cloud; and they did it with so much ease, as if so many
Sunbeams had made their way through a contrary wind. When they made a stand,
they stood like a stretched out Rock against an Ocean, bidding defiance to all
its Waves: And when they made their way through us, they passed like a fierce
wind over the heads of corn; then wheeled about, like a Whirlwind, which raised
not dust, but a smoke so big bellied wi^h fire and thunder, as with the blind
thereof they conveyed this Mattaloon safe into the Castle; whilst some few and
inconsiderable (O had we known it) made good the rear with a stand of fifteen
naked breasts, against the power of NAPLES, until called off by order: then
made their retreat as orderly, leaving a Barricado between them and us, only of
the smoke of powder; which with much difficulty, my fellow Cits and Chits got
over, but too late to gain any thing, save only the sight of these brave men
who did this act. Only here Don Peppe lies, who rather fell into, then by my
hands; and, cursed be the rage, and madness, mingled with my shame, that
colored my sword with any of his blood: But I think I rather put him out of
pain, then rid of his life: Yes, 'twas so, mortally shot through the back. He
views him. Well Peppe, though thou were mine Enemy, yet I will erect thee a
Monument: Death discharges all enmity, and had thou lived, I had doubted the
success: But

As for the rest, I make but even a scoff:
The body's soon dissected, when the head is off.
Exeunt.
ACT. III.
SCEN. I.
Enter Viceroy, Card: Mat: Capt: of the Castle, with Attendants. Card: HAc non
successit alia aggrediemur via: we must tack about again, and take another
compass, before we can arrive at our wished point.


Mat. Wished point, do ye call it? The Devil himself would never wish for such
a point, as I was like to find: the Devil a point was I likely to arrive at,
but the point of death: if you have not better points then these, I will not
give three pence a dozen for all the Points in your shop.


V. Roy. My Lord, it does not become Nobility to seem frighted into so much
choler: we admired your valor, took notice of your service, and were about to
give you thanks, had you not anticipated those thoughts which we were about to
give breath unto.


Mat. When a man has escaped hanging, I hope your Majesty will give a man
leave to be merry after it; I made but a little bold with the Cardinal's
language, but I am sure the Cardinal (a pox on his Rhetoric) had like to have
been very bold with me: neither do I repent it, since your Majesty does
command me to be serious.


V. Roy. If it be so, my Lord, I am willingly mistaken.


Card. If it were not so, I should willingly have given way to any passion my
Lord should please to have been in; for loosers should have leave to speak, and
I Am sure he has lost a Brother, whom we all shall miss as soon as he.


Mat. Could Heavens decree have been so satisfied, mine should have paid the
ransom for his life; but let us fall to considerations, how we may preserve the
lives that are left more considerable.

Lord Cardinal, it is you must beat your brains, that must be the anvil whereon
all our safeties must be wrought.


Card. My Masters, we cannot expect otherwise then speedily to be beseiged: if
so, we must expect speedily to be brought to the several exigents of famine,
and desperateness, with their Attendants, ruin and destruction. A Castle
without ammunition and provision, is like a Carcass that has neither life nor
soul; nay, like a Scheleton, that has neither flesh nor blood; therefore these
must be had: And for the effecting whereof, this is my advice; Let there be
Letters devised to this purpose, that the French are upon the Sea with a great
Fleet, and that their design is against NAPLES.

These Letters must be so ordered, as that they may be intercepted by the way:
then if this take, and we find them sensible of the danger, you shall entreat
Massenello to accept the office of General of all the Forces to be raised in
the defense of the whole Kingdom. And to make this offer appear the more real,
we will call upon all our loving Citizens to arm themselves (for the honor and
safety of their Country) with what arms and ammunition they have need of, out
of the Magazine; which is no more but what we can neither enjoy our selves, nor
hinder them of: so shall we render our selves void of all suspicion; then shall
we call upon them, as an act of the highest necessity, to provision and
ammunition the Castle: Then send for Don John of Austria to come unto our
rescue: so shall we furnish our selves with what is wanting; and by a fear of
others, lull them into such security of us, that we may at leisure work all our
ends both by Sea and Land, and so gain time, which is only able to restore us.


V. Roy. Your eminence speaks good advice.


Card. This is not all, the Queen shall go on with her old instructions, bear
him in hand, with the marriage of his Daughter; assure them all excise to be
taken off: promise Mass. that a stately Monument shall be erected in the
Mercato, containing all the articles of agreement between you and him, and
hereby add such fuel to his proud fire;

That this detestable, and so accursed
Toad swells, and with his own poison bursts.

V. Roy. Lord Card. Your advice is so good and seasonable, that it needs no
debate, but execution; let it be done speedily, and use our authority therein
as shall be requisite.

-- Come, let us rise,
And reduce words to actions, then we are wise.
Exeunt omnes. Enter Bonella, erecting several Chairs of State.
Bonell. Where are you? haw!

Enter Mariam: Agath: Flora, Vrsula. Come, sit you down there, and you there,
and you shall sit there: by the faith of my body you must take state upon you
now: you must not think to do as you have done heretofore: and is it not time
you should? Has not your Son all? Has not your Husband all? Has not your and
your Father all? Does not the King, and the Lords, and all the Evil
Councillors, hide themselves out of his sight? And does not he command and
rule all the people? Is not all at his disposing? If he bids take off a hundred
heads, they must lose them: What shall I say more? In a word, he is all in all.


Mar. Nay, I am sure all this is true.


Agath. Then all is well.


Vrsula. All the better.


Flora. And I must have my all too. All is but vanity.


Vrsula. That was but a vain speech, Sister.


Flora. I have another all for you, then: All is not gold that glisters.


Agath. This girl is always crossing of her Sister: Vile Wretch!


Bonell. Peace: how you two are always rangling and jangling: What? cannot you
agree when you have all between you? You should rather agree, and plot, and
contrive how you may get a share in the Government; sure he will not refuse to
hear his Mother speak, I ^row; and he is a very unkind Husband, that will
communicate his secrets unto his own Wife, and show all that he has unto the
Wife that is in his bosom. Have not great Kingdoms been excellently governed by
Women? And do you think that the Popedom it self could be so well ordered, if
Don Olympia, like a good Huswife, did not keep the Keys? Come, come, if I were
as you, I would see what becomes of all the Money, and all the Land, and all
the Houses, and all the Household Stuff, that is confiscated; I would see, which
way it went, and how it was disposed, and to what end and uses, that I would.


Mar. Indeed I could wish, that my Son would be ruled a little.


Ag. Mother, he must, and shall: What not hear his nearest and dearest Friend
speak? And when it is for his own good? Who should he hear?

Enter Mass. and Genesis with Attendants.
Mass. Mother, your pardon a little: Wife I pray excuse me, I am very busy.


Genesis What would you peruse --


Mass. No, no, you know I have done with the Land and Houses; I would see what
sums of money were ceased on to your use.


Genesis O here it is.


Mass. Read it.


Genesis Imprimis, Found in the Duk di Mat: his house, 60000 Spanish Pistols.

Item, in his Villa, 40000 Crowns.

Item, in Don Peppe his house --


Mass: Don Diego Devil! how many millions is there in all? What? do you talk to
me of Crowns and Pistols? Do you think that I have leisure to hear you prate of
Crowns and Pistols?


Genesis Sir, there is eleven Millions in all.


Mass. So then, eleven Millions, that is something to the purpose, we will divide
it all amongst our selves; but I Have given order that 200 houses be pulled down
already in the Mercato, for the building of my self a Palace; and I allow four
Millions out of this money toward the work; I command you see there be Workmen
enough provided, that it may be built this Summer.


Genesis I pray, will you speak to him? He talks so extravagantly, and does such
strange things, that I begin to fear him extremely: besides, he has not slept
a wink this four or five nights together.


Mar. Dear Son, I pray you, will you be ruled?


Mass. How? ruled by a Woman? Mother, I Will tell you a story, the glory of the
English Nation and Sex: the Lady Ward was in hot pursuit of a new order of the
Jesuitesses, to be granted to her, and her Sisternity, by the last Pope; which
not obtaining in his days, she renews her suit at the entrance of this present
Pope into his reign; she makes her addresses, fortifies her desires with the
most specious arguments; the Pope sends all his Cardinals and Camarers out of
the presence, pretends to trust her with the greatest secret in the world, such
a one, as he would trust no man withal: whereupon his Holiness rises up, and
fetches a little box, which he delivers unto her, desiring her but to keep it
three days, and then to bring it unto him again; giving her a strict command,
not to open it: she carries it home, her Sisters were impatient of being kept
ignorant of what was therein contained; she pleads his commands to the
contrary, they urge their Warrants of a Non-discovery: assuring her
(undoubtedly) that whatsoever were in it, they would be sure to lay it up
again, and wrap it as it was before; she yields to their temptations; the box
is opened, nothing therein but a strange kind of fly, which got away, and could
never be recovered, nor the like thereof: The time is come, when the box must
be restored; not coming, she is sent for; sent for; comes; there was the box,
but no fly; confusion of face, and distracted looks, was all her answer:
Whereupon the Pope spoke unto the Lady, as follows, Madam, Now you see your
own error, and the frailty of all your Sex together: you desire, amongst the
rest of your requests, that you would have me grant unto your Order, and to
your Sex, viz: the power of hearing Confessions: So, says he, I shall commit
the affairs and secrets of the Christian World, to a thing, called Woman; who
from first to the last, could never let alone so much as an Apple upon a Tree,
or a Be in a Box, but they must be meddling, though it were to save or confound
the whole World: Therefore, Mother, I pray keep your rules to your self, for I
do not mean to be ruled by any of you all.


Agatha. What, not by me, who am the Wife in your bosom?


Mass. No forsooth: What? hear a rib prate?


Agatha. O Lord! I would I had my old Husband again.


Mass. Why had thou ever any Husband before?


Agatha. I mean, I would I had my Husband now of the old fashion, if honors
have so changed his manners, that I must not speak to him.


Mass. I tell thee, Wife, when I was in case to do so, thou know I did it; I
made thee privy, heretofore, to all the secret windings and turnings of my Net;
and when the business was any thing intricate, you know I always called you
forth to unfold the mystery, I called you ever and anon to dilate the
business, and I always took your advice about the repairing and mending the
breaches of that our Commonwealth; you had the fing'ring and ordering, not only
of the light corks, but also of the most weighty plummets of our State; I
acquainted you from day to day, how many prisoners I had taken, viz. so many
Sprats, so many Whitings, so many Gudgeons, so many this, so many that, I
withheld nothing from your knowledge; but now the hand of providence has
called me to hold the Scales of Justice; now, to be President of a Council of
State; by and by, President of a Council of War: Do you think Women are sit
Creatures to be consulted with? Must the affairs of State hang upon an
apron-string? Look to your dishes, and see that your rooms be well swept, and
never think to teach Tomaso what he has to do.

Enter a Servingman.
Ser. Most excellent Sir, there is several poor Citizens without, who beg
admittance, and pray that you would do them justice.


Mass. Let them have admittance: O, I do love that work alife; I am never well
but when I am doing justice; they shall have justice to a hairs breadth.

Enter Citizens, with l^ttle loaves of bread.
Citiz. Most excellent, and thrice worthy Tomaso, we are come to complain of
the great injury we suffer by the most unconscionable Bakers; who contrary to
all right and honesty, have presumed to bake such loaves as these, as little as
when the Excise was on foot; and want one quarter of their weight, according to
the allowance.


Mass. Do you know the Bakers names?


Cit. Yes, here they be.


Mass. Carry these men (you I say) unto their own Ovens mouths, and let their
Ovens be heated red hot, and put them in, and there let them be baked
themselves; which will be a terror to all Bakers, how they bake light bread*


Cit. How long shall they remain there?


Mass. No longer, but until you fee them all over of a crust, and their eyes
look like parched plumbs upon a plumb cake, and then it is time to take them
forth.


Cit. It shall be done.

Ezeunt Cit:
Mass. I think I have done justice pretty well.

Enter Servingman.
Ser. And if it please your Excellence, there are more Citizens without,
desiring audience.


Mass. Some others, I warrant you, come for justice: bring them in.

Enter Citizens. How now, good fellows, what would you have with me?


Cit. We are come for justice to your Excellence.


Mass. Marry, and you shall have it, with all my heart, as freely, and with as
good a will, as ever I came from School.


Cit. Sir, here is a list of certain Butchers, who refuse to sell meat otherwise
then at the same rates they did, whilst the Excise was up.


Mass. Carry these men unto their own slaughter-houses, and there let them be
knocked on the head, as they knock down their Oxen; and let their throats be
cut, as they used their Calves.

Ex. Cit. I think I shall do such justice, e're it be long, that all the World
shall admire me.

Enter Servingman.
Ser. Sir, there are more Citizens without, with a Petition to your Excellence.


Mass. Let them come in: O, I am in my Kingdom now! O, how God-like it is, to
rule and sway! I could be contented to forsake meat, drink and sleep, so that I
might be doing of justice.

Enter Citizen, and deliver a Petition.
Mass. Genuino, read it.

He read^, The humble Petition of 200 poor Citizens, living in the Mercate.
Humbly shows,

THat whereas your said Orators were seated and possessed of good and
substantial houses, and dwelling places, in and about the Mercato; and that by
direction from your Highness, the said houses, to the number of 200 are
ordered to be pulled down, to give way to the building of your Excellencie's
Palace.

Now, forasmuch as your Excellencie's said Orators are utterly deprived of
places of abode:

They humbly pray, that your Excellency will be pleased to take the premises
into consideration, and either to give satisfaction to the said Inhabitants,
for their said dwelling houses, or else to provide some other places of abode,
whereby they may be disposed of otherwise.

And your Orators shall pray, etc.
Mass. So I will, and that presently: let them be all sent to the Galleys, and
there let them make their abode: What? When the foot of Italus his leg was in
the grave, I took it by the small, and reached it out again: When an Ocean of
calamities had overwhelmed the Land, I made that Sea run back, and keep its
channel: and do you now grudge me a place to build my house in? Ungrateful
Monsters! you shall soon know, what punishments are belonging to so great a sin.

Cit: kneel.
Cit. Your pardon, gracious Sir, we acknowledge our fault, and are heartily
contented that your will should be fulfilled; now we understand our selves, and
do humbly beg your pardon.


Mass. Lie down flat upon your bellies then: so,
Now you may rise up again, and go.

Cit. Call you this the liberty of the Subject? and the property of what is
ours?

I would we had our old Government and Governors.

Exeunt Cit:
Mass. I am not only good at justice, but I can be as good at mercy, if I
please.


Genesis Sir, Did you not perceive how they muttered forth their discontents at
the present Government and Governors?


Mass. I did, my Genuino; but they shall find me of the nature of the Cock,
that crows over the same dunghill, whose unnatural heat gave him so untimely
and preposterous production: Their hands have reared me up, but I shall not be
so easily dissolved, as are their bears of snow, which their hands have made
unshap'd, and melted to a shapelesse lump, with the least shower of rain:
Tomaso is more hard and lasting then brass or marble; not to be reduced to
nothing, by the greatest showers of tears, that possibly can fall from the
peoples eyes. These Citizens, if they abound with such bad humors, as I see
they do, I Will purge them, even to the excoriation of their guts, and make them
to commend my doings, as men use to praise the biting Mustard with tears in
their eyes. I Will be their Oracle my self, and mean to confine all truths to my
own mouth: I Will be their Colossus, all their Ships shall sail between my legs,
and their money shall all run between my fingers: I am not what I am for naught.


Genesis Brave Tomaso, how like thy self thou speak, provender pricking has
made them cast their first Rider; and they will cast you too, if you do not
hold them to hard meat.

The corruption of estates is the generation of Soldiers; whilst you drive
away their trade, you drive on your own: and what injury is it to them, to be
first made beggars, and then to be paid with their own coin?


Mass. Excellently well advised, my good Genius! How excellently thou speak!

Enter Servingman.
Ser. Sir, The Major and Aldermen are at the door to wait upon you to the
Mercato.

Ser. whispers.
Mass. It Is well then, I shall have justice business enough to last me all
this day; and I Will lay it on, let whose will take it off. Daughter, anon the
Prince will visit you, see that you are fit to entertain him in every respect.

Ex. Mass. Genesis
Mariam. Truly my Son is strangely altered of late, he is not the same man he
was wont to be.


Agath. Not suffered to speak to him, despised and jeered at every word; you
hussee, can talk with him in private, and have whole hours discourse together,
when his Mother and his Wife, I and his Daughter too, as good as you, are not
thought worthy to speak to him.


Flora. He is my Father; and what I do, is but in order to that obedience,
which I owe to him; I cannot be justly accused of any intrusion upon his
privacies, and for the common subject of his Discourse, it is as unpleasing
unto me as to your self.


Agatha. Hang you liar, I don't believe you.


Vrsula. It is a very likely thing; for when my Father calls her to his privy
Chamber, O how she trips it along as she goes! How her color rises! How she
starts up when she is called! And makes such have! I would not be guilty of such
dissimulation for the World.


Flora. I would not be guilty of so much cruelty for ten Worlds.


Agatha. What cruelty, you stinking baggage?


Flora. Not to believe a body, when one speaks truth: to chide a body for that,
which one cannot help: to envy me, for another ambition: and, in a word, to
make my duty to my Father, a displeasure to my Mother.


Agatha. Vile Harlot! I Will make that face, the make bate of this divided family,
as homely and deformed, as wounds and scars can make it. So, now let the Prince
come and visit you, and tell me how he likes you.

She stabs her into the face. Enter Mass. with the Prince.
Mass. Where Is my Daughter? Where Is Flora? I will show you a rare flower indeed.


Prince. It seems, there was a battle fought in the field, where this flower
grew, and too much blood fell to her share.


Mass. Fury, this was thy doings.


Agath. Hands off: what and if it were?


Mass. Then thus I Would use her that did it.

He breaks her neck between his hands.
Flora. O me! Father, what have you done? It had been better mine eyes had been
stabbed out of my head, then left me to behold an act so barbarous.

O, Father; you have played a Butchers part:
She stabbed my face, you strike me to the heart.
She offers to go away.
Prince. Stay, gentle Virgin; let me hear how this business is, before you go;
pray let me hear how 'twas, for it concerns me now; I came to be your Servant,
and to elect you for my Mistress.


Flora. O Sir, I am altogether unworthy to be your Mistress, or your Mistrisses
servant; it is enough, that I am your Martyr: wherefore I humbly beg you pardon,
Sir; -- for I

Have blood to stench, and also tears to dry.

Exit.
Prince. A lovelier face I never saw: But, is she thus amiable, when she wants
those compound ornaments of blood and tears?


Mass. Sir, you did but see the Sun behind a Cloud, or the Moon in an Eclypse,
when you beheld my Daughter how: I tell thee Prince, thou shall see her when
her face is washed; and, if the scars have not too much disfigured her, you will
say, you saw a Queen, if beauty has dominion.


Prince. She talked of being my Martyr, as if she had received those wounds for
my sake: how was that?


Mass. She did so; and 'twas thus: Flora is my Daughter by a former Wife, that
Blackamore mine by this: This envious Woman, envying the happiness that your
affections might throw upon that other Daughter, intended the ruin of her face,
to make way for your addresses to this foul Dowdye: when, alack,

Her outsid's not so swarthy, as her insid's black.


Prince. She Is my Martyr then indeed; methought she looked very prettily, when
the blood and tears ran races down her cheeks; and methought they did no more
disfigure her, then streamers of red and white do misbecome the goodliest ship;
and methought she carried a great deal of modesty and humility, both in her
speech and countenance.


Mass. Sir, she is so full of humility, that I protest unto you, I could never
get her to open an ear, or to leak into her the least thought of what is now. I
could never make her believe it: Father, says she, forbear this vain discourse;
it is just such another likely matter; as if you could make me believe, that you
could turn the Horses of the Sun into your Cow pasture.


Prince. Extreme witty! I shall be in love with this girl, I see.

Whatsoever my Father and you

Do, let you and I agree; you go about
Your business; I Will go seek my Mistress out.
Exeunt. Enter Major, Alder: Mass: Genesis
Major. Most excellent Sir, we have intelligence, and it comes several ways,
and from very good hands: but one especially amongst the rest, to whom we give
most credit, is, a Letter to the Viceroy, which we intercepted, thinking it to
have contained matters of other consequence; which assure us, that the French
are upon the Seas with a mighty Fleet, and they say, their design is, for
NAPLES: Sir, we thought fit to acquaint you with the business.


Mass. Most excellent Sir, have you provided the money for the Army, I sent
unto you for? I think fit to acquaint you also with this business.


Major. Sir, the money is most willingly ready, and most readily willing they
were all to pay it.


Mass. Then most readily willing, and most willingly ready I am, that you
should on to your other business.


Major. Sir, I have spoken the business already, it is concerning the French.


Mass. What a pox do we care for the French? or the French with a pox? I would
they were here, I long to be doing, now I have command and men enough.


Major. I, but Sir, we are at odds among our selves, and it is to be feared --


Mass. I tell thee, Major, I Will be friends with the Devil, and salute his Dam,
before the French shall have any thing to do here: and because they are so
forward, we will begin with them first: Go, and see that the heads of all the
French men within NAPLES, be cut off (speedily Go without any more ado, they
shall have justice, I warrant you; justice has not been executed a great
while, and now it takes its course: O how pleasant a thing it is!

Exeunt two Alder: Sound Trumpet.


Genesis Hark Sir! a parley from the Castle.


Major. Upon my life, it is about this business.


Mass. It comes very seasonably and welcome; let some know who it is that
desires to treat with us.

Exit Genesis If the King grants what we ask, then it is likely we shall do -- what
we please, so something may be done.

Enter Genesis
Genesis It is Card: Filomarino, who humbly desires to mediate between the King
and the people.


Mass. Bring him in; I never spoke with a Cardinal yet, but I believe I shall
be hard enough for him.

Enter Card: Filomarino.
Card. I am sent by the King, unto the most excellent Tomaso, and to the rest
of the most faithful Neopolitan people, to acquaint them with what great
dangers we are all in, by reason of a sudden and unexpected invasion by the
French, which is like to find us in all the confusions and distractions, that
are able to give them the greatest advantage, and us the most unavoydable ruin
that can befall a Nation, destinated to destruction: Wherefore, in regard we
may, perchance, want this very time, which we bestow in words, to employ upon
more necessary actions, he desires the most excellent Tomaso in the first
place: secondly, all his loving people, that they will open their ears to
peace, and accept of all that ever he can do, or grant, in pursuance thereof;
and that every man that wants arms, or ammunition, will speedily repair unto
the Magazine, and there furnish themselves with what is wanting: then the most
excellent, and thrice valiant Tomaso, is desired, by his Majesty, and the
whole Council, to admit of the conduct of these men against the enemy; an act
of oblivion to pass, and all to be well.


Mass: Card: What is it that the King will do?


Card: What is it that you would have him do?


Mass: Take off all Excise, all, all, all, all, etc.


Card. It shall be done: I Will undertake it.


Mass: And an oath never to set any up again.


Card: Not only so, but I will tell you more: there shall be an everlasting
Monument of Marble set up in the Mercato, containing the articles of Agreement
between the most excellent Tomaso, on the one part; and the Vice-King, on the
other.


Mass: Now you say something, Card: this is something to the purpose; but there
is something behind, which must be done -- or else, though all the French in
France should fly in the air, like so many Crows into the Land; or come by
water in sholes, like Herrings, yet will I not hear of peace, or believe a word
you say.


Card: Sir, these hands of mine shall bind them both together, but not a word
of privileges.


Mass: Not one word, but mum: Let the Monument be speedily erected, and the
Agreement sworn unto; for Card: we must have no delays, for they are
dangerous.


Card: We will go presently to the Viceroy, and have him confirm what is
agreed upon: in the interim, your servant presents you with this, as a little
pledge of great good will, and this.

He presents Mass: with a suit and cloak of gold, and a chain of gold.
Mass, Think you, that chains, or cloths of gold, can add? or the want of such
poor toys, diminish from Tomaso's worth? He Is very barren of just merit, that
borrows respect from the earths garbage: No, Card: I tell thee plainly, I think
my self no more disparaged by these clothes, then the Sun thinks himself
disgraced by Clouds.


Card: The most excellent Tomaso speaks admirably: I must confess, the richest
apparel sets him out but meanly, who always goes so clothed with renown, and
can put on new wonders every day: But Sir, I have known those, who would value
pins, and rings of rushes, when they proceed from a heart that truly honors
them: such is mine: such is my Present: such may your acceptance be, and it
will be the greatest obligation wherewith I ever was obliged.


Mass: Well, I Will wear them for your sake, Card: you and I must be better
acquainted; thou art an honest man, and speak truth, I love such an one: but
hark you in your ear --


Card: Yes, yes.

Mass: whispers.
Card: I, I, leave that to me.


Mass: Come, let us go then, wy this is excellent; nothing but ask and have: a
brave World, if it will hold.


Card: O tempora! O mores!

Exeunt omnes.
ACT. IV.
SCEN. I.
Enter Prince, with Flora in his hand, with patches on her face. Prince. I Tell
thee, sweetest, envy has done thee a courtesy, to make thee look ten times
lovelyer then thou did before. I protest, as it is my chiefest delight to
look upon thee, so it will be my chiefest happiness to enjoy thee.


Flora. Sir, as it would be an over-high presumption in me, to believe all you
say: so to say, I do not believe you were in civilitie, though but to a
Gentleman, but to my Prince it is rebellion: you say, you love me; nay, you
protest you do, and swear it too; I, and that in an honorable way; it is a
Princes word, a Princes protestation; it is a Prince that swears, if any thing
can distill into my faith, the least dram of belief out of these professions
of yours, it must be this; That it is as possible for me, Natures ruff cast,
Envies ruin, Poverties child, to appear acceptable in your eyes, as it is
possible for so good a Prince as you, to swear and vow otherwise then what your
heart directs you.


Prince. Dearest Love, necessity requires your speedy assent; and for my love,
which you seem so much to doubt of, rest you satisfied.


Flora. O Sir, that word, Necessity, is that which wounds my heart; for indeed
it is necessity that sends you unto me; there being as little merit in me to
invite you, as love has reason to bring you hither. She weeps. O Sir, I beseech
you, have pity upon me, and let me not be thrown into Paradise over the Wall,
where my entrance shall be my ruin; or flung into your arms, or forced into
your bed, for then I shall fall no welcomer then dirt, upon your cheeks; and
show in your arms no otherwise then reeds and rushes, which a sinking man is
glad for to embrace, to save his life. O, rather then so, most Princely Sir, I
beg this favor; She kneels. I will be contented, that it may be so contrived,
that to satisfy my Father's high ambition, it may be given out, that we are
married; and so ordered, that there may be no doubt made thereof, until all be
settled: then shall the most excellent Prince choose him out a Wife, amongst the
race of Kings, that may be worthy of him; and bless me with the happiness
(only) of waiting upon her: for I had rather fall to my old contentment, of
sitting alone by the Sea shore, mending my Fathers nets; where I could fancy
the pebles to be my Subjects, and the Waves my Courtiers, then to sit with you
upon a Throne, where I am not as well seated by your liking, as guarded by your
love.


Prince. How prettily she pleads against her self! and how forcibly she
attracts honor, by flying it! Come, Flora, thou art mine.


Flora. Remember your self, and know who I am; I am a Fishers Daughter.


Prince. Starts and turns aside. A Fishers Daughter is no good sound: Why did
she trouble my ears with it? Let me see; why it is impossible that humane
nature can be so much above it self, as is the nature of the Gods above
humanity: and yet we know, that the Gods themselves have been suitors unto that
which we call, Woman; and if I make choice of her, none can say, I have
transformed my self into a Beast, a Bird, or into a thing that is inanimate, as
have the Gods.


Flora. O, how my trembling heart expects the event of this sole conflict!


Prince. Thus it is Resolved upon the Question, if you will have it so,
Necessity shall marry the Fishers Daughter: but I Will have thee; thee, not by
constraint, but by affection; not by compulsion, but by free choice; not to be
the Jone make-peace of our Land, but as one who best deserves my love, and
merits me.


Flora. Can there be a distinction then, between me, and the Fishers Daughter?


Prince. Yes, Flora, such a one as the Sun makes between a vapor and an
exhalation; which being one and the same thing, whilst it cleaves unto the
earth, is but a fog: but being exhaled and drawn up nearer toward the Sun, it
appears as glorious as it self.


Flora. Great Prince, whose lasting fame is such, that flatteries can neither
hurt, nor hyperboles reach, if I were good at either: with what faces will the
honorable Women look, when they shall see such a one as I, as your Bride,
delivered into holy hands, to be made yours?


Prince. With such like faces of wonder and amazement, as the household Gods did
look, when mortals were exalted above their nature, and had their
constellations in the highest Firmament, glob'd by the breaths of all the Gods,
whilst they were tied to residence in tabernacles made with hands, and yet
durst neither envy nor complain.


Flora. Sir, You speak such high language, that I am afraid you exercise
Rhetoric, rather then Love.


Prince. I here engage my honor, as deeply, as the most unfeigned heart can
direct a tongue how to oblige it, that I rather want language to express my
love, then am either vain, or dissembling, in any thing of all which I profess.


Flora. Why then, Sir, I can answer you no more, but in this language -- weeps
-- Speak, speak apace, my best Orators; speak out and tell him the news from
whence you're come; he is good, and may, perchance, give credit --


Prince. Hold up, celestial showers, you will drown a little World: the precious
distillations are in value next to penitential tears, wherewith the gods often
drink themselves to such a height of kindness, that they forget that they are
just -- Weep upon my bosom, and make the soil fruitful in the increase of
that, which thine own just merit has there sovvn with a full hand: What!
does she sink under the burden of her She sounds. own joys, Flora, my
Flora, cannot my voice recall thee sooner then waters, my affections are above
their heat Flora, my dearest, dear Flora, where have thou been? what do thou
mean to do?

She comes to her self and finds her arms about his neck.
Flo: Sir you may see my senses were all fled, when mine arms presumed to
embrace that Sun it should adore, they are of too base metal to make a chain
for that neck.


Prin: Object that fond objection no more (I charge you) I consider thee now as
thy fathers daughter, as thy Fathers Daughter now, I say; who at this time
stands the absolutest of Monarchs, and commands all, me, Kings, and Vice-Kings,
and the greatest Princes, nor do I think otherwise then that the Fates
prodigiously raised him up to this greatness to make thee my equal, I am not
a Secretary of their State, nor privy Counselor to their wills, but
whatsoever their Decrees are, I take it so, and so take thee.


Flo: Well then, I Will tell you what I will do for you, I will be faithful to
you, I will never offend you, I will always love you, when I am with you, I
will be a servant ready to observe and put in execution all your desires, and
when I am out of your sight, wheresoever I am, I will spend my time in studying
how I may next please you when I come into your presence: when you ride from
home, I will get up upon the wings of prayer, and will importune Heaven that no
bad influence from their Stars may hurt you: I will so charm the earth with
the often falling of my tears, that no noisome vapor shall arise to prejudice
my love, and when you go into the wars I will have fervency enough in prayer
(lawfully) to make you shotfree. When my Love shall charge his enemies the
mouths of their Guns shall lose their voices, and their bullets when they come
near my Lord, shall forget their message, I Will so prevail with --


Prince. Away, Away, thou little fool, thou: it is the preriest little fond thing
that ever I saw, what do thou do, nothing but weep, she weeps: I Will d^y up
your rears for you: Come, he kisses her. Will that do it? the earnest of my
hearts union: the seal of all that ever I have said or promised; the assurance
of what we are now going about, without more delays.

Let each man envy, what the gods shall praise.

Ex^unt.
SCENA II.
Enter Vice Roy, Card. Prince, etc. Vice Roy. How do you like your Mistress,
Sirrah?


Prince. Well Sir.


Vice Roy Not very well I believe.


Prince. Yes very well.


Vice Roy. Truly?


Prince. Truly I do.


Card. You are not taken with her?


Prince. So much taken with her, that I Will take her, and bless the fates which
threw me headlong into so great happiness.


Vice Roy. The boye's in love upon my life.


Prince Sir, I Will tell you, I went unto her as if it had been some miserable
Ward forc*d by his Tyrant Guardian to a piece of some deformity, and to be
sacrificed to some soul beast, to preserve a fair estate; but when I came into
her presence, I found the world could not parallel her for beauty, when I
c^nvers'd with her; I saw she was matchless for wit, behavior, language, or
any thing, that might complete or adorn the most accomplished of all her sex:
nor shall all the riches in the world invite me for to seek another Mistress;
rather then the meanness of her condition, should be thought a consideration
why I should not have her, I would descend to her capacity and tu^n fisherman.
Nor lies it in the power of art or force of argument to wean me from her.


Vice Roy. Good Son, we are all glad she likes you so well, we were all afraid
we should be feign to use both art and argument, to draw on your affections.
But Indeed I have heard many commend her for a pretty girl.

Enter Servingman.
Ser. Sir, Massenello is coming toward the Palace.


Card. I Will go and bring him in.


Vice Roy. By all means. Son, remember you ask your father blessing when he
comes in.


Prince. Sir, I shall ask him for a blessing, and the greatest blessing: that
any man alive can give me.

Enter Massenello taking the right hand of the Card. all in gold. Attendants.
V. Roy, Tomaso is welcome to us very oppor^unely, for my son was (even) upon
your entrance in a high encomion of your daughter: truly in a word he is over
head and ears in love with her, and I am glad to see it.


Mass. Vice Roy, you have reason for what you say: and I hope there is no love
lost; my daughter loves him as well, and though I say it, she is a match for
the best Prince in Europe.


V. Roy. I make no doubt of it.


Mass. But I have not heard your Son speak, yet, concerning her, let me hear
how you like her from your own month.


Prince. Sir, I like her as a new come soul likes Elysium, and with the same
affection that the most ambitious man likes sitting in a throne crowned with
his own hearts desires.


Mass. Why then young man you are happy, when will you marry her?


Prince. When will the hunger-starved wretch eat meat? or the thirsty soul
quench his flames? or the man that is a cold come near the fire; but as soon as
ere he can.


Mass. Why then to morrow is the day, how says the Vice King.


V. Roy. With all my heart, the sooner, the better.


Card. Come then we will to the Archive scovato, and there you both shall
solemnly swear before the high Alter to perform all the Articles which are
agreed upon between you both, in the behalf of the new made happier
Neopolitans, and by this the Monument containing the articles agreed upon, is
erected in the Mercato, and from the Cathedral, the Cavalcato in the greatest
pomp, shall bring you both as paires coupled in the same desires of procuring
your Countries good, and there before all the people, you shall consecrate the
Monument with your presence; and let them all see how in your peaceable
intentions you both meet in parrallels like Apollo's twins, and from thence
unto the performance of those nuptial rates which shall make the peace between
you everlasting.


Mass. The Card. is a good man, he speaks well, but when shall this be done,
Card.


Card. Come one thing first, another at the heels,
When all is concluded action runs on wheels.
Exeunt.
SCENA III.
Enter people running over the Stage after French men, they take one. 1. HAh
Mounsier, have we taken you, off with his head.

Mouns. O pardon a moy ie vous some pric.

2. Mounsier don't be afraid, we will not hurt your locks, we will only cut off
your head.


Mouns. Vat have I done to you Gentilmen, mort dien?

3 Take heed of his Mistress favors there.

They cut off his head. Enter people with two more for Frenchmen, but one of
them is an Englishman.
Omnes. More sacks to the Mill, here is a couple of Mounsiers more, they are
cutting off, I know not how many Mouns. heads every where.

One cut off.
English. Swounds, I am an Englishman, English man, English man, Engleterra,
Engleterra.

2. He cries Engleterra, Engleterra, and the Rogue speaks French.

3. You don't know, it may be English for ought you know.

1. A pox confound him, he is a Frenchman, you may know him by his points
hanging at the wrong end of his breeches.

2. Away with him then, off with it, off with it, cut off his head, let it be
cut off, though there were no more heads in England.


English. Damn me, and ram me, and sink me, I am an Englishman; what a devil
do you mean to dee with me, I am an English man, I tell you, what will not you
believe a body when a body tells you the right: Sounds I am an Englishman;
hell confound you all for a company of Arse-wormes, Turky-drivers, and Goat
mongers; what a devil would you have? will not you believe a body with a pox?

3. Pish, pish, you may see he is a Frenchman by his locks and favors, and by
his garnished cotpeece.


Omnes. Away with him, away him, cut off his head.

He makes resistance.
English. What a pox are you, are all stark mad? is there never a wise man
amongst you, that understands English.

They use violence to him, he raves. A plague confound you all, a devils dogs
couples, hags and furies light upon you, for a company of hog dogs, and
cow-dogs, and vinegar-bottles.


Omnes. If he will not be ordered, hold up his head, and cut his throat.

They hold him by the nape of the neck, he spits in their face like a Cat, at
last cries Boh, and frights them; in which interim, comes two English Merchants
by and speaks.
Merch. Hold Gentlemen, hold I pray you, he is an Englishman, we know him.

3. You came in a very good time, or else you had sound your Countryman
shorter by the head.

Exeunt people.
English. Shorter by the head ke they? hearlikins; I was never in such a fear
in all my life: a pox on them for a company of block-heads, they could not
understand sense, nor hear reason; a company of cuckoldly curs, take my head
off: It Is more then they could do, or else it had not been on now.


Merch. You are well enough served, you must be in the French-fashion forsooth,
with your all a mode de France, with your locks, favors, and ^ibbans.

He cuts them off, and throws them away.
English. Got by it: nay what had I like to have lost by it? for I am sure I
had like to have lost my head by it which is more then ever I should have got
by them as long as I had lived; but if they ever find me with your all a mode,
de France, as you call it, I Will give them leave, not only to cut off my head,
but to make a devil of me when they have done, pray change cloaks, and hats
with me.

The Merchants charge clothes with him, and were likely to lose their heads by
the mistate. Enter a Citizen with a French man's head in one hand, and his
faulchion in the other.
English. Do you hear friend; what is the price of your Cods-head?


Cit You see what it is, it is a French man's head.


English. I pray let me have it, I will give thee money for it.


Cit. What money will you give me?


English. What money will you ask?


Cit. A French Crown.


English. What shall I crown him now his head's off, he will be little the
better for that.


Cit. You shall have it for half a Crown.


English. What shall I give thee for that sword?


Cit. Yours.


English. Thou shall, for this is an all a mode de France too, I Will endure um
no more.

He changes his brave Sword for a rusty Semiter, passes two Frenchmen over the
Stage, and taking the Englishman for an Italian, are in great fear.
Eng. Fee fo fum, hoh what are you French men?

1. French, Mercy, Mercy, Mercy, Mercy: Making pitiful faces.

He kneeles, and the English man lays his sword over the first French man's
head and says, Eng. Rise up Sir Christopher Boon-grace.

2 French, A Sir, you be de good Englishman, me can spreake little English, me
have been one, two, three times in London, spare you me I pre.

Hec takes him up by the chinne. English, Come thou shall see London the fourth
time You must not be so fearful, had I been so tame as you, whereas now I am
a cutter off of heads, I might have carried mine own head thus.

Enter Citizens passing the Stage.
Citiz. Who have you there?


Eng. They are English Gentleman of my acquaintance.

Exeunt omnes, French hugging the English.
SCENA. IV.
Enter a guard with attendants, V. Roy. Mass: On his right hand the Card: on
his left hand under the same Canopie into the Mereato a monument of counterfeit
marble, with articles inscribed behind a curtain, The Curtain drawn Trumpets
sound, Card. BEhold the hierogliphiks of our peace and happiness, the landskipp
of a joyful Country, the Map of a world of good that is derived unto us by this
days happiness, a monument which gives the best characters of the most wise
King, and the most invincible Tomaso, here is the original, peruse it and see
if they agree not.


V. Roy. They agree to a word.


Mass. It Is well, but is it not pity that the wind should blow upon it? or that
the rain should fall upon so fair a piece? or that the Sun should fade any of
its colors? or that bold and forward hands should sully any of its precious
stones? or that time it self, should eat, this, with the rest of things?


Card. Most excellent Sir, I have given directions for a safeguard of Iron,
whose bars shall be so high and sharp, that not any shall be able to behold it,
otherwise then at their due distance.


Mass. But Card: have you made any provision against Wind and Weather? that
time it self may never fill her paunch with such bits, as are too great
dainties for such a common feeder.


Card. What the most excellent Tomaso shall think further fit to the
preservation of that which preserves so great fame, we shall be glad admirers
of, but for my own particular, I have given no further directions concerning
it.


Mass. Then I shall, where is Sig. Burlameo.


V. Roy. It was nobly resolved on.

Enter Sig. Burlameo.
Mass. Burlameo I will have thee post to Egypt (hah do thou stare upon me?)
and there take pattern of the biggest Piramis that is there, and make me a
shelter over this monument fifty cubits higher than the highest of all Egypts
Piramides, and that shall be a Penthouse to keep it from the rain, so that that
greedigut Time shall find it the hardest bone to pick, that to feed upon it, it
shall loosen the old teeth of aged time, that they shall drop out faster than
these stones shall fall, and at last find it meat of so hard digestion that
time it self shall take so great a surfeit that it shall cease to be.

And dying yield unto eternity.


Omnes. Ah Massenello, ah Massenello, ah Massenello.


Card This is enough to make him stark mad, lets follow h^s humor.


Burla. S^ I hear you, and having taken measure of your mind, Il^ f^^ i^ to a
hair,


Card. When the d^vill's blind, your resolutions are like your self, great
and glorious.


V. Roy. This age is happy that has produced a man fit for so high and mighty
undertakings.


Mass. Now nothing's left undone, but that which must be done, the marriage.


V. Roy. That shall be don, to morrow is the day.
That Hymeneus asks us leave to play.
Exeunt.
SCENA: V.
Enter Vrsula and Bonella. Vrsula, Is the Pothecary coming? prithee go and
fetch him to me, and stay you without.


Bon I Will fetch him presently Madam,

Ex Bonella.
Vrs My Mothers death I will revenge on her who was the cause of it, besides
ten thousand hazards I will run, before I Will suffer her to prince it over me,
that face which age could neither blemish nor years decay shall look as pale
as death can make it. I Would rather dye my self then she should live to be so
much above me, and thought worthy of so high estate whilst I neglected, stand
like a forelorne hope perishing for want of seconds, and why? because I am
black and she 's fair, marry muff: I think my penny as good as here is.

Pepper is blaeke and has a good smacke,
And every man will it buy:
When Snow it is white, and lies in the dike
And every man let us it lie.
Enter Pothecary. Honest Pothecary I sent for thee to do me a pleasure, I am
so troubled with Rats in my chamber that I cannot be quiet for them, I pray
thee teach me a way how I may destroy them.


Pot. Madam I will fetch you some Rats-baine immediately.


Vrsu. No, no, That Is but a scurvy weak poison, they will take it and live so long
after it, that they will creep hehind the Wainscot and get into holes, and there
lie and stink, able to poison any living soul, I would have a quick
dispatching poison that shall work presently upon them that they shall not
stir from the place.


Pot. Mad: I warrant you, I Will fetch you such a poison as shall do the feate.


Vrsula Why well said honest fellow: here is for thy pains.


Pot. I thank you Maddam, I never was so rewarded for killing of Rats, I pray
God she puts it to no worse use, but why should I suspect any thing, she
pays me liberally.

Enter Prince with Flora in his hand.
Flora, My Lord, though I am not worthy to indent with you, or engage you to
the least promise, yet I may be in capacity of begging a favor at your hands:


Prince, What is it? and command what lies within my power.


Flo. Here is my only sister, please you to take notice of her, and let her be
within your thoughts to make her happy.


Prince As happy shall she be as industry it self can find out ways to make
her so-


Vrsula. I thank you Sir: I pray Sister keep your happiness to your self, I
do not desire to be made happy by you.

Enter Pothecary. She flings out of the room, and takes the Pot. with her,
remains in occulto.


Prince. What an unmannerly sister is this of thine.


Flora. Sir, It may be she cannot brook this happiness, wherewith you are
pleased to crown me, and the more I seek to please her, the worse she is.


Prince. She Is angry that she is so black, and thou so fair.


Flora. Not so my Lord, but it may be she is angry that a Prince of so great
judgment should be so much deceived in his choice, as is able to verefie the
proverb how that love is blind.


Prince. That love is blind indeed that does not see
Causes sufficient for loving thee.
Love is not blind because he has no eyes,
But cause he is guided by loves sympath^es.
Love sees, and seeing loves but yet in part;
But he loves thoroughly that does love by heart.
But I Will tell thee my dearest dear, thy sister is mad that I am not a Suitor
unto her, and I had as live be a Suitor unto the shades of night, and embrace a
moon-calfe as to be l^nckt to such deformity.


Flora. Not so an't please your highness, shades ofttinies are sought for,
when the brightest Sunbeams are eschewed; and though a black one please not
you, she may be pleasing in another eye.


Prince. Come, come, I know and see her conditions to be as foul as is her
visage, which is the index of her mind; it is thy goodness to say otherwise.


Flora. Well Sir, I that am so happy in your affections, have the less reason
to be troubled at your dis-affection to any else but indeed I must entreat you
to love my sister, though.


Prince. Well then, to morrow when she is my sister, I Will begin to love her,
because she is my sister, though there be as much difference between thee and
her, as between night and day.


Flora. Now your highness is pleased to speak of nights and days, when I
think how that there is no day to come, only one night to pass, before you
make me believe, I shall be your wife; my joys begin to be orewhelm'd with
fears, and sadness takes possession of my heart, and outs those wonted lively
apprehensions of the happiness I heretofore conceived of being yours: surely
my heart has only room for you to cast anchor there, and so possess me of
some hope, but not to bring the Sovereigne of a Sea of bliss, laden with the
riches of your love into so poor a harbor.


Prince. Humility is the crown of all other virtues, and thou crownest
humility, with such a becomingnesse, that she is true humility no where but in
thee; and it deserves an exaltation, which it shall soon find.

Exeunt omnes. Manet Ursula.
Ursula. O how I burn to be revenged: my malice (it is true)
Was first to one; now, in tha^ one, to two.
Exit.
ACTUS V.
SCENA I.
Massenello steals in the night time unto his Monument to adore it, clad in his
night Gow^e.

Mass. THus in the night of secrecy have I stolen time from sleep, that I
might sacrifice with uncontrolled devotion, unto the Idea of my mind [He
adores it.] It Is a fair piece. They were fools who thought to make Babels Tower
reach heaven by building of it high. Approaches made to heaven, do not consist
in degrees of height, nor are steps, and rounds of stairs, and ladders ways
to climb up thither, heaven is every where where men, God-like behave
themselves.

Fools were all the Wisemen seven;
This is it that reaches heaven.
Come we will be thought men no more; I begin to be immortal the symptoms of
mortallity begin to leave me, sleep: that dull and senseless block-head,
begins to know his distance; and to think himself no fit companion for us,
hunger and thirst, begin to stand aloof, and not to rush so boldly into our
presence as they were wont. I will shake off them too, and then mortallity good
night.

Alexander was an Ass, he would be deified, but never deserved it: he went
with an Army of drunken Grecians, and so stumbled upon a victory; but did he
overcome a warlike Nation with a company of boys and canes? did he frighten a
company of daring Spaniards into their retreat, and ruin with the ruffling of a
company of blew aprons? he that will become a Deity, must not rest himself
contented with the attributes of High and Mighty, but he must be wonderful:
And now I think on ^, I will go and bethink my self (how I may teach the
people how to fly, that things called walls, and towers, flanckers, and
counter-scarfes, pallisadoes, and stockadoes, fitter to keep hogs and dogs from
entrance, then men endued with so rare a thing as is a soul, surely this
invention was lest for me to bring into the world; I Will make them as good keep
out the wind, the light, the common air, as keep out me; and so I Will conquer
all the world, and not like fool Alexander, lie down and cry, because there
be no more worlds to conquer. I Will go and be merry with the gods, drink their
wine, sing catches with the angels, hunt the Devil, run races with the horses
of the Sun, hob-naile my shoos with a couple of old Moons, and so drink a pot
at every one of the celestial signs. It is decreed, nor shall thy fort, O
Rome resist my vow.

Exit furens.
SCENA II.
Enter Mariamma and Ursula, Mar. sets down a cawdle, and Ursula steals an
opportunity to drop her poison into it, Mariam. calls her grandchild Flora.
Mar. DAughter, the Prince has sent you word that he is coming to fetch you to
Church, eat this before you go, because state nuptial ceremonies are very
tedious.


Flora. Grandmother, I humbly thank you: but I am so strait laced that I
cannot get any thing down.


Mar. Come, come, you shall; there is a fine trick indeed, you may chance wish
you had.


Ursula. I, and repent it too, I Will assure you.

She takes, and eats part of it.
Flora. I do not like it: there is something in it, that has not a good taste
-- O I begin to feel it work, Grandmother I Am poisoned.


Mar. How poyson^d? nay child I Will assure you there is nothing in it but what is
good; for I am sure I put all the ingredien^s in it my self: you shall see me
eat of it.


Ursula. Mother don't, you don't know what may be.


Mar. Don't: I Am sure there*s nothing in it but good.

The Grandmother eats of it.
Flora. O my senses begin to fail me, and this poisonous drug begins to work
upon my vitalls.


Mar. Cursed caitiffe, what have thou done, poisoned thy Grandmother and thy
sister.


Ursula. I told you that you should not eat of it, and yet you would.


Mar. Why then thou confessest the murder.


Ursula. I do, but not of you, you might have chus'd, now let us see in what
fine pomp she will go unto her wedding.

Enter Prince with attendants.
Mariam. Here Is the murtheresse lay hold on her.

She is laid hold on.
Prince. What Is the matter?

[Flying upon her]
Mar. Poisoned, and I too by that infernal hag.

She falls down.
Prince. Furies light upon her, O my dear Flora, run, and without there is a
Padua Doctor, bid him come hither quickly, quickly, quickly. O my dear Flora,
she breaths, she is alive, she is warm. O help, help, help, for the Lords
sake.


Enter Doctor. Now Doctor show your skill, and be renowned for evermore.

Doctor. Sir, I have an antidote that if it has not too much wrought upon the
vitals, it will recover her; however, it will fetch her to her senses again
for a while.


He puts it into her mouth. So it will dissolve of it self, hold her up.

Prince. She begins to look up already.


Flora. Do thou know me? O I will punish that black devil with a hundred
tortures.


Flora. No my dear Lord, let not my sister be put unto any tortures for my
sake; for I forgive her with all my heart, and thank God that he has given me
so much sense before I dye, as to make it my last request to you, that you
would do so too. I was once entering into the finest place that ever was seen;
such fine flowers, such rare music, such glorious creatures! and the door was
open for me, and all, and my thought some body pulled me back and told me that
one would speak withme? was it you.


Prince; Dear heart it was I, would you not willingly if it lay in your power,
forbear that place a while for my sake?


Flora Though you are the finest man in the world, yet you are not so fine as
any there, but I pray don't you do any thing to my Sister, don't disgrace her.


Prince, She has poisoned her Grandmother too, here she lies.


Flora; I am sorry for it, why would you use so much diligence to recall me,
and extend no charity to her.


Doctor. Sir, it does her hurt to talk so much, a little sleep will do her
good, if any thing, and gentle music would be requisite if it may be had;


Prince, Yes, call for the music that was appointed for our nuptial feast,
and let them change their note, to sad Eligies. Carry that Cerberus bitch out
of my sight, and let her be cut into a thousand pieces, and cast to dogs.

aside.
Vrsula, I stand your fury, swell until thou burst,
I am beforehand with you, do your worst.
Music plays, A song. she sleeps, he weeps, O Ye Gentle powers above,
What are you your selves but love?
Pity lovers in distress,
Help us, help us more or less;
And we will sing you, your due praise;
If not years, yet give us days.
If you will not grant these things,
Do but give my spirit wings.
And see how glad my soul within
Will be to leap out of her skin
In life or death I care not whither;
So we two may be together.
If I ha'nt deserved such grace,
Give me leave to buy a place,
To be where she will be by your doom,
I Will give a Kingdom for a room.
Crown and Scepter, Throne and Ball
Let me have her, and take all.
She awakes, the music cease.


Flora O Sir I must bid you farewell,


Prince, Stay a little my dearest Flora, I will marry thee in spite of death,
that when I meet thee in another world I may claim thee as one that was
sometimes mine. Priest do your office: stay a while, go fetch the murderesse,
that I may do it in spite of envy.


Servingman, Sir she is dead.


Prince, Bring her in dead.


Serving. Sir She is cut in pieces.


Prince, Bring in the pieces.


Servirg. Sir they were thrown to the dogs, and the dogs have eaten them.


Prince, Let me have the dogs brought in, for by all that's sacred. -- Flora
makes signs to speak with him.


Omnes, Sir she would speak with you, she feels her self departing.


Prince, What would my dearest have with me.


Flora, O Sir, I feel my self now going to the place from whence you called
me back, do so no more for charity sake, I gladly would have lived yours I
must confess, but I am happier in this, that it thus lies in my power to
express a fitter tribute of my love to you, rather thus to die your Martyr,
then to live your wife, like Icarus I fly'd,

And soard too high, fell down and di'd.

Exit Vita. Enter Massenello furiens.
Mass. Where are these fools that will, and will not be married: why don't ye
come away, they all stay for you?


Prince, O Sir, your devil daughter has forbid the Banes.


Mass. What Is here to do, my mother and my daughter dead? who durst do this?
that death himself (had I forbid him) durst not do it.


Prince Your own daughter, poisoned your own mother, and her own Sister.


Mass. Where is she, she shall have justice.


Prince, That is done already.


Mass. How, justice done already, are you turned justiciary? I thought there
had been no more Justices but my self.


Prince, I thought according to the Articles of our agreement, you were to
become a private man, and to have nothing to do with justice business.


Mass. I tell thee thou Prince of Darkness, I am immortal.


Prince, I will not dispute with you in that argument, only give me leave to
take away this relic, that I may pay the tribute of mine eyes thereto, and
perform the last kind office of a lover, in seeing her honorably interred.


Mass. Why did thou love her truly? would thou have been married to her?


Prince, Would you be wedded to your will. --


Mass. Nay, if thou love her but half so well, take her and much good do
thee with her.

Exeunt omnes with the Corpse. Manet Mass.
Mass. My mother dead, my wife dead, my daughter dead, al dead? why now I stand
by my self like the popular star, fixed in his seat, and all the heavens of
great and little ones do move about me. Me thinks that presumptuous boy began
to talk of articles, do they think that I Will be confined to articles, the sun
may be confined within its tropickes, the Sea may be confined within its
bounds, the earth may be confined in a circle: but Tomaso, cannot, will not be
confined: I Will therefore go, and presently confound, that presumptuous monument
that dares confine Tomaso within any terms, had it root fixed in the very
center, I would pluck it up: or did the articke and antarticke poles, strike
through it as stays to hold it up, I Would cast it down, I Will have my words law,
my will reason, my pleasures observed, and my commands obeyed, I do not like
this hoc nihil indeclinabile, i would have ut sunt Divorum, Mars, Baccus, Apollo,
Virorum, O I love to be like one of these thundering gods, I Will tell you what,
I Will begin a new world, and if men will not follow me it is no matter, it is but
to teach foxes how to speak, they have cunning and subtlety enough, Lions have
strength, and valor, horses courage, dogs diligence, and faithfulness. It is
but teaching these the use of reason, and we will bid defiance to all mankind:
and what is this to one that is immortal: but first I must down with this
confining monument. I go about it.

Exit.
SCENA III.
Enter V: Roy: Pr: Card: Cap: of the Castle, Mat: Lo: Cha^: Lo: Con: etc. V:
Roy: WE are all resolved to honor that fair body parted from as fair a
soul, with as great solemnity as if she were my own daughter, or my own
sons wife.


Pr: O Sir, the honor of those rich jewels which were engaged within this
breast that is now turned to earth; cannot be let down, or an inventory taken
of half the good^ she had there laid up in store, were all men in the worl^
registers, the world paper, and the Ocean incke, The pens would scrawle the
paper, and the paper drink That Inckie Ocean up: the work unfinished lie: And
a thousand pities call for new supply.


Card. We all contribute sorrow to your sufferings, and pray we may not suffer
too much with you.

Great knocking without.
V. Roy: Go know the reason of this noise, Exit. Lo. Con. I pray that all be
well, the fellow was mad enough before, and it may be this will make him ten
times worse.


Card: I it is no matter, and if he be; if ^he people be not all mad.

Enter Lo. Con. with Bakers, Brewers, Butchers, etc.
Lo. Con. I have brought you a great many of discontented people, who seem to
be as much displeased with the times as we; I think we shall be very good
company together.


V. Roy. Friends speak your minds freely, we give you leave.


Bakers. Then Sir know; this Tomaso is mad: stark mad: he runs up and down the
streets, striking every man, that comes in his way; has thrown down the
Articles, will stand to nothing, breeds confusion, and turns all topsie turvy.


V. Roy. This is the Idol which ye first set up, and then adored, now ye know
the difference, betwixt a golden Scepter, and an iron rod.


Butch. I but a pox confound him, he made us believe such strange stories, and
we see n^thing performed, wherefore we are come unto you in the behalf of the
rest of our fellow Citizens to make our grievance known, and to crave your
assistance for our redress.


V Roy. Alas how can I help you!


Butch. Nay Sir, we will help you: and our selves too, and you will but give us
leave.


Card. My Masters, it was your own fault that brought you to this, and it must
be your own virtue to bring y^u out of it again; he is of your own making,
and now you would feign be rid of him if you knew how.


Butch. Yes we know how to be rid of him, and you will give us leave.


V. Roy. How.


Bakers. We Will serve him as he served us.


Butch. No, as he served us.


Omnes. Ha, Ha, He.


V. Roy. About it then if you have the hearts.


Butch. I tell you Sir he is as dead already to my thinking as a door nail.

Exeunt Bakers, etc.
Card. In the interim by all means let the Secretary be sent for, as about some
earnest business, lest he prevent the plot, and when 'ti done, that we may be
sure of him.


V. Roy. My Lord, I pray will you take the pains.

Ex. Lo Con.
Card. This is that which I was speaking unto you of, we must lay hold upon the
present disgust of the people, and make it serve our turns, these joined
together with the Morcato men, will make a good lusty party.

Eut Lo. Con. with Genesis
Lo. Con. Here is the Secretary, I met him coming to your Highness.


V Roy. What is your pleasure Mr. Secretary?


Genesis Sir I am sent unto you in the behalf of the people, who hear how that
there is a great resort of Citizens unto the Castle, and those m^n of no good
report.


V. Roy. And what then? what of that? what would you have?


Genesis They would know their business, and would not have you thus to
countenance them; and further, they would have you leave the Castle, and
remain with them for their security.


Card. What people is that which you are come from? they were people that were
here, and of more loyalty and understanding then the people that have sent you
hither. Your Master's mad already, and you are little better.


Genesis Well Card. ere it be long you shall think your self the maddest of the
three.


Card. This villain must not go alive out of the Castle, if he do, he will
spoil the plot and us.

Card. whispers.
Genesis Sir, I desire your speedy answer.


V. Roy. Our answer is your dismission; you may be gone.


Genesis Is that all?


Card. Thou saucy piece of insolence, dare thou contest with Majesty, be
gone.


Genesis I go -- but -- remember this


Card: Let the fool go, he will be met with, I warrant you.

Exeunt omnos. Enter Capt: with a Guard.
Capt: Do ye knew the man?


Guard: Yes, here he comes.


Cap: That Is he.

Enter Gennino.
Genesis Open the gate there, let down the bridge.


Guard. What are you? I will not open the gate, I have no order for it.


Genesis Well you shall rue it ere it be long.


Guard. Do you threaten the Kings guard? take that:

kills him.
Genesis O I am killed.


Guard. It makes no matter, you should have a better tongue in your head then.


Genesis 'Twas not my tongue that made me thus depart,
But 'twas this vile, and base, and treacherous heart.
Ex. vita. Exeunt omnes.
SCENA IV.
Enter Mass. into the Mercato looking wildly; all the people about him, after a
long pause, he speaks. Mass. WOnders! wonders! without all bounds and measures.
Death and Cupid quartered together last night in the same room: Venus called up
her boy betimes, time called death, present employment was for both: the more
haste, the worse speed: death groping for his quiver in the morning, laid his
hand upon Cupids, and h^s eyes being out of his head, takes the boys quiver
for his own: Cupid as blind as he, took the deadly quiver in his hand, and
dressing himself in the morning, in ordering his wings, disorders some of his
feathers in brusing them against deaths head, Venus having intelligence that
her son had got such a chamber-fellow, to prevent mistakings brings in the
light of nature; Cupid whose feathers were not right, reaches and stretches out
his wings, flutters, and claps them too and again, and blows out the candle:
go then as you are, said Venus to Cu^id, Time said the like to Death; both
never rested from journying till they came to my very door, being come there,
they both strove for priority; Death said, he scorned to give place to Cupid,
because he was but a boy; and the boy answered him as prettily again, that he
scorned to be beholding to him, and so flew in at the window: By this
unfortunate mistake, death who intended to strike me, slew my daughter; and
Cupid that would have played his part with Flora, over-acts his part with me:
Here I have it, here I burn. I cannot say I swim in love, but I am over head
and ears: But where shall I entertain my Mistress? I will have all this great
City contriv*d into one house, and the inhabitants shall leave being Citizens,
and become officers; its no matter for their liberties, so they be my servants,
for that shall be their greatest freedom. I Will have my house well furnished with
Taxes and Rates, and hung about with Sequestrations: For I must tell you, Sirs,
I am become immortal, and will make ye all Kings; but ye must be ruled by me,
for ye shall see me fly in the air, walk upon the water, run through the
fire, hang up the terrestiall globe, upon one of the Celestial poles, and it
shall so hang by the secret invention, that all Summer long it shall swing
toward the North, in Winter toward the Southern clime: so that both Summers
heat, and Winters cold shall be no more, but a sweet temper all the year:
nothing but Spring and Autome, pleasure and profit, shall ye have. This is the
golden age the Poets prophesied of. I tell you what, they never sprinkled holy
water over Vesuvias head; for if they had, it would have quenched its flames.
To morrow I am to be married to Don Olympia. I bid you to my wedding. The
triple Crowne's mine own already; and methinks I hear the keys jingling in
my pocket. --

1. Peo. He talks extravagantly.

2. Peo. He Is wild methinks.

3. Peo. Stark mad.


Bakers. Come down.


Butchers. Come down I say.


Mass. Come down, why so I will come down; Time is to lose his fore-top, and
Cupid is to be whipped; what would you have?


Butch. Your head:


Mass. Take it.

He thrusts out his head, and they cut off a false head made of a bladder
filled with blood. Exeunt with his body.
SCENA V.
A Solemn funeral of Mass. in warlike manner passes over the Stage, Mass.
open faced after the manner of the Italians lies carri*d upon a Beer, he makes
crosses, blessing the people with a counterf^it right hand, that is directed by
a Friar who stands under the Beer; the people cry out wonderful, wonderful,
he blesses us, he was a Saint, and dyed our Martyr; this was but a trick of the
royal party, who shall know that there are a hundred Massenelloes more in
Naples.

Enter the funeral of Flora meeting them; the Prince chiese mourner, the
prophetic Hermit on his right hand, with all his friends, and attendants.
Mayor speaks. Mayor. HEre they are, here they be, let us fall upon them, while
we may, we have lost too many such opportunities; make ready my Masters.


Pr. advances. Gentlemen, what do you mean?


Mayor. We mean to let you know, what it is to murder


Mas. whose self alone was worth you all; 'twas but their hands that acted
what your heads contrived, for which you shall soon suffer.


Pr. Let but these your executioners go with me to the grave, that I may but
lay, my dearest Saint to rest in peace, and then do what you please; and for
mine own part, if I ask you life, let me not live; for as her death did give
my sorrows life, so my death will ease my pain, and end my sorrow.


Omnes. He blesses us again: O holy Saint!


Mayor. This was a Saint, not called a Saint, but as you see confirmed by
wonder, and the hand of miracle.


Hermit. By the hand of an impostor. If you will be undeceived, you may look
under the Beer, and you shall find a Jugler playing the Hocus Pocus with you.

He holds up the cloth and shows the people a Friar underneath with his
juggling instruments, and Massenelloes false arm discovered.
Her. If neither the laws of God, nor the laws of nature, or the Land, nor
the rule of reason, yet let experience bear some sway, let palpable
demonstrations work upon you, what do you do with eyes and ears, if you will
not believe their intelligence? do you not see your selves cousened? Do you not
see your selves puppet played into a new war? O return therefore to your old
obedience, and your hearts cannot desire more than your Prince will give you,
what is past shall be forgotten, and forgiven, it is the false Clergy (my dear
Citizens) who have contributed the fuel, laid it together, set live coals
under it, and then have been the bellows to all those combustions, as if all
mischeifes had been but so many exaltations of their brains, set on fire by
the continual motions and agitations of their tongues, witness this
incendiary, O return, return! unto your Prince, whose arms were always open
to receive you into his bosom, whenever you should make it, though but your
last refuge.

The people cry a King, a King, a King, fall upon the Friar, and beat him to
death, throw down the body of Massenello, saying, his lousie dust shall not be
carried into the sepulchers of Kings.
V. Roy Well then good people, since it is so with you, you and the children that
are yet unborne shall have justcause to say this was a happy day, and ye shall
soon find the difference between a suppositious and a natural parent: Al things
shall be so forgot as if they had not been, And perchance

We Will laugh our follies out of countenance.


Omnes, Vita il Re di Spain, vita, vita, vita.

Exeunt Omnes shouldring and affronting the Mayor. Enter a Herald at arms
with Trumpetors on each side of him. Trumpets sound, Heralds proclaim.

To all persons of what degrees and qualities soever, is proclaimed a general
pardon by the most --

[Massenello r^vives, and starts up, speaks.]
Mass. Ha, whose that, that talks of a general pardon? the word revives me,
and has brought me my soul again, and has fastened once more unto this clog.

Your pardon, and I Will speak the Epilogue.


Epilogue.
LEt Kings beware how they provoke
Their Subjects with too hard a Yoke,
For when all is done, it will not do,
You see they break the Yoke in two:
Let Subjects no rebellion move
On such pretenses least it prove,
As sad a thing, (which God forbid)
And fatal as to us it did.
Much blood spilt, great battails won,
Our treasure spent, and nothing done.
Least fools the wise ones do deride,
Gentles foot it, beggars ride,
Lazy Lubbers get the riches,
Women preach and wear the britches,
Lest vengeance fall as did on me
Undone; and my posterity,
Helped and succored from all parts
Supported by the peoples hearts.
Riches, honors made me glad:
Pride and glory made me mad,
Madness made me do such things
The people wished they had their Kings
The King assures them acts of grace,
Here they leave me in the place.
And like Acteon ('t may be se'd)
By my own dogs I Am worried.
Fond men be ruled, play not with Kings,
With Lions claws, nor Serpents stings.
For Rebellion, and treason;
Rots your name, and outs your reason,
Could all the traitors that are dead,
But rise -- they would say -- as I have sed.
FINIS.

