POSITIONS Containing a Full Account of a Scripture-Line of Time, in the whole,
and from Joint to Joint; together with a Judgment according to Scripture
Prophecy on the present Turkish Affairs.
I Here present, in as much plainness, and shortness as I could contrive it
into, this Scripture Line of Time, upon these Great Considerations. 1. There is
not a Greater or more sensible Argument for the Being of God, than his
declaring the course of Times, and their Events beforehand, in so even and
settled a Continuation, nor more Enforcive of practical Piety, then when we see
Times are not hidden from the Almighty. 2. There is no stronger Conviction of
the whole Antichristian Imposture, than that Table of Time Scripture has given
of his so long Domination, and Tyranny and Ruin at last, and especially when
now so near. 3. There cannot be a more seasonable kind of Instruction for the
present Time, in which we are so near so wonderful'd chan^^ of the World, as
within Ten years of the Proclamation of Christ's Kingdom, n^^ in a Seditious or
Rebellious way; but the most Heavenly, Orderly and Regular, by Princes and
Sovereigns themselves; That therefore we may, 1 Chronicles. 12.32.
(as the children of Issachar, coming to make David King at Hebron,
judiciously, and as knowing the Times, and what Israel ought to do,) so prepare
our selves for the Kingdom of the Root of David, the Bright Morning Star, and
may not as the Pharisees be charged with Hypocrisy for not discerning the Signs
of the Times; I present this short Table of Times, to become as familiar to
every one, as the most known principles in these following Positions.

THere is a Line of Time drawn by Scripture from that Point, It calls, The
Beginning, Genes. 1.1.) to that Point, It calls The End, (Dan. 12. ult. and often
elsewhere.)

This Line of Time is not drawn in one, entire, continued Line of 5000 or 6000

This Line is not drawn industriously, or in a Formal show of such a Line; But
it is with Divine

The Joints of those Parcel Lines are such, as lie most visibly close One to
Another, and have

The Beginning and End of this Line are Two Points, that bound the Intermedious
Space.

The first Point is that First, and Perfect Sabbatism of the World, at the
First Inviolate Creaation; Stasis, or the First State given it by God; And It
is inclusive of the space to that Grand Oracle [The Seed of the Woman shall
break the Serpents Head] Within which Space the first Parents Fell, and in them
their Posterity; But what Space that was, Scripture has thought fit to
conceal, as to any positive definition of it, viz. when our First Parents Fell.

The last Point is, That Sabatism of the Creation Restored, or made New, sacred
Scripture styles the Apocatastasis, or the Restitution of All things in counter
distinction to its Fore-nam'd State, and the Fall from it, and so it is the
Point of Revolution: And it is the Thousand Years after which is a short
Interval of the Serpent loosed, of Gog and Magog, and the Laodicean state of
the Church: On which last Interval-Scripture has thrown a veil of secrecy also
giving us no Account what space of Time it is; within this also lies the final
Judgment.

Sabatism.





Acts. 1.7.
viz. It is not for you to know, etc. such an Enquiry as that Answer was given
to, being hasty and curious, and not according to the Order of Divine
Revelation in its own Time and Method; or according to the Order of search into
such Revelation already given by diligent Endeavor to compare Scripture with
Scripture, with earnest Prayer to be guided into the right Understanding
thereof.





Lineoles, or little Lines of each Patriarhs Age before his Teknogony or
Begetting; Genes. 6.
and this Line reaches to the Self-same day of the Flood.

Patriarchs before their Begetting each succeeding Patriarch from the Terahs
Death, Genes. 10.
and Abraham's sojourning, and the series of Promises beginning to him
immediately at Terahs Death.

going out of Egypt, there is a Line of four hundred thirty years; eight
hundred fifty eight years from the self same day of the Flood to the self same
day of the going out of Egypt.

1 King. 6.1. 1 Kings 11.47.
From the going out of Egypt is carried on the same kind of express Line in four
hundred eighty years to Solomon's first beginning the Temple, and reductively
thirty six years from thence to Solomon's Death.

Thus far the Line is purely Historical.

three hundred ninety years to the very self same day of Ezekiels Vision of the
New Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 4.5.6. Ezekiel. 40.1.
and from the self same day of the going out of Egypt to the self same day of
that Vision Given, nine hundred and six years.

three hundred and ninety years are closely conjoined forty years more to the
end of the Captivity, Dan. 9.20.
or to Cyrus-Messiah in Type, and to the Vision Preparatory to his Decree of
Judahs Redemption from Babylon in the first year of Darius, as a Type of the
True Messiah and his Redemption, given in the same Vision.

three hundred ninety years and the forty making four hundred and thirty are
numbered by the days of Ezekiels lying on his side, a day for a year, and they
commence from the House of Judah, and the House of Israel becoming two distinct
Houses. And are accounted by the Kings of Israel, as they ought to be, till
Isreal's Captivity, then by Judahs Kings, and its Captivity. And here by
especial care of Providence the prophetical Cyphar of a day for a year is
brought in for after Use.

viz. to the year of Ezekiels Captivity, c. 1.3. partly Prophetical, viz. to
the Vision of the New Jerusalem, and from thence to the end of the Captivity,
and to the Vision of restoring Jerusalem by Cyrus, and of the Great Messiah
Jesus Christ. Dan. 9.20. and in Prophetic Figure to the New Jerusalem it self.

The Line of Time, as ceasing to be Historical, and becoming Prophetical is
divided, as into two Creation to the end of the Captivity we find by Scripture
Account, three thousand four hundred fifty nine years, and the Line of
prophetical Time is twenty three hundred Prophetical Evens. Morns. or years to
the Sabbath of the thousand years; which with the thousand years of that
Sabbatism, and a subindication of a short space beyond, may draw this last part
to an Equality with Historical Time, especially the latter end of this Joint,
being partly Historical, partly Prophetical; and so communicates of it self to
each.

From Cyrus King of Persia, and the Persian Monarchy in him beginning, is drawn
the longest of It is done, It is done; Dan. 8.14. Revel. 16.17. c. 21.6.
which bound whole Intersabbatical Time at its end.

This longest of Lines being purely Prophetical is given in the prophetical
Cyphar of days for years, and that, It may be known to reach the new Heavens,
and the new Earth, and their great Sabbatism, Evens. Morns. according to the
Character of the six days of the first Creation, Genesis 1.5. etc.
reckoned by six Evens. Morns. till its Sabbath.

The Line is given at so great length, as twenty three hundred years; in
prophetic Style 2300 Evens. Morns. That it being purely prophetical might be
more definite, certain, and less subject to Ambiguity through a multiplicity of
Joints, and o^ the beginnings, and endings of them.

In the infinite Wisdom of God, and in his care over his own sacred Prophecy,
there are given twenty three hundred years, so that there remain only Four
hundred seventy five undetermined; And they also may be determined by close
Scripture researches, together with undoubted Testimony of humane History to
their just Scituations, as shall be presently shown in each particular
collateral Line.

By these Collateral Lines, this general Line of Time becoms double, and more
assured, and while

The first Collateral Line is that of the word going forth to restore, and to
build Jerusalem, Col. Line 1. Dan. 9.25.
first by Cyrus, then by Darius, called by Humane History Hystaspis, then by
Artaxerxes, called also by humane History Longimanus in his seventh year when
the weeks began, And it was the space of seventy five years.

It must needs be, that the principal Line, and the first Collateral Line must
begin together, seeing

The Prophecy of Daniel places the Vision of the 2300 Evens. and Morns. in the
beginning of the Persian Monarchy, which Monarchy began in Cyrus; both which
are most evident the first in the Ram expounded into the King of Persia, Dan.
8.3.20. the second in the universal consent of History, that Cyrus was the
founder of the Persian Monarchy. Dan. 8.3. with 20.
If then the 2300 Evens. Morns. begin in the Persian Monarchy, it must begin in
Cyrus, in whom the Persian Horn became higher than the Median, as the Vision
requires.

Whatever began with Cyrus, must begin with the 2300 Evs. Morns. which began
with Cyrus; Evs. Morns.

It is most certain, The Word going forth must needs begin with Cyrus, as it
did, 2 Cron. 36.22. Ezr. 1.5. Esa. 44. ult. Es. 45.1.
because All the Prophecies went before of him as of God's Shepherd, that
should say to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, etc. and He was therefore
renowned with the Name of Messiah, with which no other Pagan Prince was graced.

Yet the Word could not be perfectly so Gone forth by Cyrus as to be to go
forth no further; Because it was so notoriously stopped in its going forth in
his days, and for the Reigns of two Princes after: Prophecy could by no means
be Answered, but by a further going forth, Ezr. 4.
of which that by Cyrus was only a Foundation, and in that regard only a
fulfilling of all God's Pleasure, viz. of giving an original Decree for after
Decrees, or going forth of the Word.

go forth by Cyrus. so as to go forth no further, because Sacred History
Records it to go forth so remarkedly in the second Year of Darias; and that yet
it did not perfectly Go forth by Darias, Ezr. 6.1.
because there was so August a further Going forth by Artaxerxes in his Seventh
Year.

forth, and the seventy Weeks began, of which the Spirit of God is Witness by
the large Recital of so full and illustrious a Decree, and though before hand,
(as often it gives the Sum before hand, Ezr. 7.1. Ez. 6.14.
or together.) It affirms the Temple finished by the Commandment of the God of
Israel, as the supreme going forth of the Word, and by the Commandment of
Cyrus, Darias, and Artaxerxes, Kings of Persia, the Subordinate and Humane;
which was the perfect fulfilling of Dans Prophecy of the Commandment, and the
Word going forth; And then is particularly recited Ataxerxes his Decree.

Artaxerxes in his Seventh Year the Word went forth, because by the same
Artaxerxes in his Twentieth Year, Nehem. 2.7.
when there went forth a Commission by Letters in some Resemblance of the Word
going forth; It is expressly directed on the building the Walls and Gates, which
in Dans Prophecy is a Note of the Seven first Weeks in their Course, which
assures the Word was Gone forth, and the Weeks began before that, and
therefore necessarily Gone forth at the last Word in the Seventh Year.

Word then Going forth first by Cyrus to its going on still forth further by
Darius, and its Complete being Gone forth by Artaxerxes in his Seventh Year
must be a Considerable space, and by the Examination of the After parts of
these principal and collatteral Lines, together with other Symbolisms of
Scripture, (on which great weight is often hung) It may be known to be Seventy
Five Years: and so by being laid to the Principal must be a Collatteral Line.

Line Coll. 2.
From the Word thus Completely Gone forth is drawn the second Supporting, or
Collatteral Line of Seventy prophetical Weeks, till the solemn Promulgation of
the Everlasting Covenant, and the Sealing up Vision and Prophecy, Dan. 9.24.
viz. that great Prophecy of Chri^^s Kingdom by Daniel.



v. 25. Nehem. 1. etc.
1. The Seventy VVeeks to which the Building of the wall, is to be applied as
its Character: Which Seven immediately followed the Word gone forth [as before
Asserted] for Restoring Jerusalem, of which the Temple was the Principal part.

2. Sixty Two VVeeks, to which is to be applied Time of Trouble or in Straits,
viz. in the Jews low and Tributary State to other Princes among which Troubles
by Daniel's Prophecy, Antiochus his Tyranny was peculiarly remarked: These
lasted till the Messiah publicly appeared not a Prince, but a public Leader,
Guide, and Prophet in his public Ministry; As the Hebrew Nagith imports.

3. One Week of all highest Confirmations of the Everlasting Covenant, in the
First Half Week by Messiah Himself, Mat. 4.17.
at the end of which Half, or in the midst of that Week, Messiah was cut off
sometime after the sixty two Weeks, viz. three Years and a Half; and by the
Sacrifice of Himself and his Resurrection and Ascension after it, caused
typical Sacrifice and Oblation to cease, [a much different thing from taking
away the Daily Sacrifice] and so left the Confirmation of the same Covenant to
his Apostles by the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven; which three Years and
half of the last Half Week Run out, and the Gospel not accepted by the Body of
the Jews, Acts 8.1. They were Rejected to Desolations till the End or near the
Glorious Kingdom of Christ, although these Desolations are not set out in the
Revelation as not becoming the Apocalyptical Glory of Israelitism, and of the
New Jerusalem, the Types all along of Christ's Kingdom, first in its Purity,
then in its Glory throughout the Revelation.

Coll. Line 3.
Immediately after the End of the last Half Week follows the Third Collatteral
line, of four hundred Years of the Time of the Book Sealed in Daniel's
Prophecy, and seen in the Hand of Him on the Throne Sealed with seven Seals in
Revelation, Rev. c. 5.1. ^. 6. ^ 7. ^ 10.
And when six of those Seals were opened before the seventh opened a second
Sealing, viz. of the 144000 entered to carry on the Sealing further immediately
after the Appearance of the Christian Empire, then a Third Sealing followed,
viz, of the Thunders at the time of the Reformation, that so Daniel's Sealing
might reach the End.

Daniel's last Half Week must immediately run on from the end of the Former
Half Week, in Confirmation of the Covenant when Sacrifice and Oblation was made
to Cease by the Death, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ, and sending down the
Holy Spirit; Because the Character of whole Week is Confirmation of the
Covenant.

Accordingly the Apostles immediately proceeded to Confirm the Covenant, as
appears in the Sacred the Acts of the Apostles.

Answerably hereunto, as the period of the first half week, and the beginning
of the last half week of the Resurrection and sending the holy spirit is fixed,
as the Apocalyptical Epoch, when the first Seal is opened in the Apostles
solemn promulgation of the Covenant of Salvation, that was begun to be spoken
by the Lord, and was confirmed by them that heard him, Heb. 2.3. God also
bearing them witness by Miracles, etc.

With the first Seal, all the rest are conjoined, and opened in an orderly
succession, and course of Evens. Morns. a third Collateral Line, though not
given in express numbers.

Before the last half week of the last Line ended, this following Line of the
Seals, running 400 half week is adopted and engrafted into the former Line of
the weeks, by uniting the last half week in the common symbol of these seven
Seals so closely succeeding in a course of Time; with the sealing Vision at
Christ's Death.

This Line must continue till the following Line of the 1260 Prophetical days,
or years, join it Trumpets.

This Line is by several notes of Time in the course of the Seals, and by the
notes of Time, determining Rev. 6.5.6.
assured to be 404 from the Epoch of the Lords day of the Resurrection, and
Ascension; And that remarkable symbol of the Balances in the Hand of that so
known Just Prince Alexander Severus, in the third Seal determines the half time
at his Death 202 years from the Resurrection, to the vulgar Ann. Dom. 235 by
the Agreement of undoubted Humane History.

Next follows, [as it does the solemn Oath in Daniel, so the second sealing
which entered with the first Trumpet into its force, in the Revelation] Time,
Times, half a Time, Collat. lin. 4.
concurrent with the six first Trumpets; within the continent of which lie the
1260 days of the Woman, the Church in the Wilderness; the Witnesses in
Sackcloth, and slain three days and a half, and is the same thing with the
power of the holy People scattered in Daniel, Rev. 7.1, 2.8.1.11.3. c. 12.6.
the Gentiles treading the Sanctuary under foot, by means whereof the daily
service is taken away forty two months; into which months are interwoven the
beasts forty two months in the Worship of whom, and of the Image made to him,
the abomination that makes desolute is set up. c. 11.2. c. 13.5.
And the Line in the twice 42 Months so interlock'd one with another are equal
with the days, and a common Line with them being to be strictly accounted by
not Lunar, but Solar Time, and so falling one into another equal 1260 days.

This most remarkable many-character'd, though but Collatteral line has first
a Distinction of Lord's three days in the Grave, that is, a part of each. It
has also a plain division into three parts: And being the most notorious stop
of Christ's Kingdom under the Forgery of it, It is thus often remarked. c. 11.9.


1. Time, or the first Time Beginning, Ann. Dom. 437, and running through the
first 360 Years with which the Gentiles began their 42 Months, within 38 Years
of which after their beginning, the Beast at the Cessation of the Western Roman
Empire was Born into his 42 Months beginning, c. 8.10.
viz. at A.D. 475, in which the Gentiles Months are merg'd and drowned as one
and the same from that Time, at A.D. 606; When the Bishop of Rome Fell as a
Star from Heaven to enlighten Rome on the Earth at the Supremacy given him by
Phocas, and arose to the Honor of having Himself, and the Image made to Him
worshipped at his 666 Number, A. D. 725, and was fully settled in his Imperial
Beastian Power at the End of this first time, 797, c. 13. v. 15. v. 17, 18. All
procured and managed by the other Beast or Antichristian Hierarchy, with their
Gentiles.

2. The two Times wherein the Beast and his Bestians were pursued by the two
Woe Trumpets, during the former of the two times by the Mohammedan Saracens;
during the latter of the two times by the Mohammedan Turks, by whom the Grecian
Empire was extinguished, 1453. c. 9.
But yet the Beast and his Worshippers Repented not notwithstanding so great
Judgments to the very end of these two Times Ending, Ann. Dom. 1517.

The Third Division is styled the Half time; in the Morning of which after 1517
aforesaid, the Bestian Kingdom was terribly shaken by the Reformation, the
Witnesses about, A. D. 1527, being called Protestants or professed Witnesses.
But in the after parts of this Half time, It resettled it ^elf in a partial
Dominion, and has been of late, and now with more Appearance of Success, c.
10.1. etc.
endeavoring to remount it self into an entire Dominion; and may, if God
please, Epitomize or give in short the Resemblance of its Former
Antichristianism and Tyranny, but shall certainly have its Papal Garments cut
off at the middle, and the Beard of its False Prophetism half Shaven at its
Half time ending to their Everlasting Disgrace never to be repaired: This will
be about the Year 1697, ere the Instant Century take End.

Turkish Empire, or Woe shall pass away immediately after the
decemprincipality, or Tenth of the Great City, which has so long Reigned over
the Kings of the Earth, is fallen, as it shall do at that time; c. 11.14. etc.
Collat. lin. 5.
And however the Mohammedan Greatness have trembled of late, to show how easily
God can bring it down in his own time, yet it cannot Roll to the Earth till
Beastianism first does so.

The Fifth Collatteral Line is the thirty Years of the Voices, which
immediately follow on the 1260 Days ending with the sixth Trumpet; For as soon
as the sixth Trumpet shall cease, the seventh shall sound, and those great
Voices shall be heard as from Heaven, which shall proceed each in their Order,
as they are described, Rev. 14. And this Line is so joynted into the former of
the 1260 days, that it cannot be sundered the 1260 being made 1290, Dan. 12.11.
Ending A. D. 1727.

Collat. lin. 6.
The last and finishing Collatteral Line is the 45 Years of the Vials poured
out, which Vials are Represented as filled up with the Wrath of God, gathered
by the Prevalency of the last Voice for treading the Winepress, Rev. 14.18.
etc. And this is indented so with 1260 days, as not to be divided, the whole
being given as one entire Line of 1335 days or years, Dan. 12.12. Ending A. D.
1727.

Daniel's command to seal and shut up the Book in the beginning of it and by
the Sealing the 144000 in the Revelation in the end of it may be even
demonstrated by a close compare of the two Prophecies one with another, Dan.
12.4. Rev. c. 6. c. 7. c. 8.
and a Retrograde Juxta-position, or laying each part backward one to another,
from the End to that Sealing the 144000, and from thence to the sealed Book.

Daniel's End, and the New Jerusalem, the great End of the Revelation, and we
shall find how exactly they agree. Dan. 12. Rev. c. 16. c. 21. c. 20.


Daniel's End is a Resurrection of some to everlasting Life, of some to shame
and everlasting Contempt: The End of the Revelation is remarked with Two; It is
done, It is done: One of the Destruction of Resurrection. Ezekiel. 42. v. 22.


Daniel's End has its peculiar Lots, (one of which is assigned to him) John's
End has a New the Capital City of the Land of Promise, and a Royal
Priesthood; to both which the Notion of Lots is in Sacred Writ so Appropriate.

Daniel in his Lot shall All Those Be, who love the Appearance of Christ, wait
for, and come to it, viz. into the Enjoyment of it: And Blessed and Holy is He,
(says the Revelation,) who has his part in the First Resurrection. Dan. 12,
13. with Revel. 20.6.

Daniel's End lay back the 45 Days, that make the 1290 Days to be 1335, and
They must of necessity run back with an intimate Reference and Relation into
the 1290, and all parts of them, because they so closely unite with them, as
not to be accounted 45 Days without them, but with them 45 making 1335, and yet
they must be distinct because the 1290, were so many before them: So these last
45 Days must have to do with the taking away the Daily Service, with the
setting up the Abomination that makes desolate, with the scattering the Power
of the Holy People, which things are doing, during the 1335 Days so joined, and
seeing the 45 are nearest the State of Blessedness, what can they be supposed
to have to do with them, but as in Execution of Vengeance to their Removal?

Revelation, the Vials that are placed just before the Apocalyptical End, must
have to do with the Great City, with the Dragon, as giving his power to the
Beast, and being Worshipped with Him, Rev. 16.
with the Beast, with the False Prophet, with the Gentiles whose Idolatry and
Tyranny was represented before in the Revelation, as demeriting so great an
Execution of Judgment: And they must also be in Vindication of the Witnesses in
Sackcloath and slain, of the Woman in the Wilderness, and of the 144000 Sealed,
and so must look back as far as they.

Daniel's thirty days, making the 1260 Days concurrent with the time, times,
and half a time to be 1290 Days, and They must have a closer Relation to the
1260 Days, and to the taking away the Daily Service, etc. then the last 45 days
had, as being so much nearer to them, and at farther distance from the Blessed
End; But yet being removed out of them, and nearer to Blessedness, as not being
the 1260, but 1290 Days; They may be well supposed loud in Remonstrances and
Prayers against all the former Idolatry and Tyranny of taking away, etc. and
with greater Victoriousness than formerly.

Agreeably in the Revelation, the Voices, that are placed just before the Vials
are full of such Remonstrances Vials, and are executed by the 144000 (who were
sealed at the beginning of the 1260 days) and by those Instructed by them, when
They stand with the Lamb on Mount Zion, and therefore These Voices look back
more wiftly on the 144000 Sealed before the 1260 days began; and more fully
show their Concatenation with them, Rev. 14.1.
but yet they are not so Advanced toward the Glorious State as the 45, the
Temple and Ark of the Testimony not being Opened till the Vials Prepared,
Revel. 15.

Lay the Distinction made betwixt scattering the Holy People, and accomplishing
to scatter to the Time, and Times, and to the Half Time, and seeing the
scattering must needs be first and longest, and the Accomplishing must needs be
last and shortest; Dan. 12.7.
we have Reason to make a Distinction betwixt the time, times, and Half Time;
and to lay the longest scattering to the time, and times, and the Accomplishing
to the Halftime, and so to find somewhat of the last Efforts to scatter, but
yet cut off Accomplished or finished, and so the Holy People, the daily
Service, lifting up themselves, and the Desolating Abomination casting out.

Agreeably in the Revelation, when we find the Time, Times, and Half Times
Expounded into three days and a half, we have Reason to lay that breaking out
of Divine Power and Truth in the Voice of the Roaring Lion, Rev. c. 11. c. 10.
the Thunders uttering their Voices to the Morning of the Half time, and the
Half day, and to the last 180 of of the 1260 days, and though there may be the
last Efforts, and a Comprizing of the Tyranny in some parts of the Reformed
Churches, as given in three days and a half, yet that it can be neither
Universal nor long.

Lay the Oath in Daniel ushering in the Time, Times, Half a time, that so
solemnly resolves They Oath in the Revelation, that Time shall be no more,
[viz. after the Half Time, that the Oaths may not contradict one another] but
that in the days of the Seventh Angel when he shall sound All shall be
Finished, and we see Reason why the last 45 and 30 making 1335 should be deemed
Joynted more particularly into the last 180 Days of the half time then into the
1080 of the time and times because their is so great an Affinity betwixt the
Reformation, and the further Preparations to Christ's Kingdom, as there is a
greater nearness in Time to the End.

As a further Assurance of the close Connection of the 180 Days of the half
time, and the 30 and Dan. 12.10. Rev. 16.
extended upon them All at that declaring the Words Sealed, Many shall be
purified, and made white by the Reformation, and yet tried in a Furnace of
Martyrdom. The Wise shall Understand by the Voices and Vials, and come out as
God's People from among the Wicked, but the Wicked will all along do wickedly,
and not Understand, but more especially they show it in the time of the Vials,
when they Repented not but Blasphaem'd; It is no wonder then to behold
Antichristian Confidence, Obstinacy, and Obdurateness.

Consider yet Daniel's complaint, that He understood not, and that Declarations
of the Words closed, Sealed till the End, and agreeably the Thunders Sealed, v.
9.
and the Book bitter in the Prophets Belly in the Revelation, Rev. 10.9.
and we see the reason why the Half time is made most of a piece with the time
and times, the 180 with the 1080 Days, viz. because the power of the holy
People remained still scattered in great part; the daily Sacrifice not
Restored, nor the Abomination of Desolation fully Removed; the Beast and his
City yet Regnant, the Witnesses in Sackcloth, the Woman in the wilderness, and
the 144000 Sealed, and not on Mount Zion: And so we see them still, the Half
time of the 1260 Days, being not expired by Ten, and therefore the Reformation
is not Perfect as it shall be at that end of them, when the Thunders are
unsealed in the Voices.

The time and times must needs be the continued Time of All these Evils of
Antichrist, during Book of the Kingdom was Sealed, and they must run back to
the time of the second Sealing, after the seven Seals Opened, and the Oath;
There should be time, times, Half time, which was the second stop of Christ's
Kingdom in his Servants, viz. the 144000 Sealed, under the Gentiles, and the
Bestian Tyranny, etc.

Hereby we may understand the whole Time of Sealing, its signification and the
Cessation of it; Book Sealed is the Book of Daniel's Prophecy of Christ's
Kingdom; The Times of Sea^ing were when that Kingdom had Right to Appear and
was Sealed up in reserve for Future Time. 1. At the Resurrection and Anointing
with the Holy Spirit on the Apocalyptical Lord's Day, Daniel was then bidden
according to his former Vision to seal Prophecy at the Anointing the most
Holy, and to seal it to the time of the End; Accordingly the Book is seen
Sealed in the Hand of Him on the Throne; And it was given to Christ to open
Gradually to his Kingdom: Dan. 9.^2.4.
And so the Course of time next to the 70 Weeks runs on in the Opening the
seven Seals, during the Purity of the Apostolic Doctrine, the Character of
which, is, Many shall run to and fro, and Knowledge be increased by those
Voices Come and See, or some proportionable Voice; and It lasted 404 Years from
the Resurrection. 2. The Kingdom of our God, Rev. 12.10.
and Power of his Christ Appearing in the Christian Empire: It was enquired
with Hope, It was near; How long to the end of these wonders? Christ's Swearing
time, etc. was the second Sealing in the 144000; Rev. 8.9.
the force of which Seal^ng entered first in the First Trumpet, when the western
Empire was stormed by every Blast of the four First Trumpets, which all History
agrees was about 404 Years from the Resurrection, and is by Daniel's Line of
2300 Ev. Morn. determined so as before. Here was a View given of the State of
the New Jerusalem, for which the 144000 Witnesses were Sealed. 3. At the Half
time, then was again an Appearance of Chrst's Kingdom, in the Reformation the
Book was opened in Christ's hand, but yet the words are declared closed, and
the Book Sealed; because It was sealed to the time of the End, c. 7. c. 8.
which was not yet: The Sealing was therefore Affirmed and Averred, and Daniel
could not Understand, the Thunders were Sealed, and the Book Hid in the Bowels
of John; and the Kingdom still stayed, the Reformation not perfected.

Daniel was discharged from his Office of Sealing, on which Account He is
bidden to Go his way; For after this Sealing the Thunders, All should be
opening in the Voices and Vials, and no more Sealing; and he has also his
Qute^us or Discharge to his his Rest by Death from the whole Office of
Prophecy, Dan. 12.9.
signifying He Prophesied for Future times, and that He had given a Full
Account from his own time of Future times, and had attained the Final Blessed
End, and the Assurance of his own Happiness and Reward in it; v. 13.
even his Lot in the Kingdom of Christ, the Resurrection and Restitution of All
Things, which is the End throughout his Prophecy agreeable with the Revelation,
which also declares the Sealing at an End, when that Blessed State was
revealed, Revel. 22.10.

Daniel^s 2300 v. Morn. within ten Years of that great Revolution of the
Kingdoms of this world becoming the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ;
of the witnesses coming out of Sackcloth and Ascending; the Tenth of the Great
City Falling, and the Turkish woe passing away. And within Eighty five Years of
the Blessed End, or the Glory of that Kingdom it self, which is the End of the
2300 Evenings and Mornings.

times to the Coming of Christ, by the Word of God, and in the ^ight of that,
bears no opposition to that Saying of our Lord, Mar. 13.32.
Of that Day and Hour knows no Man, not the Angels, not the Son, but the
Father only; For our Savior's Word [to Know of] speaks Authoritative
Cognizance and Determination, and the Divine Order of the Revelation given by
God the Father, to Christ, to show to his Servants, etc. Before which given,
Daniel could not be Expounded, nor this Time known, and so the hasty Curiosity
of the Apostles to know the Coming of Christ, and of the End of this State of
the World, or Course of it, was curbed and restrained only, as those Things
were not yet Revealed; Next Follows Sabbatical Time, Intersabbatical Time being
expired.

Thousand Years called the End, are an exact Cube of Time, and being neither
more nor less, are the very Perfection of whole Time; less than which is the
Defect and Imperfection, and more is the Excursion, Extravagancy, and
Superfluity of Time: So that this Cube is the Just state of the Glory of
Christ's Kingdom, and was never attained before or after in time, and are both
literally so much Time, and also the Symboll of Times Perfection.

Thousand Years of Christ's Kingdom are not therefore called the End, as if
they were One single Period set to Time, but because they are One even level
space of Time, giving End to the hard Toil, and dying Labor of Intersabbatical
Time, and are therefore called the Sabbatism of the People of God, and are
admirably set out to us, in the Prayer of Moses for the Thousand Years, Psalm
90. in the Great and Perfect Security which attends, Psalm. 91. and by the Song
or Psalm composed for this Sabbath, psalm. 92. and a Course and Order of Psalms
Celebrating the Kingdom of Christ in those that Follow.

Thousand Years is not the Expiration of the Kingdom of Christ, but the
Expiration of the Time, Rev. 20.
in which Satan was bound, (so that He could not deceive the Nations, during
that space) the Expiration of that Time in which the Saints so Reign with
Christ, that there is no Appearance of an Enemy, nor any Appearance of the
Churches growing Lukewarm toward an Apostasy.

There is therefore a small Spong of Time after, in which Satan is loosed, the
Nations under the Name of Gog and Magog ascend against the Beloved City; the
Fervor of the Church here below Cools into a Lukewarmness, but none of these
Things have a Course; For they are immediately Final Judgment, which last
Judgment is also the Throne, Rev. 20.3. v. 7. etc. c. 3.14. etc. c. 3.21. c.
20.11.
and Kingdom of Christ.

The Coming of Christ at the beginning of the Thousand Years, is the First of
the Days of the Son of Man, (which we Translate Only (ONE,) a day that cannot
be mistaken, nor hastened any more than the Day of Judgment in the general
notion of it; and so can no way be dangerous to the Governments of the World;
For who can make the Lightning to lighten from under one End of the and to
shine to under the other End of it, but He that shall come at that Day and do
so? Luc. 17.^2. v. 24.


At the First of the days of the Son of Man is the subduing of All Enemies, and
Chaining up Satan, that his Kingdom may have absolute Peace and no Disturbance,
but that He may Reign over World to Come, of which we now speak, as the Second
Adam in a Full dominion over All. Re. 20.1. v.


At the Completory, or Full last Judgment, is the utter Eradication of All
Enemies, and shutting Lake: v. 14.15. 1 Cor. 15.26
And this is the Last of the Days of the Son of Man.

There is a full Agreement betwixt the First and Last of the days of the Son
Man, in the determination Rev. 20.5.6.
so that the Last is a filling up and perfecting the First, upon all that have
been here below upon Earth, during the Thousand Years, and a Ratification of
whatever was done on the first of the Days of the Son of Man, on those who were
then Judged to Reign with Christ, or Condemned to the Lake.

What the space of the Spong of Time, or of the Last of the Days of the Son of
Man, viz. of Satan etc. and of Final Judgment will be, Scripture has no where
declared, nor is it given in the Revelation God gave to Jesus Christ, so that
it is a Time hitherto Reserved in the Fathers Power.

Yet it is most certain, It shall Fill up whatever space is allowed by God to
Time or any of its

This Kingdom of Christ from the First to the very Last moment of the Last of
the Days of the Son is the Kingdom, Throne and Reign of Christ, not divided but
distinguished from the Kingdom of God, and the Father, and from Christ's
sitting on the Right Hand of God on his Throne; Rev. 3 21.
For This is his Own Throne.

Christ's Sitting therefore on the Right Hand of God, until He makes his Foes
his Footstool, is the Son of Man should Himself visibly, and by the Power
given Him by the Father bring All Things under Him.

When Christ first Sat down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High, and was
Crowned with Glory The Apostle expressly says, We see not yet All Things put
under Him, Heb. 2.8, 9.
but we see him Crowned, etc. plainly signifying, That the Kingdom of the
Second Adam, Lord of the World to come, of which He spoke, was not yet Come:
For then All Things together, and at once were to be put under Him, that
nothing could be left that was not put under Him. It must be therefore the
State of Christ in Heaven at the Right Hand of God while His Kingdom is
delayed, or Sealed (during most eminently, Time, Times, Half a Time) while He
suffers the Antichristian Forgery on his Kingdom.

This distinct Kingdom and Reign, is that which Christ delivers up to the
Father; Which delivery viz. of the Kingdom of Christ, Heb. 2.13. Rev 6.8. Mat.
25.41.
when the last Enemy Death is subdued, by being shut up with Satan, who had the
Power of Death, and with Hell that follows Death, and the Wicked Men of his
Fellowship into their own Lake.

Thus the Kingdom of Christ is a Kingdom not left to other People, but Consumes
All, and stands and is peculiar to the renewed humane nature of all the Saints
in the second Adam. Heb. 2. v. 6. with v. 11.


For into Eternity This Kingdom is delivered up, that God may be All in All.

Christ's delivery up of the Kingdom, or Gods being All in All, cannot be
understood of the absolute Mediatory Kingdom of Jesus Christ, God-Man, much
less of the Eternal Word. But Mediator, and of his Saints with Him in the Glory
that Christ had with the Father before the World was, when there was no such
Frame of Heaven and Earth, and of the Changes of them; but one smooth,
unwrinkled, Heb. 2.11. John 17.24.
unfurrowed Main of Eternity, and into which All Things now Return: Throughout
which Eternity, All Gloy, Praise, Love, Service, and Obedience, shall be to the
Father, the Word in our Nature, and the Holy Spirit from Glorfied Angels and
Saints, for Ever and Ever, Amen and Amen.

POSITIONS Giving a Judgment, according to the Prophecy of the Revelation, upon
the State of the Turkish Empire, in relation to its Continuance, or Fall, and
in compare with the Continuance, or Fall of the Papacy; whether of these two
shall first be; by way fuller Explanation and Assurance of the Line of Time in
that Remarkable Joint, the Time, Times, and Half Time, or the 1260 Days of the
Witnesses in Sackcloth: And upon Occasion of the late wonderful sinck of the
Turkish Affairs, and the seeming rise of the Papal; yet with a very undoubted
Prediction of the Fall of both within ten years, and of the Papacy first of the
Two, if duly understood, and limited.
Mohammedan Power has been a very Great Instance of the Sathanick Kingdom in
the World, Rev. 9.11.
and that the King of it may be justly Entitled the Angel of the Bottomless
Pit, Abaddon, and Apollyon, signifying destruction, Enmity to humane Nature,
and peculiar Contrariety to Christian Religion, wherein the Salvation of Men
every way consists.



universal Kingdom of Christ stopped,) must needs be acknowledged a horrible
and dreadful Judgment of God upon the World, v. 12.
especially upon the Christian World, which in regard of the Excellency of its
Religion, and the Promises to Christ our Lord of its spread with Glory upon the
World, has much more Right to so vast a Monarchy and Empire, and so may be
justly called, if distributed into the Saracenick, and Turkish Mahometanes, Two
Woes.

Hegira or Date began A. D. 622. about sixteen years after Supremacy given to
the Church, and Bishop of Rome by Phocas, and accepted by them, notwithstanding
the Remonstrance of a High Prophet of their own, Gregory the Great, that such
Supremacy was Antichristianism but just before.

Mahomatanism, a Hibris, a Mungrel of Religions begotten with its Alcoran
betwixt Mahomet the False Prophet, Rev. 9.3. etc.
and Sergius a Monk, and taking so deeply in an Age of Superstitions, cannot
but cast our Thoughts on the Locusts in the Revelation, which came out of the
Smoke of the Bottomless Pit, and were such a Woe, and Torment upon the World of
men, who had not the Seal of God on their Foreheads. For immediately after the
Armed Saracens drinking in the Poison of the False Prophetism, began their
Range, in which they tormented Mankind, as with the venomous stroke of a
Scorpion, by their Stings in their Tayls.

The Bishop of Rome, as a Star falling from the Firmament of the Gospel upon
the Earth, and inlightning Rome with New Supremacy, when It had no other Light,
v. 1. c. 17.15
being ignoble under the Exarch of Ravenna, a Governor Appointed by the
Grecian Emperor, looks very Fathally upon that Supremacy, as if it were the
Appearance of that Idolatrous Supremacy, sacred Prophecy calls Bestianism, and
makes immediately to succeed the Christian Empire, expired in the West, though
at first It was not; viz. in open Appearance, but now began to appear,

The Smoke of the Bottomless Pit, opened by the Fallen Star, and unawares to
him the Locusts Smoke look too like the False Christianity, Idolatry,
Superstitions, v. 2.
False Hell of Purgatory; enforced by Anathemaes, Excommunications, Curses,
Darkning the Knowledge of Christ the Sun of Righteousness, and the whole Air of
the Christian Profession: And yet had the Smoke not been armed afterward with
the Flames of Nebuchadnezzars Furnace of Persecution, compelling to worship the
Beast and his Image, All had been but Smoke; but such a Smoke as might well
give Advantage to the False Prophetism, the Locusts were poisoned with, to be
received in the World.

It is most evident about the time of the Worship of Images, being settled by
general use, and established Nice, these Locusts of Saracens did more fiercely
annoy the Antichristian Christian World, viz. After the years 725, and 787.

After, or out of the Cessation of the Saracens grew up the Turkish or Othoman
Power upon the Woe, when the Saracens Locusts like, by Five, and Five
Prophetical Months, c. 9.12, 13 etc.
and Five (suppose) of Intermission, coming on, and going off had lasted 435
years, or from A. D. 622, to A. D. 1057, when the Turkish Power began its play.

About this time many Servants of God must needs be supposed in the depth of
Popery to groan v. 13.
and when the public daily Worship was taken away to worship privately within
the Temple at the Altar of Incense, and to cry to Heaven for Relief; and so
from the four Horns of the Golden Altar the Voice came.

That the first Rising of the Turks was from near the River of Euphrates is so
universally agreed, as Four Angels loosed, that were there bound, c. 9. v. 14
who from Four united into One in the Othoman Family according to History.

The Great number of Horsemen in the Turkish Armies, the lively Symbols of
Great Guns, and Constantinople, their poisonous Tayls of False Prophetism, v.
15, 16, 17, 18. v. 20, 21.
their Prophetical Day, Month, Year, making 395 years from their Rising to the
Taking Constantinople; the Third part of Men [the same Figure used for Imperial
Rome before, but the killing or extinction of the Empire in the East, differing
from the darkning it wholly in the West; till the Papal Supremacy inlightning
it anew] and the Impenitency of the rest of Men, of the Western Antichristian
World after the Judgment of the Eastern or Grecian Antichristians are all so
pregnant, and agreeable Images of the Turks placing themselves in the Empire of
the East, as not easily to be refused, especially adding the admirable
Landscaph of the Reformation, Cap. 10.

The whole Tract of Mohammedan Time from 622 to 1453 before the Reformation
running parallel Papal Domination shows it a Judgment levelled against that very
Domination, c. 9. v. 4. with v. 20 v. 21.
and set up by God in scorn of that False Christianity, to which it bears in so
many things an opposite Resemblance; one Armed False Prophet against another,
one unreasonable senseless Religion against another, viz. Mahometanism against
Antichristianism, One full of the Worship Angels, Saints, Images, the other in
the Zeal of One God, denying Jesus Christ.

The Forty two Months of Western Empire being reserved to the Supremacy of the
Beast and his Ten the force of Killing fell on the Eastern Empire necessarily,
c. 17 all along.
and on the enslaved Greek Antichristians, who being guilty of the high
Pretensions to the same Papal Supremacy in John Patriark of Constantinople
challenging it, and of its being given by their Emperor to Rome, and who by
their second Council of Nice established the Idolatry upon Saints and Images,
are justly made Hostages to Divine Vengeance till the Execution of Judgment on
the Western Antichrist.

There being to the Turkish Angels an Hour above the Day Month, and Year,
signifying a designed c. 9. v. 15
till near the Fall of the Tenth of the Great City, etc. and the Glorious
Ascension of the Witnesses out of their slain Condition, dropping as Elisha
their Mantle of Sackcloth.

Prophecy, and its measures, viz. from their loosing from Euphrates and motion
over Countries throughout their Day, ^^n. 11.41.^^, 43. ^ev. 9.18.^ 11.13, 14.
^an. 11.^ 42. ^ev. 16.12.
Month, and Year, till their attaining the top of the Constantinopolitan City,
and Empire; From that time till near the Fall of the Tenth of the Great City
Rome, the Woe by them was to continue; A gradual Fall before that must
necessarily be supposed, signified in Daniel by Tidings out of the East and
North, but together with that Fall, their Constantinopolitan Empire and Woe
must cease, and but with that; Then by the drying up the River Euphrates at the
sixth Vial is intimated their subsisting in their first Euphratean Bounds; And
from thence spreading as far as they can upon the Glorious Mountains of Judea,
they are dried up under the Symbol of the Euphratean Waters, that at the
Conversion of Israel the way of those Kings of the East may be prepared, and in
the Battle of Armageddon they come to their End, and none shall be able to help
them, etc. Dan. 11. v. 43. with Rev. 16. v. 16, 17.

Turkish Falls, both as of so Great an Abaddon, and Apollyon and also, as, It
is a Pawn, and Pledge to us of the Fall of that Diametrical Enemy of the
Kingdom of Christ, the Antichrist, and his Antichristian Church or City, to
such a Degree, that the Kingdoms of the World shall be proclaimed to be the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. For the Truth of God will certainly
hasten the one with the other.

Eastern Christians, and of those Churches at the same Time, however
Antichristianiz'd now.

Christian Name, however Antichristianiz'd, Rev. 11.14. with c. 17.16.
will move the rest of the Ten Kings, who have till that time given their
Kingdom and Power to the Beast, to hate the Whore, to make her desolate, to
burn her Flesh with Fire, even that Woman who sits the Beast, and that then the
words of God will be so far fulfilled, that they shall and will do it by the
Time appointed; of which every Victory over the Mohammedan Powers is a fresh
Pledge, seeing that must be done ere the Mahometane Empire pass away from being
the Woe as under which the Grecian Empire continues to this day extinct.

Rest of Men, who repented not at the killing the Eastern third part of Men,
Rev. c. 9.20. with c. 19.21.
and all along to that Judgment, viz. when the Beast and False Prophet whom
they served, are cast into the Lake, They shall be killed with the Sword of him
that Rides in Triumph to his Kingdom.

Tenth of the Great City then falling, the Mohammedan Woe passing away, and the
True Christianity Rising into Glory. And they are described as most near and
close together.

Turkish Fall seems to be even on the Wing) yet being fully assured; All must
come to pass together; although I fear, they cannot be sooner, then that 1697:
Yet I heartily say, as the Prophet Jeremy in a like Case, Jer. 28.6. Dan. 9.1,
2, 3. v. 19. with Isa. 62.7.
Amen. The Lord hasten it. But with much more Confidence according to the 1260
Days that will be Accomplished in the Desolations of the Witnesses and the
Woman his Church at that Time; I desire my self, and humbly and earnestly
desire all the Servants of God that we may set our selves by Prayer and
Supplication with Fasting and Sackcloth and Ashes, that he would then Do and
defer not, to make his Church a Praise in the Earth. Amen.

A POSTSCRIPT to the READER.
SEeing the Consequence of this Table of Time armed with its agreeable Events,
which I here present, is so visibly and sensibly Great in the Demonstration of
True Christianity, against the Atheist, the Pagan, the Mohammedan, the Deist,
the Jew, and the Antichristian, as also full of Assurance against the (I may
almost call it superstitions) Abstemiousness and Dread of search into Sacred
Prophecy, under the show of Humility, Modesty, and avoidance of Curiosity, Col.
2.23*
I do most solemnly appeal to every Reader, whether it can be charged with any
such Absurdity, as should make it Inconsistent with it self, or such as offers
violence to Scripture, to Reason, or to undoubted History.

For if It cannot; Then, as it is most evident, there is such a Book as
Scripture; so It is as evident, I here present a Table of Time grounded upon
express places of it, embossed with the most notorious Occurrences, that have
been in the World with Relation to the Church of God in every Age, the proper
Ornament of a Scripture Line of Time, as closely disposed, and organized into
its several Joints, as the humane Body it self is, and that cannot be so much
as Dislocated without violence: And I challenge all the World to draw such
another, lest it be suspected a Creature of Fancy.

If then there is such a Table, and so unchargable, There cannot be a more
sensible-Rational proof of Divine Being, than the declaring things to come,
Isa. 41.22, 23.
and of the Divinity of Jesus Christ; who Himself gave the greater part of the
Prophetic Line, and in whom, and in whose Glorious Kingdom the whole Centers.

I do therefore most loudly again appeal to, and beseech every Reader, [if they
see Reason] to charge these Positions, or any of them with any such
Inconsistency, or violence, as must convince them of Folly, or Falsehood, that I
may either vindicate, or Retract them: If not, that there may be a due waiting
for, and Expectation of those Grand Events yet to Come, which I do with a full
Confidence declare at this very Time, when the Turkish Ruin seems to outstrip
the Antichristian; But he that balances all Times, and their Events, will
hasten both in their due Time; Isa. 34.16.
and seeing they are determined together, neither of them shall want its Mate.

And because I have already published a larger Discourse upon some parts of
this Line of Time, and an Adjustment of Solomon's most Prophetic Song of Songs
to so much of this Line, as runs from David's Time to the Glorious Kingdom of
Christ, and am endeavoring to publish the Full Discussion of those parts of
the Line not discussed in the former Treatise, I humbly beg the favorable
Assistance toward the publication of All, who have Favor for the Work, and
its Undertaking.

T Beverley.


