SPIRITUAL DISCOVERIES TO THE Overthrow of POPERY Root and Branch.

Showing that

I. The Steeplehouse is no Church. II. Hireling teachers no Gospel Ministers.
III. Tithes are against the Gospel-practice. IIII. Paaishes are no Saint-like
churches. V. Infant Baptism is Popery, Rebellion and Blasphemy. VI. No
salvation without persection here. VII. A sorcing power makes no Christians.
VIII The Epistles were to Gathered churches. IX University-degrees no
Gospel-work. X Who has no revelation is no true Minister. XI The light within
must enlighten us XII A sum of new Discoveries broken sorth.


By a Waiter in Israel, and one of the New Covenanters. Heb. 8. 8.

John 4. 22: Ye worship ye know not what.

Acts 17: 23: For as I passed by and beheld your devotion -- whom therefore you
ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.

London, Printed the second time, 1657:

To the Reade^
Reader,
HAving preached in five Steeple-hou^^^, in London, and thirty in the Country,
and I a Hirling Priest, (...) all the wages of my hearers that I could get; but
God in time was pleased to show what I did, and whom held forth the Word unto;
so searching spiritually, I (...) not four in a Parish (of the National way)
that ^^ked like Christians, but as Infidels; yet I had daubed (...) up with
untempered mortar a while for my own dis^^^est gain. Ezekiel. 22. 27. 28.


I then left selling my Sermons, seeking out, and so found (...) Independants
outstrip us; the Baptists beyond them; ^^^^ysterians very high; but the Quakers
Doctrine most (...) in the light: So the Lord convincing me, and casting (...)
the unclean spirit, (that Legion of Sins) called me (...) in this spiritual
Discovery, to publish (as in Deca^^^^) what he had done for me. Mrak. 5. 9. 20.


I have printed before 500. and now 500. more, let (...) that love the truth be
at charge (by a copy) to print ^00. or more of the same, that they may go into
all parts (...) England, and so people may have warning, and be without excuse
in Gods day.

I. Th^^ (...) ^^eeple-house is no Church.
BEfore Christ came in the flesh, the material temple was called an holy place,
but now an inward spiritual Worship is required; for God dwells not in John 4.
21, 24
Temples made with hands, such are dead things which can do no living actions;
for although man by art of sundry materials can frame a pleasant building, yet
he can put no life into it, not can he priest put holiness in it, only a Popish
delusion has deceived the people, calling that a church which is but ^ great
house.

The Church is a people, and so a true Church are a people sanctified, and me^
in the work of God, being a company of Believers, which Church^s in God; so it
was not a steeplehouse but a sanctified 1 These. 1. 1
company that communicated with Paul, but ^o^ steeplehouses they are as dumb
Idol^, Psa. 1^5. 4 8. and 1 Cor. 14. 23
who calls them a Church tells a lie, which untruths have been taught and
maintained by the Romish Priests, that like Baals prop^et^ deceive the people*
but seeing these houses are built, let them still be repaired, Jer: 2: 8.
for I hope shortly better use will be made of them.

II. That Parish-hireling Teachers are no true Gospel Ministers.
THey have pretended this a cure of souls, bu^ made it a trade to preach for
hire, and divine (...) money, preparing war (or law) against such as put Mi^.
3. 4.
not into their mouths, and so no longer pay, no longer preach, but shift from
one parish to another lik^ the Kine of Bash^n for better pasture; yea, to force
Amos 4. 1.
themselves as T^achers into Parishes without their hearers consent, and then
force a maintenance from him, like Elic's sons, 1 Samuel 2 16. having been upheld
by a civil power of Government, which was as the B^ast to carry this false
Prophet or Ministry, yet tossing the common people into such a form as as this
Roman Clergy cried up.

They owned no Teache^s, but such as submitted to their human inventions,
calling them Divine In-Institutions, but it any was led forth from this
Antichristian Church, they were aspersed with Schismatic, Heretic,
Anabaptists, etc. that none might go faher in holiness then this Clergy; but
if this false Ministry shifted round through Popery, Prelacy, Presbery,
Dependency, etc. then those that shifted not with them were accounted bad also.

This Clergy sought much after the fa^test Livings, desi^ing to ^ule all, and
to teach all, not understanding how a Church of Saints may all prophesiesie one
by one, bu^ desiring to keep all teaching to themselves; they sold the Letter
by the Sermon, or 1 Cor. 14 31.
Sabbath, or by the year, or for life; and so they traded with this de^d
letter, as if thereby they could raise living souls to God.

III. Of Tithes.
THe Tiyh-mongers leaving their pretended plea of rght thereunto from the
Levitical Priesthood, claim them as a Nation all gift from the Saxons time
given Anno 855. to be (as they fay) unto a Clergy till Doomsday.

Answer. But the Saxons which gave them were cast forth of their possession and
government by the Danes, and Normans, whereby their gift of Tithes, and all
other Saxon Laws ended also; for as the Saxon Proprietors were rooted up, so
likewise was their Laws and Acts, and their gift of Tithes then ended; but then
that covetous Romish Clergy did so oversway the ignorant people, that Tithes
did continue to that Antichristian Ministry by way of courtesy; and he that now
clasms Tithes his due for preaching, must run to Popery for proving it.

If any say that Tithes were confirmed to that Clergy since it was refined,
let them see the Statute, Ed. 2. chapter 6. 13. See the abridg. page 479, 480.
how they were only to be sued for in Ecclesiastical Courts, which Courts and
Bishops are put down, and so are Tithes by the same order, if all things were
well understood.

Tithes or money by bargain and sale for preaching, was never used in Churches
of Saints, yet they maintained their Teachers by imparting carnal things unto
them, from whom they received spiritual Phil 4. 15. etc, Romans 15. 27. Gal. 6. 6.
things; which maintenance was not forced by a Law without, but by a free
contribution from a Lawof love within; which communicating of gifts spiritual
and carnal, was only betwixt Saints, both speakers and hearers, yea the Apostle
took wages, as to live of the Gospel, yet all this was from Churches 1 Cor. 9.
14. ^ Cor. 11. 8.
of Saints, and not from such ranting Beasts as the hireling Priests take wages
of, and are in fellowship with.

The National Congregations are made up of a rabble rout, of all kind of
sinners, that if a man be truly awake from sin, he will be ashamed of Church
fellowship with such, but for a Priest to be the head of them, can be no true
Minister, but one of Babylons merchants, who come in as Robbers, climbing John.
10. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 6
the preferment-way, or else as dissemblers, creeping into Steeple Houses, the
insinuating way, and so deceive the effeminate, and being in fellowship
together, there is like people, like Priests; and be sure all you that read, so
long as maintenance is forced for to Hosea 4. 9
pay teachers, so long England shall never be without a false Ministry; carnal
men love such trades best where they can command their wages.

Gospel-Teachers first begat a people in Christ to the faith, or gathered a
flock, and then had maintenance from them, eating of the milk; yet rather then
Paul would be burdensome he did not use this power, he sought not the fleece,
but the peoples welfare, not 2 Cor. 11. 9. 2 Cor. 12. 12. Phil. 4. 17.
seeking a gift, as the Romish Priests do, but laying down this power of taking
maintenance, that so this Gospel-work should not be hindered, 1 Cor. 9. 12. 15.
16.

IIII. That Parish-Congregations are no Saint-like Churches.
GOspel churches were of Believers, who did communicate together as Brethren,
not as Beasts, Act. 1 r. 2. 9 2 Thessalonians. 4. 9 10. 1 Timothy 5. 16.
pu^hing one another, or ravening one from another, as Parish-congregations do;
but they were gathered out of the world to follow Christ Jesus, being made sons
and daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 27. so the Saints do all by love, both in distributing
to those in want, and in contributing unto such as are their Teachers; but what
is done in the Parish-congregations, they do it by a chain of Law to compel
them, who refuse as Beasts to do good until they are forced thereunto. Where
else will you look for Ranters, Smearers, I dolaters, Murderers, Drunkards,
Liars, Sorcerers, Whoremongers, proud people, disobedient to Parents, self*
lovers, Envious persons, Taritors, Covetous, Fomalists, Sabbath Breakers,
Hypocrites, etc. but in in this Society, who use also the counterfit ordinances
in sprinkling Infants: a pretending to receive the Lords Supper, and a trading
with the dead letter, saying it is the word of God, which is but a declaration
of it.

By that time such beast-like persons, are sifted out for destruction, who
shall not inherit the kingdom of God; few will be left for the true church,
having Amos 9. 9.
right to Gospel promises: yet I Judge them not, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
but see them by their fruits, who show themselves what they are; although some
of them more cuningly deck their profession so formally, yet it is but
imitation by an outside profession, as the Strumpett with her offerings,
neither dare these persons own one another; Pro. 7. 14.
yet their Teachers seeing all this: flatter them in it; saying, hold fast your
profession: Be steadfast: Be not weary of well-doing etc. as if they should
say, you Drunkards, Swearers, liars etc. hold fast what you are hearing and
paying me my Tithes, not following Separatists, Anabaptists, Dependents or
Quakers least thereby you become Christians indeed, and so leave me to my self.

Thus the streams of this fourth Romish Monarchy still run, changing the name
from Popery, Prelacy, Presbytery etc. but holding the nature; assuming the
names of Christians and yet hateing of pure Christians, and they are a people
deceiving, yet are deceived. and all though some good * Ministers in the
several As Preston ^erkins, and others
ages have been amongst them,; and doubtless many good people that were
hearers, yet what is one amongst a hundred, to make a true church; which could
not be, no more then one Judas amongst the Twelve, could make that a false
church; and it is arare thing to find two in a Parrish, Christians indeed yet
following of the common national hi^eling teacher; nor is it the goodness of
few* that will warrant the Popish standing of false churches; but it was Gods
goodness to wink at the ignorance of Act. 17. 3^
times.

V That Infrnt Baptism is Popery, Rebelion and Blasphemy.
GOd chose the Jews, giving them circumcision and made the promise to them and
to their seed. Acts. ^. 39. which extended unto as many as the Lord shoud call,
that is to the Gentiles; but the Romish church would cut of that everlasting
Covenant from the Jews. Genesis 17. 7. and thrust it upon the Gentile-In^ants
instead thereof; whereas circumcision holds still to the Jews; as Timothy who
was a Disciple, yet being half Act. 16. 1. 3 Act. 27. 2i 24.
Jewish was circumcised, and Paul cleard himself nor to appose circumcision.

Infant Baptism is Popery, in that one person undertakes to believe, confess,
repent, and engage to to God for another; and if sureties for children do not
thus, then they lie and disemble, for all know the child perceives nothing of
it, no more then if a Lamb or bird should be brought, and bid the Priest
sprinkle and name it: so here the Priests do as the Papists who pretend to have
merits, faith, and repentance for themselves, and for such children.

2. It is rebellion to Baptize before teaching, whereas our Savior has
commanded to teach and Mat. 28. 19
Baptize; first teach them what to do, and then Baptize them into what they
know; for if no actual faith nor no knowledge of God; what Baptism can be of
such a person; no more then of a piece of wood. Those at Ephesus being ignorant
of the Holy Ghost, were re-Baptised, yet they knew much more then babes: and to
Baptize a child into Christ, which never heard Acts 19. 1. 5
of him, is more like a mad man then a Christian; far worse then to make Boy a
Doctor, and then teach him to be a Scollor. John bids people act themselves,
no^ boast of Abraham's faith, and so all that came to him Luke 3: 8:
were people confessing etc. and in the Jaylors house that all which heard* the
same all, were Baptized, Acts 16: 32 33.
but our rebellious Baby sprinklers heed not Scriptures 3. Its Blasphemy;
seeing the kingdom of God belong to Infants, children without actual sin, are
very happy; but these blasphemous Priests: tell the people that they are not of
the heavenly kingdom, Mark 10: 14
until they have sprinkled them, thus making Gods holiness, and our Saviors
assertion of no effect, they act blasphemy, in taking a way Goods goodness and
setting up their own inventions.

VI. That there is no Salvation without pe^fection in in this life.
A Damnable Doctrine has been a long time held forth; that people must sin
while they are here in this li^e; grounding it upon Romans 7. 14. 85. Gal. 5. 17.
not considering the Saints grows of grace; which must be perfected in this
life or not at all, to shine more and more unto the perfect day, and having
this hope of perfection here, man purifies Prove: 4. 18 ^ John 3: 3:
himself: not hearking to such delusions, which have deceived thousands to sin
willingly, as if going to hell contentedly.

Its observed that Paul did preach near 36. years from his conversion, first
he was a persecutor, a notorious sinner, being converted, he preached the
Gospel, yet came not suddenly to a full perfection. Acts 9. 1. 1 Timothy: 1: 1
Act. 9. 20. he writes of 3. years Gal. 1. 18. and of 24. years. Gal. 2. 1,
being still a preacher, yet not come to absolute perfection but presses and
preaches perfection, not denying it as our ignorant people do.

In the 22. year of his preaching, being at Corinth he wrote to the Romans,
and then complainde of sin. Acts 18: 11:
Romans 7. 17. In the 33. year of his preaching, he wrote to the Philipians from
Rome, and then shows, how he was growing to perfection, stiring up others also:
as Phil: 3: 14 15:
if he said thus: frinds be of good cheer, the same God that made our Corn our
graces) come out of the earth and grow, to be green and flourish; although it
has many anoyances (many sins;) yet be not weary, go on; the same God can
bring this corn (these graces) to a full Harvest (to absolute perfection.)

When Paul first wrote unto Timothy, he tells him what he must do but writing
the 2. time he showed 1 Timothy: 6. 11, i2:
himself wholly obtained perfection in this life, 2. Tim 4. 7. he had fought
and finished: being then about the 35. year of his preaching: so although this
grace, was long in growing to the Harvest, yet it was ripe at last, before his
death; as appears in sending for his Cloak, books, and parchments. Verse 13.

Perfection is called from Math. 5. 4. 8. and holiness as God is holy. 1. Pet.
1. 16. which is a perfecting of holiness. 2. Cor. 7. 1. being born of
incorruptable seed 1. Pet. 23. that perfect man in the fullness of Christ Ephesians.
4. 13. ha^eing a forming of Christ in rhem, Gal. 4. 19. to walk as he walked, 1
Ioh. 2. 6. all which is by a growth in grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. attained by d^gree^
where in the buds and seeds thereof increase as, Pet. 1 5 beginning as a grain
of Must^rd feed Luk^ 13. 1^ and so as holiness increases, sin decreaseth; man
grows righteous st^ll Rev 22. 11. above the world o^ sin, until all be
converted and cast forth; and this ful^ perfection, is that redemption of the
body, wholly from sin which the Saints waited for; the fullnes o^ Romans 8. 23
Adoption, at which time the Lord Omnipotent regineth indeed: and this height
of Glory was that spoken Rev. 19. 6.
of 2. Tim. 4 7.

Who attaines this perfection sins not, John. 3. 6 8. 9 but although Paul had
it so long before death, yet it seems the Saint thee! had it the last hour, but
both Luke 23. 43
in this life.

VII. That a forcing Civil power makes no chris^an.
IN the former English ministrations; each present power and Clergy thought
themselves in the only way of Christ, and to be infall^ble Disciples, as in
Popery, Prela^y, and Pre^b^tery etc. and so desire to ^o^ce all other un^o
their opinions; like that cursed Mat 23 15 ^. King 21. 3: ^cts 6. 11. ^3.
people, to ma^e one proselitye; but who did not yeel^, must suffer as Naboth
and Stephen or else be smitten with the tongue, as Ier. 18. 18. yet all was but
a forming out side as Hypocrites, Satan sitting, and commanding to be worshipped
as God, who must be consumed* holds not long; 2 Thessalonians 2. 4. 8. although for a
time by the Iayls, Fines, and cu^lors shop men were compelld to be conformable
un^o human orders, all was but as a chaining up of Bears, Lions, Wolves, Lambs,
etc. a Bear, a wicked man, will be so still, and a Lam^, a good man, holds the
same; yet the ^haine of a Law, tying all up, makes every one ^eem holy, o^
L^mb-like; but now in this time of li^ertie, is s^e^ what the national church
was, being ^i^ a great company of wild beasts chained up, so that ^hey could
not hurt one another.

The state of most people, were the Scripture letter has been held forth, is
but as civiliz^d; ^ar unlike pure christians; having forms of Religion, which
^at up the power the^eof; but when the little stone, Dan. 2. 34, 35.
breaks this fourth Romish Monarchy, making Ba^ a confusion indeed (as now
God, is doing it by his spiritual Assy^ia, the quakers,) even then shall the
first Monarchy appear in its exelencie under Jesus Christ; yet not to be done
with material weapons Zach. 4. 6
as some think, but by his spirit, wherein Christ the eternal word shall be the
sword to cut down; even the spiritual Cyrus to execute all his offices in
glory Isa. 45. 1, 2
amongst his Saints.

VIII. That the Epistles were sent to saints only; not to the world.
THe Epistles are part of those scriptures containing a declaration of Gods
word. Luke 1. 1. Act. 20, 27 1. Cor. 15.7. 1 John 1. 3. which book may come to
loss; but the word in self is from the beginning, Joh: 1. i. 14
being made flesh, by which man lives Math. 4. 4 and so did Paul. Gal 2. 20. a
dividing word. Heb. 4. 12 which shall not return void Isa. 55. 11 having its
abiding forever Pet 1. 23. but the Letter, the false Prophets 1 Samuel 3. ^ Jer.
5. 13 14.
had as many have it now, yet God threatened to destroy them.

The Epistles were not written to Parish congr^gations, but unto churches of
Saints, gathered out of the world, as from the beginning show. Romans 1. 7. Ephesians.
1. 1 and who sometimes had their churches in houses, as, Romans 16. 5. Co. 4. 15
Phil. 2. and the letter of scripture is as seed, to be used by a faithful
seedman on good ground, and so ir becomes an effectall growing word; but where
it comes to a dry barren heart, it is as dry seed, or a dead letter; and
selling this letter for the word, holding forth Scripture promises to wicked
wratches, as the Hirelings priests do, is most abominable.

IX Than University degrees are contrary to the Gospel.
SUch degrees by acts and commencements, are human inventions; wherein men by
learning one of another, by going to school, and passing then^^, sell it in the
country for Divinity: holding the popish custom, to suffer none to be a
parrish Priest, except he first buy human learning, and recive human
ordination; but after that they were called Divine, s although never so filthy
as Baals servants were Kings 18 ^:
termed Prophets: whereas he is a Divine, that is both called and taught of
God, for the Gospel-work.

Divinity is holiness, and this stolen title they have gotten; as Batchlor of
holiness, Doctor, etc. which degrees they take one of another at their arts
and commencments befooling the people, as if they ^: 23: 30.
were made holy of God; stealing the title of holiness from poor Saints, give
it themselves, so taking ^on 5: 44: ^on 12: 43
honor one of a another and loveing the praiie of ^en, but God is a against such
a Ministry.

So also reverend, once used to God; they assume Psa: 111: 9
^o themselves, which the Apostles never did; as to ^hy reverend brother Paul
etc. yea acting as Jeroboam, to make Priests of those lowest an Gods esteem 1.
Kin. 1^. 13.

X That such are no Gosple Ministers which have no revelation.
THe trade of the Antichristian ministry, was to be a scoolboy; 2. a University
man 3. a man in orders and as such had natural gifts,, more or less, so they
were improved of; accounting where this learning was, that there must be the
gift of grace, but who had no human learning, such could be no ministers; as
if tying the gift of God under the girdle of men's devices: thus one man taught
another and ordained another; teaching that trade to preach by ^ear-say.

Men going forth to declare the letter, and writings of others, are no Gosple
ministers; but such as are 1 Cor: 2: i: 6.
^alled of God; to speak his wisdom in a mystery, in whom he reveals Jesus
Christ to preach in power, from the breathings of Gods spirit within; and such
Gal: 1: 16.
^re the teachers sent from the Lord having an im^ediate call, not of men but
of God Gal. 1. 1. for no ^an knows God, as to be a minister by heresay but ^s
things are revealed Math. 11. 25. neither can they ^now the father, but by
revelation from the son Rev. 27.

God works by the same spirit now as formerly, and ^ath promised in the latter
days, more abundantly Joel 2, 2^. Acts 2: 17
^hereof whereby he reveals, and makes known himself in man; but such as love
not such a revelation spiritually, are no Ministers of Christ: they trade only
in the letter as the Scribes, Jesuits, and Antichristian Ministry have done,
preaching what they have leraned by heare-sy.

XI That no light without can avatle us, except there be a leght within.
THe light of the body is the eye, but if the eye Luke ii. 34.
have no light within it, all the light of the sun can do no good without it:
and if God puts not first a light into the creature, how can that creature see
any thing of God? therefore know that God enlightens within first, and then
shows himself to that light.

The Gentiles knew not the Law, yet had a light Romans 2. 14, 15.
within: and the outward teaching is Judged and discerned, by this inward
light: as a blind man, cannot see a candle lighted before him, because he has
no light within his eye, so one blind in sin John 9. 41. cannot understand the
things of God, but are foolishness unto him; whilst he that has a light
within can in a mesure aprehend the things of God, held forth.

Christ the Saints husband, took of their human nature, and loveingly imparts
to them of his Divine John 1. 9.
nature, being a light shining inro all; but wicked men darken it by sin,
giving way to the flesh o^ human nature, not suffering Christ in his Divine
nature to Joh. 3. 19, 30.
rule, and so work their own condemnation; whereby that which should be the
savor of life unto life, becomes the savor of death unto death. 2 Cor: 2. i5.


God is light, 1. John 1. 5. in whom the Saints are, 1 These. 1. 1. which light
in them 2. Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 4. 16. and his light shines in our human nature, as
in a dark place to enlighten it, 2. Pet. 1. 16. making it as the shining of a
Candle, Luke 11. 36. and so the Saints, walk in this light, and are known in
the same; but the formalists know each other by a fleshly form 2 Cor. 5. i^
which the former Disciples would not do.

XII A sum of new discoveries, since time of liberty.
The several Authors, have wrote hereof, as Parkers Examen: Britens body of
divinity: Colliers works with others
1 Original sin is a mere delusion,

2 Universal redemption is now understood, which takes off Original sin: Even
so, is as the Balance Beam; and that all, which was in the state Romans 5. 18
of condemnation by Adams sin, the same all had the free gift to Justification
of life, in the state of Jesus Christ, for the words are equivalent; none were
left in the first transgression, but all redeemed, (or ransomed) Matthew. 19 14.
out of the same; and so our infants are of Gods kingdom.

3 Human nature, was that in Adam which harkned to the Serpent; and it is the
same in us, that first receives sin: and this is a distinct thing from the
divine nature: and causes wrath: the other godliness. Ephesians: 2. 3. 2 Pet. 1. 4:


4 Free Grace is offered all, after they have actuallyy sinned, see Ezekiel. 33.
11. Rev. 3. 20, 2 Pet. 29,

5 Free Will, man must have it in a measure to use his abilities; or else this
free grace can do him no more, good then a feast at London can do a man good
whilst he is chained up at York.

6 Election was confusedly wrapped up together, which is now seen, to be either
Universal or general, special, or particular, and also of persons, places,
and things: see Brittens works of these at the Angel in Cornhill.

7 Perfection must be in this life.

8 Eating blood, a heathen custom, never allowed before the Law, under the Law,
nor in the Gospel, Gen 9: 4: ^ev. 7. 26. Acts 15. 29 and 21. 25.
but forbidden.

9 Romish Relics are much seen and down; yet some remains to Englands
sorrow; as Tithes, etc.

10 Stepelehouses, are no Churches

11 Gods anointed, are not Civilized princes; but his Saints, having that
unction. 1. John 2. 20.

12. Thanks is not to be used unto man, but only to God, except as Paul used
it to saints, Romans 16. 3, 4. Thanks is to bless one another; and cursed Joab,
or flattering 2 Samuel 3. ^9. with 2 Samuel ^4. 22: Acts 21. 3: Mat: 6: 37: Mat: 17:
25 ^oh: 21: 5:
Tertullus warrant not us to use it; neither do we ever read else in all the
scriptures that one man did thank another. Consider this ye ranting beasts
which sit, I drink to you, I thank you.

13 Yea and Nay, Yes and No, in faithful speaking is the scripture language,
which must be among all saints.

14 Thee, thou, thy, and thine is the right scripture language, used to God,
and among all saints; but you and yours is plural, which used to a single
person is a lie: so it is not you, Lady, but thee, Lady, 2 John: 5:

15 Hireling Teachers are not true Ministerr.

16 The strait Gate is much more seen by Saints, how it will not admit them to
carry their pride in Apparel, and glutting the body through such a passage, but
all sin must down.

17 Light within is now known to some.

18 Forms are seen, as not uniting; but to use as God convinces, seeing the
oneness is made perfect Joh: 17: 2 2 Cor: 5
by Christ in the Saints, and they are not to know each other after the flesh.

19 Making Christians is not by a humane power.

20 Scripture-promises are now seen to belong unto the saints, and not unto
carnal wretched people, as formerly the Popish Ministry did apply them for
self ends.

21 Infant Baptism is found a mere delusion.

2 The fifth Monarchy is seen to be sweetly begun under Jesus Christ in his
spiritual reign, (but not acted by a material sword) God by the power of his
spirit in his saints is dashing Babylon in pieces; the Popish parish-Ministry
is going down, and Christ's pure Psalm. 13 8, 9. Zech. 13. Mic. 4: 1. Psalm. 1 10
Rev. 11: i
Ministry setting up the Fountain for uncleanness being opened: The Lord
setting up his Mountain (or Church) above these false churches, and making
people willing in the day of his power, from the womb of this spiritual
Morning, showing the kingdom to be his own, and not suffering a cruel clergy to
tyraunize over his people.

23 Tithes are seen to be from Anr^christ.

24 Infant-membership; that Infants are of Christ's church, is well known to be
so, and needs not the Priests help to do it.

25 Christ in the flesh is not only meant of his own flesh, for that a
reprobate will confess; but it is now further to be understood to be spoken of
the saints flesh, 1 Jo^: 4: ^: as to be formed in them, Gal: 4. 19:

26 Spirit, Soul, and Body, in men are known to be hree distinct parts. For
first, Man begets nothing immortal, yet he begets souls, Genesis 46: 26: Exodus: 1:
5: Secondly, We never read the soul returned to God, but These. 5. 3. Heb. 4. 12.
of the spirit, Eccles: 12: 7: Hab: 23: 46. Psalm. 31: 5: Act: 7: 59: Thirdly,
The division of soul and spirit made in Scriptures:

27 University Degrees, appropriating stollentitles, are against the Gospel
practice:

28 Mystical Babylon is found to be in all grown people, and all people to be
in that fleshly wisdom until they are truly sanctified:

29 Cards, Dice, etc. are all discovered to be from the devil, who has taught
people to counterfeit that great deciding Ordinance, called a Lot, Numb. 26.
55. Iona 1. 7. Acts 1. 26.

30 Plays and Players, with all such feigned and dissembled actions or
persons, are disowned in the light, being from Satan, men must give account for
every Mat 12. 36
idle word so used, and Englands Governors must answer before the Lord for
suffering of them.

31 Ballads, Fictions, Tale-Books, and idle Songs, are all to be accounted for
unto God, both by the Rulers which suffer this filth, and by all such which act
therein, its no saints practice. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4.


32 Preaching by hearsay, a delusion.

33 Circumcision is still to the Jews, see before of Infant baptism.

34 New covenant-work is now seen to be begun, and great appearances of Gods
leading forth his people from the streams of ignorance, to hear the great ^er.
31. 33: ^sa. 27. 12, ^3.
Trumpet blown, making many partakers of that unction or spiritual teaching, 1
John 2. 27.

35 Gospel Ordinances are now seen by saints what they are; and how they have
been a long time counterfeited in the Romish Church by a hireling ministry.

36 The New commandment is observed among saints, that none are purely in
Christ but such as have Joh. 13 34.
that Gospel-love without any mixture of sinister ends.

37 Uniting of saints cannot be done by any outward 1 Cor. 12, 13.
form, but by being imbodyed into one spirit.

38 Fasting for the abating fleshly desires, and pouring forth services
spiritual unto God, is now seen among saints to be very effectual: for some
sins go not forrh, but by prayer and fasting, Matthew: 17: 21:

29 Shaking, or giving hands in fellowship or love, has long time been used in
the Romish custom by dissimulation, and is not to be allowed, but in sincerity
Gal. 2 9.
amongst saints in way of true society:

40 The sabbath or holy rest, in observing a seventh part of our time in
resting from labor, that so one day in seven there might be no mixture in the
service to God and the world, is seen to belong still unto saints; as, first,
from Gods example: Secondly, from Genesis 2. 3. Exodus 20. 8. Isaiah 58: 13.
that precept of the moral Law. Thirdly, from the blessing of such as were not
Jews, which kept the sabbath, Is. 56. 3, etc: 4 From the continuance of it,
which should be from one sabbath to another for all flesh, Isa. 66. 23.
Fifthly, it was never abrogated by Christ, but only works of necessity
admitted, Luke 13. i5, 16. Lastly, If God gave forth his commandments by his
son, they that break them, and teach men so, shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5: 18, i9.

Laws are made in England, but not executed: men in the country take Offices by
turns, then beastlike officers suffer beast-like abuses, by drunkenness,
swearing, sabbath-breaking, etc. but if the Government would please to settle
in each parish a godly man to oversee these evils by way of an Officer
authorized, it might much conduce to suppressing of vice, and composing
petty-differences: see to it O ye Rulers of this people.

Many more discoveries appear in these blessed times of liberty, which the
wicked party strive to darken and mock at, like the foolish Philosophers at
Athens; Acts 17. i8, 32.
but God still brings his work forward.

When God showed me the silthiness of the parish congregations, I durst no
longer stay as a member among them, and searching the several forms, I found
the Quakers most pure in doctrine, but their conversations nor principles I
know not: I humbly wish all professions to live unto the height and purity of
religion; for the beauty of a christian is a holy life, being unspoted of the
world. James 1. 27.


I go on seeking, and wait with patience, hoping God will shortly accomplish
his covenant-work, Jer. 31. 33: when saints shall show that pure charity, i
Cor: 3: i, etc: and be well known by their masters badge, ^oh: i3: 35: who will
defend them from the wicked one; 1 John 4. 18. and so the primitive purity of
saints being Mark 16. 17, 18.
restored, their signs of faith shall follow.

FINIS.

