THE SECOND TREATISE, Propounded by Way of DIALOGUE, Touching the Nature and
Accidents of MIXED DANCING.

WHEREIN The Questions concerning its Lawfullness and Expediency, are handled,
and resolved.

BY JOSEPH BENTHAM.

Pastor sometimes of the Church of Broughton in Northampton Shire, but now of
Neather-Wickenden, in the County of Bucks.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1656.

To the Christian READER.
Christian Reader,
THE Exercise of my Ministry being by Gods Providence in a place, where dancing
was us^d much, and unseasonably, I considering the dangerous effects usually
accompanying that Exercise, and finding private discourses, and persuasions
fruitless, I began to preach on that Subject. The substance of which Sermons
(being but two) I put into the form of a Treatise and Dialogue, and then gave
it to some friends of my own profession to peruse: Some of whom, men of
judgment and ability, persuaded me to commit it to the press, which I do, not
being Magisteriall for my opinion, nor Dicta^our-like, obtruding my Conceptions
upon others: But proposing them with moderation of spirit upon such grounds of
Scripture, reason, and experience, (together with the Testimony of several
grave Authors of both parties) as may sufficiently bottom the Negative in this
controversy: With all, desiring such of my profession, who upon disquisition
may conclude mixed dancing juctly faulty, to unite their forces to remove it;
and such who are otherwise minded, to show us what kind of mixed dancing it is
they plead for, and to bound it within such limits, which lawfully and possibly
may be observed. For my part, until I see the grounds I go on, soundly
confuted, (which I suppose I shall not) I cannot alter my Judgment, Yet
remain,

Thine in the Lord, J. B.

THE SECOND TREATISE, Propounded by Way of DIALOGUE, Touching the Nature and
Accidents of MIXED DANCING.
Minister.

Countreyman.

Min. WELL met friends, whither away so fine and so fast?


Count. Truly sir, I and my brother Scholar are going to a harmless
recreation, a dancing meeting, a sport I love more then any.


Min. But why do you call it an harmless recreation, which is by many good
men condemned as offensive and hurtful?


Count. I hope it is offensive to none, nor at all hurtful to any, and in case
you can make good that charge against it, I shall dislike it, although as yet,
I do not a little delight in it. Give me but one scripture condemning dancing
if you can, scripture will prevail much with me, and in my apprehension that
allows of, and commends Music and Dancing.


Min. You say well that scripture shall prevail with you, and that it approves
of dancing and music, which although it consists but of few notes* curiously
varied, yet it makes an hundred Vision of Balaams ass.
kinds of sounds, which ravish the minds of men, so that Saul affiicted with an
evil spirit, was much comforted by playing on a harp, 1 Samuel 16. 25. Peter Hay
tells us there is a kind of furious madness of the mind in Almayn called
Sanvitus, which is not cured but by Music, and he brings in the cure of the
Tarantula Page 207 208.
(recorded by many others) in Italy. By Music he also tells us, that Augustine
cites out of Tully a remarkable instance, When certain younkers were tipled,
and whetted with wanton music, and had attempted to break open the doors of a
chaste Matrons house, Pythagoras called to the Musicians to play a slow and
grave tune, upon hearing whereof, their luxurious humor was allayed presently.
I have also read how one Timotheus, with one kind of Harmony, made Alexander in
the midst of a Feast, rise from his friends, and in a fury call for arms, and
instantly changing his note, with another kind of melody, did appease and
restore him quiet to his guests. Certain it is, that our affections are
diversely moved according to the diverse kind of harmony, Confess. l, 10. c. 33
On Exodus 15. 20.
says Saint Augustine, and therefore we have need to take heed of that which
is lascivious: Music may without doubt be used, says our learned and
laborious Willet, For Recreation, except it be against common order or honesty,
or against the work of grace or Regeneration, and to set forward any act of
Grace or Godliness, as David by his music allayed the malady and evil spirit
of Saul. He also affirms, That women Singers among the Jews were of three
sorts,

First, For Recreation, their voices excelling men's in smallness and
sharpness, in continuance and unchangeablenesse, Eccles. 2. 8. Solomon had
women Singers.

Secondly, For the praise of God in public solemnities, Ezra 2 65.

Thirdly, Extraordinary, as Anna, Deborah and Miriam, who Exodus 15. Chap. 12.
page 209, page 214.
took a Timbrell to sing the better in measure and order. Accordingly it was
the custom of the Religious women, at such times to play with Timbrells, Psalm.
68. 26. But as Peter Hay before mentioned, (who had been a Papist and turned
Protestant, writing in defense of Church music, and answering objections)
says, The Devil has not only his furnished quire for idolatry, but his
minstrelsie for wantonness, and affirms out of Bucer, to play ribbald tunes
upon Organs is to offer sacrifice to Venus.

And as for dancing, a companion of music, Luke 15. 25.

First, We read of dancing commanded, Psalm. 149. 3. 150. 4. Praise the Lord
with the dance.

Secondly, We find it practiced by good people, Exodus 15. 20. 1 Samuel 21. 11. 2.
Sam. 6. 16.

Thirdly, Amongst other favors this is promised, that the Virgins shall
rejoice in the dance, Jer. 31. 4. 13. Go forth in the dance of them that make
merry.

Fourthly, That David praised God, For turning his mourning into dancing, Psalm.
30. 11.

Fifthly, Job speaking of favors bestowed on the wicked, says Their children
dance, Job 21. 11.

Sixthly, Jeremy complaining of Judgments inflicted on Israel, says, Their
dance is turned into mourning, Lam 5. 13.

Seventhly, And God who allows a time for all things, save for sin, allows a
time to dance, Eccles. 3. 4.

Dancing therefore is commendable and lawful, but those were not such kind of
dancing as you use, men and women together, but a man alone, or men with men,
women with women, Judge. 20. 21. The daughters of Shiloh no men with them.
Doctor Willet mentions some kinds or sorts of dancings from scripture, none
mixed.

First spiritual, which proceeded of an extraordinary motion, as David danced
before the ark, to testify his joy.

Secondly civil, used in Triumphs, when they met the captains returning from
the conquest of their enemies, with dancing, thus Saul and David were met.

Thirdly, For honest recreation, as the daughters of Shiloh used to dance at
their solemn feasts, Judge. 21. 19.

Fourthly, wanton and lascivious, such as Herodias before Herod to please him,
wherewith his amorous and wanton eye was so entangled, Mark 6. 23.

He concludes the two first lawful and commendable the third indifferent and
tolerable, the last wicked and abominable, although alone. Divines therefore
condemn not all dancing, only that which is mixed, men and women dancing
together, or immodest of either apart.


Countr. The Lord promises, Jer. 31. 13. That the Virgins shall rejoice in the
Dance, both young men and old together, therefore mixed dancing is allowed.


Min. There is not the least color for such a conclusion, the place shows,
that the greatnesle of favors shall occasion such greatness of joy to women,
That the Virgins shall rejoice in the Dance, and to men, That young men and old
shall rejoice together, answerable to Exodus 15. 1. Moses and the men, verse 20.
Miriam and the women, for no mixed kind of dancing can I think be found in
scripture.

2. Chassanion says, The words are an allegorical promise of joy to come, by
a Metaphor taken from the Rite used in those times in praising God.


Schol. But Sir, you may remember the Septuagint reads it thus, (...), then the
Virgins shall rejoice in the Synagogue of young men, and the Elders shall
rejoice.


Min. First. but observe, it is (...) not (...) in the Synagogue, where they
met to worship God, not in a dancing place.

Secondly, And they read it (...) not (...), they shall rejoice, not dance
together.

Thirdly, The Hebrew word is (...) in the dance, I confess, what then? it
refers to the Virgins only, as both the Hebr. whose distinction here is
Sakeph-Katon, and the English translation has it, (...) Hebr. (...) Chald.
(...)*
so the Latin of which forthwith.

Tunc laetabitur caetus Israelis (solet autem virgo appellari ver. 4. and Is.
37. 22) cum infestis vel in tripudijs (quae infestis agitari solent) Juvenes
simul sunt una cum senibus. Then shall the congregation of Israel, (which is
usually called a Virgin, as v. 4. and Isa. 37. 22.) when in their Feasts or
Dances (which they used at their Feasts) young men and old men shall be
together. Thus it is rendered by the Chaldee Paraphrase, which interpretation,
R. David Kimchi repeats also, but refutes not. Then here are no virgins
dancing, the vulgar Latin, Tunc laetabitur virgo in choro, juvenes and senes
simul, Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, the young men and old
together, where it does apparently distinguish the Virgin from the young and
old men, which two later he puts together, and the other alludes to the custom
anciently of the virgins and women dancing, Exodus 15. 20. Psalm. 68. 26. and
this after the Hebrew, so the English as was said before.


Countr. But who were the first authors of mixed dancing?


Min. I suppose the first Authors are scarce to be traced out, although some
say that Orpheus and Mus^us were the first inventors of it, some the Jews, but
it matters not.


Schol. Your discourse with my brother, has put some scruples into my head,
for I ever thought dancing a thing indifferent, besides I have read a learned
work of a famous Doctor, who condemns the French Ministers for condemning
dancing, and I know many Ministers that do not disallow of it.


Minist. Amongst Divines there is often times a difference in judgment about some
things E. G.

First, Many who allow of some games at cards for recreation condemn dice, yet
there are two men of note who have written in defense of Lusory lots, the one I
have read clogd with cautions, I think Dicers do not observe.

Secondly, It Is ordinary and common with people to go to Stage plays, and there
are Ministers that approve of doing so, others, as Doctor Renolds, one of the
conference at Hampton Court, an Ornament to Oxford and England, whilst he
lived, wrote a learned book against them in answer to Doctor Gentilis and
before him the ancient Fathers.

Thirdly, Suppose your Doctor were so learned as you emblason him, will you
oppose him to a whole constellation of brighter stars?

Fourthly, But let me see what your Doctor says for dancing?


Schol. The French, says he, are so generally affected to dancing, that were
it not so much inveighed against by their straight-laced Ministers, it is
thought that more of the French Catholics had been of the reformed Religion,
for extremely are they bent on this sport, that neither age nor sickness, no
nor poverty it self, can make them keep their heells when they hear the Music
What makes their Minister inveigh so bitterly against dancing, and punish it
with such severity where it is used, I am not able to determine. But being it
is a recreation which this people are so given unto, and such a one as cannot
be followed, but in a great deal of company, as before many witnesses and
spectators of their actions. I must needs think the Ministers of the French
Church more nice then wise if they choose rather to deter men from their
Congregations by so strict a stoicisme, then to indulge any thing unto the
jollity, and natural gaity of the people in matters not offensive but by
accident only. Thus he.


Min. I know what Doctor you mean, I have read his Cosmography, and like the
book well enough, although I cannot approve of every passage, as not of this in
the 146 page of the folio Edition. But what do you gather from this passage?


Schol. That this learned man thinks dancing not offensive, and that the French
Ministers are to blame in inveighing so against it.


Min. He says more for dancing in this passage, and in his history of the
Sabbath, then ever I read in all other, but how will you argue from his words
to prove those particulars you collect from him.


Schol. First, Because the French Nation are so naturally given to it.

Secondly, Because it is publicly performed, and before many witnesses.

Thirdly, Because was this indulged, they might fo^sake Popery.

Fourtly, Because a man so learned and of great reading, knows not why the
Minister, of the French Church should so inveigh against it.

Fifthly, Because it is offensive by accident only.


Min. In answer to your arguments from that passage, I assure you that I see no
weight at all in them to commend dancing, or to condemn the French Ministers.
For

First, According to your first reason, Drunkenness in Saint Augustines time
was to be indulged to the Affricans, since to the Germans, now the English,
because they are much given to it.

Secondly, The abominable filthiness to Baal Peor, and other heathenish
abominations, were publicly performed, and before many witnesses: So the
Stage-plaies condemned by the Fathers, not therefore lawful. Besides, although
they are publicly performed, yet may they occasion private pollutions, such as
Matthew. 5. 28.

Thirdly, Nor is it certain they would forsake popery, was this indulged to
them, and if they would, we must not do evil, that good may come thereof. Romans
3. 8.

Fourthly, His not knowing why they should so inveigh against it, seems
strange to me, that a man of learning should condemn, before he had read and
confuted some of their books. That he who acquaints us with their Synods and
Councills condemning dancing, should see in none any cause why. He tells us it
was condemned in a Council in Sens 1524. at Paris, 1559. at Histor. of Sab.
chap. 6. page 189.
Rhemes and Tours, 1583. at Bourges 1584. and at Rochell, 1571, in these words,
All congregations should be admonished by their Ministers, seriously to
reprehend and suppress all Dancings, Mummeryes, and Interludes, as also all
dancing Masters, or those who make any dancing meetings, after they have been
often admonished, to desist, ought to be excommunicated for that contumacy and
disobedience. I can tell him why Chassanion (one of them I think) concludes
dancing unlawful for Christians, From scriptures, Luke 9. 23. enjoining us to
deny our selves and to follow Christ, Book 3. chap. 3*
Col 3 5. To mortify, Rom 12. 1. 2. To offer our bodies sacrifices, Ephesians. 4.
5. To shun scurrility, or all which may corrupt, as dancing does, and stirring
up of lust.

Secondly, From Fathers, as Origin, Basil, Augustine, Chrysostom.

Thirdly, From Councills.

Fourthly, From the Original, the Gentiles.

Fifthly, Heathens condemning them as Tully in his Oration, Pro Muraena, and in
Philip Salust in Catelinam, concluding, What will the Patrons of dancing say
opposing the word of God, the writings of the Fathers, the judgment of Moral
Heathen condemning, let it shame christians to be followers of them.

Fifthly, As for his saying dancing is offensive by accident only, if so, I
suppose it is to be shunned as an appearance of evil, such being to be avoided
1 Thessalonians. 5. 2.

Secondly, I confess ingeniously, that one Augustine, one Chrysostom, one
Peter Martyr, with the many thousands of ancient and modern Divines and
Churches, moves more with me, then a Divine or two, who speak their minds
before they mind the matter, and such who mind it much, and say little to
defend their sayings.

Thirdly, Concerning him who so severely taxes the French Ministers, let me
add.

First, That the French Church is very considerable, having been much under
persecution, and there being in it seven hundred protestant Churches, two
Ministers to each Church, and more then a milion of protestants, as Cardinal
Bentivoglio, tell us.

Secondly, That this Church has many able and learned Divines, Calvin, Beza,
Sadeel, Deodate, Mornaeus, Chamierus, etc. Not to be slighted by a private
Minister.

Thirdly, That these French Ministers preaching and writing so much against
dancing, and so crying it down as a most sinful and unchristian Pastime, as
himself says, He might soon see and know why they are so strict in preaching,
and printing against it, and punishing it where it is found.

Fourthly, That if himself consider what he has written, he shall find that
he has showed cause sufficient to justify their so doing, for in his Hystory
of Anatolia page 17. in his folio, speaking against Phrygian music, it
disposing people to lasciviousness, he says; There are three sorts of Music,
the third stirs to lascivious gestures, and wanton thoughts, most in use
amongst this loose and ungoverned Nation, such as French music in our age, a
sort of music forbidden by Aristotle save at Theaters. From hence I conclude,

First therefore, There may be just cause, why such straight la-Ministers do so
inveigh against it, himself being Judge.

Secondly, That there is more evil in it, then by accident.

Thirdly, That himself sees in Anatolia matter enough against it, although
whiles he was in France, he did not.

Fourthly, There is cause why he should forbear such kinds of expression as
straitlaced, they being laced in this kind as himself.

Fourthly, Take notice whether popish Divines allow of dancing, if not, then it
is not dancing which keeps people in the Popish Religion* I will name some, 1
Bellarmine (the Papists Champion) Observe well Bellarmine, a Pap^st, his
expressions touching dancing.
in a tract of christian Religion upon Com. 7. (with them the 6.) says, All
which prepare the way to adultery and fornication are forbidden, as wanton
looks, lascivious kisses etc. which I suppose are there.

Mr. Prin out of some Sermons of Bellarmine, namely the 6: 3. 19. 20. has
gathered diverse passages; some whereof are, When are there more sins committed
then on holy days? when are there more dances? But peradventure it is no evil
or a small evil for men to dance with women; yea verily nothing is more
pernicious. If strawes can move to the fire and not be burnt, then a young man
may dance with women, know thou the danger of dancing? how many think
thou have entered Virgins into dances, and returned harlots? know thou not
what Saint Ambrose says, She who is chaste let her learn her daughter prayers
and not dancing. Of dancing I will speak one word, If adultery and fornication
be evil I cannot see how it is not evil for men to dance with women, since it
provokes most of all thereunto. Hear holy Job, I have made Job 31. 1.
a covenant with mine eyes, that I would not think of a maid. And shall thou go
and dance with a maid, and provoke thy self to lust by dancing, and yet no
danger hang over thy head? To what end does the wise man give this admonition,
Keep not company with a woman that is a dancer least happily thou perish in
her allurements. But because if chafe can come to the fire and not be burnt,
then a young man may dance with women, and not burn, will thou add to the heat
of youth the heat of drinking, and then go and laugh and sing, and dance with
beautiful maidens, and shall I suspect no harm? But concerning the madness of
dancing, hear what the Ancients as well profane as sacred have left written.
Tully did so detest the filthinnesse of dances, that he said, No sober Nemo
sobrius saltat; which we may E^glish no man danceth that is not drunk.
man almost danceth, Blush therefore O christian, thou art overcome of an
Ethnic, and without doubt thou shall be condemned by an Ethnic. He by the
light of Nature could teach that dancing was not the practice of any, but
either of drunkards or mad men, and thou, etc. Tell thou us O blessed Ambrose,
thou most reverend old man the light of the christian Church, what think
thou of dances? worthily says he, From thence we proceed to the injury of the
divinity, for what modesty can there be where they dance shreek and make a
noise together? Tell thou us O blessed Hierom what thou deemest of Dancing?
Where the Timbrells sound says he, the pipes make a noise, the harps chatter,
the cymballs strike together, what fear of God can there be? Tell thou us O
Chrysostom the Ornament of Greece, thy opinion of Dancies, Where wanton
dancing is, there the devil is certainly present, the devil danceth in those
dances: Hear the words of Basil the great, a most holy man and most learned,
he deplores this madness, saying, Men and women together entering into common
dances, having delivered their souls unto the drunken devil, wound one another
with the pricks of unchaste affections, etc. This and much more he cites out of
Bellarmine, at the end of his history of the Bishops of Winchester.

Secondly, Nicalaus Causin a French Jesuit, in his holy Court says as
follows, Then come the dances, the frisks, capers, ballads, which makes the
body dissolve into corruption, with what a conscience can a man expect paradise
living in this manner? Page 52. Amongst the breaches of the sixth commandment
(with them) he names dances as attending wantonness. Page 69 How can you count
says he, a gadding house-wife, a dancing reveller, to be modest? page 107.
Hierome says, The Law of God was not for dancers, drunkards. Page 109. But of
idle songs, dancings, etc. such attractives are the forerunners of the loss of
Chastity. page 304 in his Diary, which is by it self, and also in the folio,
in the head of Recreations, he says, As for dancing etc. They are dangerous
Councillors of wisdom, as ill teachers of modesty, some may be sanctified in
them by miracle, but every day more is lost in them by weakness, seeing our
force is weak, not miraculous, we ought by flying from occasions to seek
those effects we cannot find in our own strength. See here a French Jesuit
will not indulge dancing into his countrymen.

Thirdly, John De Burgo, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, about the
later end of Henry the sixth, in a Book called Pupilla ^culi (as your Doctor
tells us in his Hystory of the Sabbath, page 234.) says, That they who dance
to stir up themselves or others to carnal lusts, commit a mortal sin.

Fourthly, Brugensis in Matthew. 14. 6. says as follows, she (Herodias
daughter) danced, She used Gestures as in Dances, she delighted those who
were present with lascivious gestures, before them openly, that is, They all
beholding, which could not be done, without a foul sign of a whorish
wantonness: Public dancing of such a maid, voluntarily passing into the
feast, this therefore did beseem the daughter of an harlot, there is nothing
more forcible then the beholding of the dancing of an unchaste woman, applied to
musical instruments. He, that is Herod, did not only suffer dancing, but was
so delighted with the foolish and lascious dancing of the woman dancer, v. 11.
That the Head of John Baptist was given as a reward of dancing to a maid, a
virgin exceeding all harlots in impudency, Thus he.

Fifthly, I have read that it was the saying of Frederick the third, an
Emperor, that he had rather (Febricitare quam saltare) be sick of a Fever then
dance.


Schol. But Francis Sales, Bishop of Geneva, in his Introduction to a devout
life, allows of dancing.


Min. In that book part 3. Chapter 33. he says, Dances and balls in their own
nature are things indifferent, but as they are ordinarily used they incline to
much to evil, and consequently are full of danger, They are used by night, in
darkness and obscurity, and it is easy to slide obscure, and vicious
accidents into a subject so capable of evil. They watch long in their pastimes
and afterward lose the mornings, and by consequence the opportunity of serving
God. In a word, it is always folly to change day into night, light into
darkness, and good works into wantonness, every one striveth who shall carry
thither most vanity, and vanity is so great a dispposition to depraved
affections, dangerous and reprehensible Loves, that all Getard cum Johnson
affirm that no sort of Mushromes are wholesome food, p. 1578. and advise such
who love such strange meat to beware of licking h^ne^ among thorns p. 1584.
those mischeifs are eas^ly engendered in Dancings. I say of Dances Philothea,
as Physicians say of Mushrooms, the best of them are nothing worth, yet thou will needs eat mushrooms, be sure they be well dressed, if upon some occasion
which thou can not well excuse, thou must go to a ball, see that thy Dance be
well ordered: Bue how must it be well ordered? with modesty, gravity, and
modest intention: Eat but little and seldom of Mushromes say the Physicians,
for be they never so well dressed, the quantity makes them poisonous. Dance
little and very seldom Philothea, for otherwise thou put thy self in
danger to become affectionate to it. Mushrooms according to Pliny, being spongy
and porous, do easily draw infection to them, so that being near Serpents and
Toads, they receive Venom from them: Maskes, Dances, and other night meetings,
ordinarily attract the sins and vices of the time into one place, as quarrels,
envy, scoff^ng, and wanton love, and these Exercises open the pores of the
body, so they also open the heart, by means whereof, if any Serpent taking
advantage, breath into the ear some wanton wordor lascivious discourse, or if
some Basilisk glance an unchaste look or immodest eye, the heart then opened is
easily seized on and poisoned. O Philothea, those impertinent recreations are
ordinarily dangerous, they distract the spirit of devotion, weaken the force,
and make Charity cold, and stir'in the soul a thousand evil affections, and
therefore they are to be used with great discretion. But above all they say,
that after Mushroomes, we must drink wine, and I say, that after dancing it is
necessary to use good and holy meditations, to hinder the dangerous impressions
which the vain pleasure taken in dancing may have left in our mind. But what
meditations? That whilst thou wast dancing at Note.
the Mask, many souls did burn in hell for sins committed in dancing or by
occasion of it, that many religious and devout persons were at that very time
in the presence of God singing his praises, and contemplating his beauty, Oh
how much more happily was that time spent then mine? that whilst thou wast
dancing many Souls departed out of this world in great anguish, many thousands
men and women suffered great pain in their beds, in hospitalls, in the streets,
by the stone, gout, and burning fever. Alas they have had no rest, and will thou have no compassion on them? And think thou not that one day thou shall
groan as they did, whilst thou did dance as thou did? That our blessed
Savior and the Angels behold thee dancing, Oh how did they pity thee, seeing
thy heart busied in these trifles, and so attentive to this trash? alas whilst
thou wast there the time is passed away and Death is come nearer. See how he
marks thee and calls thee to his dance, in which the groans of thy friends
shall be thy music, and where thou shall make but one step from life to death.
This dance is the true pastime of mortal men, since by it we pass in a moment
of time to eternity of joy or pain. I have set thee down these few
considerations, God will suggest better to thee, if thou fear him. Thus he who
with his thunderbolts has confounded all his cautions which are so far also
from being observed by our Dancers, that not any one of them, I fear, drink one
drop of his wine, his meditations, but rather think of their own and others
vanity and folly with delight and desire of more.


Schol. In Chap. 34. he is more punctual for dancing, telling us of some
Saints who danced.


Min. The next Chapter he does erroniously affirm, that compliance makes
indifferent things good, dangerous, tolerable, and even takes away the
mischief from these things which are in some sort evil. 1. But first this is
vain, For we may not do evil that good may come thereof, nor will compliance
make drunkenness no sin, or not so dangerous. 2. His Saints as Ignatius,
Loiola, the father of the Jesuits and such like are not much to be regarded. 3.
Were they such indeed as he affirms they were, yet he tells us that their
devotion was such that it grew amongst vanities, that their fires grew bigger
by such winds, whereas little ones (such as our dancers have) are soon blown
out. And so he affirms, with Nicholas Causin, it was by miracle, they were not
prejudiced thereby, which is no encouragement to any of ours, he who well weighs
him, will think him a poor patron for dancing.


Schol. You did speak of Churches and Fathers condemning dancing, name some.


Min. I will begin with the Waldenses and Albigenses, (Luthers and our
forerunners) a people who suffered for Christ a bitter persecution as ever did
any; they in their Doctrine, speaking of Sam. Leonard. Hist of Albig. book 2
chap. 9.
dancing say, A dance is the devils procession, and he who enters into a
dance, enters into his possession, the devil is the guide, the middle and the
and of the dance, so many paces as a man makes in dancing, so many paces he
makes to go to hell, in their judgment it is a sin damnable with a witness.

As for the ancient Fathers, I shall name some

First. Chrysostom Where there is lascivious dancing, the devil In M^tth. 1^.
Hom. 49.
is certainly present. God has not given us feet for dancing, but to walk
modestly, not to leap impudently like camels, but to stand in the Consort of
Angels, in those dances the devil danceth, in these men are deceived by the
Ministry of Devils. Here he condemns mixed, or immixt if immodest else where-
See how modestly says he they behaved themselves at Weddings, hear all In
Genesis 29. Hom. 56.
you who do so much admire Satanicall pompes, were there then any pipes? were
there then any Cymballs? were there then any divelish dancings? Tell me why at
the beginning do thou bring into thy house so great an hurt? and do call
those who are conversant in Stages, and with much cost do hurt the Virgins
continency, and make the young men more impudent? it is difficult enough for
that Age to bear moderately the Tempest of Affections, without such
provocations, but when these are added, as well what are seen and what are
heard, the fire is more kindled, and the furnace of concupiscence is more
inflamed, how shall not the Soul of youth perish? from hence all things are
corrupted, because the chastity of them are met together is hurt, and often the
first day the young man seeing with incontinent eyes, he is wounded in Soul
with the devils dart, and the Damsel by those things she hears and sees, is
made captive. This Father has many passages against Dancing.

Secondly, Augustine says, Observe the Sabbath day not in a carnal and
fleshly manner, nor in Jewish delights, who abuse their In Psalm* 32. Conc.
prima.
leisure to lewdness and wickedness, for doubtless it were better they
dug all day then danced all day. Where it is evident, that whether it was on
the Sabbath or any other day, he counted dancing a wicked delight and
recreation, elsewhere more fully. The Jews says he, keep the Sabbath with
Luxury and Idleness, whereas God commands to observe the Sabbath, they spend
it in that God has forbidden, for it is better to plow then to dance, they In
Psalm. 91. not far from ihe beginning. In Matthew. 14.
rest from good workts, and are taken up in that which is trifling and foolish.
Where it is plain, that he reckons dancing a thing forbidden of God at any
time, although worse on that day as is drunkenness or whoredom worse then,
although evil at all things.

Thirdly, Hie^ome speaking of Herodias daughter asking John Baptists head,
says, ^or the noble work of dancing, she demanded the worthy price of blood.

Fourthly, Tertullian has a passage to this purpose, Nam etsi qui modeste
spectaculis (and sic de t^ipudijs) f^uitur non tamen immobilis est animi sine
tacita spiritus passioue De Spectat. Tit. de mun^re
as if none are so dead but dancing will drumm up, but to what purpose do I
name some Fathers, whereas they were generally against all such vanities.


Schol. True it is, the ancient Fathers were bitter against dancing, Histo. of
Sabb. part 2. p. 87.
but as the learned Doctor I before named, answers. The Fathers spoke so much
against dancing, in reference to the thing or unto the time.

First in reference to the thing, They danced naked, page 85. They used
lascivious Gestures, and to prove it, he quotes Saint Ambrose affirming, That
the women in the sight of wanton and lascivious youths, danced immodest dances,
tossing about their hair, drawing aside their coats, that so they may lay
open what should not be seen, their garments open, their arms quite bare,
clapping their hands, capring with their feet, chanting obsoene filthy songs,
stirring up the lusts of ungoverned men by those uncomely motions, wanton
looks, and shameful spectacles, page 86. and 88. he quotes Ambrose,
restraining all toying, light, and beastly kind of dancing, concluding thence,
In case the dances be not toying, light, nor beastly, the Fathers did not
intend them.

Secondly, In reference to the time, Men preferring their pastimes before their
prayers: For this end he quotes Augustine Part 2. page 107.
in Psalm. 32. better men did dig all the day then dance all day on the
Sabbath. He mentions also, a council held at Petricow in Poland, forbidding
dancing on the Lords day, especially at that instant men should be at Church,
which says he, clearly shows, they prohibited dancing no otherwise, then they
were a means to Part 2 p. 169.
keep men from Church.


Min. I have read your Authors books, and would have you observe.

First, That he says, Probably as dancings were in former times they might not
be suffered, page 85.

Secondly, Nay which is more, it had been an infinite scandal to the church if
they had permitted it, page 85.

Thirdly, For there was much impurity and immodesty, such as was not to be
beheld by a christian eye, Because

First, They used lascivious Gestures, and are ours free from them?

Secondly, They danced naked, for which Ambrose is named, whereas in that place
of Ambrose there is no such thing, the nearest words to such a sense are,
drawing aside their coats, therefore they were clothed, and do not many of
our Dancers toss about their hair, and behave themselves according as Saint
Ambrose describes them?

Fourthly, that himself affirms, page 86. That only common women, or such
loose trulls as Messalina, so danced. Which Messalina (as Master Greenhill on
Ezekiell) gloried that in four and On chap. 16. page 231.
twenty hours, she had entertained five and twenty men.

Fifthly, And further says, page 87. This made the Fathers inveigh generally
against all dancings, against the sport it self. Thus I think himself has
answered this objection.

Moreover, whereas he infers from these words, Light and beastly dancing,
therefore those which are not so, are not to be repr^hended. This is not
rightly concluded, but dancing has those Epithetes given to disgrace it: As if
a man should say abominable filthy, swinish drunkenness, these are Epithetes
to disgrace, not to prove there is a drunkenness which is lawful. Or as the
Apostle Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 3. Abominable idolatries, shows all to be such,
not any to be lawful idolatries.

Lastly, Concerning Saint Augustines digging or dancing all the Sabbath day.
The words will not bear such a conclusion, as if it was forbidden only as
keeping men from Church, for

First, I hope neither were lawful at that time, if both were lawful at other.

Secondly, The words therefore must carry this sense.

First, Either that the one the work is lawful, the other the sport is
unlawful, so dancing is unlawful.

Secondly, Or if both are lawful, then that it is more lawful Answer to
Burton c. 4. p. 80. C. 3. p. 112.
to labor on the Lords day, then to use lawful sports on the Lords day, so
sports on the Lords day are unlawful against your Doctors opinion in another
book.


Schol. But Fathers were particular men, have any Council forbidden dancing as
unlawful?


Min. Many as of Laodicea, Ilardense, Toledo etc. your Doctor mentions diverse.
page 185. and from those words added in some, Especially at that instant when
men should be at Church, he infers, Which clearly shows they prohibited
dancing, and the other pastimes there recited, no otherwise then as they were a
means to keep men from the Church. Should a Law forbid drunkenness, especially
when people should be at Church, does that Law forbid drunkenness no otherwise
then as a means to keep men from Church? you are able to see the weakness of
such conclusions, and that such especially are aggravations of crimes, which
are faults at all times.


Schol. But these are ancient, what men in the present and protestant Church of
note condemn dancing, for I do not much regard every one.


Min. First, Peter Martyr, Once professor at Oxford, an eminent man, in his
common places, divides dancing into four kinds.

First, Pyrrhicam, which was to dance in Armor and Soldiers weapons, invented
by Pyrrhus, this souldierlike in commpleat harness he disalloweth not.

Secondly, Lascivious, which says he all men condemn.

Thirdly, In expression of joy which is not forbidden, because nimblenesse of
body is the gift of God, and if art be added to it, that the body may be moved
in order. and fit number and with a grace, it is not to be reprehended so it be
in season, for as it is lawful to sing, and by singing to praise God, so may
we testify the joy of the mind by moderate dancing, Exodus 15. 20 1 Samuel 18. 7.
2 Samuel 6. 16.

Fourthly, Mixed, This says he ought not to be, because these are nourishers
and provocations of wantonness and lusts. Neither Miriam nor the women, nor
David danced so, but men with men, women with women, and because they who love
the Lord with all their Soul, and with all their strength, ought not only to
keep his commandments, but are to cut off all ways whereby the keeping of
them is hindered, our dancings are evident occasions of transgressing Gods Law,
they are snares and scandalls, not only to the dancers, but also to the
spectators, for they provoke and stir up the heart of men, otherwise bad
enough, and that which is to be repressed with great study and industry, is
stirred up by the allurement of dancing. He cites some Councills, as that at
Laodicea, That Christians should not dance at marriages, but that they should
dine and sup gravely and modestly, and give God thanks for the benefits of
Marriage. In the same Council, Clergy men may be present at Marriages, but
when the singers and Minstrells come who serve to dancing, let them arise and
be gone, least by their presence they seem to approve of that wantonness. And
the Council of Ilerdense, We decree that christians do not dance at marriages,
and he quotes diverse heathen men also against dancing

Secondly, Doctor Ames Professor at Franekar, in his cases of Conscience,
says, Mixed dancings are wholly to be condemned.

First, Because they do express a certain Arrogance and madness of the mind,
for then are people most disposed to them when they are almost mad with
drunkeness or some violent affection, Exodus 32. 6. Mar. 6. 2.

Secondly, Because they openly represent with their Gestures those things,
which in the order of Nature have shamefullnesse joined.

Thirdly, because they are Snares and Offenses not only to the dancers, but
others the spectators also, for they stir up wantonness and inflame the hearts
of men to lust, which is carried thither with such facility, that by all means
it is to be suppressed.

Fourthly, Because in them there is a certain disgracing of that dignity which
ought to be preserved in all christians, and therefore amongst the most sober
Gentiles, such were used only by hirelings, harlots and singing wenches.

Then he answers four cautions used to justify dancing.

First, If dancing be used moderately and not too often.

Answ. Measure is sought in vain, in insolency, in madness, and such like,
because they are in excess.

Secondly, It is merely for recreation or delight, not from lightness and
lust.

Ans. We are to consider in our consciences, not only the end and intention of
the doer, but also the end of the work, and what is wont to flow from it,
especially when the thing it self is no ways necessary.

Thirdly, If used in good and honest company.

Answ. First we are not to give scandal to good and honest people.

Secondly, If they be so qualified, that they are without danger of offense,
they are worthy so much more Reverence which forbids to use any light and
witless toys before them.

Fourthly, If they be used to procure good will between young men and maids,
and so of making marriage between them.

Answ. Every way of making marriages is not to be allowed, but only such as are
honest ways of unpolluted marriages.

Thirdly, Your Doctor in his Geography of the Alps, says, that Dancing by no
means is tolerated at Geneva, and in his history of the Sabbath part 2. page
188. he shows, that Calvin in an Epistle to Farell says, Corneus and Perinus
with one Heinrichus one of the Elders of the church, a Syndike, and some other
of their friends being merry at an invitation fell into dancing. Calvin called
them before him to the consistory, except Corneus and Perinus, being
interrogated they denied, he puts them to their oaths about it, they confessed
their dancing, and in the house of widow Balthasats, he censures, the Syndick
is displaced, the Elder turned out of office, Perin and his wife clapped into
prison, the rest put to shame, anno 1546.

4ly. Calvin in Job 21 13. says, That mixed dancing of men and women together,
are nothing else then panderships and provocations to whoredom.

Fifthly, A certain writer records the sad effects of bad dancing (although not
mixed) mentioned in Scripture.

1. Exodus 32. 6. They rose up to play, by which says he, is understood their
dancing, singing and leaping before the calfe, as appears by the noise which
was made, described by Moses and Joshua, before they came to the calf, these
who danced did run to their own ruin and slaughter.

2. Matthew. 14. Mar. 6. Herodias her dancing is much condemned,

1. Because it was not for good, and nothing tending to the glory of God, or
good of others.

2. Because of its sad effects, it does for the most part corrupt the chastest,
and adds fuel to the fire of lust, both in the dancers and Spectators, few
can depart from such exercises, but more prone and ready to violate the Laws of
continency.

3. Because of the sad and deplorable end, as in the midst of such laughter the
heart is sad, so the end of such mirth is mourning to themselves or to others.

1. To others, The wanton dancer could not be recompensed but with John's death,
His head says Chrysostom, is the reward of the wanton dancer.

2. To themselves* this dancing Herodias being to pass a river which was
frozen over, it so pleased the Divine providence, that the ice brake, and
swallowed up her whole body to the head, and so that body which did dance so
wantonly on earth, did dance miserably in the waters, and by the Justice of God
she lost her own head (being beheaded by the meeting of the ice) that was
rewarded with the head of the Baptist, in which judgment we may read the sin,
so that as Aelian reports of the puffers that being deceived with the pipes and
dancing of the fishers, they are easily caught, so the fisher of souls the
devil, draws many into his nets by this deceit, this being the bait which
hides his hook. says my author.

Sixthly, Bishop Babington upon the seventh Commandment, says, Dancing is in
the number of vain pastimes, an allurement unto uncleanesse, as much experience
has too well proved. The scriptures check it, the Fathers mislike it,
Councills have condemned it, and the proofs of Gods judgments upon it, bid us
beware; he quotes Fathers, and tells us of a sad judgment 1505. in Colbeck in
Germany, That certain light persons hopping and dancing in the Church yard of
Saint Magnus, being by the Minister admonished to cease, and not ceasing, did
for along time, not able to stay, run round about, and at last fell all down
dead.

Seventhly, Mr. Perkins upon the seventh Commandment amongst other things
forbidden, be reckons lascivious dancing of man and woman together, and in his
treatise of conscience chap. 3: speaking of recreations to be neglected, he
instanceth in dancing commonly used in these days, in which men and women,
young men and maids all mixed together dance to the sound of the instrument or
voice in time and measure, with many wanton gestures, this exercise cannot be
numbr'd among things indifferent, for experience shows that it had been
usually either a fruit or a follower of great wickedness, as idolatry,
fornication, drunkenness. Hereupon one compares it to a circle, whose center
was the Devil, if we must give account of every idle word, then also of every
idle gesture and pace, and what account can be given of these paces backward
and forward, of cap^ings, jumps, gamholls, turnings with many other frisks of
lightness and vanity, more becoming Goats and apes, of whom they are commonly
used, then men, etc.

Eighthly, Mr. Lake in his Christian pastors proof of his parishoners faith,
page 260 says, Dancing is the bane of faith, religion and good manners, in all
that so use, it as either the high shoe in the barn, or the counterfeit pump
in the dancing School do, the great uncleanesse whereof heaven and earth do
loath and speak against, for the scriptures not only divine but humane, and
those Ethnical as well as Ecclesiastical have reproved and condemned it. Calv.
on Job 21. 11. says, this sprung not up first in our days, being of such
antiquity, Satan seeking thereby as by nothing fitter to keep men in fleshly
delights, to choke the spiritual, comparing the madness of dancers to gadding
of beasts, as scared out of their wits, and derides them for this (which a far
off a man would think) that they cast themselves in air as if they would skip
out of themselves so great pains) does lust in the presence and company of a
dancing trull, make the country Springhal to bruise his body and defile his
soul, with what fathers Ecclesiastical have not in their sermons made bitter
invectives against it? Ignat. Ambr. etc. the exactness of skill in dancing
tends either to pride or lechery or both, the two great stains of a christian
professed. Theophylact, when the younker thinks he has a maid by the hand he
closes hand with the devil in the shape of the maid whom he makes his
substitute, dancing is a kind of madness; then he calls the fiddler the devils
baudy factor, the bellows of Satan, stirring to blow up the coals of lust on
each side, and yet the miserable wretch sees not that as his eye cannot go
undefiled in his own lust, so besides his own sin he engages himself as a band
and abettor in all the sin that is through his instrument either wrought in
heart presently or after upon that entrance concluded upon or committed between
parties, or even at the cart or plow side by his disciples thought upon or
whistled, as we shall hear the feilds, and streets to resound of their dances,
but never a whit of David's Psalms. thus he. Ninthly, Mr, Trap on Mark. 6. 22.
She danced with immodest gesticulations and tripping on the toe, wherewith the
old fornicator was so inflamed that he swore she should have any thing of him,
and on Matthew. 14. 6 he says, so as Robert Duke of Normandy passed through
Falaise, he beheld among a company of young maids dancing, one Arlet a skinners
daughter, whose nimbleness in her dance so inamourd the Duke that he took her
for his concubine, such and no better commonly are the effects of mixed dancing,
which made Chrysostom. say, where dancing is there the Devil is, and another
ancient calls dancing a circle, whose center is the devil blowing up the
fire of concupiscence in the hearts of the actors, and spectators, Augustine
says, that every caper in the dance is a leap into a deep jakes, no sober man
does dance says Cicero, thus he.

Thus I have showed you Divines ancient and modern, protestant and papist,
Episcopal and presbyterian condemned dancing as unlawful.


Count. Some old melancholic men would abridge us young men of lawful liberty
themselves being past it.


Min. Truly friend I do not mention these passages nor those which follow out
of a stoicall melancholic humor. 1 I being naturally cheerful. 2. Nor am I
an enemy to music, I love it, I have had some little skill in it, and have
delight in music, might I hear it from sober persons.

3 Nor do I dissuade to abridge you or any of the least lawful liberty; for
could I be satisfied of the lawfullnesse of dancing, I would diswade no longer.

But the reasons of this my discourse with you being one of my charge, are

1. To free my own soul Ezekiel. 3. 17. 18. for although I desire to err with no
one or many, yet cannot but judge with such and so many who have dissuaded from
this Particular upon such grounds.

2. And that in recreations

First, you may not give your selves wholly t^ sports and delights.

Secondly, you carefully look that your recreations agree to time, place and
person.

Thirdly, You may not delight in unseemly and unclean words or actions which
bring obscene scurrility.

Fourthly, And that you may be fully satisfied in your consciences of the
lawfullnesse of such recreations which you use, since he who sins against
conscience, sins with a witness within.

Fifthly, And as for dancing that you may see the Fathers unanimously, Divines
Episcopal, presbyterian, and popish, whole Churches (as of the French, Geneva,
Waldenses) many Councills and Synods, of which what one are for it? condemn it.


Count. But I see no hurt in it, I think it is good.


Min. First, So say many, for other vicious things they delight in, perhaps you
see no hurt in, but think evil thoughts, idle words, and scurrilous to be
good, accounting such to be merry talk.

Secondly, Our thinking proves not things to be lawful or unlawful, but when
we think as we ought or ought not.


Count. We love not to be abridged for our recreations.


Min. Adam had trees enough besides the forbidden fruit, so have people of
recreations.


Count. But none will satisfy men so well as dancing.


Min. Then dance the dance of those heathen who danced commendably thus.

First. The old men began singing out their valorous actions they had done for
their country, to stir up others to do the like.

Secondly, Then the young men following, answered they would be such as the
other had been.

Thirdly, then followed the children, promising to imitate both.

Secondly, Or if you will dance, because it is so often mentioned in Scripture,
then dance as they did.

First, their dancing was not mixed, but men or women by themselves.

Secondly, Theirs was not accompanied with amorous songs, but psalms of praise.

Thirdly, Theirs was occasioned by Spiritual joy.

Fourthly, theirs was, First to praise and glorify God. Secondly, or for
civil recreation only, each sort apart, if any such can be found in Scripture,
for that in the last of Judges is mentioned but not commended.


Dance as David did, who then will blame you? what good man, if lame will not
endeavor to join with you? it is the mixed dancing men and women dance together
with wanton gestures, and the single wanton dancing, which is condemned


Count. But why should these be condemned?


Min. 1 have you not heard sufficiently why? 2, They are justly condemned. 1.
Because they have been the fruits and followers of other sins. 2* Because they
are accounted as bellows of lust, as causes of much evil. 3. Because they are
of evil report. 4. Because at the best, they have an appearance of evil,
therefore to be shunned 1 These. 5. 22* 5. Because they encourage a sort of men
who are 1. Vicious, for although they have songs which are civil and perhaps
religious, as if they had thoughts of heaven, yet at the wish of some to vex
others present, or to show their own superfluity of naughtiness, they have
songs to sing, as if they were before Priapus or Baal Peor, such as if the
devil was the inditer of them, too vile for any chaste ear. 2. Unprofitable.
There is great difference between laudable Musicians who delight with voice,
and instrument, yea who teach one or both in a modest manner, and these whose
carriage for the most part, is (if not wholly) to corrupt youth 6. Because
wantonness is condemned in scripture, 1 As a work of darkness, Romans 13. 13. 2,
As a work of the flesh. Gal. 5. 19. 3. As a work of an unregenerate man,
Ephesians. 4. 19. 4. Hindering the putting on of Christ, Rom 13. 13. 5. And shunned
by converted christians, 1 Pet. 4. 3. This wantoness is often forbidden in
scripture, in Greek it is (...) which is compounped of a and (...), which
Selge, they say was a city between Galatia and Cappadocia, whose inhabitants
some say were modest and temperate, and then a is privative, as noting want of
modesty others affirm the people to be dissolute and lewd, a is intensive,
dilating and increasing the sense. Howsoever wantonness is thought to be open
profession and ostentation of incontinency, by unchaste words, gestures apparel
etc. and so in wantonness is forbidden. 1 A wanton eye which glanceth, gazeth
looks upon, 1 pictures which are unseemly, bringing folly and filthiness to the
mind. 2 Persons naked in whole or part of contrary sex, 2 Samuel 11. 2. 3 And
often, the 1 Beauty Prove. 6. 25. 2. Attire, Prove. 7. 10. of others. 2 A wanton
tongue, so all obscene speeches. 1 Such being forbidden, Ephesians. 4. 29. 2. As
signs of an impure heart Luke 6. 45. 3. Such being temptations to the hearers
corrupting them 1 Cor. 15. 33. 4. Such being a verbal acting of filthiness. 5
Often and in some sort more dangerous then the act, infecting far more. 6.
Disgracing men, declaring what they are, for such as the words are, such
usually are the men. 3. A wanton ear given to scurrilous songs, wanton speeches
and discourses, Prove. 7. 11. with her speech she caused him to yield. 4. A
wanton lip given to wanton kissing, for as there are other, so there is the
harlots kiss, Prove. 7. 13. 1 with intention to stir up lust. 2 To nourish
carnal and sinful lust. 3 For carnal delight betwixt such who are not
married. 5. A wanton foot and a wanton hand given to filthy touching, which is
as a dart, a spear, and a sword.

All which or some of these usually accompany such wanton dancing and before we
depart let me persuade you to consider.

1. That an account must be given to God (and how soon we know not) of every
idle word, Matthew. 12. 36. and must there not (think you) as strict an account
be given for idle gestures, glances, paces, much more if they be uncivil, and
clearly sinful?

2. Do evil communications corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33. and do not
evil gestures also?

3. Since Solomon says of laughter, it is mad Eccl. 2. 2. what would he say
think you of such kind of dancing, in which ordinarily there is so much obscene
scurrility?

4. Should your pleaders for dancing, describe what manner of dancings and
dancers must be to make a lawful dancing, I suppose we should not find the
one or the other amongst our dancing companions nor in Sir Thomas Moors Vtopia.

5 And that in points disputable, as it is a good rule to take the safest
course, so it is the safest and surest course Not to sport on the Lords day,
Not to play at dice and cards, Not to be usurers, Not to dance. You having
heard so many grave and learned men condemn it, without dispute as abominable
in the sight of God and men.


FINIS.

