NEWS FROM ROME, OR A TRVE RELATION OF THE Conference which the POPE held with
Three of his chief Cardinals, and a Dominican Pryer, in his Palace at Rome,
against Bohemia, and these Parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland. At which
time a Letter was forged from the Emperor to the King of France. And all the
Proceedings in their Discourse, and the sharp Tants that the Pope received
from his Ieaster at the same time: and the issue thereof.

There were in this Conferen^e, 1 The Pope himself. 2 Burghesius. 3 Caesario. 4
Romanio. 5 A Domiuican Friar. 6 The Popes Ieaster.


LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by Henry Walker, 1641.

NEWS from ROME.
The Pope sitting in his Royal Palace with his Minion Cardinals ab^^^ him,
rose up, and spoke before them, as follows.

I Know you all understand, as well as J, how all our projects are disallowed,
our Curses derided, and our power slighted. What shall we do? People do now
begin to laugh at our Pardons, Derges, Masses, Purgatories; only now desiring
Salvation through Christ?


Caesario answered.

Your Holiness, dear Father, has related a sad Story: yet why should we
fear?


Pope. Why Caesario? Princes begin to cast us off, let us look to that: let men
live well, or ill, let Nations swell in wars, let them go to Heaven or to
Hell, it matters not; only let our Supremacy be held up, and our Riches,
Glory, and Delight maintained.


Caesario. Do you consider, holy Father, who revolt from you, who seek not to
you, except some scattered Lutherans, or Malcontents, or some penurious
fools; stirred up by Satan.


Pope. Few? Is it few, when whole Kingdoms have fallen from us, who care not
for us, or our threats in England, Scotland, or Ireland: are not our Legates,
thrust out of Bohemia, and our Priests made a prey? What can France do against
it self, to advance us? The Netherlands triumph under their new Governors, and
have cast us often! Cursed be that unluckie Geneva, that was the lea^er of them
all: Luther proclaimed all disgrace against us. Indeed the Grecians compl^in
that they are poor, and we enjoy their wealth.


Caes. If it be so, yet remember who you are, even Peter's successor. Open the
Church-treasure, have not your Bulls, your Curses, with all those male-dicting
Relations, (which have in former Ages kept them in awe) as much force now? Then
send them forth.


Dominick the Friar stood up, and bowing himself to the ground, spoke as
follows.

With Reverence to your Holiness, be it spoken. Alas! alas! what will Curses
now do, Bulls or Threats, since they do s^offe at all?


Burghesius answering, said.

Peter bids us to kill, and eat; let slaughter end the quarrel: let us entise
the Prince to war.


Dominick answered.

O say not so, this makes us odious.


Romanio gives his advice, and said.

Let us like Macchabeus rouse up our courage with warlike Charles, both with
Treasure and Blessings to assist his war against the Heretics.


Dominick. This is more probable to do us good, but there are such divisions
in our own Country unappeased, that we know not how to reconcile them.


Then the Pope standing up, in a great fume answered.

What shall we then let all alone, and sit still, and sigh? Is not the
Palatinate under us, their Country is destroyed; for they revolted. But
consider, that low-brought Family, does now look for aid from BRITAIN, both
horse, and foot, and infinite relief and treasure. The LONDON Heretics we
hear are resolved to disburse both freely, and large Sums of money. But in
our overthrow they rejoice. And the heavy-headed Datch will now increase in
wealth, as we decay in friends.


Caesario in great compassion said.

What the event may be our Lady knows. But your Holiness may do well, to let
the Princes know you are displeased, and cause them to break off all leagues of
peace.


Dominick answered.

You do surely make passion the Author of advice, which should not be in so
great designs. A stronger League by peace, is more prevalent: then may we
better husband our purpose. Then may our trained Garrisons better march away,
and we fill their places with supply: but let us do this work well.


Burghesius. Holy Sir, it may do well to send your Legate to France: who may
with ease, make that our own.


Dominicke. Are you a Conclavist, and know no more? How many thousands in
France, are ready to seal a Reformation with their blood, and to revolt quite
from us!


Then a Copy of a Letter was read, writ as from the Emperor, to the King of
France: to the end they should consult of it. The substance whereof was this.

MOST NOBLE PRINCE:
MAY it please you to remember, how your Predecessor, Charles the Great,
supported Rome, and rescued the Imperial Seat from the Goths and Saracens,
then be not now unkind to Catholics: But assist us with your Princely care.
Let our nearenesse in blood, increase our Amity, and it will be your Glory
before God, thus to help us against Bohemia, in the just revenge against
Revolters. Consider (worthy Prince) what may issue, in case the Turk shall
understand our troubles at home, and so the Ottonman youth take advatage of our
Distresses; and so we repent, when it is to^ late.


Burghesius stood up when the Letter was read, and spoke before them as
follows.

This was well urged, and may be a President for all Princes, this will do it.
When Poland shall hear of this, Russia, Denmark: if the triple Crowned
Britain knew of it! Surely this would work for us amongst them a l. If
Venice, Savoy, Florence, and the rest were taught this Lession: such a league
might be obtained, as would produce opportunity for our Designs.


Dominick answered.

I do confess, this may seem a prevalent way: but if we take this course, J
presume, it will not do us any good Do not we all know, that though Princes
were Tyrants in their own Kingdoms; yet would they ever protect their Peace
against foreign Enemies. The King of France has wars enough to maintain of
his own. And besides, there is so great alliance in him to the Palsgrave; That
kindness will not suffer him to rise against him: Great Britain by his
Daughter, calls him Son, Denmark, and Norway love him. The Prince of Orange is
near in blood.


Romanio not permitting him to proceed any further, brake forth into an
extreme passion, and said.

Rather then abide in this reproach, I will go to Turk and Tartar. What!
shall our Father and the Church, submit to Traytorous Heretics? No, no, rather
strangers shall defend our Cause, and understand our Canons; and then will I
raise them up, to whip these drunken Sch^smaticks,


Dominick answered,

Come this is frenzy: this is neither policy, zeal, nor Religion: shall we
because the finger aches, therefore cut the whole hand off?


Then the Pope in a great earnestness spoke.

Something must be done; shall we give way to all these T reasons against us,
and not add a Cataplasme to our Disease? Then may the whole Church be
confounded; shall we let Rome and Spain be thus abused? No sure, if God help
no^, the Devil shall: if any Art or Skill will reach it.


Dominick. O say not so: your Holiness may take a calmer course. Dismiss the
cruel Jesuits from thence with all strange projects, and abstain from
Murders, and Cruelties, and send holy, and Reverend Priests ^broad; that may
terrify the hearts of the Auditors, by their Preaching, and zealous
profession, and living: Dear Sir, be ruled by me, and proceed in gentleness.


Then the Pope called to his Ieaster, and said:

Come sirrah, let me talk with thee; for none of these do please my Humor;
What Counsel will thou give me? How shall the Palatinate be settled under us?


The Ieaster answered with a great Laughter.

Who? I! you do me much wrong, to ask me about such things, I have stranger
news to tell you. I must tell you of strange Visions, tending to a further
matter, then either Priest or Cardinal dare relate. Pope. Very like, Come,
speak, what thou will; I will hear what thou say.


The Iester spoke freely before them all as follows.

You have stirred up a Dog from his sleep; and blame me not Sir, though I bark
harsh! The writing on the wall, made Belshazzars knees to shake; but I shall
make thy heart to tremble. Nauclerus and Platina have writ against 22. Popes,
who sold their souls to Satan by Magic spells, to work wonders in the Land,
murder, Sodomy Treason: ask your Cardinals* there is no sin the Devil ever
bred, but has stood them in some stead. The sins of Rome, are worse then
Sodom, Antichrist must fall: not only the Apostles, but the Sibyls have
foretold Romes Rume. In a word, these storms you have raised, do like a
darkning Cloud, threaten fierce Rain.


This moved the Pope very much, and being very angry, at what he had said, he
told the Ieaster, as follows.

Out upon thee, thou foul mouthed villain, pull out his tongue, blast up his
body with powder into the Air: that all his speeches may perish, and his words
never be remembered.


But the Ieaster answered with boldness, saying,

yea marry that were a wise trick indeed: but take heed; for when Hidras head
was cut off, seven others were immediately bred.


Then the Pope rose up out of his Chair, as being much displeased, to see the
Ieaster, so to deride him. And rising up, he said.

What! dare thou speak again? Come let us away; shall we become a reproach
to all? Sir, thou shall smart for this.


This poor fellow was so cruelly punished afterward, that to relate it, it
would ask another volume, as big as this.

FINIS.

