A true CONFUTATION Of a Falls and scandalous Pamphlet, entitled, The true
state of the Case of Sir John Gell, Lately published to deceiv the People, and
to smother Sir John Gell's Confederacy with Colonel Andrews and others, under
Oath of Secrecy, to destroy the present GOVERNMENT.

Or a sober VINDICATION of the COUNCIL of STATE, and High Court of JUSTICE from
the impudent aspersions of that PAMPHLET.

Published to undeceiv all the well-affected of this COMMONWEALTH.

By John Bernard Gent. Captain of a Troop of Horse in the Service of the
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by Will. Du Guard. 1650.

THe Pamphlet we have to deal with, is a vafrous piece, made up of diverse
sorts of Scandals (of things and persons) some pointing directly at the present
Government, others in a more oblique line. And some are the scandals of persons,
to leav an odium upon particular men. We think not to cut our way through the
whole Pamphlet, or follow as it lead's to every particular page. The chief
strength and substance of the whole lie's in the two first pages, wherein the
Pamphletier pretend's to give a true ground, or state of the Case of Sir John
Gel. And here we shall lay our batteries, and put it to the issue in this
short Answer, whether the Man in this great undertaking deale's indeed truly,
or but prevaricate's. The Argument, as he call's it, or Conclusion contein's
the results upon the whole, and his illations and inferences, which must needs
be falls from falls premises. And it is too great a concession in any wise man
to argue with his Antagonist (otherwise then (...)) upon a falls principle. It
is to invert the true rules of Logic, and change all into fallacies. Allow
this, and the Sophister will conclude the day to be night, and truth error,
and light darkness, and turn the honestest man living with his heels upwards
and conclude him a very knave. I have (the better to enable the Reader to a
true judgment of the thing in question 'twixt me and the Pamphletier)
distinguished the things contained in the two first pages with a lesser
Character, and the Answer with a greater.

Pamphlet. That John Bernard, with one Pits (by the name of Smith) desired Mr
Andrews to join with them in a plot, to surprise the Isle of Ely. Answer. It is
an ill Omen, when the man stumble's at the threshold, and offend's against the
truth at the first setting out. In his Pamphlet he saye's, that Lievt. Pit
desired Mr Andrews to join in a plot etc. It is appealed to Mr Andrews himself,
who in his own Narrative sent by himself to the Council of State, and now
remaining with the High Court of Justice, saie's expreslie, that Lieutenant Pit
(whom he call's there by the name of Smith) was an absolute stranger to him
(the said Andrews) till the 18 of March 49, which was (but) 6 or 7 days before
Mr Andrew's apprehension at Gravesend.

And for that of John Bernard's being charged by the Pamphletier to invite
Master Andrews to the plot etc. If Master Andrews affirm's, and John Bernard
denie's, and leav the plot where he found it first, to wit, with Master
Andrews, we shall exspect so much justice from the un-prejudic'd stander by,
as to credit rather John Bernard (a friend) denying upon his oath, then Master
Andrews (an Enemy) affirming on his bare word.

Pam. That Andrews was thought to be somewhat inclinable thereunto: Bernard
com's to the Lord President Bradshaw, and acquaint's him with it. Ans. That
Master Andrews was thought etc. by this Pamphletier's leav, it is (more then
thought) known, acknowledged by Master Andrews himself in the forementioned
Narrative, that the plot to surprise the Isle of Fly was a brat begot of his
own brain in the year-44. Master Andrew's own words are -- A design in the time
of War laid by me for the taking of the Isle of Ely. It was Mr Andrew's own
plot ab o^o by his own confession: and however the Pamphletier would dawb it
over, and gull the world that Mr Andrews was (but) thought to be somewhat
inclinable thereunto, yet let Mr Andrew's own hand speak his heart in this
matter. They are his very expressions to a title all of his own handwriting,
and at this day remaining with the High Court of Justice, viz -- I approve the
putting of the Reformadoes forward to prosecute the getting of their arrears
out of the fines or forfeitures of persons delinquent, but not that they be
further acquainted with the design, then to be ready in general terms when
they shall see cause, and the place secure to repair to etc. I would that
Captain John B. go along with me on Thursdaie next into C. Shire, and receiv
satisfaction there concerning the design, and to pass to Sir I. G. and acquaint
him with it, and from him again bring to a place which at parting with him I
shall agree with him upon an assurance how far he will engage, and how soon
be ready. That don I will post a servant over, or go my self and get out
Commissions for officers General with power to give Commissions to officers
inferior, etc To draw in the Reformadoes, they are to be assured to have
Commssions answerable to their former qualities, and pay as they muster; to
which end an Establishment shall be had: thus Mr Andrews. And when examined
upon this paper of his before the Council of State he confess*d ingenuously
that by the design (there) spoken of, was meant the surprizal of the Isle of
Elie, and by John B. John Benson, and that by Sr I* G. was meant Sr John Gell,
though the Pamphletier would have kept us in the dark as to all this, yet we
see Mr Andrews in this far honester then the other) deal's more plainly in the
matter.

But the Pamphletier (now) venture's (impudently enough) upon the Lord
President Bradshaw, and there the Shoo wring's extremely. For no fewer then
eleven several times he bring's this Honorable and public Minister of State
upon the Stage. And the Lord President's crime is, that he entertained Mr
Bernard's discovery of a real plot to destroy the State. The Man's anger is,
not that the State is designed upon by evil and unthankful men; but he would
have them prosper in their wickedness, and it offend's (even to rage) that any
true and faithful patriot should wake and watch in the preservation of the
Commonwealth, and bring to light things that lie hid in darkness; otherwise,
why not com to the Lord President with our honest matters? (such as are
discoveries of the plots of Knaves upon the State) and why not acquaint him
with them? But the Pamphleter's anger is still and his fellows, that there are
in the Land, Courts of Justice and public Ministers to punish Treasons and
Rebellions, and the wicked actings of men against the State. It bring's to
remembrance a pleasant story of a famous Thief in Queen Elisabeth's days,
that Petitioned the Queen for the good behavior against the Lord Chief Justice
Popham, because he sought his life in all places, and he went in danger of him
(continually) for his life. May be we shall have Sr John Gell's friends (such
as this Pamphletier and others) Petition for the good behavior against the
Council of State and High Court of Justice, because in all their treacherous
designs upon the State, they go in danger of their lives.

Pam. The Lord President bid's Bernard go forward with the plot, as Bernard
declare's in Court at the trial of Andrews. Answ. Not an honest man but will
say it was the duty of the Lord President and Council of State, and their
Honor both to intend the good and safety of the public, and to that end to
bid and encourage Bernard to pursue the treacherous plot to a full discovery.
And Bernard declare's (not in Court only, but) again and again in his
Vindication (here) that (besides the Lord President and Council of State) He
had the encouragement of diverse others, friends and true lovers of this Common
wealth, to follow close and not give over to sound the plot (for it lay deep)
to the very bottom.

Pam. That Bernard did go again with Pitts to Andrews, and told him that if he
would draw an Oath of secrecy and sign and seal the same, then Bernard would
help him to 200 l. to bear his charges beyond Sea, to get Commissions to raise
men for the effecting the said plot. And that both Bernard and Pitts, did
promise to sign and seal the Oath of secrecy likewise. Answ. That Bernard did
go again with Pitts etc. Still the supposition is false of the acquaintance (to
any proportion of time) betwixt Lievt. Pitts and Master Andrews, when Pitts
was not known to him (as before attested from Andrew's's own mouth) till within
six or seven days of his apprehension at Gravesend. The other things charged
by the, Pamphletier, viz. of Bernards helping Andrews to 200 l. and Bernard and
Pitts promising to sign the Oath of secrecy, it is referred to Bernard's
Remonstrance of Sept. 10. now published in print, where it is spoken in this
particular to full satisfaction.

Pamph. That Andrews being in necessity, upon Bernard's motion did sign and
seal the Oath aforesaid. Answ. It is the first truth we have obtained of the
Pamphletier since we met, that Andrews signed and sealed the Oath. And because
the bringing this dark and wicked plot to light is grudged at so generally, and
the thing christened by the Pamphletier (page 7.) by the pretty names of
Fantasy, and Fiction, and Play, I shall present you with the Oath it self, or
Engagement (a true Copy of it ad verbum) extracted out of the Original, now
with the High Court of Justice, viz.

WE the Subscribers, (having first taken our voluntary oath upon the holy
Evangelists, to be true, faithful, and secret each to other, in, and
concerning our subsequent Engagement; and not to impart the same, nor any the
designs whatsoever in order to the execution of the same, proposed, and to be
hereafter enterprized to any person (King Charles and the Lord Hopton excepted)
but under the l^ke oath of secrecy, do solemnly vow and protest in the
presence of God almight^e, That we will do and use all our possible kill and
endeavor (though to the hazard of our lives and fortunes) to settle and
establ^sh ^harls the second, our rightful and law^ul Prin^e, in his thron^ of
England, against all Rebels, usurpers, or opposers whats^ever. Signed with our
hands, and sealed with our s^als Decimo Octavo Martii, secundo Caroli secundi
An. Dom. 1649.

This is the Oath or Engagement alias the Pamphletiers play, fantasy,
fiction to lead in to the plot laid not so much for the Isle of Ely, and ^yn,
and Yarmouth, as for the ruin of the whole N^tion, Parliament, Council,
Soldierie, Government and all; and introducing a strange thing, a stranger King
amongst us. It is left to every man (not poisoned with this Pamphletier*s
principles) to make a judgment of this oath, whether persons that can lodge such
vipers in their bosoms, walk which such killing daggers in their heads, that
meditate nothing but murders, and the slaughters of the best friends of this
Commonwealth, ought to be tolerated with us, and not rather to be cast forth
(at least) and proscribed, both they the wretched Autors of these things, and
all that adhere to them, and plead for them, though under the most specious
pretenses whatsoever. But the Pamphletier tell's, That Andrews his necessity
did provoke to this oath, (as if there were a necessity of doing evil) and
that Bernard wrought upon this necessity, and moved Andrews to the thing. For
the truth of this we shall appeal to no other witness then Andrews himself, in
his own Narrative sent from the Gatehous to the Council of State. His words
are: About nine a clock of night March 19. 1649. I was sent for by Captain
Ashley and Benson to subscribe the Engagement which Benson had engrossed.
Again, in his Examination taken before the Council of State, the said Master
Andrews confesses thus expressly: That his hand and seal was to the parchment
Engagement (then) showed to him (which was upon the 19 of March, 1649.) at a
cook's shop near Tower hill, where Ashley and Benson then also signed and
sealed, and all those took the oath of secrecy. Here we find Ashley and
Benson (by Andrews's own free confession) but no Bernard moving or inviting (in
the least) to the Engagement. And for Bernard's signing this Engagement (for
oath of secrecy nor he, nor Lieut. Pitts did ever enter into) he refer's to
his Remonstrance of Sept. 10. 1650.

Pamph. That Bernard and Smith did sign and seal the oath also. Answ. And for
this likewise we refer to our Remonstrance above mentioned.

Pamp. Then Bernard desired Andrews to write a Letter to some persons of note to
subscribe the oath. Andrews thereupon write's a Letter directed to Sir John
Baronet. Ans. Andrews himself saye's otherwise, that not at the request or
instigation of Bernard, but he wrote his Letter to Sir John Gell upon a Letter
he received from Benson to invite to that purpose. This Master Andrews
confesses at large in his own Narrative sent from the Gate-hous (besides
Benson's confession, now upon record, of the very samething.) Moreover,
Andrews says in that very Narrative that the Letter here directed to Sir John
Baronet (with a blank, he intended it verily to Sir John Gell, only left out
the name Gell for a blind in case of surprisal. Here Andrews himself speak's
his own sens in his own words. -- He wrote a Letter from New Inn at Gravesend
to to Sir John Gell which he sent by Mr Bernard, and that he believe's the
paper now subscribed by the now Examiners directed for Sir John (with a blank)
Baronet is a true copy thereof; and that the Blank was intended for Gell,
which was so advised, lest the Letter should be surprised. All this is
confessed by Andrews himself in his examination taken before the Council of
State; besides that he saie's in his Narrative (to the very same purpose) sent
from the Gatehous.

Pam. That as soon as this was don, Bernard had officers ready, seized on
Andrews for High Treason, and then bring's the Letter directed to Sir John
Baronet to the Lord President Brashaw. Answ. The man is wide of the thing, and
(still) report's falsely. Bernard had not officers ready, nor was Andrews
seized upon as soon as he had finished his letter to Sir John Gell; for the
letter was wrott on Friday, March 22. 49. And Andrews not seized on till the
Mundaie following. But it still troubl'es the Pamphletiers spirit, that Bernard
should carry Letter, d^rected to Sir John Baronet, to the Lord President
Bradshaw* So then if it can be made appear that Bernard did not carry this
Letter to the Lord President (as indeed he did not) we hope this will cure
him of his evil spirit; Truly no, the Man's design is upon the Lord President
still, and he care's not who escape, so his venomous pen fasten's there. But
admit the Letter had been carried to the Lord President (as it was not, but
presented to the Council of State by the hand of Master Legate.) Surely the
inference must be an argument of the care and watchfulness of the Lord
President, and his faithfulness to his trust, to discover enemies, and secure
friends, and seek the welfare of a poor Nation.

Pam. That the Lord President kept the Letter, and lets Bernard and Pits have a
copy of it. Ans. In this the Pamphletier speak's most impudentlie falsely --
that the Lord President kept the Letter; for the Lord President did not keep
the Letter; nor had Bernard and Pits a copy of it. This is the very truth,
and to give undoubted witness to it, call forth Master Andrews (once more) to
repeat his examination taken before the Council of State; his confession is
thus to a syllable, viz. That he wrote a Letter from New Inn at Gravesend to
Sir John Gell which he sent by Master Bernard; and that he beleeve's, the
paper now subscribed by the Examiners directed for Sir John (with a blank)
Baronet is a true copy thereof, and that the blanck was intended for Gell;
which was so advised least the Letter should be surpised.

In this very confession we have a candle of Master Andrew's's own lighting,
to discover whether the Letter (showed to him by the Council of State at the
time of his Examination) was the original Letter he writ from Gravesend to Sir
John Gell, or (but) a copy of it. Master Andrew's's Answer in the Case is most
positive, and without the least hesitation, to wit, that he believ's that the
Paper showed to him by the Council of State, directed for Sir John (with a
blank Baronet) is a true Copy thereof. If a true Copy, then not the Original,
as is most falsely, and with malice enough, charged upon the Lord President, to
wit, that he kept the original Letter in his own hand, and delivered Bernard
but) a Copy to carry to Sir John Gell, when Andrew's himself confesse's the
clean contrary, viz. That the Letter showed to him by the Council of State was
the same (indeed) for matter with that he wrote to Sir John Gell, but not the
same original and numerical Letter. Master Andrews himself, in the presence of
many Honorable witnesses, acknowledging it no more then a Copy. Now if the
Pamphletier still hold's of the mind that the Original Letter (for all this)
is with the Council of State, or with the Lord President, Master Andrews (his
friend) tell's him to his face he speak's falsely, there is no original Letter
there, nothing but a Copy. Or if Sir John Gell can tell tidings of this Letter
(so much controverted) (and such a thing he did insinuate to the High Court at
his Trial) he should do well to produce it; but this is one of Sir John Gell's
tricks of Legerdemain and his accomplices, to say and unsaie, to boast of great
matters, but nascitur mus. If Sir John know's of this Letter, as he would make
all men believ, let him bring it forth that we may believ him at least in
this, to be no hypocrite and Impostor-

Pamph. That Bernard and Pitts bring's the Copy, as they say, to Sir John
Gell. Answ. Surely this man will never speak true again* twice Master Andrews
has told him (if he can believ a man of his own Religion) that the Copy of
the Letter was left with the Council of State, and yet (nolit velit veritas)
he will have Bernard and Pitts bring this Copy (not the Original, but) the
Copy of it to Sir John Gell. Besides he tell's in his Pamphlet, that Bernard
and Pits brought the Copy (as they say.) Who wiil believ this man, if ever
he should speak true again, that drive's a full trade of very tales. Bernard
and Pits brought the copy to Sir John Gell, there is one; and they say so,
there is another. I think 'twere good this same copy of Master Andrews's Letter
were hanged up in Westminster Hall amongst the Scotch Clouts, to convince this
Pamphletier and all his fellow infidels, thar there it is.

Pamph. That Bernard and Pitts both say, Sir John Gell did refuse to act in
the same plot, and so burnt the Letter. Answ. Bernard and Pitts say still
(even what this Pamphletier please's) but it will prove a question shortly, how
Sir John Gell, upon the deliverie of the Letter to him, should (all) on the
sudden refuse to act in a plot he had waded in some months with so much zeal.
Let Andrews be heard speak to clear the thing, the very words in his own
Narrative sent from the Gatehous, are these, viz. About the midst of December
49. I was invited to give Sr John Gell a meeting, and amongst other discourses,
Sr John Gell did take notice of his irrequital for his service and his losses,
and the misapplication of his and other's services to an end they intended not,
and that he desired to be so understood, and when opportunity should be, to
be so represented to the Prince, and did intimate, that if ever he took up
arms again, it should be for the Prince, and at several other subsequent
meetings the discourses were general, and much to this purpose.

And again in Mr Andrews's examination taken by the Council of State, he
confesses very distinctly thus, viz. that Sr John Gell complained, he had
not his pay, nor was considered for his service, and that he intended not the
end that was now brought about, and desired to be so unde^stood by the King;
And that the Examinant, upon opportun^tie, should so represent it, and his
w^llingness to do the King service. Mr Andrews says further in the same
Examination, that Sr John Gell had twice or thrice in March last bespoken him
to beget a good opinion of him in the King; And was not satisfied in the way
he had taken formerly, and that he was sorry for what he had don against
his Father, and if the King should hear he was in arms, it should be upon his
score. One thing more yet Mr Andrews's will tell us concerning this matter of
Sr John Gell's refusing to act in the plo^, how unlikely it is. The words in Mr
Andrews's own Narrative sent from the Gate house are these to a tittle, viz.
Wednesdaie 20. March last I wrote to Sr John Gell to meet me at dinner, he
promised to com, but came not, and sent his man to excuse him and defray the
charge, and that afternoon I saw him by chance, and he told me that he had
not subscribed, nor would, but what he had said to me as touching his
realitie to the Prince, I might ing^ge my self for. Now put all altogether, and
then let me ask the Pamphletier what he thinke's of Sr John Gell's refusing
to act in Andrews's plot and the rest of them: and whether he believe's it
(still) in truth that Bernard and Pitts did ^ver utter such a thing.

Pam. That the Letter was brought to Sr John Gell as Bernard and Pitts on a
Saterdaie night after ten of the Clock. Answ. It is acknowledged that Bernard
and Capt. Pitts did bring Andrews's letter (writ at Gravesend) to Sr John Gell,
to his lodging (then) in the Sanctuary Westminster, and did present the said
Letter to Sr John Gell's own hands about eight (not ten) a Clock, Saterdaie
night: and what will the Pamphletier infer hence?

Pam. Hear himsef. that Mr Spittlehous a Messenger, had a warrant the next
morning early (being the Lords day) to apprehend Sr John Gell; All this of
this libeller is very falls: for neither had Mr Spittlehous a Warrant the next
morning early (being the Lords day), nor indeed had any Warrant at all
(first or last) to apprehend Sir John Gell. True it is Sir John Gell was
apprehended by Warrant from the Council of State; but the Pamphletier, for
haste, mistake's the Name, mistake's the day; the Warrant was not drawn up
till Mundaie morning, March 25. 49. And then directed to Captain Thornton, and
yet not executed by him (neither) till one or two a Clock that day. Pam. That
it does clearly appear that the Lord President was privy to all these
proceedings. An. This ignorant and malicious Pamphletier must konw (unless he
and the rest of them will be ignorant and blind for all the light) that it is
most consistent with the duty of all public Ministers of State to be privy
to the treasonable plots, and practices of wicked men against the State, such
as this of Andrews and Sir John Gell, and the others of that confederacy. And
we hope it will open the the Eye of Authority wider, and call to more jealousy
and watchfulness, when the loos pen of every vile Pamphletier shall dare to
arraign even Justice it self, and the public Adminstrators of it at the bar of
Traitors.

FINIS.

