A SERMON PREACHED AT THE BVRIALL OF THE SAID JOHN ATHERTON.

The next night after his Execution, December the fifth, 1640. In Saint JOHN'S
Church in Dublin.

With some other Additions and Enlargements, which the shortness of the
warning, and latenesse of the night, would not then permit, throughout
Applicatory to diverse special passages in the Relation, wherein there are also
some other added, which were before omitted.

By Nicholas Barnard Deane of Ardagh in IRELAND.

Chysost. in Laud. Pauli Homil. 1. Paulus terram and mare circumivit,
peccatorum spinas evellens, granaque pietatis ubique seminans, veritatem
reducens, ex hominibus, Angelos faciens, etc.

ACTS 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord.

Printed at Dublin. 1641.

The Sum of the Doctrines here handled.
The Dignity of Preachers, Christ's Messengers. whence for themselves, a
necessity of ordination to it. of continuance in it.
for the people, a necessity of entertainment of the. of Audience, Obedience to
them.



The duty of Preachers in the General; from whence observed. That Preaching of
all the Acts of the Ministry is the most Apostolical, and if so, the most
Episcopal.

And herein (according to a special Confession of a Vow, made, and broken by
this Person) An Exhortation both to Preaching and Catechizing. For the later of
which Four things advised Shunning Diversities of Catechismes. Unnecessary
Controversies.
Handling these Principles Briefly. Often.



In both condemned Inconstancy, either in the doctrines delivered. time, giving
it over.


The Duties of Preachers in Special Ability to preach. Perspicuity in their
Preaching. Their lives to be according.


The state of a man Unconverted resembled by a Blindness. Darkness. Slavery.


The state of Conversion resembled by giving Sight. Light. Liberty.


That the greatest Sinner once converted is capable of forgiveness.

The joyful happy estate of him who has an assurance of it, in three things,
he has Peace with God. of Conscience. with Death.


And therein of spiritual refreshings.
Throughout, Applicatory to the Party.
The Text.
ACTS XXVI. verse. 17. I send thee -- VERSE. 18. To open their eyes, to turn
them from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, etc.


THat there is an eminent 2. Sam. 3.3^.
Man this day fallen in Israel by a scandalous and ignominious death ye all
know, of whom this unwonted confluence of people speaks an expectation of
saying somewhat; For his life, to give the least Commendation, would be a
scandal to the speaker, and yet wholly to conceal his penitencie at his
death, would be a wrong both to him, and you the hearers. It was indeed his
own desire, there might be no good spoke of him at all, but (me thinks) that
it self (if there were no more) Laus humana non appeti a recte faciente, sed
subsequi debet recte facientem, ut illi proficiant, qui etiam imitar^ possunt.
Aug. de sermon. Domini in monte.
is cause sufficient to speak somewhat, in that short expression being much
included. And commendation (if ever) is then most seasonable, Lauda hominem,
sed post mortem, post consummatione, quando nec laudante adulatio movet, nec
laudatum tentat elatio. Ambr. in natali S. Eusebius.
when it can neither impute flattery to the one, nor cause a pride in the
other. Then may be thought Ibiest laudatio vanitate remota, ubietiam
vituperatio erat ab oftensione secura. Aug.
the less affected, when a dispraise would be the least offensive. And for
that we have done with in the relation:

This text fits this present occasion thus: Saint Paul is here sent to preach
the Gospel, such was the end of this our Brothers ordination, but neglected.
Such had been his solemn vow of later years, but broken. The persons to whom
he was sent, were such as lived in darkness, under the power of Satan, such
to have been his life formerly to the Churches scandal, is confessed. The
effect of S. Paul's message is to open their eyes, to turn them unto God, such
a blessed change to have been lately found in him, has been made apparent.
And if with these he has obtained the efficacy of the means, why should we
bar him, from attaining the like happiness in the end also, viz.
forgiveness of sins. It Is true he was sent, and like that Matthew. 21.30
Son, that said he would go into the vineyard, but went not. Instead of
converting others, he had corrupted them, instead of opening their eyes, he had
shut his own, instead of gayning others out of darkness, he had lived in
works of darkness himself, instead of turning men from the power of Satan,
he had drawn more subjects to him. Notwithstanding what he was ordained to
have been an instrument of in others, was by Gods grace in a great measure
wrought in himself; and if conversion, why should not we believe forgiveness,
and if forgiveness, blessedness, for Romans 4.7.
Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered, etc. The Ocean of Gods mercy is able to swallow mountains as well as
mole-hils, great sins as less, according to the proportion of repentance. S.
Paul 1 Timothy 1.13.
a blasphemer yet obtained pardon. The crucifiers of the Lord of life are bad
to be Acts 3.19.
converted, and their sins should be blotted out. It Is true he was at first
moved to it with fear, so was Hem. 11 7. vevitus.
Noah to the saving himself by the Arc. Vide orat. de vita ejus per Gr^g.
presb. and poema ejus de vita sua script. ad popul. Con^^antinop. deplorantibus
universis mortem corporis, ipse interitum animi metuebat: Mors ex aqua imminens
saluta ex aqua Baptismi antevertebat.
Gregory Nazianzen was at first converted to Christianity in a storm, our
Savior in the same breath calls his Disciples friends, Luc. 12.4.
and yet bids them fear him, for the fear of Hell it self. Apud Deu^ non
valet mensura temporis, sed doloris, non temporis longitudine, sed affectus
sinceritate poenitudo pensatur. Latro ille in Cruce non eguit prolixitate
temporis, intra enim unum momentum totius vitae sceleribus absolutus, prcedit
etiam ipsos Apostolos ad Paradisum. Chrysostom. Poenitentia non mensium cursu
pensatur, sed profunditate luctus, and lachrymarum, qua homo mortificatur.
Jsidor. de sum. bon.
He came late, so did they that went into the vineyard at the Matthew. 20.6.
eleventh hour. 2 Chronicles. 33.11.12.
Manasses began in fetters. The Luc. 15.17.18.
prodigal Son staid till he was starved, and forced. Oh let not your eyes be
evil, when God's is good. Where we find his hand, why should we doubt of
his Seal? If he were turned from the power of Satan in repentance to God, no
doubt but God has turned to him, in granting forgiveness.

In the Text you may observe these three parts.

1. S. Paul's mission, I send thee. 2. His Commission in three branches. 1. To
open their eyes. 2. To turn them from darkness to light. 3. From the power
of Satan unto God.
3. The happy fruit of both, That they may receive forgiveness of sins.
The first implies our Dignity. The second our Duty. The third our hearers
Benefit. By this our brother, the first at his arraignment, has been much
disgraced. The second, in his life more neglected, And the third at his death,
Gods mercy in him infinitely magnified. From the first, he judged himself
worthy to be degraded. For the second, he had strongly resolved if he had
lived, to have repaired. And the third was in an extraordinary manner to his
conscience sealed. So that the three things which are now to be handled from
the words are these.

1 First, the dignity of Ministers, to be Christ's Messengers. I send thee.

2 Secondly, the chief part of their message, to be Preachers (the sole end of
which, is the converting of men) to open their eyes, to turn, etc.

3 Thirdly, the latitude of Gods mercy even to the worst of men, who by their
preaching shall be converted though living under the power of Satan) yet shall
receive forgiveness of their sins. In the handling of which ye shall find
some things as seasonable as profitable, and throughout I would be understood
to be equally applicatorie to Bishops, as other inferior Ministers.

1 First, the dignity of Preachers, sent by Christ; their mission is like
Matthew. (...)
S. John's Baptism, not of men, but from heaven, they may say to their hearers
as Moses to the Israelites, Exodus 3.^4.
I am has sent me unto you. And it is observable their Commission is sealed by
the blessed Trinity, first, severally, by the Father (Matthew. 19. ult.) Pray
the Father that he will send laborers, etc. By the Son (Ephesians. 4.11. He
gave some Apostles, some Pastors, some Teachers, etc. By the holy Ghost (Act.
20.28.) Over whom the holy Ghost has made you Overseers. Secondly, jointly,
(Matthew. 28.18.) Go, teach all Nations, and Baptize them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and accordingly as S. John
Revel. 1.4.5.
begins his Revelation with a Salutation from them, so S. Paul 2 Cor. 13 14.
concludes his second Epistle to the Corinthians with a Benediction. Hence
those honorable titles by each of which we deny not, is employed a several
duty also, (honos and onus) to imply there holiness 1 Timothy 6.11. 2 Timothy 3.17.
Men of God. Their vigilancie, Heb. 13.7. 2 Timothy 4.5.
watchmen, their courage, 2 Timothy 2.3.4.
Soldiers, their painfulnesse, Matthew. 9.38.
harvest laborers, the care of their flock, Ioh. 21.15.16 1 Pet. 2.25.
Shepherds, their wisdom Acts 20.28.
Overseers, their industry 2 Timothy 2.6.
Husbandmen, their patience, Matthew 4.19.
Fishermen, their tenderness of affection 1 These. 2.7.
Nurses, their love 1 Corin. 4.15.
Fathers, nay Galat. 4.19
Mothers, their faithfulness 1 Cor. 4.1.
Stewards, their necessary use in preserving and informing of men, Mat. 5.13.14
Salt of the earth, O vere sal terrae! quo precordia nostra ne possint seculi
vanescere errore condiuntur. O lucerna! digne supra Candelabrum Ecclesiae
posita, quae late Catholicis orbibus lucem effundens, etc. Paul. ad Aug. Epist.
31.
Light of the world, their dignity 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Rulers, 2 Cor. 5.20.
Emb^ssadours, their eminency Revel. 1.20.
Angels, Revel. 22.19.
fellow servants with them 2 Cor. 6.1. (...).
Co-workers with God, Christ's Verse. before the Text.
Witnesses, Ibid. (...), as 2 Corinthians. 4.1. (...), often in Scripture taken for
such an Officer, who has authority to commit one to prison. Matthew. 5.25.
(...). etc. And such is our Office spiritually by excommunication, so to commit
incorrigible sinners, till they repent 2 Corinthians. 10.6. We have in a readiness
vengeance to execute, etc.
Ministers, nay 2 Cor. 8.23. To be Christi. Vicarius is not Antichristian, but
to claim a title of generalis; Episcopus vicarius Domini est. Ambr. Comment.
in Epist. Cor. cap. 11.
Christ's glory. To the Ministers of the Law indeed pertained Romans 9.4.
the glory (viz.) of the Ark and Temple, but these are termed the Glory of
Christ himself, typified by them, whose presence made Hag. 7.9.
the glory of the later Temple, though meaner in building, to exceed the
former. The dignity done to the Priests and Prophets under the Law was much, 2
Chro. 22 1^
Jehojada the Priest marries Jehorams daughter the King. See the honorable
terms given by 1 King. 18.7.
Obadiah, (the chief of Ahabs Courtiers) to the Prophet Elijah, and to omit
what we read from good Kings. See 2 King. 13.17
Joash (a bad one) visits Elisha in his sickness, calling him my Father,
etc. Now by how much the Hebr. 7.22. See 2 Cor. 3.7.8.9 10.
Gospel excells the Law, so ought the Ministers to be preferred, as being of a
better Testament, and of a far 2 Cor. 3. cap. 7.8.9.10. verse.
more glorious Ministration. Ambassadors are usually respected according to the
Princes they represent. S. Paul was so received by the Galatians, Galat. 4.13.
as an Angel of God, nay, as Christ Jesus; in whose stead he moved. And think
not this to be any pride in magnifying our calling, S. Paul surely was no more
ambitious of honor, then he was covetous of a gift, but yet that he might have
some fruit that might abound to their account for their own sakes no doubt, he
beseeches the 1 These. 5.12.
Thessalonians, To know those that were over them in the Lord, and to esteem
them very highly, etc. A Nihil est in hoc saeculo excellentius sacerdotibus,
sublimius Episcopis, si nomen congruat actioni, and actio respo^deat nomini. Si
non n^men innane, and crimen immane. Amb. de dignitate sacerdot.
high calling indeed, the Son of God himself despised it not, and let not the
greatest then think his son of too high a birth for it. It Is no argument,
that now they should be made the 1 Cor. 4.13.
Of-scouring of the world, because the Apostles were so, that now they should
be driven to work with their own hands, (as some it may be would be contented
with) because Act. 18.3.
S. Paul was once put to it by necessity: that now they should have no
respect, because there was so little heretofore given them by Infidells. No; ye
have not so learned Christ, and do not ye fill up the measure of your Fathers.
And yet how many are there, who seem to reverence Christ, but like the Jews
mock him in his word, and servants, like cursed Cham deriding their Fathers,
till the curse rebound upon their own heads; If like Jeremiah, a Minister deal
truly and impartially, presently Ierem. 18.18.
devices are laid for him, a conspiracy to smite him with the tongue, if he
endeavor to dispossess a man of his evil Spirit, than like Saul to David, a
dart is thrown at him, nay, Spears and Arrows of reproaches, even bitter
words. If a reproof, then you take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.

Object. We grant the Apostles to be sent of Christ, but what is that to such
as are ordained in these days?

Answ. The difference is only Vocationis modo, Christ calls Paul immediately by
himself, and he calls Timothy per media ordinaria, as S. Paul speaking to the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, whom himself had ordained, yet (Acts 20.28.)
he tells them, the holy Ghost had made them Overseers, as his Epistles may be
truly called his writings, as being the Penman, and yet Gods too, who was the
Inditer, and in them guided his hand: So the Messengers of the Church are also
Christ's, who in his name ordaines no other, then testify they find themselves
See the demands in the Book of Ordination, to Deacons, Priests, and Bishops,
a serious consideration.
inwardly moved to it by his Spirit. See both together in that forenamed (2
Cor. 8.23.) We are the Messengers of the Churches, and the glory of CHRIST, as
the man is called the glory of God, (1 Cor. 11.7.) and the woman the glory of
the man. Because as the Moon from the Sun, they each derive their light and
authority from them; so are these so called here, as receiving their dignity
and commission from Christ by the Churches hand, who in this sense confirms
the word of his servants, and is with them to the end of the world, of which
there can be no 1 Corint. 9.2. If I am not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless
I am to you, for the seal of my Apostleship are you in the Lord.
surer Seal, than the assistance of Gods Spirit in converting their hearers.

Hence a twofold instruction for the Preacher and people.

For the Preacher. 1. A necessity of Ordination. Mark 3.14. None may Hebr. 5.4.
take this upon him (be he as wise as Solomon, or Daniell) before he be called
of God as Aaron. Romans 10.15.
How can they preach, i. e. de jure, unless they be sent. God complains of
some, Ierem 23.21
I have not sent them, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they
prophesied. The Matthew. 20.7.
Laborers though able and willing yet went not in to the Vineyard till they
were bidden by the Husbandmen. They who clime John 10.1.
into this Office through the window of their own pride and self-conceit, and
enter not by this door, are rather Thieves than Shepherds. It Is an observation
some have made of Chemnit. de Ecclesia. De Origin dicu^t, cum sine vocatione
se ingessisse in officium docendi, inde factu^ est, quod in tot errores est
prolapsus.
Origin, why he fell into such dangers errors, though he had an excellent wit,
because he so long neglected orders.

2. A necessity of continuance, if their Mission be from Christ, none can then
give them a Dismiss but Christ. Have you yet set your hand to this plough,
there is no looking back; whatever other employment by man is laid upon you, of
this you cannot be unloaden. There may be indeed some good cause of a removeall
from a place, even for the same the Colt our Savior sent for was loosened,
viz. when the Lord has elsewhere need of you: but I find no writ of ease in
any place to dispense with the office.

For the people. 1. First then give them entertainment, the Apostle argues this
case largely. ( Cor. 9.) What amendment soever has bin here of late in some
places, yet still in most, the means of the Levite is like the garments of
David's Servants, by Hanun King of Ammon cut off by the halfes. But let such
consider the admonition of Moses, Deuteronomy. 12.19. Take heed to your selves. they
that thus Malach. 3.8.9
rob God, do but in conclusion rob themselves, as there are in story diverse
such observations. Moses prayer for Levi is still effectual, ( chap. 33.11.)
Bless Lord his substance, and smite throw the loins of them that rise against
him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again. That distinction of
three sorts of Sacrilege by Peter Lumbard, Pet. Lumbard sent. libr. 3.
is commonly known, Sacrum de sacro, non sacrum de sacro, sacrum de non sacro,
as that of Thomas Secunda secundae qu. 99. art. 3.
Aquinas, that it may be committed against three, in Personam, in Locum, in
rem. The last of each are alike, in a robbery upon the Churches possessions;
where in other Countries it has been consented to, it is now as much repented
of, though too late. Justinian Proximum sacrilegio crimen est quod laesae
Majestatis dicitur. Leg. 1. digest. ad leg. Iul.
makes it a greater sin than treason. Howsoever thou who worthily Romans 2.22.
abhorrest Idols, do not thou commit Sacrilege. You that stand for Christ's
word, do not you cast lots for his coat. Matt. 17.27
The fish S. Peter catched, it came up with money in the mouth, and certainly
such as are truly taken by the net of Gods word, will not grudge to supply the
Minister in Temporals, who communicates to him in Spirituals, and what ye
yield, let it be willingly, not wrung out by Suits: such as strive with the
Priest, are accounted the worst of men by the Prophet. ( Hosea 4 4.) How able
and active this our Brother was in the recoveries of such dues,
ye all know, But what a grief now, his spending so much time in them was,
whereby he lost himself, I know. The regaining of the Churches Rights he
thought might be done, but the gaining of souls, the Rights of Christ
purchased by his blood, by no means should be left undone. Often did he apply
to himself that Speech of a Card. Woolsey.
great man at his last. Had he been as diligent to have done God service, as he
had done the King, he had kept the Kings favor still So had he been as
conversant in the study of the Gospel, for the instruction of Men, as he had
been in the Law, for the settling of Lands, he had not by the Law so deservedly
lost Lands, Body and Estate, and all at once. We are called Fishers, not
Hunters, Fishers of men, not of money, we are pressed for a Spiritual warfare,
and such 2 Timothy 2.4. See what is promised at ordination, and consecration* viz.
Tolay aside the s^^dy of the world and such like cares, etc.
entangle not themselves with the affairs of this life. Non omnium Epistolis
tespondebat, nisi si quid tractarent ad Religionis pertinens negotium, ^t si
rogatus a nonnullis, in temporalibus causis, Epistolas dabat, hanc suam a
melioribus lebus occupationem, tanquam angariam deputabat, and illis
dispositis, tanquam a ^ebus mordacibus, and molestis, anm^i recursum ad
interiora mentls, and superiora faci^bat; suave^ semper habe^s de lys quae Dei
sunt allocutionem, ^el collocution^^. Possido. de vita August.
S. Augustines spirit is very worthy of imitation, who was hardly drawn to
answer any letters for himself, or others, that concerned these worldly
matters, only ready for such whose subject was spiritual. And if at any time
he were necessitated to it, he thought so much lost, and returned from it, as a
prisoner set at liberty. Nay sometimes Vbi aliquid suspicabatur exo ritu^um
litis, saepe totam causam cesserit adversario, pro magno lucro ducens, si
quietem animi rei dispendio redemisset. Eras. in Epist. ad Arch. Tol. aut op.
August. Haec non eo commemoro, quod existimem horu^ temporum Episcopos ad hanc
imaginem compellendos, sed ut declarem quantopere sanctissimi hujus praesulis
animus abhorruerit a solitis litibus. Ibid.
Gave up his right, rather than run himself into a Labyrinth of Law
contentions, according to that of our Savior, ( Matthew. 5.40.) The only way
the Devil is sometimes put to, for the stopping the mouths of able divines.
If he can but get their hearts to cleave to the world in suites, soon cleaves
their tongues to the roof of their mouths for preaching, and so by a disuse
in time, according to that threatening in the Prophet to the Idol shepherd,
Zach. 11.17.
Their arms are dried up, their their right eyes utterly darkened, And their
right hands with the Psalmist forgets their cunning: Their abilities and gifts
perish also. And it is certain (howsoever others have thought the contrary) that
as the interposition of the Earth Eclypseth the Moon: So these earthly
employments instead of spiritual, has rather clouded, than added to the glory
of our function.

Secondly then give them Audience, Obedience: I put them together, as indeed
they should never be severd. First, audience, the denying of which to the
Ambassador of the meanest Prince on Earth is accounted the highest indignity.
Heb. 12.25.
Oh, see then ye refuse not him who speaks from heaven. Say ever in this sense
as Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.10.
Speak Lord, thy servant hears. And when ye do, let it be with Attention,
not to have your mind roving about some other matter, your tongues wispering
in another care. ( A fault this our Brother publicly acknowledged in
Himself.) And let it be also with Non est minus verbu^ Dei, quam corpus
Christi, and ideo no^ minus reus qui verbu^ Dei neglige^ter audiverit, quam
ille qui corpus Christi in terram negligentia fu a cadere permisit. Aug.
Reverence. Remember it is The voice of God, and not of Man, as one observes of
that speech of John the Baptist. Ego sum vox in deserto. John was the voice,
but God the speaker, ^s holy men were the penmen of the Scripture, but God the
Inditer, Number. 23.18.
Balaam bids Balak arise. Judge. 3.20.
Eglon of himself, rose up from his Throne, when Ehud said he had a message
from God to him. If these gave this outward reverence, let us add Hebr. 12 28.
an inward reverence, and fear also. Secondly give them Frustra praecepta Dei
custodiuntur memoria, si non custodiuntur and vita. August. in Psalm. 118.
Obedience, the former is but the shell, the shadow, this is the Substance.
Many indeed give us the Hearing, but very few in that sense it is usually taken
in the Prophets, viz. Quaerit anima verbum, cui consentit ad correctionem, cui
imitetur ad virtutem, quo reformetur ad sapientiam, cui conformetur ad decorum,
cui maritetur ad foecunditatem, etc.
Obeying, Remember we are Gods messengers. Great men's entreaties are commands:
Our commands from God are but entreaties. 2 Cor. 5.20.
God does beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead; unheard off that a
King should Petition to his Subjects; and yet who of you yields? who obeyes?
Historians say that men's lives were never worse, than when the seven wise men
lived. It would be ill news if it should be so with us, since the long
continuance of the wisdom of the word among us. However, as our Savior, so
may we say unto you also, Ioh. ^2.49.50.
We have not spoken of our selves, but the Father which has sent us, he gave
us a Commandment, what we should say, and what we should speak, and the word
which we have in Gods name spoken, and not obeyed, shall rise in judgment
against you at the last day. Object not the disobedience of this particular
Person to palliate your own. Let his self condemnation, prevent yours, his
exhortation to others, be yours. He was, a prodigal, but returned, once
lost, but now found, and if the Father have remitted it, let not his Brethren
be offended at it. And so much for the first part of the Text, S. Paul's Mission
-- I send thee.

Now the second part of this Text concerns S. Paul's Commission, in a word of
Information, To open their eyes, in a word of Application To turn them, etc.
(the two necessary parts of a Sermon.) Before you heard our Dignity, now we
will confess our Duty, and it is this latter that must support the former. And
for this, we shall consider it two ways, as it may concern this our Brother.

First, Actively, as being his duty toward others.

Secondly, Passively, as having been effectual in himself.

In the first, I shall but perform the will of the dead, who had intended at
the place of Execution to have made a large Exhortative Speech, to the diligent
performance of his function in PREACHING, and CATECHIZING: but that he thought
few of his Profession would be there, and the Papists (who might be the most)
would but deride him, and so omitted it. Only he declared how the neglect of
it, was his greatest grief, and for the breach of his vow, in which he was
persuaded, (as a just punishment) God left him to himself, whereby he came to
this shameful end, for this sin of Omission, he observed Gods Justice in
giving him over to sins of Commission, according to that of the Apostle. (
Romans 1.21, 24, 26.) And as this Subject is seasonable in regard of his
particular, so is it necessary in regard of the times neglect in general. When
Preaching is so undervalued, so sighted, as if it were too mean for the
Dignitaries, and Fathers of our Church, and only left as the refuse of our
Office for the inferior Ministers. And let me not be mis-understood, as if in
the words of S. Paul, Act. 28.19.
I had ought to accuse my Nation, or Profession of: or with Cham had a desire
to discover my Fathers Nakedness. No; only let me magnify their office, and
in this our Brothers stead, incite them unto that, whereby their Dignity with
man here, and their comfort with God hereafter may be continued.

The Sum of the Apostles Commission, you see here is Preaching, which we
shall according to the Text; consider, First in it self. And then its several
parts.

First, in the General, from the Sum of the Apostles Message, observe this,
(viz.) That Preaching and converting the souls of men, of all the Acts of the
Ministry is the most (...).
APOSTOLICAL. For further proof see (1 Timothy 2.7.) both put together. I am
ordained a Preacher, and an Apostle, a Teacher of the Gentiles, etc. The very
same words again (2 Timothy 1.11) in both, see how the Apostleship is supported
on each side with this employment. It Is preferred before the Administration of
Sacraments (1 Cor. 1.17.) Christ sent me not (i. e. not so much) to baptize,
but to preach the Gospel. Nay above Miracles, gifts of tongues, government,
etc. See 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. God has set in the Church first Apostles, secondly
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then gifts of healings,
Governments, Diversities of Tongues, etc. Now, wherein has it so offended,
that lately it should be compelled to take the lowest room.

It Is a Speech of Gregory, Censemus eos qui Apostolorum siguram tenent
praedicare Gregor.
we account those to bear the Image of the Apostles, who are Preachers. And if
so, why hear we no more of it from him, who boasts his Sea to be only
Apostolical, who has not been known so far to disparage himself these
many hundred years. The more we draw back in it, the nearer we shall draw to
him. There were some in the Revel. 2.2.
Church of Ephesus that said they were Apostles, and were not, Let this one
thing be their trial, which if admitted, the former will be found a liar.

Now if Preaching be the most Apostolical, certainly this conclusion
following must be undeniable, viz. Then the most Episcopal, Apud nos
Apostolorum locum tenent Episcopi. Hieron. Epist. ad Marcel. cotra Mont.
whose Successors they are. For which, who knows not that (in the 1 Timothy 3.
which S. Hierome well calls Speculum Sacerdotij) the prime quality of a Bishop
is to be Verse. 2. Potissima functio praesulum Erasmi.
(...). i. e. not only able and fit, but apt and ready to it. The like Tit.
1.9. Prdicatio est actus principalissimus Episcopi and proprius.
Tho. Aquinas could say, that preaching was the most principal and proper act
of a Bishop, and accordingly applies Miles, Vinitor, Pastor, Bos, Trituator,
Arator, Seminator, Architectus.
eight Titles to them that imply that labor. Nay so proper to a Bishop, that
before S. Augustines time it was not Augustino Presbytero, potestatem dedit
Valerius Episcopus, coram se in Ecclesia Evangelium praedicandi, and
frequentissime tractandi, contra usum and consuetudinem Africanarum
Ecclesiarum, unde ei (viz. Valerio) nonnulli Episcopi detrahebant Possido, de
vita Aug:
nsuall for a Presbyter to preach in the presence of a Bishop; at least it was
against the custom of the Africa Church. We read Valerius then Bishop of
Hippo was much censured by other neighboring Bishops, that he should permit S.
Austine, being then but a Presbyter, to preach so often before him, and not to
do it himself, and yet there was some reason for it: Valerius being a
Grecian was not so perfect in the language as S. Austine was. And Et post a
occurrente and volante hujusmodi fama, and bono prcedente exemplo, accepta ab
Episcopis potestate, Presbyteri no^nulli, coram Episcopis, populis tractare
coeperunt verbum Dei. Ibid. See a difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter.
from his example it began first that Presbyters got the honor to preach the
Word of God in the Bishops presence. Which former custom howsoever S. Hierome
from another ground pleads much against, as inferring that the Gaudeat
Episcopus judicio suo, cum tales Christo elegerit sacerdotes. Hier. de vita
Cl^ricor. ad Nepot.
Bishop should delight to hear such of his own Election to perform their
office. Yet he acknowledges it to have Pessimae consuetudinis est in quibusdam
Ecclesijs, tacere Presbyteros, and praesentibus Episcopis non loqui. Ibid.
been the custom then also. But to return to S. Augustine; when he was made a
Bishop, did he then give it over? No; then it is said Atqueue Episcopatu
suscepto multo instantius ac ferventius, majore authoritate, non adhuc in una
tantum regione, sed ubicunqueue rogatus, venisset, verbum salutis aeternae,
alacriter, and suaviter, pullulante atque crescente Domini Ecclesia,
praedicabat. Paratus semper reddere possentibus rationem de fide, etc.
Possidon. de vita Augustine.
he preached much more then he did before, wheresoever he came, whenever
asked. The like of S. Ambrose (by whose In qua urbe (viz Mediolan.) tum
Episcopatum administrabat eximius Ambrosius, verbi Dei Praedicator
frequentissimus, cujus disputationibus Augustinus adstans in populo, sensim and
paulatim conversus fuit Ibid.
frequent Preaching S. Austin himself was converted) the Episcopi proprium
munus esse docere populum; effugere non possumus officium docendi, quod nobis
refugientibus imposuit necessitudo. Ambros. officior. lib. 1.
introduction into whose first Sermon after his Election, was the affirming
this to be his proper and necessary function. S. Chrysostom calls Preaching,
Omnium bonorum Summa, and according to his own practice would have a Bishop
preach every day, Episcopum necesse est in singulos dies sementem facere, ut
ipsa saltem assuetudine doctrinae, sermonem auditorum animi retinere possunt.
Chrysostom. de sacerd. lib. 6.
with whom ye have often cras and heri, as if he were rather a daily Preacher,
than a weekly. S. Hieromes speech, a Bishop should be for the Church, as it is
said of Episcopus imitetur Mosen, imitetur and Aaron, quid enim dicitur de ijs,
quod non discedunt a Tabernaculo Domini. Duo sunt Pontificis opera, aut a Deo
discat legendo, aut populum Dei docet praedicando. Hier. in Lev^t.
Moses and Aaron for the Tabernacle, they departed not from it, always either
preaching or studying for it, either with Matthew. 4. ver. 18.21.
Peter and Andrew fishing, or with James and John mending their nets. Well, me
thinks, when I read of S. Paul's charge for this particular to Timothy, (the
first Bishop of Ephesus, and not Parrochiall neither, 1 Timothy 4.1. and a sickely
man too) and in what high terms he gives it. I charge thee before God and the
LORD JESUS CHRIST, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing,
and in his Kingdom, Preach the Word, be instant, etc. It should make many a
man's care to tingle that has wholly neglected it, the like you have again (1 Timothy 6.13.)

For Excuses; if a not being bound to any particular charge be pretended, let
them consider S. Paul's free preaching, which he so much glories in (1 Cor.
9.19.) though he were free from all, yet had voluntarily made himself
serviceable to some. It Is possible for some urgent cause, the maintenance out
of one place may be employed for the upholding Gods service in another. Like S.
Paul (2 Cor. 11.8.) who says he had robbed other Churches, taking wages of
them, to do the Corinthians service for it, but to be wholly idle in all
places is Quomodo mercedem obsequimur, and tamen operarij nequaquam sumus
fructus Ecclesiae in quotidiano stipendio percipimus, and pro Ecclesia in
praedicatione non laboramus. Pensemus quid est sine labor percipe^e mercedem
laboris. Hieronym.
robbery indeed. If employment in government be alleged for an exemption, let
them again think of what S. Paul says of himself, 2 Cor. 11.28.
(upon whom came daily the care of all the Churches) 1 Corinthians. 9.16. Yet
necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel, and
Paul aged too. If disputing and writing, etc. be produced (as the best) for a
dispensation, let them still remember, it was Saint Paul's work also, as
writing not a little, So Acts 19.9. Cap. 9.22. Cap. 18.28.
disputing daily with the Jews and Greeks; Apollo's, Barnabbas did the like
with the false Apostles. S. Peter with the false Teachers: S. John confutes
Antichristian doctrine, and for convincing gainsayers none are freed from. See
but what is recorded of S. Augustine, how many Heretics he had a daily
contention with, Arrians, Manichees, Pelagians, Donatists, (one of which was
converted only by a digression in his Sermon) against whom, and of diverse
other subjects he wrote so much, that if all were extant, he that writes his
life says, Tanta abillo dictata and edita sunt, tantaque in Ecclesia
disputata, adversus. diversos Haereticos, conscripta, ex canonicis libris
exposita, ut ea omnia vix quisquam studiosorum nosse, and perlegere posset.
Possid. in vita August.
The greatest student would have his fill in reading of them only. Yet
notwithstanding how did he labor in a constant preaching to his last; And the
like might be related of diverse others.

So that no pretense whatsoever can excuse them from the performance of this
function, to what Dignity soever advanced, what burden soever traveling
under. I have often wondered at that in Ioathams Parable, that when some of the
Trees were desired to rule over the rest, says Judge. 9.9, 11.
the Olive, why should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honor God and
Man, etc. Says the Fig Tree, why should I leave my sweetness and my good
fruit, etc. and go to be promoted over the Trees? Why should Promotion over
Others, make men barren in themselves? Could they not bear Rule and bear
Fruit together? It Was but a Parable, and let it be so still without any further
application; Only let none of us having a Talent, be like the unprofitable
servant in hiding it.

And in Conclusion, let me be but your remembrancer, of what has been so
solemnly and publicly vowed at Ordination and Consecration, and such a
Profession before many witnesses ought to be of no light esteem. The Ye are
the Lords Messengers, Watchmen, Pastors, Stewards, to teach, to prmonish, to
feed to provide for the Lords Family. see book of Ordination, in the exhort.
Exhortation to preaching before the receiving the Order of Priesthood, the
Obligatorie promises upon demand for it, The Be thou a faithful dispe^ser of
the word and sacraments.
words of Ordination it self. The solemn deliverie of the Bible with a charge
to preach, this being the sum of the Office, why retain we the name without
executing it? And are not the same with other additions renewed at the
Consecration of a Bishop? as the Epistle, so the choice of the Gospel, for
that occasion, viz. John 21.15.
S. Peter charged three times by our Savior, If he loved him feed his Sheep,
his Lambs, had its meaning. The That he may have grace to be evermore ready,
to spread abroad the Gospel, and as a faithful serva^t to give Gods family
their meat in due season see book of Consecration
special prayer at the Consecration tends the same way. The redelivery of the
Bible as before, and opened with a charge again to be diligent, in teaching,
in giving heed to Exhortation, and to doctrine, thereby to save himself, and
those that hear him; to be a Shepherd, and not a Woolfe; to seek the lost,
etc. And in conclusion, a Prayer that the Spirit may descend upon him for the
Preaching of the Word, and being earnest in reproving, beseeching, rebuking,
etc. these surely are too serious to be thus slighted Galat. 6.7.
be not deceived, God is not mocked. Now if any persons thus Ordained and
Consecrated have been negligent in performing, let not the scandal be cast
upon our Church, who you see is very careful in enjoining, and the bonds it
takes for keeping Covenant are the greatest that can be given, the forfeiture
of which will not fail to be called upon at the judgment of the great day. And
so much for the first thing, the neglect of which this our Brother so much
lamented, viz. The forenoones work in Preaching.

There is a second, which he had expressly vowed also, and broken, and for which
equally with the former he acknowledged Gods justice in this punishment, and
that was the neglect of public Catechizing, in a plain and familiar
exposition of the Credenda, and agenda, contained in our Church Catechism,
enjoined to be the afternoones work, and it were well, if every Sunday had its
Morning, and Evening Sacrifice; its former, and latter Rain, Eccles. 11.6.
In the Morning sow thy Seed; in the Evening withhold not thy hand: Of which
duty give me leave to speak a word also, as being a thing of all others the
Most necessary, in this ignorant Island; these are the Foundation of Christian
Religion, which as it was Saint Paul's glory to have laid it with the
Corinthians, so would it be the glory of this age, to Compass the like with
this people, until which be done, it must needs be in vain, to proceed to a
building of higher points. And I believe, without any disparagement I may say
of the Major part of any of our Congregation, as the Apostle of that famous
Church of the Hebr. 5.13. See Ambr. upon this place for the necessity of
Catechizing.
Hebrews, They have more need of milk, than of strong meat. In which if it
were fit for me to direct others of greater experience, than my self, I would
advise of these ^oure things.

First, to shun diversities of Catechismes; for every one to be teaching a
several, as best likes his fancy, is but to distract, and confound the
people, if they shall remove from one Parish to another. What are they, but
several Methodes of the same thing in substance? Let us all pitch upon one,
and why not that appointed by Authority.

Secondly, shun intricate and unnecessary Controversies, which at all times in
common Congregations are unprofitable: So in this exercise the most
unseasonable. That Clause in the Apostles Letter from their first General
Council is very imitable in this, Act. 15.28.
We think it fit to lay upon you no other burden, than necessary matters,
(...)
vain bablings, foolish questions, and (...)
striving about words, and such kind of needless contentions, S. Paul bids 2 Timothy 2.14.16. Titus 3.8.
Timothy and Titus avoyde, as being to no profit, among which may be reckoned
the filling ignorant peoples ears with questions of Church Discipline, which
does not concern them, and neglect the maine. It Is a good rule, every thing is
so far Commendable as it may be Profitable.

Thirdly, handle these things briefly, without affecting too much latitude,
Act. 20.31.
S. Paul had taught his hearers in the compass of three years, the whole
Counsel of God both in public and private, and such as shall dwell so long
upon one subject, observe not the Custom of the ancient Church. How brief is
S. Augustines Symbolum, S. Ieromes Explanatio fidei ad Damasum and Cyrillum? S.
Cyprians exposition of the whole Lords prayer, is not near the length of an
ordinary Sermon. It Is true it may be said of each Petition and Commandment, as
the Philosopher says of the Soul it is (...), a great thing in a little
compass, like a Star, little in your eye, but in it self of a large
magnitude: Like a Fountain narrow at the head, but mighty streams may be
drawn from it, To that Petition Thy kingdom come, or thy will be done, may be
referd a great part of the body of Divinity (as some de Dee, and de regno Dei,
others de Fide and Obedientia make to consist the whole,) but would it not be
very impertinent to draw all thither? And let me add, that length of time
(howsoever some glory in it) does not always argue the better building, or the
more cost. Salomons Temple was built in seven years. Herod's was forty six
years in building, yet we cannot imagine it to have exceeded Salomons. Nay in
this spiritual building, it may be want of pains that causes a long
tractate, the better things are studied, and digested, the more able shall he
be to pruine off unnecessarie discourses, and to contract his matter into the
narrower room.

Fourthly, handle them often. In the French and some of the Germane Churches,
as the Sun runs his course in the Heaven once a year, so do they run
through those heavenly Principles in the same compass: For which our Canons
have well provided also. An errrour in some, who think it sufficient to go
through them once in their lives, or a few of them once a year in Lent. No,
people have not such strong memories for spiritual matters, but that we had
need with S. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.12.
To put them in remembrance of these things often, nay always; For some kind
of meats it suffices they are had sometimes in the year in their seasons,
but for Bread there must be a daily provision. It Is so for the soul, for some
points it matters not if they be seldom handled, but for the Principles of the
Catechism they are your necessary food, without which your Souls cannot be
nourished unto everlasting life, therefore it is fit that some of them should
be ever sounding in your ears. And for this it self, let it not be thought
too mean. For the Chief of us. Ye see it is the Office of 1 Cor. 3.10.
a Master Builder; And among the Fathers have we not many introductions to the
vulgar. Lactantius his Institutions, Cyrill his Catechismes, Clemens
Alexandrinus Paedagogus, S. Augustines Enchyridion, and his Book de
Catechizandi rudibus and the like. Saint Paul was all things to all, 1 Cor.
9.22.
To the weak he became as weak that by all means he might save some.

Let me for Conclusion of this, exhort all without exception, unto diligence in
both these particulars, viz. Preaching and Catechizing, which by this our
Brother were so neglected and lamented. Be not slothful in the Lords business
and in the Lords Vineyard, were it no more than the sight of those of the
Romish Clergy in every corner, who travel Sea and Land to make their
Proselites, it should me thinks, be enough to whet our resolutions to be more
industrious: Ye have heard, respect is your due, but those are only 1 Timothy
5.17,
worthy of double honor who are (...) laborers in the word and doctrine,
Maintenance is your due, but it is the Luke 10.7.
labourer is worthy of his heir. High esteem is your due (...), but 1 These.
5.13.
for your works sake. What is the cause of late, the calling has fallen into
such Contempt? Is it not for not showing your selves 2 Timothy 2.15.
workmen, rightly dividing the word of truth. Why are many of the people like
those Matt. 12.43.
dry places in regard of any goodness, which the unclean spirit walks
through, is it not because you for preaching have passed over like Verbi Dei
praecones dicu^tur nubes, quia non secus, acper quasdam nubes, spiritualem
irrigatione^ hominibus Deus offert. Chrysin Psalm. 107.
clouds and wind without rain? What is the cause so few subject themselves to
Christ's Scepter? Is it not because the sword of his Spirit, (the word) is not
thus drawn out by you? This and the like were the sole Apostolic weapons,
whereby the world was at first subdued. By these arms the Fathers purged it of
Heresies and Schisms, afterward, Non vi non armis, non carceribus sed solo
gladio spiritus, quod est verbu^ Dei, tot victorias, tot triumphos paravit
Ecclesie Christi. Possidon.
not by Pillaring, Imprisoning, Obtaining Imperial Edicts, (as it is said of S.
Augustine) but by preaching. And let no man neither, Zach. 4.10.
despise the day of small things. S. Ambrose his first Sermon de grano Sinapis
(as appears by the beginning) was preached to a Libenter nos prdicare, and
gratanter opus Dei facere manifestum est. Sed videmus plures e fratribus
pigrius ad Ecclesiam convenire: inviti loquimur, and tamen tacere non possumus.
Ambros. sermon. 1. de grane Sinapis.
thin auditory. Our Savior was content with one Woman at Samaria. Noah's eight
persons in the Arc were the better auditory, though the whole old world were
the greater. Pretend neither the undecencie of the Church, our Savior preached
out of a Fisher-boate, S. Paul upon the Sands. Where you find dead Carcasses
thither should ye like the Eagles resort. Nay, there is a way whereby all this
enjoined may not seem a burden to us neither. There is a labor of love (the
Apostle speaks of) that will make us love the labor. Jacob because he loved
Rachel thought his seven years service nothing. What pains do we see some
Oh quam pudendum, si defectat labor, ut fera capiatur, and non ut anima
capiatur! Onerosi non lunt labores amantium, nam in eo quod labor amatur, no^
laboratur. August. de von. viduit.
take in hunting, fouling, etc. accounted but a sport, because they love it!
How do some toil for the love of Money, things Momentanie! And shall not our
love to Christ constreine us rather? The compassion to the Souls that are
Christ's? the gain of an immortal crown with Christ, much more instame us?

And yet there is one thing more behind, which if we will fulfill our
Ministry, must not be omitted; which we have also solemnly promised, and that
is, Private admonitions. S. Paul had somewhat to do Act. 20.20.
from house to house, as well as in the Pulpit. Ambassadors have not done all
^n delivering their Embassage publicly upon the day of audience, but there is
much employment also in private Treaties. The Husbandman visits his ground
often after it is sown. It Is the ignorance of some people to be all for the
public, and the neglect of some Ministers to make that their stent. No, you
will find it otherwise in S. Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and it is a
thing most useful in this Kingdom, where there are so many that hate the
light in public. This was S. Augustines practice too, Docebat ille privatim in
domo, and public in Ecclesia, sacram lectionem adhibebat men's, unde de quadam
frugifera Commentabatur, and compertis terum oportunitatibus divinae legis
parts eis inculcabat, and ut speculatur Domini, admonebat praedicans
opportune, importune arguens, etc. Et praecipue operam dans eos instruere, qui
essent idonei alios docere. Possidon.
he had usually a Chapter read at his Table, upon which he would be Commenting
to his guests, took all oportunities in private to inculcate what he had
delivered before, and chiefly endeavoring to instruct those, who might be able
to teach others. And this part of our function, the Apostle gives a special
Caveat, that it be done with 2 Timothy 2.25. Iam. 3.13.
meekness of wisdom, or else he may offend as much in admonishing, as the
party who is to be admonished. Prove. 25.11.
A word fitly spoken, says Solomon, is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of
Silver, as an Earing of Gold, so is a wise reprover, etc. The word in the
Original is spoken upon its wheels, which always has the best success,
when it runs upon these four in a right observation of the Manner, Time,
Place, and Person.

There was another thing you shall find often lamented by this our Brother;
also which we must not omit, and that was his Inconstancy in what we have
already spoken of. He had run well formerly, but of late years had slackt
his pace, upon which I was an ear witness of his savorie Council to others,
by his example, to continue constantly in well doing, and not to measure their
course according to the pleasure of the times. Let me also commend this to you
from him, as the crown of all the former, viz. Constancy. 2 Timothy 3.14.
Continue in the things thou have been assured of, etc. Titus 3.8.
These things I will that thou affirm constantly, 2 Timothy 4.16.
take heed to thy self, and to the doctrine, and continue in them, were the
admonition of S. Paul to his Sons Timothy and Titus. Let us intend these
things, and intend them 1 Timothy 4.15.
wholly. An over active Spirit that admits as inmates a multitude of other
Offices, to have one foot in the Church, another in the City, and as if he
were a Tripos, a third in the Camp, usually miscarries in all, Qui in omnibus
aliquid, in toto nihil, let every one abide in that whereunto he is called. Romans
12.7.8
If in the Ministry, let us wait on our Ministry, he that teaches, on
teaching, he that exhorts, on Exhortation, and then may he expect a blessing.
Luk 1.11.
Zacharias received that joyful news of a Son by the Angel, while he was
executing his Priestly office in the Temple. The Cap. 2.8.
Shepherds theirs, while they were attending their flocks by night; the Matthew.
4.18.
Disciples were called by our Savior to be Apostles, while they were in their
callings. What work you are set unto, Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord
when he comes shall find so doing.

Some have been inconstant in the doctrine delivered; 'twas Reubens blot (who
lost his dignity) to Genes. 49.4.
be unstable as water, to be like a wave of the Sea, (to which S. James
compares some) turning according to the wind and and tide, is not becoming
Gods Messengers, who are rather compared to Jsay 41.18.
rivers, which hold their course, let the wind blow which way it will, Jam.
1.8. (...).
to be double minded, or as the Psalmist Psalm. 12.2. Heb. a heart and a heart.
double hearted is bad, but to be (...) double tongued is worse, much condemned
in Deacons, (1 Timothy 3.8.) and in this sense, it must needs be the more, when
it is in matter of doctrine, to deliver it sometimes one way, sometimes another.
No, as S. Jude verse. 3. that doctrine ye have once delivered to the Saints
contend for; If Galat. 2.18.
I build the things which I destroyed (says S. Paul) I make my self a
transgressor. 2 Cor. 1.17.18.19. upon which S. Ambros^id est non aliud agit
quam seit age^dum, sic praedicatores, non aliud faciant quam sciant, ut solent
adulatores, ne homines offendant.
Our word was not, yea, and nay, that with me there should be, yea, yea, and
nay, nay, etc. As the Lord who sends us changes not, so his Messengers must
not be changlings neither. The Septuagint translation howsoever highly to be
esteemed, yet by this appears that they were not (...), but led by a private
spirit, in that they changed some things of purpose to please Ptolomy and his
Queen, like the Oracle when King Philip came to enquire of it, the Priests
made it answer according to his humor; But it must not be so with us. The
Rabbis fabulize the Manna had a several taste according to every man's palate.
I know people would feign have it so, in the delivery of this heavenly Manna of
the Word. But if we shall so study to please men, we shall not be the servants
of Christ.

Others are inconstant for the time; have borne fruit, but now are barren; and
yet such as are of Gods planting in his house Psalm. 32.14.15.
bring forth fruit in their old age. Psalm. 148.12.
Old men must praise God as well as Children, and so accordingly was the Spirit
powered out. The two Revel. 11 7.
faithful witnesses, their lives and preaching ended together. Joel 2.28. Act.
2.17.
Thus was it with S. Augustine. Verbum Dei usqueue ad suam ipsam, extrema^
aegritudinem, alacriter, and fortiter, sana mente, sanoque consilio in Ecclesia
praedicavit; and vixit annis septuaginta sex. Possidon.
He preached till his last sickness, being then 76. year old. Indeed there is
no doubt a decrepit old age and decay of natural faculties, must have a
dispensation. God in that case has mercy and not sacrifice, like the Numb.
8.26.
Levites in the Law discharged from the heaviest burden of their Office at
fifty years. But let us not pretend more weakness then is. Our bodies (make
the most of them we can) must at length fall to dust. Now can they be spent in
a more honorable service than the Ministry? The next degree (I hold) to
Martyrdom? The usual plea is indisposition of body, 1 Timothy 4.23.
Timothy was such a one indeed, had many infirmities; S. Paul loved him
dearly. Yet (though he allowed him a little wine) does not prescribe him
little Preaching. His charge is still the same (2 Epist. 4.1.) and me thinks
strange Council for a weak man. The Orange tree, they write, is bearing fruit
all the year long, as some are ripe, so others are still budding. A good
Emblem of a Preacher as he should be weekly sending forth his labors, so
providing a new again; in this sense, like the Matthew. 13.52.
householder bringing out of his treasure things new and old.

Oh! this constancy in Preaching, and in some constant Method (though it be
the meaner) does more good, then now and then only an elaborate Sermon; like a
constant diet (though it be course fare) nourishes more, then now and then a
feast, when they must fast a long time between. Object not as a discouragement
that thou see no good come of it. Consider See Chrysostom. in homil. 31.40.
the Physician gives not always his patient over, because he mends not at
first. The Soldier does not raise the Seige, because the City is not taken the
first day. It Is possible, it may be with some of us for many years, as it was
with S. Peter for one night, he had been casting in, but John 21.3.6.
taken nothing; yet with him, at our Saviors Command we must cast in again.
Nay, the Mark 4.27.
Kingdom of God (says Christ) is like one sowing, and the seed springs and
grows up, but he knows not bow. Thou see no fruit? no more did Elias (though
quick sighted) the seven thousand in Israel: much is lost? 'twas our Saviors
own case, few converted by him, yet never man spak like him. Abundance of
diseased people compassed John 5.4.
the people of Bethesda, but there was but one healed at once, and that at a
certain season too, when an Angel descended. It Is so in these waters of the
Sanctuary, it is well if in a great Congregation one may be converted by the
Sermon. S. Paul knew he should never gain all, and therefore was content, if
he could win but some. Have thou sown, it is not lost neither? if another reap
the fruit after thee, as our Savior to the Disciples, John 4.38.
others have labored, and you have entered into their labors: be thou ever
with 1 Cor. 3.6.
S. Paul and Apollo, planting or watring, and commit the increase to God that
must give. Sit praedicator prius orator, quam doctor, magis prodesse populum
pietate orationum, quam facultate oratoris. Aug dedoctrin. Christ. lib. 4.
Aperi os tuum sed prius ut aperiatur implora. Hi^ro.
Pray for the descent of this dew of Heaven whereby it may spring, but if it be
withheld, for thy self, remember the speech of the Prophet, Isa. 49.4. I have
labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, yet my judgment is
with the Lord, and my reward with my God; thy reward shall be secundum laborem,
non secundum proventum. If mocks and reproaches befall you, be not troubled,
Vipers will leap upon Paul's hands. Shake them off as he did, no hurt shall
come unto you, Revel. 2.10.
Be faithful unto death, and ye shall receive the Crown of life.

And thus having supplied that which this our Brother had desired to have done
himself (though much larger then I had at first intended) concerning the
Commission of Treaching in the general, I am now further invited by the Text
to a consideration of the several parts of it also, which are these two, an
Information, to open their eyes; An Exhortation, to turn them from darkness,
etc.

First observe, It is our duty to open the eyes of men, i. e. their
understandings for matter of knowledge, as Malac. 2.7. The Priests lips should
preserve knowledge. The Popish Priests do what they can to close the peoples
eyes, it is our profession to clear them. How often to this purpose have ye the
prayer of the Apostle, That the Ephesians. 1.18.
eyes of their understandings may be enlighted, that they may Philip. 1.9.
increase in knowledge, and in all Judgment.

From hence then must follow these two requisites in a Preacher.

1. Ability in themselves to open. 2. Perspicuity in a plain open expression
to the people.
First, Ability for matter of learning; how can they open the eyes of others,
when they are blind themselves? Shall we in this sense expect night unto night
to show knowledge, they are called Lights. Now Si pastor qui lumen sit fidei,
caeteris ^it occaecatus, quantae in populo essent tenebrae peccatorum. Hier. in
6. Mat.
S. Jerome, if the light which be in the Minister the head be darkness, how
great must the darkness be in the body of the people? They are Leaders, should
not they then know the way themselves? It was an ill case with the Israelites,
Jsai 56.10.11.
when their Watchmen were all blind, and dumb, Shepherds that did not
understand, etc. and surely those who lay hands on such 1 Timothy 5.22.
are partakers of other men's sins, and ought to bear their judgment. S.
Chrysostom Qui ordina^t indignos ijsde^ subjacent poenis, quibus illi qui
indigni su^t ordinati, si dicunt, se eos ignorasse, ideo gravius crime^
efficitur, quoniam promoverunt, quem ignorabant, ista excusatio, fiat
accusatio. Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. 5.
thought it just, they should be both punished alike, notwithstanding any
excuse or mistake in them. The Prophet speaking of such says, Zach. 11.17.
Woe to the Idol Shepherd, and the Psalmists description agrees to them, who
Psalm. 115.5.7.8.
have eyes and see not, neither speak they through their throat, and they that
make them are like unto them. Some read it, Va Pastori nihili, and an Idol is
nothing in the world. (1. Cor. 8.) The Complaint of a Father in his time may be
taken up for some Dioceses now. Curritur in Ecclesiae curas, passim ab omni
aetate and ordine doctis pariter and indoctis, tanquam sine cura jam quisque
victurus sit, quum ad curas provenerit. The calling of the Ministry is
mysterious; Now if for pastorale magisterium, est Ars artium, and regimen
animarum. Hier.
Arts and ordinary trades, men do not take the profession on them till they
have been some years practiced in them. How much more cause have we to be many
years at the schools of the Prophets, to gain Isay 50.^.
the tongue of the learned, before we assume this 1 Corinthians. 3.8.
Ministration of the spirit. That of our Savior is observeable, that though he
was able enough at twelve years, yet he preached not till he was Luke 3.23.
Cap. 2.42.
thirty, Redemptor noster, cum sit coeli Condi^or, Angelorum doctor, ante
trice^nale tempus in ^e^ra noluit doctor sieri homi number, perfectae vitae
gratiam, non nisi in perfecta tate prdicavit. Gr^gosuper Ez^. ho. 2.
by that perfect age (says Gregory) implying the perfection of parts requisite
to that function, being as S. Chrysostom, Om^s Angelicis humeris formidandum.
What presumption is it then (says the same Father) Cur te facis pastorem, cum
sis ovis, cur caputesse contendis-cum pes existis; cur exercitum ducere
quaeris, cum inter milites adhuc censearis. Jbid,
for men to be ambitious of being Shepherds, when they are scarce Sheep? to
be Captains when they are hardly Christ's soldiers, to guide the Stern,
before they know how to handle the Ore? The Apostles were first Disciples
before Doctors, Learners before Leaders. And as our Savior bade them tarry at
Jerusalem, till they should be endowed with power from on high: So it is good
counsel for many to return to the Universitie, till they are better furnished,
and like the wise Virgins, to be sparing in the storing of others with Oil,
when least they have not enough for themselves, it is good in this as in other
matters, To be swift to hear, but slow to speak, till they be fit for it.
Ahimaaz that was so eager to be sent, and out ran Cushi when he came spoke
little to the purpose. And so it is with some hasty spirits for the Ministry,
they that come in after them, like Cushi, do their Message more fully. Apes
illa sapiens cum aeris motus suspectos habet, lapillis saepe sub^atis per
inania se librat nubila, ne leve alarm remigium, praecipitentflabra ventorum.
Ambr. de Vng. ^^. 3.
The Bees in tempestuous weather (it is S. Ambrose his similitude) use to
balance themselves with little stones least in their flight they should be
overborne by it. It is good Counsel for us in this Kingdom where we shall
meet with so many storming Adversaries to gainsay us, we had need to be
well poysed with sound and solid knowledge, least we be carried away with every
wind of doctrine. For want of this it comes to pass, that some feed their
people indeed, but it is with an empty spoone, little or no matter, Vox and
praterea nihil, like the foolish Virgins lamps, but little Oil. Instead of
polishing the Corner stones of the Temple, their doctrine is but daubing with
untempered mortar. A formal outside of preaching. but if it were w^ighed in
the balance of the Sanctuary, would be found very light, little substance in
it.

2 Perspicuitie, and plainness in their Sermons; what hope is there of opening
men's understandings, when the matter delivered is closed up from them. It Was S.
Paul's aim 1 Corin. 14.9.
to speak words easy to be understood, and so it should be ours also. There
is little difference in speaking in an unknown tongue, and speaking of things
in an unknown style. These strong lines, and forced eloquence in so high a
language, does little suite with Gods Oracles, lest fit that word that must
save the Soul. (A fault which this our Brother much condemned himself for.)
The Idolatrous Calfe was of Gold, but the Serpent that gave life, was made of
plain Brass. The Altar was to be but of Earth, or unpolisht stone. Types
indeed they were of the mean hue of Christ himself. But they may resemble the
plainness of his word too, which was usually illustrated by earthly
similitudes, rather solid in the matter, than gilded in the style. Our Savior
preached not as he himself was able, but as the people were able to hear. 1
Cor. 2.1. Upon which S. Ambrose speaks much against that. Vbi non ratio, non
virtus, sed ver^borum quaeritur compositio.
S. Paul professes he came not in the enticing words of man's wisdom, or
excellency of speech. 2 Cor. 2.17.
We are not as many (says he) who corrupt the word of God (...) a Metaphor
from Hucksters. That in the Law, Deuteronomy. 22.9.
Thou shall not sow thy vineyards with diverse kinds of seeds, is of force
still in this particular: We must not blend the pure seed of the word, with the
Chafe and Darnell of our own conceits. It Is a good rule, that seeing we are
Christ's Messengers, we should so preach as in our Consciences we are persuaded
he would have us, or as we think the Apostles would, if they were present
themselves, whom we do succeed; This were to do it in sincerity, when with S.
Paul, As of God, in the sight of God, so speak we in Christ. I wonder with
what face, some can pray before him who is the searcher of the hearts, for the
conversion of their hearers by their Sermon, when res ipsa loquitur, there can
be no such meaning in them, but rather their own Qui parvis loquitur sublimia,
curat magis se ostendere, quam auditoribus prodetse. Greg. in Moral.
applause. Painted glass is the more costly, but plainer is the more
perspicuous, and so the more useful: Men may spend much time to paint and set
out their Sermons, but the plainer the more profitable. The Child thrives more
with the mere milk of the breast, than all other sweet meats whatsoever. And
it is sure the 1 P^t. (...).
Sincere milk of the word (as S. Peter calls it) drawn out of the two Breasts
of the Church the Old and N^w Testament, nourishes more to everlasting life,
than all other Placentia, men-pleasing Oratory whatsoever. Matt. 13.47.
The word in the Parable is compared to a Net, the world to the Sea, Men to
Fishes. If we will have the Fish catched, the Net must be spread and unfolded,
and so must the word be explained if we will be Fishers of men. And from this,
let none on the other side collect, as if a rudeness of speech were justified,
the apparrelling this heavenly wisdom in some tattered style. No, Eccles.
12.9. Because the Preacher was wise, He gave good heed, and sought out words,
and set them in order, he sought out fit words, etc. Apta non alta, and
certainly it is the upshot of all learning to distinguish aptly and clearly of
that which is confused, and to illustrate plainly that which is obscure. Some
have a faculty to speak obscurely of a plain subject, as if according to
that threatening in the Prophet, Amos 8.9.
The would cause the Sun to go down at noone. To do Gods work
negligently, ye know is cursed; We must do herein, as David, (1 Chronicles. 29,
2.) who prepared withal his might for the house of God, the Oil in the Lamps
of the Tabernacle must be beaten (Exodus 27.29) to signify we must beat our
brains in the preparing for the light of the word, not in this sense, to offer
ex tempore unto God that which cost us nothing: No, it ought to be with some
labor and pains. Yet, as S. Augustine says well, the e is quaedam diligens
negligentia, commendable in a Preacher, neither to have his Phrase too curious,
nor too careless, quae sic ornatum detrahit, ut sordes non contrahit. While
the Temple was in framing in Mount Libanus, there was doubtless the use of all
tools, but when it was set up, it is said King. 6.7.
there was not then either Hammer or Axe or any tool of Iron heard in it. It
may be applied to this spiritual building, while the Sermon is in framing in
the study, make use of all Authors, but in the very delivery of it in the
Temple to the People, what needs there the noise of so many names of Fathers
and other writers, which often drownes the matter it self, and the producing
of Heathen Poets. Me thinks it is like the bringing of the uncircumcised into
Gods house, of all the most unfitting. If thou shall lift up such tools upon
it, (as it is said of the Exodus 20.25.
Altar) thou have polluted it. In a word, so preach, that the hearer may be
convicted, his heart discovered, his tongue confess (not that learning, wit,
or eloquence, but 1 Cor. 14.25.
that God is in you indeed, that your tongues are touched with a Coal from Gods
Altar. Preaching consists not in flashes and Rhetorical descants, and such
like S. August. Of Homer. dulcissime vanus Confess.
pleasing vanities, but in the power and demonstration of the spirit, in
enlightening the mind, in wounding the Conscience, and healing it again.
Lachrymae auditorum lauds tu sunt, docente te in Ecclesia gemitus suscitetur,
ille est Doctor Ecclesiasticus, qui lachrymas non risum movet. Hieron. ad nepot.
The tears of the people are a Preachers praise, says S. Hierome. The words
of the wise says Solomon are as goads and nails. Dicuntur pungere, non
palpare, says the same Father, not to stroke but to pierce, not to flatter,
but to fright men out of their evil courses, and so much for the first part of
the Commission, To open their eyes.

2 The second part of the Commission to turn them from darkness to light,
from the power of Satan unto God, no great difference between them: For as
sin is often set out by darkness, so is Satan called the power and the
Prince of darkness. As Grace is often resembled by light, so is God also
called light it self, the Father of light, etc. Howsoever if this be a
Preachers Office to turn others, this Conclusion must necessarily follow also,
viz. He must be first turned himself: They must not then be such as live in
the works of darkness, and under the power of Satan themselves. Quomodo
pocest praeses Ecclesiae auferre malum de medio ejus qui in delictum simile
corruit. Aut qua liberate peccantem corripere potest, cum tacitus ille sibi
respondet, eadem se admisisse, quae corripit Hier. in Epist. ad Tit.
What effect can that Ambassador expect when his actions shall contradict his
treaties? Can he hope to draw others to take the Oath of Allegiance when he
refuses it himself? When our lives do not second our doctrine, we shall but
pull down with one hand, what we build up with the other. He that would have
a Sermon effectual (faith a Father) Qui verba Dei loquitur, ex vita sua
colligat, quid and qualiter dicat, ille loqui veraciter novit, qui prius
benefacere didicit. Greg sup eua^g. Sern o no^ habetdulcedinem, cum vita
reproba remordet conscientiam. Jd. Qui maledictus est, quomodo potest
benedicere; cu^ in Christi corpote non sunt, quomodo populo possunt Christi
corpus tradere? Idem. Cujus vita despicitur, ejus doctrina contemnatur. Hier.
Must first read it in himself. He can only speak as he ought, who lives as
he should. What sweetness can there be in that speech to the hearers, when
it is contradicted within the Conscience of the Speaker. They can care but little
for his Counsel who is himself careless of his life. How shall he bless the
people, when he is in a cursed estate himself? How shall he give the body of
Christ to others, who is not a member himself? As neither the blind nor lame
sacrifice were accepted with God ( Habbac. 1.) So are they as unprofitable with
man, the blind in knowledge, the halte in conversation. Praedicat viva voce,
qui vita and voce. S. Paul bids Timothy be 1 Timothy 4.12. Tit. 2.7. 1 P^t. 5.3.
Tanta debet esse conversatio Pontificis, ut omnis motus and egressus, and
universa ejus opera sint exemplaria, and quicquid agat, quicquid loquitur,
doctrina fit populorum. H^eron.
an example to the believers in his Conversation. Titus in all things to show
himself a Pattern of good works gravity, etc. S. Peter exhorts the Elders to
be examples to the flock, it is the same word in all three, (...), a Metaphor
from a Seal or stamp, to which the people are like the Wax or Paper, who
accordingly receive their Print. S. Ambrose well calls the Ministers life, the
Episcopus ut cunctos inspicrat, sic cunctorum oculi in illum recipient. Nulli
jamjam illicitum esse videatur, quod ab Episcopo quasi licitum perpetratur.
Ergo quia ita est, cur te velut tetram speculum univerforum oculis demonstras,
ut non possent obscuritate tua se comptins exornare. Ambr. d^dig^t sacerdot.
peoples lookingglasse according to which they usually dress themselves, as
taking whatsoever he does to be Gospel; now if the glass be false, Si oculus
nequam est, totum corpus tuum tenebrosum est, idest, si Episcopus qui videbatur
Corpori subdito lucem praebere obnubilatur nequitiae caecitate, quid facient
caetera membra, quibus lux adempta est oculorum. Amb. ibid.
the eye be evil, how can the whole body but be disordered, and full of
darkness? Nay, he ought to fly to the very suspicion Tit. 1.6. 1 Timothy 3.7.
Philip. 4.8. Augustinus paru^ esse judicaret Episcopi pudicitiam esse integram,
nisi and famam haberes illibatam, nee satis, si suam unius fama^ a sinistris
rumoribus praestitisset, nisi clericos etiam haberet integrinominis Erasm. de
vita August.
of his fame, that he be not so much as accused or ill reported.

His life should be like the land of Goshen Lux gregis, flamma pastoris. Hieron.
light, though all the rest of Egypt be dark. Like Gideons fleece wett with
the dew of Heaven, though all the ground about be dry. Gregory well compares
the Preacher to the Cock, as in his Meslage which is to erie Romans 13.12.
with S. Paul. Nox praecessit, etc. The night is past, the day is at hand: So
in his preparation, Qui prius alijs insonat, quam cantus emittat; First wakes
himself before he wakes others, Sic praedicatores antequa^ alios movent, se
prius in sanctis actionibus exercent, se ptius excutiant, and tunc alios
sollicitos reddunt, prius sua puniri fletibus curant, and tunc quae aliorum
sunt punienda denunciant. Gregor.
So (says he) should a Preacher first shake off the dust of his own feet,
and then take care to clean others; First move himself in good works and
then draw and drive on others; First repent himself, and then denounce a
judgment on them that do not: And for this exemplary innocent life, both in
your selves and families, has it not been seriously charged, and solemnly
vowed, both at your Ordination, and Consecration, many prayers then made for
you in it, if so be it be yet in vain. And certainly it is a thing most
necessary in this Kingdom, where there are so many that will not hear our
words there our works must be the Preacher, where they shut their eyes against
the light of the word, there the light of our life's must shine before them. And
examples are the stronger Cords of the two. What we say proverbially of the
Plough, That it thrives best when the hushandman says not, Ite, but Venite: So
it is with the seed of the word, when the sower can say with S. Paul, 1 Corinthians.
11.1.
Be followers of me, as you see me do, do likewise. The life and doctrine are
like that sign of Castor and Pollux, when they are seen together, are a
presage of a prosperous voyage, when a sunder, they portend a dangerous storm.
Si been docueris and been vixeris, omnium judex es: si been docueris and male
vixeris, tui solius. Priore instruis populum quomodo debet vivere, posteriore
Deu^, ^uomodo debet te condemnare. Hier.
If thou live well (says S. Hierome) thou art as the spiritual man, judge
of all; If thou teach well and live ill, a Judge only of thy self, and
judged of all. By thy teaching thou tells the people how to live, by thy life
thou show God how to condemn thy self. There are some like Nebuchanezzars
Image, the head was of Gold, but the feet of Clay. They have golden wits, but
their conversation is earthly and sensual. Whether that be true or no that is
proverbially said of Tusser, that he wrote excellently well of husbandry, but
himself was the worst Husband that ever water wet It Is true of many in this
sense, who can preach very well to save others, but 1 Cor. 9.27. (...) id est,
disaproved as Cap. 11.19. etc. opponitur probo, sicut pecuniam, probam vocamus
minime adulterinam, Beza.
cast away themselves. In a word, let us so teach and so do, that we may 1 Timothy 4.6.
both save our selves, and them that hear us. And Thomas Aquinas makes it a
greater difficulty for a Prelate to be saved, than another man, for this
reason Quia debet ratione^ reddere de proprijs and alienis, Tho. Aquin.
because he has other men's sins lying upon him, besides his own, and for the
same cause Non temere dico, sed ut affectus sum, and sentio, non arbittor inter
sacerdotes multos esse qui falvifiant, sed multos esse qui pereant,
glorificemur aliquando apud homines, and tamen perdimur apud Deum, quia
cuicunqueue multum datur, multum quaeratur ab eo, and non solum redituri sint
rationem suorum delictorum, sed and aliorum, Chrysostom. 3. homil. in Act.
Apost. and de sacerdot. lib. 6.
S. Chrysostom says the like of Ministers also, and that seriously, that he
thought few of them would be saved, both because more is expected from them,
than from others, and their sins greater than the sins of others. The
hazard of which Epist. 148. ad Valor. and Possidon. in vita August.
S. Augustine says was the cause he so wept at his Consecration. The like
says Vt nihil Episcopo excellentius, sic nihil miserabilius, si de sancta vita
periclitetur, si sacerdos in crimine teneatur de dignit. sacerd.
S. Ambrose, No Office more excellent, and if they fall none more dangerous.
Grandis dignitas sacerdotum, sed and grandis ruina, si peccant, non est
tantigaudij excelsa tenuisse, quam moeroris de sublimioribus corruisse, Hieron.
A great honor, says S. Hierome, but if they sin, a great fall, the one is
not such a joy, as the other a sadness. The nearer we approach to God in our
service, the greater is the offense, if we shall run into rebellion. See the
Apostles Argument Romans 2.21.22.23.24. Thou that teach another, teach thou
not thy self? Thou that Preachest, etc. In the Law it is observed the measures
and weights of the Sanctuary were double to the Common, and so are the sins
of the Officers of Gods Sanctuary that draw nigh to him, double and treble to
the same sins in the Common people. If the Levit. 4.3. It exceeded those of
the common sort, verse. 28. the rulers 23. equal with the whole congregation,
verse. 13
Priest anointed did sin, his Offering for expiation was to be as much as for
the sin of the whole Congregation; So the sins of such as are consecrated,
and set apart for Gods service require a deeper measure of repentance; a
greater portion of sorrow, than might suffice for many others, by how much they
are the more scandalous. And has not this of late been the cause of the
contempt of our calling? that the vulgar (though erroneously) have argued from
the persons to the Offices, according to that of Malac. 7.8. Because ye have
departed out of the way, and corrupted the Covenant of Levi, therefore have I
made you base and Contemptible before all the people, according as you have not
kept my ways. A good strict life, needs no other help to gain respect. Vice
usually stands in awe of virtue. See but that instance in Mark 6.20.
Herod who feared John, and observed him, because he was a just man and a holy,
etc. It Is the prescription of S. Paul to 1 Timothy 4.12. Tit. 2.15.
Timothy, and Titus for it: I speak the more of it, in regard the contrary
has been pretended, as the Original of all these stirs. A present
lamentable example we have in this person, the fruit of whose life has been
this ignominious death, both scandalous, both lamented. Yet in this differing,
his life, a continual spiritual death, his death a beginning, and a great
progress of a spiritual life. Let him die in your thoughts for his life, But
let him live in your memories by his penitent death, forget the former, and
imitate the latter. And thus we have considered the second part of the Text,
applicatorie to this our Brother, as it was to have been his employment
toward others.

A word of it only as it was effectually found in himself; and so we shall
have done with it:

Ye have here a Threefold Metaphorical description of the sinful state of
nature before Conversion, and the state of Grace after it, The former by a 1.
Blindness. 2. Darkness. 3. Slavery.
The latter, by a 1. Sight, 2. Light, 3. Liberty.


The Devision of the former is somewhat like S. John's Tricotomize, etc.
referring 1 John 2 16.
all in the world to the Eye, the Flesh, and Life, according to the usual
distinction of sins, into those of the Heart, Fact, and Custom. The first ex
Ignorantia, the second ex Infirmitate, the third ex Studio. As this sinful
condition by Nature is, a dead estate, you may Tribus gradibus ad peccatu^
pervenitur, in cord, in facto, in consuetudine, tanqua^ tres mortes, una quasi
in domo, altera quasi pro lata extra portum, tertia quasi in sepulchro jam
putrescens, Quae tria genera mortuorum Dominu^ suscitasse, quisquis Evangelium
legit, and agnoscit, Augast. sermon. in Mont.
perceive three degrees of it, according to a distinction of S. Augustines. The
first (Blindness) is like the Man dead in his Bed. the second (Darkness) put
into his Coffin. The third (Under the power of Satan) laid in his Grave. Three
such our Savior raised to life. Mark. 5.41.
Iairus his daughter in her bed within doors. ^^k 7.14.
The Widow of Naims Son in his Coffin carrying out. John 11.4^.
And Lazarus putrefying in his Grave; all were miracles, but the last the
greatest. Such several. Degrees of sinners is S. Paul here sent to raise from
the death of sin, to the life of Grace, to the last degree of which (to
magnify Gods mercy the more) was this our Brother fallen, and raised again by
repentance.

1. The first degree of our wretched estate before Conversion is set out by a
Blindness (to open their eyes, therefore blind before) which indeed is like
his, Ioh. 9.1. from our very birth. And yet in many things, this of the Soul,
is worse than that of the body. He that is blind in body is glad of a guide,
these often scorn instruction, the former, thinks them happy that see and
defires it, These despise such, and will not see though they might. The one
believes he is blind and laments it. The other thinks he sees well enough,
like the Pharisees, ( John 9.41.) The Corporally blind sometimes excel in
parts of the mind, as Memory, etc. But a man spiritually blind, has no good
thing in him at all.

2. The second by a darkness, as the world the first day of the Creation was
empty and void, wrapped up in a confused darkness, such is our estate, as we
are borne at first, void of all good (Romans 7.18.) Darkness in the
Understanding, Confusion in the Affections, and Conscience. And there is some
similitude between them. First a man in Darkness is subject to error, so are
such to go astray, resembled in the lost Luke 15.
Groate and Sheep. Secondly, subject to John 11.1^.
stumbling, so are these to dangerous falls and scandals in their lives, till
they slip at last into that Pit of darkness. Thirdly, insensible of any evil
before them. So are these of Hell and damnation, let them be never so often
turned. Fourthly, subject to mistakes, to think they are right when they are
wrong. So are such often strongly conceited, they are in the way to heaven, and
yet Posting the contrary. Lastly, subject to fears and frights, such is the
Case of those, who live in the works of darkness, they have many horrors
and scars within their Consciences, especially if they fall into any danger of
death, by sickness, or any other accident. The same which this our Brother
often acknowledged to have been his condition before his Conversion.

3. Thirdly, by a slavery, and the worst of any (omni malo and exitio pejor)
under the power or thraldom of Satan (2. Tim. 2.26.) An Emblem of it ye have
in Sampsou, who had his eyes first pulled out by the Philistines, and then bound
in fetters, and made to grind in the Prison, it is so expressed Esaias 42.7. To
open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison house.
Signified somewhat by the Israelits miserable estate in the Egyptian bondage.
They were in a strange Country, and so the more helpelesse hopeless. Such is
this, where we are Pilgrims, and strangers: The taske-masters may resemble the
buffetings and cruel exactions of our spiritual enemies. Pharaoh commands to
have their Children killed in the birth, and so does Satan endeavor daily to
crush the very first motions and beginnings of any spiritual birth in us, like
the Dragon in the Revelation, Revel. 12.4.
when he could not murder the Mother, attempted the Child as soon as it was
borne. Sin, is in us as in the stream, in Adam as in the Spring, in the
Devil as in the Sea, from whom as all comes, so to whom all that die in them
must return. And yet herein as Anselme observes by some Circumstances the
Scholar exceedes the Master, the sins of men may be greater than Satan's
Satan peccat Deo reprobante, ego Deo revocante, ille obduratur ad punientem,
ego ad blandiente^, ille peccat contra non requirentem se, ego contra morientem
pro me, ecce cujus imaginem horrebam, ho^rorem in multis aspicio me
horribiliorem. Anselm. in lib. de casu Diaboli.
(says he) He sins against God reprobating him, man against God recalling
him. H^e is hardened against the punisher of him, Man against the allurer. He
against one not seeking him. Man against one dying for him.

For the state of grace by Conversion. It Is

1. Set forth here by sight (To open) Corporal miracles are ceased, but behold
a spiritual, the greater remains. If any should question us whether the word
we preach be Christ's, we may reply as our Savior to the like from John by his
Disciples Matthew. 11.5.
Go, tell him the blind see, the lame walk, etc. My works testify of me.
And indeed it is Christ's work Originally, though instrumentally ours, Elisha
may send his servant, and his staff, but no life to the 2 King. 4.31.
Shunamites Child till he come himself. The Cock may crow twice, or thrice,
but Peter remembers not himself Luke 22.61.
till Christ looks on him. As it is not all the outward light in the Sun will
make a Man see if there be wanting the light in the eye within. Nisi intus sit
qui doceat Doctoris, lingua in vacuum laborat. Hieron.
So all outward admonitions avayle not, without the seconding of them by his
Spirit. The first thing made in the Creation was light, and so it is in the
regeneration the lightning of the Conscience which Solomon calls the Prove. 20.27.
Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the heart, (and this was
it that gave the first token of spiritual life in this our Brother.)

2 By light, as Matthew. 4.16. The people that sat in darkness saw great
light, and by it (to omit diverse others) is especially signified Jsay 50.20.
Chap. 58.8.
Comfort, as the contrary is usually meant by Darkness.

Observe hence; That Conversion puts a Man into a lightsome and cheerful
Condition. See Psalm. 97.11. Luke 1.79. Matthew. 9.2. be of good cheer, etc.

Object. It does not seem so, but rather that wicked men have the merryest
lives.

Answ. First, you must not always judge of Mirth by outward laughter, men
sometimes laugh more at a jest than at the news of a Pardon: But they are said
to joy in the latter not in the former.

Secondly it may be the fault of some Christians like Judge. 4.17.
Sampsons wife to weep all the days of the feast, like Mary Magdalen
lamenting the loss of Christ, and yet she was talking with him. Men may be in
the estate of joy, and yet not apprehend it. Like Genesis 21.17.
Hagar though there was a Fountain of Water near her, yet till God opened her
eyes to see it cries out for thirst.

Thirdly if we shall take a survey of this Carnal mirth, we shall find it
not worth the naming. For the brevitie, Job says enough, Job. 15.5.
It lasts but for a Moment. If like Jonas his Gourd it come up in one night,
it withers the next, usually like that creature the Naturalist speaks off,
which dies the same day it is brought forth. If like the Marygold their hearts
open in mirth at Sunrising, they shut again in sadness before it be down. If
it has any light in it, it is like that of a Candle Prove. 24.20.
(as Solomon compares it too) that gives a fair light in a room for the
present, but the least puff of wind puts all out. In the midst of their
joylitie the least frown of a Superior, a thwaat of an equal, any affront of
an inferior imbitters all. Only Mordecai's stiff knee, so turns the edge
Ester. 5.13.
of Hamans proud heart, that all his honor avayld him nothing. 1 Samuel 25.37
Nabal can be merry enough at his drunken feast ore night, but a little ill
news told him in the Morning makes his heart to sink within him like a stone.
While the play lasts the sensualist laughs, when it is done he is in his dumps
again. Whilst the Gamester wins, he is well pleased, but when the game once
turns, and he has made all away, he is ready to make away himself. For the
fruit of it, tell me you that give your selves to pleasure all the day, does
not a heavy heartedness conclude it in the Evening? Does not usually such
sensual mirth go out like a Candle? leaves the stink of a snuff behind it,
damps and sore griefs within your Consciences. I am sure it was that which
this our Brother often acknowledged, and it had been said by Solomon before
him, Prover. 14.13. In their laughter their heart is sorrowful. (See the
shortness) and the end of their mirth is heaviness. (See the issue:) One
fitly compares it to lightning, which as it is but a Flash and away, so the
fruit of it is but a blast upon the heart, and as after a lightning often
follows a Thunder. So after this flashy mirth, loud cries and tempests in the
Conscience, take one with the other, and in reason it is not worth the having.
But this spiritual joy Prove. 10.22.
adds no such sorrow with it, and even though 2 Cor. 6.10.
sorrowing, yet always rejoicing. The poor condition of the former, see
Isaiah 24.7.8. and the magnanimity of the latter. Habb. 3.17. of both which,
having so lately tasted, how savoury have I heard this our Brother thus to
distinguish.

3. Thirdly by a setting at liberty (from the power of Satan) so it is expressed
( Luke 4.18.) to preach deliverance, and setting at liberty them that were
bruised. Before every Lust was a Commander, the Devil General, but now he is
delivered from them all, and out of the heaviest yoke of thraldom, to the
most glorious liberty, even of the sons of God. To ransom, or rescue a
Christian from the slaverie of the Turks was ever accounted an honorable act,
but the converting of a sinner from the error of his way, must needs exceed
it. I need not tell you, it is Gods act thus to Psalm. 119.22.
enlarge the heart, it is plain it must be so, if you consider but the strength
of him under whom we are bound, and see how especially it is given to the
blessed Trinity. God the John. 6.44.
Father draws, It Is the Chap. 8.36.
Son which makes you free indeed. Where the 2 Cor. 3.17.
Spirit of the Lord is, there is a liberty. What little freedom of will we
have naturally, to any saving good, this our Brother would sufficiently
testify in himself. See the Relation page 4.
Who for a long time, (though wanted no apprehension of his misery) continued
stupid and senseless, heavily complaining for the want of a spirit of
Compunction. Well he was once Prove. 5.22.
held with the Cords of his own sins, 2 Timothy 2.26.
in the snare of the Devil, taken captive of him at his will, but Psalm. 124.6.
Blessed be the Lord that has not given him as a prey unto his teeth, his
soul is escaped as a Bird out of the snare of the Fouler, the snare is broken,
and he is delivered.

And now having seen the enlargement of him: Let us in Conclusion take a short
view of the Latitude of Gods mercy to him (which stands always wide open to
penitent sinners,) in the Third and last part of the Text, The happy fruit of
all, in his receiving forgiveness.

For the doctrine hence observeable, that wheresoever there is true repentance
given, there is Quid est peccatum, si cum Domini misericordia conferatur, tela
araneae ventus flat, and disrumpitur. Deus vult, and peccatum dissolvitur.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 5.
forgiveness attained. I shall not need to enter into any further
declaration, so many worthy late Divines have so fully opened it, that I should
but light a Candle to the Sun in it. Only let me say thus much, that if S.
Paul were the 1 Timothy 1.16.
first upon whom Jesus Christ did show forth all long suffering and mercy for a
Pattern for them that should be hereafter, this our Brother might be a second
in whom Gods mercy has been infinitely magnified. In his own judgment he
censured himself above all former presidents whatsoever, even of Manasses
himself, who he thought had not that knowledge, was not trusted with that
function, and incurred not that scandal. And yet, for this particular, he had
it not only by evident arguments made apparent to him, but also by a rare
measure of spiritual refreshings sealed within him. A high sinner, a deep
repentance. And lo, a large dole of comfort.

And let it not seem so improbable, that so great a sinner upon so humble a
Contrition, should have such an enlightening. Our Savior appeared first to
Mark. 16.9.
Mary Magdalene before all others, who had seven Devils cast out of her. S.
Peter had fowly denied his Master with Oaths and curses, yet after his bitter
weeping our Savior appeared 1 Cor. 15.5.
to him, before he did to the rest; and the Angels gave a more Mark. 16.7.
Fidelior factus est Petrus, postquam fidem se perdidisse deflevit, atque ideo
majorem gratiam reperit, qua^ amisit. Ambran s^rm. de vincul.
special charge to tell the blessed news of his Resurrection to him than to
the others. It Is true he was but an Infant for his time, (it was his own speech,
he reckoned himself but a week old,) now for Jnfants the Father sometimes
smile more upon them, take them oftener in their Arms, than when they come to
further years. And such is found by experience to be In inchoatione
conversionis, inveniu^tur blandimenta dulcedinis, vitam uniuscujusque co^versi,
inenoatio blanda permulcet. Greg. 24. Mora.
Gods dealing with some of his at their first conversion; when the Ex Egypto
Israelitis exeu^tibus a vicino bello per viam terrae Philistim subtrahuntur,
and tranquilitas ostenditur, ne in ipsa teneretudine turbati. etc. Sic prius
suavitatem sen tiunt conveth, pacis quiet nutriunrur, etc. idem Gregor.
Israelites were newly delivered out of Egypt, God was more careful at that
instant for their peaceable travel, than afterward. (Exodus 13.17.) More mirth
was made at the very return of the Prodigal, than had been for the other
brother, that had never so offended. More joy for the return of one lost
sheep, than for the ninety-nine, not gone astray. And if we can be persuaded,
he might reap a full Crop of joy in heaven afterward; Why may it not be
believed, he might receive some first fruits, as an earnest, some few hours
before here.

Concerning these spiritual refreshings, some of our practical Divines
observe these particulars. That either they follow some Ad videndum lumen
internae bonitatis, polluta dudum conscienria, lachrymis, debet baptizari, quo
ubethis culpa fletur, eo altius agnitio veritatis attingitur. Gregor. in Moral.
deep humiliation (Esaias 66.2.) I will look to him that is of a contrite
spirit, etc, Or as a reward after a Conflict with victory. (Revel. 2.17. To him
that overcomes will I give of the hidden Manna, etc. Sometimes it is
accompanied with Satan's malice, like S. Paul after his revelations, had the
messenger Satan buffeting him (2. Cor. 12.7.) The effects are some
extraordinary spirit of prayer. (Romans 8.15.26.) A further abasement of the
party himself, As Job after he had seen God, (Chap. 42.5.6.) an undervaluing
all the things of this world in respect of it, as David (Psalm. 4.7.) A longing
to have that joy in its fullness, like Saint Paul after his raptures, wishing
to be dissolved (Philip. 1.23.) And for the time it is observed usually to be
against some heavy trial, a viaticum against the approach of death, or the
like. Now all these were evidently found in him: His sorrow was deep, his
conflicts many, the effects were to my admiration, and the time very
seasonable, being deferred till that very Morning before his execution, (the
cause I believe of his so undaunted a spirit at the sight of it.) Well, you see
how fitly repentance may be termed a (...) Amaritudine^ radicis dulcedo pomi
compensat. Pericula maris spe lucri delectant, Dolorem medicicinae, spes
salutis mitigat. Hic. in Matthew.
the root is bitter, but the fruit sweet, it is a stormy voyage but a rich
return, a sharp medicine, but very sovereign. At the entrance it is like our
Saviors draught of Gall, and vinegar, but the Conclusion is like the end of
Ionathans rod dipped in a Hony-combe, the end of that man is in peace and joy.
Pour out as many tears upon thy self offering to God, as 1 King. 18.34.
Elijah did water the second and third time upon his sacrifice at Mount Carmel,
The fire of Gods spirit shall descend, and lick up those drops into spiritual
joys, and dry up all tears from thine eyes. The spirit of the Lord may be
well said Genes. 1.2.
to moove upon the face of such waters. These Rivers as they have their head in
Paradise, their spring in Heaven; so they return to Heaven again. This holy
water drawn at this spiritual marriage, will Christ turn into Wine indeed,
give such the Esaias 61.3.
garments of gladness for the spirit of heaviness.

To conclude, how can it be, but a joyful estate, when a Man is assured his
sins are forgiven. If we consider it, in these three things. He has peace
with God. Peace of Conscience. Peace with Death. The two latter, are
consequences of the first.

1. First, he has peace with God, Romans 5.1. They report some Fires no thing
will quench them but Blood. It Is true of the wrath of God for sin, no thing
but the blood of Christ can appease. It was Rehoboams speech to the Israelites,
My little finger shall be heavier than my Fathers loins. It Is true in this
sense, for sin, the least degree of Gods displeasure, is more than all the
worlds. A Man without this peace, be he decked with Jewels, is but like a fair
Room richly hung, but wants a Roof, who would make choice of it for his
lodging. Such is the man, be he never so gorgeously appareld, if he lies yet
open to the revenge of heaven, whose iniquities are not covered. Let it be the
praise of Italy to be the Garden of the world: It is a Christians happiness,
to be the Garden of God, that the Tree of life is in the midst of him, that God
is at peace with him.

2. He has peace of Conscience. The Earth no outward weight can moove, yet
the stirring of a few unruly vapors within, will make some parts to quake:
There are some men, no outward Crosses can trouble, but the guilt of some
secret sins within has made them Conscientia peccati est formidinis matter.
Chrysostom. Nulla prna gravior paena malae co^scientiae.
tremble. The soul of a wicked man is often like a Esaias 57.20.
troubled Sea, or like the Ship in a storm the Disciples were tossed in, but
as soon as Christ entered, there was a calm. So as soon as the Conscience is
possessed of Christ, there is peace, Some when they are disquieted in their
minds do as David wished he could do (Psalm. 55.7 When fearfulness and
horror overwhelmed him, Oh, that I had wings like a dove, then would J fly
away and be at rest, Go travel, as if they would out ride the cry of
Conscience which they carry with them. Some send for Music, as Saul for a
Harper when his evil spirit came upon him. Others deal with their
Consciences, that thus arrest them in Gods name, as some have done with the
Sergeant, make him Drunk, and so Timete ipsu^, alium enim potes fugere, te
(...) autem nunqua^, falli potuit fa^a, conscientia nunquam.
escape him. These ways and the like had this our Brother tried formealy, but
found no found peace, till he thus turned to Christ, the Prince of it. The
Mariners in that mighty tempest rowed hard to get the Ship to land, but no
means would do, till Jonas. 1.15.
Jonas was cast out, and then presently the Sea ceased from her raging, I have
been a witness of strong tempests raised within his Conscience, when he first
grew sensible, but after ^ee had Conscientia est cordis scientia, est Codex
animi, in quo quotidiana pec cata conscribu^tur.
disburdn'd it, and out with those pressing sins in such salt and overflowing
tears, in Confession and Repentance, he soon found the fruit of that call of
our Savior. Matthew. 11.28.
Come unto me you that are weary and heavy laden, and J will give you rest.
Having like Noah's Dove strayed from the Arc of Christ, he found no rest for
the feet of his Soul, till he returned to Christ again. It Is a usual
division of these four sorts of Consciences, a quiet but not a good, neither
good nor quiet, a good but not a quiet, both good and quiet. The two former he
had experience of in his life, the two latter near his death, the misery of
the one, and the happiness of the other (which he had so lately exchanged) how
sensibly have I heard him express, apprehending in the deepest degree of his
humiliation, more true content, than in the height of all his sinful
pleasures: Chrysostom calls the Conscience Numisma Dei conscientia, in solidis
Caesar videtur, in conscientia Deus agnoscitur. Chrysostom.
Gods Coin, wherein as the Kings Image is in his, so is Gods instamped in
this. And therefore as we give that which is Cesars to Caesar, so he exhorts,
to give this which is Gods to God: and a Conscientia bona est templum
Salomonis, ager benedictionis, hortus deliciarum, aureum declinatorium arca
foederis, Thesaurus Regis, aula Dei, habitaculum Spiritus, gaudium Angelorum.
Hugo de anima
good Conscience before God and man, it is the richest pearl, the most
invalueable treasure under Heaven. S. Paul's glory and joy (1 Cor 1.12. Act.
23.1.

3. Thirdly, he has peace with Death: a Be without her sting is more feared
than hurtful: It Is so with this, once freed from the guilt of sin, the 1 Cor.
15.56.
sting of it. He that knows he owes nothing, flies not the aproach of the
Bayliffe, He that is assured of the blotting out of the handwriting that was
against him needs not to shun the arrest of death. Be it sudden, yet it is not
untimely to him. What a measure of this Christian valor was found in this our
Brother after this spiritual sealing, has been See the Relation page 30.31
manifested before many witnesses, and needs not any repetition here. Only
observe what this blessed change in him, had wrought in others, of him. He
once wept much by himself in private, when the tongues of men with good cause
were open against him in public; Now tears of all sorts are shed for him
publicly, when he had Comforts within himself secretly. He that was hated
at his Condemnation, is loved at his Execution. Such as were grieved at his
life, are comforted at his Death. He began with his own tears, he departs
with the sobs of others. And I doubt not, but what he sowed in tears, he
reapes in joy, what was sealed here on Earth, is ratified in Heaven. From a
Death temporal he is passed to a life eternal: Unto which God of his mercy
bring us all, for the merits of his dear Son. To whom with the Father and
the holy Spirit be all honor, and glory now and evermore Amen.

FINIS.
These Errors following (which by the necessity of the Authors Absence has
happened) thou have here corrected, for any other mistakes in the distinctions,
they are left to thy own ingenuous apprehension.

Errata in the Relation.
Page 2. marg. l. 37. r. de via. p. 4. l. 7. r. their prisoners, r. his Throne.
p. 5. l. 27. m.r. lenit. p. 11. l. 18. m. r. admisceat. p. 12. l. 33. r. this
death. p. 14. l. 28. m. Nam r. Now. p. 15. l. 21. m r. Principes. l. 24. r.
proprijs giratur. p. 17. l. 27. m. r. nolle. p. 20. l. 19. m. r. gustus. p. 22.
l. 8. dele and. l. 26. we r. he. p. 30. l. 24. r. from you. p. 31. l. 9. r.
Lord now.

Errata in the Sermon.
Page 2. l. 12. r. the works. p. 7. l. 14. dele yet. p. 12. l. 15. m. r. Erasm.
l. 23. r. triturator. p. 17. l. 11. r. as at. m. l. 2. r. (...). l. 3. r.
(...). l. 34. r. (...) p. 19. l. 1. r. Catechisandis. p. 20. m. l. 21. r.
speculator. p. 24. l. 18. r. give it. p. 25. l. 14. r. Now as. p. 26. l. 18.
dele when. p. 31. l. 2. dele to. l. 10. r. alis. p. 34. l. 20. m. dele and. p.
35. l. 17 r. often warned. p. 37. l. 29. too r. to. p. 38. l. 9. r. sore
gripes. p. 39. l. 4. dele a.


