THE SAINTS INHERITANCE After the Day of IVDGEMENT.

Being also An Answer to certain scruples of late delivered, and others
Printed, especially in that Book entitled, [The Personal Reign of Christ
upon Earth.]

By T. B.

Isa. 45. 17, 18. For Israel shall be saved with an everlasting salvation, ye
shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end: for thus says the Lord
that created the heavens, God himself that formed the earth and made it, he
has established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited,
I am the Lord, and there is none else.

Dan. 7. 18. 27. But the Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom, and
possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever, and the Kingdom, and
the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the
people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, and are to be sold by John Sweeting, in
Popes-head-Alley. 1643.

Revel. 21. 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his
God, and be shall be my son.


THe meaning of these words are not to be confined only to the joys of
heaven, when the body is dead and the Soul is ascended up thither, and has
the fruition of God the Father and of Jesus Christ and the blessed Spirit, and
the holy Angels and souls of just men made perfect, but it reaches unto all
things that are here below in this world to satisfy the body also at the
resurrection day when the creatures and man also are all restored again to
their first perfection; for says the Lord, I will bring a seed out of Jacob
and out of Judah an inheritour of my mountains, and mine elect shall inherit
it; Isa. 65. 10. 11. see 3 5, 2.
and my Servants shall dwell there; and Sharron shall be a fold for flocks,
and the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie down in for my people
that have sought me: This is promised to those that overcome. First the world
as it is now corrupted by the sin of man, so that neither the pleasures nor
profits thereof, deceive our hearts to set our love immoderately on it, Let
your moderation be known to all men, the Lord is at hand. Secondly, to them
that stand fast against all the wiles of the Devil, Phil. 4. 5. Ephe. 6. 11
and do not let Satan get advantage of them, those that are not ignorant of
his devices, but resist the Devil and cause him to fly from them. Thirdly, 2
Cor. 2. 11 Jam. 4. 7. Isa. 44. 20. Pro. 4. 23. 1 Cor. 9. 27
those that their own deceived heart has not turned them aside, those that
keep their heart withal diligence, those that keep under their body and
bring it in subjection, and keep their mouth with a bridle, Psalm. 39. 1. and
make a covenant with their eyes, Job 31. 1. he that thus overcomes, says
Christ, will I grant to fit with me on his throne. Rev. 3. 21. he shall inherit
all things; but in this world we are Warriors fighting against them, for they
are not really overcome in this world, therefore the full fruition of all
things is reserved till after death in the world to come, when old things are
passed away and all things are become new, for he that sat on Revel. 21. 5
the throue said, Behold I make all things new; then says the Lord, I will be
his God and he shall be my Son. Beloved now we are the Sons of God and it
does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear
we shall be like him, but while we are here in this 1 John 3. 2. Gal 4. 1.
world, we are as the heir under age being a child and differing nothing from
a servant though he be Lord of all, we are not fit to have that authority over
the creatures as Adam had, till we are again restored to that perfection that
he had to be without sin as he was; neither are the creatures fit to do
their duty to us being all corrupted with our sins, but when we and they are
again restored to our first perfection, then and not before shall the Saints
inherit all things, for this inheritance must be immortal, uncorruptible,
undefiled, that fades not away, but these things as they 1 Pet. 1. 4. Mat. 5.
Heb. 12. 28.
are now are sometimes taken from us, and sometimes we are taken from them, and
at the day of judgment the heavens and earth shall pass away, I do not mean
the heaven of the blessed, that is a kingdom that cannot be moved, but the
starry heavens and the cloudy heavens they shall pass away with a great noise,
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works
that are therein shall be burnt up, the heavens being 2 Pet. 3. 10. 12.
on fire shall be dissolved and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; and
says John, I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose
face the earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them;
thus in Revel. 20. 11.
the day of Judgment, but the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his
Temple, even the messenger of the covenant whom ye delight in, behold he shall
come says the Lord of Hoasts, but who may abide his coming, and who shall
stand when he appears? for he shall be like refiners fire and fullers soap,
he shall purify the sons of Levi, for he shall sit as a refiner and purifier
of silver, and shall purge them as gold and Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
silver that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness, then
shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant to the Lord; but in this
Judgment he will be a swift witness against the wicked, then will Christ
purify the creatures through fire at that day, and consume their dross with
fire and brimstone, and bring them back again to their first Chaos: and then
says John in his vision, I saw a new heaven and a new earth, Rev. 21. 1.
for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away, and there was no
more sea; and we according to his promise, look for new heavens, and a new
earth, 2 Pet. 3. 12, 13.
wherein dwells righteousness; for says the Lord, Behold, I create new
heavens and a new earth, for the former shall not be remembered, nor come into
mind: The new heavens and the new earth which I will make, shall remain before
me. Isa 65. 17. Isa. 66. 22.


And for the rest of the creatures, the earnest expectation of the creature
waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God, for the creature it self
also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious Romans
8. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
liberty of the Sons of God; For we know that the whole creation groaneth and
travelleth in pain together until now, and not only they, but we our selves
also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves wait for
the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our bodies, and then man shall inherit
all things, both 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23.
in heaven and in the earth, things present and things to come; All are yours,
and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up to death for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us
all things? Godliness Romans 8. 32. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come.

The reason why man after the day of Judgment shall inherit all things, is
this, because the second Adam has restored again all that the first Adam
lost, for he is mighty to save, he is a Rock and his work is perfect, he Isa.
63. 1. Deuteronomy 32. 4. Joh. 17. 4. 19. 30. Heb. 7. 25.
has not done his work by the halves, he says, I have finished the work
that thou gave me to do, he said, It is finished, wherefore he is able to
save them to the uttermost, so that all which the first Adam had, is restored
by the second, but the first Adam was the Masterpiece of the whole creation,
therefore man was the last that was made, and all the rest were but prepared
for him; and when man was to be made, the Lord did it with much deliberation,
and called a Council, the whole Trinity seemed to consult about his creation,
saying, Let us make man in our likeness, in our image, and let him Genesis 1. 26.
have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul of the Air, and
over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every thing that creeps
upon the earth: And man is an Epitome or an Abridgement of all the creatures;
he has a vegetative, or a growing life, answerable to the plants and the
Herbs, and grass of the earth; and he has a sensitive life, answerable to
the beasts, and fowls, and fishes; and he has a reasonable life, answerable
to that of Anges: thus all the creatures are to be seen in man; he has a
soul so glorious, fit to associate it self with the glorious Angels in
Heaven, and he has a body compounded of the four elements, fit to communicate
with and to govern the creatures here below: and when he was made, God blessed
them, and said unto them, Be fruitful and replenish the earth, and subdue it,
and Genesis 1. 28.
have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the air, and
over every living thing that moves upon the earth. And when the Lord had
formed all Genesis 2. 19, 20.
the beasts of the Field, and fowls of the air, he brought them all to Adam,
as to their Lord, to see what he would call them, and whatsoever Adam called
every creature that was the name thereof, and he gave names to all Cattle, and
to the foul of the air, and to every beast of the field: thus they tendered
their duty to him and were at unity among themselves.

But now since Adam fell from God, the creatures are disobedient to man, says
the Lord to Job out of the whirlewinde, Will the Unicorn be willing to Job 39
9, 10, 11, 12, 27.
serve thee, will he harrow the valley after thee, will thou trust him because
his strength is great, or will thou leave thy labor to him, will thou believe
that he will bring home thy seed, and gather it into thy Barn? or does the
Eagle fly at thy command? no, we find the creatures disobedience to us, since
our first disobedience to the Lord.

But to our comfort, the second Adam has restored to us again all that the
first Adam lost, and although we have not that duty and service from the
creatures, as Adam had at the first, by reason of their corruption, that came
by our sin, yet after the day of Judgment, when they are freed from this
bondage, under which they groan, and shall be restored to their first
perfection, then they will freely do their duty unto man as they ought to do,
but this will not be, till the restitution of all things, for he that sat upon
the Throne said, Behold, I make all things new, then shall that saying Rev. 24.
5.
be fulfilled, Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. 2
Cor. 5. 17.
And says the Lord, Behold, I do a new thing, now it shall spring forth, and
shall ye not know it? I will make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the
desert; Isa 43. 19.
and what follows; the beasts of the field shall honor me, even the
unlikeliest of all the creatures, Dragons and Owls at that day.

The reason why the creatures, as the Heavens and the earth, and all sorts of
creatures in them, shall be restored to their first perfection, is, because
they with man since the fall at their best estate are but vanity, Psalm 39. 5.
so, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, says the Preacher: Eccles. 1. 1.
For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of
him who subdued the same, but yet in hope and expectation to be delivered, for
the whole creation groaneth in pain until now, and not only they, but we our
selves also, which have received the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our
selves groan, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our bodies.
Romans 8. 20. 22, 23.
The bondage which makes the creatures groan are many, from which in time they
shall be delivered, I mean at the restoration of all things after the day of
Judgment.

First, They are frail and subject to corruption, and putrefaction, which came
by the sin of man, this is a sore bondage.

Secondly, They are subject to confusions and inconstancy in any one condition,
as by the many mutations, and alterations appears daily, being compounded of
the four elements, and the many confusions from the same four elements; from
this bondage they groan to be delivered.

Thirdly, They are forced to serve wicked men, The Sun shines on the just and
unjust, and the heavens make fruitful with their showers, the field of the
wick^d as well as the field of the just, Mat. 5 45.
and the earth is forced to feed and to receive into her bowels, the ungodly
as well as the godly, this is a sore bondage.

Fourthly, The visible creatures of God proclaim as in a book, the invisible
things of God, as his eternal power, and Godhead, to vain men Romans 1. 20.
that will not learn; This is a sore bondage for which they groan.

Fifthly, The creature is many times made the subject of man's punishment, for
man's sin, as when the heaven is made Brass, and the earth Iron, Deu. 28. 23
and when the ground was cursed for man's sin, Genesis 3. 17, 18.
He turns a fruitful land into barrenness for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein; Psa. 107. 34
this is a sore bondage.

Sixthly, Every creature would preserve his own kind for ever, but the
variance and discord of the creatures one with another make it to seem
unpossible, and all their labor to be lost, this was occasioned by the sin of
man, that all the foundations of the earth are out of course; Psa. 82. 5.
from this burden, they groan to be delivered.

Seventhly, It is a great bondage to the creatures, that they have lost a great
part of their virtue, operation, and influence, they are by the sin of man
much dulled and disabled to act or to operate, or to communicate their virtues
to others as they did at the first creation, and this is a great bondage, from
which they groan to delivered, but this is true, that the Heb. 1. 11, 12. Joh.
15. 15.
heavens wax old as a garment and as a vesture they shall be changed, and
subject to perish too for the sin of man, for that it has defiled them. The
heavens are not clean in his sight; and it is observed by some since the
creation, that the Sun has lost a great part of its heat, and that it runs
nearer to the earth now then it did at the first, by at the least 9976. Germane
miles, Byfield on the Colossians.
which shows the dullness of it in comparison of its first creation, therefore
without exception, the heaven and the earth with all the creatures that are in
them as men and beasts and fowls groan to be delivered.

But I suppose that the Sea and the Creatures that live in it shall not
continue after the day of judgment; for it is said expressly, when the new
heavens and the new earth are made, there shall be no more Sea; neither were
the Fishes brought to Adam as to their Lord, to see what he would call Rev.
21. 1. Genesis 2. 19, 20. Genesis 1. 21. Genesis 6. 17. 19, 20.
them, when all the beasts and fowls were, and God gave the Whales their name
before Adam was made, neither were any Fishes in Noah's Arc preserved from that
great Deluge, which was a type how some of every kind shall be preserved from
the fire in the day of judgment, as then they were from the water which then
drowned all the world, therefore I exclude them from the groaning creatures.

And the blessed Angels I cannot include among the groaning creatures, yet they
sustain a kind of bondage, for they are made to serve earthly Psalm. 91 11.
Matthew. 18. 10. Heb. 1. 14.
things, men have their Angels to attend and guard them, and it is thought they
have the charge and protection of Kingdoms committed to them, from such places
as these in Scripture, Dan. 10. 13. 12. 1. Psalm. 34. 7. Revel. 12. 7. Luke 2.
9, 10. 13. 15. And some think they move the Orbs of Heaven, and sometimes
they are put to inflict punishments on wicked men, as on the Isa. 37. 36.
Camp of the King of Assyria, and sometimes they are hindered in their work,
as one complains, that the great Prince of the kingdom of Persia Dan. 10 13.
withstood him one and twenty days; and although the Angels shall be employed
at the day of judgment, yet they must not know when it must Matthew. 24. 31 36.
1 Pet. 1. 12. Ephe. 3. 10. Luke 15. 7.
be, and the Angels desire to look into the mystery of our redemption as not
being satisfied in their knowledge; and by the Church is made known to them the
manifold wisdom of God, and they have some joy when one sinner is converted;
thus when their knowledge and joy is increased by the Church, and they are
freed from all the forementioned things; it will be a great ease to them as it
were a deliverance out of bondage; but this is true, For unto the Angels has
he not put into subjection the world to come, whereof Heb. 2. 5.
we speak; they shall be eased of that bondage.

concerning the age of the world, we are not so simple as to affirm the
account from Christ is the account of the world, for we know the contrary.
Again, it cannot be meant that now under the Gospel is the world to come, for
says the Apostle, after Christ's ascension we are they on whom 1 Cor. 10, 11
Heb. 9. 2^.
the ends of the world are come; now if it be counted by the Apostle since that
Christ was on the earth to be the end of the old world, it cannot be the world
to come here spoken of. Again the world may be divided into three parts; the
first from the creation, to the giving of the Law, in which man's diet was the
herbs of the field, and they had not the written Law but only by tradition,
and the Church was in but one family. Secondly, Genesis 1. 23. Genesis 18.
from Moses to Christ, in which they might eat of such beasts as were clean
by the Law, so that they did not eat the blood which was the life, and they
had the Law written, yet darkely in types and shadows, and a whole kingdom
taken into the Church. Thirdly, from Christ to the end of the world, in which
all things may be eaten with thankesgiving, and nothing 1 Timothy 4. 3. Acts 10.
to be counted common or unclean, and we have not only the Law in dark
types and shadows, but the veil taken away, and the Gospel clearly setting
forth Christ far beyond all types and shadows, and the bounds of the Church
to be in all nations; this third age of the world is Matthew 28. 19. Gal. 4. 4. 1 Timothy 3. 1. 2 Pet. 3. 3. Jude 17. 18, 19.
called the fullness of time, and says Paul, In the last days perilous times
shall come, and says Peter, There shall come in the last days scoffers
walking after their own lusts, and says Jude, Remember ye the words which
were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that they told
you that there should come mockers in the last times, who would walk after
their own lusts; now mark, These be they, says he, who separate themselves,
sensual, having not the Spirit, and says John, Little Children, it is the
last time, and ye have heard that Antichrist 1 John 2. 18.
shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is
the last time; therefore if now be the last times of the old world, then sure I
am that it is not the world to come, and as Adam was made Lord of all the
creatures living under heaven, and the Lord himself brought all the beasts and
Genesis 1. 29. Genesis 2. 19.
fowls unto him as to their Lord, to see what he would call them, but now
since the fall, neither beasts nor fowls will yield him any free subjection,
but by the halfes, as he does to the Lord; but at the restoration of all Job
39. 9. 27.
things when all that offend are taken away, and all that do iniquity, then
shall the righteous shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father; Matthew.
13. 41. 43. 1 Cor. 15 24. Heb. 2. 8.
that is, when Christ has rendered up the kingdom to his Father, then shall
all these creatures yield their free obedience to man as at the first; but
says the Apostle, we see not yet all things put in subjection under him, and
as I said before, the Angels have the charge of things here below, because man
by reason of his corruption and weakness that came by sin is unable to
govern the creatures; but when man is restored to his first perfection, and
made able to do it, the Angels shall do it no longer: but this we see is not
yet, therefore it is still the third part of the old world, for unto the Angels
he has not put in subjection the world to come, then the Angels shall abide in
heaven their own proper place, and man being made equal to the Angels shall
have the dominion over all things as at the first; and Christ is at his Fathers
right hand till all these things be done, the heaven shall receive him until
the restitution of all things to their first perfection, this is that
refreshing that is for to come from the presence of the Acts 3. 19. 21.
Lord, he shall send Jesus Christ which before was preached unto you, then you
that are troubled shall rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed 2
These. 1. 7. 10.
from heaven with his mighty Angels, when he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, then shall the creatures
be delivered into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, that is, Rom 8. 21.
they shall have a most excellent estate when the children of God are glorified,
the Lord will do them justice also in restoring them to their first
perfection, and they shall have again all that they lost by the sin and fall
of Adam; I do not say that there shall be any resurrection of the creatures
that are dead, but there shall be some of every kind that was given to Adam,
Genesis 6. 19. 20. Eccle. 3. 14 1 Cor. 3. 15
both of fowls and beasts, whereof Noah's Arc was a figure, for I know says
Solomon whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever, the judgment day shall be
as a purgation to purify the creatures, and they shall be saved as through
fire, as death and the grave do not destroy our bodies for ever and as the
corn is cast into the earth, it must die before it can be quickened, but being
dead God gives it a body, so shall the creatures be purified at the day of
judgment, then shall the light of the Moon be as the light of the 1 Cor. 15.
36, 37, 38. Esa. 30. 26.
Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold as the light of seven
days, but as the wages of sin is death, and it is gone over all except those
that are found alive at the last day, they shall not die but be changed at the
twinkling of an eye, and so made able to endure the fire that they may not be
1 Cor. 15. 52, 53.
consumed but purged from their corruption.

But some, because it is said that the Saints shall reign with Christ a
thousand years, and they will needs have it in this world before the end,
Revel. 2 5.
and not knowing where to find it they say the judgment day shall continue a
1000. years, but this cannot be except they deny the express Word of God:
because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world, The day of
the Lord comes as a thief in the night, The great Acts 17. 31. 1 These. 5. 24
2 Pet. 3. 10. 12. Acts 2. 20. Romans 2 16. Matthew. 24. 36. Matke 13. 32.
and notable day of the Lord, In the day when God shall judge the secrets of
all men, That day and hour knows no man; thus it appears to me to be rather
less then a day then more, it may be the shortest day that ever came for any
thing we know, but more it cannot be, when the Scripture is so full and clear
to every understanding that will be satisfied in it.

When the righteous and the wicked appear before the Lord at the day of
judgment, Christ for the love he bears to the righteous he will come leaping
over the mountains and skipping over the hills, Can. 2. 8. he is not slack
concerning his promise, 2 Pet. 3. 9. When the Son of man comes, I tell you
that he will avenge them speedily, Luke 18. 8. and concerning the wicked says
he, I will come nearre to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness
against them, Mal. 3. 5. here Christ comes leaping and skipping speedily and
swiftly, that his elect may not be held too long in suspense from their
happiness, as some would have it, a 1000. years waiting at the bar before
the Judge for absolution. And there is good reason for it, for God that is able
and will bring to every man's remembrance at that day, all their thoughts, words
and deeds that ever was in all their lives, and the book of their conscience,
and the book of the Law of God shall be both open to them; Revel. 20. 12.
then I suppose the sentence may soon be passed upon them, they need not have
their sentence one after another, as some that affirm this would have it, but
the righteous being all on the right hand, and the wicked all on the left hand,
then shall the Judge say to them on the right hand, Come ye blessed, and to all
on the left hand, Go ye cursed. Matthew. 25. 34. 41.
And if they reply and say, one day with the Lord is as a thousand years. I
answer, this was the judgment of those that hold, because God was six days in
creating the world, therefore it should continue six thousand years, which if
it be so, there being passed above five thousand and a half already, where
will you find a thousand years more before the day of judgment? so that this
will not help them at all; and to say the Saints do reign with Christ a
1000. years, meaning while they stand at the bar of his judgment, to me it
seems very improper, and though their cause be never so good; neither can they
be said to reign here before the day of judgment, when the wicked shall have
as great authority and riches as they, neither can it properly be said that the
Saints shall reign in heaven, for there is none to be subject unto them, then
it remains that the Saints after the day of judgment shall reign here on
earth, Revel. 5. 10
when they shall shine as the Sun in the Firmament, Matthew 13. 43.
and be as glorious in the fight of God as he was at the first, and all the
creatures restored to their first persection then they will yield to man all
that obedience that is due unto him, and then shall man be honored in the
earth by the creatures, as their Lord and King, and wonderful happy among the
Angels in heaven, being of their nature in his soul, and in his body also,
being made of the same elements with other creatures here below; then the
Angels shall continue in heaven and these creatures shall continue here, and
men shall have bodies so full of agility to ascend up to heaven, and to walk
in the air, as to go upon the ground, and the glory of the soul shall be
the wonderful perfection of Gods Image in all the faculties of it, then shall
we know both the secrets of heaven and earth, then shall our memories, will
and affections be after an unconceivable manner made conformable unto God, yea
we shall have both in our souls and bodies rivers of joys, and pleasure for
evermore; Psalm. 16. 11. Revel. 21 7 Esaias 66. 22.
then shall the Saints inherit all things, and the new heavens, and the new
earth which I will make, shall remain before me, says the Lord, and so shall
your seed and your name remain; then shall we be Luke 20. 35. 36.
equal to the Angels, being children of the resurrection, and counted worthy
to obtain that world, and we shall be as Kings and Priests, and we shall
reign on the earth, Revel. 5. 10. and all the creatures here will yield
subjection to us as to their Lord and King, and we shall be as Priests to offer
the sacrifice of praise to the Lord, and give him all the glory.

And if any shall yet say, these times shall be before the end of the world,
because in the eighth Psalm it is said, thou have crowned man with glory and
honor, and thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands, and
have put all things under his feet, and then names all the creatures here below.

I answer, David here magnifies the Lord for that great glory and honor that
was put upon man at the first in Paradise, when he had dominion over Psalm. 8. 6.
all things under the heavens, for this is spoken in the time past, Thou made
him have dominion, and thou have put all things under his feet; but Heb. 2. 8.
if we speak of the new world, we see not yet all things put under him.

And whereas some hold that the souls of men departed shall return again,
and their bodies shall be raised and united to them, and they shall live here
again before the day of judgment a thousand years; but I demand Revel. 20. 4
with what bodies shall they rise, if it be sown a corrupted body, shall it
not rise in incorruption, if it be sown a natural body, shall 1 Cor. 15. 43
44.
it not rise a spiritual body? they must rise with such a body as Christ did.
But when the disciples saw him they were terrified and affrighted, Luke 23. 37
Act. 10. 40. 41.
and supposed that they had seen a spirit: and as for wicked men, they never
saw his body at all after his resurrection; him God raised up the third day,
and showed him openly, not to all the people, but unto witnesses, chosen before
of God, even to us who did eat and drink with him after he Luke 24. 31. 51.
John 20. 17. Mich (...). 10.
arose from the dead: and when he was with them, as soon as they knew him he
vanished out of their sight, this strangeness was between his spiritual and
their corporal bodies, this is not your rest because it is polluted; he
charged Mary that she should not touch him, then what communion can be betwixt
them, when some must not touch him, and others were affrighted at the sight of
him, and as soon as they knew him he vanished away because the world is
polluted, then it cannot be that spiritual and corporal bodies should live
together, and though he eat and drank with them after his Resurrection, yet
we must not think it was for necessity, or through the peril of hunger, but
only for delight, and to show them that Luke 24 3^. 40.
he had a real body as before, with flesh and bones, only it was made
immortal and everlasting, never to dye more, nor to suffer any peril more.

And whereas it is said, That the souls of them that were beheaded for the
witness Revel. 20. 4
of Jesus, and for the word of God, and had not worshipped the beast, they
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years: This cannot be meant of a
corporal death, or of a bodily resurrection, for the rest that were dead lived
not again Verse. 5. 6.
till the 1000. years were finished, and yet in the first Resurrection, who
are as blessed and holy as the rest, On them the second death has no power:
and they being in the first resurrection, and yet not raised in their bodies,
what is this but to rise from the death of sin to the life of grace? on such
the second death has no power; and Christ answered the Sadduces that Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob are living, for God is the God of the living, and he is their
Mat. 22. 32 John 5. 24.
God, he that is thus alive shall dye no more, but is passed from death to life.

And again the planting of the Gospel, and increasing or spreading of the
Church may very well be called a Resurrection, because men were brought out of
a state of death to a state of life, and the growth of the Church was like to
the rising of the waters of the sanctuary, first to the Ezekiel 47.
ankles, then to the knees then to the loins, and to a river that could not be
passed over, so was the Resurrection of the Church, at the first but twelve,
Acts 1. 15. 2. 41. 44, 5 14.
then a hundred and twenty, then there was added three thousand, then five
thousand, then multitudes both of men and women; now he that has part in this
first resurrection, on them the second death has no power, and whether they
have this first Resurrection, in the first thousand years, after Christ's
ascension, or in the second, it matters not, so they have it before the day of
Judgment, on them the second death has no power: But our controversy is
about those that were slain for the witness of Jesus, and yet lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years, but as I said before, this cannot be
meant of a corporal death, or bodily resurrection, but it must be understood
mystically, that they were slain in their outward livelihood, both in their
name and estate; says David, I was as a dead man out of mind in the esteem of
the world, and yet at the same time reign over satan and their own
corruptions.

Or if any were slain in the first thousand years, yet God left not himself
without witness, but the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied
Acts 14, 17 Exodus 2. 12 Rev. 11.
and grew, as Israel did in the bondage of Egypt, and some of the witnesses
that were slain are said to lie in the streets, and not suffered to be
buried, and after three days and a half, the Spirit of life came into them
and they stood upon their feet, these things have been clearly showed of
late to be understood mystically. And again, can we think that some of them
that are dead, their souls shall return, and some shall not, to live here a
thousand years, and their bodies raised, and not all? shall some rise a
thousand years before others? does not Christ say, they shall all rise in one
hour? Marvel not at this, for the hour comes in which all that are John 5.
28, 29.
in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done
good to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the
resurrection of damnation. 1 Cor. 15. 52.
And does not Paul say, In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump, for the trump shall sound, and the dead shall be raised: Then I conclude
this argument, that if the bodies of all shall rise together in one hour in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, but it is said, all they that are in the
graves, not some of them, and in a moment, not a thousand years distance of
some from the rest that shall rise from the dead.

And whereas some affirm, that in this thousand years, the Church or Kingdom
of Christ, shall be all righteous, all Saints under the King of Saints, and no
hypocrites, nor excommunicate persons, and the wicked Revel. 15.
shall be as slaves to them in that day, and the Saints shall be as Lords in
the earth, and shall neither marry nor be given in marriage, and the Apostles
shall come and rule this Kingdom.

I answer, these things some are false, and some are true, but mis-applyed,
those that are true, are to be fulfilled after the day of Judgment, and not in
this corrupted world, as when the people shall be all righteous, they shall
inherit the Land, not only a thousand years, but for ever in the Isa. 60. 19,
20, 21.
new world when the Sun shall no more go down, nor the Moon withdraw it
self, but the Lord shall be to them an everlasting light, and thy God thy
glory. And so, if the Saints of the most High shall take and possess the
Kingdom. I answer, After the day of Judgment, so they shall not only for a
thousand years, but for ever, even for ever, for his dominion Dan. 7. 18. 14,
7.
is an everlasting dominion, when all people and Nations, and languages shall
serve him in it: and to say that there shall be no Hypocrites in it, I say so
too, in the new Jerusalem, when it comes down from heaven unto the earth, but
this will never be, till the restitution of all things, till the fire at the
day of Judgment has purged the earth, and made it fit for so great a mercy,
wherein dwells righteousness, but till that day of Judgment this cannot be.
For the Tares and the Wheat shall grow together until the Harvest, which is
at the end of the world, and the Angels are the Reapers, and by them shall the
Wheat be brought into the Barn, they shall gather the elect from the four
winds, Mat. 24. 31. And they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, and them Math. 13. 41, 42.
that do iniquity, and shall cast them into the furnace of fire, but when the
Angels are sent about this business, they will find them altogether minding
earthly things, as eating and drinking, and marrying, and mixed together, Mat.
24 37, 38.
two in a bed, the one taken and the other left, two in the field, and two
grinding at the Mill, the one taken and the other left. Therefore, when Christ
comes to Judgment, there shall be Hypocrites, and they shall not be used as
slaves, but in the same bed, at the same work and recreation together. And to
say the Saints shall be Lords over the wicked, this cannot be true neither here
nor hereafter, for before the end the wicked shall have as great a share of
outward riches and honor as the Saints, and many times greater: and after the
day of Judgment, I showed before that all things that offend, and that do
iniquity, shall be cast into the furnace of fire: so that though it be true,
they shall be Lords and Kings, it is not meant over wicked men, but over the
rest of the creatures, this Adam had, and lost it, and Revel. 5. 10
the second Adam has restored it to us again, as I showed before, and to say
that the Apostles shall rule this Kingdom when they are all Saints, and the
King of Saints present, is not worth the answering, for they shall be all Kings
and Priests unto God and his Father, Fear not little flock, it is your Rev.
1. 6, 5, 10.
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom: none shall rule but God alone,
for all rule and authority, and power, shall then be put down. Then shall Luke
12, 32 1 Cor. 15. 24, 28. Revel. 20 1, 2, 3.
God himself be all in all. But they will object against all this clear
light, that John saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, and he laid hold on the
Dragon, that old serpent, which is the devil, and bound him a thousand years,
and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up and set a seal upon
him, that he should not deceive the Nations till the thousand years should be
fulfilled, and after that he must be loosed a little season; This say they, is
to be understood of Christ, binding the devil a thousand years, after their
souls are returned again, and their bodies raised and united to them, then
they say they shall live here a thousand years again before the day of
Judgment in great glory and happiness.

I answer, the devils were bound in chains of darkness as soon as they had
sinned, For God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell,
and delivered them into chains of darkness. And if you ask me how long? I 2
Pet 2. 4. Jude 6. Job 1.
answer, till the day of Judgment. He was in chains in Jobs time, and could
not touch his goods nor children, nor his body, but as he had commission from
God, and the devil desired to entice Ahab to go and fall at Ramoth Gilead,
and told the Lord how, but he could not do it, till the 2 Chronicles. 18. 20, 21.
Lord said, Go and do so: and so in the times of the Gospel, they besought
Christ that they might go into the herd of Swine, but could not, till Christ
said unto them, Go: but yet in this time he did not cease to compass Mal. 8.
31, 32. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
the earth, but goes up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, and his chain is long, and his commission large to do much hurt, but
that God who is able to bring good out of evil, and all things work together
for good to them that love God, as in Jobs case, 2 Samuel 16. 12.
Jam. 5. 11. And as the malice of Joseph's brethren wrought for his good, but
when Christ came into the world, the devils knew that he would Romans 8. 28 Genesis
50. 20.
chain them up from their purpose a thousand years, which would be a great
torment unto them, therefore when they saw Jesus they fell down before him,
and with a loud voice said, Thou Son of God most high, I beseech Luke 8. 28,
29. 31.
thee torment me not: But he commanded the unclean spirit to come out. And
they besought him that he would not command them to go into the deep, meaning
this bondage for a thousand years: Christ comes and disarmes the strong Mat.
12. 29, Luke 11 21 22. Col. 2. 14, 15
man and binds him, and then spoils his goods, upon the Cross he spoiled
Principalities and powers, he made a show of them, openly triumphing over them
in it, the Son of God was made manifest to destroy the works of the devil,
then says Christ after this, I am he that was dead 1 John 3. 8.
and am alive, and behold I live for evermore, and have the keys of hell and
death. Then he laid hold on the Dragon that old Serpent which is the Devil,
and Revel. 1. 18 Revel. 20. 1, 2, 3.
Satan, and bound him from his purpose a thousand years, he having the keys
of the bottomless pit, cast him in and shut him up and set a seal upon him,
that he should not deceive the Nations any more, till the thousand years
should be fulfilled, and after that he must be loosed a little season.

Here Christ did not bind the devil from going up and down as a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour, and his commission did reach 1 Pet. 5. 8.
to do much hurt in this thousand years to single persons, but the Devils
purpose was to set up the man of sin, that mystery of iniquity, that son of
perdition, the Antichrist, in his Throne and full authority: this he knew
would make great spoils in the Church of Christ, and the mystery of iniquity
did already work, and Diotrephes loves to have the pre-eminence, 3 John 9. 10
he prates against the ministers of Christ with malicious words and would not
receive them, and forbad others that would, and cast them out of the Church.

Here you see how busy the devil is with this instrument to set up
Antichrist, because he aims not so much at single persons as the ruin of
nations from which he is bound a thousand years: I grant that he raised great
persecutions and sowed the tares of heresies that did much mischief, and
occasioned great wars, and made great spoils in the Church, yet this did not
content him, for he knew that Antichrist was for to come, having great
knowledge in the prophesies of Daniel, which made him stir so Dan 7. 20, 21.
much, and caused his wicked instruments to bring in one patch of Popery after
another, and would not rest till he had him in his throne, which was about a
thousand years before he was in his full ruff to do that mischief to the
Church of God that the Devil expected he should.

Now when this thousand years was ended, there was a star fell from heaven
unto the earth, and to him was given the key of the bittomlesse pit, Revel. 9.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose the smoke of the pit, as
the smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and the air was darkened by the
smoke of the pit, and there came out of the smoke Locusts upon the earth, and
unto them was given power as the Scorpions of the earth have power, and it was
commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, nor any
green thing, nor any tree; but only those men which have not the seal of God
in their foreheads, and to them was commanded, that they should not kill them,
but that they should be tormented or vexed five months, and that their pain
should be as the torment of a Scorpion when he stingeth and strikes a man.

Here you see the bottomless pit that was shut, and the devil that was bound
a thousand years, now the pit is opened and the devils loosed, yet not to do
what they list, but according to the commission granted to them.

Francis Junius in his Annotations upon this place, says, by this star is
meant some Angel glistering with glory as a star from heaven, it may be
Christ who by princely authority has the Keys of Hell, Chap. 1. 18. or some
other inferior Angel who has the same key permitted unto him, and occupies
it ministerially or by office of his ministry, the key was given to the star;
for those powers of wickedness are thrust 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6. Revel. 20. 3
down into hell, and bound with chains of darkness and are there kept unto
damnation unless God for a time do let them loose; by the bottomless pit he
means the deepest darkness of hell, and the smoke of the hellish and
infernal spirits, all dark, and dackning all things in heaven and in earth,
the spiritual darkenesses are the causes of all disorder and confusion, for
the devil sent these darkenesses into his kingdom, that he might at once with
one impression overthrow all things, and pervert if it were possible the elect
themselves, by this light, both active as the Sun and passive as the air,
which is lightened by the Sun, is taken away, and this is that which goes
before the spirits, a description of the malignant spirits invading the world,
taken from their nature and power; from their nature, for they are like unto
Lo^usts in quickness, subtlenesse, hurtfulnesse and in number; and for their
power they are like the Scorpians of the earth who have a secret power to do
hurt, yet although these devils be let loose, and their commission is enlarged,
yet still they are bounded by the counsel of God, because they hurt not all
men, but only the reprobate, verse. 4. neither had they all power, nor at all
times, nor ever all those that are their own, but limited in manner and time
by the prescript of God, verse. 5.

After the thousand years was expired, the devil was loosed a little season,
that is, five months, Revel. 9. 5. or a hundred and fifty days, or so many
years, in which Revel. 20 3
time the devils have mightily perverted all things in the world, and yet
without killing as they were commanded, verse. 5. being under the fifth Angel
this little season of a hundred and fifty years wherein Satan had his
commission enlarged being loosed Revel. 9. 5. Verse 1. Francis Junius
Annotations. Revel. 9. 5. 20. 3.
in some measure from his thousand years bondage; which says Francis Junius
fell out precisely in the Popedom of Gregory the seventh, that monstrous
Necromancer a man being made altogether of impiety and wickedness, a slave of
the devil whom he served, he was the most wicked firebrand of the world, he
excommunicated the Emperor Henry the fourth, he went about by all manner of
treachery to set up and pull down Emperors and kingdoms, he doubted not to
put in Rodolph the Sweden over the Empire in stead of Henry the fourth, sending
him a crown with this verse annexed to it:

The Rock to Peter gave the Crown,
And Peter Rodolph does renown.
He so sinely beslirred himself in his affairs, that he miserably set all
Christendom on flre, and convayed over unto his successors the burning brand
of the same, who raged with like ambition, never ceased to nourish that flame,
and to kindle it more and more, whereby Cities, Commonwealths, and whole
Kingdoms set together by the cares amongst themselves by most expert
cutthroats, came to ruin while they most miserably wounded one another, this
hundred and fifty years being that little season that Satan was loosed ended
in the time of Gregory the ninth.

This man caused to be compiled by one Raymond his Chaplain the body of
Decretalls, and by sufferance of Kings and Princes to be published in the
Christian world, and established for a Law, for by this slight at length the
Popes arrogated unto themselves li^ence to kill whom they would whiles others
were unawares, and without fear established a butchery out of many of their
wicked Canons and of the Decretals, the effects of these bloody actions
declared upon the sixth verse of the ninth Chapter that the miserable world
languishing in so great calamities run together unto death and prefer the
same before life, by reason of the grievous miseries that oppressed So far
Junius.
them.

B^t before these Kings were in the first thousand years, the Saints may
Revel. 9. 1.
be said to reign with Christ, because the devil should be hindered of his
purpose all that time, but the time being expired and Satan loosed in the 2
These. 2. 9.
ninth Chapter, then the Dragon gave him his power and his seat, and great
authority, Revel. 13. 2. then he was set up whose coming is after the working
of Satan with all power, and signs, and lying wonders; now the Angels are
loosed that were bound in the River Euphrates, being a type Revel 9. 13 14.
of new Babylon, when they were going to set up the Pope in his Throne, they
were bound in the River, and could not get over till the thousand years were
ended, but now they are gone into all the four quarters of the earth to
deceive the Nations, and to gather Gog and Magog together, both Revel. 20. 7,
8, 9. Revel. 11. 8
Turk and Pope, whose number is as the sand of the Sea, against the holy
City, the Church of God, till fire come down from God out of heaven and
devour them; for as Rome is spiritually called Sodom for their filthiness
committed in it, so I suppose their judgment shall be alike, both for the
Genesis 19. Revel. 18*
suddenness, the one in a moment, the other in an hour, and both with fire
from heaven.

If some shall yet say, that Satan was not bound the first thousand years,
Revel. 20. 3, 4.
because as soon as he is loosed there is mention made of thrones, and they
that sat on them; I answer, they were not the throne of Christ, for that is
mentioned in the 11. Verse, where John says, I saw a great white throne, and
him that is Christ sat on it, but the other are called in the Psalm. 12 25.
plural number thrones, and they that sat on them, these are thrones of
judgment, thrones of the house of David, or earthly thrones, these Dan. 7. 9.
thrones must be all cast down when the ancient of days does sit, and he
alone shall be exalted in that day.

Again, them that plead for Christ's living here a thousand years before the
day of judgment, they hold that then all things here below shall return to
the same confused Chaos as it was in the creation, and so remain for ever: and
they hold likewise that the bodies and souls of men after the day of judgment
shall be confined in heaven: but I have answered these things already, and
something more I shall say anon. But the mean time what delight is it to the
Lord to look upon a confused Chaos to all eternity, when all his glorious
works of creation are spoiled? if it should be so; both God, and man, and the
rest of the creatures would be at great loss, God for spending his labor in
the creation, and now to end in a confused Chaos, and man would suffer a great
loss to lose a world of creatures that was given to him at the first, this
would become a great reproach to the second Adam, as though he were not able to
restore again to us all that the first Adam lost, and the rest of the
creatures would suffer both loss and injustice, if they should not have that
restored which was not lost through their default, but surely God that is able
to change our vile bodies when they are turned to dust, is able to subdue all
things unto himself, The Lord made Phil. 3. 21. Prove. 16. 4. Eccles. 3. 14
Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Genesis 1. 31. Exodus 31. 17.
all things for himself, then whatsoever God does it shall be for ever; He is
a rock and his work is perfect; A God of truth without iniquity, Just and
true is he, All his ways are done in judgment, The Lord looked upon all his
works, and said they were very good, He took so great delight in them that it
is said he rested and was refreshed: then shall all things lie for ever in a
confused Chaos? I cannot harbor such a thought.

Then says the Lord, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth, and the
former shall not be remembered nor come into mind; and what follows, Esaias 65.
17, 18, 19.
Be you glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create, for I create
Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy, and I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and joy in my people, the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her,
violence shall be no more heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy
borders, but thou shall call thy walls salvation, and thy gates Reve. 21. 22.
22. 9.
prayer, the Sun shall be thy light no more by day, neither for brightness
shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be to thee an
everlasting light, and thy God thy glory, thy Sun shall no more go down, Esaias
60. 18, 19, 20, 21.
neither shall the moon withdraw it self, for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended, thy people
shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my
planting, the work of my hands that I may be glorified: and not only Esaias 86.
24.
so, that they shall enjoy all things here, but they shall go forth, and look
upon the carcasses of them that have transgressed against the Lord, for their
worm shall nor die, not the fire be quenched, but they shall be an abhorring
to all flesh, the miseries of the damned that they shall see shall much
increase their joy, when they shall see what judgments the Lord has saved
them from; and what a joy will it be when the creatures shall yield us true
subjection as they did to Adam in Paradise? and how will the Angels rejoice to
see all the Saints not only converted but glorified? Luke 15. 7.
and how shall we rejoice to see the will of God done on the earth as it is in
heavens; and when we shall have that Petition granted, which we have so long
prayed and waited for, which is, Thy kingdom come? Matthew 6.


If any shall yet object and say, the Saints shall not enjoy all things,
because we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain we shall carry
nothing out, naked we came and naked we shall return; Arise and depart, 1 Timothy
6. 7. Job 1. 21. Micah 2. 10 Heb. 11. 16 Matthew. 8. 11 Luke 23. 43 Eccle. 12. 7
for this is not your rest, because it is polluted; therefore they desire a
better country, that is, a heavenly, and they shall come from the East and
West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven, and this shall be as soon as they depart this life, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise, then shall dust return to the earth as it was,
and the spirit to God who gave it.

The answering of this may satisfy three sorts of opinions, first, that the
soul is begotten as well as the body; secondly, that there is a place of abode
for the soul when it is departed from the body besides heaven or hell;
thirdly, it may answer those that think the soul and body both shall not
after the day of judgment enjoy all things, but shall be confined in heaven
for ever.

First, if the spirit return to God that gave it, then the Father did not
beget it, but the Lord breathed into Adam the breath of life, and he became a
living soul, and the Lord forms the spirit of man within him, and Gen 2. 7.
Zach. 12. 1.
some untimely birthes never had any spirit in them. Man is the father of the
flesh, because he begot it, but it is Gods own peculiar title to be the Father
of Spirits, Numb. 16. 22. 27. 16. See Heb. 12. 9. because he formed it, Zach.
12. 1. and gave it, Eccles. 12. 7. If man should beget the soul of his child,
then he that has a righteous soul would beget a soul in his own likeness,
but we see the contrary.

Again, if a man should beget the soul of his child, he must either infuse
his own soul into it, or else he must infuse a piece of it, but which of the
two is it? If he infuse a piece of his own soul into the child, then he has
but a piece left himself, and his child another piece, but if he has parted
with all his soul, then he has none himself; but so much for this ridiculous
question.

For the second, that there is a place for the souls abode, when it is
departed from the body, besides heaven or hell, this I deny, for I suppose the
testimony of Christ is sufficient to prove that the Souls of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob are in Heaven, for we do not conceive that their bodies are there,
but that they are turned to dust, and are in that burying place which Abraham
bought of Ephron the Hittite; then their souls are in heaven, else Genesis 23. 15
how shall they come from the East, and from the West, and sit down with them
in Heaven? If they were not there before the day of Judgment, we should be
there as soon as they: But where is that great assembly, of the first borne, I
mean of all those that are borne anew of the water and the Spirit, if they be
not entered into the Kingdom of God? Where those first borne, such as
Andronicus and Junia, who were in Christ before me, Joh. 3. 3. 5. Romans 16 7.
Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.
are not they in the heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the living God, is it not
there where the spirits or souls of Just men are made perfect? they are with
Jesus the mediator of the new Covenant, and where is he but in heaven till the
restitution of all things? and this as soon as their souls depart Acts 3. 21.
Heb. 9. 24.
from the body; says Christ to him upon the Cross, this day shall thou be
with me in Paradise: but will you know where this Paradise is? if you will take
Paul's word for it, he will tell you that it is the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12. 3 4.
for says he, such a one was taken up into the third heaven, he was caught up
into Paradise, now if from this place you be not satisfied that Paradise and
the third heaven is to be understood the same thing, you must be forced to
grant that Paradise is above it, for he was first taken up into the third
heaven and then he was caught up into Paradise, he does not say that he was
cast down again into Paradise, so then if the soul of the thief was that
day with Christ in Paradise, then it was in the third heaven where the souls
of all just men are made perfect that are departed, for they are not so while
they are here; and in the Parable the rich man died and in hell he lift up his
eyes being in torments, here it is plain that his Soul went immediately to
hell, but the beggar went to Abraham's bosom. But Luke 66. 22 23.
say they, where is Abraham? I say that Christ has told you already, in
heaven: but why in Abraham's bosom? because he is said to be the father of the
faithful; as the father of the Prodigal rejoiced to see the return of his
Son, so will Abraham rejoice to see his children partake with him of that
eternal happiness in heaven; says John, I have no greater joy Luke 15 20 3
John 4.
then to hear that my children walk in truth: yet I suppose the rich man's
petition was not to the soul of Abraham, but to the God of Abraham who is the
chief and only father of the faithful, who has said he will gather his
lambs in his arms and carry them in his bosom, to him all the souls in
heaven are subject: then to me it seems adsurd to think that the soul of
Abraham should have power to send the soul of Lazarus out Isa. 40. 11. 46. 3,
4. Genesis 31. 55 Psa. 24. 6. Hos. 3. 5.
of heaven, and for the name we need not much to scruple at, for the Lord is
often times called by the name of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Joshua, and the
like, and if they should say that the soul of Abraham, and the rest of the
Saints departed, are in the airie heaven, then they might know many things that
are done on the earth, for the soul is of a large capacity being disburdened
Isa. 13. 16.
of a corrupted body, But Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not,
then surely their souls are gone above the two lower heavens, which are
stained with sin, and must be purged with fire at the Judgment day.

If they say, none but the High Priest went into the Holy of Holies, so none
but Christ, to heaven in his body and soul, after his resurrection, I answer,
Heb. 9. 24.
the beast that was sacrificed, signified the body of Christ, and the Holiest
of all was the figure of heaven, but the High Priest went in, and left the
sacrifice behind, and so did Christ go into heaven it self, while his body
Luke 23. 43 46.
was sacrificed, and lay in the earth, that day was he in Paradise; if this be
not sufficient to prove it, then mark his last words, Jesus cried with a loud
voice, and said, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, and when he had
said thus, he gave up the Ghost. Neither would he suffer his Joh. 20. 17
body to be touched, til that had been with his Father, although afterward he
bade them to handle him, to strengthen their faith in him, now shall we think
that this going to his Father, was not to go into the glory of the third
heaven? themselves cannot deny it. It may be they will say that heaven was not
opened till Christ entered in with his body and soul.

I answer, the way has been open from the beginning, although not made so
manifest, for Christ was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, and
their faith before his visible coming in the flesh, gave substance Heb. 9. 8.
Revel. 13. 8. Heb. 11. 1. John 8. 56.
to things hoped for, Abraham saw his day and was glad: but if they grant that
heaven is open since his coming in the flesh, I demand why the souls that now
d^part must not enter into it: this they dare not grant, because there is a
great gulf fixed, and no passage out, till they come with Luke 16. 26 1 Thessalonians
3. 13. Jude 14, 15 Zach. 14. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 22. Acts 3. 21.
Christ to Judgment, at the last day, so that then they cannot Reign here a
thousand years before the end of the world: but suppose the souls departed be
not in heaven, yet they cannot deny but Christ is there, he is gone into
heaven, and the Heaven shall receive him, till the restitution of all things.
This gulf must keep him in till the day of Judgment, and that is called his
second coming, which is unto salvation, therefore there can be none before
that, and as the High priest went in, not for himself, Heb. 9. 28. Exo. 28. 29
but bare the name of all Israel upon his breast, no more did Christ, but as
soon as the body of any of the elect is sacrificed by death, their soul he
John 17. 24
receives to himself, to be where he is, to behold his glory, else why did
Steven when he was stoned, and saw the Heavens open, and Christ standing at
Gods right hand, say, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit? and to what purpose Acts 7.
56, 59. 1 Pet 4. 19.
does Peter bid us, when we suffer according to the will of God, to commit our
souls unto him? did God the Father deceive the Son when he prayed thus? does
he not say, Thou hear me always? or did the Son dissemble, when he said,
I will that they be where I am; and therefore he Joh. 11. 42 Heb. 5. 7.
would not hear Steven, a man full of Faith and of the Holy Ghost? or does
Peter deceive us all, in bidding us at our death to commit our souls to God
when they shall not come near him? I mean to that happiness prepared for
them: but what makes Paul, desire to depart and to be with Christ, Christ is
not among the Stars, nor is he yet come in the clouds, that we Phil. 1. 23. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17. 2 Cor. 5. 6, 8.
should go there to meet him, what makes him say, while we are in the body,
we are absent from the Lord, and we are willing rather to be absent from the
body, that we may be present with the Lord; but if their souls after they
depart should be kept in a kind of purgatory, or prison from the Lord Christ,
they had as good be in the body still, and absent from the Lord here, as there
to be frustrate of our expectation, but the wicked shall be turned into hell,
and the expectation of the poor Saints shall not perish, their soul shall
return to God who gave it; as there is but Psalm. 9. 17, 18.
two ways, so there is but two ends for all men good and bad, which are Heaven
or Hell: says Christ, In my Fathers house are many Mansions, if Eccle. 12. 7
it were not so, I would have told you, that I go to prepare a place for you,
But he will make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, John.
14. 2. Rom 9 23. Mat 25. 34. Psalm. 3^. 19.
which he had before prepared unto glory, The Kingdom of Heaven was prepared
for them before the foundation of the world, This is laid up for those that
fear the Lord: they will not say, surely, it is among the stars, or in the
clouds, no, let Edom make his nest there, but when we depart, we shall be with
Christ, which is far better. It may be Phil. 1, 23.
some will after all this, rather then they will yield, that the soul departed
is gone into the heaven of the blessed, they will say that it dies mortally
with the body, but if they will believe Christ, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
are living, they may be convinced of it; for God is the God of the living, and
he is their God, they need not to fear them that kill the body, but cannot
Mar. 22. 32. Mat. 10. 28 Luke 2. 29.
kill the soul, the soul cannot dye with the body, but it departs away from
it: Then I conclude, that if the Soul as soon as it leaves the body, goes
immediately to Paradise, the third heaven, there is neither purgatory nor place
of residence after death, but as the tree falls so it lies, after death to
Judgment; a particular sentence is passed immediately upon them for heaven or
hell, and there is no place of abode for Abraham's children, till they come into
his bosom with him in Heaven for ever.

But thirdly, which is the maine objection to all my former discourse, if the
soul of Abraham be in Heaven, and when he was here he desired a better Country
than this world, which is a heavenly, then they say after the day of Judgment,
the Saints shall not inherit all these things here below in this world, because
the Saints did always set a low value of them.

To this I answer, that the Soul is of a Heavenly substance, and when it Romans
6. 7.
leaves the body, then it has ceased from sin, therefore no place between
this and Paradise is fit to receive it. Therefore says the Prophet, Arise ye
and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is polluted: and after the
Heb. 12. 23.
day of Judgment, the Angels shall abide in Heaven, being a place for such
glorious Spirits, and the souls of men made perfect, being of the same nature
with them, shall abide in Heaven also till the body shall rise again, for as
the souls of men are now confined in Heaven, Luke 16. 26. and the Angels have
business both in the Heavens and in the Earth, so after the day of Judgment,
when they have finished their work in this world, they shall rest, and I
suppose shall be confined in Heaven for ever, and when our bodies Eccle 21. 7.
are risen and united to our souls, then shall we inherit all things here in
their first perfection, and also we shall have sweet communion with Angels in
Heaven: for as I said before, man consists of two parts, body and soul, so he
shall have two worlds answerable to his two natures to delight himself in,
that he may have fullness of joy for whom all things were made; 1 Timothy 4. 8.
for godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come; and the mean time that the body lies in
the grave, the soul is gone to take possession of the kingdom of heaven, and
when the body rises again it shall then have this world bestowed upon it, and
as the soul brought nothing with it, so it shall take nothing out with it, no
not his own body but leaves it here, in the earth till it comes again, and so
the body goes to the grave and takes nothing with it but weeping and mourning,
yet when it comes again, having had the precious seeds of grace in it, shall
doubtless come again with rejoicing, and Psalm. 126. 6.
bring his sheaves with him: so then after the day of judgment when all things
are purified by fire, and restored to their first perfection, then I say man
shall inherit all things, both in this world and in the world to come; then
shall the meek inherit the earth, and delight themselves in the abundance Psalm
37. 11. Joh. 16. 20. 33. Esaias 49. 8. Matthew. 10. 16.
of peace; but this cannot be before the day of judgment, for says Christ In
this world you shall have tribulation, and Christ was given for a covenant of
the people to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages,
but for the present the Saints are as sheep among wolves, so that these things
shall not be restored to the Saints till themselves are in their first
perfection, then they shall be given us again perfect as they were to Adam at
the first.

And although man's body shall put on immortality, and shall be made so firm
and permanent as to endure for ever eternally, yet his body shall not be turned
into a spirit, it shall be a body still with flesh and bones, as Luke 24. 39,
49.
the body of Christ was after his resurrection; says he, Handle me and see,
for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have, And he did eat and
drink with his disciples after his resurrection, they gave him a piece of a
Luke 24. 42, 43, 30. Joh. 21. 9. 12. 13. Acts 10. 41 Matthew. 26. 29. Romans 14. 17
Joh. 18. 36.
broyled fish, and of an honey comb, and he took it and did eat before them:
so it is likely man may after his resurrection, for says Christ, I will
henceforth drink no more of the fruit of the vine, till I drink it new in my
Fathers Kingdom, this cannot be meant presently after his ascension, for we
never read that he drank wine in all that forty days, and his kingdom does
not consist in drinking wine, but in righteousness, peace and joy in the holy
Ghost, My kingdom is not of this world says he, then I conclude that Christ
will not drink of the fruit of the vine till he has rendered up the kingdom
to 1 Cor. 15. 24.
his Father, then will Christ amongst the Saints drink it new, not as though
he desired to drink new wine rather then old; for he himself says, that no
man having old wine desires new; for he says the old is better: Luke 5. 39.
then the meaning is, when the vine is made now, and all the trees and
creatures restored to their first perfection, then will he drink with them in
his Psalm. 96. 11 12, 13.
Fathers kingdom, then shall the heavens rejoice and the earth be glad, the
fields shall be joyful, and all the trees of the wood shall rejoice before the
Lord when he comes to judge the earth, He shall judge the world with
righteousness and his people with his truth; then here you see the world,
every creature, the very trees shall have righteousness, as they have suffered
by the sin of man, so shall they have benefit in man's deliverance from his
sin, this is that which the whole creation groaneth and traveleth in pain
together until now, but the creature it self shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children Romans 8. 21. 22.
of God; but it is observable when all the creatures in heaven and earth
rejoice at the coming of Christ to judgment, at the same time the Sea Psa.
96. 11.
roares, and the fullness thereof, because it is said there shall be no more
Sea, Revel. 21. 1. then shall man enjoy all the creatures that were given him
at the first as he did in his innocence, so that he may eat of all the trees
for his pleasure, and yet not feel the peril of hunger, and although our
bodies shall be made perfect and glorious like unto the body of Christ, yet
with flesh and bones as he had after his resurrection, and as our souls shall
be renewed Phil. 3. 21. Luke 24. 39, 40.
in all the faculties, so shall the bodies be perfect in all the senses, and
they shall be abundantly satisfied for ever in the world to come.

If any shall ask me what the bodies of Christ, and Enoch, and Elias now do
feed upon? I answer, when they were here they lived upon food as others do
now: Yet as God was able to make Christ, and Elias, and Moses to fast forty
days and forty nights, so he is able to make them live there without food; yet
I will not contend whether our bodies shall eat for necessity, yet I suppose
when the new Jerusalem shall come down from heaven and the Saints shall
inherit all things, that then they shall eat and Revel. 21. 7
drink although not for hunger, and thirst, but only for pleasure sake, and
although those bodies that are in heaven want earthly food, yet they have
souls like Angels, and they amongst them are content with the joy of Angels as
here sometimes inward comfort satisfies a Christian, when he wants outward
comfort, so are they with heavenly food at this time in the want of earthly
food, yet their fullness or joy is not till they enjoy all things both in
heaven and earth answerable to both parts of body and soul.

But it may be they will say it is absurd to say that the bodies of Eno^h and
Elias are in heaven, or at the least that they were there before the body of
Christ, because Christ is become the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor.
15. 20. and all shall be made alive, every man in his own order, Christ the
first fruits, and afterward they that are in Christ, ver. 23. To this I answer.

That there were many both in the Old Testament and the new, that were raised
from a corporal death to a corporal life, and all before Christ, but they
died again, 1 Kings 7. 22. 2 Kings 4. Joh. 11. 44. and it is said expressly
that Eliah went up in a whirlewind into heaven, 2 Kings 2. 11. but he died not,
and Enoch was translated that he should not see death, and God took him, Heb.
11. 5. Genesis 5. 24. here you see some arose under the Law, and under the Gospel
to confirm their resurrection, yet died again, and some ascended into heaven
before the Law, and under the Law to confirm their hopes after death, yet
Christ was the first that did both arise from the dead and died no more, but
ascended into heaven, and there he is with the souls of all the Saints
departed, and there is the body of Enoch and of Elias, and it is no absurd
thing to believe it.

And because the souls of all the elect when they leave the earth ascend up to
heaven, therefore it is called Jerusalem which is above, the mother of us all,
it is called the mount Sion, the City of the living God, the heavenly Gal. 4.
26.
Jerusalem, the general assembly and Church of the firstborn, where the
spirits of just men are made perfect; but at the day of judgment when Heb. 12.
22. 23.
their bodies shall rise spiritual bodies and in their first perfection,

Then Jerusalem which is above shall come down from God out of heaven Revel.
21. 3, 4
as a bride adorned for her husband, then the Tabernacle of God shall be with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God, then shall the bride be glad and
rejoice, and give honor to Christ, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and
the bride has made her self ready: we were espoused Revel. 19. 7 Isay 54. 4.
Ier. 3. 14. Hose. 2. 19, 20. Ephe. 5. 31. 32. Revel. 15. 3 2 These. 1. 10.
Revel. 19. 8 Luke 2. 36, 37. Reve. 7. 14, 15. Reve. 19. 9.
or betrothed unto Christ in our convesion, but the great solemnity of the
marriage is when the King of Saints shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and to be admired of all them that believe, then to his bride shall be granted
that she shall be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, for the fine linen
is the righteousness of the Saints, these are they which have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, they served God in the
temple with fasting and prayer night and day, therefore they are before the
throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits
on the throne will dwell amongst them when this great solemnity is kept,
Blessed are they which are called to the marriage Supper of the Lamb, these
are the true sayings of God, The Angel said unto John, come hither, and I will
show thee the bride, the Lambs wife, and he carried me in the spirit to a
great mountain, and showed me the great City, the holy Jerusalem descending
out of heaven from God, Revel. 21. 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
and in it was the glory of God shining like a stone most precious: it had a
wall great and high, and twelve gates to it, and twelve foundations, the City
was fouresquare, the length and the breadth and height they are all equal,
twelve thousand furlongs every way, and the wall was a hundred forty four
four cubits in thickness, and the wall was built of Jasper stone, and the
City was pure gold, like unto pure glass, the foundations of the wall of the
City was garnished with all manner of precious stones; and the twelve gates
were of twelve pearls, and the streets of the City were of pure gold as it
were transparent glass. I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty and
the Lamb are the temple of it, and the City had no need of the Sun or Moon
to shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
of it, and the nations of them that are saved shall walk in the light of it,
and the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor into it, and the
gates of it shall not be shut at all by day, for there shall be no night
there, and there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, or
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie, but only they which are
written in the Lambs book of life, this is the glorious City, the new
Jerusalem, the Lambs wife.

And he showed me a pure River of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding
Revel. 22.
out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb in the midst of the street of it,
and of either side of the River was there the tree of life which bare twelve
manner of fruits, and yielded her fruits every month; and the leaves of the
tree were for the healing of the nations, and there shall be no more curse, but
the Throne of God, and the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve
him, and they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads, and
there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the
Sun, for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and
ever, and he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true; then blessed
are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of
life, and may enter in through the gates into the City, then shall they
rejoice in their portion, in their land they shall have double, everlasting joy
shall be unto them: I Isay 61. 7. Isay 60. 15. 18.
will make thee an eternal excellency, violence shall no more be heard in thy
land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders, but thou shall call thy walls
salvation, and thy gates praise: For they shall hunger no more, neither thirst
any more, for the Lamb in the midst of the Throne shall Reve. 7. 16, 17. Luke
20 35, 36.
feed them, and lead them unto living fountains of water: and they that are
accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, can
die no more, but are equal to the Angels in this new heaven, and new earth:
God will wipe away all tears from our eyes, there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow nor crying, neither any more pain, because the former things
are passed away: And he that sat on the Throne said, behold I make all things
new, and there shall be none in Revel 21. 1, 4, 5
that world that his strength is gone with age nor an Infant who is weak Isay
65. 20.
for want of age, or that has not fulfilled his days, they shall be all in
their full growth, and first perfection. If it be said the child shall die a
hundred years old, I answer, I have showed before that there shall be no more
death in the new Jerusalem when it is come down from God out of heaven, Revel.
21. 4. Luke 20. 36. then the meaning of that place is this; those that lived in
the first age of the world, living eight or nine hundred years were a hundred
years before they came to their full growth, but in the resurrection they
shall rise in their full growth as if they had dyedat the age of a hundred
years old; yet in this age of the world I suppose they that die shall rise
about the age of the second Adam, when he gave his life a ransom for us, being
the full growth of this age to their full strength and Isay 65. 22.
perfection: but it was I suppose a hundred years in the first age, before
they came to the stature and full growth of the first Adam in the day of his
creation; this is also the meaning of the next words, For as the days of a
tree, are the days of my people, that is, say the Philosophers an Oak tree is
a hundred years before it is come to its full growth, so was man before the
flood: then at this age they shall rise again, and long enjoy the work of
their hands: then Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting
salvation, Ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end, for thus
says the Lord, that created the Heavens, God himself that formed the Earth
and made it, he has established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it
to be inhabited, I am the Lord and there is none else. Isa. 45. 18, 19.
Do but mind this Text and consider it well, and judge thy self, who ever
thou art that read it, whether the lower Heavens, and the Earth, and all the
creatures in them shall be consumed at the day of judgment, and become an
unp^ofitable and uncomfortable Chaos, and so remain for ever. No, the Lord
Reigns, the world shall be established, that it shall not be moved: Psa 96.
10.
One generation goes, and another generation comes, but the earth abides
for ever: Eccles. 1. 4.
The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, the world, and they that
dwell therein, for he has founded it upon the Seas, and established it upon
the floods, Psalm. 24. 1, 2
The world also is established that it cannot be moved. Psalm 93. 1. 2


Peter tells us in the last days there shall come scoffers, and then shows
the occasion of their scoffing, and that is some promises that were made of the
coming of Christ, such as these, Sing, O Daughter of Zion, for lo I come, and
I will dwell in the midst of thee, says the Lord, Zach. 3. 10, 11, 12. 8. 3.
8. Behold, I come quickly, Revel. 22. 12. He that shall come will come, Heb.
10. 37. Behold he comes, Rev. 1. 7. Jude 14. But say these scoffers, where is
the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3. 3. Another occasion is of his preparation
for his coming, for says the Apostle, we according to his promise in Isa. 65.
17. 66. 22. look for new Heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, ver. 13. But say these scoffers, All things continue as they
were from the beginning of the creation, ver. 4. now this is to be understood
literally of the Heavens and earth, for he blames them of their ignorance, how
that the Heavens were of old, and the earth stood out of the waters, and then
in the waters, for the world that then was, was overflowed and perished, v. 5,
6. But the Heavens and earth that are now, are reserved for fire at the day of
Judgment, then shall the elements melt, and the earth and all things in it
shall be burnt up, v. 7. 10. 12. Then he exhorts them to a holy conversation,
and godliness from this motive, that we according to his promise look for new
Heavens and a new Earth after that day, wherein dwells righteousness, v. 11.
13. And God made all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4. And he greatly
delights in the works of his hands, and although man has prodigally lost
them all by sin, yet God will not lose them so, and by Christ all things were
made, both in heaven, and in earth, they were all made by him, and for him, and
shall we think that Christ will lose them all? no, he made peace through the
blood of his Cross, to reconcile all things unto himself, both things in
earth, and things in heaven, Col. 1. 16. 20. And God has made Christ Heir of
all things, for by him the worlds were made, and he upholdeth all things by the
word of his power, Heb. 1. 2, 3. And the children of God are joynt-heires with
Christ, of the same inheritance, and the creatures themselves wait for that
day, to be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty
of the Sons of God, Romans 8. 19. 21. And all the creatures rejoice at the
coming of Christ to Judgment, Psalm. 96. 11, 12, 13. because then they shall
be restored again to their first perfection; by these things I know that what
God does it shall be for ever, Eccles. 3. 14.

Yet I am confident that in this world before the end of it, here well be
glorious days, for the Gospel shall be Preached in many nations together in
the last days, in the times of the Gospel being the third and last age of the
World, when the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the
mountains and exalted above the hills, that is, the Gospel shall Micah 4. 1,
2, 3. Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4
prevail against and above all mountains and hills of opposition and all
nations shall flow unto it, and many nations shall go and say, come let us go
up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, he will
teach us of his ways and we will walk in his paths, for out of Zion shall go
forth the law and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and he shall judge among
the nations and shall rebuke many people, that is, Christ by his Church and
people will bridle and curb and keep under the power of the enemies: but the
next words cannot well be fulfilled in this world before the end, that is, when
they shall beat their swords into Ploughshares, and their spears into Pruning
hooks, and learn wars no Verse 4. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 2, 3, 4. Mat. 24,
7, 8
more, for all the life of a Christian is but warfare, and we must endure
hardness as a good Soldier and we know by experience what wars has been
this last age under the Gospel, and so they shall continue, for Kingdom shall
be against Kingdom, and there shall be wars and rumors of wars till the
coming of Christ to Judgment, but after that day when the Saints shall have
all things restored to them in their first perfection Mat. 13. 41, 42.
and all things are taken out of his Kingdom that do offend and that do
iniquity, and are cast into the furnace of fire by the Angels at that day, then
I suppose the Saints shall dress the gardens and prune the vineyards as Adam
did in his innocence, yet for pleasure and recreation, not working as a toil
but for delight, then shall this be fulfilled, there shall be wars no more,
but in the most glorious times under the Gospel before the end of the world
we shall never be freed from wars as I said before, but when Kingdom is
against Kingdom, and Nation against Mat. 24 6, 7. 14. 29, 30 36.
Nation, then shall the Gospel be Preached in all the world for a witness
unto all Nations, and then shall the end come, and immediately after the
tribulation, shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven, yet the
Judgment day knows no man nor Angel in heaven. But it will be very glorious
times when the hearts of Lions, Tigers, Wolyes, Leopards and Cockatrices shall
be taken from them, and the hearts of Lambs and Children given to them, so
that they shall not hurt nor destroy in the Isa. 11 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
mountain of the Lord, but the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters that cover the Sea, then shall his rest be glorious when
his ways are known upon earth, and his saving health is come into all
Nations, and some shall be redeemed out of every Nation, every kindred, tongue,
and people, Other sheep he has which are not yet of this fold, them also I
must bring, and they shall hear his voice, and there shall be one fold and one
shepherd, yet all this in troublous times. Dan. 9. 25. The children of Israel
shall return and seek the Lord their God and David Psalm. 67 2. Rev. 5. 9.
Joh. 10. 16. Hos. 3. 5.
their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodnesses in the latter days.
Zions righteousness shall go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof
as a lamp that burns, and the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all
Kings thy glory, and thou shall be called by a new name which the Isa. 62. 1,
2, 3.
mouth of the Lord shall name, thou shall also be a crown of glory in the
Lord, and a Royal Diadem in the hand of thy God; Arise, shine, for the light
is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, for darkness shall
cover Isa 60. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the Lord shall rise upon thee,
and his glory shall be seen upon thee, and the gentiles shall come to thy light
and Kings to the brightness of thy rising, thy sons shall come from far, and
thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side, then shall thou see and flow
together, and thy heart shall fear and be enlarged, because the abundance of
the Sea shall be converted unto thee, and the forces of the Gentiles shall come
unto thee: surely these will be glorious times when Jews and Gentiles so well
accord to serve the Lord, and this shall be before the end; and I Rev. 31. 13.
18, 19.
hope it is near at hand that Antichrist shall down this Kingdom being the
tenth part of the great City which now is falling off, and the rest will soon
molder away, and the Kingdoms of the world are become the Kingdoms of our
Lord and of his Christ, and the Temple of God was opened in heaven, and there
was seen in his Temple the Arc of his Testament and the Nations were angry:
then what makes the Nations so angry with us? how quiet have the Nations been
these hundred years, till now the tenth part of the City fell, and the Temple
is opened and the Arc and the Testimony are seen, that is Christ, and the
saving doctrines of election and free grace are clearly laid open, this makes
the Nations angry, but we hope in this great Earthquake all the superstition
and Idolatry of Antichrist will tumble down, and many of those gracious
promises shall be fulfilled.

But as the destruction of Jerusalem and the destruction of the world foretold
in the Gospel, are so infolded together that it is hard to distinguish one
from the other, because that in many things they do so agree, Mat. 24.
yet in some things they may be known: so the restoration of Jerusalem or the
calling of the Jews does so agree with that restoration of all things to the
first perfection and the coming down of that Jerusalem out of heaven, Rev.
21. 2.
that it is hard to distinguish the one from the other, yet in some things they
may be known. I will here name some places of the Scripture which I suppose
the promises are so mixed that they neither can be applied before nor after,
but partly before and partly after: it is said, judgment shall dwell in the
Wilderness, and righteousness remain in the Isa. 32. 16, 17, 18.
fruitful field, the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect
of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever; and my people shall dwell
in a peaceable habitation, sure dwellings and quiet resting places: again, Isa.
33. 5, 6.
the Lord is exalted, for he dwells on high, he has filled Zion with
judgment and righteousness, and wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability
of thy times, and strength of salvation, the fear of the Lord is his treasure.

But I suppose these precious promises are not to be fulfilled till after the
day of Judgment, for which the sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness has
surprised the hypocrite; they say, who shall dwell with devouring fire? who can
dwell with everlasting burnings? ver. 14. the answer is made, he that walks
righteously, that speaks uprightly, he that despises the gain of
oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding of bribes, and stops his
ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing of evil, he
shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munition of Rocks,
bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure, thine eyes shall see the
King in his beauty, they shall behold the Land that is very far off. verse.
15, 16, 17.

But where is this land which these promises are of? look unto Zion the City
of of our solemnities; thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a
Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, nor one of the Stakes thereof shall
ever be removed, neither shall any of the coards thereof be broken, and the
inhabitant shall not say, I am sick, the people that dwell therein shall be
forgiven their iniquity. ver. 20. and 24.

These things cannot be fulfilled in this world, for before the end all
Churches are subject to sin, sickness, and alteration, and desolation. But
is this promise to the Jews only?

I answer, No: Come near ye Nations to hear, and hearken ye people: let the
earth hear, and all that is therein, the world and all things that Isa. 34. 1.
come forth of it: here you see the extent of this promise is to all people and
Nations, and not only so, but to the earth and all creatures that come forth
of it: Out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field and every
foul of the air, and brought them unto Adam. All Genesis 2. 19.
these have suffered a long time for the sin of man, but here is a promise
for them; this is the ground of their hope and the earnest expectation Romans 8.
19.
of the creature, this makes the heavens and the earth so glad, and the Psalm.
96. 11. 12. 13.
field and the trees of the wood to rejoice; when the Lord comes to judge the
earth and the world, he will then do all creatures Justice.

But shall this promise be fullfiled before the day of Judgment?

I answer, No, for all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens
shall be rouled together as a scroll, and all their host shall fall down as
the leaf falls off from the vine, and as the falling fig from the figtree,
for it is the day of the Lords vengeance and the year of recompenses for the
controversy of Zion; verse. 4. 8. then shall the wilderness and desert Isa 35
1.
be glad for them, and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as a rose, it
shall blossom abundantly and rejoice even with joy and singing, the glory Ver.
1, 2.
of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon: they
shall see the glory of the Lord and the excellency of our God; this may very
well be understood to be after the day of Judgment, for your God will come
with vengeance, even God with recompense, he will save you; verse. 4.

Then in what manner shall this salvation be?

I answer, from all bodily infirmities, there shall neither be blind, nor
lame, nor dumb, nor deaf, v. 5, 6. but this cannot be fulfilled in this world
before the end, till all the creatures are freed from the corruption that came
in with sin; but that cannot be before the day of Judgment, for if sin
were removed before the day of Judgment, that day should never come, for God
will not judge and condemn men where no sin is. Again, they are not only
freed from infirmities, but from danger without. No Lion shall be there, nor
any any ravenous beast shall be found there; and then the great comfort and
fellowship of the Saints, none but the redeemed shall walk there, the ransomed
of the Lord of hoasts shall come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon
their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing stall
flee away. v. 9. 10. I suppose none will think to have these things fulfilled
in this corrupted world before Acts 3.
the restitution of all things to their first perfection at the last day.

Again, in those days and in that time says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel
shall be sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they
shall not be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve; but this cannot be
understood of Israel and Judah in this world, but of them Jer. 50. 20.
that are reserved for another, yet I grant that single persons in respect of
their justification are freed from sin, yet not in respect of sanctification,
it is there still although it does not reign in them, but if we take in all
Israel and Judah, it must be fulfilled after the day of judgment. Again, he
has not beheld iniquity in Jacob nor seen perverseness in Israel, the Number.
3. 21.
Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King among them, that is, God was
with them by his Angel that went before them, and the Arc was a Exodus 23. 20.
Micah 7. 18.
sign of his presence, and by success and conquest over their enemies, and
God did pass by their sins; and as the Apostle says, in the times of
ignorance Acts 17. 30
God winked at them, that is, he did not so exactly mark their iniquities as
to punish them, but this is chiefly to be understood after the Psalm 130. 3.
day of judgment, then there shall be no sin, and Christ will live amongst
them; I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day, which can be Zach.
3. 9.
no other but the judgment day; again, sing and rejoice O daughter of Zion,
for lo I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, says the Lord, and
many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people,
and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and the Lord Zach. 2. 10, 11, 12.
shall inherit Judah his portion, and shall choose Jerusalem; again, thus
says the Lord, I am returned unto Zion, and I will dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called a City of truth, the mountain of the
Lord of hoasts, the holy mountain, but now I will not be unto the residue of
this people as in the former days, says the Lord, for the seed shall be
prosperous, the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her
increase, and the heavens shall give their dew, and I will cause the Zach 3. 3.
^, 12.
remnant of this people to possess all these things, I will bring them, and
they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and they shall be my people, and
I will be their God in truth and righteousness; The Lord their God shall save
them in that day as the flock of his people, for they shall be as the stones
of a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his land; In that day Zach. 9. 16.
shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble
among them at that day shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as
Zach. 12. 8, 9.
God, as the Angel of the Lord before him; And in that day I will destroy all
the nations that come against Jerusalem, and the Lord shall be King over all
the earth, in that day there shall be one Lord, and his name one, and men shall
dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction, but Jerusalem shall
be safely inhabited, And the Lord shall reign over them in Zach. 14. 9. 11.
Micah 4. 7, 8.
mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever, and thou O Tower of the flock, the
strong hold of the daughter of Sion, unto thee shall it come even the first
dominion, in that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious,
and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely, for them that are
escaped in Israel; and it shall come to pass that he that is left in Zion and
he that remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy, even every one that is
written among the living in Jerusalem, when the Lord shall have washed away the
filth of the daughter of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem
from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and Isay 4. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
by the spirit of burning, and the Lord will create upon every dwelling place
of mount Zion and upon her assemblies a cloud, and a smoke by day, and the
shining of a flaming fire by night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense,
and there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat,
and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain.

In the valley of Jehosaphat the Lord will sit to judge the heathen round
about, for the day of the Lord is near, the Sun and the Moon shall Joel 3.
12. 14, 15. 20, 21.
be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining, but Judah shall
ldwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation; for I will
cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed, for the Lord dwells in Zion,
then shall the light of the Moon be as the light of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun shall be seven fold as the light of seven days, in the day that
the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals Isay 30. 26.
the stroke of their wound; The Lord most high is terrible, he is a great
King over all the earth, he shall subdue the people under us, and the nations
under our feet, he shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob
whom he loved; God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a
Trumpet, Sing praises to our God, sing praises, sing praises to our King, sing
praises, for God is the King of all the earth, sing praises Psa. 47.
with understanding, God reigns over the heathen, God sits upon the Throne
of his Holiness.

In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer, for as the
waters of Noah I have sworn shall no more go over the earth; so have Isay 54.
9, 10, etc.
I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee nor rebuke thee; behold the
mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed says the
Lord, that has mercy on thee; O thou afflicted, tossed with tempests and not
comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay the
foundations with saphires, and windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles,
and all thy borders of pleasant stones, and all thy children shall be taught of
the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children, in righteousness shall
thou be established, thou shall be far from oppression, for thou shall not
fear, and from terror, for it shall not come unto thee, and whosoever shall
gather together against thee shall fall, for thy sake no weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in
judgment thou shall condemn, this is the heritage of the servants of the
Lord, and their righteousness is of me says the Lord; Great is the Lord, and
greatly to be praised in the City of our God, in the mountain of his
holiness, beautiful for situation, Psalm. 48. 1, 2.
the joy of the whole earth is Mount Zion, God is known in her palaces Verse 3.
8. 11, 12, 13, 14.
for a refuge, as we have heard, so have we seen, in the City of the Lord of
Host, in the City of our God, God will establish it for ever, Selah; Let
mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy
judgments, walk about Zion, go round abour her and tell the towers thereof,
mark well her Bulwarks, for this God is our God for ever and ever: these
things are mixed together concerning the calling of the Jews to their
Jerusalem, and the coming down of Jerusalem out of heaven that it is hard to
distinguish them, yet many of these things cannot be fulfilled before the
restitution of all things, for Christ must be in heaven till then, so that
these things must be fulfilled afterward; again, at the day of judgment
Christ shall come from heaven with his mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7 10.
when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints; for, behold the Lord
comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon all, Jude 14
15
but if Christ and his Saints should come and live here a thousand years
before, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13.
how could it be said he and all the Saints shall come down from heaven at
that day; but you see that to be true, And we which are alive and remain
here, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in
the air: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
then I conclude that the Saints departed are in heaven with Christ, neither
shall they come again before, with him nor without him, till the day of
judgment, for as Adam had the world prepared for him before his creation, so
shall the Saints departed have; the world purged from all the corruption of it
before they shall have it restored to them again, and this shall be a great
happiness to them to have it in the first perfection for ever; yet I grant
from the creation of the world to the end of it, that Christ as a King rules by
his power and providence over all kingdoms, peoples, and creatures, he upholds
all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3.
he says, By me kings reign, and Princes decree justice, by me princes rule,
and nobles, even all the Judges of the earth, Prove. 8. 15, 16.
our God is in heaven and has done whatsoever he pleased, his counsel shall
stand, and the thoughts of his heart to all generations. Psalm. 115. 3. 135. 6.
33. 10, 11.


Secondly, Christ rules his Church in an especial manner, ordering all the
affairs of it, he has made known to us the mystery of his will according to
his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself, who works all things
after the counsel of his own will, he works in us both to will and to do
of his own good pleasure, Ephe. 1. 9. 11.
thus Christ rules now, and shall to the end of the world, and no otherwise.
Phil. 2. 13.


And to say that Christ shall rule and govern as earthly monarchs have done
over this corrupted world before the day of judgment, in a worldly visible and
earthly glory, is but a fancy and cannot be grounded upon the word of God, and
the author of that book that goes in the name of Mr. Archer, grants himself,
Page 5. that there is a world to come to be put in subjection to Christ, of
which Adam in his Innocence was a type in many respects, first as he damned
all mankind, this was a type and figure of Christ saving all the elect, Rom 5.
14.
and his marriage to the woman was a type of the conjunction of Christ to his
Church, Ephe. 5. 30, 31, 32.
and his soverainty over this present world was a figure of the subjection of
the world to come to Christ, these things I grant, yet not before the day of
judgment, because the good and the bad are mixed together, and shall be so
till the day of judgment; Ioh 15. 15.
and because all the creatures are corrupted by the sin of man, The heavens
are not clear in his sight; and God looked upon the earth, and behold it was
corrupt, Gen 6. 2.
for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth, this came by the sin of
man, and shall not be purged but by fire at the judgment day.

But they object, this cannot be after the day of judgment, because then
Object. 1 Cor. 15. 24. Luke 19. 11, 12. 2 Timothy 4. ^
Christ resignes up his Kingdom; but Christ in that parable of the noble man
is gone into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to
return, and says the Apostle at the appearance of Christ and his kingdom,
from these places they would prove that Christ shall come a thousand years to
reign here before his last coming to judgment.

To these things I answer, that it is not meant that Christ shall render up his
kingdom out of his own hand, but to render up the manner of government he
shall then render up his mediatorship, he need make intercession no longer when
his people are in full possession of all that happiness that is promised to
them, neither need Christ to make use of earthly things, as his deputies or
Isay 49. 23 Dan. 7. 9. 1 Cor. 15. Verse. 28. Heb 7. 25. Mark 13. 3 John 8. 29 4.
34.
vicegerents to be noursing fathers to his Churches; all these thrones shall be
cast down when the ancient of days does sit, and though it may be said then
the Son shall be subject to him that put all things under him, that God may
be all in all, this is to be understood the humanity of Christ shall be subject
to the deity and so it is now, for he now makes intercession for his people,
and as man he knows not when the day of judgment shall be, and says he, the
Father has not left me alone, for I do always those things that please him,
Jesus said unto them, my meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to
finish his work, but his mediatorship is not yet finished, Matthew. 22. 44. till
all his enemies are made his footstool, then will his glory be far greater
then now it is: when the Devils and wicked men, and all things that offend, and
that do iniquity shall by the Angels be cast out of his kingdom, and cast
into Matthew. 13 41, 42. John 17. 2 Ephe. 1. 2 4. 13. Dan 7. 1^ 18. 27. Revel.
22. ^ Revel 21. ^ Luke 19. ^ 11, 12. Heb. 12. 2^ 24. 2 Timothy 4. ^ 1 Thessalonians. 3^ 3
13. 2 Thessalonians. 1^
the furnace of fire, and all his Saints shall be where he is to behold his
glory, this is called the fullness of Christ when all his Saints are glorified
with him, his dominion is everlasting which shall not pass away, his kingdom
shall not be destroyed, but when the curse is taken from the earth, the throne
of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him as
natural members of his body, when the Saints shall inherit all things.

And whereas it is said, that Christ went to receive a kingdom, and to
return, I answer that he is gone to heaven to receive that kingdom for us,
and the souls of just men made perfect do enjoy it; and from that other place
spoken of his appearing and his kingdom, this is at the day of judgment when
he comes to judge both the quick and dead at his appearing and his kingdom,
and then shall Christ have another kingdom when he comes from heaven with all
his Saints, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
Angels, all these earthly things shall then be purified by fire, and restored
again to him and his Saints in their first perfection, and unto them that
look for him, he shall appear the second time without sin unto salvation,
then if salvation be at his second coming, in my judgment there needs Heb. 9.
2^
not a third, neither can his second coming be understood of his living here
in this corrupted world a thousand years, but after the day of judgment in
that new world to all eternity.

The Prophet Isay, after he has spoken of the coming of Christ in the flesh,
Chap. 11. from the first verse to the eleventh, then he speaks of his coming
to judgment, and this he calls a second coming, Verse. 11. in these words, And
it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall set his hand again the
second time to recover the remnant of his people which shall be left in many
parts of the world, and from the Islands of the Sea: he shall set up an ensign
for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather
together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth, Verse. 12.
the next chapter is nothing else but a praising God for those excellent things
that he has made known in all the earth, Verse. 5. and in the 13. Chap. Verse.
9, 10, 11. is showed the manner of his judgments; Behold the day of the Lord
comes cruel, both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the Land desolate, and
he shall destroy the sinners out of it, then the stars of heaven and the
constellations thereof shall not give their light; the Sun shall be darkened
and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine, for I will punish the world
for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; now if the coming of
Christ to judgment be his second coming, then where will be found his
coming to reign here a thousand years before the end of the world?

But they would needs have Christ to rule here as the other monarchs have done,
because he is mentioned to rise upon the downfall of those monarchs; first
the Assyrian which fell into the Babylonian, that was overcome by the Medes and
Persians, and that of the Medes and Persians was overcome by the Grecians, and
that of the Grecians was overcome by the Romans, and that of the Romans was
overcome by the white stone cut out of the rock without hands, this western
monarch which fell into many kingdoms, the white stone shall ruin all these
kingdoms, and smite the image on the feet that were of Iron and Clay, and
swallow up the whole Image, all the foregoing monarchs were ^an. 2. 34, ^5.
brought under, and by it to nothing, and it became a monarch over the whole
earth, by these things he would have the monarchy of Christ here spoken of to
be before the day of judgment in this corrupted world, while the good and the
bad are in it, and every creature defiled with sin as I have showed before,
but this cannot be, for all things that offend, and that do iniquity, the
Angels shall gather out of this kingdom, and cast them into the Furnace of
fire, Matthew. 13. (...), 41, 42.
and this kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the Saints of the
most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall
serve and obey him, the Saints of the most High shall possess the kingdom
^an. 7. 27. ^ers. 18.
for ever, even for ever; then this cannot be before the day of judgment,
because that none but Saints shall possess it, for here the Tares and Wheat
shall grow together, and the good and the bad shall be together till the very
day that the Angels are sent to fetch them before the Judge, and the heavens
shall receive Christ till the restitution of all things to their first
perfection, then shall the Saints inherit all things.

And where he says, that the Saints shall be confined in heaven, and all
things here below shall be turned again into a confused Chaos, and so remain
for ever, this I have answered already.

One scruple more is this, whether the middle heaven, called the starry heaven,
shall continue after the day of judgment, because some times it is spoken in
the singular number; I saw a new heaven, and the City had no need of the Sun
or Moon to shine in it, and there shall be no night there; now if the Revel.
21. 1
heavens be destroyed, and but one be made new, and the City no need of the
Sun, Moon or Stars, then say they, God will make nothing in vain; Revel.
21. 23. 25. Isay 45. 18. Revel. 21. 1 2 Pet. 3. 10. 12, 13.
I answer, where it is said, I saw a new heaven, in the same place it is said,
the first heaven passed away, this is spoken only for brevity as in Cap. 20.
Ver. 11. it is said, the earth and the heaven fled away, but we know the
heavens shall pass away, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and
we according to his promise look for new heavens; now where the Scripture in
some places speaks more briefly, and other places more largely, we ought to
take the largest expression, and whereas it is said, in the City there shall
be no need of the Sun or Moon to shine in it; I answer it is true when every
Saint of God shall shine as the Sun in the Firmament, and Christ their head
ten thousand times more brighter then the Sun, besides the infinite glory of
God himself Matthew. 13. 43. Revel. 21. 23.
shall be there to inlighten it, so that in the City there will be no need
of these things, yet out of the City the beasts and fowls both stand in need
of these things, therefore they shall be purified, that the rest of the
creatures may have those comforts belonging to them, and so they shall continue
for ever, the light of the moon shall then be as light as the Sun, and the
light of the Sun shall be seven fold as the light of seven days, in the day
that the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of
their wound; then shall the Sun no more go down, neither shall the Isay 30.
26.
Moon withdraw it self, else the creatures would not be in so happy a
condition under the second Adam in the new world, as they were in their
creation Isay 60. 20.
under the first Adam in the old world. The uses follow.

First Use, has Jesus sent his Angel to testify these things unto the
Churches? Revel. 22. 16, 17. 20.
then let the Spirit and the bride say Come, and let him that hears say come,
and let him that is athirst come, for he that testifies these things says,
surely I come quickly; even so come Lord Jesus; there be many benefits that
come with Christ that may cause the Saints to desire his appearing; there is a
Crown of righteousness which the righteous Judge shall give me at that day,
and not to me alone, but to all that love his appearing. Beloved, 2 Timothy 48. 1
Pet. 5. 4.
we are now the Sons of God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be,
but we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see
him as he is, then let us look for that blessed hope, and the glorious 1 John
3. 2 Titus 2. 13. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Psalm. 96. 11 12, 13.
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, We according to his
promise look for new heavens and a new earth wherein dwells righteousness,
the heavens rejoice and the earth is glad, the field is joyful and all that is
therein, and all the trees of the wood will rejoice before the Lord, when he
comes to judge the earth; Then shall they see the Son of man coming in a
cloud with power and great glory, when these things begin to come to pass,
then look Luke 21. 27, 28. Revel. 19. 7 Luke 2. 25. 26.
up and lift up your heads, for your redemption draneth nigh; Let us rejoice
and be glad, and give honor to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and
his bride has made herself ready; because it was revealed to old Simeon that
he should not see death, till he had seen the Lords Christ, therefore he
waited for the consolation of Israel; be patient therefore brethren unto the
coming of our Lord, behold the husbandman waits for the fruit of the earth,
be ye also patient, establish your heart, for the coming of the Lord draws
nigh, says Micah, James 5. 7, 8. Micah 7. 7.
I will wait for the God of my salvation, and Paul commends the Corinthians
for this thing, for says he, ye come behind in no gift, waiting for the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall confirm you unto the end, that ye
may be blameless in the day of our Lord, for says he, our conversation 1 Cor.
1. 7. 8.
is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like unto his Phil 3 20, 21.
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all
things unto himself, Blessed is he that waits and comes to the 1335.
days says the Angel to Daniel, but go thou thy way, thou shall rest till the
end Dan. 12. 12, 13.
be, and then stand in thy lot in the end of the days when all things are
restored to their first perfection, then Daniel shall have his lot among other
Saints; therefore wait I say on the Lord, I will wait for the Lord, my soul
does wait, in his word do I wait, My soul does wait for the Lord, more
then they that watch for the morning, I say more then they that watch for Psalm.
130.
the morning; let Israel hope in the Lord, watch therefore, for ye know not at
what hour your Lord does come, therefore be ye ready, for in such an Matthew.
24. 42. 44. 46. 47.
hour as ye think not of the Son of man comes; blessed is that servant
whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing, verily I say unto you he
will make him ruler over all his goods, now what are those goods that the
Saints shall be made Rulers over at the day of judgment, but those creatures
that were given to the first Adam, and he by his sin lost this Lordship over
them, and the second Adam has restored to him all again in their first
perfection, and says Luke, he will make him ruler over his Luke 12. 42. 44.
household and over all that he has; now says Paul, I bow my knees unto the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and Ephe. 3
14. 15.
earth is named, what other meaning can this have but this after the day of
judgment, to be made Lords and Rulers over all the creatures here below, and
as I take it in some degree also above the Angels in heaven? howsoever here is
sufficient to answer a question sometimes moved, which is this, whether Quest.
shall the Saints or Angels have the highest degree of glory after the day of
judgment? I answer the Saints, for as the beasts shall be confined to the
earth, so Answ.
the Angels shall be confined in heaven, but man shall inherit all things, all
things I say both in earth and heaven, and as man shall have more glory on
earth then any beast or foul can have, so I suppose he shall have more glory
in heaven then any Angel there, because that he is the master piece of all, and
as it were a model of all the creation, being the last that was made, all the
rest being but made for him; the Elders were with Christ on the throne, and the
Angels standing round about it, read Revel. 7. 11. therefore in more glory
Revel. 5. 11 7. 11.
then the Angels.

Secondly, Use may teach us admiration with David, and say, O how great is thy
goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou Psalm.
31. 19.
have wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men!

First, Look back upon sin and see the cursed nature of it, and admire at
the filthy contagion of it that has defiled the lower heavens and the earth
Job 15. 15. Gen 6. 12.
and all creatures in them and spoiled the glory and beauty of them all.

Secondly, This may teach us to admire at the great mercy and goodness Psalm.
136. 23. 72. 12. Psalm. 63. 5.
of our God who remembered us in our low estate, how he delivered us when we had
no helper, he looked and there was none to help, then his own Arm brought
salvation.

Thirdly, Here we may admire at the folly of Adam that would hazard such a
glorious world of creatures and lose them all for a bit of an Apple.

Fourthly, we may admire at their happy and permanent condition under the
second Adam, when as they shall be established for ever, and see how fickle
and mutable they were under the first Adam, O then happy is he that is not
under the first but under the second Adam, who has restored again what the
first lost.

Fifthly, here we may admire at the great price of our redemption, the worth and
value of the blood of Christ, when we had spoiled and ruined the whole 1 Pet.
1. 19
creation, all the glorious works of God by our sins, that the blood of
Christ should purchase redemption for mankind, and establishment to the Angels
that had not sinned, and purification to the creatures here below, and
establishment to all.

Sixthly, here we may see and admire at the justice of God to all, that
creatures that have suffered punishment, not for their own sins but for ours,
now they shall not only be delivered after so long a time, but established in
an unchangable condition for ever, which will make amends for their great loss
they had by the sin of man.

Seventhly, admire at the wisdom of God that could find out such a way to
satisfy his own justice and yet to save his creatures.

Eighthly, this may teach us to admire at the power of God that is able to do
all these things, which in all men's judgment was a greater work to renew the
ruins of the old world, then it was at the first to make it of nothing, he
traveled in the greatness of his strength, and is mighty to save, he laid
Isay 63. 1. Psalm. 89. 19 Psalm. 33. 9.
help upon one that is mighty whereas the world was made by a word of command,
He spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast.

Ninthly, this may teach us to admire at the great love of God to us, in not
sparing his own Son, but gave him up to death for us all. Romans 8. 32.


10. Admire at the great love of Christ, for when we were yet without Romans 5.
68
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly, God commended his love to
us in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us.

11. Admire at Gods free acceptance of Christ's atonement and satisfaction when
he became our surety, says he, behold my Servant whom I have L 2 Heb. 7. 22. F
Mat 12. 18, I 20, 21. 2
chosen, my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased, I will put my Spirit upon
him and he shall show Judgment to the Gentiles he shall send forth judgment
unto victory, and in his name shall the Gentiles trust.

12. Admire at the faithfulness of God the father to God the son in giving
to Christ all the elect, and of the Son to the Father that will lose none of
them that the Father, gave him before Christ came in the flesh, the Father gave
Christ all the elect and set him a day to pay for the purchase, and now it is
paid, the Son trusts the Father for all the elect as they fall in their
several ages of the world.

The third use, Is it so that all things shall be restored again to the Saints
in their first perfection? then let us not so much labor for them in their
corrupted condition, as to have them perfect at the day of Judgment, let us
use them to Gods glory in giving to relieve the poor, and behold all things
are clean Luke 11. 41
unto you, unto the pure all things are pure; that is, he has not only a pure
and a sanctified use of them here, but they shall be restored to their first
purity Tit. 1. 15.
after the day of Judgment; let us not desire them immoderately in their
corrupted condition, nor to get them unjustly by fraud or deceit, nor unjustly
possess them by keeping them to our selves, when the Lord calls for them for
public uses, neither be thou envious at the foolish, when thou see the
prosperity of the wicked: There is a sore evil which I have seen under the
Psalm. 37. 1. 7 3. 3. Eccles 5. 13 Verse. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Prove. 23. 5. 1 Pet.
5. 7. Heb. 10. 34 Prox. 8. 18
Sun, namely, riches kept to the hurt of the owners; these things in their
corrupted condition will not satisfy us, he that loves silver shall not be
satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase; and they are
but uncertain riches, trust not in them but in the living God who gives us
all things richly to enjoy, then set not thine heart upon that which is not,
for riches make themselves wings and fly away as an Eagle toward heaven, cast
your care upon God, for he cares for you, the Saints in former times could
suffer with joyfulnesse the spoiling of their goods, because they had a better
and an enduring substance, let us labor for wisdom, and that will bring with
it durable riches and righteousness, and her merchandise, and her hire shall
be holiness to the Lord, it shall not be treasured up, for her merchandise
shall be before them that dwell before the Lord to eat sufficiently Isa 23.
28. Mat 6. 33. Luke 12 31, 32. Luk 12. 43, 44. Genesis 3. 17, 18. Isa. 55 12, 23.
and for durable clothing. First seek the Kingdom of God, and all these
things shall be added unto you, if not in this world, yet they shall in their
purity and first perfection be restored at the last day; Fear not little
flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Here might
be a use of comfort to the poor Saints of God, who have but little of these
outward things, let them not be discouraged, for all is theirs as soon as the
dross and corruption is taken off from them, for they are like unto men that
wait for their Lord, if you be found so doing you shall be blessed and made
rulers over all that he has: when the curse is taken from the earth, and in
stead of the thorn shall come up the fur tree, and in stead of the bryer
shall come up the fur tree, this shall be to the Lord for a name and for an
everlasting sign that shall not be cut off, for ye shall go forth with joy
and be led forth with peace: the mountains and hills shall break forth before
you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands, his
honor have all the Saints, praise ye the Lord. Psalm. 149. 9.

FINIS

